a3140 11655972 48000
LANCEL. ANDRE EPISCOP{us} ELYENSIS E REVERENDISSIMUS ET DOCTISS: DOMIN These LINEAMENTS of Art, haue well set forth Some outward features (though no inward worth) But to these LINES his WRITINGS added, cann Make vp the faire resemblance of a MAN For as the BODIE'S forme is figurd here So there the beautyes of his SOULE appeare; WHICH I had praised; but that in THIS place To praise THEM, were to praise Him to his FACE. Ge: Wi:
THE MORALL LAW EXPOVNDED, 1. Largely, 2. Learnedly, 3. Orthodoxly. THAT IS, The long-expected, and much-desired Worke of Bishop ANDREVVES, upon THE TEN COMMANDEMENTS: Being his Lectures many yeares since in Pembroch-Hall Chappell, in Cambridge, which have ever since passed from hand to hand in Manu∣scripts, and beene accounted one of the greatest Trea∣sures of private Libraries, but never before this, published in Print. Whereunto is annexed nineteene Sermons of His, upon Prayer in Generall, and upon the Lords Prayer, in Particular. Also seven Sermons upon our Saviours Tentations, in the WILDERNESSE. Both which Two latter Treatises, though before Printed, yet being much worne out of Presse, were thought fit for divers reasons to be added to this Worke. LONDON, Printed for Michael Sparke, Robert Milbourne, Richard Cotes, and Andrew Crooke. 1642.
TO THE HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMENT, BOTH LORDS AND COMMONS: More particularly to the Worthy Speakers of both Houses: The Right Honourable Edward, Lord Littleton, Lord Keeper of the Great-Seale of England▪ and the Right Worshipfull William Lenthall, Esquire. My Lords, and Gentlemen, TO aske whether Light be pleasant, is a blind mans question; and whether know∣ledge be sweet, is an ignorant mans que∣stion; and whether Divine Light and knowledge (in regard of which all other is but as a Glow-worme of the Braine) be most pleasant, and most sweet, is a pro∣phane mans question. This Booke challengeth an eminent Dedication of it selfe both ex congruo & condigno in diverse regards. For first, the origi∣rall Theame, which beares the burthen of the whole Discourse, and Tractate is the ten Commandements of Almighty God, which are the ten Predicaments of all those vertues and vices, which render men either acceptable or odious to their Maker; the Scripture of Scripture, as being prerogatived above the whole Bible, in this re∣spect, that in issuing them forth to the sonnes of men, God was
pleased to become his owne Amanuensis; The whole Scripture is2 Tim. 3.16. inspired by God, but onely1. Pet. 1.21. holy men of God spake and wrote them as they were inspired by the Holy Ghost, but here God both indited and spake and wrote, not onely the mind and mouth, but theExod. 8.19. Finger of God was here. Secondly, the Author of this Booke is enough praised in naming of him, it was Dr. Andrewes, the late Bishop of Winchester, a man both at home and abroad of great fame, for his Clerk, ship, and of a good fame for his regular and strict life: of whom the lesse is said, the more is said, for that to fetch lustre to his name from a meane stile or tongue, is to goe Northward for heat. Thirdly, the worke it selfe is such, as in those dayes when it was Preached, he was scarce reputed a pretender to learning and piety then in Cambridge, who made not himselfe a disciple of Mr. An∣drewes by diligent resorting to his Lectures: nor he a pretender to the study of Divinity, who did not transcribe his notes, and ever since they have in many hundreds of Copies passed from hand to hand, and have beene esteemed a very Library to young Divines, and an Oracle to consult at, to Laureat and grave Divines: in all which severall regards, they are more fit to sweeten, and even to sanctifie the Presse, from the pollutions and prophanations of it, which of late it hath beene defiled withall, by those many lying and scandalous pamphlets, which have beene Printed to the dishonour of God, the shame of ours, and just distaste of other Nations, to the prejudice of truth and charity, and to the particular wrong of that excellent Art of Printing, which being rightly used is of such availe to all Christian both Churches and Commonwealths. And that the publisher hereof makes such a bold and ambitious ac∣cesse unto your Honours, as to Nuncupate and present it to so high and eminent persons, this is to be said, that as the worke in it selfe is so worthy, as it may justly be thought to merit the wing and patronage of the greatest Christian Prince in the world, so can it now no where be laid so properly as at the feete of the Parlia∣ment. First, because hereby the Law of God, which is both the best rule of making humane Lawes, and the best enforcement to yeeld obedience unto them being made, is in you virtually, and by way of representation, expounded to the whole Nation.
Nextly, not onely Kings, but, according to their Latitude, all Magistrates and Civill powers ordayned of God (whereof yours is the chiefe) are Custodes utriusque tabulae. And also, because here are two strong and sinewy Tractates, the one about Idolatry in handling the second Commandement: and the other about observation of the Sabbath, under the fourth; which will both no∣tably redargue the late heterodox insinuations of both doctrine and practice in some, anent those things, and concurre with you in pro∣pugning the Orthodox tenets of both those points. Lastly, because Preachers are publique Oratours, and like winds upon seas, have great influence upon the people, therefore here they have presidented before them, that which in due time will fall un∣der your Considerations to call them unto, to wit, the right Art of Sermoning and salvificall Preaching, which consists not in State invectives, or popular declamations, to sway multitudes and tumults, either one way or other, (wherein they Preach themselves, and not Christ) but in revealing the whole Counsell of God, and shew∣ing their auditors how to decline the infortunate Jslands of sin and hell, and to thrust into the faire havens of grace and glory. God Almighty of his great mercy so blesse your Counsels, as that truth may empire over errour in the Church: Peace triumph over divi∣sion in the Common-wealth: Plenty over famine in the Countrey: Riches over poverty in the City: Learning over barbarisme in the Ʋniversities, &c. To which end this Worke is most humbly Dedi∣cated to your Honours, both for protection and direction, by Your Honours most humble, and most faithfull Servant, in the things of God, and of Christ, JOHN JACKSON.
A PREFACE Concerning Catechisme. CLemens Alexandrinus, writing of instructi∣on or Catechising, in his three Bookes, entituled his Paedagogus, hath his , an exhortatory Introducti∣on. Cyrill, Bishop of Ierusalem, before his twenty foure Catechismes, hath another Booke, which maketh up the twenty five, called of him , or ; that is, an enterance to the Catechisme. Both ground them∣selves upon the example of David: who being to comprise Religion into a short sum, maketh his entrance, , Psal 34.11. Come children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the feare of the Lord. Then for introduction, as they,Three things observable in Catechisme: so we may gather these three points: 1. That it is a thing not onely pleasing the Lord, but also com∣manded by him, that children be taught in the feare of God. 2. The manner how they should be taught; i. by measure, in this word . The Chatechumeni were these who were to be Catechised. 3. What the Catechumeni are to performe, that this instruction may be profitable unto them, , Come yee, hearken unto me. For the first, There is a sort, both among the Heathen,1. Catechising commanded, &c. as also in the Scripture mentioned; who thinke that religion is not to come so low, as to be taught to children: but that they be brought up in all boldnesse, and liberty, that we may see what is in them: And after when they come to riper yeeres, to be instructed in reli∣gion. The Heathen they tell us of that,The heathen opinion con∣cerning Cate∣chising. which is in the beginning of the Philosophers morals; , a young man is not a fit hearer of the morals. As also the counsell of the Orator in his defence for Caelius, that it is a point of policie
and wisedome, to let youth have his course, till all were sodden; quoad deferbuerit: untill it cease from seething. But whatsoever they say, this exercise of catechising was used among the Gentiles also.The practice of the Heathen in Catechising. We read in Porphyrius, his question upon Homer is, . Since we were boyes, we knew this, by meanes of our catechising. And Solons verses, called  sacred remembrancings, in Aeschines his oration, shew that it was usuall among the Athenians for youth to be instructed. As also the history of the Heathen declare, that their children were taught. For it was a custome among them not to poll their children, before they were instructed , in the Holy remembrancings, and then were they suffered to poll themselves, and burne their haire, and dedicate it to Apollo: signifying thereby, that they were able to carry Tapers into his Temple: and then were they called , Taperbearers. One also saith, , it behoveth those that are to be catechised to learne good things; but the best manner of confuting, is to confute them by themselves. Arist.An answer to the former o∣pinions. as his interpretors say, meant potius de facto, quam de eo quod fieri debet. Else were he to be called to his Polit. 7. ub 17. cap. , fit it is, that that age should be restrained both from hearing and seeing of things unlawfull. And againe, , for all things whereof they are capable, it is better even from their childhood, to accustome them thereunto but by little & little. And we may appeale from the Orator, pleading at the Barre, for a lewd young man, to his bookes, De divinatione, & de officiis. Ea aetas maximè arcenda est a voluptatibus, exercendque laboribus; that age especially is to be kept in from pleasures, and to be exercised in labours. Thus much for reason uncorrupt. Scripture ex∣ample against Catechisme.For vinity and Scriptures, Exod. 10.11. Pharao being requested, that the Israelites with their children, might goe into the Wilder∣nesse, maketh a skoffe of it, that their children should goe worship, as if religion pertayned not to them, Matth. 19.13. When children were brought unto Christ, to be blessed of him, his Dis∣ciples forbad, and rebuked them that brought them. But for the first, Moses opposeth himselfe against Pharaoh, and answereth, that howsoever it was not the manner of the Gods of Egypt,An answer to the example. yet it was expedient that their children should goe with them, for that they honoured the living God. For the second, Christ opposed himselfe against his Disciples, granting children safe conduct unto him, and pronouncing a curse against them that kept them from him. This is manifest both in the Law,This appeares in the Law. and in the Gospell. In the Law Psa 119.9. The Lord in giving forth his Lawes, had an eye, not onely to the elder sort, but to the yonger; and therefore as the Jewes note, there is thrice made mention of children in the Law; 1. And visit the sinnes of the fathers upon the children, &c. But if that be denied, yet in the fourth Commandement it is manifest, Thou and thy sonne, and thy daughter. Againe, Exod. 12.26. When the children would be
too busie and curious in asking their parents, what meaneth the slay∣ing of the Lambes? The Lord is so farre from accusing them for this curiosity, that he layeth a charge on their parents to declare it them. Exod. 12.26. When your children aske you, what service is this you keepe? 27. Then yee shall say, Its the sacrifice of the Lords passeover, when he passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, and smote the Egyptins and preserved our houses. And whereas many hold it is not materiall what children doe, and that they are not to be censured by their doings; yet they are confuted by Salomon, Prov. 20.11. A child also is knowne by his doings, whether his workes be true and right. they shall be judged by their steps. As the blessing of God is on them that give themselves to wisedome, as in Psal. 127. & 128. in that in the one, an house full of such children is compared to a Qui∣ver full of good arrowes: and in the other to Olive branches full of Olives; and elsewhere to plants. So are they not free, though children, (if they commit wickednesse) from the curse of God; as appeareth by 2. Kin. 2.24. though children, that scoffed at Elisha, yet were they devovred by the Shee-Beares. The Rabbinicall proverbe in regard of death is, that in Golgotha are skuls of all sizes, and Revel. 20.12. Iohn saith, that he saw , the dead great and small, waiting for their judgement. In the Gospell. Omnis Christi actio, nostra est instructio. Christs actions are our instru∣ctions. Non minus placet Deo Hosanna puerorum, quam Halleluiah viro∣rum. The childrens Hosanna please no lesse then the mens Hal∣leluiah. Matth. 2.16. Dedit praecep∣tum, qui exem∣plum probavit. Who hath al∣lowed exam∣ple, hath given precept.In (Christ) our Saviour yet more extraordinary things: 1. That being a child of twelve yeeres, ut Luk. 2.52. he grew in wisdome, i. the feare of God (ut Job 28.28. And unto man he said, behold the feare of the Lord is wisdome, & to depart from evill is understanding.) & knowledge both with God and man, i. both divine and humane. 2. He allowed of Hosanna, that the children sang unto him; insomuch that when the High Priests and Scribes spake to him to rebuke them for it; he alledged for them out of Psal 8.2. out of the mouthes of babes and sucklings hast thou ordained to set forth thy praise. 3. Matth. 18.6. . Christs curse is on them that hinder little children to come unto him; (though at that time it pleased him to beare with his Disci∣ples, and to shew mercy to them; yet even after a curse is pronoun∣ced:) and in the same place, Matth. 18.14. when his Disciples forbad them to come to him, he saith, It is not the will of our Father which is in Heaven, that one of these little ones should perish. Perish they must un∣lesse they come to him; and Christs curse is on all that seeke to lay a stumblingblock before them. And they have a stumblingblock laid before them; yet that shall be taken away by admonitions: and if they will not heare, when they are forewarned, they shall perish: for we may say that the Lord hath purposed their destruction, as 1. Sam. 2.25. Notwithstanding they obeyed not unto the voyce of their fa∣ther. because the Lord would slay them: Speaking of the sonnes of Eli. 4. Christ being ready to be taken up into Heaven, his charge to Peter, and so in him to all the Apostles, and in them to all their suc∣cessors, which was his last charge, as Augustine noteth,1. Feed my Lambes. pasce agnos nieos. 2. Pasce oves meas.2. Feed my Sheepe▪ For the prospering of the Lords sheepfold
dependeth upon the good feeding of the Lambes. And thus you see that children are to be brought up in the feare of the Lord. The reason: 1. There is a promise and stipulation in our bap∣tisme; that as soone as we could, we should fall in hand with it: as Prov. 6.4. When a man hath made a promise unto the Lord, he is not to rest untill he hath performed it. For though the naturall order be as Christ biddeth, Matth. 28.19. first teach, and then baptize, yet in singular mercy to the children of the faithfull he hath granted this priviledge,In primi annis dantur nobis ma∣gistri, ut in nobis generent timo∣rem Dei. In our first yeeres Tutors are given unto us, that they may beget in us the feare of the Lord. Piut. Sumptio virilis tagae, non est , sed , The taking of the robe of a man is not a casting away of the groundworke, but a change. 2. Pers. first to be baptized, therefore though we begin never so soone, yet we doe it not in that order that it should be done. Of this Nazianzen saith well, let us not set that in no place, because the Lord hath set it in the second place, which should have been in the first. 2. And Augustine, he saith, Quare adhibetur magister extrinsecus? nisi ut sit magister intus? Wherefore is there given unto us an out∣ward teacher, but that there may be an inward teacher? But when we come to be men, we cannot have this outward teacher: ergo, we are to endeavour as soone as may be, to establish the inward teacher, that is, to direct us all our life long. 3. For as much as the light of nature doth leade us thus farre, that there is an aptnesse in children to vice: ergo, it is requisite that we take the advantage, and apply their aptnesse to goodnesse: for he that is able to say to Elizeus, bald-pate, is able to say to Christ Hosanna. , and I will instruct or catechise you: Arg. A nomine probat tenuiter, declarat concinnè, he proves it from the name barely, declares it properly: English & Latine followeth the Greek , catechising, which seemeth to come of the Hebrew word  which signifieth repetere, acuere, to rehearse, to sharpen: in which two is contained the office of the Catechist, and the catechized. And as in the one, so in , there is included an iteration of a sound, from whence our eccho commeth, for  is to sound the last syllable; , to sound the whole speech after another. Clemens defineth catechising to be ,What Catechi∣sing is. an abridge∣ment of Christian doctrine to be delivered to the youth. The diffe∣rence of catechising from preaching,The differences betwixt cate∣chising and preaching. is in three things. 1. Preaching is the dilating of one member of Religion: cate∣chising is a contraction of the whole. 2. Catechising is to be delivered to the yong and ignorant: prea∣ching to all. 3. Preaching exacteth no repetition; catechising requireth re∣petition.Whether the Scriptures may be abbreviated? They may, first from Christs example. Abbreviating of Scriptures taught us of God. 2. From Salo∣mon. Concerning that it is a summe, here is a doubt, whether such summes or epitomes may be made? They may; For proofe where∣of, see Matth. 22.37. where Christ draweth the whole Law into two Heads: and John 3.16. Christ catechising Nicodemus, contracteth the summe of the Gospell into one verse, God so loved the world, that he gave his onely, &c. 2. Likewise also Eccles. 12.13. Salomon compriseth all that hee had said before, in these two heads; First, feare God. Secondly,
and keepe his Commandements; for this is the whole duty of man. 3. Practice of the Church. It hath beene the use of the Church in all ages, that it be not onely deli∣vered to them, but also requi∣red of them againe.3. Hebr. 6.2. The whole summe of Religion is drawne into re∣pentance from dead works, and faith in Christ. This is also seene in other Sciences. Physitians have their principles; 1. Aphorisme, com∣monly delivered in parva arte, in the short or briefe art. 2. Lawyers in their institutions, their maximae. Philosophers, in their introducti∣ons, their , chiefe sentences. One calleth this sepes legis, the fence of the law; Clemens, , fundamentum, vel basis, a foundation or pillar. The fruit of this. It is a limit to the whole Scriptures. It teacheth us how to range our studies into method and order;4. The same in other sciences. The fruit of catechising. to what head we are to referre all our readings: , thankes be unto the blessed God, who hath made these things that are necessary, short and easie to be understood, and things not con∣cise, not necessary, and difficult. Seeing therefore things are drawne into such a narrow compasse, they are , without excuse, that will not frame themselves to the knowledge of God, being so easie and compendious. In these places,Catechising, a short Gospell. 2 Pet. 3.18. 1 Cor. 14.20. Ephes. 14.13. We are to proceed continually. For as there are places where every Lambe may wade over; so there are places also, where Elephants may swim. For wee shall never be free from Scrutamini Scripturas, search the Scriptures. 2. For teaching them as they are now taught; This is warranted us before the flood, Genes. 4.3.4. Cain and Abel sacrificing must needs have learned of their Father this duty: and a good argument, that the Scripture was yet , non ; though some thinke that there can but probable conjectures be made before the flood: ergo, they reason probably, that say, that the worship of God could not have continued. 2. After the flood to Abrahams time there was no other way of propagating Religion, then by the delivery of the parents to their children: though some thinke that Sybils verses were nothing else but the sum of those doctrines which the parents delivered to their children. Vsque adeo pla∣cuit Deo cate∣chesis Abrahae, ut ei revelata sit & legis & Evange∣lii summa. So was God pleased with Abrahams cate∣chising, that the sum both of Law and Gospel was re∣vealed to him.3. In Abraham, that the Scripture beareth him witnesse, that hee taught his family in the waies of the Lord, Gen. 18.17.19. Shall I hide from my servant Abraham that thing which I doe? 19. For I know that he will command his family and his houshold after him, that they keep the waies of the Lord, to do righteousnesse and judgement; that the Lord might bring uon Abraham that which he hath spoken unto him. What he taught, it is evident by the summe of the Law delivered unto him by God, Gen. 17.1. Ambula coram me, & esto integer, walke before me, and be thou perfect. As by the summe also of the Gospell, Gen. 18.18. as also Gen. 22.18. And in thy seed shall all the Nations, &c. be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voyce. The effect of Abrahams cate∣chising.The fruit and effect of his catechising: 1. In his sonne Isaac, Gen. 24.63. And Isaac went out to pray in the fields towards the Evening. 2. In his servant. 1. He beginneth with prayer before his businesse, Gen. 24.12. 2. He endeth in prayer and thanksgiving, for having good successe in his businesse, Gen. 24.27. 3. His care and faithfulnesse
in performing his Masters businesse, Vers. 33. in that hee would not eate before he had shewed his message. And thus it was before the Law was written. 4. In the Law, Deut. 6.7. So soone as the Law was given, God commanded that they should teach it their children. In the same place, foure duties mentioned; writing, speaking, sharpening binding: of which, this often rehearseing or sharpning is the chiefest.The speciall lecture of the Law. According to the Rabbins. And among the Rabbins, this is the speciall lecture of all the five Bookes of the Law, Num. 15. Deut. 11.19. The practise of this commandement in David, Psal. 34.11. And as Salomon testifieth, Prov. 4.4. that he was his fathers sonne, tenderly beloved of his mo∣ther, and absolutely catechised of David his father, 1. Chron. 28.9. and 19. David before all the people directeth his sonne Salomon. Salomon in his nine first Chapters of his Proverbes instructeth his sonne Rehoboam, 2. King. 12.2. Joash the yong King, instructed by Ie∣hoiadah. After the captivity, because there are no monuments in the Scriptures, we must relie to Iosephus, and his writings. Yet in the third verse of the story of Susanna, she is said to have beene taught of her parents, in the Law of Moses. Iosephus testifieth, that between Christ and Antiochus time, and the restoring of the captivity, there was never under foure hundred houses of catechisings; of ex∣pounding the Law, called in the Talmud  places for the Law. 5. In the Booke of antiquities of the Jewes is recorded; that there was an act made at Ierusalem, that when their children were thirteene yeeres old, they should be sent to catechising; to which Paul seemeth to have some relation, Rom. 2.18.  being instructed out of the Law. 6. In the Christian Church, it is commanded, Eph. 6.4. that pa∣rents should not onely enter their children, , to bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. 1 Cor. 14.19. , that I might teach others. The party to be catechized.For the , or persons to be catechised, we have warrant in three notable persons: 1. Theophilus, Luke 1.4. , wherein thou hast beene instructed. 2. In Apollos, Acts 18.25. , this man was instructed in the way of the Lord, and being fervent in the spirit. 3. Timothy, 2. Tim. 3.15. , &c. and that from a child thou hast knowne the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation. Galat. 6.6. mention made both of the Catechiste and Catechumenos, , Let him that is taught in the word, communicate unto him that teacheth in all good things. After the Apostles time, the first of any fame was the Evangelist Marke Catechist at Alexandria; after him Palemus; after him Clemens Alexandrinus; after him Origen; after him Cyrill of Ierusalem; then Gregory Nicen his Catechisme; Athanasii synopsis sanctae scripturae; his inventory of the sacred Scriptures; Fulgentius. Augustines booke de rudibus catechisandis, of catechising the ignorant; De gratia Dei, of
the grace of God; foure bookes de symbolo, the Creed, De fide ad Petrum diaconum; of faith to Peter the Deacon. In the Fathers time, it may appeare by the sixth Canon of the Councel of Neocesarea; by the sixth & seventh Canon of the Councel holden at Toledo in Spaine, 2. The Councell of Braccharie. i. of the fourth of Toledo, 24. Canon.As it appeareth in the councell of Cullen, Synod of Osburge. 8. ch. 24. sect. of the councell of Trent, 6. ch. No more mention of this till the time of Luther; which because it did greatly further religion, the pa∣pists renewed, and commended the effect and fruit. Egesippus testifieth, that by the diligent instructing of the Church, there was no knowne common wealth in any part of the world in∣habited; but within 40. yeeres after Christs passion received a great shaking off heathenish religion. The same may be seene in the most wicked Julian the Apostat, the subtillest enemy that ever the Church had; who the easier to roote out religion, suppressed all Christian schooles, places of catechising, &c. and if he had not beene as a cloud, that soone passeth away; it had beene to be fea∣red, lest within a short time hee had over-shadowed all religion. Now when catechising was taken from the Church, it was all over∣spread with ignorance. The papists acknowledge all the advantage the protestants have gotten of them, to come, for that they began sooner to catechise. And it is to be feared, that if ever they get ad∣vantage of us, it will be by reason of their exacter catechising then ours. The Reasons of the continuing of catechising.1. The reasons why it hath beene thus continued; illud Christi, Reddes rationem; that of Christ, Thou shalt give an account: and e∣very one will give mor ttention to that, which he knoweth he shall after give account for, . 2. Because we are all bound to give account of our faith, 1 Pet. 3.15. , Ready alwaies to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you. Oportet reddere , non stultam & vanam & inanem opinionem; you must render a reason, not a foolish and vaine opinion. Therefore, it is best to render a rea∣son before Agrippa our Countreyman, before we come to Caesar. Forasmuch as Christ is become not onely our King and Priest,We must be Prophets. Our prophecy∣ing in foure things. but also our Prophet; we must become Prophets. Our prophecying must stand in these foure things: 1. In examining the doctrine that we heare, 1 Iohn. 4. 2. In examining our selves before the word and Sacraments, 1 Cor. 11.28. 2 Cor. 13.5. 3. In admonishing our brethren; which we cannot doe without catechising, Rom. 15.14. and able to admonish one another. 4. Forasmuch as when we are children, we doe imbibere errores, drinke in errors. We must learne to put them off, while we are chil∣dren, and have truth in their place. The fruit of the first: that knowing that judgement waiteth for us, we may be carefull of our duties, and so to practise them. Of the second. Forasmuch as we see of the Church in all ages, that it is a thing especially commanded of the Lord; we must know
that those houres which we bestow on this exercise, we bstow them on a thing most pleasing to God. Veniendum ergo alacriter, & cum venerimus, ita nos gerere oportet, ut decet: scilicet ut arrectis auribus, intentis animis auscultemus; We must therefore come cheerfully, and when we come, so behave our selves as it becometh, namely we must heare with attentive eares, and earnest hearts. Paul asketh the Romans some fruit of their former life. Paul, Rom. 6.21. ; What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? and secondly, in the 22 verse, he setteth the fruit downe to be holinesse of life; , unto holinesse. And the heathen wisheth us in all our actions to aske this question, Cui bono, to what good; admonishing us to enquire what good commeth to us by our exercises. Even that which Paul setteth downe, 1 Tim. 4.8. . For bodily exercise profiteth little, but godlinesse is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. In this life, the fruit length of daies; as Deut. 11.21. In the life to come, John 17.3. , eternall life. Having seene the fruit, we are to take care that those houres which we spend in this exercise, we mispend not, least we be deprived thereof. For as in naturall philosophy, it is a great absurdity, ut quid frustrafiat; that any thing be in vaine: and in morall, ut sit , vaine desire: In divine things much more;Ne frustra au∣diamus. Let us not heare in vaine. 1 Cor. 15.14. Paul useth no other argu∣ment to prove that Christ is risen, then that, else his preaching and their hearing should be in vaine. Gal. 2.2. . I went up by reve∣lation, and communicated unto them that Gospell which I preach among the Gentiles, but severally to them which were of reputation. Ratio, the reason, , lest by any meanes I should run, or had runne in vaine, 2 Cor. 6.1. as he desired the Corinthians that they received not the grace of God in vaine: so wee are to looke that we heare nothing in vaine; least we be like those (Ier. 6.29.) that let the bellowes burne, and the lead consume in the fire, and the founder melt in vaine.The word of God not in vaine, in respect of it selfe. The word of the Lord is not in vaine, either in re∣spect 1. of it selfe; 2. Preacher; 3. hearer. In respect of it selfe, it cannot be in vaine, Esa. 55.10, 11. As the raine and snow commeth from Heaven, and returneth not againe, but watereth the Earth, and maketh it to bring forth and bud; that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to him that eateth. 11. So shall my word be that goeth out of my mouth; it shall not returne to me voyd, but it shall accomplish that which I will; and shall prosper in the thing whereto I send it: therefore by every hearing we are either bettered, or har∣dened.2. Neither in regard of the preacher. And as the word in respect of it selfe cannot be in vaine; so neither in regard of the preacher, Esay 49.4. I have laboured in vaine; I have spent my strength for nothing: but my judgement and worke is with the Lord. It is also warranted, Luke 10.6. If the sonne of peace be there, your peace shall be upon him; if not, it shall returne to you againe. More plaine, 2 Cor. 2.15. , we are unto God a sweet savour of Christ, in them
that are saved, and in them that perish. Great care then is to be ta∣ken how we behave our selves in hearing. 3. Pars. The third part. Venite & auscultate; come and hearken. Its the manner of the holy Ghost, to comprise many things in one word. In the first, re∣quired presence, to come; the beginning of Christs obedience, Psal. 40.7, 8. Then said I, loe, I come, &c. The action, Psal. 122.1. I rejoyced when they said unto me, we will goe into the house of the Lord. Esay 2.2, 3. And many people shall say, come let us goe up to the house of the Lord, &c. And the Hebrew proverbe is, Blessed is he that dusteth himselfe with the dust of the temple; alledging the Psal. 84.10. For a day in thy Courts is better then 1000 otherwhere. The cause of our comming. Because it is to be feared, lest wee concurre with those, Esay 29.23. that came rather for feare of dis∣favour or mulct, then for any godly respect: to such the Word shall be as a sealed booke, that shall not be opened. Therefore though all mens censure were removed, and it were free for us to come, or not to come, yet are we so to be affected, seeing the Lord hath said venite, come, in respect of God. The Centurion, Matth. 8.9. saith, that they which were under him, when hee called them, came, &c. Therefore it is but a small service which we doe to the Lord in com∣ming. The people made three daies journey after Christ into the wildernesse, Act. 20. Paul prolonged his speech till midnight; but our comming and attention is but small to these, Psal. 105.31. & 34. Grashoppers, Flies, Lice, Caterpillers, come at the commandement of the Lord; therefore if we come behind these unreasonable crea∣tures, we shall not need to have sentence pronounced against us; for our owne consciences will condemne us. For comming.2. Assiduity. Because in the second place we see by Act. 17.21. an humour in the Athenians, whiles Pauls doctrine was, they came gladly as Luk. 23.8. Herod rejoyced when Christ came to him, hoping to see some miracle wrought by him. Augustine calleth the three daies journey of the people, monstrum diligentiae, the wonder of diligence: therefore as they Acts 2.46. daily continued and resorted together, &c. and Pro. 8.33. Waiting daily at my doores, and giving attendance at the posts of my doores; so are we to doe the like: and never to intermit this exercise. Cyrill,Villa non est pec∣catum: sed si im∣pediat, est pecca∣tum. The Farme is no sinne, but if it hinder, that is a sinne. Excuses ordi∣nary. Not to be ad∣mitted. 1. Businesse. 2. Play. Math. 20.6. He reprehen∣ded them that stood in the market idle. Non sunt istae institutiones, sicut homiliae; these institutions are not as Homilies: for if we misse a Sermon, we may redeeme it; if we once misse this exercise, we cannot have a perfect building; Comparatur enim aedi∣ficio: si vel una desit pars, totum sit imperfectum aedisicium necesse est; it is compared to a building, in it if one part be wanting, then of force the whole Fabricke is imperfect. Therefore we are to follow the Apostles counsell, Ephes. 5.16. Redeeming the time, because the daies are evill. Then are we not to excuse our selves, whe∣ther it be by excuse or businesse, as Matth. 22.5. for though the things of themselves be lawfull and good: yet where they come to hinder the knowledge of God, they become sinne. Or by play, Gen. 25.27. no other reason given of Esaus idlenesse, then that he was a man of the field, and loved his pastime and gaming. Or by
Idlenesse, Exod. 32.16. The people sate them downe to eate and drinke, and rose up to play. Or by a spirit of unlustinesse, as Esay 29.10. The Lord hath covered you with the spirit of slumber, and hath shut up your eyes. Ergo deponenda quaelibet impedimenta; therefore all impedi∣ments must be laid aside. Yet if sicknesse, or any other impediment hinder us; then are we to follow the counsell of the Apostle, Eph. 5.16. of redeeming the time. 3. Forasmuch as we see by Matth. 22.11. that every commer is not welcome,3. Idlenesse. but he that hath his wedding garment and commeth prepared as he ought,4. Spirit of un∣lustinesse. Videndum quo∣modo audiamus, Take heed how we heare. Bona, bene, good things, well. 2 Chron. 29.34. the Priests being too few (adhuc imperfecta existente religione) to slay all the burnt-offe∣rings, their brethren the Levites helped them, till they had done the worke, and other Priests were sanctified; for the Levites were more upright in heart to sanctifie themselves, then the Priests. And seeing 1 Chron. 29.18. when David had taken as good order as he could, he directed his prayer to God, that it would please him to prepare the hearts of the people. And for the Gospell, Matth. 3.3. the office of John was, to prepare the way of the Lord, and to make streight his pathes. Therefore we are to be prepared as the Lord requireth; which though it be so manifold, that the wise men of Israel have set downe 48. things, to be used: yet may they be reduced to two. First,Wherein our preparation to hearing doth consist. 1. The purpose of the heart. that which the light of nature hath set downe, , vel , the purpose of our heart, to frame our lives accor∣dingly, Act. 11.23. Barnabas his first exhortation, , with purpose of heart to cleave unto the Lord. And this is the first: whosoever will heare, must heare with this condition, that he convert it to his life, and put it in practice; quia hic finis est, for this is the end. Psal. 119.9. A young man must rule his life according to the word; to this end to cleanse his waies: Ergo, he that practiseth not that which he heareth, faileth in this first point. Luke 12.1. Christ calleth the doctrine of the Pharisees there leaven; Sic & dici potest doctrina Christi, fermentum Christi; so the doctrine of Christ may be called the leaven of Christ: whose property is, as 1 Cor. 5.6. to turne the whole lumpe into the property of it selfe. So if we heare the doctrine of Christ, it must be leaven to us. But the leaven turneth the taste of the lumpe into the taste of it selfe. To this purpose, a most fearefull place, Deut. 29.18. That there be not among you, man or woman, nor family, nor Tribe, which should turne his heart this day from the Lord our God, to serve the gods of these Nations, and that there be not any roote among you that bringeth forth gall or wormwood. The second thing is prayer.. Prayer. Because as David saith, Psal. 10.19. when the Lord hath prepared ones heart, then he bendeth his eares to his prayers. Againe, the feare of God is wisedome: wisedome cannot be got, except it be asked for of God; as Iames 1.5. If any one lacke wisedome, let him aske it of God, &c. Practise whereof in Salomon, 1 King. 3.9. praying to the Lord for wisdome; and the Lords appro∣bation, that he required wisedome, in the same place, vers. 10. Matth. 21.13. Domus mea, domus orationis vocabitur; My house shall be
called the house of prayer. These short prayers are those the fa∣thers call ejaculationes. Of such is the Psal. 119. full; as vers. 18. Open thou mine eyes, that I may see the wondrous things of thy Law. And in the middest, when he feeleth himselfe dull, vers. 37. he saith, O turne away mine eyes, lest they behold vanity; and quicken thou me in the way. And in the same place concludeth with thankesgiving, saying, I will thanke thee with an unfained heart, when I shall have learned the judgements of thy righteousnesse. By these and such like we must seeke to be upholden. Effect of our prayer prepa∣ring to the ca∣techisme.For the effect of our request, that forasmuch as Eccles. 12.11. the words of the Lord are likened to goades, and nailes, as on the con∣trary, Psal. 19.10. to Honey-combes, we are to pray that it would please the Lord that we may as well feele the nayles of his threat∣nings, as the Honey-combes of his mercy. Thus must we believe that there be such things in the word, though we have no feeling of them: yet the Saints of God have felt them. If this might also be in us, it would pricke us forward, as Genes. 32.11. Jacob prayeth to be delivered from the hands of his brother Esau: but contrariwise, If we might feele the sweetnesse and delight of this Honey-combe, so that we might have a love to them; the diligence would neces∣sarily follow; for Delectatio, diléctio & diligentia, ex se pendent,Dilectio, delecta∣tio, diligentia sese mutuò & neces∣sariò consequun∣tur. Love, delight, diligence, doe mutually and necessarily fol∣low each other. seque necessariò consequuntur. Delight, love, and diligence doe mutually and necessarily follow one another. 2. Pars. Auscultate mihi. The second part. Hearken unto me. New∣nesse of life, Esay 29.13. This people come neere to me with their mouth, and honour me with their lips, but their hearts they have removed farre from me; and their feare towards me was taught by the precepts of men. As also, Marke 7.6. ▪ This people honoureth me with their lippes, but their heart is farre from me: which the heathen man declareth by that which they call praesens, absens; present, absent. Therefore in this respect it is requi∣red that we be so present, as that we give eare, and have our hearts so neere as our bodies, i. , to listen unto, to obey; Psal. 40.8. Sacrifices and offerings didst thou not require; but mine eares hast thou opened, Esay 22.3. the Lord to Esay, The eyes of them that see, shall not be shut, and the eares of them that heare, shall hearken, Exod. 5.17. Pharao of this opinion, that religion is an idle mans exercise. The heathen thinketh that all the duty lieth on the speaker. But Christ maketh it a great matter to heare well, Luke 8.18. . Take heed how ye heare. He addeth his reason;  for to every one that hath, to him shall be given; and whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken even that which he seemeth to have. Because he that heareth well, the spirit will reveale more unto him; & from him that heareth not well,Plutarch. lib. de auditione, p. 168.5. soloecismes in heaing. shall be taken away that little which he had before. And the Gentiles set downe, , that one may as well , commit soloecismes in hearing, as to commit a soloecisme in speaking. There be five soloecismes in hearing, 1. , contraria :1.  A looking like one that is goggleeyed. the straying of the eye; contrary to those, Luke 4.20.
And the eyes of all them that were in the syna∣gogue were fastened on him. 2. . The hanging downe of the countenance;. A casting downe of the countenance. contrary to that, 2 Cor. 9.7. . Not grudgingly, or of necessity, for God loveth a cheerefull giver. Col. 3.23. , And whatsoever ye doe, doe it heartily as to the Lord, and not unto men. 3. , the variation of the body, which ar∣gueth a wearinesse in hearing.. The altering or change of the body. 4. , sleepy yawnings, gasping; cleane contrary to auscultation, which argueth a desire to sleepe:. Sleepy yaw∣nings. for which Christ, Matth. 26 40. rebuketh his disciples. ; What cold ye not watch with me one houre? 5. Smiling one upon another, whispering in the eare, beckning one to another, &c.Smiling, nodding, whis∣pering, beck∣ning, &c. The heathen, before their mysteries, and ministring of their sacrifices; had some one, that stood up in the middest of them, and cryed aloud, Hoc agite, attend to this; . It is an easie thing to heare, a hard thing to obey. Esay. 32.3. Iames 1.23. If any man heareth the word and doth it not, he is like to a man, that beholdeth his naturall face in a glasse; for when hee hath consi∣dered himselfe, he goeth his way and forgetteth immediately, what manner of one he was. So also may we say of them; that though they heare attentively, yet lay not up those words that they heare, in their hearts. A Rabbin compareth such kind of eares to an houre-glasse. When the one glasse is full of sand, it is turned; and the sand run∣neth out againe into the other glasse. These kind of eares are the worst, and not worthy to participate the mysteries of God.3. Signe, that we give our mind to it. There must not onely be a laying up in memory, but in our hearts also; so long, 2 Pet. 1.19. . Ʋntill the day dawne, and the day-starre arise in your hearts. Amongst the Schoolemen,Axioma: Quod cor non facit, non sit. there is this Axiome, Quod cor non facit, non sit: what is not done with the heart, is not done. Else shall we be like Pharao, Exod. 7.23. Pharao returned, and went againe to his house, nei∣ther entered it into his heart. Therefore the precept is set downe, Deut. 6.6. And these words which I command thee this day shall be in thy heart. And againe, this order of catechising there briefly set downe; Deut. 6.6. 1. Write them. 2. Bind them, that we remember them. 3. Speake of it to worke thereafter. Pro. 4.21. Let them not depart from thine eyes; but keepe them in the middest of thine heart. Pro. 3.1. Let thy heart, &c. 3. upon the table of thy heart. 5. with all thy heart. The talking of these must be to this end, that they may worke more knowledge in us. We are for the most part in these daies content with the . Prov. 1.4. To give to the simple sharpnesse of wit; to give to the children, knowledge and discretion: A learned man saith, That he learned much of his Master; more, of his fellowes; most, of them whom he taught. Prov. 2.10.11. When wisedome entereth into thine heart, and knowledge delighteth thy soule, then shall counsell preserve thee, and understanding shall keepe thee. There∣fore the writing,2. This practise is the fruit. committing to memory, and talking of them, is to this end, that they may worke deeper knowledge in our hearts. Con∣cerning them therefore; that we may not onely be able to intreate
of them, but also to practice them: we have these 3. rules. 1. , probatio; examination. 2. , meditation. 3. , dilatio vel potius  communicatio, conference. Because the Lord would have us to be called to his word, he commandeth us to search the Scriptures.1. Rule,  examination. For , iall; John 5.39. , Search the Scriptures. Esay 8.19, &c. When they shall say unto you, inquire of them that have the spirit of Divination, &c. Revel. 2.2. , &c. Thou hast tried them, which say they are Apostles, &c. Acts 17.11. , searching the Scriptures. 2. , care, meditation.2. . meditation. Besides the manifold iteration, Psal. 119. Abrahams servant, Gen. 24.33. Most plaine, 1 Tim. 4.15. , Meditate upon these things, give thy selfe wholly to them, that thy profiting may appeare to all. 3. , conference, Gal. 2.2.3. . Conference. , I went up by revelation, and communicated unto them. Luk. 24.17. ; What man∣ner of communications are these that ye have one to another? Mal. 3.16.17. Then spake they that feared the Lord, every one to his neighbour, &c. Though they say that experience is the mother of knowledge; yet , conversation, is the grandmother; for it begetteth the expe∣rience; and in our owne reason, the practice is all, and fruit of all, Esay 27.9. hic est omnis fructus, ut auferatur omne peccatum; this is all the fruit, to take away his sinne. As in diseases there are bastard feavers, which have  febrium verarum, tokens of true fea∣vers: Sic & spuria est pietas, so is there a counterfeit piety. Thus for these two points, Venite & auscultate, Come and hearken. The Apostle saith, 1 Cor. 13.8. . Whether there be prophecies, they shall faile; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away. But Christ saith, Luke 10.42. Mary hath chosen the good part, which shall not be taken from her. 2. Prov. 1.28. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seeke me early, but they shall not find me. Therefore God will not heare them, because they heard not him. 3. 1 Sam. 2.25. They heark∣ned not unto the voice of their father, because the Lord would slay them. Ideo non audiunt, quia Deus interficiet cos. Therefore men heare not, because God will slay them. 4. Labour for knowledge, Phil. 2.16. Holding forth the word of life, that I may rejoyce in the day of Christ, that I have not runne in vaine, nor laboured in vaine. That it may be with us, as with the Romanes, of whom the Apostle saies, , &c. Rom. 6.17. But God be thanked, that ye were the servants of sinne; but ye have obeyed from the heart that forme of doctrine which was delivered you. Thus we conclude, as Cyrill did, Meum est docere; vestrum auscul∣tare: Dei perficere. It is my part to teach, yours diligently to heare, Gods to perfect.
Religion a building; the principles, the foundation. In teaching religion, where we are to be∣gin.The course of Religion which we are to intreate of, is compared to a building, Matth. 7.24. & 26. , &c. Hath built his house upon a Rocke, &c. the teacher to a builder, 1 Cor. 3.10. . As a wise Builder. The principles of Religion, to a foundati∣on, Heb. 6.1. , Not laying againe the foundation of repentance from dead workes, and of faith towards God. Col. 3.23. . Doe it heartily. In a building, the chiefest thing is, that the foundation be layd deepe enough. Our warrant out of Luke 6.48. (Non super arenam) Not upon sands. , &c. but as it is in the same place, He digged deepe, and laid the foundation, &c. This is spoken o this end; for that the builders in our age digge not deepe enough, till they come to the hard rocke. 1. If any ground of Religion be set downe: it is asked how we know that it is true? 2. How we know that these Scriptures are the words of God. And if they be, how we can prove ipsum propositum, the purpose or aime it selfe, by the Scriptures. Lastly, how we know that there is a God: and if, what is the regard of him towards man; whether such, as that he would afford him his word, and what is the regard of God. But they without further examination, presuppose these booke to be true and the Word of God: and digge, to build, no further then the earth, leaving advantage for the under∣myner. And we know that many have undermined the very foun∣dation, and have flatly denyed that there is a God: and so when the divell shall bring with him his , inundations and floods, He will shake the foundation of Religion; as hereto∣fore, he hath plunged the dearest of Gods children.4 questions that we way come to the rocke it selfe. These are taken for granted by Catechists without any examination. Therefore that we may begin at the hard rocke, we will adde these foure questions. 1. Whether there is a God? against the Atheists. 2. Whether he hath a care of man: and such, as that he would deliver his word unto him: against the Semi-atheists, Epicures. 3. Whe∣ther the Scriptures we use, be his word, and true: against the Turkes and Pagans. 4. Whether this being the Word of God, our religion be truly grounded on it: against the Jewes, Papists, and other heretickes. 1. Whether there be a God?For the first, our warrant, Heb. 11.6. wherein the two first are set downe, . He that commeth unto God,Heb. 6.11. handled. Three things to be observed in Heb. 11.6. must beleeve that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seeke him. Wherein these three things are to be noted: 1. the fruit of Religion, of all our doings and our life, i. , to come unto God. 2. The meanes to attaine this fruit. i. by beleeving. 3. What we are to beleeve? 1. That there is a God. 2. That he is a rewarder of good to the good, and evill to the evill. Or, first the end of our journey. 2. The way it selfe. 3. The two stations. In the first is contained the short summe of the felicity of man, able to stirre him up to give care. 2. The snatching of the people at that which they suppose it to be. 3. The great breaking of the braines of men, about the seeking out of it.
1. The fruit of religion, or the summe of mans felicity.That this happinesse is God, every mans desire sufficiently testi∣fieth it. And David saith, Psal. 4.6. Who will shew us any good? Au∣gustine alledgeth out of Varro, 288. severall opinions of Philoso∣phers, concerning this felicity. August. de civit. Dei, lib. 19. cap. 1. from Varro out of his booke De philosophia. First then, that man is not happy in his owne estate, it is too plaine, by the Epithetes that the heathen give to man: Nudus, miser, . Naked, wretched, a most weake creature, A patterne of imbecillity. Therefore seeing that it is not in man himselfe, it must be in com∣ming to another thing, , to come. This phrase also of com∣ming, is used in the vulgar tongue; comming to wealth, honour, learning, &c. The opinion therefore of Christian wisedome is this, That whilst man kept Gods Commandement, and submitted his wisedome to him: he was partaker of Gods goodnesse, and was in happinesse; after desiring to depart from God, fell into extreame misery; 1. Into sinne. 2. Into shame. 3. Feare. 4. Travell, care, vexation of body and mind. Lastly, into death. So by comming to God, we shall have all these redeemed, and become happy againe. The opinion of others, that thinke a man may have his felicity here, and of himselfe, may be reduced to these five heads. 1. Wealth,5. Divers opini∣ons concerning mans felicity. Particular ex∣ceptions. worldlings. 2. Honour politickes. 3. Pleasure, Epicures. 4. Vertue, Stoicks. 5. Contemplation, Idea, Plato, &c. 1. Against rich∣es, that felicity doth not con∣sist in them. Goods, goods, apparrell, &c. preferre not a man to a high∣er place, but keepeth his na∣ture from de∣caying; but fe∣licity maketh a man higher then he was.Against these short exceptions: and 1. against wealth. 1. Wealth, in things artificiall is not for it selfe; neither is wealth naturall for it selfe: but onely supplying the wants of nature; but cannot bring us to an higher estate. 2. The end of man is better then man him∣selfe; but these, worse than man: for a man for his life, would give the whole world: therefore 3. à modo retorquendi Stoicorum, From the Stoicks manner of retorting. It is a strange thing that that should be optimum bonum, the chiefe good, which hath beene doubted since the world stood, whether it be good or evill. Seneca, semper eguerunt interprete; alwaies needed an interpreter. 1. That they make not a man good. 2. That God and the celestiall natures have them not, yet happy. 3. That is not good, which may sometimes profit, but that which alwaies profiteth. 4. The inconveniences that should come hereby; 1. then men should not be esteemed, by that they are; but by that they have: so his leather bagge full of money, should be better then himselfe. None esteemeth a sword by the scabbard, nor the horse by his trappings. 5. The good that com∣meth from wealth is in spending it, and parting from it. Sic esset summa felicitas, abscedere a felicitate: quod omnium absurdissimum. So chiefe felicity should consist in parting from felicity, which is most absurd. 2. Nor doth humane feli∣city consist in honour, this is but a signe of vertue, and the signe is alwaies deterior to the thing signified.2. Honour. 1. They bring themselves from this; in saying that honos est virtutis umbra; honour is but the shadow of vertue: for who knoweth not that we must leave the shadow, and follow the body? therefore potius statuenda est virtus felicitas, we must rather determine vertue to be felicity. 2. Seeing there must be honourers, and honoured, therefore there must be many to make one happy;
quod felicitatis non est; which pertaines not to felicity. 3. As they may have honourers, so they may have dishonourers: sic partim erunt felices, partim infelices; so they shall be in part happy, in part unhappy. But they leave that which is the greatest; Honore dignunt esse quod virtutis est, to be worthy of honour, which belongs to ver∣tue. 4. Quia honor est bonum sine omni stabilitate, for honour is a good without any stability; and hangeth on other mens mouthes. There∣fore we shall fall into that absurdity, that we should make felicity most mutable, like a Vane or Weathercocke. Christ triumphed royally riding into Ierusalem, after three or foure daies he was accu∣sed of the same people that would before have made him their King; in so much that they cried, crucifige eum, &c. crucifie him. As for pleasure,3. Nor doth it consist in plea∣sure. Our body re∣ceiveth paine by every part, by the prick∣ing of a pin in the skin. the very mould of our body doth reclaime a∣gainst it. For there are but two parts and conditions whereby plea∣sure is commended to us; and for the one, the Epicures themselves have wished themselves to be like Cranes; for the other like Spar∣rowes. 2. Cum homo sit spiritualis, & intellectualis; voluptas sensibi∣lis, seeing a man is spirituall, and intellectuall, but pleasure sensible; Therefore by comming to pleasure, he commeth to a thing inferior to himselfe; but felicity must be above him. And Seneca wisheth himselfe never to have beene botne, if he had beene borne to this end. s. Sapere cibum, Vinum potare; to taste meate, to drinke wine. 3. We should be more miserable then the boasts, if pleasure were our end; for they use their pleasures openly and at liberty. man in his most lawfull pleasures, is ashamed to doe them openly; apage felicitatem, quae latebras quaerit; away with that felicity which seek∣eth corners 2. They doe it without remorse of conscience, man after he hath done it, is pricked in his conscience; and feeleth paine in himselfe. In voluptate humana, elsi vel maximè legitima, 1. verecun∣da. 2. successio morsus conscientiae. In humane pleasure, even the most lawfull, there is 1. a bashfulnesse. 2. a succeeding of a biting conscience. Quicquid bo∣num est, ex hypo∣thesi, è se bonum non est: sed eo quod dat illi con∣ditionem illam.4. By their owne confession it is not good, unlesse it be modera∣ted; so that it hath the goodnesse from that, which giveth mode∣ration to it. If pleasure should be felicity, then should the vertues of temperance, continence, shamefac'dnesse, &c. have been lost. 3. Tem∣perantia est abstinentia à voluptatibus, Temperance is an abstinence from pleasures. Therefore felicitas esset in abstinentia à selicitate, Hap∣pinesse should be a restraining from happinesse. 5. We say, that he is continent that abstaines from pleasures. Shall we say also, that he is continent that abstaineth from felicity, or that he is praiseworthy? 6. Plutarch. If an Epicure, had but an houre to live, and for that houre, it were put to his choyce, whether for that houre he would sport himselfe in greatest pleasures, and make a sumptuous ban∣quet; or worke some noble exploit to get him a perpetuall fame? I know saith he, he would rather choose some noble act, then to en∣joy such a momentanie pleasure, and so would condemne his owne opinion.
Morall vertues are onely to pacifie the troublesome parts of the mind, i. the affections. The pacifying of our affections,Nor consists felicity in ver∣tue. to bring an easinesse to our actions. Omnis autem actio est proper finem, every action is for some end. Therefore sunt alii ultra hunc fines, there are other ends beyond this. There is of every vertue a severall use; as of Justice, to maintaine Peace. Of Fortitude, to procure Peace: therefore these have a further end then themselves. 3. This principall vertue. s. prudencie: (est enim forma virtutum omnium, for it is the forme of all vertues,) is defined to be nothing else, but a dire∣ction to an end: prudentia est scientia eorum quae aguntur propter finem. prudence is a knowledge of those things which are done for the end. 4. Quidam habent peratiam jaculandi, tollunt autem scopum: some have skill in shooting, but take away the marke: which they declare by , &c. Appetere, metam attingere,Nor doth hap∣pinesse consist in contempla∣tion. Axio. Phys. à scopo abrrare, considerare, to desire greatly, to reach the marke, to misse the marke, to consider, &c. It is an absurd thing in nature, Ʋt esset lon∣gum in generatione, quod breve in fruitione & duratione: si autem con∣templatio esset felicitas, that that should be long in generation, which is short in fruition and duration: but if contemplation were felicity, a man should be all daies of his life in getting of it; and keepe it but a yeere or two. 2. Our understanding is onely in power; and to be happy, is duci in actum, to be brought into act. But to say that this perfect power may Be brought to a perfect act is most absurd; for there is no man that can say, there is nothing but I know it. 3. By their owne confession we know not the essentiall forme, no not of the most vile creature: and we are ignorant in most familiar things to us: quanto igitur major sutura caecutientia est, & cognitionis imper∣sectio, cum ad diviniores naturas perventum fuerit, adeoque ipsum Deum? de quo nihil cognoscimus, nisi per privationem, se▪ infinitus, incompre∣hensibilis. How much more then will our blindnesse be, and the darknesse of our understanding, when we shall come to more divine natures, and so to God himselfe? of whom we know nothing, but by way of privation: as that he is infinite, incomprehensible. 4. And they themselves testifie that they know nothing: Socrates, Hoc unum scio, me nihil scire; this one thing I know, that I know nothing. Augustine confesseth, he had  in contemplandis entibus coelestibus; Gray or sky-coloured eyes in contemplating of celestiall beings. Simonides, the more time he had to meditate of Gods es∣sence, the farther off he confessed himselfe to be. Democritus, In prosundo est, It is in the deepe; I cannot sound it. Maxima pars eorum quae seimus, est minima pars eorum quae ignoramus; The greatest part of these things we know, is the least part of these we know not.2 Demonstra∣tive arguments to prove there is no happines but in God. Hitherto for particular exceptions. Now generally to conclude against them all demonstratively, that to come to any thing besides God, is not happinesse. They set downe two things in their felicity; 1. Terminus appetitus, or  the bound or limit of the desire, or a mind contented with its owne lot. 2. Perpetuity. But to come to any thing but to God, non facit terminum appeti∣tui, doth not satisfie the desire; for God onely giveth rest to the
appetite. Ʋt enim ponatur terminus appetitui; for to satisfie the desire, there must be first contentatio, hoc esse non potest sine satisfactione. Ap∣petitui nihil potest satisfacere, nisi Deus unicus; contentation this can∣not be without satisfaction. Nothing can satisfie the appetite save God alone. The reason, because the appetite of man was ordained to receive God. That which is ordained to receive God, all the world is too little to fill it; and without God there is no universall good: and therefore there is some want, and therefore desire, and therefore labour to come to it, and therefore unquietnesse, and therefore no felicity. Facilius appareat in speciali examplo, this more easily may appeare in particular example; as of riches. , i. ardere. A word that commeth from a verbe which signifieth to burne. Sive ardens appetitus, a burning or unbridled desire. But if a man should heape never so much wood on the fire, though at the first it might seeme to keepe it downe, and put it out; yet by little and little the fire will wax bigger and bigger, &c. and so in riches, the more matter is ministred, the lesse it is quenched; and so this desire waxeth infinite. Quid cius sitim restinguet, cujus sitis è potu crescit? what can quench his thirst, whose thirst increaseth by drin∣king? There is no worldly thing to satisfie the appetite of man: riches were not made to fill a mans minde, no more then a bagge to be filled with learning; or one to stand all day gaping in the wind, thinking to be filled therewith. 3. Though it would receive them, yet is it not put to the soule of man: contrary to that principle, Oportet apponi desideratum desideranti; that the thing desired must be set before him that desireth it. 4. Granting all this to be; yet when one hath all that he desired to have, he may have a new ap∣petite; and so after he hath filled one bagge, he may desire to fill another; after one barne, another. Here they are compared, Prov. 30.15. to Horseleeches, give, give: and to the greedy Mastiffe, that swalloweth whole morsels, as fast as they are cast to him. Id apparet in Alexandro planissimè, this appeareth in Alexander the great, plain∣ly; that shed many teares after he had conquered all the World, for that there were no more worlds. Theocritus, and every one will wish, Mille meis errent in montibus agni; & sic denuo ascendet gradatim eorum appetitus, that they had a thousand sheepe feeding on the Mountaines, and so their desire will increase by degrees; untill they may say, pauperis est numerare pecus, it's for a poore man to tell his cattell. As Abraham, Gen. 18. descended, in his intercession for Sodome from fifty to ten, so will they descend. Therefore we may conclude, that all these waies are unnaturall; and this desire unna∣turall. If an appetite be naturall, it hath his end: else if it hath not his end, it is unnaturall. Therefore they are not out of the way; Via enim eunti terminus est; for the way is the bound to him that go∣eth; therefore it is not possible to have an end, but of God: but they, when they are filled, cease not; Quia non ex vacuitate, sed ex abundantia eorum appetitus oritur: quod naturale est, expletum cessat, quia ex vacuitate. Naturalis appetitus non naturalis ex abundantia; ut in hy∣drope, & morbo lupino, cum quis laborat veracitate lupina: because
their desire proceedeth not from emptinesse, but from fulnesse: that which is naturall being filled ceaseth, because naturall appetite comes of want, but that which is not naturall from aboundance; as in the Hydropsie, and in the woolfe sicknesse, when one is sicke of a woolfish gluttony. The 2. thing perpetuity. Where this wanteth, there is uncertainty,Perpetuity. and therefore feare, or expectation of losse; and so, unquietnesse: therefore no felicity. But this perpetuity is in none but in God: for though we continue, they shall passe: as Job 1. and though they con∣tinue, we shall passe; as Luke 12.20. of the rich man: and when we have obtained them, and peradventure shall not get them with∣out much labour, they may, (Esay 59.5.) be as a spiders webbe to us, that may suddenly be swept away. They are uncertaine, 1. mo∣ney, for theeves. 2. merchandise for the winds. 3. building for fire. 4. possessions for unrighteous Judges: and all these for the bands of the Sabees; that is, our enemies. Or as a Cockatrices egge, which he that eateth of, dieth: and that which is trodden upon, breaketh into a serpent. Augustine, Habent, si non sinem suum, finem tuum: ha∣bent, si non finem tuum, finem suum: quisquis est contemptor vitae suae, est dominus tuae. They have, if not their owne end, yet thy end: they have, if not thy end, yet their owne end: whosoever is a despiser of his owne life is Lord of thine. 1. The uncertainty of many in dan∣ger of the seas, winds, stormes; of unrighteous Judges, the bands of the enemy; Mans life hath 300. diseases and odde. A little poyson overcommeth it: if one care not to be hanged, he will not care to kill thee. Augustine proveth that a man is brickle in respect of them, by his great grandfathers glasse, that lasted three or foure mens ages. Divintiae autem fragillimae; ergo in his nulla faelicitas: but riches are most brickle, therefore in them is no felicity. But in com∣ming to God, there is both , full contentment, and perfection. Stability, ergo & felicitas summa & unica; therefore both chiefe and onely felicity. For as Christ said to the woman of Samaria, if thou wilt have the water of life, you must goe to God, the fountaine of all goodnesse; God is universale bonum,Iohn 4.14. primum bonum: fons boni, primum ens: fons essentiae: aeterna mens. God is the universall good: the first good, the fountaine of goodnesse, the first being: the fountaine of being: the eternall mind. Experience of the true waies of comming to God;3. Ab experi∣entia. From experi∣ence. in David Psal. 16.12. In thy presence is the fulnesse of joy; and at thy right hand there is pleasure forevermore. Experience of the false waies of cōming to God; in Salomon, who through the whole booke of the Preacher, confes∣sed that in the whole world he found, 1. inanity, 2. vanity. 4. Confessed also by the heathen before Christs time:4. The confes∣sion of the hea∣then. in Sybils oracles, and , to be happy, to live happily, declareth the fe∣licity of man to be the union to God. Pythagoras his , golden sayings, Plato 10. of the rep. and in his phaedo. Hermes, Plutarch, Sim∣plicius upon Epictetus. Iamblichus of the Egyptian mysteries. Cyrill against Julian. No felicity but in comming to God. Thus is hath beene proved, 1. By particular exceptions. 2. by demonstrative
arguments. 3. by experience. 4. by the confession of the heathen. Augustine in his meditations saith, Domine creâsti nos ad te; nunquam ergo quietum erit cor, donec pervenerit ad te. O Lord thou hast created us to thy selfe, the heart therefore will never be at rest till it shall come unto thee. To come, velest in itinere, vel in appulsu, is either 1. in the journey, or 2. in the arriving. The last steppe is commonly adventus, the advent or comming. There is duplex felicitas, a two∣fold happinesse, Viae, vitae, of the way, of the life: of the way which is penultimus finis, the penult end; and of the life, which is finis ul∣timus, the last end, Walking and going in the way of his comman∣dements. Or as the Rabbins, there is felicitas atrii, & triclinii, the happinesse of the porch, and of the parlour. In respect of these two felicities, 1. in itinere. 2. in appulsu; 1. in the journey, 2. in the ap∣proach, No perfect felicity in this life. Ratio: nil ab omni parte beatum; neque quicquam ab omni parte miserum. The reason; there is nothing absolutely happy, nor is there any thing in every respect miserable. Children are accounted free men, quia spe liberi, because free through hope; we in this life are happy quia spe felices, because happy through hope. The reason, quia vita quam sic vivimus, non est vita nostra, sedvia ad vitam, caetera habent hîc vitam suam. Because the life we thus live, is not our life, but the way to life; all others have here their owne life. 2. It is not possible to come to felicity in this life. Heb. 6.19. the state of man is compared to a ship, felicity to an anker, hope to a cable. The way to come to God.Now the way to come to God, is , to beleeve. Comming to any thing is a motion; Omnis motio est ab appetitu: ut moveatur appe∣titus, cognoscenda ipsa via. Ignoti enim nulla cupido: Every motion is from the appetite; that the appetite be moved the way must be knowne, for there is no desire of a thing unknowne. Therefore the way must be knowne; Via ad Deum accedendi duplex; the way to come to God is twofold. 1. By reach of mans reason. 2 By beleeving. The Manichees (according to S. Augustine) in a bravery against the Christians,The heresie of the Manichees next to A∣theisme. held that errour, that men were to come to God by reason, not by beliefe, Atque adeo dicere solitisunt, Christianos impo∣nere jugum credendi, non autem aperire fontem sciendi. And so they were wont to say, that Christians did impose the yoke of beleeving, but did not open the fountaine of knowing. This way, because it best pleased man, did most and longest prevaile; atque adeo hi haeretici apud omnes omnium aetatum homines valuerunt plurimum, & ubique floruerunt. And indeed the Heretickes prevailed exceeding much amongst all men of all ages, and flourished every where. In so much that if any Philosophers had associated themselves to reli∣gion, they were first Manichees. This also is manifest from this; for that Faustus his errour was most dangerous, and of longest continu∣ance. The like sect is in our daies,The way of beliefe the best way to come to God, of rea∣son worst. Quaeristae, querists, who will have a reason of every thing; and so farre as you can goe with them by reason, so farre will they goe with you, no further. Then we must prove that the way of beleefe, is most convenient and necessary: of reason, most inconvenient and worst.
1. If we come to God by reason, then should none but excellent wits be saved; because none beside them are capable of demonstra∣tive reason. But that way is inconvenient, which but few can goe in: Such is the way of reason, of saith contrariwise, if this were it were all one: as if a company should take a journey; and because some of the company could leape over hedges and ditches, they should still make a high way through hedges and ditches. Deus an∣tem habet viam suam regiam. God hath his owne high way. 2. Besides the goodnesse of wit paines are necessarily required; and divers are commonly of such weake natures,Gods way is so easie, that aswel the weake, s the strong, may walke in it. that they cannot take such paines. Many also cannot intend such paines, because their callings are not for it, but are busied otherwise: so that the most part should be excluded from this way. But that way is incon∣venient, which lieth through many inconveniences. 3. We see by daily experience, before we come to Divinity, how many yeeres we spend: so that all, who are cut off before they come to these yeeres, should be debarred this felicity. But God hath set downe his way, a short way; so that we need no more but believe, & assecuti sumus, and we have attained.Porphyris his objection against saith. But they use to object one thing against faith, which Porphyrie against the Christians of his time. That it is a signe of simplicity to be too credulous, and that was a stoppe to many at that time, that they would not come to God by beleefe, lest they should be misliked. But the Philosopher can tell them, that none is too credulous, Nisi qui aut stulto,The solution. aut im∣probo credit; but he that believeth either a foolish or a wicked man. But these two necessarily are excluded from God; Deus enim ipsa veritas falsum dicere non potest: Deus ipsa prudentia, ne{que} fallere, ne{que} falli potest. Ide perfectae veritati perfecta sapientia, perfectae honestati perfect a conjuncta est justitia: nullus ergo incredulitati locus. For God who is truth it selfe cannot lie; God who is wisedome it selfe, can neither deceive, nor be deceived; therefore to perfect truth is joyned per∣fect wisedome, to perfect honour perfect justice; no place therefore is left for incredulity. That the way of beleefe is firme and grounded upon Gods Word, s proved from foure effects.Now that this way of beleeving is sure, and that this whereon it is grounded is the Word of God, though set forth by men, it may appea by tese foure effects or circumstances; (as Origen against Celsus) 1. healing of incurable diseases; as leprosie, dropsie, palsie, men possessed with foule spirits, such as physicke durst never at∣tempt to cure. 2. They raised divers from death. 3. They shooke the powers of Heaven. 4. Simple and unskilfull men proved won∣derfull and skilfull in one day of all tongues. Therefore there must needs have beene in them a Divine power that wrought these things in them. Therefore we see it in the certainety of the effect, though not in the certainety of the cause. Credulity more in reason, then in faith.This suspition of credulity, is more in the way of reason, then of beleefe, three reasons. 1. There being 288. sects of philosophy, and every one having his reasons for his opinion: therefore in that way there must needs be many crosse-waies, Cum veritatis via sit simplex & unica; since the
way of truth is simple and one; therefore impossible it is, that a man seeing such diversity of opinions, should not be but in greatest un∣certainty and doubt, Adeóque in incredulitatem labatur vel maximam; and so fall into great incredulity. 2. Arist. 1. Demonstr. That there is no necessary thing without the mixtion of contingency in it; therefore no absolute demon∣stration. Therefore nothing but is subject both to knowledge and contingency: ubi hoc, where this is, there is uncertainety. There∣fore nothing but may have diversity of opinions, by reason of our memories, and the confusion of our notions. 3. And chiefely, in cognoscendis primis causis, In knowing the first causes, they themselves confesse, that they are in the darke; both in respect of the object, quia immaterialia, because immateriall; and in respect of the fountaine and cause of our knowledge: quia prin∣cipia rationis meae a sensibus ducuntur: Deus & coelestia sensibus non subjiciuntur;The memory is able to re∣teine distinct notions. because the principles of my reason are drawne from sence, but God and divine things are not subject to sense, as the Phi∣losopher saies in his metaphysicks. God is a thing above reason, God above nature and sense. Sense can give no rules of God, and celestiall natures. For our reasons and understanding are confoun∣ded: illa autem simplicia & inconfusa, but they are simple and uncon∣founded. Therefore we cannot come to him by reason; therefore there must be some other way. Now that it is necessary that there can be no other way, then be∣leefe. If they should take away beleefe,Without be∣liefe no hu∣mane society. there should be an over∣throw of all things: and so they should neither be friends to any, nor any to them. If any one were to report any thing to another, that was not at the sight of that thing, and he to whom this thing were reported should not beleeve them, unlesse they brought their proofs for the least circumstance: non adigeret eos ad insaniam? would it not make them mad? 2. August. in his booke to Honoratus,August. cap. 10. de utilitate credendi, of the utility of beleeving. If one should come to me, and say to me, Augustine, shew me the true way by reason; then I say to him, you come to me in dissimulation and hypocrisie, not in any good mea∣ning: then will he protest his good meaning, and bolster it out with words as much as he can;Faith which they deny in words, they prove by their acts. then will I say, I beleeve you, yet you cannot perswade me by reason: now therefore seeing you will have me to beleeve you in this; is it not equity, that you beleeve me? seeing the profit of your beleefe doth not redound to me, but to you? 3. None of them all dare once call in question the words of a Prince: and God being at least as good as a Prince, ipsius verbo non credendum existimare, quanta impietas? to thinke hat this word is not to be beleeved, what impiety? 4. Arg. apertum & manifestum de actu (quem vocant patres) ex∣plicito, it is plaine and manifest concerning the act (which the fa∣thers call) explicite. There is none of them all but doth beleeve, and ought to beleeve: therefore the way of beleefe is not altogether to be rejected.
The necessity of beleeving.There are certaine matters which are to be knowne, that cannot be demonstrated by reason or sense, &c. but must necessarily be be∣leeved: as, whther he whom he calleth his father, be his father, &c. Istiusmodi quotidie creduntur, quia ratio ea persuadee non potest. Such are daily beleeved, because reason is not able to perswade them; in these we can say no more, but that we beleeve them. A∣mong which, is the comming to a place. We therefore making God the end of our journey, must beleeve that he is, Si quis peregre profectus vidisset procul a patriâ desertam regionem, & de ea apud alios referret aliquano, nque ei crederetur; quid afferre posst, nisi a testibus vel historia prbe? impossibile est ejus detur demonstrativa ratio. Atque haec de necessi. ate credendi. I any man travelling into farre countries had seene farre from his countrey a desert region, and should after∣ward make mention of it to others, and they should not beleve him, what could he bring unlesse he could prove it by witnesse or history? It is impossible a demonstrative reason should be given of it. And thus farre of the necessity of beleeving. In faith foure things to be noced.Now for this word Beliefe, note 4. things, 1. The heathen them∣selves have set downe in every art, oportet discentem credere, a lerner must beleeve; & whatsoever we first receive, we receive it from our teachers. This principle hath his ground, Actio perfect, in imperfecto recipitur, primò imperfectè tum perfectè, the action o one perfect is re∣ceived in one imperfect, 1. imperfectly, 2. perfectly▪ Wood 1. warmeth, & tum habet imperfectum & alienum calorem, then it hath an imperfect and strange heate; then it burneth, habetque prorium: sie discentes prius ab aliena recipunt ide, quam ipsi ad perfectioem aspirent cognitio∣nem; and it hath its owne proper heat: so learners first receive from the faith of others, which they themselves bring to a more perfect knowledge. Confirmed by Esay 7.9. Nisi credideritis, non stabilie∣mini. If ye will not beleeve, surely ye shall not be established. 2. After we have received by beliefe, then may we seeke for it by demonstrations, aut à priori, aut à posteriore, either from the former, or from the latter, to confirme our beliefe: Ratio, quia ut artium reliquarum, ita & religionis principia nobis innata habemus; the reason is, because as of other arts, so have we also the principles of religion naturally bred in us. The prin∣ciples of Divinity alwaies agree with true reason: truth disagreeth not with truth: the principles of religion are not contrary: for if we should never come to any certainety or knowledge. Warrant, that reason agreeth with religion, Acts 17.24. &c. The true worship of God proved by naturall reason. True reason, an helpe to faith, and faith to it, the uncorrupt judgement of man choaketh not reli∣gion, Rom. 1.19.By the princi∣ples of nature we may come to that which may be known of God, Acts 17.24. &c. , &c. That which may be knowne of God is manifest in them. For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearely seene, be∣ing understood by the things that are made; even his eternall power and Godhead, &c. 1. De partibus animalium, , if though in a small measure we attaine to the
knowledge of the Gods; that knowledge is worth all other know∣ledges. If God had made contrariety, it had then beene unpossible we should come to an end. 3. When we have yeelded our selves to beliefe, and have streng∣thened it by reason; yet we must looke for an higher teacher, and though faith be an unperfect way, and we unperfect; yet may we walke in it. We are therefore to pray to God, that by the inspira∣tion of his spirit, he would keepe us in this way. Now this  divine inspiration is given to those in whom religion is sealed. Arist. in his metaph. De iis quae supranaturam sunt, soli Deo credendum, &  concerning those things which are above nature, we must beleeve God above, and his divine inspiration is to be sought with sacrificings. 4. The meanes of contemning order in these three.4. Because this inspiration commeth not at the first, we must wax perfect by little and little; and be sure that we build on the rule: and stay, till it please him that will send it. Festina lente. Hasten leasurely. No greater e∣nemy to know∣ledge, then to be a hasty be∣leever.The avoyding of praepropera consilia, overhastie counsels, doth agree with Esay 28.16. qui crediderit, ne festinet, he that beleeveth shall not make hast. A man therefore is not to ground of presump∣tions, and presupposings; but by little and little goe forward till he come to the rocke. Therefore this part is spent, 1. in receiving it, (i. beliefe.) 2. in seeking to strengthen it. 3. in expecting of an higher teacher. 4. that we be sure to proceed by little and little, sed certo tramite, but in a sure path. The first daies station. Foure degrees of Satans ten∣tations, what they be, and how they de∣pend each on other. . Selfe-deity.The third part. 1. The first daies journey, or the first station that a man is to goe, is to beleeve that there is a God. For preparation to this point, note foure things, (they are Satans proceedings.) 1. Heresie, , selfe-deity: when as man was in the state of his first perfection, it was impossible to perswade that either himselfe was God, or to worship any creature as God, or to beleeve that there were no God: or to worship the divell as God. Therefore the divell sought to put into mans mind, that he himselfe was God. Therefore he perswaded Adam that his eyes should be opened, and that he should be like unto God. Therefore as man departed from God by unbeliefe and presumption, so was he to come to him by beliefe and humiliation; but this opinion he left the same day; for he was confuted so soone as he had eaten of the apple, and after by hiding himselfe behind the bush: Alexandri excepto in obsidione vul∣nere, hic sanguis hominem esse denotat. Claudii, qui sibi se Deum esse per∣suasisset, quoad audito tonitruin tentorium consugiens, dixisset, hic Deus est, Claudius autem non est Deus. That of Alexander is observable: at a besieging having received a wound, this blood saith he, sheweth me to be a man. And of Claudius who perswaded himselfe he was a God, till hearing the thunder he fled into his tent and said: This is God,Satans way of bringing man to the igno∣rance of the true God. Claudius is not God. So you see that these who were given to this Heresie are soone confuted, as Adam was. 2. Because God, (Genes. 4.) was an helper to man after his fall, as in making him gar∣ments; the divell by a false conversion strooke this into the minds
of his posterity, that whatsoever did them good, was to be worship∣ed as God: ut ille, ,2.  A conceit of many Gods. whatsoever nouri∣sheth me that I count a God. By this confounding the profit that came of the instrument, with that which is of the principall: and so were brought unto a great company of Gods, into a great com∣pany of men. 2 Into celestiall bodies. 3. Into those beasts that did any good to the Egyptians, 1. canes, ibides, crocodiles; dogges, snypes, crocodiles; and so brought in  plurality of Gods, after they came to worship, as Juvenal. Quorum nascuntur in hortis Numina, their Garden-gods, or those things that grew in their gar∣dens, for Gods.3. . Atheisme. Then 3. was it an easie matter to bring in a doubt whether there was a God: And this was the cause, as some thinke, why Diagoras Theodorus brought in this doubt,4.  Antitheisine. Omnes diaboli actiones ed ten∣dunt, ut ipse co∣latur tanquam Deus: at que adeò ut persuadeat ho∣minibus, se Deum esse. All the divels actions tend to this, that he may be worshipped as God, & so may perswade men that he i God. Examples of Antichrist, these esteeme the worship of the devill the rule of their life. The second point, wherein foure things. whether there were a God; and by a soolish argument they brought in that there was no God. 4. When the Divell had brought them to Atheisme, it was impossible that they should stay long time in it, therefore com∣meth in fresh upon them, shewing them some of his lying wonders, and prophecies, and strange signes: and so brings them againe to re∣ligion: and so by these wonderfull signes bringing himselfe into admiration with them, maketh them to follow his religion, and to worship him as God. Apollonius Thyanaeus, Iamblichus, Julian the A∣postata, first they were of no religion, after they fell to worship the divell; and proved necromancers, conjurers, sorcerers. The same succession in the East-Indies, to whom the Gospell was preached by Thomas; after falling into contentions about religion, they grewat the length to the worshipping of his ugly image; and worship him till this day. The second point, the confutation of their opinion that held with Atheisme, 1. The causes of it. 2. Their reasons that they were led by to it. 3. That those things that were put for Gods, were not Gods; viz. that nature, fortune, &c. is not governour of the world. 4. Ipsa quaestio, the question it selfe. For he that will come to God, must beleeve that there is a God. In gene∣rall of those five false opinions and orders of them, how they hang one on the other. 1. That there was a time, when there was no society among men, but were , companions of beasts, and wandred like beasts. 2. By the devise of some excellent man they were brought into one politicall body. 3. Cum non possent homines in suis contineri officiis, when men could not be conteined in their duties, they began to enact lawes. 4. When lawes were not able to bridle them, but that in secret they would not sticke to commit great offences, as mur∣der, &c. When this would not serve, then wise men intended this, to worke this perswasion in mens minds, that there was another oculus eye, and invisible essence, that did see also these things that they did in secret: and would punish them for their sinnes, if not in this life, yet in the life to come, and that most severely both in body and soule. This they say, and prove nothing; yet are these they that will
beleeve nothing, unlesse great proofes be alledged for it; therefore they condemne themselves by their owne,Cities came of inhabaed tami∣lies, not of wandring wild∣men. seeing they can neither alledge reason nor authority, but all their ground false. 1 If there were first , wild men; it was degenerando, non ge∣nerando, by degenerating, not by generating. For either they were outlawed or sequestred themselves from company, for committing of some notable offence. 2. That they came into a society è Nomadibus, beastly savages, it is manifestly false: homo enim a primo instituto est animal politicum, for man even from the first institution is a politicke creature. For these politicall societies came first of houses; familiae in vicos excre∣verunt, vici in civitates, fa milies grew up into streets or Villages, and these into Cities. 3. Lawes were after religion, Ʋt poetae testantur Ethniet, as the Heathen Poets testifie. No Lawes in Homers time, yet religion; the stories of the Heathen doe testifie, that lawes began almost a thou∣sand yeeres after religion.Its impossible that religion is a devise of man. Reasons here∣of. 1. The uni∣versality of re∣ligion. For when religion was too weake, be∣cause men became so brutish, lawes were made, to be as it were snaffles and bridles for such Horses and Mules. The universality of the perswasion of the worship of God, not only written in the heart of every man, but also in the consent of all Nations; therefore impossible to be a devise of man. Within these hundred yeeres, the Spaniards and Portugals found out Nations in the Antarticke part of the World, both in the South and West parts, that had no dealing with any other Nation, because they were with out apparrell, marriage, &c. that had no lawes, no governments, that were most necessary things, yet were they not without religion; and they had some things which they called their Gods, and worshipped them as God indeed. Therefore seeing there is no Nation without religion, & yet some have beene knowne to have no dealing with other Nations; it cannot be a devise of man, or a devise of propa∣gation: But religion is not of propagation.Object. Solu. 2. The diversi∣ty of religions, without any analogy of the one to the other. But if it be objected, that those Nations had it of their borderers: This may be another argument against them; for they are so farre from taking religion one of another, that there is as great a variety herein as may be pos∣sible, without any proportion of one religion to another. Diversitas simillimarum gentium, the diversity of like Nations; (but all devises that come of any devise, will have some analogie with it.) For some as the Jewes, worship an invisible thing. i. God himselfe; all the Gentiles, visible: as, Heavens, Starres, Planets, Elements, Birds, Beasts, Snailes, Plants, as Garlicke and Onions: some a peece of red cloth hanged upon a pole; some the first thing that they met, that they worshipped as God all that day; manifestum ergo religionem è propa∣gatione non esse ortam, adeoque neque ab humano instituto, It is mani∣fest therefore that religion came not of propagation, and therefore neither of humane institution. 3. Falshood can claime no kindred but of time; for onely truth is without all time. Opinionum commenta delet dies; naturae judicium con∣firmat, time vanquishes the inventions of opinions, but confirmes the
judgement of nature. Therefore every thing besides truth, brought in by mans inventions, or by any other thing whatsoever, weareth out; but religion was and shall be perpetually, religion weareth not, there is no antiquity but religion is beyond it; no posterity but it is in it. If they object that the necessity maketh it continue so long,Obj. Sol. it may be a fourth argument against them; for falshood and truth can never agree. And they dare not say that policy is fained thing,4. The neces∣sity of religion. Religion stan∣deth very well with policy, nay it is the backbone of policy. nor the common wealth. Therefore in saying thus, they say that a thing of truth is upholden by a thing of falshood. The Gentiles call Reli∣gion the backbone of the common wealth; therefore religion can be no devise, because it agreeth with truth. 2. Because it upholdeth truth. Quorum neutrum falsitati competit, neither of which appertai∣neth to falshood, for truth needeth not falshood to sustaine it. That religion upholdeth the common wealth, it may appeare by these three things: 1. If faith were taken from the dealings of men, one would not trust another, neither should there be any dealings at all. 2. It no preaching of the word, there would be no outward restrai∣ner of the concupiscence of man to bridle it; then would not so many be poore, so few ritch. 3. Without religion there would be no submission to government. A whole country would (not) obey one Prince. But for Atheisme, we can shew the persons,Atheisme be∣gan 3701. or 3702. yeeres agoe. time and place of forging it. It began in Egypt of Cham, the youngest sonne of Noe, whom the Gentiles call Cambyses. Cato in his Origines, Ca∣meses, Berosus Agosthenes, &c. Cham as it is in Iosephus in the yeere of the world, 1950. being cursed of God and his father,If Atheisme were a truth it were impossi∣ble it should worke to the destruction of a truth. and so out of the favour of them both, 1. out of a stomacke against then both, began to teach that men were not beholding to God, but one to another. Being by this curse deprived of all joyes in the world to come; whiles he lived in this world, gave himselfe to all brutish pleasures, and at length taught that there was no God, and fell to worshipping the divell: hence was he called Zoroastes the great Magitian. Therefore we see in him both the causes of Atheisme, 1. stomacke, desire of revenge. 2. sensuality. Which two are from the two filthy parts of the mind. 1. . 2. , 1. a stout sto∣macke. 2. a desire of revenge. For stomacke, we may see in Diagoras, which was on this occasion (as Diodorus Siculus affirms) having made a booke in verse, that pleased him well, either by negligence lost it, or by subtilty of another had it stolne from him, before he could set it forth in print. This person that had it, being brought before the Senate of Athens about it, sware that he had it not; and so by this oth was set free. After the same partie set them out in print, and got all the commendation of the worke. Now because Diagoras saw that this wickednesse was not punished presently with a thunderbolt frō Heaven, but that he prospered & got all the praise; he on a stomack affirmed that there was no religion, no God. The reasons of his book are very frivolous, and such as in that great confuting world, none would vouchsafe to answer his booke. For thus he reasoned, Iupiter, Saturne, &c. were no Gods: therefore there were no Gods. As if one should say, many who seem to be good Schollers, are not: therefore there are none. As in Diagoras, so Nicephorus testifieth of Porphyrie,
and Lucian; who first were Christians, after receiving injuries, one of words,Porphyrie, the greatest enemy the Church had for wri∣ting. the other of blowes in the Church; when they saw that they that wronged them, had not punishment of the Church to their mind; to doe the Church a spite, on a stomacke became plaine Atheists, though they termed themselves but Apostataes. Epicurus and his followers, fell first into Atheisme, af∣firming there was no God.2. For sensuality; the Epicure and his followers, as Lucretius, say, that they have an excellent and great benefit to become brutish in their pleasures; and at first held Diagoras his opinion, that there was no God. This came of that, that they thought they should not live after this world, and the soule of man was not immortall: but the very Heathen at that time confuted them sufficiently.2. Into semi-Atheisme, af∣firming God had no care of man. The best foun∣dation of sen∣suality, to have care of things present. 1. In things that together are corrupted, corruption taketh hold of both at once: but in senectute, in old age, when the body is most weake, the soule is most strong. 2. The perfection of the soule is the abstracting it from the body, & the more it is abstracted from the body, the per∣fecter it is. 3. Augustine saith, that the soule is the subject of truth; but no subject of truth decayeth, else should truth decay: but truth is im∣mortall. 4. Corruption is by contraries: and nothing is corrupted, but where there is a contrary: but the soule, whē it heareth an evil thing, turneth it to good, and a good thing to good or evill; and receiveth contrary things, and yet receiveth no harme. Therefore. Then they fell to the denying of Gods providence over man, , give me this day, take to morrow to thy selfe: after they tooke the easiest way they could for their pleasures; and as Arcesilas, the chiefe of the Academickes, seeing with what difficulty men came to knowledge, and with what great paines they attained to small learning, tooke a very short course to himselfe, and held that there was no knowledge at all: so the Epicures, seeing a re∣strayning of Religion, and that circumstances limited every action, they brought in a short course and held, that there was no God; the rather for that they saw it was a hard thing to live godly: and as the thiefe desireth to have the Candle put out, that he might be in the darke, that his trechery may not be seene; least if he were in the light, every one might checke him: So they, having a light in them, that would not suffer them to walke in the darknesse of their brutish pleasures, would have this light put out, that their consci∣ence might no more checke them. And because conscience will not checke them without religion and knowledge of God; therefore they extinguished all light, forgetting that there was any God, and putting away the byting of their conscience by little and little; as Marius having a convulsion in his thigh, had every day a cicuta, a kind of Hemlocke put to his legge, and a piece of flesh puld from him: at length fell into Atheisme. Quamdiu in nobis insunt conscientiae stimuli, non patientur nos corporis obvolutare voluptatibus, so long as te prickes of conscience are in us, they will not suffer us to wallow in the pleasures of the body. The point it selfe, that God is.Now the affirmative part, that God is, by uncorrupt reasons to confirme us in our beliefe; the reasons of the heathen. 1. There is a first cause, a first mover in all things; which if they can prove, they
goe no further. They were brought to the first cause, thus:The reasons. First from the cause. The first cause, the first mover is God. If we grant not a first cause, a first mover; then before every cause, before every mover, there is another cause or mover, in infinitum, to infi∣nite: therefore there should be infinite causes, tum haec sequentur absurda, these absurdiies will follow. Infinite causes must have in∣finite time to bring forth infinite effects. 2. Or infinite time. 3. There∣fore all shall be instrumentall causes, no principall; Et quia omnis inferior causa operatur in virtute principalis, nulla existenti principali, nullum erit effectum, and because every inferiour cause worketh in the vertue of the principall, now if there be no principall, then there will be no effect. 2. There is a divell,2. From spiri∣tuall natures. therefore there is a spirit in the world set on mischiefe, seeking to endamage men in their goods, and as far as might be, to bring all mankind to destruction, as is plaine by sorcerers and witches: And as he is bent to the utter ruine of mankind, so out of doubt he would long ere this, have brought it to passe, had there not beene a superior power to restraine this his fury. Therefore they were forced to beleeve that there was a divell, postea, esse Deum, qui istius resisteret, & quasi jura daret tyran∣nidi, and afterwards that there was a God, who might resist and set bounds to his tyranny, especially he being farre mightier then we, and we not able to withstand him. 3. The frame of the world.3. From the frame of the World. There is a beginner of the World, Sic apud Poetas veteres, . So we read in the ancient Poets, of the Prince of the World, the maker of the World, the World hath both a be∣ginner, and beginning. As a tree, though we finde not the roote of it, yet we know a roote it hath; though we cannot finde the fountaine whence the river comes, yet we do know it hath one: So, though we cānot come to know how the world had his beginning, yet sure are we that it had a beginning. Men make a controversie of that, in the picture whereof they will not stand in controversie. 4. Damascene.4. Whatsoever is concluded of the properties of things, is al∣so concluded of the natures. That which is , in the manner of being, is also , in the being; so we seeing all things in the World had their , conversion; We may well conclude that they had their beginning. 2. Where there are divers natures most discrepant, and these are brought into an harmony and concord, it must necessarily be argued, that there was one that accorded them, that tuned them; as in a Lute tuned: so the World being full of varieties of natures, yet they agreeing in a wonderfull sympathy, there must needs be a tuner of this so great an harmony. 3. Whereas it is evident, that celestiall bodies have no other use, but to make fruit come out of the earth; and all inferior bo∣dies were made for the use of man: and whatsoever is in man, is of knowledge of these things, and of every thing that is in the World, the inventor, the age, the time, &c. may be assigned when they began: as lawes, learning in Jury, arts, &c. And Pliny, though he write of the invention and inventors of things, yet about the be∣ginning of the World he writeth very suspitiously.Obj. Sol. And for that they say, Ex nihilo nihil fit: Responsio: Alia conditio est rei dum fit, alia cum facta est. Nutritur quisque in conceptu per umbilicum, post con∣ceptum
per os. That nothing comes of nothing, I answer: there is one condition of a thing when it is in making, another when it is made. In the belly every one is nourished by the navell, but after he is borne by the mouth.Object. And for that they say, they know not whether moveri or motum esse, to be done, in fieri, in the doing, and to be done in facto, in the deed done, be the first; Ergo mundi nullum principium:Sol. Sol. In pulsu cordis est &  nescitur uira pior: Therefore the world had no beginning, I answer: In the heart beating there is both contraction, and dilatation, it is unknown whe∣ther be former: yet we know that the heart had a beginning, ejusque pulsus,Object. and its beating. And for that they say against invention of things; it is possible that there have beene many deluges: and though the beginning of Arts, &c. may be alledged after the deluge, yet not before the former deluges. Now seeing there was a be∣ginning, it must proceed either from chance, , made of it selfe;The beginning of the world, whence. 1. Not from chance. or nature, or will and counsell, or from God. 1. Not from chance. If a man should come into a desert Wildernesse, and see a cottage erected, his conscience would give him that it came not by chance, but built up by some one. If Aristippus came to see a circle, triangle, drawne on the shore, he will streight imagine that some drew them; therefore we must not ascribe the beginning of the world to fortune, especially seeing the whole generation of man ascribeth not rerum generationem fortunae, sed interitum the ge∣neration of things to fortune, but  destruction. As we say, it chan∣ced that such a house was burnt with fire; it chanced that such a thing happened to such a thing. Rerum autem inventionem, genera∣tionem, correctionem, tribuimus arti vel consilio, But we atttibute the invention, generation, and amendment of things to art and counsell. In Apollonii argonauticis, the poore Countreyman seeing the first Shippe that arrived at Colchos, could say, ; is any within to guide it? 2. In fortuitis, chanceable things, there is no order that can be observed; no more than in the Dice, but confusion: but in the world there is a most excellent order in all things, but in the actions of man disordered by his fall. 3. Chance and purpose can never agree. Fortuitum enim defini∣tur esse praeter propositum A changeable thing is defined to be a thing beside the purpose; but of the world there is a manifest purpose: for there is an eye, that eye hath his object, that his line, that his medium, middle, that a species, a vision; and so a counsell, and a mu∣tuall distinction. 2. Not from nature.Secondly, not by nature, which is the course that all the world shall continue by: if nature were the first cause, then they should reduce all things to it, and bring a reason of every thing from it. Hoc autem fieri non potest, but this cannot be done. For they themselves cannot give a reason of the ebbing and flowing of the sea: the colour of the Rainebow: the strength of the neather chappe, which is able to snap a sunder iron, yet hath a very weake upholder. The heat of the stomacke, why it consumeth any meat,
that hurteth not it selfe, nor the next parts. And even in vertues, they make another kinde of vertue, , divine, heroicall. 3. If nature were the first cause, then seeing nothing can goe a∣gainst the chiefe cause, there should be nothing against nature. But we see the Sunne stood at the commandement of Joshua, the Sunnes eclyps in the full of the Moone against nature, at Christs passion; the Comet against nature in the constellation of Cassiopeia, with the watery signes. No naturall reasons pro∣phecying that Cyrus should dl ver and restore Isael.3. Prophecying and foretelling things to come in plaine names, Esay 44 28. A prophecy of Cyrus, 100 yeeres before he was borne, 1 Kings 13.2. Of Iosias 300. before his birth. Iosh. 6.26. Of Hiel 500 yeeres before his time almost; that he should uld Ierico, and lay the foundation of it in his eldest sonne Abiram and set up the gates thereof, in his yongest sonne Segub. Id quodevenit, that which cam to passe. 1 Kin. 16.34. Ergo a Deo, qui est agens voluntarium, Therefore from God who is a voluntary agent, prophecie of necessity must be referred to a superior cause. God so sensibly proved to us in his creatures, that we may as it were , touch or han∣dle him.4. The order of the creatures, the wonderfull framing of them, the hidden power in them, and the great art in the searching out of them; insomuch that the ordinary and contemptible things have wrought to the astonishment of all men. Pliny marvelleth at the Gnat, at the trunke of it, where with she maketh a noyse; and saith, that wit out a power above nature that thing could not be created; As also th Butterflies, and infinite others. Galene, de usu partium, blasphemously intreating of the parts of man: when he commeth to one of least account, he is in admiration of it, and is constrained to name God and saith, he hath described Hymnum Domino, a Hymne or song o the Lord, in describing the use of that part. And as we learne by those things that are without us, that there is a God, so may we learne the same by things in us. We have a soule indued with reason and understanding immortall; then this must either be the cause of it selfe, or else have it of some other Of it selfe it is not, for it knoweth not it selfe; no not the body, but by anatomy; but every cause knoweth his effect, not onely post quam productum fuerit, sed etiam antequam producatur, & quibus quasi gradi∣bus producitur, after it is brought forth, but even before the produ∣ction, and as it were by what meanes it is produced. The cause must know its effect.2. Our parents, our father in begetting us, our mother in concei∣ving knew not what should be begotten: ad causam autem necssariò requiritur ut cognoseat suum effectum antequam existat: & dum est in producendo. For to the cause it is necessarily required that it know its effect before it be, and while it is in producing. The cause must command the effect.3. And after we be brought forth, we cannot command every part of us; as the beating of the Arteries in the heart; therefore from our selves we proceed not. Therefore we must necessarily have our cause aliunde, from some other. And there is no cause in the world partaker of mans understanding, but man. For no unrea∣sonable thing: and none is above reason, but God. And Arist. 9. ad Eudemum, . Reason is not
the cause of reason, but reason commeth of a better thing then rea∣son;The cause is better than the effects. Aratus alledged, Acts 17.28. , We are also his off-spring. Rom. 1.19. , that which may be knowne of God, is manifest in them. 4. Within our soule are certaine sparkes of the light of nature, i. principles of infallible and undoubted truth; as to honour our parents and superiours, to doe as we would be done to: to defend our selves, to keepe promise, to hurt no man without a cause, &c. at the first hearing whereof we assent. And if these were not, we were all naught, and the overthrow of all sciences, nature and society should follow:All naturall notions, infal∣lible truths. among which, this is one, that there is a God, and that he is to be worshipped: and howsoever all other faileth, yet this never faileth; all other principles yeeld to this. A signe that it is deeper printed in us then the rest, insomuch that the pride of mans nature which will yeeld to nothing else, is contented misera∣bly to submit it self to a peece of red cloath,, selfe-love. rather then there should be no religion. This notion therefore the chiefe, and will not be pluckt out,Object. unlesse the heart goe also. If exception be here taken: If this notion be universall, how then be there so many Atheists? We will answer them with Seneca:Sol. 1. Mentiuntur, qui aiunt se non sentire esse Deum: affirmant tibi, non sibi: affirmant interdiu, non noctu: & evelli non potest è corde cor ipsum evellendum est. They lie, who affirme that they perceive not that there is a God; they who say so, they say it to thee, but not to themselves; they affirme it in the day time, but not in the night: and it cannot be pluckt out of the heart, the heart it selfe must first be pluckt out. But better thus: A man may proceed to great hardnesse of heart,Sol. 2. and blinding of himselfe; yet must we hold that rule, 1. Polit. 1. Specimen naturae cujuslibet, è natura optima sumendum est, the proofe of the nature of any one, is to be taken from the best nature. & Cic. de nat. deorum. If we will know what notion is most universall in man, we must take our argument from the best. But they say there is an universall notion. For the other, which are sicke of the world and the flesh, and the pleasures of them both: as we cannot from a sicke man reason of taste; so we are not to judge by these men, what is naturally in man: for they are a loose sort, dissolute in life, and having no leisure to thinke a good thing, having their hearts fat; yet though he be as fat as the Horse or a Mule, yet if the Lord put his bit into their mouths, these naturall sparkes will breake forth, and darknesse shall not be able to comprehend the light. And it is even in the worst natures: if at any time they be straighted by afflictions, as in Aeschylus , when the Persians being put to flight at the lake Strimon,When danger commeth, then the light brea∣keth forth. must needs goe on the Ise thawing, by the heate of the Sunne; then every one that before said there was no God, fell on his knees, and prayed God that the Ise might beare them. So Dion Boristhenes, as the Ita∣lian Histories report, Antonius Ʋrceus Codrus, when the Lord atta∣ched them of age; Cephalus, (1. Plat. de rep.) saith to Hippocrates, while I was a young man, when they told me of Styx, Acheron, I could thinke that there was none, and I scoffed at them: but now
in my old age, when I am to depart, I begin to doubt, how if there be such. So we see danger, sicknesse, and age will shew us that there is a God. The maine ar∣gument.The major. The notions naturall in us, are universally true. The minor. Of the essence of God, we have a notion. Conclusion, there∣fore, we must beleeve that there is a God. , God hath revealed them. Argument 2. Ab altera animi notione, a reali sc. distinctione boni & mali, contra Pyrrhonem; from the other notion of the mind: namely from the real distinction of good and evill, against Pyrrho; that said, That nothing was simply good or evill. We see, Gen 9.22. though Cham was such an ungodly person;Genes. 9.22. yet he seeth this, that it was an uncom∣ly thing to lie as his father did. Therefore in him a power to di∣stinguish betweene decorum & non decorum, that which is comely, and not comely. Genes. 14.21. the most wicked Sodomites knew,Genes. 14.21. that good was to be requited to Abraham. Gen. 27.41. Esau would kill his brother Jacob, yet not whilst his father lived. 2. Sam. 19.17. Absalom though in Armes against his father, yet seeth this wicked∣nesse in Hushai his fathers friend, and rebuketh it. Math. 26.48. Judas, though he would betray his Master, yet hee would not doe it in open manner; but gave them a privy token; Whomsoever I shall kisse, &c. The ground of reall distincti∣on betweene good and evill.So then seeing the most evill would seeme good; and deny evill in themselves, and reprehend it in others; this is really to distin∣guish betweene good and evill. The ground of this distinction, either the consent of men betweene themselves, as Pyrrho saith, which cannot be; for then every thing at mans appointment should be good or evill. Or from a nature above man: and so it leadeth us to God an unchangeable nature. Gen. 3.11.  Who told thee? &c. From a manifest part of the soule, sc. conscientia, the con∣science, which is Gods Deputy. That is also a demonstration a∣gainst those that thinke that religion is a devise.Conscientia 3. 3. Those that committed any offence, are alwaies troubled, and never in quiet. If any object, least they should be revealed to the Law. Then give them security; let them doe it in the wildernesse in the darke,Object. Sol. where and when none shall see them: yet shall they never be quiet. , the conscience shall smite the soule. They shall have their surda verbera, deafe strokes: yea they them∣selves will be constrained to tell it in their sleepe, or in their mad∣nesse; or as Plutarch saith of Bessus, he shall thinke that the Birds of the aire will tell it. Then is not religion a devise of man (as they say) nor shall be,Of Gods feare∣full vengeance. as long as they have the Vicegerent of God in them. And Christ useth this to condemne them; out of Esay 66.24. Vermis eorum non moritur, their worme dieth not. 4. To conclude this point. They that have denied it in their lifes, their deathes have proved it for them, Genes. 7. the overwhel∣ming of the Flood, the punishing of Sodome with utter destruction. Pharaoh. And whereas the Lord useth in all sinnes to punish them most severely at the beginning, and after to suffer them: yet in this
sinne he hath taken another course; to confute the Atheists lives, by their death; to confute them by the end of their daies. Pherecides the Syrian never almost durst come into company; yet once at a banquet amongst his friends, being merrily disposed, saith, that he had lived a long time, yet never done sacrifice, nor offered up prayer to any God. And within few daies after, he was eaten up with lie. So Diagoras was the cause of his proscription at Athens, and of the sacking and destruction of his whole Country, in revenge of that wicked opinion of his. Julian the Apostata, being overcome of Ne∣cromates in battaile,The horrible death of Atheists. pulled out his owne guts, and cast his blood into the aire, and so died with miserable yelling. Lucian, keeping for recreation a kennell of hounds, leaving them fast bound and safe when he went out to supper; at that supper, having spoke much against the truth of God, as he came home, his dogges ran mad, and breaking loose, fell upon him and tare him in pieces. Appion (against whom Iosephus writeth) scoffing against the old Testament, but especially at the point of circumcision; the Lord in that very same place strooke him with ulcers, so that he made him a spectacle to all that came after him. Machiavels end, was in the pri∣son of Florence, rotting in pieces. Therefore for a conclusion, as the heathen men write upon Zenacharibs tombe, , whosoever looketh upon me, let him learne to be godly: so may we conclude, , Whosoever looketh upon these, let him learne to be godly. The second station is, that God is a rewarder of them that seeke him:The second station. Gods providence. God in regard of his essence is as a stranger to us in a farre Countrey. Foure false o∣pinions. 1. No providence. therefore we must not onely acknowledge his essence, but also his providence: for denying of his providence is semiatheisme, and the Epicures erred in this. For though they were by reason compelled to confesse that there was a God, yet they said, Non curare eum nos, that he hath no care of us. Then of the providence of God, 1. what God is to us; (the knowledge whereof must be joyned with his essence) there be foure branches of opinions: 1. That God at no hand medleth, but that he hath drawne the Heavens betwixt him and us,2. That God had providence and governe∣ment in the be∣ginning of the world, but after set his Deputy to rule the world. that we should not see what he doth, nor he what we doe. 2. That there is a providence, but of generall things; a generall providence, rewar∣der to two causes, but not to every particular individuum, individu∣all. 3. Grant both these; esse etiam individuorum providentiam, that there is a providence of individuals: Yet that its such, that if any one should looke upon a stage play,3. That there hath alwaies beene a provi∣dence, but a generall pro∣vidence; not medling with rewarding or punishing. when any thing is ill meant, to laugh at it; when well to praise: but not to meddle with rewarding or pu∣nishing. 4. As he hath a providence in generall and particular things and causes; so doth he not onely behold, but also reward and pu∣nish: and this is true, for we must joyne his essence and providence together. Concerning the former. i. his essence: little glory re∣turneth to him, and lesse profit to us; but we must know what he is to us: therefore this is to be joyned, that he will and ought to be sought: and though (ut quidam scitè) we are Domini vernae, the Lords bondmen, and bound to seeke him; yet is there a reward quaerentibus ipsum, to them that seeke him.
The reasons of the first opini∣on, that there is no provi∣dence.For the first, the especiall reasons why they altogether excluded the providenc of God. 1. The adversity of the good men, and the prosperitie of the wicked. For say they, if there were any provi∣dence, Bonis bene esset, malis malè, it would be well for good men, and ill for bad men; but sense teacheth plainely the contrary: 2. When he alledged, that though divers abuse the gifts of God, yet he dealeth unto all so, that he is not to be blamed: They say, that he might as well have given the use of the gift, as the gift; Ergo verisimile nullam esse providentiam, it would therefore seeme that there is no providence. 3. The manifold defects in naturall and morall things, exclude his providence. For the first, if any man be perfectly good,Sol. no adversity can bend him; if perfectly evill, no prosperity: but none in the world is either perfectly good or evill. But it standeth with the justice of God, that evill that is in the good, to punish it in this life: that good that is in the evill, to reward it in this life; ut eorum malum puniat in vita fu∣tura, that he may punish their evill in the life to come. And the punishment in this life is a great benefit. Hence Aug. Domine hîc seca, hîc ure modò ibi pacas, O Lord, here in this life cut me, burne me,Sol. 2. so that in the life to come thou spare me. 2. Con. We know what the di∣vell said concerning Iob, Doth Iob serve God for nought? God to stop the mouthes of the wicked and Satan, punisheth the godly. Hence the divell, if good men live in prosperity, is ready to object, They live in hypocrisie, that they serve God, because God serves them. Therefore God to make manifest,Vertue is not mercenary, but free. that the godly serve him not for temporall commodities, and that vertue is not mercenary, but gratuita, free, he often layeth afflictions upon his: and this affli∣ction his children willingly embrace. 2. Con. The same with the for∣mer. The divell, Iob can doe no other but serve God;Conclus. 2. he is not left to his owne choice. Sol. There is no commendation, and therefore no reward, if a man doe that, which he must needs doe.Sol. Now if God shall have left men in this cause, he could not have rewarded them: and what commendation is it for the fire to burne? Cum ejus sic ferat natura, since that is its nature. For the three first, its necessary that God hath no part in the evill doing, or with the doer.Sol. 3. A good thing will not permit evill. God no cause of evill. Omnis actio omnisque motio a Deo: actionis imperfectio non a Deo, sed a malè se habente instrumento. Every action, and every motion is from God, but the obliquity or imperfection of the action is not from God, but frō the perversenesse or weaknes of the instru∣ment. In the creeples, the motion is from the soule; the deformitie of the motion, a distortione membri, from the crookednesse of the mem∣ber: moving and haling unum per accidens, (alterum per se) the one, by accident, the other by it selfe, therefore the action whatsoever, it is from God; but if it halt, the deformity is of the crookednesse of the instrument. Secondly, he permitteth evill,The Lords will is to make a Theater of his goodnesse. non nisi per priva∣tionem gratiae suae, not but by privation of his grace. For the per∣mission; the reasons first being granted, that the defect of every thing from his goodnesse, is his evill; evill hath no part with God. If there had beene no defect in the variety and multitude of things
in the world, Gods goodnesse could not so fully have beene expres∣sed: neither should there have beene any resemblance of God.Where is no defect, there is no meane. There is a like affection in none, therefore much lesse in the Lords creatures. But God willing to shew his goodnesse in all degrees, and to have a re∣semblance of himselfe in things, hath made a defect in things. 2. If no defect, there had beene but one good thing. Excellency is a pro∣perty of God: if there were no defect in things, there could be no excellence, the resemblance of God: but in some creature there is some resemblance of the Creator. 3. No order; for unlesse there be a prior and posterior, there can be no order. Againe, sundry ver∣tues had beene superfluous, justice, temperance, &c. Thirdly, because it is necessary that good should be loved in the highest degree, and we cannot be brought to love good more then by the want of it:The Lord drew the greatest benefit that e∣ver we had, our redemption out of the grea∣test evil. and suffering the evill and defect being the way to the want of it, therefore this permission would he never have gran∣ted, unlesse more good might be had by the permission of it, then by the not having of it. The greatest evill that ever was, was the betraying of Christ: out of this the Lord drew the greatest benefit that ever was; our redemption. That there is a providence.  proper∣ly is that affe∣ction of love which the pa∣rents beare to their children, and the chil∣dren to their parents.  is the want of it.Now that there is providence, 1. generall. 2. in singular things, not onely by the ordinary course of second causes, but also by the direction of God himselfe. For the first: Its naturall to every thing to be carefull to preserve that which he hath brought forth: and and that is , naturall affection. And as  naturall affection is a great vertue, and the having of it is Gods gift; so is , the want of naturall affection, a great infamy and vice. If , the want of naturall affection, be a vice and reprehensible; no doubt it cannot fall in Deum, upon God; therefore we must give him his , affe∣ction over his creatures. 2. No workman will give over his worke till he hath brought his worke unto perfection. But generation of things is not yet compleat; and every day he bringeth forth some new thing: therefore yet God hath not given over his providence. Dilucidius apparebit in singularibus, this will more clearely appeare in particulars. 1. Arist. de motu animalium, argues of the providence of God; the Sea being higher then the Land, and the waters farre above the brimmes of the earth; and no Philosopher being able to give a reason why it should not overflow the earth, especially seeing the nature of it is to overflow; it must needs be of Gods pro∣vidence, which doth limit its bounds, that it cannot passe. 2. Ploti∣nus from plants. They, without any direction, if they stand betweene two soyles, the one dry and barren, the other moyst and fruitfull, they will shoote their roote from the dry and barren, to the moyst and good ground. 3. From the Flowers, that shut themselves in the night, lest they should receive corrupt and evill moystures: in the day they open themselves, for to receive the heate of the sunne.Psal. 147.9. 4. In the Birds. The yong Ravens (saith David) cry unto the Lord, and he feedeth them, being as yet scarce covered with the white mosse, and forsaken of the old Raven: from their dung there in∣gendereth a worme, that creepeth up to their bill, and so are fed. 5. Arist. that the little fish Pimotheca, entreth league with the Sea∣crabbe,
and taking a stone in his mouth, when the Oyster openeth it selfe against the sunne, swimmeth in with the stone in her mouth, so that the Oyster cannot shut againe; so the Crabbe pulleth forth the meat, and they both fall to their prey. 6. In Beasts. The wild beasts are not so fruitfull and generative as the tame: least all things should be overrunne with them, therefore there is something that taketh their fruitfulnesse from them, namely God. 2. Whereas their natures are to pray; therefore by all likelyhood, they should love those places that are fittest to pray in; yet they love desert places, dennes. 3. Psal. 104. When man is to goe forth to his worke, all the day time they lie in their dennes: at night when man is to take his rest, they goe forth to seeke their prey. Generally in all, the discerning the places of nourishment, and the meanes how to get nourishment out of it, the knowing of the motions of the musculs without a teacher. 2. When a man of great experi∣ence and knowledge, may easily be confounded and deceived in a great company of sheepe, in seeking every Lambs ewe, the Lambe in the thickest of them will finde out her owne ewe. 3. In discer∣ning of hurtfull things; at the voyce of a Kite, the Chicken: at the smell of a Woolfe, the Lambe will flie, though they never had ex∣perience of any hurt by them. 4. The , affection of the parents toward mishapen children, though to every one else most odious, yet no lesse loved of their parents then if they had all the gifts of na∣ture perfect. 5. The sudden cry of every creature affrighted with any griefe: by all mens confession it cannot be voluntary: no reason can be given of it: and it hath made the heathen confesse, that it was Vox naturae, vel amantis dominum naturae; the voyce of nature or of one loving the Lord of nature. So we see that there is a pro∣vidence, both by argument, and also by practise, in the Sea, Plants, Flowres, Fishes, Wild-beasts, &c. Theodoret Bishop of Sirus hath ta∣ken paines about this point in his ten Sermons de providentia, concer∣ning providence. The second o∣pinion.The second point. To that imagination that granteth provi∣dence, but such onely, as is in a Clocke, the plummets weighing downe by little and little; so that the providence is in the second causes. 1. The meanes worke nothing; but as the Prophets say, there is beside the bread, the staffe of bread,Ezech. 4.16. & 5.16. & 14.13. Matth 4.4. Psal. 17.14. Hag. 1.6. which Christ calleth the World of God, David, Gods hidden treasure, which if it be not, we shall (as Haggai saith) put money into a bottomlesse purse. The meanes alwaies worketh not, because there is not a thing added to the meanes, that giveth strength. The Philosophers have acknow∣ledged it; and called it the infusion of strength and efficacy into the creatures. This is the first cause; not of the secondary causes; that if without meanes divers things have beene brought to passe, not onely, Genes. 1. because men should not thinke that the sunne is cause of light, he made the light before the sunne; nor thinke that the seed is cause of fruit, therefore he made with the seed, fruit: but also in these daies we see preferment cast on them, that never sought for it. Second causes withstanding, yet the effects are
brought forth. Christ used clay to open eyes, which is rather a meanes to put them out. Helias put Salt into Salt water, to make it fresh and sweet.Iohn 9.6. 2 Reg. 2.20. Gen. 40. & 41. Iason Phereus healed by a sword thrust into his belly, Iosephs imprisonment the meanes of his preferment, the first brin∣ging in of the Christian faith doth most firmely shew this. Then by want of learning,They had not onely no meanes, but also meanes against them. great learning confounded; by weaknesse, strength; by nothing, something. 2. Fortunes commission it is not, issue of warre: of which though many profane mouthes have given forth this, that Sors Domini campi, fortune is Lady of the field; yet there never was any, but before he entered battell, vowed; and after payed his vow. So in drawing of lots, which a man would thinke especially to be of chance:Ionah 1.7. &c. 5.16. &c. yet the Marriners in the shippe with Ionas, used this as being of the providence of God. Cassena in Plutarch. 3. Ihado: when the Heathen could not finde out any thing, but was in doubt, used to fall to lots, as if God would answer them in their doubtfull lots. 3. From chaunce medly, Herodotus. Cam∣byses lighting off his horse, his sword falling out of the Scabbard, ranne him into the groyne: and he ascribeth this to providence, for his evill behaviour in Egypt. Lastly, the Philosopher concludes: That casuall things are nothing else, but effects of causes farre off removed; if of these, much more the things concurring neere to∣gether are referred to providence. That is a greater argument of providence, to joyne things farre asunder, then those that be neere. But (that which proves all fully) Prophecy cannot be brought to passe withall the plummets; but that is of the providence of God. Having shewed, that there is a providence of God in generall. 2. That it dealeth her selfe, and hath her owne hand in bringing things to passe.Both Philoso∣phie and hu∣mane reason shew that there is a singular providence. 3. Now that this providence reacheth it selfe to every singular man, this by Philosophy and mans reason proved. Yea Philosophy making providence a part of prudence, and pru∣dence a practicall vertue; and practicall vertues having their ob∣jects in singularibus, in particulars; Therefore secondly it is sure, that the power of God reacheth to every thing, Quia virtutis est maximae pertingere vel remotissima, for supreme vertue can reach things most remote. But his goodnesse and will to doe good, is no shorter then his power: all good qualities and of equall longitude and latitude; & where there is power and providence, there can be no hinderance. 3. There are none, but will confesse, that it is a more commen∣dation to provide for every particular thing, then for the whole in generall. Mithridates is highly commended for that having many thousands in his Armie, could speake familiarly to every one: and call him by his name. Then si quod melius non agatur, if that which is better be not done, it is of some defect in the doer: but in God there is no defect. Now from the rest of creatures to man: (ut Christus) If God hath a care of Heaven, which hath no use of his owne light or motion; but is onely to make the inferiour things fruitfull, and Cattell have the use of greene things, and man of Cattell, and all other things; and the Philosopher telling, that that which hath the use of all
things is principall of all; man having the use of all things, must needs be principall. Si sit providentia Dei in reliquas creaturas, & in principalem se extendat necesse est, If Gods providence reach to the other creatures, then much more must it extend it selfe to the prin∣cipall. Psal. 8. David considereth the great glory of the Heavens; then the eternity of them: and he wondreth how God could passe by them a most glorious body; and put the soule of man, a most ex∣cellent creature, into a vile lumpe of clay and earth. 3. Man was the inteded end of all other creatures: for they know not their owne gifts; Equus, si vires suas nosceret, non reciperet sesso∣rem suum, The Horse if he knew his owne strength, would not re∣ceive his Rider. Therefore this occultation of the gift from that that hath it, and the manifestation of it to man that hath it not, is an argument that man is Gods County Palantine of the whole world. This is that that Chrysostome in a godly anger, being dis∣pleased with mankind, saith, Appende te homo, ponder thy selfe, O man, art thou not better then all other creatures? yet is Gods pro∣vidence over the basest of them. And as from all other creatures to man; so from men, to good men. For if he have a providence of those, who have onely the Image of God, in them, by nature; then where there are two Images of God, 1. of Nature, 2. of grace through Christ, multo magis, much more, The Philosophers simili∣tude is, magnes amoris amor, love is the loadstone of love. If he care for all mankind, then much more for them that hate themselves to love him; that lose themselves, to finde him; that perish,The third stati∣on, that God will be sought. to live with him. There are yet two things. 1. That God will be sought. 2. That he will reward them that seeke him. 1. Facientis finis est ipsemet, the end of the doer is himselfe. Therefore bringing this to God, and by 2. necessity, because God hath no end; quia finis est supra effici∣entem, the end is above the efficient; and God having nothing above himselfe, ipse sui finis, therefore he himselfe is his owne end. And being his owne end, it must needs be that he created all things ei∣ther for his owne profit, pleasure, or honour. But neither for profit, (for no profit can redound from us to him; nor for pleasure, there∣fore for honour: and this honour is the seeking of God. 2. Where there are two relatives, there is grounded a mutuall duty betweene them: betweene a father and a sonne, obedience: betweene a ser∣vant and a master, service: betweene the husband and the wife, mutuall love: betweene the creature and the Creator, cultus. i.The fourth sta∣tion, God is the rewarder. ho∣nour. 1. Therefore he being sought, (for sure it is, that though we be but vernae Domini, the Lords bondmen; and that possit esse Dei diplomata condere, God may make Charters, or Letters Pattents;) as of Kings that give Lawes, and yet give no rewards to the keepers of them, but punishe the breakers of them; yet he will reward both the keepers, and breakers of his lawes. And that he will reward, there can be no better argument, then that he rewardeth some: and he saith, , I will give unto this last, even as unto thee, Matth. 20.14. But in the eyes of the world we see, that
he rewardeth some; and it cannot stand with the justice of God, that he should reward some, and not othersome: therefore there shall be a place where these all shall be rewarded. And if we see not the multitude of rewards as we would; let us ascribe it to this, that God is not sought for as he should be: small service; for doctrine, in examining controversies; for life, in examining our actions. This, to this end; that religion being divided into these two parts: into Christianity, and in Christianity; The body of christianity, which is the true part, having such little seeking of God; there being no doubting in doctrine, none in mens actions; he so seldome re∣warding. After the Counsell of Trent, when the league was made by mu∣tuall marriage, of the Emperour, King of Spaine, King of France, having then taken their oath for the rooting out of us and our re∣ligion, the Lord at that time disappointed them by the death of their corpses: and within halfe a yeere, they fell together by the eares. 2. The wounding of the Spaniard Ieroego; who was shot thorough the head, and no faculty hurt. In the delivery of Rochel, when the King of Spaine withall his power laid siege to it, and fa∣mind it; There was a great multitude of shell-fishes brought to the City, that never was seene before, nor never after; and by that meanes was the City saved. In the siege of Harlam, by Duke de Alva, the reward of them that seeke not God.Reward of them that seeke not God. Examples. The King of Sweveland, deposed of his owne subjects, for incest. For murther, the last King of France died miserably; the blood gushing out of as many places of his body, as could come forth; and that presently upon that great slaughter of the Saints.Deut. 28.1. Levit. 26.3. For breach of faith: The Venetians making league against the Turke, and after joyning themselves with the Turke, were punished by the losse of the best Ile in all their Coun∣try, Cyprus. In Portugall the Lord overthrew Stukeley, made King of Ireland by the Pope. Foure stations already handled in the way that we are to walke in: that we are to come to God, and not to rest in any thing beside, and leane to religion, leaving the world, and wandring without an end. 2. We have declined from the way of reason, to the way of beliefe. 3. We have passed through the dangerous pathes of A∣theisme. 4. We have searched them that call into question the ge∣nerall and particular providence of God; being in this way, seeking to finde God, we come into another quadrivium, or way that hath foure turnings, the foure principall religions of the world, where∣by the diversities of Nations have perswaded themselves that they have sought God. Concerning these, 1 Cor. 8.5, 6. the Apostle foresaw this division of waies, and hath given us warning of them. 1. The Heathen in most parts in America, and in the East Iles, and in a great part of Tartary, worshipped creatures in all ages, and the dead, as did the Gentiles. 2. That which the Jewes as yet scattered here and there, hold. 3. Of the Turkes and Saracens in all Asia, a great part of A∣frica and Europe. 4. Is Christianity, professed of us. Concerning
these; sure it is, that there can be but one true: & if we go into three of them, we shall erre. Therefore that we might be sure,Concerning religion, the way to seeke God, which is the true reli∣gion. and not be led by a prejudicate religion, wherein we are brought up, and to shake off the temptations of the Adversarie; it remaines that we shew, which is the true and right religion. The Emperours Am∣bassadour being at Constantinople with the great Turke, saw wrought in cloth of estate in manner of an Embleme, foure Candlestickes, and foure Candles in them, and three of them turned upside down: and as it were, but one onely burning; and it had this inscription in Arabicke, This is the true light. The Ambassadour asking of the meaning of this inscription; they expounded, that they betokened the foure Religions in the World, whereof three were false, the other true; and that it was their Religion. Therefore we are to shew that those three of theirs are false, and no true lights; and the Christian the true light. And to begin with Heathen religion,Heathen reli∣gion or paga∣nisme. or Paganisme, which once spread it selfe over all the earth, saving a corner in Syria: It cannot be denied but that the chiefest wits con∣cerning the knowledge of Arts and policy, have beene in them, and among them: and in Philosophy, their light hath shined most brightly; and we have all lighted our Candles at their light: and yet as the wisest of us may wonder at them for nature and humane knowledge, so may the simplest of us laugh at them for the wor∣ship of God: so dim hath their light burned in the worship of God. Reasons against the idolatry of the heathen.The first reason against them is the Apostles in this place. They went amisse, because they worshipped and had many Gods, and many Lords. Aug. lib. 4. De civit. Dei, & Varro, lib. 1. de rebus divinis, making an Inventory of the Gods of the Heathen; found 30000. Gods: 300. were Jupiters; beside a great number of Dii majorum gentium & minorum: tutelares, medioximi, patellares, penates, &c. of Gods of greater and lesser Nations, tutelar, small, petty Gods, houshold Gods, &c. Whether they may be many or one, there is no question: here it is said, , in whom are all things, by whom are all things. The reason is: The inferiour causes are resemblances of the superiour, and they of the highest. But we see in all the inferiour causes, that many branches come from one roote: many partes ruled by one head; many veines by one master veine; many channels from one fountaine. So in supe∣riour causes, many lights from one light; many motions from one motion: therefore in the highest cause, this unity must be after the most perfect sort. , In whom are all things. i. the mutuall order of all things in nature, that all things are one for another: Mutuus or do in se invicem, est propter conjunci um ordinem in uno, the mutuall order toward themselves is for the conjunct order in one. And as all things flow from one, so they returne to one againe. But their owne reasons are sufficient against them. Pythagoras saith, that in God there must be ,It is the nature of the effect not to receive a greater thing then the effect. an infinite or unlimited power. Else should the understanding of man. i. the effect (because he is able to conceive an infinite power) exceed his cause. Because it is able to conceive a greater thing then his cause. If the power
be infinite, the nature must be infinite; quia accidentis capacitas non excedit capacitatem subjecti, the capacity of the accident doth not exceed the capacity of the subject. If the nature be infinite, then it is one: the reason; If one grant two infinites, then there must be a line to part them: and on that part that the line is of, they must be both finite. Therefore if we grant two infinites, we must also grant they have two severall forces:Virtus unita fortior. Vnited forces stron∣ger. and being divided, they cannot be so perfect as if they were joyned together. Therfore they having truely respect to it which could be, God were unperfect: but no imperfectnesse with God. Ʋt sit Deus imperfect us, est in natura monstrum, that God should be imperfect, is a monster in nature; but if they be both perfect, then are they both all one, for nothing makes them differ. Lactantius. 2. Because God ought to be omnipo∣tent, either they must be of equall force, or of unequall: if of equall, either they agree, or disagree. If both equall and agree; then one superfluous: but superfluity excluded out of the deity: and every thing in nature must be done after the best manner.That which may be done in nature, must be done after the best man∣ner. Let them dis∣agree, then there will not be the same course of things. If of une∣quall power and disagree, then the greater will swallow up the lesse; and so bring all to one. And howsoever the Heathen out∣wardly and in the face of the Common-wealth durst not but hold Polytheisme; yet privily among their friends, and in their wri∣tings, they condemned it , a having many Princes or Ru∣lers, is counted an inconvenience every where.. It is not good there be many Lords, let there be one Lord. Therefore the hea∣then have made one of their Gods a Father, the rest as his children; one a King, the rest as his subjects. Pythagoras his advise to his scho∣lers was, to search , the unity. Arist. his drift was alwaies, as in every thing, to seeke for prima, the first things: So being in any prima, especially to seeke ante omnia primum, that which was first before all. Flato in his Epistles to Dionysius, signifieth unto him that those Epistles that containe sound matters, and that he would have him beleeve, he beginneth with , God, or with Gods helpe in the singular: those that he would not have him to beleeve, and that containe doubtfull matter, with , Gods, or with the helpe of the gods in the plurall: making God the note of truth,Seneca. Varro. Cic. de nat. deo∣rum. and gods the note of falshood. Zeno would say to his schol∣lers, Dicite plures, discite unum, say many, learne one. Sophocles, , in the truths there is one God. Thus among themselves they muttered the truth, howsoever for feare of punish∣ment, or because they would not trouble the Common-wealth, they thought this errour of the multitude of gods very expedient to be suffered. But because (as Aug. 24. de civit. Dei 4.) in the latter daies in the Primitive Church, the Philosophers were ashamed of the multitude of their gods; and therefore said that they in the old time would never be so absurd as to worship divers gods; but that those names were given in respect of the divers powers: therefore we must goe farther with these:Porphyrie. No similitude can be made, which can re∣present God. 1. The Heathen did appoint diver∣sity of gods. 2. That they commanded the images to be made like to themselves; if they shewed their images, then they were circum∣script:
therefore no Gods, but men. For God is infinite, neither can be resembled by images. Secondly,Aug. the whole course of the religion of the Heathen see∣keth no farther then the eye can lead them: striketh no further then the skinne. i. onely to the outward action. They could not search into the raines; no remedy they had for the restraining of the heart, and mind, as hypocrisie. But nothing is more familiar in ours, then the forbidding of concupiscence, and restrayning of the heart. 4. There is not one of them but doth require honour to be done unto him, onely in respect of every particular benefit;Origen cont. Cllum. But is content to have his ho¦nour in respect of some parti∣cular benefit. Deus autem universale bonum; but God is an universall good, as the Scrip∣tures themselves testisie; whereas none of their gods can doe so much to him. Againe, (whereas Cyrill against Iulian, which made him almost stagger;) whereas the Heathen also confesse, that by the sinne of the body, the soule also is polluted, at que adeo together to be punished; there must needs be something to purge the soule as well as to cure the body; the heart and mind is first to be purged, then the ody: and that religion that taketh away the pollution of the soule, is not found in their religion: for it cannot be purged by any expiation in all their liturgies. Purgatio non potest perspici, nisi per principium; not by Frankincense, for purging cannot be plaine∣ly understood, but by the beginning: nothing polluted before it be purged, can recover its first happinesse. It is demanded, If then their Gods were no Gods, it would be known what they were? I ans. 1. They were men. 2. Wicked and beastly men. That they were men:Heathen gods. but men. There is none of their gods, but his father and mother may be assig∣ned, and his kindred, in Poets: as in Hesiods , pedegree of the gods. In Philosophy, as Tullie de nat. deorum. Cyrill against Iulian, Aug. de Civ. Dei. Euseb. de prepar. Evang. but best by Euemerus Missenius, Cypr. de vanitate idolorum, of the vanity of Idols. Cyprian out of Haecataeus. Alex. the great entering in private conference with Leo High Priest of Egypt, received of him thus much, as a great secret. That the gods of the Grecians and other Nations came out of Egypt: and all the Grecians gods and their religion came by Cecrops, that brought all things he had from Egypt: and by Cadmus, a Phenician. Phaenices autem Aegypti is omnia sua dona accepta referunt, the Phenicians ac∣knowledge to have received all their gifts from the Egyptians. The Romanes had all theirs from the Grecians by Numa Pompilius: he from Dardnus and Aeneas. Aeneas out of Syria, and the gods of the Egyptians were but men, and that they of those daies could assigne their progenies: Ʋt Hermes Trismegistus to Aesclepius, had his pedegree from Ʋranus, and Mercurius his great grandfather, which was accounted one of the Heathen gods.Heathens gods wicked men. That they were wicked men. For religion is nothing else but a faculty, to make us one perfectly in the life to come; and in this life to frame our selves to Gods action in similitude. But their Gods were full of rapes, adulteries, &c. Concerning this matter, you may read Euseb. de praepa. Evangel. Cyrillus, Josephus cont. Appian. Athanasius. Origen. Tertullian. in apologetico. Lactantius in his two first bookes.
If they were men, how came they to be worshipped divinis honori∣bus,How the Hea∣then gods, be∣ing but men, came to be wor∣shipped with divine honors. with divine honours, at all? How came the beasts to be wor∣shipped as Gods? The waies are many; but they may be reduced to these three: two of the deifying of men, one of beasts. After the flood, a generall revolting from religion: and that that did them good, they worshipped as God. Now by reason of the slymes and mud, there grew many Serpents and many monsters; at the last the beasts greatly multiplyed. And thirdly, there increased a sort of beastly men, given to Epicurisine. Against these three, those that opposed themselves, both in regard of the good received by them, and to stirre up others to doe the like; they worshipped them with divine honours. Another way was this. Porphyrie saith that Ninus in honour of Belus his father, having obtained the Mo∣narchy, erected an Image for his love of the dead. This Image, be∣cause he would have it no lesse esteemed of others then of himselfe, made it a sanctuary: so that if any malefactor, or any that was in debt, had fled to it, he was safe, and freed from his debt. So by this, divers having received benefit; partly to be thankefull for their be∣nefit received, partly to doe Ninus a pleasure, then living and bearing rule, they solemnized it with hymnes, and with feasts, instituted certaine daies for the solemnising of it; hanged it about with garlands: baecque virtutis ergô facta sunt, & celebrandae illustri∣um hominum mortuorum, & incitandae posterorum; these things were done for vertues sake, to extoll famous men dead, and to the en∣couragement of the posterity. After, the cause of this celebration being forgot, they began to make prayers unto it; first in verse, ac∣counting it a light thing to sing Hymnes unto it in verse, after in prose. And this was that Bel in the Scriptures, which the broader dialect of the Hebrewes call Baal. Deifying of beasts, how it came first.For the deifying of beasts, Plutarch in his Isis & Osyris, saith that Osiris King of Egypt, (whom Porphyrie proveth to be the Bacchus of the Gentiles) dividing his Kingdome into certaine Provinces, and to every Province giving a certaine signe or cognisance, agreeable to the nature of that, that most abounded in that Province; as to the part most arable, an Oxe; that had most woods, a dogge; to the part most full of medowes, a clod with a little greene grasse on the top of it; where most waters were, a Crocodile; the posterity com∣ming after him, not knowing his purpose, conceived of them, as of some divine natures; and every one worshipped that, by which he had his living most especially: as they that lived by tillage, the Oxe, calling it Apis; they which followed their hunting, the Dogge, calling it Anubito; they that lived by their medowes, their Clod, i. Isis: and this was the beginning of idolatry. How miracles and Oracles came among the Heathen. Difference be∣tweene good and bad mira∣cles.3. How then came their miracles and Oracles? For their mi∣racles: 1. This is the difference betweene a good miracle and a bad miracle. The good tendeth to the profit of mankind; as the raising from the dead, the curing of incurable diseases, the feeding of many thousands with a few Loaves and Fishes, &c. The other have but a shew of vanity, altogether frivolous; as it is reported
of Simon Magus, that he made an hill seeme to move. Accius Manius did cut a Whetstone with a Razor. And it is sure that Apollonius Thyanaeus had done as great miracles as all the Oracles at Delos, they being but witches and sorcerers: he was but three or foure degrees from Mercurius. 2. The Christian miracles are not expres∣sible by Magicke. For the Ora∣cles, the Hea∣then them∣selves against them. Auguslin out of Porphyrie con∣cerning the vanity of idols, shewes: 1. The ambiguity. 2. The vanity. 3. The contra∣riety of oracles. 4. That most part came not to proofe. For their Oracles. Porphyry saies of the Oracles of the Gentiles, that as great things were done by the Magitians in his time, as by any of them. Hermes to Asclepius professed, that he through his ma∣gicke brought certaine spirits to possesse the image of his grand∣father and others. Suidas at the word , Phylis, reporteth that the chiefe idoll of the Egyptians, being asked what he was; answered that he was an under-spirit, and that his name was Serapion. i. in the holy tongue, an Angell. Zoroastes, Cham, and the ancient Fathers are of opinion, that the divell fell out of the company of Angels, called Seraphim. Iamblychus declareth how the divels would be allured to come into images, by annointing the image with worm∣wood; at the length that they came most willingly, though they would seeme to be forced with outward meanes. Euseb. lib. 4. de praepar. Evang his confession of the Oracles is, that commonly they were ambiguous, vaine, and frivolous. 2. And some∣time contrary one to another. 3. and most came not to proofe. 4. and if they came to proofe, they might either have beene done by Astronomy, or by some wise and politicke man. And it is most certaine, that they delighted to have men sacrificed to them, where∣as God made man his speciall workmanship. 1. Therefore if they were Gods, they would rather seeke to preserve man,Herodotus, Livius. then to seeke his utter ruine; whereas they did covet their blood-shedding: and that afterward of good men, of virgins, babes, and young men, &c. as the Carthaginians. 2. The same Gods, when they were more gentle, they tooke this course. When they delivered them from any warre, or from any other danger,Improved by Scipio, Nasica & Scevola. they required the institutions of Stage-plaies, and spectacles of Fencers; and by that meanes also was killing: as also kinds of Circenses. Aug. 8. de Civit. Dei. If their gods did so highly accept of Stage-plaies, then should the Stage-players be in most price among the Heathen, as the especiall servants of their gods: but the Common-wealths of Greece and and Rome banished them, made no account of them, yea they made a decree, that they should die intestate. Ita dum tollunt pestem corporum, inducunt pestem animorum, so while they take away the plague of the body, they bring in the plague of soules. , Styx the terrour of the gods.3: Lastly for the proofe of this, it is common not onely in Homer and Virgil, but also in the Philos. concerning their gods, if they named but Styx and Cocytus, &c. they would tremble and be afraid, the images would be all on a sweate, Iuratote per Stygem, deorum terrorem, sweare ye by Styx the terrour of the gods. But we know that no Prince would be afraid of his owne prison; much lesse God of his prison: for these causes, though they misliked the whole course of their religion; yet not being able to come to a greater
perfection,Rather looking to quietnesse, then to tuth. Socraes in apolog. in his stterunt, they persisted in these. But one went beyond them all. i. that said, that one might as well sweare by an Onion or a Leeke, as by Jupiter; and was wont to sweare by the basest and vilest things, and inveighed much against the Athenian gods, and said that they were no gods: and for these and such ar∣ticles was arraigned. But as Lacrtius testifieth, not long after his death, there happened such a plague, as was never the like before or ever since:Prytancm was the place where those that had well deserved of the Common-wealth were kept. 1 Cor. 8.5, 6. and asking counsell of the Oracle, they had no other answer, then that it was for the death of the innocent: so after∣ward then erected him an image in Prytanco: so in ascribing ho∣nour to him that dishonoured their Gods, they condemned both themselves and their gods. The concession being twofold: 1. That there is one God to us. 2. That there is one Christ. The controversie betweene these of the heathen in religion, was concerning the first part. The state of the Jewes and Saracens is concerning the second part. As the Jewes ut∣terly deny Christ to be the Messiah, and that he is not yet come: so the Turkes substitute another in his place. Betweene the Jewes and us,The opinions of the Jewes concerning the Messia. the wise man: Affirmations and negations change not the na∣tures of things. They acknowledge the old Testament, as well as we; therefore the proofes shall be from it, and the authours of most account among them. The positions that they hold are three) First, that the Messias shall have an earthly Kingdome, and his seate shall be at Jerusalem. Secondly, that our Christ is not the Messiah. Thirdly, that he is yet to come. The first. If they would give credit to their Chaldean paraphrast, or to Ionathan, or to Rabbi Shimon te sonne of Ishai, or to Rabbi Moses the sonne of Nichar; or to Rabbi Haccodesh,Whether Christ should be an earthly Monarch. and to all the ancient Rabbins that lived before the com∣ming of Christ, then were the matter at an end. But they give more credit to the latter Rabbins, which all were moved with envie a∣gainst Christ, Rabbi Salomon Nizahon. For the first, whether the Messias comming should be an earthly Kingdome. See Esay 53.2. but especially verse 6.Esay 53.6, 8. The Lord hath laid upon him the iniquity of us all. But they shift this off and say, Its meant of the whole people. But after he saith, He shall die for his people. And it were absurd to say, the people shall die for the people; neither could they die. Psal. 22.16.18. They pierced my hands and my feete,Psal. 22, 16, 17, 18. they parted my gar∣ments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture; which cannot be un∣derstood by David.Zach. 9.9. Zach. 9.9. The King of Zion shall come to thee poore and kumble, sitting on an Asse: most plainely, Dan. 9.26. And after 62. weekes Messiah shall be slaine,Daniel 9.26. &c. This the elder Jewes could not con∣ceive; and Philo Iudaeus understandeth it of the sanctification of the high Priest. But he might easily gather that this place was meant of the Messiah, by Iohn the Baptist that sent two of his Disci∣ples, to know whether he were that Christ or no: but especially that place of Daniel troubleth them: insomuch that Nizahon falleth in∣to these blasphemous words, that the Prophet was deceived and over-seene. Reason against the Jewes. 1. Haggai 2.8. That the Messias of the world, should be the expectation of the Gentiles.
How should it be a comfort to the Gentiles,Reasons against the Jewes. to have a stranger raigne over them? which is forbidden the Jewes, Deut. 17.15, 16. There shall not be a stranger to raigne over them. 2. For as much as it is plaine, that the Messias should be that that giveth felicity to all the world; I would know of them how Abraham, Isaac and Iacob could be saved, by an earthly Prince and temporall; they being dead many hundred yeeres before his time? This they shake off so weakely, that they are faine to say,It shall be (as they say) no bigger then it was before: as also the City. God will not call the Saints from the fell-city that they have with him, to an earthly banquet. Whether Christ be the Messiah. that they and all the true Jewes shall returne to life againe. But that is absurder than the first. For first, they doe themselves injury to thinke, that the Land of Iury, as also their Temple, can hold all the Jewes that ever were. 2. They are utterly injurious to the Heavenly soules, to call them out of an heavenly paradise, out of Abrahams bosome, to come into an earthly paradise. The third is common. By this, there should be no purgation of the soules from sinne: for this earthly King∣dome cannot purge the soule: it belongeth onely to the body. The second part, That Christ is not the Messias. 1. Gen. 49.10. That the Scepter shall not depart from Iudah, nor a Law-giver from be∣tweene his feet; till Shiloh come. It was sure that before the captivity, it was altogether in Iudah, till the leading of the captivity conti∣nued. In the captivity they had it by one of their brethren, that was called the King of captivity. And after the captivity it conti∣nued, till it fell betweene Aristobulus and Hircanus; Rex multitudinis deportatae. who striving for it, were both dispossessed, and Herod an Idumaean placed in their roome; and then was the time of Christ. Now if they shift this off and say: that the Macchabees were not of the Tribe of Iudah,Object. but of Levi; and so deny the prophecy. Sol. The prophecie is divided,Sol. that either a King or a Law-giver should be of the Tribe of Iuda. And that there was a Law-giver even till Christ was borne, its ma∣nifest, for they confesse that Simeon Iustus,Note. whose song we have in our Liturgy, was the last of them; and ever since the whole com∣pany of their Sanedrim dispersed. The third answer.Object. They say that in the prophecy  The Scepter shall not de∣part from Iudah. The word  signifieth not a Scepter, but a Tribe: so that it is meant, that Iudah should be a Tribe, till Shiloah come. Even that way they are confounded. For ever since that time,Sol. all the Tribes have beene promiscuae, confused; and the Emperours presently after that they had heard, that In Iudaea nascetur orbis do∣minus, the Lord of the World should be borne in Iudaea; sought to roote out the Jewes, and especially that Tribe that Christ should come of; and so it made them to confound their Genealogies. 2. Dan. 9.25. Daniel receiveth this Oracle from the Angell, that from that time to Messiah, &c. What these seven weekes are, its shewed in the Gospell; that they stand for yeeres: so counting for every weeke seven yeeres; 49. And so long was the Temple in building: for three yeeres they were in building the walles, and gathering themselves together; the other 46. in building the Tem∣ple, as the Iewes said to our Saviour, from that time to the comming of the Messias, 490. yeeres.
3. Hag. 2.10. The glory of the last house, shall be greater then the first. But in the first Temple, there was th Arke of the Lord, the pot of Manna, Aarons rod, the shew-bread, &c. the second Temple had none of these: but the Prophet saith the second Temple should be more glorious. This glory they cannot finde, unlesse it be in the time of Christ; for forty yeeres after his death it was destroyed: so they make this no prophecie.Petrus Galati∣nus de aris. Two Famous companies among the Iewes: the schollers of Rabbi Shamma. 2. Of R. Hillel: but the latter, the more fa∣mous. Petrus Galatinus out of the third of their Talmud, that the schollers of Rabbi Hillel, considering thse three prophecies, Daniel, Haggai, Esay, though they lived 50 yeeres before his time, hoped that he should be borne in those daies: being thereto induced by the end of the 60. chapter of Esay, That God would hasten his comming. In the same chapter of the Talmud, on that place, Esay 9.7.  is written with  finale. in all copis in that place onely, against the nature of the letter. Whereupon Rabbi Thalumma doth hold it is an Oracle: s. that i is the number of the yeeres betweene Esay and Christ his comming. i 600. yeeres. 3. They say,This a princi∣ple among the Iewes, that the vaile should not open, not the voyce of the Lord faile, till the com∣ming of the Messiah. that the prophecie of the second Temple, should not cease: (which was nothing else but a small still voyce comming from the Lord:) nor the Temple open, till the Messiah came, &c. And they confessed that this voyce ceased in Christs time, and in Herods daies, and that the vaile of the Temple rent in two peeces, and never since came it together. Besides these three, other three or foure. The continuall sending to and fro, as of Iohn Baptist, doth argue, that they wholy did looke for his comming then: the Disciples to Christ. Some, that thou art Elias; some, Jeremias; some, one of the Pro∣phets. 2. About that time there were so many false and counterfeit Messiahs, as never were before, nor never after. For there were then either eight or ten,Seven or eight as Iosephus in the 18, 19, 20. books of antiquities. Beside Herod, of whom came the Herodians: Iudas the sonne of Mar∣baeus,Acts 5.36, 37. by Gamaliel. Thudas, Arthronges, Barchosba, the elder and the yonger. But especially the yonger was in such reputation, that all the Rabbins did acknowledge him for the Messiah. These upstarts de argue that there was a great expectation among the people; for never since then, durst any be so bold, as to call himselfe the Messiah, save one. 3. Suidas in the word  Iesus, saith that it was reported to Iustinian the Emperour, by Philip a Merchant of Constantinople, that had received it by the report of one Theodosius a Iw, that in the catalogue of Priests was found ,In the Temple for a while. At the same time that Christ was cru∣cified, there was the first breach made into the City, in the same time of the yeere. Ams 6.14. Zach. 11.12.13. The siege of Ierusalem most miserable. Isus the Sonne of God and of Mary, and that he was admitted into the company of the twenty two Priests. It should therefore seeme, that he was a Priest, else could he not have preached; because he was of the Tribe of Iudah. And for this cause some thinke that he was per∣mitted to preach at Capernaum. Beside these, one more. The pro∣phecie of Christ, Luke 19.43. of the destruction of the second tem∣ple. They confessing that after Malachy, there should no Prophet arise, but it should be Messiah, Amos 6.14. from the entring of Ha∣math to the river of the wildernesse, Zach. 11.12, 13. The siege of the City so strange and wonderfull as never was the like: that the very heathen did see and confesse that the hand of the Lord was
against them, when they could not besiege it long for water, there was a little brooke Siloh, which in former yeeres was so dryed up, that men might goe over it dry-foote. That did so swell suddenly, without any naturall cause, that it served all the armies of the Ro∣mans. 2. Titus did labour by all meanes possible to offer them peace: yea he granted them to set downe what condition of peace they would; so they would yeeld themselves to the Romanes: yet they were so wilfull, that they would suffer no condition of peace. There was such a great plague, beside many millions slaine, that the ground could not containe the dead bodies, but were faine to cast them over the walles: such a famine, that they were faine to eate their owne children, &c. The first breach that the enemy made into the City, was at the brooke Cedron, where they tooke Christ; and on the same day that Christ was taken, was the Citty taken; on the same feast day at the same time of the yeere. The Emperour commanded them to be whipped there, where they had whipped Christ. 30. Jewes were sold for a penny, as they sold Christ for thirty pence. There is a prophecy,Amos 2.6. Amos 2.6. For three transgressions of Iudah, and for foure, I will not turne to it; because they sold the innocent for silver, and the poore for shooes.Righteous. They being urged to tell of whom the Prophet meant in this place: knowing not how to shift it off, are faine to say, that it is of Ioseph, that was sold of the Patriarchs for silver: and for that cause, that they suffered that mi∣sery. And never since had they any reliefe, but have lien these 1500. yeeres, scattered over all the world, hated of all, scoffed at of all, and now they are become common bondslaves to all the world: and whereas before they were wont to feede their Rab∣bines, now they are faine to feed the people, least they should be forsaken of them. Whether Christ be come.That the Messiah is not come. Beside the confounding of the Tribes, they all confesse, Mich. 5.2. That he shall be borne in Bethlehem. There is now no Bethlehem, nor any place where Bethlehem stood, for him to be borne. This they are driven to answer thus: that he was borne indeed, before the building of the second Temple; but ever since he hath lurked in some corner or other, they know not where; but he will at the length come. But Paulus Berosus and Augustine an∣swer this. Ammianus Marcellinus. Iulian to worke despight to the Christians, gave them leave to build their Temple againe, sought to gather them together. Being come together, and having laid the foundation thereof: there brast a fire out of the earth that bur∣ned their timber, cast downe their stones: and though the Empe∣rout oft times encouraged them to their worke, and gave them great summes to the building of it; yet yould the flames come out of the ground, and overthrow their building. There was one since, that tooke upon him to gather them together, that called himselfe Moses Cretensis; he would needs with foure hundred divide the sea, and goe thorow it dry-shod. But the waves stragling against their course and nature, suddenly comming upon them, they were all drowned; and their friends that stood all along the sea-shore were not able to save one of them.
Againe, there were often prefixed times by the Rabbins, when Christ should come, and yet all deceived. Rabbi Shahadiah ap∣pointeth 1200. yeeres. Rabbi Salomon, Rabbi Jehuda, 1390. Rabbi Elias, 4230. Rabbi Moses ben Maymon, 4474. and his time that ap∣pointed last, was expired 300. yeeres agoe: and yet their Messiah is not come; and they are ashamed to appoint any more time, but forbid under paine of death, Ʋt sint in spiritu vertiginis, that they may be in the spirit of giddinesse; having their eyes open, and will not see. 3. Thirdly, betweene the Mahometists, Turkes and us. They say there is but one God, and therein they agree with us: but in Christ they agree not with us. For they say in the fourth chapter of the Alcoran, that he was not the last Prophet, that should finish all prophecies, but Mahomet. Seven points to prove that their religion cannot be the truth. 1. Because it is forbidden through∣out all his Dominions, to call it into question. And to him that shall at any time call it into question, it is present death. But the truth delighteth in nothing more then in sifting, and feareth it shall ne∣ver be sufficiently sifted. They give us money, and say it is good, but will not suffer us to weigh it. 2. If ever there were mulierum fa∣bulae, old wives fables,2. It is fabu∣lous. it is very like they are in the Alkoran: its full of untruths. Andreas Maurus, not onely a Saracen, but also a Bishop of theirs, hath set downe 900. untruths out of the Alkoran; whereof these be two: first, 15. chap. Eluiraim, that Abraham was the sonne of Lazarus a beggar; whereas it is certaine, that there are about 3000. yeeres betweene them. Secondly, 18. section. That Mary the mother of Christ was Moses sister: whereas there are 1600. yeeres betwixt.3. Doctrine, the manner of it, it came of the will of man, that was captivated wholly to his sence, and could goe no further. Thirdly, their doctrine foolish, vulgar, carnall, al∣together belonging to the body; there is nothing in it but is visible, sensible, &c. 16. section, Mahomet saith he was in Heaven, and saw God as an , having the forme of a man: but his face he could not see; but he felt his hand, and that was seven times colder then the Ise. Of the Angels, that they have bodies, and many heads; and some of them 70000. heads. Of the divels, that they were circumcised, and being circumcised must needs have bodies. Of the Starres, chap. 23. that they are nothing else but Candles in a round Glasse, hanging downe by chaines. And this is the manner of his doctrine. 4. The promi∣ses of this re∣ligion brutish wicked.4. His Promises, chap. 35.52.54. His Paradise after this life, he maketh of those brutish pleasures, of gluttony, of leachery, &c. 5. His doctrine or precepts, 65. chap. A plaine indulgencie for swearing and perjury.5. the precepts satanicall. And there for a small matter they will sweare and forsweare: for revenge and murder, chap. 41. non ul∣cisci injuriam, impium; it is impious not to revenge an injury. For Polygamie and divorcing. 3. chap. the practice doth confirme it, and the precept is plaine. And for Adultery, chap. 23. none may accuse one, without foure witnesses. Every man hath foure wives; fifteene Concubines he may have. 41. chap. they may couple them∣selves with beasts; and those that doe this, are counted the holiest
men among them: for spoile, whatsoever they can get in Ʋia Dei,Polygamy hath almost made all the countrey rob∣bers, because otherwise, they are not able to main∣taine their owne wives. 6. The mira∣cles false, and without wit∣nesses. in the way of God, (as they call it) is their owne. 16. chap. And that is the cause, why there goes none into their dominions, unlesse they be well furnished: who neverthelesse are then commonly spoyled. 6. For his miracles, there are some set downe, but all without witnesses. 92 ch. When he was a child, being sent into the fields with Cattell (for he was a driver of Asses) he met with the Angell Ga∣briel, which ript his belly, tooke out his heart, cut it in two, out of the middest of it tooke a lumpe of blacke blood, which (as he said) maketh men to sinne, and is the beginner of temptation in man: after closed up his heart, and did put it into his place againe. First, there is no such lumpe, say all the Anatomists. Secondly, there can∣not be a naturall cause of temptation, which is spirituall. Second∣ly, being with one of his kinsmen in a faire Moone-shine night, his kinsman required this of him, that he would cause the Moone to come downe, and breake it selfe into two halfes: and that the one part might come into one of his sleeves, and the other into the other sleeve; and come out whole at his brest, and so goe up into her place againe, and so it did. But its marvell that the Astro∣nomers did never misse her out of Heaven, and one would thinke it impossible for such a great body to come into such a slender body, seeing they have noted the very least Eclyps; it was a close miracle betweene him and his cosen. 7. Its propaga∣tion by force.Lastly, by what meanes the propagation of his Kingdome came, 9. chap. That God delivered him a sword to compell men to his religion, if they would not otherwise be brought to it: but (as be∣fore is said) unnaturall meanes for truth. And so it hath beene his practise alwaies. At the first he was of very base condition, subject to the falling sicknesse, and troubled with divels. First, he was a servant; but afterward by the bignesse and comlinesse of his body, after his Masters death married with his Mistresse, whom he served before, whom he entised by sorcery; after was banished by the men of the same City for his evill demeanor.Machah his wife, and his 15. concubins. After that by the helpe of his wifes friends, and his parents, recovered the City; got the rule of the City; warred against the King of Scythia, to whom they were then in subjection; having overcome him, by meanes of the negligence of the Emperour Heraclius, entering a league of peace with the Emperour, and after breaking it, got all the Emperours Dominions. It prevailed when the world was at the worst; when religion was cleane worne out; when there were fewest learned men: it hath never taken hold of any excellent man,The Turke himselfe stan∣deth in awe of the robbers, so that he is faine to feed them with money, that they might not be trou∣blesome to him. either for the gifts of nature, art, or grace. It agreeth not with the proceedings of Christian religion: the manner of the proceeding of Christian faith was not by killing, but by being killed. The effects of their religion in perjury, in swea∣ring, in murther, in sheading of blood of their children, and kins∣folkes. Some have slaine 17. of their kindred, to convey the suc∣cession of the Empire to one of their owne: in divorces their spoy∣ling
about Arabia deserta. Last, they live in a most servile estate: for they can convey nothing to their successours; but after their death, all is the Turkes. Mancipia sunt sui imperatoris. 2. Pet. 1.19. . We have a more sure word of prophecie, whereunto ye doe well that ye take heed,How we know that those Scrip∣tures are the true words of God. Men in old time spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. Religion is the coupling of relations between God the Creator, and man the creature: God is provider, and man that is the provi∣ded for. Quod propter ali∣ud, psterius est eo, propter quod est. That which is for some other thing then for it selfe, is poste∣rior to that for which it is. as unto a light that shineth in a darke place untill the day dawne, and the day starre arise in your hearts. Now the fourth is ours. That it is to take place, before in the other three, , by way of confutation, or negatively. Now in the fourth , positively. But because the fourth principall question is so neerely joyned with the proofes of Christs Religion, as ex∣cept in one or two points, they cannot be severed: Therefore it is not amisse, to handle both under one. 1. The effect of the mea∣ning of the Apostle here is, that we have a most sure word from the Prophets, and of all those, from whose hands we have received the Scriptures. This is most sure. And albeit there is but a small portion come immediately from God; yet being delivered by the ministery of man, the ministery of man prevailed no farther, then that it agreed with the word immediately comming from God. 1. Seeing that man is to come to God some way, and religion is this way; we necessarily gather, that this way is as ancient as man himselfe: else should there be a time wherein man was out of this way, and so consequently frustrated of his end. 2. Tertullian. de praescript. adversus haeret: Quod primum, verum, what is first is true. It holdeth in religion, and in any other thing. The Philos. Entia maximè vera, being chiefely true. Reasons: because as the truth is an affection of that which is; so falshood an affection of that which is not. Therefore falshood non potest consistere in suo, sed in alieno, cannot consist in it selfe, but in another. Therefore falshood is after truth. (Assum.) But the religion of the Christians is more ancient; for the Jewish and Christian religion are both one. The Law is nothing else but the old Gospell, the Gospell nothing else but the new Law. The Law Evangelium absconditum, a hidden Gospell. The Gospell Lex revelata, a revealed Law. So that they agree with us till the comming of Christ, and there they leave us. As for the Heathen religion, a great part of their stories is fabu∣lous; and part true. For that part which is fabulous, it began with their Gods: for further then their Gods they cannot doe. Now their Gods (as Orpheus and Homer that write upon them) they cannot be but the age before the Trojane warre: forasmuch as Hercules, Aeneas, and the rest of their children lived at that warre, which warre was 3030. yeeres after the Chronology of the Bible. And betweene Orpheus his writing, which was their ancientest Poet, and Moses, are at least 800. yeeres. As Strabo, Plutarch, Diodor. Siculus, doe testifie. If their fabulous part commeth so short of our religion, then must the true part come farre shorter. Ʋarro saith (who was in Tullies time) that that truth which the Gentiles hold could not be much ancienter then 700. yeeres before his time. And it is
sure, that the ancientest records of their truth, come from the se∣ven wise men, of whom Solon is the chiefe and ancientest:The restoring of the capti∣vity by Cyrus, in Esdras time. he was in Croesus time; Croesus with Cyrus. Cyrus and Esdras of a time. Esdras is the last of the Canons of the old Testament. Therefore the whole Bible was before any writer or recorder of the true part of the Heathen stories. Their ancientest Historiographer is Hero∣dotus; yet he presently after the beginning of his booke, entreth into the History of Croesus: By the which we plainely see that the Christian religion is farre more ancient then the Heathen. So may another consequent be gathered: that whatsoever God or truth was of the heathens religion, they had it from the Jewes religion.Rome called Magna Gaecia: the Romanes had their let∣ters from H∣mtinus phsus. These 2. coun∣tries Egypt and Phenicea, with the Mediter∣raneum sea doe compasse in Iury. The Druidae among the French men; and the Bardi and off-spring of the Druidae, fetch all these monuments out of Greece. The Ro∣mans, they thanke the Grecians for all that they had; both for their letters, lawes, and religion: for they had them from Numa Pom∣pilius a Grecian. The Grecians referre all that they have to Cecrops an Egyptian. Affrique, Lybie, Cataphrygians, Indians, they in Arabia petrea, to Cadmus, a Phenician. Now Phenicea bordereth North∣ward upon Iury, Egypt Southward, the Medeterranean Sea West∣ward. Now if we enquire from whence the Phenicians and the Egyptians had their knowledge, we shall see that it came from the Jewes. The wise men among the Grecians asking counsell at their Gods how they might get wisedome, and from whence the know∣ledge of arts where to be had received this answer: That it was to be had among the Chaldees. . The onely wise men are the Chaldeans, and happily the Hebrewes; which , declarative or expositive, and noteth some one part of the Chaldees. i. the Jewes. So Orpheus saith,All know∣ledge refer∣red to one Chaldean, to one stranger. Iosphu lib. 2. cont. Appio∣oem: out of Manetho. Origen lib. 4. cont. Celsum. For the know∣ledge of Phi∣losophy: for the Egyptians were perfect in philoso∣phy, the Gre∣cians but chil∣dren for man∣ners, ocyllides his verses out of Numb. Deut. and Exod. All Solons wis∣dome from an Egyptian. Pythagoras from a Iew. that God after the fall of man, being angry with mankind, destroyed all; and had revealed all knowledge and wisedome Vni Chaldaeo, to one Chaldean the eighth person: and Plato in Epimenide, referreth all learning uni Barbaro, to one Barbarian or stranger. Who this 8. Chaldean and 8. Barbare is, is now to be enquired. The Egyptians, they confesse they had all from one they call Theuth. The Phenicians call him Thaath, not much unlike the former. Theuth in Caldee signifieth a stranger. This stranger, by all likelihood must be Abraham, who was a stranger. And Eusebius out of Manetho doth witnesse, that Abraham was so greatly esteemed of in those Countries, and honou∣red with so honourable remembrance, and so many: that it is very plaine, that he was that stranger; their chiefest exorcismes used to be done through the God of Abraham. And Manetho alledgeth, that in many places of the Countrey, his name was written or in∣graven, &c. in sundry Temples, &c. i. Phocyllides. For manners, living in the 59. Olympiade, his verses are so evident, that one may see, that they be word for word taken out of Moses his law: and that one may easily point forth, that this and that verse is taken out of this and that place of Deuter nomy Numbers, and Exodus, &c. But we will deale with their owne records Plutarch saith that Solon fetcheth all his wisdome from Egypt, from one Souchedis. Plato all his from
Caldaea of one Semuthis. Strabo lib. 16. saith that Pythagoras had daily conference in the mount Carmel; and that in that mountaine were ambulachra Pythagorae, Pythagoras his walkes. And some of the Heathen said, that he was cicumcised. Euseb. lib. 4. de praepar. Euangel. out of Clearchus a peripatetik, affirmeth, that Aristotle never went into Egypt, but yet he had daily conference with an Egyptian, or a Jew. Demetrius reported to Ptolomey that gathered together the great Library; that he had heard Aristotles schollers say, that sundry of the Philosophers and Poets would have translated the old Testa∣ment into Greeke; and yet in the same booke, in the Epistle of Aristobulus it is said, that part of it was translated before the Empire of the Persians was begun; long before it came to be translated of the 70. But it appeareth that it hath pleased God, in most strange manner, in every Nation to leave some Register or Chronicle of this; as among the Egyptians Manetho: among the Phenicians, San∣choniatho: among the Chaldees, Berosus: in Asia minor, Abidenus: among the Persians, Metasthenes: among the Gentiles, Histaspis, Heca∣taeus, Euemerus, Alexander polyhistor. In the second booke of Herodotus, we shall finde that notable mi∣racle that God wrought on Senacherib, though somewhat corrup∣ted: the edict of Cyrus, almost the whole prophecie of Daniel. 11. booke of Josephus, (as Augustine lib. 8. de civit. Dei.) Alexander being in Babylon and purposing to build an Image to Belus; and certaine of the scattered Jewes, which were then the cunningest workemen, refusing to build an Image to any Idoll of the Heathen, vowed to roote out cleane all the Nations of the Jewes: but he was soone ap∣peased by Iaddus the High Priest: for he hearing of the Kings vow, met him in peaceable manner, in Aarons attire; whom, as soone as Alexander saw, he fell downe before him and worshipped him, and presently gave over his purpose. And being demanded the cause of so sudden change of his purpose; answered, that Hiaddus appea∣red unto him in the same likenesse of that God which appeared to him, bidding him to conquer the whole world; in the very same attire that that man ware. After those daies, by the meanes of Ptolomey and his Embassage to Aristobulus, and his great Library in Alexandria, the Jewes religion was dispersed. Lartius in the life of Epimenides, which agreeth with Act. 17. The Athenians being visited with a strange plague, and asking counsell of the Oracle how to rid themselves of it; the Oracle sent them to Epimenides. He told them that they were not to seeke to their owne God, but to another God: for it was another, above all their Gods, that sent them this plague; and it was onely to be driven away by Sacrifice. They making offer to discharge themselves of this, offered Sacrifice: the plague never∣thelesse continuing, they were faine to send to Epimenides the se∣cond time, to know in what manner they should sacrifice, and where? he counselled them to let the beasts goe whither they would, and in that place where they should stand still, there to sa∣crifice them to that God, that had sent them that plague. The beasts went on with the Sacrifice on their backe, untill they came
to Mars his streete; and comming to a faire plat, there stayed: where they built an Altar, and dedicated it ,Acts 17. to the un∣knowne God. The like is in the Romane histories: the Romans having got a great victory over their enemies, after built a Tem∣ple, and consecrated it to peace: and demanding of their Oracle, how long it should continue; word was given them that it should endure, quoad virgo peperit, till a Virgin should beare a child: which, because they thought it would never be; they set this inscription upon the doore, Templum pacis aeternum. The everlasting Temple of peace. And about the time that Christ was borne, in the shut∣ting, on an evening it fell downe to the ground, without any helpe. Thus much for the Antiquity, both by them whose writings yet re∣maine, and fathers: as also by the Heathen themselves, that pro∣position alwaies holding, Quod primum, verum. What is most ancient is true. 2. Argument. The continu∣ance of it.The second argument, from the continuance of preservation of it, most miraculously. as that the religion that commeth from man or any false God, cannot have the like: whereas we see the Jewes continued in captivities under other nations, more then any: as under the Philistins, Moabites, Amorites, Persians, Romans, Egypti∣ans: and yet in all these it hath continued. So also the people round about them,Especially the victorers na∣ture being to turne the re∣ligion and lawes of the conquered to his owne. bearing a deadly hate to them and their reli∣gion: And Antiochus bending himselfe wholly to destroy all the copies of the Law; and yet hath it beene so wonderfully preser∣ved, as not one jot of it hath at any time perished. We see that the chiefest men in Philosophy, Physicke, Law, &c. have left their schol∣lers behind them to renw their writing: their workes have beene countenanced of mighty men as much as could be; all meanes in the world hath beene used for the preservation of them, yet most of their writings have beene lost; some have come to the posterity unperfect, or very corrupt. On the other side, there hath beene extreme contempt of the Jewes, their enemies intent alwaies to subvert them, and their religion: as also a purposed malice of the Jewes themselves against their owne religion. All meanes possible used to the subverting of it, yet as yet, it hath continued. So that there is not a materiall point that feareth the sifting, either concer∣ning manners or faith: so that we may say, Hîc Dei digitus, here is the finger of God; for time leaveth her markes in humane things. And though there be differences in the divers taking of things: and in the divers forme of words: yet they tend all to one end. There is no materiall difference about any materiall point: so that it mattereth not which of all the waies it be taken. The like may be said concerning the whole manner of their re∣ligion. They never changed their religion, customes or lawes, being in captivity in divers strange Lands: whereas any other Nation, being instituted in a strange religion, strange customes and Lawes, useth to alter her owne, and give her selfe to that other religin. 3. The cer∣tainty of Christian religion.The third thing, the certainty. That whereas other writings are brought into question, or are imperfect, or not authenticall, but
counterfeits,The perfectest of all mans writings fals into one of these. In it 1. no im∣perfection. Impossible that man should take away the least part in the Christian re∣ligion, with∣out the de∣struction of the whole. 2. No contra∣diction. or include contradictions: but this religion can fall into none of these. Therefore this religion must needs be the religion of God. 1. For imperfection. It is a certaine note, that when any thing commeth from man, it groweth by little and little, untill it come to perfection, no such thing in this. For in the delivery of the Law all was delivered at once most absolutely, in the 10. Com∣mandements, under which there is no duty, but may be sensibly contained: to which nothing hath beene or could be added; no∣thing be detracted, without the cleane overthrow of the whole, onely writers have explained them. which, because man cannot doe in his writings, it must needs be from God. 2. For contradictions, Paul, 2. Cor. 1. The words of man are sea∣led with etiam & non, yea and no: but the writings of the Prophets are etiam & amen, yea and amen. In this behalfe we are to relie our selves to the fathers writings, that say, that all the contradicti∣ons, that are in the Scripturs, may be reconciled by the 7. rules of Logicke. For the 3. others, seeking for feare of reprehension to hord up their writings among a few;3. No corrup∣tion. the best of them have had some cor∣ruption. And that hath often beene taken under the name of di∣vers authors, that was not the authours owne: and often supposititia have had such resemblance to the authours stile, and to the rest of his workes,Platonis Axia. Arist. de plantis, &c. that one could hardly, or not at all, discerne them from the rest. But God taketh a contrary order for his law: he will have a copy of it in the side of the Arke: another for the Prince, another for the high Priest: for every Priest one, a copy for every Tribe. He commanded the people of Israel to have it in their hangings,The diversity of waies to preserve Gods Law without corruption. in their frontlets and fringes of their garments; in the eyes of all men. That what evill soever had betyded them, it might not one with be empaired; and that no corruption might take hold of it. And the Jewes knew very well the daies of Antiochus, that those worthy men died for the maintaining of it, would not have ventu∣red their life for a counterfeit Law. 4. No Prophet hath corre∣cted any Prophet that went before him, or that was of the same time with him. Theophrastus corrected Ari∣stotle his ma∣ster.4. In all other writings, there have beene some things, that their successours have amended. Some they have abrogated, or have put to of their owne; no such thing here. No Prophet that hath beene since Moses, hath at any time gone about to correct Moses, or to correct any thing that he hath, or to put in; but hath yeelded to that as true, and sought more to confirme it, &c. but for the man∣ner of the first religion, that none shall dispute of; God requireth no such thing of us; but commandeth the contrary, Deut. 4. , try all things. Fourth thing. The end, whereto all these bookes drive. What∣soever man bringeth forth, it must needs have proprias hominis pas∣siones, mans proper passions. The proper passions of man, will seeke to make man (at least in part) their end. An unregenerate mans actions,That religion which attri∣buteth all ho∣nour to God, is the true. full of affections. So that when any religion doth either take all to it, or the chiefest part; it referreth all the ho∣nour, or the chiefest part, to her end. The end of religion, the
honour of God; his glory wholly onely: now, he cannot be brought out of conceit of himselfe, but Religion bringeth him. As God is the authour of all essence, so also of all good; therefore the end of all good: therefore all honour wholly to be given to him, none to have any part with him; all honour must be given to him, that giveth all other their attributes: but this doth not any religion, but the Christian religion. Every victory, all honour of it goeth to God, nothing to man: whereas all the other seeke mans honour, ei∣ther in the whole, or in part. The Poets and Philosophers have greatly stood on mans free∣will: they will give him his igniculi & semina naturae, sparkes and seeds of nature to goodnesse. And by these, with exercise they will make him authour of his owne perfection. But our religion ac∣knowledgeth nothing, but that it came from God, and to be refer∣red to God. In God there must be an unity: therefore that religion naught, that acknowledgeth any more then one God. 6. Deuteron.True religion acknowled∣geth but one God. Diodorus Siculus alledgeth that Moses departure out of Egypt was of no other occasion, but that he would not worship many Gods. We have but one God: the Jewes (no) more; and though the Turkes seeme to hold that there is but one God in essence: yet when it commeth to the point, that there is but one God, that doth good, they will have many mediators to that God; and so consequently, many Gods: but we have but onely one Mediator. 5. Arg. That religion that commandeth all good, and forbiddeth all evill, is true.5. Arg. The precepts or doctrine. i. Because we hold that there is darknesse in every man, not regenerated. Therefore in the reli∣gion of man it cannot be, that all good should be commanded, or all evill restrained: but some lawfull things are restrained, and some unlawfull permitted. No sect cleane of this. Among the Athenians it was counted so small a thing, the keeping of a mans faith, or the breaking of it, that of them came this proverbe, Graeca fides, small truth. Theft permitted among the Spartans. Among the Romanes, Lupercalia, Floralia, Bacchanalia, solemne Sacrifices and playes dedicated to Pan, Flora, Bacchus. To the first state, they knew but one Commandement. i. the seventh, and that was not kept. The first Commandement openly broken: the second broken, or shame∣fully abused; as the rest, either broken, or never heard of. Beside actuall sinne, they knew none; they knew not that concupiscence is a sinne: of the lusts of the flesh they counted nothing; but affe∣ctions indifferent, &c. But some restrained the use of marriage: some the use of meates. 6. Arg. Ano∣ther note.As unlawfull things are forbidden, so are they forbidden to all alike; but the Heathen have no such exact Law, but there may be a dispensation for it: no such straight punishment for any offence, but it may be restrained by the person time, &c. As the Magi said of the King of Persia; indeed we finde that it is not lawfull for a man to marry his sister: yet we finde by another Law, that a King may doe what he list. But the Saints of God would have said flatly with Iohn the Baptist, non licet tibi, &c.Math. 14.. it is not lawfull for thee to have her; though they had lost their head for it.
7. Arg. Out of this, another argument: That this religion, and these bookes, goeth to the very heart: and other sticke in the skin. These stop the streames; they make the lusts of the flesh but affe∣ctions and indifferent things. This religion taketh away concupi∣scence, the roote of all sinnes. 8. The Scrip∣tures exceed mans under∣standing.Another Argument. It is a necessary argument, that that which cannot come from man, commeth from God. But there are sundry things in our Scriptures, that are metaphysickes indeed: and passe the capacity of man: as that Jehovah should be Elohim, that is, three persons in one God, the Trinity in Unity; that God should become man: that God should take the guiltinesse of man, by suffering for him his punishment: that God could ordaine a world, and out of it gather a Church to himselfe;They exceed mans will and appetite. Caque naturale est, sua peccata, patriae, & suo∣rum, quantum fiori potest tegere. & all of nothing. So for a man to come to this, that he wil not conceale his fathers, mothers, or friends faults: to speake against his owne country and countrymen: yea against himselfe, is against the nature of man, & cannot be wrought in man, but by a supernaturall cause. This we see the holy men in the Scrip∣tures did; It is naturall to every man so farre as he can, to cover his owne faults, and the faults of his Countrey and friends. Moses, when no necessity bound him, confessed that he came of a cursed stocke: spared not his brother Aarons fault in making the Calfe, but com∣mitted it to writing; spared not his sister Miriam in the cause of murmuring: no not his owne fault, in murmuring against the Lord at the waters of strife;Numb. 11.11. dispossessed his owne children, and would not have them to succeed him in the Magistracy (a very unnaturall thing) but preferred Ioshua; yea he put by his owne Tribe, and the Tribe of Iuda, and preferred Ephraim. This is not able to agree with the naturall man, but must come from an higher cause. Therefore the writers of these bookes must be inspired by God. 10. Whereas the whole drift of the greatest Philosophers, and most learned men, was to teach how Kings should enlarge their Kingdomes, and to be in credit with Princes and great men: this teacheth, that life is the contempt of life. It teacheth the contempt of the world, and worldly honours. The Prophets, they never sought to be in favour with Princes, but were so farre from that, that they answered them not so much to that they asked, as to that they should have asked: therefore this is supernaturall. Therefore the true way, and from God, not from man. Against the Iewes.The next point, as God is a Spirit, so must his worship be spiri∣tuall: so we finde in the Scriptures, not onely forbidding of images and shadowes; but also a flat negative. And as in the case of Gods unity, though false religion may agree with the true in the first point, yet not in the second: so in this regard, howsoever they ex∣clude images; yet they fault in this, that all their worship is ceremo∣niall; bodily, and rituall, consisting in matters of ablution and outward types. And though there be types in the old Testament, yet he proclaymeth every where, that he abhorreth them: for he will have a contrite heart, and onely the circumcision of the heart.
Therefore as man is bodily, and his notions fall into the compasse of the body; so as that worship that commeth from him, is bodily: whereas the worship that commeth from God is spirituall. 2. To this may be added that of Miracles and Oracles, to con∣firme this religion, as the other did in confirming their religion. They were not done in corners, but in the sight of Pharao, in the middest of all his servants. 2. Againe, they were not frivolous, but they that have felt them, have got good by them. 3. They are not imitable nor expressible by the art of man: as the dividing of the red Sea; the causing the Sunne to stand still in Ioshuahs time; the making of Ahaz Diall to goe backe 10. degrees; both which Areo∣pageta saith are in the Persian Oracles. The raining of Manna from Heaven, Iannes and Iambres were not able to imitate Moses. For Oracles of the Gentiles, they did , philippise;Oracles. speake as King Philip would have them: and that they were very ambi∣guous, and needed Delio natatore, the Swimmer, the Interpreter Apollo to expound them. Therefore Porphyry said that their Oracles commonly had Posticum, a backe-dore. These doe not , philippise, are not doubtfull, need no Delius natator, the Swimmer, the Interpreter Apollo. Last, most of the heathens Oracles came not to passe: but in the Scriptures, they came all to passe: some three hundred yeeres before; some 500. some a thousand, some three thousand, as the dilatation of Iapheth, which happened not before the calling of the Gentiles. And this for confirmation both of the old and new Te∣stament, common to the Jewes aswell as to us; those that follow, are proper to Christian religion. 1. Aug. 23. de eivitate Dei; out of Por∣phyrie, de regressu animae, of the regresse of the soule, the greatest enemy that ever the Church had, That it is no true religion that doth not yeeld a sufficient purgation to the soule of man. Moreover he addeth there that the Platonists received from the Chaldees, that the purgation of the soule of man, cannot be nisi per principia: but by the principles; we know that Plato his principles were  the father, the mind, love: an enignaticall speech of our Trinity. But this. i. the purgation of the soule of man, no religion teacheth but ours; for it teacheth that , the word tooke upon him sinfull flesh, to purge away the sins of man; therefore ours the true, all the rest are meerely bodily; for all their exorcismes and sacrifices are bodily, and not spirituall: and so withall, the God of the Christians, is not like to the heathen gods; for he is , one who loveth man. i. he delighteth not in cutting mens throats, or burning them to afhes; as their divels, had virgins, babes, old men, young men, good men offered up to them. And the sacrifices of beasts in the old law, were onely used for two respects. 1. That they might be types of those things that are in the Gospell. 2. To be an admonition to men, to shew them that they have deserved to be thus killed and sacrificed. God was so farre from having men to be sacrificed to him, that he himselfe came downe to give himselfe a Sacrifice for our sinnes. And what greater love can be, then for a man to give his
life for that he loveth for his friend; therefore no greater , love to man then this.In a witnesse, two things required: 1. Skill. 2. Honesty. 1. Ioh. 1.1. Now for the Gospell. 1. For the witnesses. In a witnesse, two things required. 1. Skill. 2. Honesty. First, for the skill. There is never a one of them, but can say, we write and say, . Which we have heard, which we have seene with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and which our hands have handled. Not as Ho∣mer, Plato, and the rest, that had their things from other, and by report: And withall, the writers of the Scriptures, writing them when the world bare greatest hatred against them; and yet never any durst write any booke against Moses in his time, or against the Gospell in these daies. And de probitate testis, concer∣ning the honesty of a witnesse;The honesty of a witnesse. there can be no better reason given, then that Tacitus giveth: That they testifie best, quibus nullum est mendacii pretium; that have nothing for their labour: and so here, the Prophets and the Apostles had nothing for their paines; where∣as if this religion were false, he had reaped perpetuall ignominie and shame,For the credit of the story, eternall testi∣monies. he had in vaine deprived himselfe, of all pleasure, wealth, and preferment: For the credit of the story, concerning first the nativity of Christ: secondly, his death. For his birth, we know the Oracles of the Sybillae were in greatest account among the heathen, and held as true of all men: and if those be they which we have, there is nothing which can more plainely set forth the birth of Christ; his life, his death. For there we may see every action set downe, and almost every circumstance. That they be the same, first those two verses that Lactantius citeth, we finde in these. Secondly, those that the heathen cite, as Tully, one saith that they were the very speculum Historiarum, the mirrour of Histories. And we read that many of the learned men in these latter daies, as Marcellinus & Secundanus, were converted to the Christian religion, onely by reading those verses, Cic. 1. epist. to Lentulus. There is much adoe who shall bring Ptolomy the last into his Kingdome a∣gaine? Lentulus maketh great suit; his reason was, because that it was the Oracles of Sybillae, that presently upon the reducing of Ptolomee, Prodiret dominus orbis, The Lord of the world should ap∣peare. 2. Of divination. Vocandus nobis Rex, ex quo salvi simus, He is to be called of us a King, of whom we may be saved. Tacitus and Suetonius say, that in the time of the Gentiles, espe∣cially in the time of Vespasian, it was said throughout the whole world, that the King of the world should come out of Iury: and therefore his flatterers went about to perswade him, that it was meant by him. Therefore we shall finde, that Augustus Tiberius, and the other Emperours, did labour to roote out the Nation of the Jewes; and especially that Tribe, that the King of the world should come out of. Rodiginus and Voluteran, leave this on their credit, in their writings, That among the monuments of Egypt, they found an Altar of Isis, dedicated Virgini pariturae, to the Virgin that is to bring forth. And like to that de Templo pacis, of the Temple of peace, that it should stand, quoad virgo peperit, untill a virgin hath
brought forth a child. So Postellus witnesseth from the Druidae, that they had an Altar with this superscription, ara primogenito Dei, an Altar to the first begotten Sonne of God. Suetonius saith, that about the annunciation of Mary, the yeere before his incarnation, as it were on a faire day, in a great assembly of the people at Rome, there appeared a Raine-bow about the Sunne, of a golden colour, almost of the same brightnesse with the Sunne, save that the colour of it was more yellow. And the Augures being asked a reason of it, they answered, that God would invisere humanum genus, visit mankind. When Christ was borne, the same day, were seene three Sunnes in the firmament; (not three parelii) Images of the Sunne,Sueton. in the life of Vespa∣tian. Virg. 4. eglog. Tacit. 21. of his story. that after met and went into one; which cannot be in a meteor; for that it is in a fixed cloud: so that 3. parelii, Images of the Sunne, cannot come into one: to which the Augures answered, that he was then borne, whom both Augustus, and the people, and all the world should wor∣ship; this was a signe of the mystery of the Trinity: therefore it is said, that at the next meeting of the Senate, Augustus gave over his title, Dominus orbis, Lord of the world; and would no more be cal∣led so. And it is reported that on the same day there ranne out of a shop in Rome, for the space of a day, as it were a river of Oyle, which some take for a signe of his spirituall annoynting. But the chie∣fest is of a Starre that appeared, mentioned in the Scripture, as also of the Heathen, that confessed it was stella maximè salutaris,Virg. eclog. 4▪ the luckiest Starre that ever appeared for mankind. 2. Pliny 25. chap. calleth it stella crinita, sine crine; a blazing Starre without crest. And many by cogitation of this Starre, have beene converted to the truth: as Charaemon, among the Stoickes; Caladius among the Plato∣nists, upon the inquiry of the estate of that starre, went into Jury, and became a Jew. For his death,Signes for his death. we finde that the ancient wise among the Egyptians, using not to write by letters, but by characters, when they would expresse vitam aeternam, eternall life, it should be done per signum crucis, by the signe of the Crosse; whereby they shewed a badge, that should necessarily concurre with the action that should be the salvation of the world.Math. 27.45. Mark. 15.33. Concerning the two things that the Holy Ghost hath set downe. i. the universall eclypse of the Sunne, and the universall earthquake; so often and so much cast into the teeth of the heathen, that they are ashamed to deny it. Of the earthquake, Pliny 2.25. ch. of both Phlegon, Trallianus, 13. lib. Chron. testified of all the Heathen, not to have come by any natu∣rall cause. For the earthquake, there can be no universall motion in any thing: for in nature, every thing that is moved, must have  its owne stay; but this earthquake went throughout the world; for the universall eclypse of the Sunne, many were conver∣ted by the strangenesse of it, as Dionysius and Apollophanes: For first, the Sunnes eclypses are all particular; this was universall. 2. It was at the feast of the Passover, which was 14. day of the Moone, when the Moone was just at the full, flat oppositly, contrary to the rules of Astronomy, and the reason of man. 3. In the Emperour Tiberius his raigne it is said that presently upon the eclypse, there was an
universall defect of Oracles: of which argument, Plutarch hath a whole Treatise:M. Arelis. 3. Chinades in∣ulae.  Cyclades▪ wherein he saith, that one Epithe ses, one that was in great credit with the Emperour, sayling by Cyclades, heard a voyce as it were comming out of one of the Ilands, with great yel∣ling as they thought or could conceives of spirits, to make report, that the great God  Pan was dead. The Emperour afterward hearing of this, called together all the wise men and Magitians. But none could tell,Niceph. lib. 1. cap. 17. . An He∣brew child, who com∣mandeth the blessed Gods enjoynes me to leave this house, and straightwaies to goe hence into hell: therefore thou being silent, depart hence from our Altars. what this great God Pan should meane. Nicephorus saith, that the Emperours from Augustus to Adrian, did not onely enquire the cause of this defect, from wisemen; but also caused them to raise up the spirits themselves. One asking the Oracle at Delos, why it was put to silence; answer was made, because of , the Hebrew child. Trophonius his cave, the Oracle there, the Oracle Delos Jupiter; and Jupiter Dodonaeus all put to silence. Saint Ambrose, Tertullian, Justin Martyr testifie, that by Pilates E∣pistle to the Emperour Tiberius, they were confirmed. Egesippus in , the briefe heads of Christ; of his innocent death, godly life, and his resurrection; Ad Senatum de Jesu in Deorum numerum referendo, cum vocis suae praerogativa retulit. He propounded to the Senate with the consent of his voyce, to bring in Jesus into the number of the Gods. But the Councell refused to doe it; quia author ipse consilii non fuer at, because the motion did not first of all proceed from the Senate it selfe. And the chiefest that was against it, was Sejanus who afterward came to a most miserable end. The next and chiefest argument is the proceedings of this reli∣gion. i. Whereas nature and reason teacheth us to get apt instru∣ments to worke with, and that the matter must be disposed and well fitted before we worke. But there were no meanes wrought to propagate this religion. For the instruments, they cannot be de∣vised more unfit, of no nobility, of no power, of no learning, &c. but barbarous, rude, handicrafts men: for the matter to worke upon, they had it altogether unprepared, nay cleane against them. They had the Jewes in hatred against them; in as deadly hatred, as possibly could be. The heathen also at the first continued this ha∣tred against them, after were converted by them; but afterward re∣turned to their former hatred. The learnedst men have been against it. Ʋlpian, the greatest Lawyer, who wrote 460. bookes against the Christians. Gallen the greatest physitian; Plotinus the greatest Pla∣tonist. Porphyry, the greatest Aristotelian: Libanius, a great writer in the Grecian tongue: Iulian the greatest forcerer: Lucian, the greatest scoffer. For persecutions. The ten strangest and bloo∣diest persecutions were against them. The strangest torments that could be devised, were executed upon them: nothing there was, that could be done by force, but it was done. Great and huge heaps of Christians, suffering every where, every day for their faith. For craft and policy. Iulian used all the meanes that could be wrought, by putting downe schooles of catechising, and schooles of the Pro∣phets; by breaking godly meetings, by making Dialogues be∣tweene Christ and Pilate, against Christ, &c. causing them to be
insteed of catechizing to abalienate the childrens minds from Chri∣stian religion by all meanes possible. Yet at length forme prevailed, the matter being never so ill disposed. Man cannot away with this happines.6. The Commandements and precepts in no wise agreeable to flesh and blood. For revenge: we must love them; Love them that hate us, speake good of them that persecute us. Happy shall you be when men revile you and persecute you. For lust: we may not looke after a woman with our eye, to lust after her. For covetousnesse: we must be ready to part with all. For truth: we must not onely con∣fesse, and also professe it, when any one asketh of our faith: here is no plausiblenesse in the world. The meanes. s. promises 7. the next way to make a man forsake, and to terrifie him from it. Math. 10.17. Iohn 21.18. Math. 10.38.7. The promises. Others, as Turkes, Epicures, &c. their reli∣gions set them great promises, either in this life, or in the life to come: or in both; as wealth, preferment, &c. in the world to come, ablutions. This, for this life. Flgellabunt vos in Synagogis suis, they will scourge you in their Synagogues Christ to Peter. They shall bind thee, and lead thee whither thou wouldest not; they shall stone thee, &c. to forsake that they have, and take up the Crosse and follow Christ. He that forsaketh not father, mother, friends, house, all, his owne soule, cannot be my Disciple, &c. You shall not have so much as a breathing time in your persecutions, he that cannot be content to part with all he hath, yea with himselfe, for Christ his cause, he is not wor∣thy of Christ. This is not the next way for sequimini me, follow me; but discedite â me, depart from me. Here is a very resemblance of the creation: as in the creation something was made of nothing; so here, nothing is set to confound something: that we may plain∣ly say, and see that it is the finger of God, that worketh here. Here is strength confounded by weakenesse, something by nothing, death by death. What is this, but a divine religion. Mahometisme could never take any hold of any learned man.When Mahometisme first began, the Emperour gave himselfe to pleasure; the people to idlenesse: so that there was nothing but idlenesse and palpable ignorance; religion freezed; very few lear∣ned men: But in the time when this began, the world was full of eyes; never so great industry: then it pleased the Lord to shew forth his weaknesse, in the greatest strength of the world; and by his most simple meanes to convert the learned men that then lived; as Pantenus, Clemens, Origen, Bsil, Augustin, Ambrose. For the con∣version; Paul having a testimony from the counsell, to binde all such as he found professors of Christs name, and to imprison them; being in the highest way to preferment, a man of speciall account among the Jewes (so that Porphyrie saith, it is pitie, that so excellent a man for the gifts of learning, so neere preferment, should have beene converted to the Christian religion;) yet then suddenly he was content to turne to many sharpe showres, whippings, perils by Sea and by Land, shipwracks, &c. he had no great pleasure,2. Cor. 12.2. for he had no time to breath in his afflictions; when he should come to honour; and the people of Lycaonia came to sacrifice to him, and Barnabas: they rent their clothes, beate their brests, ranne in the middest of them, and told them that they were but men as they
were; so that they were not vaine-glorious. Origen was the fai∣rest for preferment that any man could be. Ammonius was his master; alwaies preferred before Plotinus, who afterward came to great preferment in the common wealth. Yet he was content to leave all, and betake himselfe to be a poore catechist in Alexandria, where he was every minute, in danger of his life: After they were converted, after they were not converted to any sect, &c. never the like examples of manners and all kind of vertues, as in these; of fasting, of abstinence, of continence, of liberality, of justice, in all things, and with all men: of fortitude, (Plotinus one of their great ene∣mies saith of thē) omnis Christianus mortis contemptor, every Christian is a despiser of death. For life most innocent and simple. Longinianus the Philosopher in his Epistle to Augustine: I reason thus with my selfe,The heathen men had it cast into their heads, that Christ wrought not by the finger of God, but by magicke. Perfecation by sword, by bookes. They say that your Saviour wrought by magike, and that he learned it in Egypt; but I can hardly be brought to beleeve it. For if he were such a one, and wrought by inferiour spirits, non trium∣pharet de diis he could not triumph over the Gods, for he hath con∣founded all our Gods, and put them to silence. If he wrought by such meanes, no doubt neither he, nor his followers, would exhort others to such austerity of life and manners; and forbid all such unlawfull meanes. Pliny 2. testifieth of the Christians, that they were the innocentest people that ever lived: and giveth the Em∣perour counsell, that if they were accused of any, that the Law might take hold of them; otherwise, that he should not once enquire of them. The next, their constancy in suffering death; not onely in men of strength, but also in silly old men, maides, children, with their parents &c. And that after so ambitious desire of death, that they would offer themselves to die; as the woman with the child in her armes, that crossed the Proconsulls horse, and being asked the cause why she did so; answered that she feared lest she should come too late to suffer with the other Christians, that had their names in his bill to be executed; for she said that she also was a Christian. Tertullian in his apoogy. Omne malum, aut timore, aut pudore na∣tura perfundit: malefici denique gestiunt latere▪ devitant apparere, trepi∣dant deprehensi, negant accusati, ne torti quidem facile aut semper confi∣tentur, certè damnati moerent, dementati in semetipsis, mentis malae impetus vel fato, vel astris imputant▪ nolunt esse suum, quia malum agno∣scunt: Christianis verò quid simile? neminem pudet, neminem poenitet, nisi planè jam antea non fursse: si quis denotatur, gloriatur. Every sinne nature besprinkles it either with feare or shame; the wicked they desire gladly to lie hid, they shunne to be seene, being taken tardy they tremble, being accused they deny, though tortured scarce ever doc they freely confesse, being condemned they are pensive; they waxe foolish in themselves, the vehement rage of their evill heart, they impute either to fate, or to the starres. They will not have it to be theirs, because they know it is evill: but to Christians what is like? none is ashamed of it, none forethinkes it, unlesse that he was not such sooner: if any be marked, he glories. Si accusatur, non
defendit: interrogatus, velultro consitetur, damnatus, gratias agit: Quid hoc mali, quid non habet mali; timorem, pudorem, tergi∣versationem; poenitentiam, deplorationem? Quid hoc maliest, cujus reus gaudet, cujus accusativo votum; cujus poena, felicitas, &c. If any be accused, he defends not; being asked, he confesses freely, being condemned, he gives thankes: what evill is this? what wicked∣nesse hath it not, feare, shame, hasting, despising, bewailing. But what evill can this be, whereof the party accused rejoyceth, where∣of to be accused, is their desire, for which to suffer punishment they account felicity. There is never a sect of all the Philosophers, but one edict put forth of the common wealth, that it should be present death to be maintainers of it, would dash it, as it did Pyrrho and his followers. But no edict ever could, or hath put this to si∣lence, no persecutions either by sword or by bookes, &c. but the Christians tyred their persecutors. Where there is a mutation, there must be an agent to worke; but these were onely the patients, and by suffering did weary the agents. For the manner of the departure of their persecutors. From the persecution under Claudius, to the last of the ten; all the Emperors, and all that had set to their hand to any Bill, in those ten persecu∣tions of the Christians, came to a fearefull end: onely Libanius escaped, that presently went to Basil and became a Christian. All the rest came to a miserable end, as Iudas, Herod, Pilat, &c. Sejanus, So that one crieth out to an Emperours, parce nobis; si non nobis, parce tibi; si non tibi, parce Carthagini: pitty us; if not us, yet pitty thy selfe; if not thy selfe, yet pitty the City Carthage. Last, the divels testimony. For it is a point in Law, that how ill soever any witnesse is otherwise disposed, yet his witnesse may be taken, Cum confitetur in dedecùs suum, when he confesseth to his owne reproach. Eusebius saith, that Iulian the Apostata being in Antioch, and being desirous to deale with inchanting the spirits, having made his circle upon the place, where Babylas a martyr was buried, and adjuring after his manner, the divell to come up; the divell confesseth, that he by all his cunnings and adjurings could make him come up there, before he had digged up Babylas his ashes. Tertullian challengeth the Emperour and his Religion. Let me come, saith he, into your Temples, and let me talke with any of the spirits in your Images. If I make not, or any Christian, the feind to confesse as much, as the foule spirits in the Gospell, to come out of the image: then let your religion prevaile, and ours take the foyle: And surely his great offer had beene taken, had not the Emperour feared the overthrow. Last, Plotinus, Apollonius, Thyanaeus, and other of the heathen as∣sayed divers times to bring up the Images of Iupiter, Mars, &c. and brought them up; but they all confessed this, that when they came to bring up the Image of Christ, they and the Spirits were con∣founnded; ergo there can be no power to represent him. That also may be added, that their God was afraid of Styx; now we have found him, whom Styx it selfe standeth in feare of, yea of the ashes of a Christian.
Being entered into this way, we fall once more into another di∣vision. For as we know, Christian faith standeth on two sorts: so that each part pleadeth the possession of it, as well as other: and each taketh the other to be wrong. Now therefore to know, whe∣ther of these we are to betake our selves to: And it is no difficulty, if we take the markes of true religion. 1. That the worship of God is spirituall. 2. That it restraineth the concupiscence; in particular hereafter it shal be resolved. Now in generall: because they build on the Word of God as well as we, so that each plead their interest in it, but after a divers meaning: that we may take a right course, for the right interpretation of the Scripture:The maine question. the question lieth thus, betweene us and the Chruch of Rome; how that certaine and infal∣lible interpretation of the Word of God may be had? They say it may be had of the Fathers, Councels, Church, or the chiefe Father in the Church. i. the Pope. We in another sort: this their opinion may be resolved, 2. Pet. 1.20. that it is not , of any pri∣vate interpretation. To make it plaine: 1. We both hold out of Acts 8.31. that the Scriptures cannot be understood , with∣out a guid. And if the Eunuch, a man not of the vulgar sort, was not otherwise able to doe;  then none of the vulgar sort. 2. This being set downe, we adde this also: That there is a certaine inter∣pretation, whereto a man may safely commit himselfe: For else, it is well knowne, that we cannot build on the rocke, but be blowne downe at every blast of contrary doctrine. 3. As we affirme it out of Peter, that they pertaine not to any private interpretation. i. that one may not interpret them after his owne fancy. i. as 2. Pet. 3.16. , Pet. 3.16. to wrest the Scriptures: but as Hilary saith, Referre sensum è Scripturis, non auferre è Scripturis: to utter the sense out of Scriptures, not to take it away from the Scriptures. Therefore we hold this,1. Cor. 12.10. 1. Cor. 12.10. that God hath given the gift of interpreta∣tion; which gift, as we acknowledge, not to be given out of the Chruch: as, 1 Cor. 2.14. . The naturall man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God. i. a man, onely as he is a man, cannot interpret aright. So neither we hold, that it is given to the common people, whom as Augustine saith, Non vivacitas intelligendi, sed simplicitas credendi salvos reddit. Not live∣linesse of understanding, but simplicity of faith saveth them. But to the learned, and to those of the learned, that have the gift of inter∣pretation. Now forasmuch as, 1 Cor. 12.11. God doth divide these gifts, singulis prout vult, to every one as he pleaseth. Therefore it is hard restraining of it to the succession of Bishops: as the grosser Papists doe. Stapleton lib. 10. Of controversie, cap. 7. when he had done all he could, yet at the length the truth prevaileth with him, that he saith, that it is not so tyed to the succession of Bishops; but that God may worke it in other extraordinarily; that as well to Amos a Heardman, as to Ieremy a Priest, the gift of Prophecy was given. And those of the sounder sort of them, as Andradius, leaneth flat to the contrary part: that the interpretations of the Bishops, ga∣thered together, may be taken, though it be flat contrary to the Scrip∣tures.
Now for the sense of the Scriptures, they say well in Law, that Apices juris, non sunt jus, Extremity of law, is not law: so of the Scrip∣tures, The booke is not the Scripture, not the draught of words, but the meaning. And for the meaning of them, Aquinas saith, that to prove any matter of faith or manners, no sense must be taken, but the literall sence. 2. But if we come to exhorting and instruct∣ing; then we may use tropologicall sense (as the Fathers, for the most part every where.) 3. That the literall sence can be but one, in one place, albeit a man may draw sundry consequences, a contrariis, similibus, &c. from contraries, from likes, &c. by the rules and places of Logicke, yet the literall sence of the authour is but one. 4. That is the literall sense of every place, which the construction doth shew, if it lead not to an absurdity: then must it needs be a trope, or figure. Thirdly, seeing then there must be an interpretation, and it must come from the letter, unlesse it bring us to an absurdity: 3. fol∣loweth the examination of the sense. And first, against all Staple∣tons issues of arguments, That if these be the meanes, there is al∣waies left a place for wrangling; but it is no inconvenience. For he that will wrangle, may aswell wrangle upon the interpretations of the Fathers, Councels, &c. We must not looke to bring an ad∣versary so farre, that he can say nothing; for what is it, that the di∣vell cannot say against it? All the inconveniences, that an here∣tike may be brought to are two. The first, Tit. 3.11. to drive them so farre, till they condemne themselves, in their owne facts, Tit. 3.11. that after two or three disputings, we may give them over, , being condemned of themselves. 2. Seeing the divell so blindeth the understanding of some, that they will not perceive reason; therefore as it is,2. Tim. 3.9. 2 Tim. 3.9. so long we may reason with them till their , their folly be manifest to all men. One may set downe conclusions in halfe an houre that may trouble all the learned men halfe a yeere to confute them. 2. We must know, that as in other sciences,The judge∣ment to be taken from the principles. so in Divinity, the judg∣ment of every part is to be taken ex principiis, from the principles; and examined by them: For these principles, Aug. de doct. Christiana. 2.9. In iis quae apertè posita sunt, inveniuntur illa omnia, quae pertinent ad fidem, moresque vivendi, in these things which are plainely set downe, all things are found which belong either to faith or manners. Chrys. in 2 Thes. 2. ho. 3. manifesta sunt, quae sunt ad mores, aut ad fidem necessaria, these things which are necessary to faith or manners, are manifest. And again, quae tam indoctis, quam doctis patent, which are manifest as well to the unlearned, as to the learned.Canus a great man among the Papists. Canus 3.2. ch. of places theo∣logicall; saith, that there are divers places, that none can give any o∣ther sence of, then the literall; nor can write thē, unlesse he will needs wrangle. Irenaeus 2. against heresies, 46, 47. ch That all those plaine places make our principles; and that all those places of doubtfull understanding, must be judged by these plaine places. And the next way for agreement of those parties were, first that learned men agreed, what those plaine places were. Now of the meanes how to finde out the true sense of Scripture: they are many, but may be brought to six.
Meanes to finde out the true sens of Scripture.The first is that, wherein they agree with us, sc. Pietas & diligentia, piety and diligence. Prayer must goe first. Aug. Oratio postulet. lectio inquirat, meditatio inveniat, contemplatio degustet & digerat. Let prayer desire, reading search, meditation finde, contemplation feele and digest. So Christ, Luk. 24.13. opened their eyes, prepared their hearts. The 2,3,4, are for the phrase of speech. 2. Conference of places warranted by August. de doct. Christian. lib. 2. cap. 8. The lesse plaine places in the Scripture are to be refer∣red to the more plaine, and the lesse in number. And it seemeth to be the course of the Holy ghost, Act. 17.11. 3. Inspectio fontium, a viewing or considering of the fountaines. i. for the opening of divers significations of the word, the consulting with the two originall tongues: for the old Testament, with the He∣brew; for the new, with the Greeke. Aug. 2. de doct. Christiana. cap. II. 4. The knowledge of the holy Ghosts phrase, i. idiome, dialect, or stile: For the Holy Ghost useth divers idiomes, that are not to be found in other writers; as the crucifying of a mans flesh, the mortifying of his concupiscence, &c. Therefore we must be perfect in these: and as Heb. 5. v. last. Habere Have our senses exercised, that we may know the Holy Ghost when he speak∣eth. Often we shall meet with , this is being in∣terpreted, the Holy ghost in Greeke referreth us to the Holy ghost in Hebrew. And these are the remedies for the right understan∣ding of the words. There are two others for whole sentences or Chapters. 5. Is that the Fathers call Oculus ad scopum, the eye to the marke. As what was Gods intent in setting downe the Law, in giving a pro∣phecy, in doing a miracle, &c. As Paul to Timothy, against those that made an evill use of the Law, reasoned from the end of the Law. So saith Hilary, E causis dictorum sumenda est intelligentia dictorum. From the causes of things that are spoken, the understanding of them is to be taken. 6. That which the wise men of the Jewes say, We must looke all about us; before us, behind us, beside us, &c. i. the diligent weigh∣ing of the antecedentia & consequentia, antecedents and consequents; and every other circumstance. To these six circumstances may be referred the rules of Irenaeus, lib. 2. ch. 46,47. Aug. 2.2. & 3. ch. That every one of these meanes serve not for every thing; but to divers things, divers instruments are applyed. And here, against Stapletons errours, who taketh some one thing which would be resolved by some one of these; and objecteth it to another of them whereby it cannot be resolved. Because one of these are not necessary to such a thing, therefore not necessary at all. 2. That we attribute not the interpretation of the true sence to each one of these;Naught, not for that he thinketh them simply naught but insuffici∣ent. but to all together. Whereas Stapleton con∣cludeth them all to be naught, because sverally they will not suf∣fice; naught, not for that he thinketh them simply naught, but insufficient. His second argument. To every one of these, there is a place left
ad contradicendum, for contradiction. 2. Being used singularly, they will not suffice. But we know the first argument to be none. And 2. that every one of these, hath his peculiar office. The meanes that Papists use to under∣stand the Scriptures.Now they, beside Prayer, set downe these meanes; the interpre∣tation of Fathers, of Councels, the practise of the Church; the de∣finitive sentence of the Pope. They say, all these are true, infallible and sufficient. For the assertions of the Fathers, and Councels; as a doubt may be found in the Scriptures, so in their exposition upon the Scriptures. For the practise of the Church, and sentence of the Pope: A question may be made whether the Church is the true Church; and so there is yet place for doubting. For the second inconvenience, as we unfeinedly acknowledge, that all their meanes are commendable; as they include the use of our former meanes. If ever they did well, it was by using our meanes: on the contrary, If ever they erred, they erred in one of these. But take their meanes all together, without the other, they will misse. For the Fathers; They will have all the Fathers meet in one exposition of one place: which is a vaine speculation of theirs. For there is not one place of an hundred, that all the Fathers expound. 2. In expounding, they keepe not lightly the literall sense, ex∣cept it be in the controversies that were in their times: but in their Homilies and writings followed sensum Tropologicum, the Tropo∣logicall sense; drawing out divers doctrines and applications ne∣cessary for manners. So saith Augustine against Julian. That in con∣troversies, that fell not in their time, the Fathers loquebantur obscurè, controversià nondum motą in caeteris loquebantuąr securè, controversią nondum notą spake obscurely, the controversie not yet moved; in the rest they spake securely, the controversie not yet knowne. Basil. epist. 14. saith of Dionysius a Father; multa loquebatur , he spake many things controversally; in his vehemency of disputation against the heretickes of his time, quae non defenderet , which he would not defend determinatively. And in sundry things the Fathers must be taken to have spoken per modum contradicendi, non docendi, in way of contraedicting, not of teaching. But they them∣selves are at strife among themselves; Cardinall Cajetan saith in the second Councell at Tent, that if he knew a good and true exposi∣tion of any place in the Scripture, and that might be drawne out of the place, he would hold it contra torrentem, against the current of all the Doctors and Bishops: so also Andradius; and they them∣selves use to deny Fathers in their schooles. Non  at honest, dispensatio, sed  dissimulatio. Hicron. It was not a true dispensa∣tion, but a dis∣simulation.But now they leane to that, which the most part doe say. Augustin in epist. II. There is a question betweene him and Jerome, whether Paul in reproving Peter, did meane sincerely? i. reprooved him in∣deed, or did dissemble? Jerome holdeth that he did dissemble; Augustine that he meant simply: And though Jerome oppressed him with divers Fathers authority; yet he regarded them not at all; but thought that he reprehended him indeed; ut ad Calat. 2. and we know Augustines part carrieth it away. And Jerome in the expounding of the Psalmes, saith, That he had set downe divers
things, that were not holden in those daies, Augustine refuseth Cyprian an ancient Father his opinion, and preferred Tironius a Donatists opinion upon a place of Scripture; because he knew it was the sounder. And he hath set seven rules out of him de doct. Christiana, against that of Stapleton, that would have us to regard, non quid dicatur, sed quis dicat, not what is spoken, but who speaketh. 2. In the exposition of these words, Tu es Petrus, & suprahanc Pe∣tram, thou art Peter, and upon this Rocke; almost every one of the Fathers, at least, most part of them, and best, expound it of Peters faith: yet the Papists understand it, Non de side, sed de persons Petri, not of the faith, but of the person of Peter. Here they disagree them∣selves from the Fathers: And Stapleton saith, it was lapsus humanus, a humane failing. In the division of the Law, they goe cleane con∣trary to the greatest part of the Fathers: for whereas the Fathers divide the Commandements as we doe; the Papists make the two first, one; and the tenth, two. 2. They have no Father to countenance them in this, but Augustin. 2. For the practise of the Church, great doubtfulnesse. i. in the cause of the primacy: all the Christians of the East-Church have refused it; onely the West Churches held with it: so that here is halfe the Church against it. And if the practise of the Church were to be urged; all Christendome were once Arrians, saving three or foure Bishops. So that here is ambiguity with great perill. Basil. 27. de Spiritu Sancto; de immersione trina in Baptismo, of the Holy Ghost, of thrise dipping in baptisme: that first the children were but once dipped into the water; after thrise: at this day it is but once, and the other abrogated. 3. For Councels; they are divided into Action and Canon: for the Action, it is either intollerable or shamelesse; or they must con∣fesse infinite writings: so that they confesse, the action may erre. For the Canon, there is not one place among a thousand that hath the indefinite sentence of the Fathers. 2. There have beene Canons directly contrary one to the other. The generall Councell of Con∣stance and of Basil, both generall, both allowed. 1. by Pope Martin the fist. 2. By Pope Eugenius the fourth; and their Bils be at them, one opposite to the other. One saith, The Councell can erre, not the Pope. The other, the Pope, not the Councell. The Canon of the Councell of Ferrara, contrary to the Canon of the Councell of Flo∣rence; the one, that the Pope was above the Councell; the other that the Councell was above the Pope. Decretum de 4. conclusionibus, the decree of the foure conclusions. 4. For the Pope; Ierome saith, that Damasus a Pope did consent ad subscriptionem haereseos, to the subscription of heresie. Liberius (as Ambrose) though for a while he was constant, and a great enemy against the Arrians; yet being put by his Bishopricke, and bani∣shed; after revolted, and upon his revolting was restored to his Bishopricke, and in an Arrian Councell, did subscribere haeresi, sub∣scribe to heresie. 1. That Christ in respect of his Godhead, was not equall with his Father. 2. To the heresie of the Monothelites:
that Christ in respect that he was both God and man, had but one will; and therefore but one nature. Honorius was condemned in seven Canons, and seven actions, by the sixt generall Councell of Constantinople; propter subversionem fidei. for subverting the faith: and accursed by the 7. and 8. generall Councell of Nice. So that they are faine to say, these Councels were corrupt; and so, not onely they, but also the writings of Beda shall be corrupt: so that we see, these severally to be false rules. Now to shew that they faile, being taken altogether. In the ministring of the Communion or Supper to infants. 1. Augustine defendeth it against Iulian. 2. Aurelius, and indeed all the Fathers, interpreting, Iohn 6.53. Except ye eate the flesh of the Sonne of man, and drinke his blood, you have no life in you;) of the Sacrament; whereas it is de re Sacramentis i. de invisibili gratià, of the matter of the Sacrament; that is, of the invisible grace. It hath beene confirmed by the Councell at Milevitanum, where Augustine, Aurelius, &c. subscribed;Aug. 2. Canon against Pelagi∣ans. it hath been the practise of the Church: and Innocentius Pope of Rome, in his letter confirmed it: Qui parvulis definivit, ut Augustinus, lib. de Sa∣cramentis; hath limited little children, as Augustine in his booke of the Sacraments; grounding on that place of Iohn. They being brought to this, that they see, that every interpretation is not good,Against Iulian because it is given; but because it is according to rules: and there is no rules but ours: if they make the rule to hang on the personall exposition, not on the reall, as Stapleton, lib. 10. cap. 11. then they must have his thirteene cautions. Who in the end is brought to an infinite absurdity, that he is faine to say, that the interpretation of a Bishop, though unlearned, is to be preferred before the interpre∣tation of a learned Divine. Andradius. We beleeve the Fathers, not whatsoever they say, nor because they say it; but because their say∣ing is according to the rules. Hitherto the Preface to Religion. Now we must handle the summe of Christian religion it selfe in it selfe. The whole Christian religion hath two parts,Delege, Of the Law the Law and the Gospell. If we have the summe of both these, we may assure our selves that we are grounded as much as is for our salvation. The summes of them are principles simply necessary to our salvation. The war∣rant for these is out of Iohn 1.17. For the Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth commeth by Iesus Christ. Seeing these be the parts, we must know first, whether is first to be handled? The Church of Rome, as it is in the Treatise of D. Hessel, Canisius, but especially in the last Councels Catechisme at Trident, perverteth the order, and teacheth the Gospell before the Law. Which standeth against the order both of time and nature. For these reasons. 1. For these are nothing else but two covenants, which God made with man∣kind: 1. Of the Law. 2. Of the Gospell. The old and new Te∣stament, not as they are in our bookes, for so they are confounded: and as Saint Augustine saith, the Law is nothing else but Enangelium occultatum, a Gospell hid. The Gospell, Lex revelata, a revealed Law. But taking them for Covenants: as in a Will or Testament, there
are two parties; the Testator, and the party to whom the legacie is made. So in each Covenant, there were two parties: in the first, God and Adam: The Covenant on Gods side, eternall felicity, both in this life, and in the life to come: on Adams, perfect obedience. Therefore it is called the Covenant of obedience. This perfect obe∣dience man received stength to performe; but abusing his strength, and setting it against God, justly incurred the forfeiture. i. of his fe∣licity: and the penalty. i. eternall death, and hell, opposite to Pa∣radise, to which his strength should have kept him. sc. morte morie∣ris, namely, that thou shalt die the death. By this meanes the first Covenant being broken and made voyd, yet not in regard of the forfeiture, but of the penalty it pleased God to make a new cove∣nant; in which are two bonds. 1. Betweene God and Christ. 2. Be∣tweene Christ and us. On Gods side, felicity; or the conveyance of his eternall right to Christs. On Christs, satisfaction to God: to us, to restore all to us that we have lost. On our side, faith unfai∣ned. As man fell, and by his fall, lost all that he had; so if he would recover that he lost, he was to make satisfaction: and beside, if he could fulfill the Law, he had promise of eternall felicity. Christ un∣dertooke this perfect satisfaction for man: suffered all, that man should have suffered; and so tooke away the penalty: satisfied the forfeiture; and so restored all that man had lost: and so came to two rights; one of inheritance, another of purchasement. The right of inheritance, which he had by nature, in that he was the Sonne of God, he reteineth himselfe: the other of purchacement, he giveth to all them that lay hold of him, fide non ficta, with faith unfained; and that not of our owne strength, but in Christ: and therefore its called the covenant of faith, and that with no losse; for if a thing be taken away, and a recompence be made by a bet∣ter thing, there is no taking away. The reason of this second cove∣nant is, that if the first covenant had stood, and Adam had remained in his owne strength, he must needs have had some part of the honour for using it well; and not abusing it when he might: there∣fore that God might have the whole glory, he suffered the first to be broken; for God in creating required onely honour. Therefore man fell. For his fall he was to make satisfaction; this was not to be performed but in Gods strength; the grace of God preventing us, and making us of unwilling, willing; and of unable, able: in that measure that God will require at their hands: we have all our strength from God. So that the first covenant. i. Moses his Law, be∣ing weake and unperfect, standing on a promise in figure, and curse without figure: in truth the figure was performed in Christ; the curse taken away by his death: then, when perfecta, things perfect came, imperfect a abiêre, things imperfect were done away; one Co∣venant of God maketh not any bond but onely in part: that is, the curse taken away by grace: the ceremony by the truth of Christs: and that which is fulfilled shall be taken in the Court of Grace, not pleaded in the Court of Moyses: that is, in the sincerity of faith, not in perfection of the Law.
2. The first Covenant  was given, the Law is said to be given by Moses, but we had not hearts to receive it. But this. i. the Gos∣pell not onely  was given, but also  per Christum, was made by Christ. The Law is changed,The use of the Law not ta∣ken away by Christ his comming, Math. 5.17. . Thinke not that I am come to destroy the Law and the Prophets: I am not come to de∣stroy, but to ful∣fill. The order observed, 1. By God himselfe with Adam. nothing but onely the ceremonies are taken away by Christ his truth: and the curse by grace: So that the bond and observing of the Law is not taken away by Christ his comming; but, as he himselfe confesseth, fulfilled. as it is in Math. ch. 28. vers ult. , Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. There∣fore doubtlesse, humbling commeth first, which is by the Law. The naturall order of the covenants, the second brought in on the first. This course of teaching by humiliation, in letting us see what we are, hath beene used from the beginning of the world: from the practise not onely of the Apostles, but also of the Prophets, and of God himselfe. 1. Gods owne proceedings on the violation of the first covenant. After the transgression, Adam remained till the eve∣ning in the experience or feare of the Law, by hiding himselfe: then first began the Law to goe upon him, Ʋbi es? Where art thou? After he had told God what he had done, Gods sentence procee∣ded, Edisti igitur, Thou hast eaten therefore, presently after came the promise, semen mulieris conteret caput serpentis; the seed of the woman shall breake the head of the Serpent. So you see, first he called him forth. 2. Man confesseth his transgression. 3. Judgement of death pas∣seth on him. 4. After Christs is taught. Secondly, the same order tooke God after the flood; when he taught Abraham, Genes. 17.1.2. By God af∣ter the flood. Ambula mecum. & esto integer. Walke with me, and be thou perfect. In∣tegrity is the whole scope of the Law; after is the Gospell taught. So did God to the Patriarkes. Moses in Deuter. i. In Lege iterata,Genes. 22.18. Acts 3.25. in repetition of the Law; after the three first chapters, in the fourth he beginneth to teach the summe of the Law, unto the eighteenth. There he telleth them, that God would raise a Prophet among their brethren, &c. and so goeth on in delivery of the Gospell, the same doth Stephen, Acts 7.37. As in Moses, so in the Prophets, espe∣cially in Esay, in his 39. first chapters he sheweth in grosse:3. By the Pro∣phets. (though there be certaine promises intermingled) the whole summe of the Law; then the summe of the Gospell. But more plainly in his first chapter from the beginning to vers. 18. there is a bitter invective of the curse of the Law; from thence to the end; is the Gospell. Come then, if thy sinnes, &c. In the Psalmes, Psal. 1. nothing else but a re∣capitulation of the Law,4. In the Psalmes. with the promises and curses thereto ad∣joyned. The second Psalme of the comming of Christ, and the Gospell. 5. John Baptist, Matth. 3. , &c. Ge∣neration of vipers, who hath forewarned you. Matth. 3.10. , &c. The Axe now is put to the roote of the trees. The Law. Vers. 11. . &c. I indeed baptise you with water. The Gospell. 6. Christ his owne order; whose me∣thod is our instruction,6. By Christ. Math. 23.12. , Whosoever shall exalt himselfe shall be abased;
and he that shall humble himselfe shall be exalted.Legis est humili∣are, the Law humbleth. 7. By the A∣postles. First, humiliation; then exaltation. There is no humbling, but by the law; and therefore it is called the humiliator. 7. The practise of the Apostles, as of Paul, in his Epistle to the Romanes; which is said to be the summe of all religion. After the prooemium or salutation, in the 17. first verses, from the 18. verse of the first Chapter, to the 25. verse of the 7. chapter, he speaketh of the Law, that all are condemned, 1. Gentiles. 2. Jewes. 3. Unregenerate. 4. Regenerate; and inclu∣deth himselfe in. From the first verse of the 8. chapter, he delivereth the summe of the Gospell: shewing in what covenant we are to looke to be saved. This is for the warrant of practise. In the forme of instructing, the paterne of it is in Heb. 6. first re∣pentance from dead workes. 2. Faith in Christ. And thus standeth the order. 1. Repentance from dead workes. 1. The Law. Now the Law teacheth us three things: 1. Praeceptum, the Commande∣ment. i. what is required;Lex tria docet. hoc fac, & vives, This doe and live. 2. The transgression from the precept,delict a quis intelligit, who can under∣stand his errours?i. How farre we are gone from that which is re∣quired of us.Psal. 19.12. 3.Morte morieris, Thou shalt die the death: the punish∣ment; what we are to looke for. The Gospell likewise teacheth us other three things.Euangelium 3. et. 1. Ecce agnus Dei, Behold the Lambe of God. How we are delivered from the curse of the Law. 2. In 2 Pet. 1.10. How we may be sure that this deliverance pertaineth to us: if we make our calling and faith sure. 3. Quid retribuam? what we are to per∣forme? i. true obedience: not secundum , jus plectorium: secun∣dum jus praetorium, , not according to the extremity of the Law, the Law punishing, but according to praeter Law, equity and right, in Christ. Now for the Law naturall, we learned in the ge∣nerall prooemium, or preface, that we depend of Gods providence; and therefore we must thinke of God, as of a King. For so it is Revel. 19.16. and therefore as he hath rewards from us,Revel. 19.16. . The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. In every law, foure things are required. 1. The worke. 2. The man∣ner. 3. The reward. 4. The punishment. so he hath , his worke house to try us in, and this is the world. Then we, being in a work house, must have our agenda, things we are to doe: and the Law being defined doctrina agendorum, the doctrine of things which are to be done, it is our agenda, thing we are to doe. And as there are foure things in every Law in mundo, in the world; so doth this, which is Lex creatoris mundi, the law of the Creator of the world, containe them all. 1. The worke; this you must doe. 2. The manner, thus you shall doe. 3. Reward in palatio, in Court. 4. Carcer, the prison; punishment in the prison. All these are in every law; and so are they in Gods law. In the law of Moses, who hath set downe in the decalogue a perfect pandect of all the workes and duties, that God requireth at our hands. These are the true Ethica Christiana, Christian Ethickes, passing all others Ethickes. In this thing are they of the Church of Rome to be commended; that tea∣ching their youth Logicke, Physicke, and Metaphysicke, three yeeres: because they are not compleately to be found in these bookes; referre them to these bookes for Ethiks, propter regulam morum, for the rule of manners. For this is the just square of all our
actions: it ought neither to be longer or shorter then this. This law was given by Moses, saith he here. Gods Law is the rule of our life; in regard of the first of the foure things, it is called our agenda, or things to be done. In respect of the other, the rule, or cubit of the Sanctuary. Here may a doubt arise: Seeing that the law was not given till 2600: yeeres after the creation: it might seeme that men might as∣well live still without the Law. But to shew how the world was go∣verned by the law; and that which is, Rom. 2.14. The Gentiles both before and after, doing the things that belong to the law, are , a Law to themselves; not to doe what they list, but to doe the workes of the Law: how that can be; it is thus: that they had , i. they had the effect of the law (written) in their heart, which was equivalent to the law it selfe. This he proveth, because they had  or , the accusing or excusing of their thoughts; and that they had their conscience for a witnesse to them both. Gen. 3. Man is the image of God. Col. 1.10. The Image of God is , the knowledge of God. And therefore Augustine, of the Trinity;Ioh. 1.5. . And the light shineth in darknesse and the darknesse comprehended it not. Psal. 119.142. Thy Law is from everlasting, as concerning thy testimonies, I have knowne long since, that thou hast groun∣ded than forever. Effectumlegis praestitum esse ante legis tra∣ditionem. Gen 31.53. Laban sware by the God of A∣braham, and Na∣hor, and of their fathers; but Iacob sware by the feare of his father Isaac. lib. 14. ch. 14. saith, That every man had it in his heart; which must be understood after the fall. For before it was all perfection. Mali multa rectè laudant, rectè reprehendunt. Quibus regulis hoc faciunt? ubi habent hoc, quod homines sic vivere debent, cum ipsi sic non vivant? hae regulae sunt justae, mentes corum injustae: hae regulae immutabiles, mentes eorum mutabiles. Evill men praise many things rightly, and reprehend rightly; upon what ground doe they this? where have they this, that men ought thus to live? and yet they themselves live not so; these rules are just, their minds unjust; these rules unchangeable, their minds changeable: then he concludeth, Vident eas in libro lucis, they see them in the booke of truth; which truth, being in God as a seale, maketh a print in the mind of man; and yet keepeth it it selfe; which print they can never plucke out: and so by this meanes, all men have the effect of the Law in them. To prove that this effect was performed before the giving of the Law: For the first Commandement; not so manifest, Gen. 11.13. by the departure of Terah with Abraham, Sarah and Lot out of Ʋr of the Chaldees, from their idolatry into Canaan, Gen. 35.2. Jacob said to his houshold, and to all that were with him; put away the strange Gods that are among you, and clense your selves, and change your garments. For the second, ibidem verse 5. where Jacob buried the idols under an Oake: More plaine, Gen. 31.34. Rachel hid her fathers idols in the Camels straw. For the third, Gen. 24 3. Abraham made his eldest servant to put his hand under his thigh, and sweare by the Lord God of Heaven and earth, that he should not take a wife to his sonne, of the daughters of the Canaanites among whom he dwelt. Gen. 31.53. The solemne oath betweene Laban and Iacob. For the fourth, Gen. 2.2. God hallowed the seventh day 2600. yeeres before the delivery of the Law▪ God useth not to sanctifie a thing so long before, when there shall be no use of it. Gen, 16.23. Tomorrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the
Lord: bake that to day, which ye will bake; and seeth that ye will seeth: and all that remaineth, lay it up to keepe till the morning for you. Gen. 2.2. For in the seventh day, God ended his worke which he had made, and in the seventh day he rested from all his workes that he had made. For the fifth. Gen. 27.28. Esaus howling and crying for his fathers blessing. Verse 41. He stood in aw of his father, though otherwise prophane. For so long as his father lived, he would not kill Iacob. For the sixth, a plaine precept, Gen. 9.6. Whoso sheddeth mans blood, by man shall his blood be shed. For the seventh, Gen. 38.24. Of Thmar, whom Iudah would have burned for playing the whore. Gen. 34.31. The answer of Simeon and Levi, that had put a whole Citty to the sword for their sister; Should they abuse our sister, as a whore? For the eighth. Genes. 44.7. The putting of the cup into the Sacke, was enough to clap them into prison. For the ninth. Gen. 38.23. Because Iudah promised to send the whore a Kid, he was as good as his promise. For the tenth. Gen. 20.3. There was no act, no purpose of Abimelech against Sarah; yet he was punished by God. No punishment preventeth a fault. The Law, what it was, and how it consisted,This is the first principle in nature. dictum est, is spoken. The summe is, Ambula mecum; walke with me, or before me. The meanes to doe this, Amos 3.3. Can two walke together, if they be not in love? Now to love Christ, Iohn 14.15. is to keepe his Com∣mandements. Therefore we must be integri, perfect both in body and soule. There is no love, but betweene likes. The summe of the Law containeth two things: 1. Flying from evill. 2. Doing of good. Psal. 34.13. Esay 1.16. Take away the evils of your workes from be∣fore mine eyes; cease to doe evill, learne to doe good. In flying the evill, against the law, which is peccatum commissionis, sinne of commission: in respect of the other, is peccatum omissionis, sinne of omission. In respect of the first, we are said militare Deo, to warre for God: In respect of the second we are called his operarii, labourers. Of the first, we are called innocentes, innocents. Of the second, boni & justi, good and just: both goe together. In good workes, both facere, & abstinere, to doe and abstaine must concurre: if we could keepe the second, we should not so much offend in the first. For the Jewes were very diligent in offering sacrifice to God; yet because they burned in lust, and every one neighed after his neighbours wife, their Sacrifices were not accepted with God. Contra, If we be never so innocent, yet because we doe not pascere, feed, nor vestire, clothes we sinne. Doing good is set downe, Titus 2.12. In living, Pie, godly towards God. Iuste, erga proximum, righteously to∣wards our neighbours. Sobrie, soberly toward our selves. For these three, Augustine setteth downe two naturall principles. 1. Deterius subjiciendum praestantiori, the worser is to be postposed to the more excellent. For Pie, godly; Subde Deo, quod habes commune cum Angelis, Subject to God, what thou hast commune with the An∣gels. For sobrie, soberly; Subde rationi, quod habes commune cum
brutis. Subject to reason, what thou hast common with brutes. For juste, righteously; Fac, quod vis pati, doe what thou wouldest suffer. The corruption of these, is the corruption and transgres∣sion of the whole Law. The corruption of the first. Ipse cognoscito bonum & malum. 2. Quod libet, licet. Know thou good and evill. The corruption of the second, what liketh is lawfull. The temper to the sonnes of men; Videte & nubite, see and cover. Let your lust be your law. The corruption of the third, is that principle of Ma∣chiavel. Bonum praestantioris bonum communitatis.  Quod potes, exige. The benefit of the superiour is the quiet∣nesse of society, the good of him that is more excellent, is just. Exact what thou canst. Of the foure things required in the law; the second is the means to this. This manner is by learned men wonderfully dilated.To the means three things: 1. Toti. 2. Totum. 3. Toto tempore. 1. That all doe it. 2. That we do the whole. 3. And that at all times. 3. Poena, the punishment. To this are required three things. For we must doe it: 1. Toti, all of us. 2. Totum, all, the whole. That we with whole soule and body commit our selves to the observation of it. 2. Totum. Gen. 7.5. Noah did according to all that God had commanded him. 3. Toto tempore, at all times. That we continue in it, all the daies of our life, Gen. 6.9. Noah was a just, and upright man in his time, . Abrahams old age, like his youth. 3. For the reward of punishment; it standeth on this ground, that it is impossible, though a man breake one part of the law, he should escape the whole. Therefore God hath taken order for this; that though they over-reach the law in one part, in contemning of it: yet on the other part, punishment shall over∣reach them. This was knowne before the giving of the law, Exod. 9.27. That God was righteous, but his people wicked. So saith Au∣gustine, Aut faciendum quod debemus, aut patiendum quod debemus, Ei∣ther we must doe what we ought, or we must suffer what we ought. Both in Gen. 4.7. God to Cain, If thou doe well, shalt thou not be accepted; if thou doe ill, sinne lieth at thy doore, like a wild Beare, or like a Ma∣stife dogge, so long as thou art within doores, (i. ut Patres exponunt, as the Fathers expound it) so long as thou art in this life, thou mayest haply escape punishment for thy sinne: but when thou de∣partest, vae, woe, &c. more distinctly, this reward is to them that doe well. 1. temporall benefits. Gen. 39.3. of Ioseph,Genes. 39.3. And his Master saw that the Lord was with him, and that the Lord made all that he did to prosper in his hands. That the com∣mandements were knowne of the Gen∣tiles. because he trusted in God, all prospered under his hand, that his Master com∣mitted to him. Here felicity in this life. 2. For felicity and eternall benefits, Gen. 5.24. Enoch for walking with God, was translated. Here everlasting life. 2. In the law of nature, to them that do evill, temporall punishment, consequently in the estate of Adam, Cain, and Eve: Josephs punishment: but especially the confession of Pharao. Exod. 9.27. I have now sinned: the Lord is righteous; but I and my people are sinners. For the punishment in the life to come, 1 Pet. 3.19. to the spirits of unbeliefe, and are now, kept in chaines; and to the sinners that refused the voice of Noah. And thus we see that this law hath all those, that any other law hath. But the heathen which were before the comming of Christ, which did not use these; because they are not mentioned in the Bible, thinke themselves not to be
included herein. To shew therefore these foure points in them: and first for the ten Commandements.Though they had not the inward part of the law, yet they had the outward. For 6. it is very plaine, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. for the other foure, namely, 1, 2, 4, 10. they are somewhat darke in the writings of the Gentiles. For the third, Diodorus Siculus saith, that it was death among the Egyptians; Perjurii poena: capite ple∣ctuntur, fustibus caeduntur; The punishment of perjury, they lose the life, they are beate with cudgels. So 12. Tab. . Sweare not rashly. For the fifth, Homer. Il. , brevi tempore durans erat vita, quia parentibus nutritionis praemia non retribuit; his life was short, because he retur∣ned not food and nourishment to his parents. So saith one to this, & , sic, ut satis sit vives; thou shalt live long Among Charondas his lawe, there was one, , summum esto scelus, senum contemptus, let it be accounted an hainous crime, the neglect of venerable old men. For the sixt, it is a canon of the common law, homicida, quod fecit expectet; the murtherer, what he hath done, let him expect. For the seventh, Stephan out of Nicostra∣tus, , whoso∣ever would live in this City, and not be fleyed, let the very name of Adultery be feared. For theft, Demosthenes against Timocrates repea∣teth Solons law, very close joyned with the words in this law. For the ninth, tab. 12. Qui falsum testimonium dixerit, Tarpeio sane dejicia∣tur, whosoever shall give a false testimony, let him be throwne downe from Tarpeius, a great high rocke in Rome. For the other foure: which are now more darke with them. For the first: though we finde them for the most part speaking in the plurall number, , to worship the Gods, or to feare the Gods: yet the thing was notoriously well knowne to the Philosophers, and especially to Pythagoras, If any man say he is a God, beside one, that made all things, let him make another World, &c. So Sophocles, , in his truth, there is one God: and they could dispute in their schooles, that there was but one God. For the second, that which Socrates in Platonis repub. he would have us worship , as he himselfe thinketh best And so the Heathen altogether thought it meete; and this is the very ground of the second Commandement. But for the thing it selfe, Augustine 8. de civitate Dei, cap. 31. ex Varrone, That Varro's allowance of the Jewish religion was great, because it ex∣cluded Images; and saith, that if all had used it, it had beene a great meanes to have taken away much trifling. For the fourth, but very little to be found: yet they had this com∣mon among them, that numerus septenarius est numerus quietis, the number of seven is the number of rest: and that 7. betokeneth rest: and that numerus septenarius est Deo gratissimus, the number of seven is most acceptable to God. Out of these, they might have gathered a conclusion; that God would have his rest on that day, &c. The practise of this, in the finishing of their exequiae, burials, seven daies after the birth: in many funerals, seven daies after any mans death. So did they allow Saturne, Jupiter, and Apollo, &c. the seventh day.
One of the Pythagoreans mysteries was in numero Septenario, in the number of seven. For the ten, Menander. , O Divine, covet not at any time so much as another mans needle. They must not desire so much as another mans Pinne or Button; as some say, , not to covet another mans, is the top and pitch of justice. And indeed, though in their lawes they never touched this, yet the very scope of their lawes, though they thought no such thing, did drive them to this: , not to covet: therefore we may conclude with Paul, Rom 1.20. that they were inexcusable. Now to shew that they had the grounds and the rules of these lawes. They had writ∣ten on the doore of Apollo's Temple, at Delphos, in the uppermost place, the Greeke , if, to signifie, that if any one would aske coun∣sell at that Oracle; if God once say it, he should doe it., if. , if, the rule of godlinesse▪ , know thy selfe, the rule of sobernesse. , nothing too much, a rule of justice. And that was Subde Deo, quod habes commune cum Angelis, subdue to God what thou hast commune with Angels. Under the one leafe of the doore , know thy selfe; that a man should acknowledge how farre he is better then the beasts; and the mind, then the body: and so by this knowledge should Subdere appetitum rationi, quod habet commune cum brutis; & corpus animae, &c. To subdue the appetite, which he hath commune with bruites, to reason; and the body to the soule. On the other leafe was . i. fac quod vis pati, no∣thing too much, that is, doe that which thou wouldest suffer.Covetous∣nesse the root of all evill. Sobriety the ground of justice. That no man should desire more then he should, against covetousnesse. And though they had not had this, yet they had their , aequale repensum, due recompence. Nemo facit injuriam quin velit idem sibi fieri; no man doth an injury, who would the same to be done to him. As soone as ever Severus the Emperour heard this sentence, he ever after used it in every punishment. Quod tibi fieri non vis, alieri ne feceris, that which thou wouldest not to be done to thy selfe, see that thou doe it not to another;2. Modus, the manner. and caused it to be graven in his plate: And thus they had rules for actions; and for the substance of obedience. 2. The manner. 1. for doing it, toti, totis viribus, animi & corporis; the whole man, with the whole strength of soule and body: they had this among them, , either all, or not at all. We must doe, with all our mind,. Either we must eate sea snailes whole, or not eate of them. with all our scope, affection, strength, heart, or not at all. Plutarch compareth our duties to a kind of fish; if we eate niggardly of it, it will doe us no good, and withall, will be troublesome to us: but if we eate it whole, it is not onely wholesome, but also medicinable. 2. For doing the whole duty, totum. They found fault with Euripides the Philoso∣pher, and Caesar, that used this sentence, . The summe is: We must keepe justice in all, but onely in the way to obtaine a Kingdome. So the adulterer: And man must keepe justice; onely for pleasure he may breake it, &c. Therefore justice must not be broken for any thing. 3. Toto tempore, and the daies of our life, continually: there must be in a good man, the resemblance of a tetragonisme, on all sides alike, as a die. Alway like himselfe, never like a Camaeleon, sometime good,
sometime bad: For reward and punishment, we see what they hold; Iupiters parch∣ment. that god Iupiter had , a sheet or parchment, made of the skinne of the Goat that nourished him: wherein he wrote all mens deeds, what they had done in this life: and that those that had done well, he had the 3. Gratiae, , Graces, for them in this life: and Elysii campi, the Elysian or pleasant fields in the life to come; to the square of the paradise in the Scriptures. For those that had done evill, he had 3. Erinnyes, Furies, to punish them in this life; and Tartarus, Styx, and Cocytus, &c. a place of trouble, and lamentation. Hell according to Tophet or Gehenna in the Scriptures, Esay 30.33. Matth. 5.22. Now then, for the law of Moses,Object. this question may be made. If that they had the law written in their hearts before: what need God have delivered it in tables of stone? Answ. Because the former law, it was but in shards, being whole in paradise;Answ. for Adams fall broke it in pieces. So after, these shards were broken smaller and smaller. i. the light of nature grew dimmer and dimmer;The fathers compare the breaking of the first table, to the break∣ing of nature. so that these shards could hardly be put toge∣ther again. Therefore because writing in the heart would not serve, but decayed; it was necessary it should be written in tables of stone, and set before our eyes, that they seeing, it might againe be brought to their hearts. Now then we are to see how it came to be thus; that this first law. i. the law of nature, became to be dimmer and dimmer. The reasons be three: 1. that men did themselves what they could to blot it out. Noluerunt intelligere rationem, they would not under∣stand counsell.How the law of nature came to be dimmer and dimmer. They had . Because they had done evill, and consulted with their hearts, and their hearts told them they did evill, they would no more consult with their hearts; facti sunt homines fugitivi à corde suo, They were made fugitive, from their owne heart. Saint Augustin saies, quisque malus, est fugitivus cordis sui; that every wicked man was a fly-away from his owne heart. Therefore it was expedient, that flying from their hearts, it might runne into their eyes, that so they might be brought to their hearts againe, unde fugerunt, from whence they had fled. 2. Because as Christ saith, there ranne a su∣perseminator, a sower-over-againe. i. The divell he was very busie to sow his tares in their hearts. i. false principles, as Vos ipsi agnoscite, & eritis dii. Know ye your selves, and ye shall be as Gods, and such like. So that this Cockle overgrew the wheate, and choaked it up cleane. Therefore it was good this seed should be sowne againe, and so that it should not corrupt. i. that it should be delivered in tables. 3. The punishment of God, because he would punish them with blinnesse, August 1. Confess. 18. Lege infatigabili spargit deus poenales caecitates super illicitas cupiditates, God by an infatigable law poures out pe∣nall blindnesse upon unlawfull lusts. Therefore when men would not cherish their light, it pleased God to send on them the spirit of giddinesse and slumber. What knowledge they had anedictum est, is said before. For their practise, first in respect of God. Tis is a great thing that moved them to take sharpe revenge of God. What∣soever they found out, or understood, they attributed it to their own industry. Rom. 1.22. , they professed themselves to be
wise. And therefore , they became fooles, not acknow∣ledging that all came from God. i. That little light they had, they attributed to themselves: and yet, The planter is nothing, nor the waterer; but God that giveth the increase. 2. In respect of God: whereas it is sure, that every actions goodnesse is from the end: All their good deeds were either to an evill end, or to no end at all. As the Epicures would have all things to be done for pleasure: the Platonists, Propter praxin politicam, for politicke or civill action: the Stoicks, Officium propter officium, or propter virtutem omnianon propter gratiam Dei, duty for duty, or all for vertue; not for the glory of God. But we know that officium is propter quiddam altius officio, duety is for somewhat more sublime then duety; namely, the glory of God: and God saith, Gloriam me im alteri non dabo, my glory will I give to no other; and they robbed God of hi glory. 3. In respect of God. Whereas God is no lesse offended with the breach of the first table, then of the second, yea sometimes more; they set downe great pu∣nishments for adultery, theft, &c. such offences as are committed against them: but when they came to blasphemy, and Gods inju∣ries; there is either no punishment, or very little: for they thought that it did not touch them, which they should have set most by: namely, Gods honour. 2. In regard of men.2. In respect of men. For the second table, the duties of parents and children: men grew so unnaturall, that they sacrificed their owne sonnes and daughters to divels; children undutifull unto pa∣rents; and they had their Corban for it; that a man might neglect his duty to his parents, if he bestowed a gift upon the Church: For stealth, it was no robbery in Sparta; the law bare them out in it Tu quoque fac simile, thou also doe the like. For adultery, they had their vagae libidines, wandring lusts; and their abominable feasts and stewes. 3. In regard of themselves.3. In respect of themselves, they had their  &  their drinkings & drunkennesses  drunkennesses even after they had sacrificed: so much, that as Augustine saith, they did bi∣bere mensuras sine mensura, drinke measures without measure. And it was a commendable thing among them: therefore no marvell that God so plagued them with darknesse, since they so abused the light: therefore mans heart being an evill custos keeper of the law, Ignorantia poena peccati subsecuta est;Ignorantia poena peccati. Ignorance a punishment of sinne. ignorance the punishment of sinne followed after: an they cannot defend themselves, si interro∣gentur à cogitationibus suis, if their owne thoughts should accuse them. Then came in Moses his law, Exod. 3.18. the first tables were whol∣ly Gods worke, written with his owne finger, which beareth a signe of the law of nature: but after it was broken into fragments,Necesse fuit le∣gem dari quo tempre dabatur. It ws neces∣sary the Law should be gi∣ven at that time it was given.Moses made it new; hewed out the stone: wrote them himselfe, and ever since delivered by the ministery of man. It was necessary that the law should be given at that time, that it was given, for two respects. 1. Si nunquam caruissemus, if we had never wanted it, we should have beene , dicentes, boasting
creatures. 2. If it had beene given to all Nations,Quo quis nun∣quam caruit, d fibi attribuit. What a man ever had, ne∣ver wanted, that he as∣cribes to himselfe. of common things we have the like thoughts. Later it could not conveniently have beene given; for then it could not have beene over the World be∣fore the comming of Christ; and then men might have pleaded ignorance, being no time for the divulging of it. To shew that in this written law of Moses be those foure parts, that are in all lawes. 1. Psal. 19.7. The Law of God is a perfect rule for all duties, and actions, vers. 11. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soule: the testimony of the Lord is sure, and giveth wisedome unto the simple. 2. The manners, 1. that we may be whole observers of it:1. Toti. All, the whole, of all men. we must doe it with all our whole soule and body. For we consist but of two parts, of a soule, and body. The soule hath but two partes, mind and heart; God must be scopus perfectus metae, the perfect scope we aime at. There must be plena intentio Dei, a full intention of God. The heart, the will must be tota inflammata, wholly inflamed. For the body, with all the strength; every member must be an instru∣ment of righteousnesse, Deut. 6.5. And thou shalt love the Lord thy God,2. Totum. The whole Law.with all thy heart, soule and might. 2. For all the law, it is the wish of God, Deut. 5.29. Oh that there were such an heart in them to feare me, and to keepe all my Commandements alwaies, that it might goe well with them, and with their children for ever. And the contrary were very absurd: for whereas God is perfectly wise, if some of his precepts were needlesse, then might God be arraigned of folly, in not leaving out that which is superfluous: as also Gods wisedome is impeached, if any thing beside the law were to be kept: then that added to the law would make the whole, which we should doe: and the law it selfe should be but part of our Agenda things to be done; and so im∣perfect: and the Lord should be an unwise Law-giver, but this is impossible. Therefore doth the Lord justly say, Whatsoever I com∣mand you, take heed you doe it: thou shalt put nothing thereto, nor take ought there-from,3. Toti tempore. at all times.Deut. 12.32. 3. For continuance, totâ vitâ, alwaies, all the daies of our life, Deut. 12.32. And though the place includeth not the time, yet the time includeth the place: alwaies, without dis∣pensation. If this law be perfect,3. Pramium. The reward.  it carrieth with it a reward, 1. Tim. 4.8. There are two rewards; of this life (and that to come:) Deut. 28. à vers 3. to 9. in the soule, from the 9. to the 11. Levit. 26. à vers. 3: For the life to come, Levit. 26.3. expounded, Dan. 12. some to ever∣lasting life, &c. Christ, Iohn 5.29. saies, . They shall come forth, that have done good, to the resurrection of life; but they that have done evill, unto the resurrection of condemnation. Acts 26.6, 7. Paul answered before Agrippa, that he rested in the expectation of the just: and the opinion of the Sadduces was very odious among the Jewes.4. Pna. The punishment. Againe on the contrary, if they be not kept; or not after this manner, 1. Toti, not wholly, but  in a double heart, Jer. 48.10. Cursed be he that doth the worke of the Lord negligently, and that keepeth backe his sword from blood. And so for the whole law, Deut. 27.26. Cursed be he that confirmeth not all the words of this Law, to doe them; and all the people shall say, Amen. For the other, that continueth
not in every part of the law, he is cursed. This curse of the Lord was pronounced by the Priest: and all the people said, Amen. These curses, are Gods curses; and when he saith benè, well, it will be well indeed. And there is a full blessing to them that can keepe it; so the fulnesse of his wrath is to the breakers of it. A curse without blessing, and a blessing without curse. In this life, Deut. 28.15. But if thou wilt not obey the voyce of the Lord, to keepe and to doe all his Commandments, and Ordinances which I command thee this day, then all those curses shall light on thee, and overtake thee. Levit. 26.14. But if ye will not obey me, nor doe all these Commandements, &c. In the life to come, Psal. 21.9. Their houses are peaceable, without feare, and the rod of God is not on them. Esay 66.24. For their worme shall not die, nor their fire be quenched, and they shall be an abomination to all flesh. So that this law of Moses in summe agreeth with that of nature. And as the Pro∣consull said in the Acts, so say we: This law is open, the good uni∣versall, and without end; whereof the one taketh away feare, the other filleth the desire. The law is open, any man that will, may lay claime to it. But Paul, Gods Atturney, from Rom. 1.18. to Rom. 7.13. laieth his accusation. 1. To the Gentiles. 2. To the Jewes; proveth both to have forfeited; after he excludeth the regenerate, and with∣all, himselfe: for though the spirit were willing, yet the law of his members was disobedient; children guilty by reason of originall sinne, as cockatrise egs. All men guilty of prevarication, and doing against their owne knowledge. But Pauls owne argument is suffici∣ent: because the stipend of sinne hath taken hold on all: and the stipend of sinne is death; God being just: therefore sinne also must needs take hold on all. David confessed this, Delict a quis intelligit, Who can understand his faults? Salomon confessed he could lay no clame to it. What then? If all offend, it should seeme God com∣manded an impossible thing to be kept; It is sure that God is just. Therefore we must thinke, that there is no injustice in the dealings of God; though the matter be never so untoward, yet the rule must be streight, not as a Lesbian leaden rule. 2. It cannot be other∣wise; for God being perfectly just, his rule also must be perfectly just. Why then were we not made to it; Adam received strength to fulfill it in that perfection that was required: but he was like the evill servant, who receiving money of his master to accomplish his businesse; spendeth it, and so maketh his excuse, that he hath no money to lay out; or being sent about his masters businesse, in the way is drunken, and so is not able to discharge that businesse, that is justly required at his hands. And thus of the law generally. A preparation to the exposition of the Law. PSalm. 119.144. The Law of the Lord is from everlasting. Genes. 1.26. Let us make man according to our Image and likenesse. Colos. 3.10. The likenesse of God is said to be in all knowledge. And have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the Image of him
that created him.A preparation to the hearing of the Law, grounded on Exod. 19. and for the hearing of the Gospell. Iohn 3. Two daies a preparation to Christs pas∣sion. And albeit, Iohn 1.5. darknesse could not compre∣hend light, yet the light shone in darknesse. Now the exposition of the law. But before the particular exposition of the law, there must be a preparation. There is no benefit of God to be received of us, before we are prepared for it, Exod. 19. A preparation of the peo∣ple before the receiving of the law. The hearing of the Gospell, no lesse plaine by John the Baptist, Parate vias Domini, &c. Prepare ye the ways of the Lord. Proportionable to these, prepared the Church her Vespera Sabbathi, the evening of the Sabbath; and for their holy daies, and also for there solemne feast daies, at the first instituted for a good end, after there grew a superstition of it, and was abused. Observe two things. First, forasmuch as the Sacrament is but appen∣dix verbi, a dependent of the word, and the seale of it; surely we cannot be justified for our doings, that prepare our selves for the one, and not to the other. Secondly, that we may know that a pre∣paration is required necessarily of the hearer, as of the speaker; according to that, Preach. 4.17. Take heed to thy foote, when thou enterest into the house of God, and be more neere to heare then to give the sacrifice of fooles: for they know not that they doe evill. The preparation of the law hath his ground in Exod. 19.4. Ye have seene what I did to the Egyptians, and how I carried you on Eagles wings, and brought you to me. 10. More over the Lord said to Moses, goe to the people, and sanctifie them, to morrow, and let them wash their clothes. 12. And thou shalt set markes, to the people round about, saying, Take heed to your selves, that ye goe not up to the Mount, nor touch the border of it; whosoever toucheth the mount, shall surely die. Three meanes are set downe by God directly to be practised three daies before the publishing of the law: and the fourth may be added, drawne out of a circumstance. i. Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel; in every action,1. Voluntatem promovere, To move for∣ward the will. A man must as well num∣ber as value the benefits of God innu∣merable. the will is to goe first: the first therefore is to make the Is∣raelites willing to heare and receive the message that should come. Therefore, first he maketh a Catalogue of the benefits and good∣nesse of God. So that the ordinary meanes to stirre up a will in us, to embrace the Law of God, is, that we enter into a mediation with our selves concerning the benefits that our countrey, parents, friends, kinsfolkes, have received; that either respect us, or them that touch us. The Lord by that right interest he hath in us by vertue of creation, that we are as pots in his hands, to be either made or bro∣ken, as he will: and that we are as sons, and as born subjects, he may command us to doe this, and need not to reward the doers of it: as Dan. 3. Nebuchadnezzar, his subjects had nothing for doing his com∣mandement; but if they did it not, the Oven should be heated seven times hotter: yea we are Deivernae, Gods bond-men; and as the Poet saith,A fourefold consideration of the mercies of God. Quis praemia vernae, who gives a reward to his slave? We are bought. In the law nothing so humbleth. No matter that a man may sooner fall into, then the consideration of the Lords benefits. This is a large and great sea: and first, if we consider our selves, as we are creatures, Psal. 148. the dragons, winds, stormes, snow, haile, &c. are bound to praise him: so that if it pleased the Lord to make
us wind or hailestones, yet in that respect also, we ought to praise the Lord. How much more then, for giving us a living soule. 2. For the use of naturall functions, for the use of all our members; if we were bereft of the use of an arme, or an eye, or any one member, how exceedingly beholden would we thinke our selves to be, to those that could restore the use of this member, by reason of the grievousnesse of the want of the use thereof. Much more ought we to be thankefull to him, that hath given us the use of all. 3. But when we consider that he hath given us a reasonable soule, that be∣ing a third degree of thankfulnesse; and Augustine saith, Quisque optat cum sanâ mente perpetuò lamentari, quàm cum insanâ ridere, each man had rather be in perpetuall sorrow, with a sound mind, then in joy with an outragious. But the fourth swalloweth up all the rest: namely, if we consider the goodnesse and glory of all things,(though the earth be the Lords, and all that therein is) yet that he hath chosen us above all to be of his Church, and to pertaine to him. All the other be extreme miseries without this. And this we shall learne thus to valew: If we consider the Saints of God, that were wiser then the sonnes of men, how they have chosen him with infi∣nite calamities, and have refused places of great preferment, rather than to enjoy the pleasures of sinne for a season: as Moses, to suffer afflictions with the people of God, then to be called Pharaohs daugh∣ters sonne. Now afterward he divideth his benefits into, 1. Past. 2. To come. The benefits past, are either the taking away of evill; or gi∣ving of good. Those that are past, he subdivideth into, 1. Deli∣verance. 2. Eagles wings. In the deliverance, it is either generall to us with many more, in this is the spirituall deliverance, besides a temporall; in this generall, either of the Common-wealth, or of the Church. Particular to every one, either in regard of himselfe, or of those that be neere him, by the bond of blood, or of duty, or of love, or of league or friendship. For deliverance, we need to take no other argument, then that which God here useth. You have seene what I did to the Egyptians, and how I carried, &c. And going to the Egypt spirituall, how we are delivered from the King∣dome of sinne and of Satan, from the shadow of death, from Gods judgements; which doe incomparably passe Pharaoh and his servants, Psal 91.3. Surely he will deliver thee from the snare of the hun∣ter, and from the noysome pestilence by the day, &c. And though the hunter did set a snare, yet the Lord hath delivered us from all his snares, à terrore nocturno liberavit, & àsagitta diurna; He hath de∣livered us from the terrour by night, and from the arrow that flieth by day. On our right hand thousands have fallen, and on our left, ten thousands; and yet the danger never came neere us, Multi undiquaque ceciderunt, nos autem stamus, many have fallen on each side, but we stand. Eagles wings, Revel. 12.14. , &c. And to the woman were given two wings of a great Eagle, &c. God saith to the woman, that is, the Church, that he will give her two wings, even the wings of a great Eagle. These
two wings by the interpretation of the learned, are, 1. the provi∣dence of God. 2. His especiall grace, Dei providentia in hoc seculo, ala una: gratia Deispecialis ala Ecclesiae altera, The providence of God in this world, is the one wing; his speciall grace the other wing of the Church. As in a wing, there is an infinite number of feathers, so in each of Gods wings, infinite number of particular benefits; but e∣specially these three. 1. Gods care over us; whereby he abaseth him∣selfe to number the haires of our head; to our dough, bread, &c. 2. The use of all his creatures, both for necessity, and pleasure. 3. The gard of his Angels, for us, base matter, wormes, compassed about with sinne. His providence is thus considered. He being a God, infinite and eternall, yet he considereth to looke upon every particular little thing of ours, Levit. 26. and Deut. 28. to our dough, our bread, Psalm. 41. to the turning and making of our bed. In the Gospell, the number of the haires of our head, which we never doe. Last of all, he hath allotted to us poore wormes, an handfull, the most excellent guard of his Angels, Heb. 1.14. ; Are they not all ministring spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heires of salvation? He hath commanded them to waite on us. Yea he hath made this goodly Theater, and all creatures; and hath given them for our use. Adeo ut sit inexhaustus fons divinae bonitatis, so that the fountaine of the goodnesse of God is inexhaustible. For his speciall grace, in vouchsafing his sonne to redeeme the world by his death. 2. A measure of sanctification and vertue to doe well. 3. The out∣ward ministery of his Word and Sacraments, are as seales of his pro∣mises. 4. Revel. 3.20. , Behold, I stand at the doore, and knocke: if any man will heare my voyce, and open the doore, I will come in to him, and will suppe with him, and he with me. Pulsationes spiritus, good motions to doe well. Generall grace is, first preventing. 2. Following. God bestoweth his bene∣fits on us, before we looke for them; they are acceptable, and ac∣cepted, by the following. The use of his meanes, his Word, Sacra∣ments, and motions of the Spirit, the judgements of God. Particu∣lar grace. In particular, the good gifts of nature, of grace, of those among whom we live; of whom we have benefit. Beside these, if we come in particular to weigh every man by himselfe; Gods par∣ticular graces, 1. by bond of nature, 2. of charge, 3. of friendship: in these graces particular, we are to consider, 1. that God, seeing he hath done thus much for us, must needs love us. 2. That loving us, he will command us no other thing, then that which is good and profitable for us. But adde to those benefits that are promised, the promises that are to come, Prae his, illa nihil sunt, in comparison of these, those are nothing; namely, beneficia futura, in futuro seculo, benefits to come, in the World to come. The Prophet Esay 64.4. valueth them by the eye, eare, heart; and he denieth that eye hath seene, or eare hath heard, or that it hath entred into the heart of man, to understand those joyes that are for them, which
seeke him. For since the beginning of the World, they have not heard nor understood with the eares, neither hath the eye seene another God, beside thee, which doth so to him that waiteth for him. The eye may see much: for Christ saw all the world, 1. Cor. 2.9. The place of Esay recited, . Eye hath not seene, nor eare heard, neither hath entred into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. The eare can heare many things, but the heart can conceive infinite things. Therefore the joyes of the World to come must passe infinite, being compassed about with the flesh, when as yet it was never seene, heard, nor con∣ceived of any. And this is that name, which is said, Revel. 2.17. No man knoweth it, but he that receiveth it. Revel. 2.17. . To him that overcommeth will I give to eate of the hidden Manna, and will give him a new name written, which no man knoweth, but he that receiveth it. No knowledge of it, till we receive it. But for some taste of it: whereas this Earth and this Heaven is too good for us; yet he promiseth that he will make a new Heaven: and indeed, the uttermost of his power will he shew, in heaping joyes, and creating anew, for those that seeke him: so it is proved by manifest demonstration, that he will shew the uttermost of his power in increasing our pleasures. Therefore this is it that we con∣ceive of it, that it is more then we can conceive. So that this shall be more then excellent or over-excellent; because we are not able to conceive it. All this tendeth to this end, to stirre up in us a love; and if that come, we shall finde ease and delight: these, will, dili∣gence and continuance follow. And there are but three things to move us to love: 1. Pulchritudo, the beauty of that we are to love. 2. Consanguinitas, neerenesse of kindred. 3. Beneficentia, benefits; these make the most savage beasts to love. For the excellency of the beauty of the Lord, and his house; his creatures, and the sparkes we have by nature, will sufficiently shew us. 2. For the neerenesse, what greater can be then betweene creature and Crea∣tor; and then by the second bond of adoption, we shall be his sons. 1 Sam. 18.18. What am I, and what is my life, that I should be sonne in law to the King! David maketh it a wonderfull great matter to be sonne in law to the King; much more to God. 3. For Benefits, The Asse knoweth the Masters Cribbe, and the Oxe the Stall: he hath not onely bestowed on those that were before rehearsed; but his love was such to mankind, that he was faine to have his onely be∣gotten sonne, to come downe and die for us: And if this move us not, then let Jeremies saying take place, Obstupescat coelum, & terra, let Heaven and Earth be astonished. And thus much to make us willing. The second point is in the 10. vers. Moreover the Lord said to Moses,2. Point. goe to the people and sanctifie them to day and to morrow; and let them wash their clothes: and let them be ready on the third day. For the third day the Lord will come downe in the sight of all the people, upon Mount
Sinai. As the first was to make us willing; so the second is to make us able, and giveth us ability. Before in the preface was said, Sacta sanctis, & munda mundis; holy things, to them that are holy; and cleane things, to them that are cleane: so here, Sanctis, sancta, To them that are holy, holy things. Therefore we must sanctifie our selves, or else we are not capable: the reasons are, 1. The receiving of a cleane thing into an uncleane; maketh the cleane, uncleane. 2. Out of Luke 5.37. . No man putteth new Wine into old Bottles; else the new wine will burst the Bottels, and be spilled, and the Bottles shall perish. Keepe not a proportion betweene the Bottles and Wine, they will both be lost: so if there be not a proportion betweene the hearer, and the thing that is heard, it shall be both the condemnation of the hearer, and frustration of the word. Every man is not able, though willing, unlesse he be prepa∣red, every bottle is not for new Wine.Tempus praepara∣tionis. The time of praeparation. The time to prepare here is, two daies; Sanctifie them to day, and to morrow; that they may be ready the third day. 1 Sam. 14.18. And Saul said to Ahiah, bring hither the Arke of God: for the Arke of God at that time was with the children of Israel: and while Saul talked with the Priest, the noise that was in the host of the Philistins, spread further abroad and increased: therefore Saul said to the Priest withdraw thine hand. Saul here being to encoun∣ter with his enemies, tooke the Ephod, and would fall to prayers before the battell: but vers. 19. hearing that his enemies were at hand, straight layd aside the Ephod, left off praying, and fell to set his people in aray; fearing least he should lose time in praying: so his preparation was in vaine. But it appeared afterward, that he played the foole for doing so. For that time that is bestowed in prayer, is never lost: yea it is the best time that can be bestowed. And this care must be in us alwaies; so it is Gods will we should doe, Deut. 5.29. O that there were such a heart in them, to feare me, and keepe all my Commandements alwaies, that it might goe well with them, and with their children for ever. The Lords wish is, that the people had such an heart alwaies to feare him, &c. This sanctification here to them, was in a ceremony, 1 Cor. 10.11. . Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples: and they are written for our admoni∣tion, upon whom the ends of the World are come. And there is no cere∣monie, but it hath his , equity, to the which we are all bound. The garments of the old Testament, or Law, were Vestimentum & stola: id est, the inward garment, and the outward. To this seemeth John to have an allusion, Revel. 7.14. . These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white, in the blood of the Lambe. And Paul, 2 Cor. 7.1. . Let us cleanse our selves from all filthinesse of the flesh and spirit. We must make us cleane both in the flesh and in the spirit. We shall best see how to make our selves cleane, by knowing how we came foule; that when we
are once washed, we may keepe our selves cleane still. And the meanes be two: The first, principall. Secondly, an under meanes. As in a garment, there is either the internall pollution, namely, the moth; or the externall, namely, spots & aspersiones, and besprink∣lings: so in us: 1. If a man touch a dead body, or any one that hath an issue, by the very touch he is uncleane,Levit. 15. Wholy of that matter, de pollutione; as de intrinseca, Levit. 13.  propria. Levit. 15. Haec est pollutio carnis, externa, ab extrinseco, à societate aliorum. This is that pollution we receive of the world, of evill example, of evill company; pol∣lution externall. Levit. 13.2. If a man hath an issue of his owne flesh. Haec est pollutio Spiritus interna à fluxu proprio. This is that unclean∣nesse that is within us; that is, concupiscence. The knowledge being blind, and leading the will to corruption, had need of wash∣ing both defile us, 2 Cor. 6.16. . Sumus templa Spiritus, We are the temples of the spirit. Augustine on that place saith, Quisque Christianus Templum est in Templo, templum in domo, templum domi, foris, ubique & semper, templum ambulans. Every Christian is a Temple in a Temple, a Temple in the house, a Temple at home, a Temple abroad, in every place, at all times, a walking Temple. And Revel. 21.27. Nihil in∣quinatum ingredietur in illud, &c. . And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth, neither what∣soever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie: but they which are written in the Lambs booke of life. Therefore we must make us cleane, that other things may be cleane unto us. Sic munda, sed mundis. So things are cleane, but to the cleane. But if we be once cleane, we must take heed least we after touch pitch againe. Syrach. He that washeth himselfe, after he hath touched a dead course, and toucheth it againe, is defiled. We must not be like the dogge that returneth to his vomit; nor the Sow, that walloweth againe in the mire:Modus purgandi, The manner of purging: 1. By the blood of Christ. Therefore we must be continuall clensers of our selves. But how may we wash our selves? Mundamur primo per bap∣tismum flaminis, we are cleansed first by the baptisme of fire, that is, the spirit. August. Balneum autem nobis erectum, balneum sanguinis sui. Now a bath is prepared for us, even the bath of his blood. We are bathed in the blood of Christ. And this is that whereby our aspersions and blemishes are washed away: of this bath the water in Baptisme is a representation. And not onely that, but baptismus flaminis, the baptisme of fire goeth with it,Bap∣tismus aquae, flaminis. that will purge cleere. i. the Spirit of God, which remaineth with us to the Worlds end,Bap∣tisme of water, of fire. and wherewith we are every day baptised. So doth the Spirit of God abridge our concupiscences daily. There is another meanes set down, yet all one with this: (for you may purge either with Nitre or with the Fullers earth. Iohn 15.3. . Mundi estis, propter sermonem, quem audivistis.2. By the word. Now ye are cleane through the word which I have spoken unto you. The daily hearing of God, by the mouth of man; If we will compare it with water, it is like the Fullers earth, wherewith the Spirit scoureth us, correcting us, and comforting us. By the out∣ward
washing, they meane the washing of the body; and he that cleanseth not that, is not onely beneath a Scribe or Pharisee; for he maketh cleane the outside of the Platter; but is worse also, then the heathen. 2. And for the inward parts, the cleansing of the heart reacheth especially to Christians; because from it commeth all uncleannesse out. Non concupisces, Thou shalt not covet: no issue at all. 15. verse here; Be ready on the third day, and come not at your wifes. This may seeme to be an addition of Moses to the Comman∣dement of God:This an advise of Moses, ever after imitated of all the lear∣ned Jewes. The Jewes report, that besides the Law of God, the ancientest saying among them, and such as they called dictum sapientum, was this, facite circumscriptionem legi, make ye a border to the Law. And they expound it thus: God commandeth in Deut. 7.21. the Israelites, not to enter, or make any league or covenant with the Gentiles and unbeleevers. Therefore because they (will) be sure to make no league with them, they set themselves a border on this side that law, and would not the company of an unbeleever, nor drinke with them. Iob 31.1. I made a covenant with mine eyes, why then should I thinke on a maid? Whereas the Commandement was, not to covet another mans wife, he made a covenant with his eyes, not to looke on a maid. So Paul in his Chapter of expediency, so called, because the Church stood in persecutions, Conjugium honorabile, Marriage is honourable. 1 Cor. 7.8. . I say therefore to the unmarried and widdowes, it is good for them, if they abide even as I. But if they cannot containe, let them marry. It is lawfull to marry; yet its better not to marry: abridging himselfe of a lawfull thing, that he might not fall into an unlawfull thing. It is lawfull to marry, to drinke with the heathen, to looke on a maid; but it teacheth us a good point of wisedome, not to come neere the pit, for so shall we be sure not to fall in. It is bet∣ter to take somewhat shorter of the goale, then to keepe close unto it.Oportet facere sepem. We must make a fence. 3. Polluendi mo∣dus. The man∣ner of defi∣ling. These be their counsels; so is it Moses his counsell here. The ground of the equity of this Commandement, bringeth a third thing to make us need washing. A thing is not onely defiled by uncleane things; but every thing that is not of an equall nature to it, that is as good as it: as an holy thing, touched by any thing not so good as it, is unhallowed. Hagg. 2.13.6. If one beare holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt doe touch bread, pot∣tage, wine, oyle, or any meate, shall it be holier? Esay 1.22. Thy Silver is become drosse, thy wine is mixt with water. Here mention is made of a double pollution: 1. That their silver is become drosse. Se∣condly, that their wine was mixt with water. The drosse defileth the silver, because it is naught; but water defileth wine, because it is not so good as it. And this is a pollution mixed with inferiour things, though lawfull. In what respect it commeth to defile, the Apostle, Heb. 12.1. . Let us lay aside every weight, and the sinne which doth so easily beset us, and let us runne with patience the race that is set before us. He maketh a division: we must forbeare, 1. .
2. . Not onely sinne, but the weight of sinne also, that presseth downe and hindereth. The weight is no sinne; but because it is an impediment, it must be washed away, 1 Cor. 6.12. . All things are lawful unto me, but all things are not expedient: all things are lawfull for me, but I will not be brought under the power of any. And again, 10.23. . All things are lawfull for me, but all things are not expedient: all things are lawfull for me, but all things edifie not. We may not use all lawfull things; si non expediat. If lawfull things beginne once to be inex∣pedient, they are not to be used of a Christian man; but eschewed. Lawfull things, if they hinder our swiftnesse and our nimblenesse, are to be eschewed. It is a lawfull thing: but every lawfull thing doth not edifie. By the use of things indifferent, we come to be brought to their power. We must come so farre in using them, that we may forbeare them when we will, and use them when we will. We must use indifferent things so farre as they profit, no further: For the divell as well insinuateth himselfe to us by the creatures of God, by Gods graces, by good meanes, as by evill meanes. And we are no lesse to take heed of him, in indifferent things, as in evill things, Psalm. 69.23. Let their table be made a snare to take themselves withall: and let the things that should have been for their wealth, be unto them an occasion of falling. Their tables are snares to them. Matth. 6.2. their almes and prayer into sinne. These things are spoken to this end, that those things that are lawfull, if any man finde himselfe more slow in the course of God, by them, and that they waxe heavy and troublesome to him, let him follow the counsell of Moses. 3. Point. This 3. point sheweth a foolish affe∣ction in our nature, that we desire su∣perfluous things and novelties. As it argueth curiosity, so a marvellous streame of curiosity.3. Point in the preparation, is verse 12. And thou shalt set markes to the people, round about, saying, take heed to your selves, that you goe not up to the mount, nor touch the border of it; whosoever toucheth the mount, shall surely die. To set markes, about the mount, which they should not passe. And because the same matter is in the 21. verse, (Goe downe, charge the people that they breake not their bounds, to goe up to the Lord to gaze, lest many of them perish.) We may count it certaine. (For sure it is, that in the Scriptures there is no vaine repetition.) As Io∣sephs dreames, Genes. 37.7, 9. and Pharaohs, Genes. 41.1, 7. Now as the first made us willing, the second able; so this setteth us markes, that we should not passe; and so the other willing: this sheweth us one foolish affection that is in us, that we will be desirous of super∣fluous things, and novelties, not onely with the hazzard of things necessary, but even also with a manifest contempt and breach of the Lords Commandements, Genes. 3. The divell will have us know, that Cur vetuit vos Deus, was a great mote in the Serpents eye, and a great meane to tempt the woman: the divell would have them∣selves to know good and evill. Exod. 16.19. Commandement was given by Moses, that none should reserve Manna till the next mor∣ning, yet in the 20. verse, they itched to try conclusions, and saved it till the morrow: the fruit they had of their labour, it was full of wormes, and stanke. Vers. 26, They were charged not to goe forth
the Sabbath day,With curiosi∣ty of our na∣ture, we may seeke, and finde naught. for they should finde none; yet verse 27. they would needs goe out to seeke, and found none. This is a curious inclination of our nature; it cleaveth fast to us, 1. Sam. 6.19. The men of Beth-shemesh would needs know what was in the Arke; but they payed well for it. 50070. men of them were slaine for that one action: so here God enacted, that none should touch the moun∣taine: and that for the beast, much more for man. Numb. 14.45. the people of Israel that would enter into the Land contrary to Gods Will, are soone slaine. Verse 44. yet they presumed obstinately, to goe up to the top of the mount: But the Arke of the Covenant of the Lord, and Moses departed not out of the Campe. 45. Then the Amalekites, and the Canaanites which dwelt in that mountaine, came downe and smote them,Two things: 1. To goe up into the mount. 2. To touch the mount. Its nt te law that these men have de∣sire to know, its but to goe up into the mount, to gaze: which was altoge∣ther unprofi∣table. They have omitted the thing, and searched for the times and places. and consumed them to Hormach.) It was no necessary thing, for the people to ascend the mountaine; yet the people itched after it: and when they should come there, they would not be so hastie to know, as to gaze; so that the knowledge was not so much sought of them, as the place; therefore it was an idle thing and odious to God. We see the very same hath raigned among the sonnes of men. Acts 1.6. Lord wilt thou at this time restore the Kingdome to Israel? Matth. 24.3. Tellus. when shall these things be, and what signe shall be of thy com∣ming, and of the end of the World? But as Christ answereth them there; Its not for you to know the times and the seasons, which my heaven∣ly Father hath put into his owne power. So Moses here, Its not for you to touch or ascend into the mountaine; it pertaineth not to you. This then must be our wisedome, as it is Deut. 29.29. Hiddn things belong to God, and those that are manifest, to us, We must say to our selves, as Moses said to the people, Its not for you to ascend up into the moun∣taine. More excellently, Rom. 12.3. Not to be wise above that we ought, but to be wise unto sobriety. We must therefore keepe our selves in the limits, which the Holy Ghost setteth downe. As tem∣porall death, or punishment here is for trangressors, and those that be over-curious in seeking out quiddities: so Pro. 25.27. Qui scru∣tator est majestatis divinae, opprimetur a gloria. The curious inquirer after divine Majesty, shall be overwhelmed of glory. Those that are overcurious in seeking things unnecessary, shall seeke with ig∣norance, and lose the knowledge they had of necessary things, 1 Tim. 6.4. they shall , languish, they shall be sicke with foolish questions, deceiving others, and themselves to. They shall be al∣waies a learning, but never know any thing. A fearefull example of Salomon, Preach 1 17. I gave my heart to know wisedome and knowledge, madnesse and foolishnesse I knew also that this is a vexation of the Spirit. August. Qui inventa veritote, aliud quaerit mendacium quaerit. He that having found the truth, seeketh any thing else, seeketh a lie. This overmuch curiosity made Salomon subject to the grievous points of Idolatry. We are then to know our barres about the law, unum est necessarium One thing is needfull. Fourth point, of the del ve∣ry or the law.There is added of the learned, another point, not as a point of preparation, but as a necessary motive in the delivery of the Law; necessary meditation of the law, gathered out of the delivery of it:
and it may be comprehended in the points of the delivery of the law, Heb. 12. à v. 17. to the end; whatsoever terrible thing there was, the Lord caused them to concurre at the delivery of the law. vers. 9.16. first, in a thicke cloud: secondly, with thunderings, and thirdly lightnings; fourthly, the sound of a Trumpet sounding exceeding loud; 18. fifthly, Mount Sinai on fire, and a vapour of smoake: sixthly, the quaking of the mount; and as David, Psal. 20.8. The voice of the Lord made the wildernesse to tremble, the wildernesse of Cades. All these, as they are fearefull sights, and objects of the cogitation of man; so it was the purpose of God to shew his law in terrible things, to terrisie them withall. And we see it tooke effect: For first the mountaines and rockes trembled; in the next chapter the people fled, and desired Moses, that they might heare God speake no more to them. And Moses himselfe, Heb. 12.21. , So terrible was the sight, that Moses cried out and said, , I exceedingly feare and quake. This fourth point is a cir∣cumstance of the manner of delivery; which though it be not of requiring the preparation, yet Heb. 12. the Apostle useth it, as a great argument to stir us up effectually. For whatsoever thing is terrible, either to the eye, to behold, or to the heart, to thinke, (18. v. 31. Mount Sinai was all on a smoke, because the Lord came down upon it in fire, and the smoke therof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and all the mount trembled exceedingly.) So that this wrought such a requisit reverence in the people, that the Lord said, Deut. 5.29. O that my people had alway such an heart to feare me, &c. These sights and sounds, because they are past, affect us not. But yet that argument of the Apostle, Heb. 12.25, 26. may affect us. If the delivery of the law be so terrible; if the law (Act. 7.53. . Who have received the Law by the disposition of Angels, and have not kept it.) being deli∣vered by the hands of Angels, be so dreadfull; when God in the power of his Majesty shall come to require it, how dreadfull shall it be? And this shall more plainely appeare, by the conference of circumstances of the delivery of the law, and of the day of judge∣ment. 1. The delivery of the law was done by Angels,A collation of circumstances in the delive∣ry of the Law and in the day of judge∣ment. 1. By Angels. 2. Darknesse. the requiry shall be by God himselfe. 2. Here is mention made of a thicke and darke cloud. Amos 5.18. that it shall be a darke and gloomy day, that there shall be darknesse and no light. Woe to you that desire the day of the Lord; what have you to doe with it? the day of the Lord, is darknesse, and not light. 19. As if a man did flie from a Lyon, and a Beare met him: or went into the house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a Serpent bit him. 20. Shall not the day of the Lord be darknesse, and not light, even darknesse, & no light in it? Jude v. 13. saith, that then shall be blacknesse of darknesse: and that because, as it is in Joel 3.15. The Sunne and the Moone shall be darkned, and the Starres shall loose their light. For the third, namely,3. Thunder∣claps. Thunderclaps, 2. Pet. 3.10. . But the day of the Lord will come as a Thiefe in the night, in the which the Heavens shall passe away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heate, the earth also and the workes that are therein shall be
burnt up. The beames of the earth shall cracke in pieces. And no doubt, the noyse of the Heavens passing away, of the elements melting, of the earth burning; must needs be greater then a thunderclap. That spectacle both to the eye and eare must needs be much more feare∣full then this. The effect of this last day, not temporall; for the other,4. Fire. they had a remedy, but for this they had none at all. 4. For fire. It was then but on one simple mountaine Sinai, but here it shall be on all the earth: this fire was but as the fire in the bush, the bush was not a whit consumed by it; no more was Sinai by it. But our God, Heb. 12. v. last. is himselfe a consuming fire: and such, Revel. 19.3. . And her smoke rose up for ever and ever. As it shall inflict on us paines for ever, so the smoke of it shall ascend forever,5. Earthquake. and the flame never be quenched. 5. For the shaking of the earth; this shall passe that: there, one mountaine qua∣ked; but here, both Heaven & Earth shall shake. Heb. 12.26, 27. Whose voice then shooke the earth; but now he hath promised, saying, yet once more I shake not the earth onely, but also heaven, &c. So as that there shall be a manifest moving of them. Hag. 2.7. Yet a little while, & I will shake the Heavens and the Earth, the Sea, and dry Land. Whereas this hill standeth stil as it did before,6. Sound of Trumpet. in the wildernesse. 6. For the sound of the Trum∣pet, that pierced the eares of the living, this shall raise up the dead also. Here shall be the Trump of the Archangell: That removed not the mount, nor the wildernesse, but here shall be such a sound, that it shal raise the dead. And as we compare the circumstances of both, so may we compare the effects of both. The giving made Moses to shake and tremble; but at the requiring againe of it, as it is, 1 Pet. 4.18. ; And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appeare? There shall be a like trembling of all. For Justus vix servabitur, the righ∣teous scarce shall be saved. And as for the unjust, they shall smite their knees together, and shall cry to the mountaines (though in vaine, for they cannot be heard) to fall on them, and to cover them, from the face of the just judge. Apoc. 6.16. . And they said to the mountaines, and rockes, fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sitteth on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lambe. So that thus we see by way of comparison, that the deli∣very did in some part answer the requiring of it: but the terrible∣nesse of that day cannot be expressed. Let us therefore say, as the people to Moses: Lord let us heare the ministerie of man, Hebr. 12.28. . Wherefore, we receiving a Kingdome which cannot be mo∣ved, Let us have grace whereby we may serve God with reverence, and godlinesse, for Deut. 33.2. The Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them; and appeared clearely from mount Paran, and he came with 10000. of Saints: and at his right hand a fiery law for them. No doubt when Christ commeth from Heaven, he shall bring with him a fiery law, executed with fire and brimstone. And thus much for the preparation.
The use and end of the Law. 4. Circum∣stance.THere is yet one thing to be considered; namely, the use or end of the law: which shall be explained out of the circumstances of a proposition of the giving of the law. The proposition is,Heb. 7.19. Heb. 7.19. . For the law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope, by the which we draw nigh unto God. The end of the law bringeth two uses: 1. It bringeth us to know perfection it selfe. 2. It leadeth us to a better thing, it is our schoolemaster to Christ. 1. For the first, though it be a law that carrieth with it the marke of the Law-giver, (as Solons lawes a marke of their giver; to wit, mildnesse; and Dracoes lawes, cruelty and stubbornnesse.) And that it is Mandatum sanctum, a holy commandement, in respect of the duties to God; Justum, just, in respect of the duties to other men; bonum, good, in respect of our selves, Rom. 7.12. . Wherefore the Law is holy, and the Comman∣dement holy, and just, and good; yet by occasion of transgression, and infection, it bringeth no perfection with it, as may be shewed out of the circumstances. 1. Of the place; a waste and barren Wil∣dernesse, that yeelded no fruit; which signifieth that the law should be so barren, that it should not yeeld so much as one soule to God. Legem non per∣ficere: è circum∣stantiis legis, cum traderetur. 1. á loco. That the law bringeth no perfection, appeares from the circum∣stances of the law, when it was delive∣red. 1. From the place.Secondly, this Agar, Galat. 4.25. standeth in Arabia: therefore it holdeth of Ishmael, the sonne of Agar the bond-woman. And the effect and right of bond-men is to be cast out with their children, and not to receive the inheritance due to Isaac: so those that thinke to bring forth fruit of their owne righteousnesse; they are as Ishmael, which was borne by nature, and not by promise: not as Isaac, whose birth was supernaturall, not consisting in the likenesse of the parents, but in the promise; and the inheritance is by pro∣mise: therefore the children of the law, because they cannot be perfected by it, are to be cast out with their mother. Those that seeke to bring forth fruit by their owne nature, must be cast forth: for the inheritance is not by nature, but by promise. 3. Againe, this mountaine, (namely Sinai,) none might ascend into, none might touch it; but the condition of the Gospell is con∣trary. Sion the hill of grace, must be gone up to; and many have ascended it. Esay 2.3. And many people shall goe and say, come and let us goe up into the mountaine of the Lord, to the house of the God of Iacob: and he will teach us his waies, and we will walke in his paths. For the law shall goe forth of Sion, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. Salva∣tion is from Sion, the Law unperfect before it was perfectly delivered. 2. A persona. From the per∣son.2. From the person. 1. From Moses: if any man should have re∣ceived perfection by it, no doubt he that gave it. But of Moses we finde, Numb. 20.12. Againe the Lord spake to Moses and Aaron, because ye beleeved me not, to sanctifie me in the presence of the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the Land which I have
given them. He was a transgressor of the law before he received it. 2. And he that delivered the law, was not partaker of the least pro∣mise of the law. i. to enter into the promsed Land. 3. His whole ministery was destructive; his signes and miracles that he wrought in Egypt, were plagues of Lice, Caterpillers, death, &c. and there∣fore he shewed himselfe the minister of Gods justice and wrath: whereas the ministery of grace raised the dead out of their graves, healed the sicke,The ministery of the law, a destroying ministery: the ministery of grace, a saving ministery. cast out divels, &c. shewing plainely that it was a saving spirit. 4. Exod. 34.35. The children of Israel saw the face of Moses, how the skin of Moses face shone bright, therefore Moses put the covering on his face, till he went to speake with God. 2 Cor. 3.13. . And not as Moses which put a vaile over his face, that the children of Israel could not stedfstly looke to the end of that which is abolished. Moses, when he had left talking with the Lord, and had come downe from the mount, the skinne of his face shone so, that without a vaile put over his face, there was no talking with him: so that the perfection of the law is to blinde and dasill their eyes that view it, rather then to cleere and enlighten them. But the Gospell shewes us the face of God clearely. b ipa lege, om the law  elfe.3. From the law it selfe: from the tables, that were broken before the law could be delivered: which is, in the judgement of the fathers, that that covenant should be made voyd. 2. And in that very time that the people should have received the law, they were in the greatest trangression of it, that could be; namely, idolatry, worshipping the golden Calfe. So the law to increase sinne, offence betweene God and man, made sinne to superabound, Rom. 7. 4. A modo, From the manner. The Gospell was delive∣red, not with a fearefull sound of any warlike In∣strument, sounding de∣fiance: but with a song of Angels. 2. Part. Lex paedagog ad Christium, The Law a schoolmaster to Christ.Last, from the manner. With the blast of a Trumpet, that terri∣fied the people, that was delivered with terrour, shewing that that was a law of terrour, and that it should exact terrible things at our hands. But the delivery of the Gospell was contrary; for that was delivered with the comfortable songs of Angels, Luke 2.14. . Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will towards men. The second part, Gal. 3.18. That the law is Paedagogus a School∣master to Christ; which likewise may be shewed by the cricum∣stances of the law. 1. That it was delivered by the disposition of Angels in the hand of a mediator, Galat. 3.19. . Ordained by Angels in the hand of a mediator; namely, Christ. Galat. 3.24. . Wherefore the law was our Schoolemaster to Christ, that we might be justi∣fied by faith. Now a mediator hath full authority and power to end the matter as he list, either to establish the law, or to abbrogate it. So Christ, because for our health he could not doe otherwise, tooke order in his owne person to abrogate the old Covenant, and to make a new. 2. Another: a charge given to Moses, that the Tables should be put into the Arke of the Testimony, And thou shalt put the mercy Seate above upon the Arke, and in the Arke thou shalt put the Testimony which I will give thee. Which was a signe of Gods presence
with us; the presence of God with us is onely in Christ, per Ema∣nuelem nostrum, by our Emanuel. 3. Another. Of the vaile of Mo∣ses; which was a ceremony of the mitigation of the brightnesse of the law. That the vaile is now removed, and we see Christ,The ceremo∣niall law is made now spirituall. . 2. Cor. 3.18. . But we all with open face, beholding as in a glasse the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory to glory▪ even as by the Spirit of the Lord. The vaile is nothing else, but the ceremo∣nies of the law: these nothing else but Christ, and to leade us to him. Betweene Moses and us, Christ is as a vaile. 4. Another. Of the time of the delivery of the law. It was the fiftieth day after the celebration of the Passeover; the time of the first fruits.An argument betweene the day of the delivery of the law, and the day of the descending of the Holy Ghost. At the very same time, in the very same day, the fitieth from the Passeover of Christs resurrection, came the holy Ghost in the Gospell. And though we cannot fulfill all that we should; yet because these fif∣tie daies are the time of first fruits, though we cannot offer up every action, we may offer our first fruits; to wit, in hoatam obedi∣entiam, a begun obedience, received by Christ: Christ performing that which was required at our hands; though not at the barre of judgement, yet at the barre of grace. This inchoatam obedientiam, be∣gunne obedience, we shall have, when we shall have new hearts, not of stone, but of flesh, Ezek. 36.26. A new heart also will I give you,Ezek. 36.26. and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will take away the stony heart, out of your body, and I will give you an heart of flesh; to wit, 2 Cor. 3 3. His new Testament being written in the fleshly tables of our hearts, whereby we shall offer our first fruits. Last, Num 21.5 They protest that they will heare neither God, nor Moses;Numb. 21.5, 6, 7, 8. a plain desolation of the law: presently upon this, came the signe of Hell. 6. The Lord sent fiery serpents, among the people, which stung them; so that many of the people died. 7. Their humiliation. The people came to Moses and said, We have sinned, for we have spoken against the Lord, and against thee: pray to the Lord to take away the serpents from us. 8. v. A declara∣tion of the Gospell, and of the comming of Christ. And the Lord said to Moses, make thee a fiery serpent, and set it up for a signe, that as many as are bitten may looke on it and live. Which brazen serpent, Christ (John 3.14.) applieth to himselfe. 1 Cor. 10.2, 3, 4. The Fathers,1 Cor. 10.2, 3, 4. as they had their Cloud, they passing through the Sea, their Manna, the water out of the Rocke; so they had also the signes of the Gos∣pell. Their being under the Cloud, and passing through the Sea, like to our baptisme; Manna to Christ his body; the water out of the rocke to his blood. The order of the uses of the law. Opotet vocare ad calculum. We must cll to an account. 1. Vse of the law.Yet two necessary points. That where there is no perfection in the law, through the imperfection of nature, yet it is aedagogus ad Christum, a schoolmaster to Christ. To make this more plaine: Christs wise dome must be ours. That a man must often call himselfe to accounts how he hath used his talent. Matth. 25.14. God is compa∣red to a Housholder, that will take account of his servants, of those talents that he delivered to them at his departure. We must vocare
talenta nostra ad calculum, call our talents to account; and not doe as the wicked and foolish servant, that is noted of great folly, for hiding his talent in the ground. Then for the first use of the law, it is our Tabula supputationum, table of accounts. It containeth our credita & debita, what things are owen to thee, and what thou owest; its the table, that we must cast our accounts by; it sheweth us where we are, and telleth us our accounts: est remedium ignorantiae, a remedy of ignorance. Now because it sheweth us that our debt is much greater then we are able to pay, and that it shew∣eth us the strength of sinne, 1 Cor. 15.56. that it is so strong, that it bringeth us to that, Revel. 2.5. Memor esto unde excideris, remember whence thou art fallen, shewing us our miserable estate; the image of God, from whence we are fallen, and hell into which we shall fall: whereof the one will worke in us a griefe, the other a horrour: the law is, that if our debt be greater then we are able to pay, our goods, children, and our selves, must be sold, and payment made. 4. When it hath once gotten us to this, that we may be condemned in the whole summe,Secundus legis usu, ducit nos ad Christum, ducit nos ad aeneum serpentem. 2. Vse of the law leads us to the brasen serpent Christ. The covenant of faith being entered into us, then have we this use of the law. 1. It puts us in mind of the great delive∣rance of Christ from the law. 2. It granteth grace in that measure that is required in this life. The law sheweth the finne and the remedy. Exod. 20.1. &c. when sinne and we have reckoned, it hath her mi∣nister and Scrivener, the conscience to subscribe and set seale to this great debt. And thus will the 3. use of the Law come, that it will be humiliator, an humbler. And so as it is, Gal. 3.23. It shutteth us up in the dungeon, and imprisoneth us; and this is a remedium super∣iae, a remedie of pride. Then commeth in the second use of the law. That forasmuch as we see our condemnation is just, and that we can never discharge so great an account, it maketh us seeke for a surety to defray the whole summe for us. It doth , drive us to thinke of a sure∣ty; namely, to the brazen Serpent, as Moses did the Jewes, that is, Christ. And of these two uses, two other uses will follow. 1. It serveth us as an Arrow shot into us, to put us in remembrance of our great deliverance, and guideth us over the billes of accounts; that we seeing that much is forgiven us, might love much. The other, Psal. 119.59. to teach, Quid retribuam Domino? What shall I render to the Lord? to turne our selves into his pathes, and to draw no more debt upon Christ, then needs. The preface of the Law. ANd God spake all these words and said, &c. till the 18. verse. The summe of all these words, and in effect, the body of the law containes two parts. The style, verse 2. I am the Lord thy God, &c. 2. The charge, which receiveth the whole ten precepts. In every law, according to the positions in mans law, is required: 1. Wise∣dome. 2. Authority. For the wisdome of God, Deut. 4.8. And what Nation is so great a Nation, that hath Ordinances and Lawes so righteous, as all this law, which I set before you this day. Moses challengeth all the lawes and the Nations of the World. The wisdome of a law is best seene and tryed by the sufficiency of it. For his authority, it is rerum agendarum telum: This is alwaies the preface of every law;
and is here in the second verse. In every edict and Proclamation, the beginning is with the stile of the Prince; whereby he challen∣geth by his prerogative Royall, to doe what he list. For this autho∣rity is the common reason of the whole charge of the law; and is annexed to every Commandement that hath a reason; as to the 2,Where there is a reason given, it is from hs au∣thority. 3, 4. For I the Lord thy God, &c. For the Lord will not hold him guilt∣lesse. For in six daies the Lord made Heaven, and Earth, &c. And if it be true, that men need not a reason to perswade them to a benefit; then surely not to this: because it is a benefit and a priviledge; as Psal. 147. v. last, He hath not dealt so with any Nation, neither have the Heathen knowledge of his lawes. Yet it pleaseth God to adde his rea∣son, from his owne person; though indeed profit be a sufficient O∣rator. Chap. 19: v. 2, 3, 4, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 25, 28, 30, 31, 32, 34, 37. Chap. 20. v. 7, 24, 26. Chap. 21. of Leviticus, v. 8, 12, 15, 23. The reason of the new Testament annexed, Rom. 14.11. & Phil. 2.10. . For it is written, as I live saith the Lord, every knee shall bow unto me, of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the Earth, and every tongue shall confesse to God.The parts of the preface. In this stile or authority, are three parts, according to three titles. The first title, of his Name Jehovah. Secondly, the title of his jurisdicti∣on, Thy God. Thirdly, the title of that notable act he did last; Which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, &c. Such prefaces, in their Edicts and Statutes doe earthly Princes use. 1. Is the name of the Prince, Caius Caesar. 2. The jurisdiction, Emperour or King of such a Countrey. 3. The last noble act he did: as when the Romans had overcome Germany, every Caesar was called Germanicus: or when they had overcome Affrica, Scipio Affricanus, Scipio the con∣querour of Affrica. And alwaies the last triumph did drive out all the former. For the Name first, Jehovah: I Jehovah, not I am Jehovah. It argueth his nature, power, and benefits. Thou art Lord. The name of his nature it cannot be denied, (Psal. 83.18. That they may know that thou whose Name is Jehovah.) it is communicable to no other then to God. Concerning this word, it is tetragrammaton, a word of foure letters, much written of, and much spoken of, and divers spe∣culations gathered out of it: as namely, that there are three letters, according to the number of the three Persons in the Trinity; and and that of those three letters, the first signifieth Power, the proper adjunct of the Father. The second, wisedome and knowledge, the proper adjunct of the Sonne. The third, love, the proper adjunct of the Holy Ghost. And that the second letter is doubled, to teach us, that the Second Person should take on him two natures, of God and Man. The diminution of Jehovah in Jah, that  signifieth Deum diminu∣tum God in the Diminutive,  Praise ye Iah, whereof there is such manifold use in the Psalmes. But plainely this may be sufficient for us, that it is a name taken from Being; as  vel  esse, to BE. The effect of it is expounded, Rom. 11.36. .
For of him, and through him and to him are all things: to whom be glory for ever. That he is from none, for none, by none; but all things for him, by him, and from him: and as his being is most, so is his power. Therefore he hath no promise in his title, no commission, as to be commanded of any, (as all earthly Princes have:) because his power is highest. For earthly Princes fetch all their power from him,Omnes Reges terrae ab ato suam habent potestatem. All the Kings of the Earth have their power from an other. as by Commission: as our Prince hath in his title, Dei gratia Angliae &c. By the Grace of God, of Eng∣land, &c. Therefore he is ab aliquo, from some other; only God hath no commission, but is in himselfe, without a supreame. He onely may command simply: he hath no dependance of any, either of Being or Power; but all things depend on him. The force of the reason is, Psal 104. v. 29.30. When thou hidest thy face, they are troubled: when thou takest away their breath, they die; and turne againe to their dust. When thou lettest thy breath goe forth, they shall be made, and thou shalt renew the face of the earth. And when he looketh not on us, but turneth away his face, yea when he breatheth not on us, we come to nothing. There the Prophet saith, that streames proceed from his countenance, as beames to every creature; and if any of them be stopped, that creature that it should come to, dieth. And verse 30. that he is the onely breath of all the world, and that his breathing on the crea∣tures, giveth life: and at the drawing in of his breath, all perish. Now if we would imagine of any man in the world, that with his looking on us, could preserve our lives, and looking off us, could destroy, that had our life at such an advantage; certainely we must be marvellous ready to please him: And yet such is our dependance on God. He was.The word  he was, as it hath two significations, so it hath two uses, in Scriptures significations. First, essence. 2. The effect thereof. 1. Use for his essence. 2. To give effect; to wit, is essence. Exod. 3.14: I am hath sent me to you. He calleth himselfe, I am. Ero, I shall be, sent this. And howsoever there be comparisons of him in time, in respect of us; yet in regard of his induring, he is for ever with∣out all time; he is alwaies Ero, shal be. Revel. 1.8. . I am Alpha, and Omega, the beginning & the ending, saith the Lord; which is, & which was, and which is to come, The Almighty. The eternity of his essence, even I am α, Alpha, and ω, Omega; the beginning, and the ending; which is, which was which shall be. Heb. 13.8. . The same yesterday, to day, and the same for ever. And this taketh from us the hope that we may have of earthly Princes. A man if he hath offended against an earthly Prince, either he may escape by going out of his Dominions, or by out-living him; but there is no hope of escaping out of the Lords Dominion, Psalm. 34 7. The An∣gell of the Lord is round about them that feare him, and delivereth them. He pitcheth his Tent round about us: he compasseth us as in a circle. If we runne from one end of the world to the other, we are still in his Dominion: he can fetch us from any place. So in respect of God, we can be in no place, but he will be with us, Amos 9.2.
Though they dig into hell, thence shall mine hand fet them; though they climbe up into Heaven, thence will I bring them downe; and though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search, and take them out thence: And though they hide themselves from my sight in the bottome of the Sea, thence will I command the Serpent, and I will bite them Obadiah vers. 4. If we should flie up as high as the Eagle, and build our nest among the Starres, &c. for height: for depth, Amos, in the depth of the Sea; nay if they should dig to hell, Psalm. 139.7. Secondly,Psalm. 139.7. to last longer then the Prince. So, in respect of Gods being, we cannot out∣last him. The time is infinite; for his Name is Ero shall be: and he shall alwaies be Ero, shall be, in time. Therefore we must needs obey. Secondly, of his truth, in bringing to effect, that which he promiseth us. Exod. 6.3. God said, that Abraham and the Patriarkes knew him by the Name of Almighty, not by that Name of Iehovah as yet. i. One that is as good as his word. Yet then shall my night be turned to day. It is plaine, Genes. 15.6. that Abraham beleeved,  in Iehovah, and it was counted to him for righteousnesse. And God saith, vers. 7. I am Jehovah, that brought thee out of Ʋr, &c. Yet God saith to Moses, that the Patriarkes knew him not by Iehovah, but by Al∣mighty. To reconcile these places, we must understand, that by Ie∣hovah is meant here, the bringing to effect this generall promise. So long as God maketh a promise, so long is he  my Lord, or , God, &c. but when he hath brought it to passe, then he is Iehovah. So the Patriarkes knew him Iehovah, by some particular promise: as Abraham, in the birth of Isaac; Noah, in the delivery from the de∣luge; Lot, in the delivery from the destruction of Sodome: but they never knew him by the Name of Iehovah, in bringing to passe the greatest and generall promise of Canaan. In this sence, Ezek. 5.13. Thus shall mine anger be accomplished, and I will cause my wrath to cease in them, and I will be comforted; and they shall know that I the Lord have spoken it in my zeale, when I have accomplished my wrath in them. Thou shalt bring thy judgement upon them, and they shall know that thou art Iehovah. 2. Title, Thy God. Thy God. This is the title of his jurisdiction: to which title he hath claime in a double respect: 1. Generall. 2. Particular. Ge∣nerall, Psal. 148.5, 6. For he spake the word, and they were made; he com∣manded, and they were created. He hath made them fast for ever and ever, he hath given them a Law which shall not be broken. So this jurisdiction is over every thing, as it is a creature. The creatures, as they have their law; so we see, 2 Pet. 3. vers. last. . To him be glory, both now, and for ever. All the creatures have their rule from him. Esay 1.2. Heare, O Heavens, and hearken O Earth, for the Lord hath said, I have nourished and brought up children▪ but they have rebelled against me. Deut. 32.1. Hearken O Heavens, and I will speake, and let the Earth heare my words. The creatures of the Lord are called to beare witnesse against Israel, that they were breakers of the Law of God. But that law or jurisdiction being broken, it gave occasion to the second, namely, the particular, which is conditionall. 1. God is our Iehovah by covenant. Deut. 5. Heare, O Israel, the Lawes and Ordi∣nances
which I propose to you this day, that you may learne them, and take heed to observe them. Audis, sum Deus; non audis non sum Deus, hearest thou, I am God; hearest thou not, I am not God. Hereupon saith a Father, Audias, Deus sum; ne audias, Deus non sum. If thou hearest, I am God;Ierem. 31.33. if thou dost not heare, I am not God. Ierem. 31.33. I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Meum and tuum are relatives. But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those daies, saith the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people. He is ours, and we are his so long as we keepe his Commande∣ments, Deut. 10.14. Behold Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens is the Lords, thy Gods; and the Earth with all that therein is. 15. Yet the Lord hath set his delight in thy fathers, to love them; and did choose their seed after them, even you above all people, as appeareth this day. In which words Moses telleth the children of Israel a strange thing. Behold, saith he, the Heavens, and the Heavens of Heavens is the Lords; and the Earth, with all therein: and yet hath he separated thee from the rest, even an handfull (for so is the Church) to make a covenant with thee. And this is a marvellous strange mercy of God; that when he will be de∣scribed, he will condescend to come into our description. He re∣jecteth all his excellent titles, that he might have of his most excel∣lent creatures; as, the God of Heaven, of Earth, &c. onely to have this his jurisdiction, being so vile in nature, and so wicked in our workes; which is a great argument of his goodnesse to us ward. Heb. 11.16. . But now they desire a bet∣ter Countrey, that is, an heavenly; wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God: for he hath prepared for them a City. God was not ashamed to be called their God. And as one saith very well, Conjunxit utili∣tatem tuam cum gloria sua. He hath joyned thy commodity with his own glory. So he might better have said, Conjunxit gloriam suam cum gloria tua. He hath joyned his owne glory with thy glory. So will that be verified, Psal. 144.15. Happy are the people that be in such a case, yea bles∣sed are the people that have the Lord for their God. Blessed are the peo∣ple that have the Lord for their God. 3. Which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt,3. Title. &c. A title from the last act he did: but yet it serveth for a proofe of both the former, in two points. 1. By their estate in the house of thraldome. Their estate was miserable, they were servants in the servilest worke that could be; they were put to the Furnace to make Bricke. Exod. 5. They were in servitude unto their enemies, yea to cruell enemies: yea in servitude not to be rewarded, but to be punished daily. They were compelled to worke, and yet they had no instrument provi∣ded for them for their worke; they were faine also to gather their owne straw,By his con∣temptible creatures that the delivery might be more strange. and yet nothing of their tale of Bricke that they made before, when they had their straw gathered them, was diminished. They had their children drowned before their eyes, every day. 2. The delivery with a mighty hand, and stretched-out arme out of Egypt, most strange; in drowning Pharaoh, and all his host, by a
most contemptible creature, in the red Sea. His two first titles have alwaies stood: this last, in respect of his last noble act; it hath al∣waies beene altered. First, after the worke of his creation, he was called God the Creator of Heaven and Earth. Secondly, after the flood, he was called Iah paean: (i. as was among the heathen, Io paean.) Dominus dispersor aquarum. The Lord that scatereth about (commandeth) the waters. To the daies of Abraham. 3. Genes. 15.7. I am the Lord, that brought thee out of Ʋr of the Chaldees: to the time of Moses. In his time, Exod. 3.6. The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; till the delivery out of Egypt: here, The Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Ierem. 16.14. When God should deliver them from the captivity of the North, it is said, that the other title should perish: and it should be said, The Lord that delivered us out of the captivity of Babylon: and this last∣ed till the daies of Christ. The last is prophecied of Ierem. c. 23. v. 6. Jehovah justitia nostra, God our righteousnesse. 1 Cor. 1.30. For Christ is become to us righteousnesse. Gal. 1.8. The Father of Christ. Now this great benefit being not full six weekes before the delivery of the law, it must needs sticke greatly in their minds; and now they being in the wildernesse, where they were wholy to depend on the safe∣gard of God: so that in regard of Memoria recentis beneficii, & spe jamjam futuri, the memory of a new received mercy, and the hope of a future; as also the place where they could rest nothing on themselves: that was both a fit time and place to give the law in. So that, seeing the Law could not well be given in Egypt, for they had evill will to goe thence: nor in Canaan, for there they murmu∣red against God; it was most fitly given here. For their delivery was not, that they should be masters, but that they should serve. The former two, and indeed the third, they all pertaine to us. For though it be true, that Non obligamur legi propter Sinai, sed propter Pa∣radisum, We are not tied to the law for Sinai, but for Paradise: and so to all the sonnes of Adam. And though God gave, Rom. 11.11. to one Nation his law, to provoke all other Nations to emulate them; as also the Jewes themselves to emulation: yet this also is true, that there is not one of these titles, but in farre more deepe title pertai∣neth to us, which have a better performance;Tituli in prio legis ad nos per∣tinent. The titles in the Preface of the Law be∣long to us. and therefore are grounded on a better promise. First, Iehovah: As the excellency of his Name is in respect of the performance of a new covenant: So Heb. 8.6. The Gospell. i. the new covenant, saith Paul, is the better covenant; because it hath better promises: and it is better to say, In semine tuo benedicentur omnes gentes, in thy seed all Nations shall be blessed: then to say, semini tuo dabo omnem terram Canaan, unto thy seed will I give all the Land of Canaan. Ours is farre better then theirs; namely, the cove∣nant of obedience, sanctification and glory. For the second, Thy God. We are included with them in the first, and in the second also we have a part; but the third perfecter, the Covenant in mercy and redemption. They had but two, creation and obedience
Thirdly, for the deliverance. How many more dangers we are de∣livered from, then they; from the sting of conscience, from sinne, from death: how much more the divell and all his Angels passe Pharaoh and his Tak-masters: Hell and Gehenna, the Lime-kils, the torments without number passe the tale of Brickes with num∣ber; so much our deliverance passeth theirs. Colos. 1.13.  Who hath delivered us from the power of darknesse, and hath translated us into the Kingdome of the sonne of his love. 2 Tim. 1.10. In this world from errours, that most part of the world fall into: in the world to come, 1.1. Thou Iehovah; we vile crea∣turesFrom the justice of God. 2. From the law. 3. From the sting of conscience. 4. From sinne. 5. From death. 6. From Hell. 7 From the divell and his angels.2. I thy God: we thy ser∣vants. 8. From the spirituall Egypt. 9. From the Egypt of the world. i. Antichrist. Now as God hath his titles, so are we to have ours.3. Which have delivered thee, we delivered, &c. 1. We, most vile creatures. 2. We, thy miserable servants. 3. We that have beene delivered from sinne, &c. from a thousand dangers. Audi Israel, Heare Israel, Speake Lord, thy servants heare thee. Let us therefore heare him and be his servants; least we be hi servants that are spoken of, 2 Chron. 12.8. Servants to our worldly desires. Ne∣verthelesse they shall be his servants, so shall they know my service, and the service of the Kingdomes of the earth. The law being divided into the stile in Exod. 20.2. that hath been handled, and into the charge. Now of the charge, which is nothing else but the ten words, commonly called the ten Commandements. The number is set downe, Deut. 10.4. as well to take away mans presumption of adding any thing: in which respect, Exod. 32.15. God wrote both the sides of the Tables full; that nothing might be added to them. 2. As also to take away excuse from man; for that they may be easily kept in memory, because they are so few; whereas those of the heathen are infinite. These for better order, and memory, receive a division from the subject. First, Deut. 6.4. divided according to the two Tables; which Christ, Matth. 22.40. Marke 12.30. warranteth: speaking to a Scribe, he divideth them according to two objects: 1. God. 2. Man. And this is not his owne, but it is warranted in the Scriptures of the law. The duty toward God, Deut. 6.5. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, soule might. Duty to man, Love thy Neighbour, as thy selfe. Levit. 19.18. from whence Christ hath it. So that this division according to the tables and contents of them, is Christs division, 1 Tim. 1.5. because  love, is so often repeated in the Law, Paul maketh  & , the summe and end of the Law to be love. Ro. 13.9. The whole law is recapitulated into this summe: Thou shalt love thy Neighbour as thy selfe. For our love proceeding and ascending up to God; when we descend and come to our neighbour, it is but a reverberation of the love we have towards God: and every reverberation praesup∣poseth a direct beame: so that every man hath God first in his direct motion.
The division of the ten Commandements into two Tables. NOw these ten precepts must be sorted into these two Tables of God; and in the sorting of them there may arise some doubt: The first is betweene the Jewes and the Christians: the second be∣tweene the Christians themselves.1. Doubt, The Jewes make an even divi∣sion, five in one Table, and five in the other. Their warrant, as they thinke, is Psal. 82.6. I have said, ye are Gods, therefore the fifth Com∣mandement to be referred to the first Table. Answer.Solution. But because in the Commandement are also included inferiours, and they are no Gods: we must seclude it out of the first Table; because it pertai∣neth not to God directly, but to man. Secondly, betweene the Christians themselves. The Church of Rome, they make the two first, one: and the last Commandement they stretch and make two of it. Wherein they follow not the grea∣test number of Fathers, as they say they doe in their interpretations: but divide this Commandement, into non concupisces vitam, non con∣cupisces famam. Thou shalt not covet the life, thou shalt not covet the name. That it cannot be theirs, 1. The desire Non concupisces vitam pro∣ximi tui, thou shalt not covet the life of thy neighbour; which is the desire of the 6. Commandement; and non concupises famam proximi tui, thou shalt not covet the name of thy neighbour; which is the desire of the ninth, might as well make two Commandements, as these two; and better too. But common sense telleth us, that to make lawes of particulars, is the greatest folly that may be. Much lesse Gods law, which is exceedingly generall. And we see that of con∣cupiscence, set downe here in generall, there are two branches of it: and when they interpret of it in their comments, they say they finde some little difference betweene them: and indeed they finde such inconvenience, that commonly they include them both into one. 2. No wise man would imagine, that a Law-giver, that would give ten Commandements, could give two of them at one breath, at one period; yea in one verse: and the other in distinct periods. 3. A greater witnesse then these are, Rom. 7.7. maketh but one, non concupisces, thou shalt not covet, for all. 4. The whole course of the Church of God, Jewes and Christians have consented to this divi∣sion; and all disallow theirs, onely Augustine excepted. As Iosephus lib. 3. of the Commandements, that the two first, which they make but one, are two: and the two last are but one. Philo Iudaeus, de de∣calogo, of the decalogue. Aben Ezra, Rab. Salomon, upon Exod. 20. Christians, Clemens 6. . of his Strom. The tenth word or Commandement concerning all the affections and lusts. Chrysostome on Matth. Athanasius de sacris Scripturis, concerning the holy Scriptures. Ambrose and Ierome on Ephes. 6. Nazianzen in his verses. Onely Augustine de decem praeceptis, of the ten Commandements, alloweth of theirs. Yet himselfe, ve∣teris & novi testamenti quaest. septima, in the seventh question of the
old and new Testament, divideth them plainely thus. And the rea∣son that moved him to the contrary, was but weake, and a bare conjecture; that he would have but three Commandements in the first Table, because there are but three persons in the Trinity. By the same reason we might adde the fourth, for the unity in the Tri∣nity. Canisius hath an argument of great force with them; that is, he saith the reason of the Law must alwaies be annexed to the first Commandement; but according to our division, it is in the second: (For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God.) therefore all that is but the first. Answer. But we say, that the reason went before the charge, was not annexed to any of the Commandements. Our duty to God. perpetuall, inward, in heart and mind, Commandement 1. outward, in gesture, Commandement 2. speech, Commandement 3. temporall, seventh day, Commandement 4. our neigh∣bour: in deed or intent, particular, Comm. 5. his body, Command. 6. his wife, Command. 7. his goods, Command. 8. his good name, Com. 9. generall, concerning, the restraint of the first motions, C. 10. For the division of the foure Commandements of the first table, 1. the table of holinesse, which taketh order (for the worship of God: this order is, 1. Perpetuall. 2. Temporall. Perpetuall, either inward in heart and minde, Commandement first: or outward; and this, either in gesture; the outward worship, Commandement second: or in speech and communication, Commandement third. The temporall, with the Congregation, Commandement fourth. Or thus: into the manner and meanes of Gods worship, Commande∣ment second. And the scope, Commandment third. The second table, the table of righteousnesse: either for truth in the inward parts, or the actions, as they are committed before God, or man; as our neighbours. Either respective, Commandement fifth, because there is onely a relation: or absolute, either to touch his neighbours person in his life, Commandement sixth: or his owne flesh, Commandement seventh; or his gifts, substance, wisdom, Com∣mandement eight; or his good name, Commandement ninth. Or else this table restraineth the first motions, Commandement tenth. The interpretation of the Law. FOr the interpretation of them as they lie: The Commande∣ments, they must needs be interpreted. For if the Law of God be perfect, Psalm. 19. then it commandeth all things that we are to doe, and forbiddeth all that we are not to doe. Which, if it be in∣terpreted by the letter onely, we shall not finde the thousandth part of those things that are to be commanded or forbidden; therefore there must be interpretation. A conclusion. Every law standeth on a Synecdoche: the reason is, because the law being to take order
for actions; the actions of man being infinite, both for variety and number, because the circumstances, and the degrees of the circum∣stances are infinite; the rules also should be infinite, and so exceed the memory of man; which cannot be: therefore God taking another course, hath set downe generall rules; and so doth man after his example. And these generall are to receive interpretation, and to be applied to particulars.Quest. 1. Answ. If it be asked where this interpretation is to be had? I answer, Deut. 17.9. Mal. 2.7. If a matter of controver∣sie arise, it must goe to the Levites, to the Priests, and Ministers of God. Here may a question arise,Quest. 2. Whether every thing that they deliver, be good; and that the interpretation which they deliver, be alwaies true and good? I answer: It is not.Answ. As there be rules in giving an interpreta∣tion: so there may be rules to examine it, and to judge of it. But there are rules in examining the interpretation, and judging of it: and unlesse it be done according to those rules, it is not good. For Christ, Matth. 5. reprehended the Lawyers for not giving them according to the Rules. The condition of the law standing in a more particular respect, there must also be more particular rules, then the bare sentence gi∣veth. The interpretation must be but to shew the compasse of the law, how farre it extendeth, where it may be excepted. Fines man∣datorum sunt observandi. The bounds of the Commandements must be observed. And they are but two: 1. Ampliatio praecepti, an en∣largement of the Commandement. 2. Limitatio praecepti, a bounding of the precept. The later writers call them, the extent, and the ex∣ception of the precept: so that these two are a complete division of the interpretation of any law. How these two are to be done in the law of God; they may be knowne generally by that rule, Oculus ad scopum, the eye to the marke: because the law is not , the word spoken; but  the meaning of the law; Certum est, quod is committit inlegem, qui legis verba observat, sed contra mentem legislato∣ris facit. For intentio legislatoris voluntas legis. It is certaine, that he trespasseth against the law, who observeth the words of the law, but doth contrary to the mind of the giver of the law. For the in∣tention of the Law-giver is the will of the law: or, the purpose of the law is best knowne, by the intent of the Law-giver. For as the law is regula actionis, the rule of action:The intent of the Law giver is the mea∣ning of the law: we must therefore will what God willeth. it a mens legislatoris regula legis, so is the mind of the Law-giver, the rule of the law. The intent of the Law-giver, is best knowne by his end. It is a morall axiom. As bonitas ethice, Morall goodnesse, it a bonitas theologica pendet à fine so theologicall goodnesse depends on the end. The end of God is, Esay 42.8. Gloriam meam alteri non dabo, My glory will I give to no other. 2. Subordinately the end, 1 Tim, 2.4. Ʋult homines ser∣vari, he wils men to be saved. But more particularly to know this end and direction, these two, limitation and extension, be the best. Rules for ex∣extension of precepts. 1. Rule.First for extension: the Jewes have set downe thirteene, which the Christians also have observed; and may be reduced to these six: First, as the Jewes say in every Commandement there is prae∣ceptum faciens, an affirmative precept, and praeceptum non faciens, a precept negative: if the Commandement be affirmative, it im∣plieth
also his negative, and contrarily; according to the rule of Logicke, à contrariis, taken from contraries. Si hoc sit faciendum, ejus contrarium fugiendum, if this be to be done, then his contrarie is to be shunned. Psalm. 34.14. Fuge malum, & fac bonum, Eschew evill, and doe good; the practise of this rule. The affirmatives of the law are but two: namely, the fourth and fifth Commandements. These the Rabbins finde in the books of Moses, dilated into 248. Comman∣dements affirmative, which they call , Precepts com∣manding, to the number of joynts in a mans body: And the nega∣tives in the same five bookes of Moses, into 365▪ negative Comman∣dements, which they call , precepts forbidding; to the number of the daies in the yeere: both added together, make 613. according to the letters of the ten Commandements. 2. That wheresoever a thing is either forbidden or commanded,2. Rule. there all the homogenea, of the same kinde to it, are commanded or forbidden. The same may be seen in mans law. A law is extended, vel specificè, vel per aequipollens, specifically, or by a thing of like force, and valew. Specifically, Cum quid sit ejusdem naturae, circumstantiis diversum, when a thing is set downe, that is of the same kind, but by circumstance is diverse. 2. By equipollent. The Rabbins call it by two names: 1. Where the ballances hang equall, the Logicians call it, à pari, from the like. As in the Commandement of theft; to set a mans house on fire, is as evill as to steale. 2. Where one is ei∣ther lighter or heavier; from the lesse to the greater. If a man be bound to honour his superiour, then much more to preserve him. The third is peculiar to the law of God. Ro. 7.14. ,3. Rule. the law is spirituall, &c. When you have extended this specifice & per aequipollens, specifically and by equipollent, they must be extended to the spirit. Lex humana ligat manum & linguam: divina verò comprimit animam. The Law of man ties the hand and the tongue: but the law of God presseth the soule. John 4.23. the true worship of God, , in spirit and truth. And the reason is good; for the heart is the fountaine for all evill; è corde cogitationes malae, out of the heart come evill thoughts. This appeared in the heathen, by the dreame of Polydorus in Plutarch, de sera numinis vindicta, of the grievous punishment of God: that dreamed in the night, that his heart came to him and said, Ego tibi horum omnium malorum sum author, I am unto thee the authour of all these evils. The heart there∣fore is first to be cleansed, by truely planting the feare of God in it, and the knowledge of him. Plutarch said, that the heathen, if they could, they would have restrained the heart; but because they could not come to it, they forbare it. The law of man, by reason of it, ceaseth two waies: 1. For want of knowledge; because they know not the heart. 2. For want of power; as where the number of the offenders is so great, or the power so great, that there is no standing against thē. And upon these must needs come both tolerations in the Church & Common-wealth. For want of knowledge, as when things are so subtilly and slylie conveyed, that one cannot tell where the fault is, or how it may be remedied. But in Gods law neither of these
holdeth: and therefore there is no fault tollerable with him. For his power, Jerem. 17.9. Cor hominis pravum & inscrutabile, quis cog∣noscit idem? the heart of man is wicked, and unsearchable, who knoweth it? And in the next verse (scio, I know) he sheweth that there is a quis, who? and who it is that knoweth it. Ego dominus scrutans renes, & corda, I the Lord who search the reines, and the hearts. There is no defect of knowledge in God, for he is  the knower of hearts. August. If the Candle burne, videt te, he sees thee; if it be out, videt te, he seeth thee: he seeth all thy faults both present and past, and thy thoughts too.7 Degrees in sin before we come to the act. A desire to looke on it a little longer. Therefore in this point its justly said, that the law is spirituall. Now for the thought, it may be divided into seven branches or stations. 1. Cogitatio ascendens, the thought ascending: the very suggestion. 2. Inclinatio voluntatis, the inclination of the will, to give entertainment to that thought. 3. Mora, a delay in the thought. 4. A delight, which commeth of the conceiving of it. 5. The desire of the feeling in outward act; of the inward pleasure, agreeable to the outward act. 6. The con∣sent of the heart to the practise. 7. The deliberation, of many meanes, and the choosing of some one to bring it to passe. The law of God taketh hold of all these though mans law doth not. The fourth rule of extension is,4. Rule. that which the law of man hath made. Cum quid prohibetur, prohibentur illa omnia, per quae pervenitur ad illud; & contra, when any thing is prohibited, all things which lead thereunto are also prohibited: and on the other part. The Jewes say, ambulandum est in praeceptis, we must walke in the Com∣mandements; not by any out-path, but viâ regiâ, by the Kings high way: that is, by those meanes and instruments, that God hath com∣manded: the reason is,Bonum pendet à fine. A good thing dependeth upon the end. The goodnesse of a way or motion depen∣deth of the end. So that if these, or these meanes bring to an evill end, they are evill; and so consequently, are not to be used in good things: neither are we in them to seeke God. Psalm. 1. Nor stood in the way of sinners. The way is the meanes. So with the act we con∣clude the meanes. So if the thing be good; the omission of it, as also of the meanes, is evill. Bonae legis est non solùm tollere vitia, sed etiam occasiones vitiorum, and contrariwise: Good lawes do not onely prevent vices, but the occasions of vices. The fifth rule, is a rule also of man. Cum quid prohibetur,5. Rule. vel jube∣tur; prohibentur, vel jubentur illa omnia, quae consequuntur ex illo. When any thing is prohibited, or commanded; then all the consequences thereof, are prohibited or commanded. That is, the signes and outward notes of things: (ante before) namely, where the good thing is commanded, there is also the signe of it commanded. And contrariwise, when it pleaseth the Holy Ghost to condemne pride, Psal. 101. & 131. he condemeth a proud and high stomacke. Esay 3.16. He condemneth the walking with the necke stretched forth; and with a foolish strange gate, 1 Tim. 2.9. 1 Pet. 3.3. , the frizeling of the haire. Oversumptuous aparrell, plates, &c. Zeph. i. 8: strange apparrell: because they are not the signes of Gods gifts, and rather are of pride, then of decency: ye ought not to seeme
that, which ye are not: Sarahs modest lookes, modest apparrell commended by the Apostle: Sarah went modestly, so should you. God will have the signe to goe with the thing signified. The sixt rule,6. Rule. the rule of mans lawes. Accessorium sequitur natu∣ram principalis. Agentes & consentientes, pari poena plectuntur. The accessory followeth the nature of the principall: doers, and consen∣ters, suffer or are punished alike. The reason, Quia lex non solùm observanda, sed etiam conservanda. We must see, that not onely our selves be observers of the law; but that others also observe it. We must understand that God will have glory from us, and not for us; and from others, by us. Sic luceat lux vestra: sicut ego, sicut tu; ego sicut tu, & tu sient ego. So let your light shine, &c. for, as I, as thou; I am as thou, and thou as I: not that you might be glorified, but that men seeing your good workes, may glorifie your Father which is in Heaven. Therefore there must be in us a care that God might be glorified both in our selves, and in others: and consequenly we must not be accessary to any evill, nor command any, whereby other mens sinnes may become ours. This sinne, it is committed either in things lawfull or unlawfull: unlawfull is called peccatum alienum,Quot modis rei fimus peccati alieni. How many waies we be∣come guilty of another mans sinne. 1. Iussio. In comman∣ding men sin. 1. By ungodly statute. 2. Without statute, by word of mouth. 3. Comman∣dement of one present. 4. Absent by writing. A man may commit sinne being farre of. a strange sinne: lawfull is called scandalum, offence. 1. In unlawfull things. For which they set downe nine waies; which may be brought to six: whereof the two first concerne Ma∣gistrates; the other foure concerne all men alike. In them this sinne is extended, if they command any thing that is evill, either in man∣ner of a law, Esay 10.1. Woe to them that decree wicked decrees, and write grievous things▪ &c. Dan. 3.4, 5, 6. Nebuchadnezar made the law for idolatry, the people are commanded by an Herald, at the sound of a Trumpet, &c. to goe fall downe and worship the golden image that he had set up. 2. 1 Sam. 22 18. Saul himselfe drawes not the sword, and falls on the Priests, yet for commanding Doeg, the mur∣der became his. Though the murder of the Priests was committed by Doeg, yet the offence rested on Saul for commanding Doeg. Acts 23.2, 3. Though Ananias rose not out of his seate to strike Paul, yet because he was stricken at his commandement, Paul calleth him painted wall for it, and denounceeth the judgement of God against him. This blow was extended to Ananias. 3. If we write, as David wrote, 2 Sam. 11.15. David did not put Ʋriah in the fore-front of the strength of the battell, but Joab; but because he wrote to Joab to put him in the fore-front, the murther of Ʋriah is attributed to him by Nathan. 1 King. 21.10. Jezebel was farre off when Naboth was stoned: but because she wrote to the Elders of Israel to proclaime a fast, and to set Naboth among the chiefe of the people, and to set wicked men to witnesse against him, and so to put him to death; she was made guilty of his death. The second, removens, prohibens, the removing of that which should be an impediment.2. Petmissio, con∣niventia. Permission, connivence. This is a mover to a second sinne: namely, the sinne of permission, or of winking at faults. When a man is in authority, though he command not an evill thing, yet because he is in authority, and so hath power to restraine evill doers; if he do not, he is in fault. Levit. 20.4, 5.
If the people of the land hide their eyes, and winke at that man, when he giveth his children to Moloch, and kill him not. 5. Then will I set my face against that man, and gainst his family; and will cut him off, &c. That is, if the people in whom it lay to redresse the fault, neglected to do it, and suffered the malefactor to live, the fault should have beene on their heads, and yet the malefactours should not escape unpunished. August. Man hath the sword committed into his hands, ut malus, si non demittat voluntatem, amittat facultatem peccandi, if a wicked man lay not aside the will, let him want the power and faculty of sinning. Of the civill Magistrate in a Common wealth, Rom. 13.4. the Apostle describing the civill Magistrate, he saith, that he beareth not the sword for nought: and telleth the end wherefore he beareth it; namely, to take vengeance of the evill doers. 2. The Ecclesiasticall Magistrate in the Church. 1 Cor. 5.2. There is a rule for Ecclesiasti∣call Magistrates. For he inveyeth against them of Corinth, for not executing Ecclesiasticall punishment upon an open offender, but suffered him to be in the Church. 3. Domesticall censure of the father on his children, 1 Sam. 3.13. And I have told him, that I will judge his house for ever, for the iniquity which he knoweth. Quia vidit filios indignè agere, & non prohibuit, For his sonnes ranne into a slander, and he stayed them not, was Elies offence; for which God told him, that he would judge his house for ever. So also, 1 Kings 20.42. Thus saith the Lord, because thou hast let goe out of thy hands, a man whom I had appointed to die, thy life shall goe for his life, and thy people for his people. The punishment that should have lighted on Benhadad for his sinne, lighted on Ahab, for suffering him to escape. He that suffereth an offender to escape unpunished, the state of that party shall be as the state of the party permitted. Iohn 19.16.Iohn 19, 16. Matth. 7.37. Mark. 15.1. Luke. 23.26. For a perpetuall oppro∣brie of Pilate, there is set downe, that he delivered Christ to the Jewes to be crucified. What a faire shew made he? what a doe kept he, in washing his hands before all the people, in protesting his innocence of Christs death? yet because he was the chiefe of the Province, and had authority to withhold the Jewes from kil∣ling Christ, he was guilty of the death of Christ. 1 Kings 1.6. Ado∣niahs wantonnesse and riot came on this occasion; because his fa∣ther David was loath to displease him from his childhood, nor would so much as say, why dost thou thus? What this permission will worke in the end, Adoniah by permission in his youth, after became ambitious and trayterous. And it pleaseth the Holy Ghost, throughout the whole course of the Bookes of Samuel and the Kings, to leave this as a blemish for wicked Kings. Quia non, &c. That they tooke not away the groves and high places, &c. that they per∣mitted the high places to stand. Therefore Augustine saith very well, Tu imple personam tuam, alioqui Deus & de te, & de illo implebit suam, Performe thou thy part, otherwise God will performe his, both upon thee, and upon him. Thou shalt be punished with the offen∣der; and its better ut sentiam lenitatem patrie, quam severitatem judi∣cis, that I feele the lenity of a father, then the severity of a Judge.3. Provoca∣tion. The other goe before action. 3. Provocation, provoking to sinne Pro∣vocation
is by two means: whether it be of a superiour or inferiour. 1. By daring: as Jobs wife, Iob 2.9. Dost thou continue in thine up∣rightnesse? blaspheme God and die. Or as when men be provoked to sweare, to anger, &c. 2. To provoke by alluring meanes. 1 Kings 21.25. Iezebel. Ahab sold himselfe to doe evill, whom Iezebel his wife pro∣voked. And Iob if he had beene tempted, no doubt his wife had beene guilty of it. And God is so farre from provoking, that he ta∣keth it cleane from the superiours to their inferiours. Ephes. 6.4. Fathers, provoke not your children, but bring them up in the feare of God. Generally, Galat. 5.26. Lets not be desirous of vaine-glory, provoking one another,4. Malum con∣silium. Evill counsel. envying one another. 4. Evill counsell or advice, Psal. 1.1. Blessed is the man, that hath not walked in the counsell of the ungodly. Genes. 49.6. Iacob lying in his deathbed, and calling his sonnes toge∣ther to blesse them, saith: Simeon and Levi, into their secret let not my soule come; my glory, be not thou joyned with their assembly. For in their wrath they slew a man, and in their selfe-will they digged downe a wall. The same prayer maketh Iob 21.16. Loe their wealth is not in their hand; therefore let the counsell of the wicked be farre from me. Ezra c. 4. v. 5. Privy Counsellers hired to hinder the building of the Temple. 2 Sam. 16.21. Absolon committed the incest with dis fathers concu∣bines: but the incest is layd to Ahitophel, that did put the counsell into his head. Marke 6.24. Herods wifes daughter, asked John Bap∣tists head in a platter, but Herodias the mother counselled her to aske it: and the blood of that godly man is laid to her charge. Iohn 11.49, 50. The sinne of the Jewes in desiring Christ to be crucified, came upon Caiphas his head, that gave them the advise. Acts 19.25. The uproare against Paul is laid to Demetrius the Silversmith; that counselled the rest of the handicrafts men, &c. These by ex∣tension are also condemned.5. Consensus. Consent. Consensus inter∣pretativus. Consent by interpreta∣tion. These two goe before. 5. The fault of consent. Consilium est instar agentis principalioris, consensus instar instrumenti, Counsell, is like the principall agent; consent like the instrument. Rom. 1.32. . Who knowing the judgement of God, (that they which commit such things, are worthy of death) not onely doe the same, but consent with them that doe them. Consensu peccatur, men sinne by consent; whether it be as the Lawyers say, consensu directo vel vero; vel interpretativo: by plaine consent, or consent by interpretation. 1 Tim. 5.22. . Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other mens sinnes: keepe thy selfe pure. Consent by interpretation, is, when a man is instru∣ment of an evill deed by his action, though in words he mislike it. 2 Sam. 11.16. Ioab is an instrument of evill: namely, Davids instru∣ment to kill Ʋriah. 2. And not onely that, but approbation also. Acts 8.1. Saul is said to have beene consenting to Stephens death, by onely keeping their clothes that stoned Stephen. Num. 16.26. Moses maketh all consenters to the rebellion of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, which stood by and would not depart from their tents. 3. Taking part in the gaine Ps. 50.18. When thou sawest a Thiefe thou consentedst to him,
and hast beene partaker with the adulterers. 4. Casting of lots, Prov. 1.14. Cast in thy lot among us, we will have all one purse. 5. Ano∣ther is consensus silentii, consent by silence. When a man is bound to withstand another mans sinnes, and doth it not, be doth after a sort consent to it. That he is bound to it, Levit. 19.17. a flat precept. This is commonest of all; the reason why this consent by silence is a sinne, is this: Augustine, ut malus sermo inducit in peccatum; sic malum silentium relinquit in peccato: as evill counsell leads men into sinne; so evill silence leaves men in sinne. 6. Is no doubt a kind by consent by interpretation; but its so speciall,6 Defending▪ &c. that it may be a kind of it selfe: namely, a defending, commending, flattering of other in their sinnes, excusing of them when they are done, &c. Pro 24.24. He that saith to the wicked, thou art righteous, him shall the people curse; and the multitude shall abhorre him, Prov. 16.29. Lactant amicos suos, & ducunt per viam non bonam, with faire words they deceive their friends, and lead them by a way which is not good. This lactatio peccatorum, this deceiving of sinners, is the way that leades to de∣struction, Ps. 55.22. Habent verba butyrina, they have words as smooth as Butter, but warre in their hearts. Their words were softer to him then Oyle, yet very swords. Let not their sweet words breake my head, but rather let the godly reprove me friendly, Rom. 16.18. , By good words and faire speeches they deceive the hearts of the simple. A woe pronounced against them, Esay 5.20. Woe to them that speake good of evill, and evill of good; which put darknesse for light, and light for darknesse; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. And Ezek. 13.10. they are said to be dawbers up of other mens sins, (And therefore because they have decei∣ved my people, saying, peace, when there is no peace: and one built up a wall, and behold the other dawbed it with untempered morter:) and in the 18. verse, they are called sowers of pillowes under other mens elbowes. We have example of this, 1 Kings 22. in Ahabs false Pro∣phets, verse 6. Goe up, for the Lord shall deliver it into the hands of the King. And especially in Zidkiah verse 11. that made himselfe hornes of Iron, saying, Thus saith the Lord, with these shalt thou push at the Aramites untill thou hast consumed them. And because Micaiah stood against him, he was smitten on the face, and sent away to prison. The rea∣son, why this sinne is so grievous, when a man commeth to com∣mend sinne, its a signe that his judgement and conscience are cor∣rupt. Non autem semper corrupta est mens malè operantis. At semper corrupta malè defendentis. The mind of him that worketh evill, is not alwaies corrupt; but the mind of him that defendeth evill, is ever corrupt. Scandalum. Scandall or offence.For scandalum, sic de eo statuendum, scandall or offence, thus we must determine of it. In a thing indifferent, if it be not de praecepto, of the precept. And if we know that by the omitting of it we shall doe good, and by the doing of it we shall doe hurt, peccatum est, si fiat, it is a sinne, if it be done. If it be commanded, potius scandalum admittatur, quàm veritas deseratur, let rather a scandall be suffered, then the truth should be deserted. If it be not de praecepto, of the pre∣cept;
or in praecepto, in the precept, and the manner of the doing of it be commanded, and I know that will offend my brother; I am yet bound not to doe it; but to stay, and no longer then I can in∣forme the party that is offended, that it is a lawfull meanes, that I use. But if after sufficient information, the party will still be offen∣ded, then it is scandalum acceptum, non datum, an offence taken, not given; and we may doe it. The second part.The rules of restraint. The second part: to make the restraint as narrow as may be. The Hebrewes said that there be universall precepts of the Scriptures, which we would judge like to particu∣lars, but beare a larger interpretation, are all enlarged as generals, either in the signification of the words, or in their derivations. This practise of enlarging and restrayning; the one hath beene a token of good interpreters, the other a marke of evill interpretors. August. de mendacio of a lye, saith, that the question still lyeth about the assumptions, Non ex regula veritatis, sed ex propria cupiditate; non quod ille fugiendum judicat, sed quod ipse magis horrescit. Not from the rule of truth, but from ones owne desire. Not that this man judgeth it a thing to be avoyded, but that another doth more detest it. As men in their private actions, so in interpretations wicked interpre∣tors keepe them to this rule, Math. 5. examples of both. The Pharises rules be narrow, though their phylacteries be abroad. The comman∣dement, Non jurabis, they restraine to either, Non pejerabis, vel non ju∣rabis per nomen Jehovae, Thou shalt not forsweare, or sweare by the name of Jehovah. But our Saviour by the first rule sheweth, that they are not to sweare at all, but that their conversation should be yea, yea, and nay, nay. Ʋt & amplificat etiam ab intentione Dei, as he doth also amplifie it, from the intention of God. He sheweth them that God would have his name, an end of all weighty controversies, but not of every foolish controversie; and so doth confound both theirs. Non occides, Thou shalt not kill. They restraine it to innocent men onely; but a man might revenge an injury offered to him. But Christ by the third rule of extention doth make anger and wrath, mur∣der; because its the seed of greater offence; and commands us to love our enemies. For the breach of wedlocke, Non moechaberis, Thou shalt not commit adultery: For the occasions they accounted not; but yet that was strange, that they might make as many di∣vorcements as they would; and that they might marry as many as they would. But Christ by the fourth rule of extention, doth ex∣clude even the occasions, Luk. 10.25. The parable of the Samaritan, an expounder of the Law, and Christ rest on this terme Neighbour; which they restrained onely to them that dwelt neere them: but Christ by the rule of aequipollens, extendeth it to every man. So Christs interpretings warrant extensions: Though it be true that the Rabbins say, that its necessary to extend and to restraine; but more necessary the first:The rules of restraint lesse necessary, then the rules for extending. yet rules must be set downe of restraint also. A rule. Consuetudo est optima legum interpres, Custome is the best interpreter of the law, in mans judgement; but in the inter∣pretation of Gods Law its most false; its the worst interpretor. In
civill law, communis error facit jus, common errour makes a law,Consuetudo est optima legum humanarum in∣terpres, divinarū pessima. Custome is the best ex∣pounder of hum ne laws, but of divine lawes the worst. say they: but in Gods Law, its no rule. Consuetudo cedat authoritati divinae, custome must yeeld to divine authority. These rules have no place in the ten Commandements, there is no errour can plead custome, or so common, ut faciat jus, it make a law. If this could have beene, its no question but the interpretation of the seventh Commandement would have beene good of polygamy; for it had prevailed amongst them 3000. yeeres. But its condemned by Malac. 2. and of Christ out of him. The like is of divorce; which was an ordinary custome from Moses to Christ, his daies. If Iehosphat walk not after Gods law, but after the custome of Israel, he is blamed: if he leave not Ahabs society, he is of the same society. The reason why custome is to give place to Gods lawes. In the positive law of man, its necessary to sever in every law jus positivum, & naturae: ut necessariò consequatur repetitio: & repetitio arguit & praesupponit de∣liberationem, The positive law, and the law of nature: and necessa∣rily must follow a reherasing: now this repetition argues and pre∣supposes a deliberation. And oftentimes . This is their custome, the afterwit is better then the former. But the law of God was set downe at the first so wisely, that it cannot come into the forge of man: no afterwit can be better then this way in the law of God. Howsoever it goeth with mans law, yet in Gods lawes usus authoritati cedat. Per principium in lege Dei omnia exami∣nanda, Let custome give place to authority. In the Law of God all things are to be tryed by the principle. How many waies we may finde, where a commandement hold∣eth not. 3. Rules. 1. That which every Prince challengeth to himselfe, a prerogative royall to dispense with his owne positive law. It commeth à dispensando, from dispensing; which is nothing else, but to doe as a Steward of a family doth.Dispensatio con∣tinua est privi∣legium. A continued dispensation is a privilege. Superveniente causa princeps habet potestatem dispensandi legem. Vpon just cause the Prince may dispense with the law. Tertullians answer to the Heathen. The Stewards office is to allot to every man his portion of meate in due season, either more or lesse, as he seeth that every man needeth. This if it be con∣tinuall, is called a priviledge. This being granted to earthly Princes, with a greater right it may be granted to God. For their dispensa∣tions commonly proceed from their will, which may be corrupt: but Gods will is the rule of all justice: there can be no danger in his dispensations. This is their rule. Quod licitum est, mutatur exsuper∣veniente causa, what is lawfull, is changed by the accession of a new cause. So in some cases God hath restrained his law, but very sel∣dome dispensed; such a thing is in the Law of God, though not so common. The warrant of this is either first by his word, the image of the brazen serpent, against the second Commandement. Or se∣condly, by ratifying by signes, blessing them by extraordinary gifts, above the cours of mankind For these dispensations or exemptions from the common law, because they be priviledges, they are to be restrained to the persons, to whom they were granted; as in the doings of the Prophets, these warrants now cease. Quae exorbitant à jure communi, non sunt trahenda in consequentiam, vel argumento argu∣menti, vel exemplo. This is a maxim. These things which swerve from
common right, are not to be drawne into consequence, either for proofe of an argument, or for example. Though we be willing to make many restraints, yet there are but few: and if we make more, great injury is done to God. Its a commendation of a law, to have fewest priviledges, (for where there are fewest dispensations, there is most equity,) as he said of Rome, that all the good Emperours might be graven on the one side of a penny: and therefore great injury done to God in it, granting they were. Therefore in Gods, they should be, & are fewest. The slaughter of Phineas, the marriage of Oseah, the robbery of the Egyptians, are not restraints: for this is certaine, that though they were, yet they are not for us: they are not for our times, neither have we the signe of the voice of God for them. And it may be proved substantially, that many things in the old Testament, which are thought to be restraints, were not, but kept to the uttermost. This is to stop the mouth of vaine per∣sons, that cannot uphold themselves but with the distinction of or∣dinary and extraordinary: and indeed, all the stirre now adaies is about the limiting of ordinary and extraordinary. The conclusion is, we have but little use of this rule. 2. Rule. Natura praecepti The nature of the precept.2. Rule. By the nature of a precept, that in sundry cases it giveth a restraint: the nature of the fift Commandement, to honour supe∣riours, Princes having none upon earth, are exempted. The nature of the fourth Commandement, one day in seven: And this restraint troubleth them, that fancy a perfecter righteousnesse. The conti∣nuall practice of an affirmative, is part of a precept. The rule of the affirmative precept, Semper tenemur bonum facere: sed non tene∣mur bonum facere semper. Affirmat: tenet semper; negat: tenet semper & ad semper. We are bound alwaies to do good, but we are not bound to worke alwaies. The affirmative precept must needs be restrai∣ned, the negative not so. Some thinke themselves bound to thinke on nothing but God. The negative indeed holdeth at all times; the affirmative doth not. Augustine, Miro modo homo etiam ex amore Dei, on cogitat de Deo, After an unspeakable manner, a man even from the love of God, thinketh not of God. Even as a man from the use of reason, ceaseth from the use of reason, this is plaine by a fami∣liar example, as in sleepe. So in abstaining from a good worke, he doth a good worke. Quemadmodum homo ex usu rationis caret, vel cessat ab usu rationis; sic ex amore Dei, abstinet ab amore Dei. The rea∣son is, the nature of doing a good thing well, standeth thus: that there must be a concurring of all due cases and circumstances be∣longing thereto. Malum ex singularium defectu oritur, bonum è causa integra, Evill ariseth from the defect of any one cause, but good springs from a whole and intire cause. Now all these circumstan∣ces cannot alwaies concurre, and so consequently cannot alwaies be kept. Therefore in respect of the affirmative part we are exemp∣ted by the nature of it. And secondly, the ardour of affection that is required in doing good, sheweth that it cannot continue in a per∣petuity. This also is not of so great use. The third rule is of greatest use.. Rule. This by sundry occasions re∣ceiveth
sundry judgements, A conflict of lawes. and yet they may be reduced to one rule. The case is called , a conflict of two lawes. The Jewes say, when two Commandements make one another a lyer, till a third commeth and maketh them agree; by restraining one of them. This therefore is for a rule, Nemo unquam ita perplexus est inter duo peccata, quin illi pateat exitus sine tertio, No man is so perplexed be∣twixt two sinnes, but that a way out lyeth open without a third. And if it were not so, it should argue a great want of knowledge in God. 2. How we shall be able to rid our selves out of both sine tertio peccato, without a third sinne. Either the 2. precepts may be compounded and reconciled, or not reconciled. If they may be agreed upon, then there is no necessity that a third come: but we may dimittere erroneam opinionem, let goe the erroneous opinion. As in Herod, If he had let go his oath, his perpetuity had been none. After his promises and oath, he was in such a perplexity, that he ima∣gined, that he must either breake his oath, or put John Baptist to death: he should let goe his opinion, and let Iohn Baptists head stand still. For if he had let goe his oath, he had committed no more sinne, then before. If they cannot be agreed upon, Tum agat id, ad quod est magis ob∣ligatus, then let him doe that, to which he is more bound. Whose end is superiour, Cantic. 2. Dominus or dinavit in nobis charitatem, his banner over us was love. He hath set one law above another: all must not come together. The rule in reason and judgement, Ʋbi est principium, ibi digerendae sunt res ad illud principium, Where a principle is, there, things are to be directed to that principle. The chiefe end is Gods glory. 2. The soule and health of man; the health of every man. 3. The like care of our brethren. In respect of the glory of God, the health of man must fall to the ground, Vt misericordia pateat, that mercy may be manifested. That God might have the glory, and he purchace to himselfe mercy. But that the justice of God may have his glory, salvation must be denied to o∣ther, our health before our brethren, we may not commit sinne to deliver them from sinne. Therefore a man must have speciall re∣gard of himselfe. The first Table doth bind more then the second. The health of our owne soules to be preferred before our bre∣threns. The reason is, because none can deliver his brother from sinne, Sed corpus non praeferendum, but the body is not to be prefer∣red. We must hazzard this life for our brothers soule. This being set downe, we see the end of the first Table, being Gods glory, the second the health of our selves and our brethren, here is an order: we are more bound to the first, then to the second Table: but that as Augustine saith in the love of God, this poyson of the love of temporall commodity, and feare of temporall displeasure, blinds our eyes: so many times the conflict of the first Commandement, and the fifth, Obey God, and obey your Rulers: When this  conflict of the lawes fals out, its easie to determine it. The second precept obedience, which is nothing else but to be moved at the commandement of a superiour; and common sense may tell us, that
if a stronger arme hold me, then that which should raise or remove me, I shall never rise, nor be removed. But Gods authority, whose Proconsuls on earth are Magistrates, is more then their authority. His arme is stronger to hold me in his obedience. This is a rule in reason, Modus impeditur, ubi fortior vis detinet. Motion is hindred, when a stronger force holds us backe. And this is one case, wherein superiours are not to be obeyed. Another is, whereas nothing is to move, ultra speciem suam, beyond his owne bonds, as if a fire be made to heate onely, it must not drie too: so, quando excedunt regulā dominationis suae, when they exceed the limits of their authority, (as if a Captaine should send forth his souldiers out of the Campe into the field to feed sheep: its more then he can doe, and the souldier is not bound to do it.) God hath limitted their authority, he hath shortned their arme: therefore there needs to be no perplexity in this. There is a maxim in our Common Law, Iuris interpretatio non debet laedere jus regium. The interpretation of the Law, ought not to wrong the Royall right, the Kings preroga∣tive. And if there be not a restraint of Obedite praeposit is vestris, Obey those that are set over you, we shall prejudice Gods authority royall: and what is this else, but laedere jus regium, to wrong royall autho∣rity. For they are but  servants and Ministers. Base termes goe not. Papinian an heathen man, but one which for the testimony of justice was content to leave his life (his grave may beseeme Christians) his rule was, whereby he interpreted all his lawes, Potior semper sit ea ratio, quae pro religione facit, let that reason ever be preferred, which makes for religion. Now after that we have compared both the Tables, and shewed the conflict betweene them, we are to shew the conflict in both se∣verally. In the first Table, three Commandements are perpetuall, one temporall; cedat temporale aeterno, let the temporall give place to the eternall. Therefore the fourth in the first: if it come in compari∣son with any of the other, it may be violated: the rest of the Sab∣bath may be broken, that Gods Name may be sanctified: In the second Table, Non occides, Thou shalt not kill; Therefore that being the Table of justice; and we know that the nature of justice is, Ʋt cuivis detur debitum, nulli fiat indebitum, that due be given to every one; what is not due, be done to none. An innocent man may not be slaine, but he that deserveth it, Si non lingua demittat voluntatem peccandi, amittat potestatem, If the tongue let not go the will to sin, let it lose the power. Either he is to fulfill the Law faciendo quod debet, or patiendo quod debet, by doing what he ought, or by suffering what he ought. Or the Magistrate in Gods right is to punish him. If any of the other come in comparison with the fift Commandement, its to give place; because that is de communi bono, of the common good: the other de privato, of the private: and commune privato praeferen∣dum, common is to be preferred before private; generall before particular. Order in the first Table: 1. Commandement, est cultu animae. 2. Totius corporis. 3. Partis praecipuae, is of the worship of the soule. The second, of the whole body. The third, of the chiefe part.
Order in the second Table; that which is common before that which is private: in the state of a damage, damage of life before damage of chastity; in chastity, before in goods; in goods, before fame. For goods a real thing, but fame nothing else but a depravati∣on of the opinion of other men, grounded on a naturall reason. Cujus finis superior, illud praeferatur. Whose end is superiour, let that be preferred. We are more restrained in actions, then in word; and in word, more then in thought. life is more precious then chastity, chastity then substance, substance then fame; there can be no better order then that which God hath set downe, Ordinavit Deus charitatem, God hath appointed love. There remaineth a third case, and that is this: A Commande∣ment is doubtfull, either by obscurity in the chiefe sentence; or by a word of ambiguity, that may beare two senses or more: or by controversie, when there is an hearing on both sides, so that men cannot agree; for it pleased certaine wits to bring in controversies that need not. We must have a direction for this: Augustine, writing on Rom. 14. In nullo debet opinio vacillare, Opinion ought to waver in nothing. He saith, if that be true, how shall many doe, that though in words they be very resolute, yet inwardly may vacillare, waver; and no man seeth, but God seeth, and consequently no man restrai∣neth them? There is no other way, saith he, then tene rectum, di∣mitte incertum, hold the right; let goe the doubtfull: the counsell is good, whatsoever a man doth, let him doe it with full confidence. How shall we doe it? quicquid non est cum rectâ ratione, poenale est: whatsoever is not done with a full setled perswasion, is sinne. 1. Ob∣scurity;1. Obscurity. when both parts confesse, that they cannot tell what to make of such a word, or phrase in the sentence, or of such a place. In those places that are mysticall and have allegories, the safest way is, that men be not too bold, but rather to take of the lesse, then of the more. A rule, In obscuris minimum. That is, if we be not certaine how much he meant, it is best to take it with the lowest; for if he meant the most, sure it is that he meant the least: not on the con∣trary. We must be as sober as we may in mysteries. 2. Ambiguity.2. Ambiguity. Where there is a word that wil beare two senses; Christian wisdome will do best, if we include both senses; least happily the Holy Ghosts sense be not that which we leane to. Example of it, 1 Pet. 5.2.  Feed the Flock that is among you. He includeth both sen∣ses. 3. For controversies. When both think very plain and great rea∣son may be brought on both sides; in controversiis maximum.3. Controver∣sies. Its best to take it at the farthest, to follow that part that includeth most: as in the question of Usury; some thinke it is altogether unlawfull: some thinke it unlawfull in some case. A man shall be safest,Its the nature of man to run over a minute long, and then his hand to be shortned. if he lay not out his money at all to Usury. That will make his heart lightest, when the sorrows of death will make it most heavie. Its the nature of a minute long to run over. A man is a niggard of his hand, and prodigall of his tongue. Its best therefore, & Christian wisdome, to doe with the most, and speake with the least. These our common
restrainers count but little things. And for doing with the most, we must be sure to follow the rule of the wise man, Non negligere mini∣ma, not to neglect the least. God saith, Qui minima spernit, paulatim decidit,A father: Non put are mi∣nimum, non neg∣igere minima. Not to sup∣pose the least not to neglect the least. 3 In queque praecepto obser∣vanda. Three things observable in every Commande∣ment. he that despises the least, decayes by little and little. If thy eye cause or occasion thee to doe evill, cut it out. Instandum in mi∣nimis, we must be instant in the least. To avoid the occasions of evill, our safest way is, to beware of the Serpents counsell, and to command Eve, and our concupiscence not to looke upon the tree. This is to be done in cases of controversie. Three speciall points to be observed, through the whole course of the Commandements. 1. The three first, and the five last Com∣mandements, they runne in the second person singular, Thou shalt not doe this or that, &c. Gods stile is not like the stile of the lawes of the heathen; that runnes in the third person plurall, Deos adeunto castè, &c. let them approach the Gods chastly. 2. That for the most part they runne in the negative (onely two excepted) the three first, and the five last. 3. They runne in the future tense, the fourth and the fifth ex∣cepted, eight of them. For the first, we see in Deut. 5. God begin∣neth and speaketh to Israel, as to one man: Audi Israel, Non hbebis Deos alienos coram me, Heare Israel, thou shalt not have strange Gods before me. He speaketh to all, and to all alike: as to the basest of the army, so to Moses and Aaron. Its an argument of equality in re∣spect of the bond of observing the law of God: none is more accep∣ted for it than another: therefore by vertue of that Non moechaberis, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Nathan said to David, Tu es homo. Thou art the man. And John Baptist to Herod, though he were a King, Non licet tibi, &c. It is not lawfull for thee. So on the other side it leaveth us not in a generality, that we may slip our necks: but its in the second person; which whosoever heareth or readeth, its as forcible, as if there were so man y Tu's, as there are persons that heare it. So for application its best, because every man hearing it spoken in the second person, applieth it streight to himselfe, and is as forcible, as if he applied his speech to every particular thing that every man had done. 2. The negative: and therein we have a confirmation of the contrary: of the negative its said in Logicke, ad plura se extendit negatio, quàm affirmatio, The negative extends farther then the af∣firmative. It was Gods purpose to have his Commandements bea∣ten out so farre, as the rules of extention used by Christ, would suffer: and though ad negationem non sequitur affirmatio oppositi, unto a negative, the affirming of the contrary doth not follow; yet the rule in Logicke holdeth onely in bare affirmations and negations; not in commanding and forbidding: for in lawes, qui prohibet impedimen∣tum, praecipit adjumentum. His intent is to have a thing done, when he will have the impediments taken away. Qui negat prohibens, jubet promovens. He commandeth the helpe, who taketh away the im∣pediment. 2. Its an admonition to us, to shew us how full of impediments
we are by nature, that we must heare of many lets, before we can come to heare what is commanded. A no, before a yea. How full of weeds our nature is; that it is not capable of a Commande∣ment, but of a countermand. We are not capable of God before we are weeded of that which is evill. The future tense, i. that as its , a secret signe of our transgressions past: so that for the times to come, its uncertaine what we will be. But for the times past, we know what we have beene; grievous offenders. A warning concer∣ning the inclineablenesse of our nature in time to come, that even then we are as ready to doe wickedly, as before we were. For as there is one that will say, Non facies, Thou shalt not doe; so there is another that will say as fast, facies, thou shalt doe. Evill suggestion, evill example, our owne corrupt nature and satan, will egge us for∣ward: therefore we must keepe a diligent watch, abridge our selves of things lawfull, we must flie from the smoke, from all ap∣pearance of evill, that the body of sinne may not reigne in us. So in the second, it argueth a continuall keeping of the law, so long as we live. A future tense not restrayned, bindeth a man for ever. it is for to morrow, and so to our lives end. Therefore our warfare against sinne must be to blood, and to death: and before that we are not discharged of the law, as saith the Apostle to the Hebrews. Mandatum pri∣mum. The first Commande∣ment.. The end of the law is, to make a man good. Here two things: 1. As farre as may be, the impediments must be remo∣ved, that we may keepe the law: as when a building is to be made up, or in ministring cure, or in casting seed into the ground. If there be a tree that standeth where the building should be reared up, it must first be cut downe: or if the ground be not dry and steddy, its not meet for a building: so where the whole body is corrupt, or some member hath nothing but dead flesh; as in bodily, so in spiri∣tuall physicke, there is first a cutting a way of the dead flesh, then the curing. So Jer. 4.4. there is a laying fallow the ground. For this God hath provided in his Law, that the Commandements they run negatively; and that in the very beginning, there is a removing, Non habebis, thou shalt not have. 2. The second thing followeth, Prima primò, that that be done first, which is in order first: as in a building, the foundation is first; in the naturall generation of the members, the heart. This also is done, the first being, Thou shalt have no other Gods before me. Scopus primi mandati. The scope of the first Comman∣dement.Then to observe our former rules: Its said, Fines mandatorum sunt diligenter observandi, the end of the Commandements are dili∣gently to be observed. We must first know what intent God had in giving this Commandement. The end of the law, , to beget good. Its said that the generall end of this Commande∣ment, 1 Cor. 10.31. is the glory of God; of the first table, godlinesse, holinesse, or religion. Religion being an action, must needs pro∣ceed from something: and so it doth. For that that it commeth from, is the soule of man; and principally from the spirit of it. In that regard it is compared, Matth. 12.35. Luke 6.45. to a treasure-house, out of which good men bring good things; evill men, evill
things: for that as the furniture of any part of the house commeth from thence; so in like state is it of outward worship of the tongue, the hand, the eye; it commeth de bon thesauro cordis, out of the good treasure of the heart; if it be good, our worship will be good: as mala de malo, Mat. 15.19. The breaches of it commeth from thence, , For out of the heart proceed evill thoughts, murders, adul∣teries, fornications, thefts, false witnesse, blasphemies. This then we see, in as much as this is principall, 1. Regard must be had of his spirituall worship: and its the scope of the first Com∣mandement. Its said, that according to the superiour end, the Com∣mandement is esteemed: quo prior finis, eo prior necessitas, the more principall the end is, the more prime the necessity. The first table, before the second, Mar. 2.27. man was made the end of the Sabbath, not the Sabbath the end of man: therefore the breach of the out∣ward part of the Sabbath must yeeld to the health of man. This is generall; the higher the end, the nearer the necessity. Therefore this precept is primae necessitatis, of chiefe necessity. This was never dispensed with, nor ever shall be. Now we come to the second. Which is the first rule in extension to the affirmative part of the Commandement. The negative was, Thou shalt have none other Gods. The affirmative part is set downe, Matth. 4.10. Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him onely shalt thou serve. And in his allegation out of Deut. 6.13.10.20. Thou shalt worship one God; or to answer the negative, Thou shalt have me alone for thy God. This is done in the third rule, which is the drawing of it into particular branches. The second rule herein is best. First, to follow the plaine order, and to see how many propositions will naturally arise out of it; and they be three: First, we must have a God. Se∣condly, we must have him for our God. Thirdly, we must have him alone for our God. So you see, The affirmative as a proposition, com∣pounded of three propositions. Propositiones primi mandati. The Propositi∣ons of the first Commande∣ment.First, that we should have a God; the meaning of this, that we should not be our selves Gods: (which was the beginning of all mischiefe:) judging of good and evill by our owne choice: but to knowledge a superiour nature, and of him to take our rules, to follow God and abstaine from evill, and not to stand to our owne mind. 2. That this nature thus teaching us what is good and evill, and promising to bring us to the full fruition of all good things: by the contrary, we should acknowledge him, and tie our selves to him. This acknowledging or tying our selves to him, is to have a religion; and so consequently, that we should worship him, and have our religion from him. 2. The second. That we must have him for our God. The mea∣ning of it is this: that the gods of the Nations are nothing but Idols, and no Gods; and consequently, that their services are false. But Jehovah our God, who hath shewed himselfe to be a true God, he is the God indeed; and his religion is the true religion: and there∣fore that we should give over them, and their religion: and con∣secrate
our selves to him and his worship; and here is commanded true religion. 3. That we should have him alone. The meaning is, that there is not one of those Gods, and indeed none besides God, that hath revealed or can performe eternall blessednesse to us; or that can joyne with him, and helpe him in performance: but he alone is able and willing; and consequently as he alone doth, and will do it, so he will onely have all the glory to himselfe; he will have none to be joyned with him in it. Profanenesse. Peccata contra∣ria virtutibus mandati. Sins contrary to the vertues of the Com∣mandements.1. The sinne of the first of these, of not having a God, but fol∣lowing our owne mind, is called prophanenesse; when a man will have his owne liking in every thing, so that he will doe that onely that seemeth good in his owne eyes, when he will have no yoke, no cords, no bonds, but will breake them; giving credit to nothing but that which his owne reason, his God, perswadeth him unto: and pursuing nothing but that his will standeth well affected unto. And doe nothing but by his owne direction. 2. The sinne of the second is false worship, or whatsoever false religion it be, it pleaseth the Holy Ghost here to call it other gods.2. Cultus peregri∣nus. Strange wor∣ship. As in the Scriptures he calleth all evill by the name of strange: as strange flesh, an harlot: strange worship, idolatry: strange gods, false gods. This is secondly forbidden. 3. Idolatry, Samarita∣nisme.3. The sinne of the third. That which Elias found such fault with: namely, halting on both sides, mingling Gods religion with others; following both God and Baal, as the Samaritans did, having an Altar on the one side of the Temple, and the image of an idoll on the other: joyning God together with other Gods and idols. These are three speciall things that the divell shooteth at; and hath helpes in our nature to bring his purpose to passe; when he tooke upon him first, the name of (Belus) Belial (which is being without the yoke) that he would lay no yoke upon any, he would force him to nothing then that he was willing to follow himselfe: and therefore this was his way in his first tentation, that Adam was now yoked, that he must be underaw, and that he needed a dire∣ctor; whereas if he would but taste of the Apple, he should be a guide to himselfe, and should doe whatsoever he thought good, and that he should appoint good and evill himselfe. This vaine licentiousnesse, wherein men according to their corrupt nature, de∣light dissolutely to follow their concupiscence, and in all things to sit Judges, to define good and evill, is the greatest way to trans∣gression, and a degree of profanenesse and Atheisme. So in the second place, there is a marvellous desire in us of cove∣ting newnesse; change for our eye; stolne bread, privy matters, strange flesh: and this he taketh hold of, and strengthneth as much as he can: and where prophanenesse prevaileth, he faileth not of bringing them to a curious desire to seeke beyond the truth, till at the last they finde a lye instead of it, such as he brought Salomon to: who having the knowledge of true religion, as much as any man had, was not content with that, but fell to seeking after strange
religions abroad:Salomonis idolo∣latria curiositate oriunda. Salomons Ido∣latry procee∣ded from cu∣riosity. And there was never any errour sowne, but it grew upon a misliking of the truth in that point; and an inordinate desire of seeking after new misteries and conceits. In the third, there is also in us a great desire to reconcile God and mammon: and though our Saviour said flatly, that it was impossible to serve both; yet we seeke to the attaining of temporall commo∣dities, to have a Paradise here, and elsewhere. There is a desire in us, to make our selves common to all, and to use a freenesse or friendlinesse to all,A desire to make our selves com∣mon to as many as can be, and so to be loved of all. good and bad: thinking that while we are in the world, the world will doe us good; and when we come into Hea∣ven, God will doe us good also. This the divell misliketh not; for he runneth not on soli, vel tantum, to himselfe alone, or onely; for when he tempted Christ, and had promised to give him all the Kingdomes of the earth if he would fall downe and worship; his desire was not that he onely should be worshipped, but that hee might be joyned to God, and have part of the service with him. Now the reasons whereby these are forbidden: 1. We must con∣fesse,Contra ha duae rationes. Against these two reasons. that the nature of man hath received a great wound, insomuch as none can be partaker of his hearts desire, as other creatures have in some state. And therefore the heathen with us confesse a maime in mans nature. But we know the cause of it, (being enformed by the history of the Bible, what befell to man:) namely, that it is by dealing with the tree, by being our owne choosers: and therefore this choosing of ours must be left, and we are to tye our selves to the will and choice of our superiour nature, that knoweth best what is best for us. 2. Of the second, the reason is evident; that when we have a God, we should desire to have the true God: no man would erre, even they that bend themselves to deceive others, cannot abide to be deceived themselves. None would thinke that to be, that is not; or that not to be, that is. 3. The reason of the third is, that there be sundry things that a man cannot have but alone: in which number is a master. God therefore is to be had alone, else not. God so comparing himselfe, to a master, Mala. 1.6. No man can serve two masters: the service to a master, must be alone, or else not. Oseah 2.20. where he maketh God to say, Sponsabo te mihi in fide, I will marry thee unto me in faithfulnesse. As also, 2. Cor. 11.2. that he had espoused the faithfull to one husband Christ. A master and husband must be had alone. This is a 2. consideration; for an hus∣band also must be had alone. So the having of God is of like nature: either we must have him alone, or none at all. God in jealousie, in the second Cōmandement, hath a relation to this. If a farther reason be required; that will be sure to serve, and that is, that the joyning of any thing with God, must needs abase him and his worship. For he being the excellentest nature in the world, all inferiour things, if they be joyned with him, abase him, and he will not be abased. Therefore this worship must be kept pure, without mingling it with any other worship. Whatsoever being of a nobler substance, if it be joyned with any viler thing, it is adultery. This for the three pro∣positions.
Propositio prima. Habebis Deum. The first pro∣position. Thou shalt have a God. Object. A doubt how we can be without God.Now the consideration of the first proposition, 1. Habebis Deum, 1 Cor. 8.4. , For an idoll is nothing in the world. Its said, that an idoll is nothing, and we know it. And consequently, if he be God, and an idoll nothing, there can be no other God but he: and therefore it cannot be a God, and so not joyned with him. Therefore this must needs be strange, to command us that we must needs have a God, a true and alone God. We must learn to distinguish of the word (have) and so we come unto the particular precept, non facies, Thou shalt not make. As we say, though a man take Armes against his Prince, yet she is his Prince still, and he hath none other: and this having is in re∣gard of the superiority; yet he himselfe hath her not, or at the least will not have her, because he accounteth her not his Prince. The like is betweene God and us: In regard of the superiour, it is ferrea frons vel lex, an yron law; we must needs have him: and therefore it were best for us to have him. Yet in as much as we would exempt our selves from his service and obedience; they that rise up against him in the breach of any of these three propositions, with those that acknow∣ledge him not, or would not have him, they have him not. Its the course of the Holy Ghost, to use this phrase in the Prophets, They had Baalim and Astaroth: Not that they were Gods, or any thing, but that in their account they had them for Gods, in the superiour part. We are said to have a thing, when we have it and acknow∣ledge it not; or when we have it and acknowledge it. We are said to have a thing (saith the Philosopher) if it be knowne to be had. For if a man have treasure digged in his ground, or in his Cellar, and know not of it; he hath it not. So the Nations that know not God, are said not to have had God. 2. That a man hath not that which a man accounteth not of: as a man hath rushes & cobwebs in his house, yet he is not to be said to have thē; or because he careth not whether he have them or no. Into these two parts, all the breaches of this fall. Thou shalt have a God. i. First thou shalt worship a God. Worship, in Mat. 4.10. doth expound, have, in this place. It was said that the spiri∣tuall worship of God, or having of God, is the end and scope of this Commandement. The worship of the spirit or soule is divided as the soule is divided, and that also falleth into the division of having. The parts of the soule, as God maketh them, Deut. 6.5. are reason or understanding, called the soule. 2. The affection or will, called the Heart. Therefore they are foolish schoolemen, that expound by the heart, the body of man. So the duety of the mind being to know, (as is abovesaid in the treatise) of the heart and appetite to regard: love falleth right to this. But under the division, for the well expounding of the parts; we must labour for the true sense of this. Therefore as we know the parts of the mind, so we must know that these parts have their order. Vires animae sunt ordinatae, the powers of the soule are set in order, saith the Philosopher. The order is this; that we must know it before we can regard it and love it. For ignoti nulla cupido, there is no love of that we know not, the Philosopher. That invisa possumus cupere, incognita nequaquam, we may covet things unseene, but never things unknown, Augustin. Therefore they say well, where two things be in order, if the first be taken away, the second shall never be fulfilled. So if ignorance be brought in, God shal never be desired, nor loved: and so not had.
The first kowledge: He must be knowne: and that standeth first, the duty of the mind, and understanding part. 2. Love, he must be loved, esteemed; the duty of the second part, the heart or will. Now the end of knowledge, is but the fulnesse of perswasion, a set∣led beliefe, which we call faith; both the meanes and end of know∣ledge. And therefore comprehended in the first part: as the fulnesse of regard and love is nothing else but obedience. But to make it more plaine: let the mind begin, that we may first know God: know∣ledge must have its object, and that is God. He cannot be knowne à priore, in himselfe; therefore we must seeke to know him à posteriore: and that is, by his attributes and effects. For his Attributes, they are those ten set downe Exod. 34.6, 7. His Majesty, Truth, Ʋnchangeablenesse, Will, Justice, Mercy, Knowledge, Power, Ʋbiquity, Eternity. Of these, two especially are called principall, and concerne us most, his Justice and Mercy; the other 8. are called com∣muniter ad dno, common to two; because they fall into these two alike. So knowledge in fulnesse, 1. proceeding to faith, apprehendeth, 1. the Justice of God. 2. his Mercy: and beleeveth them both. Adde the other 8. to his Iustice, that he is of infinite majesty, infallibly true, &c. and they make it more perfect, and consequently more fearefull: adde them also to his Mercy, that he that loveth us, is King of eternall life, &c. and it maketh his Mercy more, and consequently farre more to be beloved. Out of this faith or knowledge▪ proceeding of his justice, there proceedeth feare; and out of it humility. These out of Justice, the first part; and out of the knowledge and faith of mercy, with the other 8. proceed two duties more: one hope, who would not hope? 2. Fructus spei invocatio, & precatio est interpres spei. The fruit of hope, invocation, prayer is the interpreter of hope. By prayer or thankes∣giving, i. to acknowledge from whom we have received it. Love hath his effect and fruit. Love is full in obedience: which is a conforming of our selves and our will, to the Will of God. Or a bearing willingly of whatsoever it pleaseth God to lay on us, for not conforming our selves to him in this life: and that is called pati∣ence, obedientia crucis, the obedience of the Crosse. In these the ha∣ving of God doth wholly consist: and there can be no other duety added to them. We must understand this, that it pleaseth the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures, by the figure Synecdoche, for shortnesse of speech, sundry times to name one of these, and thereby to meane and comprehend the whole worship of God. As Iohn 17.3. all is given to knowledge. This is life eternall, that they know thee, &c. In another place all to feare. And in another place, all to hope, &c. In the rest under the name of one synecdochicall to comprehend all the other.Virtutes 2. & 3. propostionis. Vertues of the second and thrd propo∣sitions.  shall not be, must be per∣petuall. And not without good reason: for they have a very good dependance one of the other. Now to these we must adde the duty of the second proposition. 1. true religion: and out of the third proposition, pure religion: against joyning it with other worship. And beside these, out of the word  shall be, which is the future tense: to consent to it in our life, till this non erit,  shall not be, devoure our erit,  shall be. It inclu∣deth
the verture of perseverance, through all the Commandements. And coram facie mea, before my face; includeth sincerity and singlenes of heart: for our heart is as well before his eyes, as our other parts: & contrariwise condemneth hypocrisie. These make up the manner of his worship. In the resolution of the first Commandement, the first thing in it,Knowledge. is knowledge: of which in regard of the excellency and dignity of it, Iohn writeth thus, ch. 17. v. 3. , &c. This is eternall life, that they know thee. In the handling of these severall ver∣tues, as before in the explication of the Commandement, we must follow those rules, that we have set downe.Ʋsus & neces∣sitas cognitionis Dei. The use and necessity of the know∣ledge of God. The first thing concer∣ning knowledge, is the use of it: and thence the necessity of it. The necessity out of this place; that knowing, we must attaine everlasting life. And forasmuch as life everlasting is so much worth to us, and without this knowledge we lost it; but we are dull by our owne na∣ture, therefore we are to seeke a further provocation. We must there∣fore adde that Ier. 9.24. where God plucketh from us all our Peacock feathers; as gifts of nature, as wisdome, gentry, riches, strength, &c. and chargeth not to rejoyce in them, but in that we know God. But let him that glorieth, glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me. And herein only must we glory. But as we said, it is not the excellency that can so strike into us, our dull hearts; but they cannot desire to be ex∣cellent. But because we cannot be without it, when we come to shew that we must needs have it, that is, ferrea ratio, a hard reason. If he finde us ignorant, that we cannot doe agendum, i. the law being our agend; and no action can be without moving, and no moving without the will; and no will, without desire; and no desire, without a thing knowne: therefore take away knowledge, and take away all; and so nothing shall be done, and consequently we shall become idle. Not but that we shall doe; for evill men are practicall. But our knowledge being deprived of the true end, we must needs erre in false ends and waies, and so wander and never come to the right end; but to another end; and so consequently end in darknesse, deprived of the fruit, for which we came into the world. So that Rom. 10.14. it is true, that with∣out hearing there can be no knowledge; (and therefore is hearing called the sence of knowledge.) without knowledge, no beliefe; without beliefe,Auditus scientiae sensus. Hearing the sense of knowledge. no love; without love, no obedience: and therefore that knowledge is ne∣cessary to obedience. ; How shall they call on him in whom they have not beleeved? and how shall they beleeve in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they heare without a preacher? Rom. 10.14. 2. There is in all these vertues, an inchoation in this life, and a per∣fecting in the life to come. The schoolmen call them by the name of first and second perfection: so our knowledge in this life is but praeli∣batio, a taste of that which shall be blessed in the life to come. And as the Apostle maketh two resurrections, the first and the second: and blessed is he that hath his part in the first, for he shall have it also in the last▪ so there are two knowledges; the first fides faith, the second visio Dei, vel vita aeterna, the vision of God, or eternall life; and blessed is he
that hath his part in the first: so that as in the second resurrection none shall have part, but those that have had in the first: so in the se∣cond knowledge, none can have their portion, but they that have had it in the first. And as none can be partaker of the second, unlesse he hath been partaker of the first; so the first availeth nothing without the second. 3. The great witnesse of this, is Christ, Luke 10.42. Martha troubled herselfe about many things, and no doubt necessary, in entertaining of Christ honourably: yet we see what Christ said, unum est necessarium, one thing is needfull, and that is this, that Mary had chosen to sit downe at Christ his feet, and learne his will. A necessary practice of knowledge in Mary: whereas great provision was made by Martha, for the entertainement of Christ, Christ restraineth the necessary part into one point; so the learning of the Will of God is onely necessary. If this onely be necessary, and seeing the end, that without it there is no processe, then we have done with the first part; the first part must needs be from knowledge. And thus we see both the excellency and necessity of it. 2. Part. How to come to knowledge. There must be a finding. All know∣ledge is either of our owne invention, or we learne it of others.In the second is this. That if knowledge be so necessary, how shall we come by it? In knowledge, there is a teacher, & one that is taught. We must either finde it out of our selves, or learn it of others For fin∣ding it of our selves, Ier. 10.14. hath taught us a lesson: Every man is a beast by his owne direction: if he hath none to direct him but his owne naturall knowledge, he shall come to more grossenesse and ab∣surdities, then the very beasts. We are all destitute of the knowledge of God by nature. So having no hope to finde it our selves, and being not like to learn it of others, because all are thus affected, We must seeke to an higher teacher, that hath higher knowledge then we have: and he is set downe to us, 1. Sam. 2.3. Deus scientiae Dominus, For the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him enterprises are established. So then he can teach us, and of his will we be very sure. He hath knowledge to teach us, and others: we must not looke for it elsewhere. Esay 54.13. Erunt omnes docti à Deo, And all the children shall be taught of the Lord. Psal. 36.9. For with thee is the well of life, and in thy light shal we see light. Though we are all blind, and have no light in any of our selves; yet in his light we shall see light. And therefore he can teach; and that he is willing we have seene before. The next thing is, that seeing we know where we must have our knowledge, to see, 1. whether we are willing to be taught: which can∣not but be, seeing the necessity of it. 2. Whether God be willing to teach us. Gods willingnesse in Iob is testified, that he hath written un∣derstanding in the reines of man. So he began it in Adam, he preserved it in the Patriarks: and then it decaying, he taught it by traditions: after that, they being corrupted, and knowledge more decaying; he wrote the law:If there prove no sufficient knowledge, it is either on the teachers part, or on his that is taught. being so written, it was broken at the foote of the Mount: when that was broken, he tooke order for a new writing: and in Deut. he taketh order for continuall practice of it, that they should continue in the hearing of it. Nehem. 8.8. he gave it to the Levites to in∣terpret it to the people, and make them to understand it; and they
read in the booke of the Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the reading. When they failed, and false interpretations came, he raised up Prophets, to give the true sense of the law. And when this was not sufficient, as its Heb. 1. He sent his only Sonne, the last expounder of the law: and he going up to glory,And as he hath done ths in his word: so hath he done it in his ministery Philip, Peter. to his Father, gave of the gifts that he had received, unto men. As Ephes. 4.11. , &c. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastours and Teachers, &c. and 1 Cor. 12.28. And whereas in Gods knowledge there are required two things: 1. The outward meanes of the Minister. 2. The inward meanes of the holy Ghost: For the outward meanes, we have in Act. 8.29. the Eunuch sitting in his Chariot, and reading a place of Esay, desirous to know the meaning of the place. God provided him a Minister, that is Philip, to expound it to him. And so in Act. 10.30. Cornelius, continuing in fast∣ing from the fourth houre to the ninth houre, and on the ninth houre falling to prayer, &c. was provided for by Peter. For the inward meanes, the holy Ghost; Christ, Luke 11.13. giveth forth, that his Father will send downe his holy Spirit, &c. So that the out∣ward means being diligently performed on our part, we may be per∣swaded he will performe the other, which is in Ioh. 5.39. Christ per∣swades the Pharisees to search the Scriptures, and so perswades us in them to come to life. Search the Scriptures, for in them, &c. That that remaineth▪ which is, 1 Ioh. 2.27. that God will supply the inward an∣nointing, , But the anoynting, which ye have received of him, abideth in you: and ye need not that any man teach you; but as the same annoynting teacheth you in all things, and is truth, and is no lie. So there shall be no defect on his part: we must looke to our owne duty, whether we be willing or no; and it appea∣reth by the Commandement laid upon us, that we are not willing: for a good man that's willing is a law to himselfe: but we have a Com∣mandement to provoke us to knowledge. In which, as in every Com∣mandement, we consider, 1. That that's commanded. 2. That that's forbidden. The affirmative, and the negative. The affirmative, there is first cōmanded knowledge: and not every knowledge,Quia hic praeci∣piatur. What here commanded. but that which is Col. 3.16. a plentifull and rich knowledge, . A rich measure, so great as we can attaine unto for our vocation. Non solùm scire, sedetiam bene scire. Not onely to know, but to know well. Neg. 2. things forbidden. The rule in divinity is, Peccatum est non tan∣tùm appetitus malorum, sedetiam desertio meliorum. Sin is not only a desire of evill things, but also a forsaking of better.Ignorantia. Ignorance. The common accusation of the papists is, Ignorance is the mother of devotion. Rationes contra ignorantiam. Reasons against igno∣rance. So where fulnesse is com∣manded, we must not only not be empty, but full also: not only emp∣tinesse is forbidden, but also scarsity. Therefore, 1. ignorance is for∣bidden. 2. A light knowledge, ,a fleeting knowledge, a superficiall skill. For ignorance, the Church of Rome is charged for justifying of it, though it cannot be found that they are patrons of ig∣norance, but only faulty in the 2. part. If any thinke ignorance justifi∣able, let this perswade him to the contrary. 1. A sinne it must needs be, else as it is, Levit. 4.2. there should not have beene a sacrifice for it, yet
there, if any had offended through ignorance, a sacrifice was cōman∣ded to be made for him. And Psal. 79.6. If it had been a light offence, David had made a very uncharitable prayer to God, that he would powre out his vengeance on them that know not his Name. Powre out thine indignation on the heathen that have not known thee, and upon the Kingdomes that have not called on thy Name. Its not only sin, but also the cause of sin, & cause of punishment for sin. 1. Its cause of sin, as Hose. 4.1. he saith that the Lord had a controversie with the inhabitants of the Land, for that there was no mercy: and the rea∣son of that was, because there was no true dealing; and the reason of both these was, because there was no knowledge of God. And streight after he telleth them of their destruction for it. So Ro. 3.17. when he had shew∣ed all the enormities of the heathen, his conclusion is, because the way of peace  they have not known. 2. Its the cause of punishment for sin, as Esa. 5.13. he saith, that the captivity of Babylon was, because they wanted the knowledge of God. And its not the cause of punishment, but as its the cause of sin; and that is set forth to us in Pro. 14.22. Do not they erre that imagine evill? There is no sin but there is an error: therefore planting of perfect knowledge would be a cutting away of many sins, and Aug. saith, Non erratur, nisi ignorantia. There is no sinning, but through ig∣norance. Doth not Salomon say, Do they not all erre that work wickednes? Therfore that sin may be diminished, knowledge must needs be plan∣ted. Ignorance is by the learned made threefold: 1. That which they excuse,Ignorantia, 3. Ignorance threefold. and think God regardeth it not, Act. 17.30. That God did wink at the times of ignorance, i. marked them not. They use to call it an in∣vincible ignorance; and its first in children, before they have the use of reason. And 2. in those that want the use of reason, that are borne and continue so. And 3. in those that by disease, or any such thing, are bereft of the use of it; and that ignorance, they say, is not imputed to them. They adde a fourth also. i. where the means cannot be had. But if a man having the love of God in the heart, set himselfe to seeke, he shall be sure to find them. God hath even by revelations made them known, even to those men that have made a conscience of keeping the rules of nature. The other kinds are faulty. 2. The 2. is affected ignorance. David saith, Ps. 36.3. Noluerunt intel∣ligere ut bene agerent. They would not understand that they might doe good. And its in those specially that are skilfull, that know that they are in a sin, and are not willing to come out of it. They doe quasi nectere sibi quaestiones, they draw one question in the necke of another, that they do not know a definition of it. Aug. saith well of them. Ʋbi non est dolus in inquisitione, ibi non est peccatum in inventione. Where there is no de∣ceit in the inquisition, there is there no fault in the invention. Many would come to him and aske him many questions, and tell him that they could not finde any reason in that that he affirmed, to have no darknes at all, nor hardnes in it: and he would say, dolose quaerebas, do∣lose inveniebas, you did inquire deceitfully, ye did find deceitfully. This is the conclusion, when a thing is made plain unto us, and we will not have it plaine, and so not see it, we fall into this kind of ignorance. The 3. they call supina ignorantia, retchlesse and carelesse ignorance, the cōmon fault in these daies. This is, when a man habet à quo discat, &
non vult discere, hath from whom he may learn, and will not learn. And as in these times, when almost the whole Land are guilty of it, if they be ignorant: so if it be in the springs of knowledge, it is most retchlesse ig∣norance. Its in those that either through negligence or slothfulnesse to know, or through shamefastnes to enquire, will not know. And this for ignorance. 2. The other is light knowledge.Light knowledge Wch is full now in our daies contrary to that rule of the Apostle, Ro. 12.3. God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith. And that measure of faith is expressed, Col. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdome. Not only the whole absence but the absence of the measure of faith is condemned. When a thing is commended to us in a measure, not only the not having of it at all, but also the not having of the measure is a fault. And not only that, but its also required, that according to our yeeres, our gifts, & our measure, our knowledge should waxe greater. In 1 Cor. 14.20. he saith, Be ye children, if ye will, for malice, but not for knowledge, . Brethren, be not children, &c. Esa. 28.9. he goeth lower, and calleth it, a sucking know∣ledge. Therefore he saith, he will teach them no more, because they will not grow in knowledge, but are still as if they had the pap in their mouthes, v. 10. for saith he, Precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept, line unto line, line unto line; here a little. and there a little. But as tis 1 Tim. 4.7 They are ever learning, and yet never come to knowledge. And tis that which the Apostle, Heb. 5.12. inveigheth against in the Hebrew Christians, that they were not as yet come to the Christian faith, having spent so much time, and profited no better, but as yet needed to be catechised in the first principles,  &c. For when for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one teach you againe which be the first principles of the Oracles of God, &c. For the time before Christ, in Dan. 12.3. And they that be wise, shal shine as the brightnes of the firmament, and they that turne many to righteous∣nes, shall shine as the starres for ever. And also Ioel 2.28. And afterward I will poure out of my Spirit on all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophe∣cy, &c. In Esa. 54.13. And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and much peace shall be to thy children. What flouds of knowledge did the Prophets foresee should be in our times, Esa. 9.2? The people that walked in darknes, have seene a great light. They that dwelt in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light shined. And we have proofes of it in the Primitive Church. For the time of Christ, its a common and ordinary phrase with Christ, Non legistis? non audiistis? have ye not read? have ye not heard? This were strange now, for he knowes, they know it not. It was a questi∣on then; but now a man needs not aske the question; for he may be sure, that they neither read, nor knew. The Apostle sets down commonly a question and an  shame, if they know not, as 1 Cor. 15.29. Else what doe they which are baptized over the dead, &c. And a little after, For some have not the knowledge of God, I speake this to your shame. And this is not onely in light matters, but even as (1 Cor. 6.2, 3.) in high mysteries. Know ye not, which was heretofore known? know ye not, that the Saints shall judge the world? And if the world shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the least things? doe ye not know, that ye shall judge the Angels? , how much more things which belong to this life? And v. 5. . I speak to your shame. So in the primitive Church it was their use, without collation of chapter, or place, or Author to alledge: and we see oftentimes in the Scriptures and in the Fathers, divers places alledged without quoting: therefore if
there had not been greater skill in them, then now, there had beene but small edifying; but they knew that they knew the places. So we read, 1 Cor. 14.34 that the Corinthians were so forward in religion, that the women thought themselves able to teach, and to dispute about weighty points in religion, so that the Apostle was faine to make a prohibition, not to speak in the congregation, (Your women, &c.) wch argueth, though too great boldnesse, yet great knowledge in them So Act. 18.3. Aquila and Priscilla being makers of Tents, Aquila afterward attained much know∣ledge, so that he was a pillar of the Church. And Severus, as the ecclesia∣sticall story maketh mention, was a wool-winder; yet afterwards for his knowledge, was chosen Bishop, and a Bishop of a great See. If we confer these, and see how carefull they were for the avoyding of light know∣ledge, we shall think it odious (to be in the number of them.) And if that wil not move us in Hos 8.12. (I have written to them great things of mylaw, but they are counted as a strange thing. That we count it strange: yet that Heb. 5.12. should prevaile, whereas we should be far past principles, we have not the measure of knowledge that is required. And for the measure that the common people should have, If I should speak to the people that dig not after knowledge, I would not appoint them that measure that the Church of Rome doth. But seeing in knowledge there must be a discerning, to know quid verum what is true; and in that quare verum, a giving of a reason: therefore that in the 1 Thes. 5.21. I would require (omnia probate, try all things) that they be able to prove what they say, i. that they be able to prove that they heare. Or that in Io. 10.5. That they know their own shep-heard and his voyce, and a stranger they will not follow. Or at the least wise, that which is 1 Pet. 3.15. , &c. that they can give a reason of that they believe and hope for. But that our scioli, smatterers in knowledge, should enter to debate of controversies, which is not theirs, as discussing of hard and great questions; but Timothy's office, i. the Ministers, that they should do this it cannot be allowed. And it will be found that which the papists say, that sancta simplicitas est virtus laicorum, holy simplicity is the vertue of the laicks. Yet not ignorance, but knowledge is required. He that said, that time to be evill, that laboured of both extreames, must now more say it. That either they are ignorant, be cause as it is Ps 82.5. They will not be learned nor understand, but walk still in darknesse; or because they are out of course, that are the foundations of the earth, i. the teachers: and as Chrysostome saith,Ierome. if darknesse be on the tops of high mountaines, its no marvell that there is a myst in the valleys; and where there is know∣ledge, it filleth the mouth of the adversary. They will check and controll their teachers,The 2. Rule of our knowledge is to no further end, but to worship God aright. Objectum scien∣tiae driae The objct of divine know∣ledge. S much knowledge as sufficeth for Gods worship, is sufficient for . which is now done in our times. So in the 2. rule we see what is forbidden. Wherein is included both the Species & Aequipollens. Of the 3. rule of extension, we have no use in the first Commandement, because it is wholly spirituall. To the 4. rule, belong the means of know∣ledge. But before we intreat of the means, we must first know the ob∣ject, which is one of the circumstances; and that is here, God the Father, & he whom he hath sent, Iesus Christ, Joh. 17.3. Of God the Father, and the Deity, we read, 1 Tim. 6.16. that no man hathever seen him. And Moses could see but his back-parts, and when he saw them, he was afraid, and did hide his face. Therefore 'tis sufficient for us to know them. For as much as our knowledge is to be referred to our worship, we must labour for no more then must serve for his worship. i. things revealed to us in the Scriptures.
The I. Commandement. Thou shalt have no other, &c. COncerning God, for the Unitie of his Es∣sence, and Trinitie in Persons; and so what he is to us, we are bound to know. And that is set downe, Exod. 29.46.The rule of our know∣ledge. Then shall they know that I am the Lord their God, that brought them out of the Land of Aegypt, that I might dwell among them; I am the Lord their God. The Scripture doth not onely set downe what he is in himselfe, but what he is in relation to us: So in Exod. 34.6. God maketh Proclamation of his owne Attributes, The Lord,There be in the Scripture cer∣taine things set downe, concerning his nature, also concerning his attributes; wee are also to know his acti∣ons: then be∣sides, what the goodwill of God, for us to be directed, whether in ge∣nerall as wee are Christians, or in particu∣lar as wee are every man in our severall vocations. the Lord; strong, mercifull, and gracious; slow to anger, and abundant in goodnesse and truth; reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniqui∣tie and transgression of sinne: not making the wicked innocent, visi∣ting the iniquitie of the fathers upon the children, and upon childrens children, unto the third and fourth generation. Besides these that God hath done for us, what we are to doe for him: namely, the knowledge of his will, both in regard of the generall, what all are to doe; and in regard of the particular calling, which every one hath, what we are to doe. Now the meanes whereby we come to this. It is well said of the Heathen, Ponenti finem, ponenda media; he that would attaine un∣to the end must use the meanes. In them the order must bee thus. 1. To remove the impediments, removenda impedimenta. 2. That must be first placed which is first, primo prima. 1. For the first, In Pro. 1.16. is set downe, there is a company, that will not sticke to draw evill upon evill;Prov. 1.16. My sonne if sinners intiee the consent not, &c. such as will lactare hominem, intice a man unto evill, it is called Evill counsell: or as it is, Pro. 19.27. my sonne, (if thou wilt remove the impediment) heare no more the instruction that causeth thee to erre from the words of knowledge. The instructions that cause us to erre,Instructions causing us to erre. or the im∣pediments to be removed, be threefold; either 1. In our selves; or, 2. Without our selves.
1.1. Our owne reason.Within us, our owne reason: That which is set downe, Deut. 12.8. ye shall not doe after all these things that we doe here this day, that is, every man whatsoever seemeth good in his owne eyes: And Ephes. 4.17. in the vanity of our owne reason: This therefore I say and witnesse in the Lord, that yee walke not henceforth as other Gentiles walke,We must give over our rea∣son, for that was the errour of the Gen∣tiles. , in the vanities of their mind, 2 Cor. 10.5. for heavenly knowledge all our strong holds, all our moun∣taines of reason must be cast away, or throwne downe and brought into captivitie, , &c. and every thing that ex∣alteth it selfe against the knowledge of God: There is  a pulling downe of strong holds, and  and a bringing into Captivity. Where it doth resist, we must cast it downe; as in the mystery of the Trinitie; where it striveth with us, it must bee brought into captivity. 2. Those that are without us are two. First, in the 1 Pet. 1.18. ,2. Tradition of Elders. tradition of our Elders; least we take Religion by inheritance: a great impediment. Such as our Fathers have taught us, we will doe. Our rule must be Scrutamini Scripturas, Search the Scripture: and we must receive nothing by tradition, so farre as it standeth not with this rule. 2. And secondly, in the 2 Chron. 17.4. of Jehosaphat: But sought to the Lord God of his Father,3. The fashion of the world. and walked in his Commandements, and not after the trade of Israel, to doe as they doe now adayes, and after the manner of the place. The common trade of the World must be no rule for us; unlesse it agree with our rule, it must be removed: for this , the fashion of the people, and  (whereof hath beene spoken before) and a sharp wit to doe whatsoeuer our reason will tell us,) are the rules of mans wisedome, these must be cast away, 1 Cor. 3.18. If any man will be wise, let him be a foole in this world, let him give over the rules of mans wisedome, , This was Luthers rule, Si quis vult were sapiens esse in Aristotele, stultisicetur in Christo, and the rules of worldly wisedome must be received so farre forth, as they be equall to the foolish rules: for if we become not little ones in our owne wisedome, and fooles in regard of mans wisedome, Christ will not account us among them that he speaketh of, Mat. 11.25. for whom he thanketh God, that he hath revealed his mysteries unto them, and not to the wise of the world, Rom. 1.22. this , this professing themselves to be wise was the cause why the wise men of the world  became such fooles. Now to the meanes themselves; they were partly before handled: Therefore we will be shorter in them. But if any desire a direction for this part, first we must be perswadad thus of Gods knowledge: We must have the perswasion of the neces∣sity of it, Luke 10.42. , it is the one needfull thing; and that no vocation can be more necessarie. Though civility will not let men say, that they spend more time in that that shall not profit; and lesse upon that which is necessary, because they thinke good to spend some times in it, yet they shew that this in respect
of other things is but  a by-worke, they are meere Scepticks in this one needfull thing; their study is a studying for pride, or discoursing at table; they read Authors, as the Butterflie suckes the flowers, to paint her wings; but this must not be so spent on the tongue. No other knowledge shall prosper without this.Christs counsell, Mat. 6.33. that this must first be sought, and then other things will follow. Primum quaerite Regnum, &c. First seek the Kingome of God; for we have no warrant that our other studies shall be sanctified, unlesse this be first, that shall after sanctifie the other: So that it is necessary in all things. For this attaining of knowledge, as it must have his course, so it must have a space of time, and diligence withall; the one without the other is nothing. Time, Psalm. 46.10. vacate & videte,To attaine knowledge, 1. time, 2. dl∣gence must be used. be still (or take time) and know that I am God. They must be at lei∣sure, that they may know. It will not be had at certaine times, 1 Cor. 7.5. his counsell is to the man and wife, not to come toge∣ther for a time, that they might , give themselves,1 Time. To leave the use of the bed, that they might vacate melori, attend better things. (or be at leasure) to prayer and fasting: and by an argument à majore, if we should abstaine from indifferent things, then from other things, that are not indifferent. This Act. 17.21. of the Athenians, how∣soever other businesse fell out, that they did , spend their time; which is more then , to be vacant, to tell or heare of novelties: then we may be ashamed that this hath not wrought that in us, which it did in them. For Diligence, Augustines rule for this is strange;2 Diligence. but it may be the rule till a better come: Satis reputatur quis facere, cum tan∣tum facit pro Deo, quantum facit pro mundo,Ier. 4.22. For my people is foolish: they have not knowne mee, they are foo∣lish children, and have no understan∣ding; they are wise to doe e∣vill, but to doe good they have no know∣ledge. Media cogniti∣onis adipiscen∣dae. we then discharge our duty to God-ward, when we are as industrious in his service as we are for the world. If we bestowed but asmuch diligence on Gods statutes, as we doe in the penall statutes of a Prince; as 6. Micah 16. (for the statutes of Omri are kept, and all the manners of the house of Ahab, ye walke in their counsels) then we might come to some knowledge: Jer. 4.22. if that paine that we take to doe evill and to deceive, we would take to study the Law, and to learne the Commandements of God, he would not complaine of us as he doth, that we perish for want of knowledge. Now to the pointe; the necessarie meanes: First, there is requi∣red prayer; wisdome and knowledge (Jam. 1.5.) must be asked of God; in the 8. Wisd. v. 21. Solomon makes it a point of wisdome, first to know how to come by wisdome, & c. 9. he makes his pray∣er to God for it, as also, 1. King. 3.6. Solomons prayer for wisdome is set, & 10. v. that which is more, that God tooke great pleasure to be desired it: and this is the first meanes. Secondly, the other are set down, Deut. 6.6.7.8.9. (i.) first that wee should bring it into the heart, which is past the braine: for this. First, thou shalt whet them, (i.) our catechising, or the first prin∣ciples must be had perfectly. How wee shall come by it, it is set downe, Rom. 10.17. an ordinary meanes, hearing and repeating.
Talking of it, which signifieth to conserre. Writing, and in that included, reading; which are fruitfull with other, and alone. A binding of them before our eyes, and upon our hands, not now used; but the fathers interpret the having before the eyes, Medi∣tation, which doth as it were put it before the eyes, and for the binding it on their hands, as in Physick there is a rule, per brachium fit judicium de corde, that the straints and veines come from the heart to the hand; so it is in divinity; by the arme is practise and exer∣cise meant: and this is to binde it on the armes: it is a good way to make aconscience of the practise of that wee know. Quod datur o∣ranti, quodaperitur quaerenti, id exerce, see that thou exercise and put in practice those gifts and graces which thy prayers have obtained of God, Bernard. But the contrary practising bringeth forth poena∣les caecitates for illicitas cupiditates, penall blindnesse for unlawfull desires.No knowledge to the know∣ledge of pra∣ctise. The heathen man saith, that he that hath an habit of justice, shall be able to say more of it, then he that hath the perfect spe∣culation of the Ethicks: so the poorest man that hath practised his knowledge, and is well practised in faith, shall say more of the feare of God, and of faith, then the learnedest Doctor, that hath not practised: and so in all other things, exercitium is signum potentiae, and so signum scientiae, Exercise is a signe of knowledge as well as of strentgh. The signes of knowledge. 3. Humility.The next rule is of the signes of knowledge; they are foure. That is true, that of the consequent, the best rule is by the an∣tecedent. If feare want, there can be no love, if love want, there can be no obedience.The want of humilitie is a signe of no knowledge. But specially that of humility. Augustines prayer, Domine Deus noverim te, noverim me: he adds, they know not God, if they know not themselves. Vera scientia non facit homi∣nem exultantem, sed lamentantem, True knowledge begets not pride, but teares. So the Heathen man saith, Quod faciunt alii de aliis, id ipse de se facit apud se. Et inter sapiences sapientior, qui humilior est, That which other men would have others to doe, that he ex∣acted of himselfe. And he is wiser then others, that is more hum∣ble then others. He that hath a conceit of himselfe, can never come to knowledge. 2. That which the Heathen give forth:2. Order. and it is Aristotles in his Metaphysicks, Scientis est ordinare, he is a wise man that can order his doings, to preferre eternall things, before temporall, &c. But we doe contrarie: it is a common order, to put private profit against common profit; and to preferre temporall things before eternall. Therefore this is a signe that we have no knowledge. 3. In the 1 Cor. 14.26. we must not be like those,3. Constan∣ie. 1 Cor. 15.58. that be chil∣dren in knowledge, that be carried away with every wind of vaine Doctrine; and as Joel saith, They are empty cloudes, carried with the winde, and like the waves carried with the tyde. In our dayes there are more turning tempests, by reason of the want of know∣ledge. 4. That which was before alleadged,4. Practice. No man doth against his
certaine knowledge, then if we knew God,If wee practice not wee have but a foolish knowledge. our actions would wit∣nesse it. If our knowledge were in heavenly things, as it is in sen∣sible, we would not do against it; but now we have but a pretie opi∣nion in Divinity, and therefore it doth not stay us. 5. Lastly, That we hinder not knowledge in others, whether it be by authority, and that by Commandement, Permission; or by counsell; provoking others to seeke after knowledge, and to increase it in others, as much as we can: for our knowledge must be to helpe others; for there are three uses of it: First, to teach them that are ignorant. Secondly, to resolve them that are in doubt, and to strengthen them that waver. Thirdly, to comfort them that are in distresse, and the afflicted conscience. And thus much for know∣ledge, which is the first duty of the minde. Now perfect understanding bringeth in the second dutic of the minde, that is, Beliefe; for fulnesse of knowledge is scire ut credas,Beliefe. so to know that thou mayst beleeve. Beliefe addeth two things. The first which is in John 6.69. the manner,  &c. & we beleeve & a ssuredly know that thou art Christ, &c. Secondly, the measure, that is, the fulnesse of perswasion, which in Ephes. 3.12. is called , boldnesse. And Heb. 10.12. , the full assurance of faith: and it is often used in the tran∣slated sense. To make it plainer, there is in every proposition a double part; a contradiction: sometimes a man holdeth neither part, because he seeth equall reasons may be brought on both sides; and it is called doubting, as Luke 12.29. ,1. Dubita∣tio, Doubting. and seeke not ye what ye shall eate, or what yeeshall drinke, neither be ye of a doutfull minde; or be ye not like Meteors, puft up and ready to be carried away with every blast. If he encline to one part, yet so,2. Opinio, Opinion. as he feareth lest the reasons of the other part should convince him, then it is an opinion: as Acts 26.28. Agrippa was perswaded  almost to be a Chri∣stian,3. Scientia, Knowledge. but yet he rejected it: , almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian.Gen. 45.27. 3. When we fully consent to one part, it is called knowledge, be∣yond both the other, an evidence and assurance of the true part. Knowledge is in three manners. First, it is either of sense. Se∣condly, or by discourse ofRatio, why neither of the former know∣ledges bee so sure as the 3d. and that in faith there is choice made of this especially, 1. in the know∣ledge by sense, if the object be absent, there is straight a knowledge by faith. 2. in knowledge by discourse, if the object bee of too great ex∣cellency, straight comes in the know∣ledge by reve∣lation. reason. Thirdly, or by relation of o∣ther men; and that is properly the knowledge of faith. 1. Knowledge by sense; such was the knowledge of Josephs bre∣thren that had seene him in Aegypt, and therefore knew him. 2. Knowledge by discourse; such was Jacobs, when he saw the Charets, he gathered straight that his sonne Joseph was alive. 3. By relation of others, as Jacob knew that his sonne yet lived, when his sonnes told him. When a thing cannot be present to the sense, then must we relie our selves wholly to the third, as 1. Kings 10.6. the Queene of Sheba must first heare of Solomons wis∣dome,
in her owne Land, before she can come to him and heare him her selfe. For matters of reason, there is nothing absent from it: but the absence of our understanding is said then to be, as John 3.9. when a thing exceedeth the capacity of him, that should understand; as that of so great a Rabin in Israel: therefore we must rely our selves in this also to the third meanes, 1 Cor. 2.9. for the first, no eye hath seene, no eare hath heard, which can certifie us of the things which God hath prepared for them that love him: and for the second, he addeth, it hath not at any time ascended into the heart of man, that is, it exceedeth the reason of man to thinke of them: Therefore the third must necessarily be brought in, Job 36.26. Behold God is excellent; and we know him not, neither can the number of his yeares be searched out. Our other knowledge of Sense and Discourse are bounded with∣in the limits of naturall causes, but God is supernaturall: there∣fore this is plaine, which is Esay 7.9. Nisi credideritis, non stabi∣liemini, if ye beleeve not, surely ye shall not be established. Not that but after we have beleeved, we may seek a reason, that we may be able reddere rationem,A difference betweene the knowledge by discourse und by religion; in the knowledge by discourse, 1. commeth a thought, 'then an establi∣shing of the thought: and then when we see it evident∣ly, cometh the consent: but in faith, its first consented to, then concei∣ved, 1. Pet. 3.15. the meanes of this, because in the action of beliefe, will beares the greatest sway, the will being moved with her object, (i.) blessed∣nesse, annex∣ed to it. Ratio, because great honor is given to him by it, therefore it is evident that this is the cer∣tainest and best way of knowledge. as it is 1 Pet. 3.15. , &c. Be ready al∣wayes to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you, because grace doth not make voide nature: but as it is 2 Cor. 10.5. we must use the meanes as the hand-maide (be∣cause it holds in captivity the understanding of man;) and still, as it is Acts 4.31. looke for the Holy Ghost to teach us those things that our nature is not able to beare. For Faith then, it thus differeth from Science: In science, first, there goeth an inquiring thought, and then followeth the assent: but in faith there is the assent first, and then the conceiving of that we have consented to. Psal. 18.45. As soone as they beare of me they shall obey me. It is conceptus cum assensione, a conceiving with an assent: because the object of the understanding doth not constraine us to beleeve; but the will holdeth it prisoner, and keepeth it captive, Rom. 10.10. Beliefe being an act of the understanding, should first come à mente, from the intellect; but he there saith, we must corde credere, beleeve with the heart: and the will hath a speciall act in it. The reason why it pleased God thus to institute the powers of the mind, is, that if reason could first have conceiveed the things that pertaine to God, little or no glory at all had come to God by it. Againe, this is ratio scientisica, the profound meanes of the wisedome of the flesh; we see how God doth confound and cast them downe; and in Religion the ground of it is contrary to that of Philosophie , Not to beleeve; is the way of Philosophy, , To beleeve; of Divinity: and Lucian he scoffed at it. For warrant of it, somewhat hath beene spoken before, I will therefore add a little now; Cyrill in his fifth Catechisme; and Cy∣prian in his Exposition upon Saint Matthew. And Chrysostome and other of the ancient Fathers hold this against the Philosophers, that Quiequid fit,Audit an is. fide fit, whatsoever is done, it is faith that doth it;
but there faith is not fully that, which it is here: But a faith which is civill; as the husbandmans faith is a civill faith; he seeing un∣kindly weather, &c. maketh himselfe ready every yeare to sow and till his ground; and to bestow great cost and paines on it, though he have no demonstrative knowledge, whether he shall reape any commodity of it that yeare. So it is in Merchandize, the Merchants see stormes arise very oft, yet they hazzard their goods upon a civill faith. So in Marriage, some are unfruitfull; yet they marry in hope to have Children: So in Warfare, the Souldier makes himselfe ready for the battel in hope of victory. The Schoolemen that came after them, they goe a subtiller way to worke; and they hold, that quicquid scitur, fide scitur: that even in those things that we know, we doe beleeve. For our senses, un∣derstanding, we know, and they are our witnesses; our reason con∣ceiving we know, and it beareth us witnesse; and they themselves confesse that both the witnesses are very deceitfull: For they eye, which is the best of outward senses, and certainest (because it ap∣prehendeth more differences, and apprehendeth his object after a more speciall manner.) The Opticks reckon up twenty wayes how it may be deceived; and a great imperfection in it, 1 Cor. 13.11. When we are children, we speake as children,The perfect∣nesse of the fa∣cultie of see∣ing, standeth but in degrees. conceive and reason as children. They at the Plough cannot judge of the for∣mall causes of things, because they cannot see them; but tell them of labour, and that they see: Therefore in respect of a superiour understanding they are farre short; therefore we may be deceived in things above us; so there may a relation be made. Locus à testi∣monio. The unper∣fectnesse of the knowledge of science cometh of the unperfectnesse of the know∣ledge by faith. There is no certainer way then this.Now to the place of Testimonie, it hath his imperfection onely from the imperfection of Science. It hath but two exceptions. First, want of skill: Secondly, want of faithfulnesse. Now if the party want skill and cannot, or if he can, but is not honest, and will not; his testimony is not to be taken. Whereas the know∣ledge of faith, and grounds of Divinity are laid upon such wit∣nesses, as want neither skill, nor faithfulnesse, but for their skill, can; and for their faithfulnesse will, deliver the truth: Therefore it hath a fuller resolution then the other: for as it is 2 Tim. 1.12. We beleeve not whom we know; but scio cui credo. ,Though wee may not say, Sclo quod sca, yet wee may say, Scio cui credidi. We know him whom we beleeve: we know that he is Amen, and as it is Revel. 1.5. , The faithfull witnesse, and as it is, Rev. 3.14. , These things saith the faithfull, and true witnesse the beginning of the creation of God. Tit. 1.2. such a one as cannot lye. Now for the manner of giving his testimonie: The termes in the Scripture are Dictum Jehovae, dixit Dominus; Thus saith the Lord, 1. There is his saying: and because a mans stipulation and promise is certainer then his bare saying, and will be better be∣leeved and sooner taken: therefore Rom. 1.2. it is , which he had promised before by his Prophets in the holy Scriptures, and Tit. 1.2. , In hope of eternall life which
God that cannot lye promised before the World began: 2. he hath made a promise, and 3. Heb. 6.17, 18. for our greater comfort and assurance, hee hath also sworne , &c. Wherein, God willing more abundantly to shew unto us the heires of Promise, the im∣mutability of his counsell, confirmed it with an oath, &c. and because if we have a mans hand set to in writing, we will beleeve him yet more: 4. We have his handwriting, in Exod. 32.33, 34. written with his owne finger, wherein he hath set downe that he will shew mercy, on whom he will shew mercy; and take vengeance, on whom he will take vengeance. 5. For confirmation of his hand writing, Rom. 4.11. he hath set his handwriting, under a seale , &c. a seale of the righteousnesse of the faith, &c. And lastly, which is the furthest degree a man can goe; he hath given us a pledge an earnest penny, 2 Cor. 1.22. Who also hath sea∣led us, , and given us the ear∣nest of the Spirit in our hearts, 2 Cor. 5.5. , Now he that hath wrought us for the selfe same thing is God, who also hath given unto us the earnest of the Spirit. The exception that may be taken against this,Object. is, that the voice of God is not dayly heard among us; and that which we heare, is intituled to other; as to Moses, Esay, Jeremie, Matthew, &c. Answ. 2 Pet. 1.21. To this wee answer as in the proeme.Yea, but though men did it, yet they were such men, as did nothing of themselves, nor followed their owne interpretations, but as they were moved by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. For our Prince will not speake to us by her owne mouth; but by Proclamations, we must allow, as to our Prince, , his ambassadours and his writs: So the Holy Ghost to speake unto us in the Scripture by the mouth of his Prophets and Apostles, is as much as if we heard God himselfe speaking viva voce from Heaven unto us. How know I that this is true that they are the messengers of God?Object. As the Scepter of the Kingdome delivered to them that bring it,Answ. is a witnesse among us, that they come from and for the Prince; so the scepter of Gods extraordinary power was committed to these men; and is a witnesse unto them. John 6.30. the Jewes require of Christ but that he would shew them a signe, which was this Scepter: And Christ, John 10.38. would desire no more of the Jewes, then that if they would not beleeve him for his Word, yet for his Workes: , &c. if I doe then, though ye beleeve not me, beleeve the workes, &c. John. 15.24. he saith that if he had not done such things, nor wrought such miracles among them, they might have had excuses: , &c. if I had not done workes among them which no other man did,The mutuall proofe dictum supra naturam by factum su∣pra naturā & contra. &c. Augustine upon that, that they were done; saith, that ei∣ther we must grant that these miracles were done, or else that without any miracles all the world was converted, and became Christians; which is a greater miracle then any of the other: so
grant we must a miracle, whether we will or no. Such were the Prophets and Apostles; for they wrought such workes, as no man else could worke, seeing they came from God. These war∣rant us that these men, that is, the Prophets and Apostles they came from God, and God hath spoken to us by them. Now whether we be able to performe these things; Luke 1.37. with God nothing is impossible ,, both for his know∣ledge, power, and will. for so he saith, Mat. 19.26. , with men this is unpossible, but with God all things are possi∣ble; and the reason is, if it were not so, there must needs be a want in his knowledge, for every impotency, it is for want of a∣bilitie of knowledge; but for his knowledge, Heb. 4.15. all things are naked to him, , &c. neither is there any crea∣ture which is not manifest in his sight, but all things are naked and open unto his eyes: For his Power, Esay 59.1. his hand is not short∣ned, it is able to reach to all: and that we may see out of Numb: 11.23. where God promising flesh enough for all the Host: We see Moses his unbeliefe, insomuch as he said, Shall all the Fish of the Sea bee gathered together, or all the Beasts of the Field come toge∣ther: and God saith, ver. 23. Is the Lords hand shortned? thou shalt see now whether my words shall come to passe or no, to thee! The order.Lastly, for his Will, that in Lament. 3.25. The Lord is good to them that trust in him, and to the soule that seeketh him: A Father, Scioposse, scio scire, cuperem velle, I am perswaded of the Power and Knowledge of God, but it is his Will I stick at. 1. Faith, Heb. 11.1. is called , the substance of those things that are hoped for; and the ground, evidence,. or demon∣stration of those things that are not seene. Both words argue the great necessity of the Order of it. If it be a substance, it is to be handled first; or if it be not the whole substance, but the first part yet it commeth first to be handled. For in totis ordinatis, in all things where there is Order: (as Religion hath an order) the first part dicitur substantia reliquarum, is said to be the substance of the rest; as the substance of an house, is in the foundation: of a ship, in the sterne: of a tree, in the root: Col. 1.23. it is com∣pared to a Foundation: , if ye continue grounded in the faith: Col. 1.23, to a root, , rooted in the faith: and there is a Shipwrack of our faith, as 1 Tim. 1.19. and conse∣quently it is compared to the sterne of Ship. . Argumentum or , is the first Principle, Rom. 4.14. if the Law stand still in effect, then faith is voyde; and then the princi∣ple of Religion is denyed , &c. 1 Cor. 15.17. If Christ be not risen, then is your faith vaine; making faith the first Principle. And this for the Order. Necessitas fidei.There is a further thing to be considered in Faith, that is, the necessity of it. That is necessary, without which nothing can be done of a Christian man: Faith is a diffused thing, every where, a Cor. 1.24. if we stand, it is by Faith, , for by faith yee
stand. 2 Cor. 5.7. if we walke, we walke by faith, ,for we walke by faith and not by sight, 1 Cor. 7.37. if we sit, it is our seat; , &c. he that stand∣eth firme in his heart, &c. or Rom. 14.23. whatsoever we doe, if we have not faith, it is sinne; and in this respect, Faith is called mater obedientiae, the mother of obedience; because all duties a∣rise out of it: at every thing that it apprehendeth, it bringeth forth a new Vertue. Luther hath a saying, and if it be taken in a good sense, it is true: That in Faith, all the Law is fulfilled before we have fulfilled any part thereof, or worke of it in act. And therefore (in regard of this great necessity) it pleased God to cast away the great names of the jolly wise men of the world, and Philosophers: (1 Cor. 1.19, 20.) , &c. for seeing the world knew not God in the wisedome of God, it hath pleased God by the foo∣lishnesse of Preaching to save them that beleeve:Prima x christians, cre∣do. and to entitle his flock onely by the name of Faithfull. And Eusebius Emissenus hath a good reason for it, for the first word of a Christian is Credo, I beleeve; which maketh a Christian. If we be not faithfull, we are unbeleevers; and God giveth us no other name then that he is contented to take to himselfe; 2 Cor. 1.18. Fidelis Deus, God is faithfull: and his sonne, Heb. 12.2. is in no other sense called Au∣thor fidei, & finitor fidei, the author and finisher of our Faith, 1. Tim. 3.1. & 4.9. his word is called Sermo fidelis, a true or faith∣full saying;This inchoatio visionis is be∣gunne in this life, and per∣formed by faith. and in the same place, 1 Tim. 4.6. Sermo fidei, and Rom. 10.8. Verbum fidei, the word of Faith; Gal. 6.10. the Church is called the Houshould of Faith, Jam. 5.15. Prayer is called the Prayer of Faith, Rom. 4.11. the Sacraments are called the Seales of Faith.The king∣dome of Hea∣ven being compared to a marriage. So we see it goeth cleane through all duties. Every good duty in this life, is an in∣choation of the blessed∣nesse in the life to come. And not only this, but also that which was said in knowledge, may be said of Faith: (for knowledge is for faith) That it is the beginning of our blessednesse, John 20.29. the faith without sight, blessed are they that see not,The necessity of the Nega∣tive. The reason of the necessity, why it should be so punished: for else woe make God a lyer. and yet beleeve, Hosea 2.20. there is a fit similitude to expresse this. God likening the knowledge that we shall have to a Marriage, and the knowledge that we have now, to Espousing; as the inchoation and certainty of marriage is in sponsalibus, in true espousals: When hands are given; so our sponsalia, espousals, are in fide, in Faith: therefore it is said, Mar. 16.16. that qui non crediderit, condemnabitur, he that will not be∣leeve shall be damned: And as it is, John 3.18. it is not differred, but the sentence is gone on him;Et quanto ma∣jor, tanto mi∣gis expetit, the greater any one is, the more tender is he of his word. he is already condemned. Then we may conclude with that, Heb. 11.6. that without faith it is impossible to please God. And the reason why God dealeth thus streitly with them, that beleeve not (for there is no man, but desireth this to be credi∣ted:To argue, that the Princes word must be so stedfast, as if that no other disgrace or dammage might come to him, but the breaking of his word, yet in that respect he is to stand to his word. The honourable man thinks the venturing of his honour sufficient for his credit: the Prince, his word: if there be such majesty in an earthly Prince, then much more in the word of God; not only giving his word, but also sweaing, writing, sealing, pledging, &c. as you have heard before.)
and the greater person he is, the more he desireth it; as a private man would be credited upon his honesty; a man of grea∣ter state upon his Worship or Honour, the Prince upon his own word, Teste me ipso, witnesse my selfe; and if on any of these of∣fers, credit were denyed to any of these, they would thinke great discourtesie offered them. If there be a God, he must set himselfe higher then a Prince, and consequently he may with greater right say, teste meipso, witnesse my selfe; because he is above all. Job saith, none dare say to a wicked Prince, Impius es, much lesse to a good Prince; and least of all, can a∣ny say it to God. Especially seeing he ads on his part that it is true. 1 John 3.33. If ye beleeve, signastis quod Deus est verus, you have set to your seale that God is true; and on the contrary, 1 Joh. 5.10. Qui non crediderit, facit Deum mendacem, he that beleeveth not God hath made him a lyar; and there can be nothing more to Gods disgrace, then to say that he is a lyar. Bernard upon that, sine fide impossibile est placere Deo, without faith it is impossible to please God: Quomodo potest placere Deo, cui non placet Deus? how can he please God (saith he) that is not pleased with God, that likes not of him. And this is for the necessity and end of Faith. Unbeliefe for∣bidden.Now we come to our Rules: As we have seene the Affirmative, and what is commanded; so we must see the Negative, and what is forbidden: Here is forbidden first Unbeliefe, Ephes. 5.1. it is a note of the reprobate, to be the children of unbeliefe; whether it be a proud imagination of our owne reason, as Habac. 1. ver. 5. saith, or in contempt, or any other wretchednesse, that notwithstanding the forbidding of it, yet in carelesnesse the world is like to grow to be Scepticks, and to come to this that Machiavell holdeth,God punish∣eth unbeliefe by it selfe. Non curandum quid boni credat, sed quid faciat, it matters not what our beleife is, if our actions be good: And it is thus punished, 2 Thes. 2.11. , and for this cause God shall send them strong delusions that they should beleeve a lye. If thou any way reject the truth, thou shalt be given over, and beleeve a lye. Because they beleeved not Christ, when he came in his Fathers name, one shall come in his owne name, and shall prevaile, and they shall beleeve him. So in our age, those that would not cleave to the truth, shall be given over to untruths in this World; and for the world to come,And so the promises of God, they shal see them per∣formed in this life, albeit in the life to come thy shall have no com∣munication. that punishment shall befall them, which is 2 King 7.19. when the Prince, on whose hand the King leaned, would not beleeve the Prophet prophecy∣ing of great plenty of victuals, though the Lord should make windowes in Heaven; the Prophet said to him, Videbis, sed non gustabis, thou shalt see it, but shalt not tast of it: So they shall see the glory of God, and their children after them; but they shall have no tast of it. 2. A scanty measure of faith forbid∣den.And as unbeliefe is forbidden, so also a scant measure of faith is forbidden, when a man doth partly beleeve, but it is mingled with many doubts, Rom. 12.3. there is mention of a measure of faith, and if we want that, we are not of the faithfull, Mat. 8.10. ve∣rily
I say to you, I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel, Mat. 15.28. ,We must pray for faith, and I : when is setled, ad  then bring it to the measure. O woman great is thy faith: there is a great faith, and Mat. 14.31. Christ to Peter, , O thou of little faith wherefore didst thou doubt: here is a little faith, Luke 17.5. there is a prayer made by the Apostles to the Lord for the increase of Faith, , Lord increase our faith: and this is, if we have faith; if we have it not, then in Mark 9.24. Credo Domine, adjuva incredulitatem meam, Lord I beleeve, helpe my unbeleife. We must first pray to God to helpe it; Secondly, to increase it. The reason of the quantity, why it must come to a measure. If it be not in some measure, it will not be able to hold fast; as Heb. 11. the quantity we see, is not great; no greater then a graine of Mustardseed, Luke 17.6. It is, Roman. 14.5. , let every one have a full assurance, a full re∣solution. The Interpreters thinke it is a metaphor taken from a Ship,This is our power and our strength: 1. a∣gainst Satan. 2. against the world. that commeth with full sailes. Our strength it is of God, Ephes. 6.16. there is commended unto us a speciall defence against the Devill and his firy darts; scutum fidei, the shield of faith: a∣gainst the World, 1 John 5.4. This is your victorie wherewith ye o∣vercome the World; Fides vestra, even your faith: Against the Flesh, 1 Thes. 5.8. the Apostle willeth us to be sober, and to put on lo∣ricam fidei, the breast-plate of Faith. And no marvaile that faith is a thing of so great might, and hath such strength; seeing the Apostle maketh the strength of the Sacraments to come by Faith (, &c. who through faith subdued Kingdomes,Heb. 11.33. &c. beside that which we see, Matth. 14.29. It prevailes with things above nature, as also in things naturall. Peters faith made his body so light, and brought it to such a temper, that he walked on the sea and sunke not, and that Mark. 6.5. that except faith be, his power is restrained, not but that he can worke miracles, but that he hath so compounded it; and as this was to prove the concurrence of Faith with the mercy of God, so he ascribeth the strength of all the Sacraments to Faith. Christ could not worke any more miracles, because of their unbeliefe: so that it seemeth by Gods owne ordinance, that he must have helpe of our faith, or else he can doe nothing among us. And Mark 9.23. Sipotes credere, if thou canst beleexe, it may be done: for to faith and to him that beleeveth all things are possible; that is given to God before, Mat. 17. Christ he had given power and commission to his Disciples to cast forth Devils, they could not; they aske him why they could not? he answereth them, because they wanted faith: and yet more strange, for Luke 8.44, 45. We see no mention of any word, that Christ spake; but as if it were without his will, the Woman onely conceiving, that if she should touch the hemme of his garment, she should presently be healed, Christ not ware of it. Her faith (as Origen presently be healed,Origen com∣pares faith to a Loadstone, and to Naph∣tah. The strength of faith. saith) vim attulit Christo, did as it were force our Saviour: as the Loadstone by a certaine hidden nature and force in it, draweth Iron to it, and Napthtah pitch: sure so faith hath a commanding
power whereby it prevailes over the creature. And no marvell of all this: for it prevaileth also with God himselfe: For the Angel Gen. 32.28. when he saw that Jacob, by his Faith would not let him goe, till he had blessed him, and that he could not prevaile a∣gainst him; faith, that he shall no more be called Jacob,If we be Isra∣el, (i.) if wee prevaile with God, we shall be Jacob, (.) we shall pre∣vaile with men. If it prevaile thus with God; then much more with other things. but Isra∣el, because, as it is said, thou hast prevailed with God, and hast overcome him: and because thou hast prevailed with God, thou shalt also prevaile with men: and in Mat. 15.28. Christ, he was faine to take the foyle of the woman of Cyrophanissa, in Canaan: O woman great is thy Faith, Be it unto thee as thou wilt. And faith is so wonderfull, that it becometh wonderfull to him, to whom nothing is wonderfull: For Mat. 8.10. Christ himselfe marveiled at such faith of the Centurion, and accordingly re∣warded it with an ut credidisti fiat tibi, as thou hast beleeved, so be it done unto thee. This then is the reason of the degrees and increase in Faith. To avoyd error, we must be admonished, that in Divinity there are three sorts of faith,Three kinds of faith. The degrees in the meanes, these. 1. Generall. 2. Legall. 3. Evangelicall, and Justifying. but the most of these, that we have spoken of, hath not beene of the third, of the justifying faith. For the generall standeth in be∣leeving that God is; and it is onely of these,As our life is, 1. In Paradise. 2. Under the Law. 3. Under the Gospell, so our faith. Heb. 11.6. he that commeth to God, must beleeve that God is, and that he will find meanes to bring his to felicitie. And that was the faith of Adam in Paradise; and he beleeved this, that God would shew the way how he would be sought, and in what manner he would be wor∣shipped: and on the other side, that he would reward him if he did seeke him. The second, Legall, it is certaine it standeth upon the beleeving of the Law, and the promise thereof, (that is) punishment and reward. We must not confound the covenants. Jonah 3.5. The Ninivites, they beleeved, though but at the ministery of threat∣ning, John 5.46. If ye had beleeved Moses, ye would also have beleeved me; for he wrote of me. There is a Faith of the Law; and that as it apprehendeth the punishment, so also the reward of the Law, as in the second Commandement. And shewing mercy unto thousands, &c. The third, is the faith of the Gospell, upon the promise of Christs death; which doth not pertaine to the Law, nor to this place.It is here com∣manded, be∣cause it is a meane, by which Gods spirit is conti∣nued in us. Then there is commended unto us the faith of the Law; by which we consent that the punishments and rewards contained therein are true and just.
The object of Fait. So this faith is commanded that it may be a meanes in us to maintaine Gods spirit in us, Luk 12.49. out of Mat. 3.11. where he compareth fire with the Holy Ghost. Now fire must have light and heat; the object of it, Heb. 4.2. must be a thing mixed of faith, and the word of God: now the word of God and faith comming together, it raiseth us and quickneth us; & consequēt∣ly where the word is heard, it is as a spark that falleth in∣to any dire combustable matter which presently is in∣flamed. And God set∣eth this faith fovere ignem, to cherish and hold fresh the word. The meanes of beleife. 1. If we have no experience our selves, we must beleeve them that have had, ere wee try our selves. 2. When we have experi∣ence, we be∣leeve in regard of our owne experience: our experiēce is in regard of things belong∣ing to this life. The object it selfe is the word of God.The object of it is the Word, as Heb. 4.2. things prospered not with the Jewes in respect of Salvation, because the Word was not mingled with Faith: Therefore there must be a mixture of our Faith and the Word of God; for the Word and Faith continue the Spirit of God in us: as it is Luke 12. (that his com∣ming was, to put fire in the earth;) compared to a fire, Mat. 3.11. the baptisme of fire, the baptisme of the Holy Ghost, 1 Thes. 5.19. Quench not the spirit; and that which nourisheth it, is in vers. 20. despise not prophecyings: Lampas fidei, the oyle of faith, the spirit of prophecy, and the word, which is the matter, if it come into a man, it is but an oyle, which flameth for a time; so in the sundry hearers, it but as a little blaze, when the word is not mingled with faith, it bideth but a brunt of godlinesse, if this nutrition be wanting, it wanteth in the wicked. Austens reason, Non quia dicitur, sed quia creditur, the word saves thee not because it is preacht to thee but because it is beleeved of thee: And thus they grow together with the light of grace, Sicut credis, ita sit tibi, according to thy faith be it unto thee: Non est semen immortale, nisi credis esse a Deo, qui solus est immortalis, the seed of the Word is not immortall unlesse thou beleevest that it is from God who onely is immortall. And this is the necessary use of faith. The third Rule hath no use in this commandement. The fourth Rule. The meanes to beleeve. About them we need not much to labour, because it is sure, that the meanes of belee∣ving, is first by the report of others; as 1 King. 10.6. the Queen of Sheba must heare of the report of King Solomon in her owne country, before she can come and heare his wisedome her selfe: And therefore the reports of Saints which have reposed their whole confidence in God, may be able to perswade us; because we may not thinke that all Patriarchs and Prophets were either Unwise, or Unhonest; and that their faith was in vaine: But as they felt themselves by experience, so they left their experience to the Posteritie. 2. So there is none of us, but will say as the Samaritans, John 4.42. Now we beleeve, not because of thy report, for we our selves have heard him, and doe know that this is the Christ, the Saviour of the World: and this we have by our owne experience, that God hath beene with us, and it may now teach us, that they which trusted in God, were never deceived. Now our owne experience is in regard of things belonging to this life; and if we can have experience of these, we shall have an easier experience of the rest. 3. So beyond both these, the proper and especiall meanes is the very object, the Word of God, and that, Roman. 10.17. Preached; and after that, we must returne to the same course, that we held in knowledge: for the word by often repetition, we must acquaint our selves with it, we must read it, speake of it, heare it, Deuter. 6. and use the whole practise, as wee said before.
Our experi∣ence must teach us sence. Fdes , the beliefe of earthly things. A meane and way Ad fidem , unto the be∣liefe of hea∣venly.But because Christ, Luke 16.10. saith, that he that is not faithfull in a little, will not be faithfull in much: and John 3.10. if wee beleeve not earthly things, wee shall come farre short in the beliefe of Heavenly things; therefore it hath pleased the learned, both ancient and late, to distinguish Faith into , . a beleife of Heavenly, Earthly, things. And the one (that is) the latter of these, a meanes or way to the other. An argument; it is a way of preparation, and therefore spe∣cially to be handled, which is a speciall part of faith and most effectuall, and is rather to be called Confidentia quàm fides, Con∣fidence then beliefe. It pleaseth God thus to prepare us to faith, that a man must repose himselfe wholly upon God, and he that can be brought to this etiam vacuo penu, when there is no hope of any good, and he altogether unfurnished of earthly meanes, that man will also be able to bestow his confidence on God in heavenly things. Now when the Storehouse of meanes (that is) faith in these earthly things is empty, we cannot attaine to heavenly things.So both are here enjoyned us, that whe∣ther wee have the meanes, or have them not, we should beleeve. The trust in God two wayes, either when it pleas∣eth him to give the meanes, or when wee are destitute of them: when wee have the meanes, be∣cause it plea∣seth God to order that these should be instru∣ments, of our actions, wee are to use them. This faith, or rather confidence in God is considered two wayes, first, either the man that hath it, hath the meanes also: or second∣ly, he that hath it, is utterly without the meanes: If we have them, as we are willed, we are to use them, because it pleased God to ordaine them as ordinary instruments to worke with; as Gen. 30.30. a good care in Jacob to provide for his owne Family. Thou knowest what service I have done thee, and in what case the cattell hath beene under my hand; for the little thou haddest before I came, is in∣creased into a multitude, and the Lord hath blessed thee by my comming: But now when shall I provide for mine owne Family. As also Gen. 22.8. Abraham to Isaac, Isaac speaketh to his Father, here is wood, and fire, and the knife, but where is the Sacrifice? And Abraham answereth, God will provide us the rest, my sonne, he will provide a Sacrifice; if we will doe our parts, God will per∣forme the rest. Therefore we must not doe as (Mat 4.6.) the Tempter would have Christ to doe; to cast himselfe downe from the pinacle of the Temple, when there was an ordinary way to come downe. For this were to neglect the meanes, and to seeke extraordinary meanes. And as we are commanded to use them, and not presume with∣out them: So on the other side, we are forbidden to trust in them. Whether they be private to the Art we are in, which Habac. 1.16. expresseth by a Net, if we sacrifice to our Net, that is, ascribe that we have, to that within us; that is there noted as a fault and fol∣ly. If we ascribe all to our Wealth, and to that our hands get; as Job 31.24. If I made gold my hope, or have said to the wedge of gold, thou art my confidence. vers. 25. If I rejoyced because my sub∣stance was great, or because my hand had gotten much. Or if we trust
to great personages, as Jer. 17.5. He that saith to flesh, that is, to great men, great personages, thou art mine arme, there shall a curse follow, and fall upon him: and not onely to great Personages, but even to Common-wealths, and the strength of them, Psalm. 20.7. Some put their trust in Charriots, and some in Horses; but we will remember the name of the Lord our God; and to the Church, as Jer. 7.4. if we trust that we are of the Church trust not in ly∣ing words, saying, Templum Domini, Templum Domini, Templum Domini hoc est:Though wee heare dili∣gently yet it is not enough unlesse wee have a found judgment withall to judge of them. Meanes desti∣tute of Gods grace, be no∣thing, for their naturall force worketh by his blessing. The meanes have a force given to them naturally, but the blessing, the lord keeps it to himselfe. or as it is, Ezek. 33.30. ordinary commers to Ezekiels Sermons, to heare the word of the Lord, and to jest at it: and to seeke in their hearts after covetousnesse, diligent hea∣rers, not looking to an higher power to blesse the meanes; all shall be made sinne to us, and here is our meanes to our destructi∣on. Therefore this is a speciall thing to regard in them, as to use them well, so not to trust in them. Which may be done two wayes. First, by having a right judgement concerning them. Se∣condly, by using them aright; so as we shew that we doe not thinke that for the good using of them, we shall be blest. For right judgement, Deut. 8.3. God saith, it is not bread that a man liveth by, but his Word; that his eternall decree in nature is that bread that should nourish us: but when he giveth his staffe, it is that, that a man liveth by; and Psalm. 42.6. the Prophet he looked on his Bow and on his Sword, and he saw that they could not helpe him, (for I will not trust in my Bow, it is not my Sword, that shall helpe me) and Psal. 127.1.2. If the Lord adde not his buil∣ding, to our building; and his watching, to our watching; nei∣ther our building, nor our watching shall prosper: The Lord must give us the Staffe of building, watching, nourishing, &c. or else all our meanes will be used in vaine; nothing can be without his blessing. Therefore we are to looke on bread, as on a stone; knowing that it is not that, but the word of the Lord that nourish∣eth: and this must be our judgement of them. For the second, the using of them aright, because this is true, that they are of no more force without a blessing annexed to them;Rectus usus causarum se∣cundarum, the right use of secundary causes. God must san∣ctify them, else there is nothing in them. If wee do not sanctify Gods creatures, with thanksgiving, they will re∣turne to our greater con∣demnation. therefore we are to seeke for a further thing, that may give force and strength to them: and that is procured, and God shall give his infusion, 1 Tim. 4.4, 5. if Prayer goe before, and hearty thanks∣giving, which sanctifie them; and withall, that be provided, that our thanksgiving be not of course, a forme of words, and some∣times begun and ended, before it should have beene begun: This hollow harty thankes was that that Job feared in his sonnes: for he knew, that by reason of his good and carefull education of them, that they did not omit prayer and thanksgiving any day; but he feared least it came not from their heart, and their under∣standing and heart went not together: and therefore every morn∣ing he offered burnt offerings according to the number of them. And doing thus, we come into the number of the Saints, concern∣ing whom we shall reade in the Scriptures, that they have used the same: as Gen. 32.9. Jacob using all the meanes that could be,
in sending messengers before to his brother, to tell him of his comming, thereby to know how his brothers minde was yet af∣fected to him, and telling what they should say unto his brother, and how to demeane themselves, and using great pollicy in sepa∣rating his wives and servants, &c. that were with him, and the Sheep and the Oxen and the Camels, into two companies, and pro∣viding a gift for every one, & setting them in order, that if his bro∣ther came to one company to smite thē, the other company might flie and escape: yet we see, that in the same place he giveth him∣selfe to prayer, thinking that all his meanes could not prevaile, nor should be blessed, unlesse God did add to his arme. So Exod. 17.11. all furniture for the warre is provided for the Israelites; Joshua is their Captaine, all things are in order; but knowing that all this is not availeable, Moses goeth up into the Mount, with Aaron and Hur, to pray, with the rod of God in his hand, and Moses is no longer praying, nor his hands are up, then the Israelites prosper and are victorious; and the Israelites are no longer victorious, then Moses is praying, and his hands are lifted up. How to know if our trust be in God, or in the meanes he givethus. Quid primum in mentem ve∣niat cogitan∣dum, observe thy first thoughts.We find in the Fathers two meanes, whereby a man may cer∣tifie himselfe, whether his trust be in the meanes, more then in the commandement, or no. First, when thou hast any thing to do; cometh thy Net first in∣to thy minde, or thy money, or thy Charriot or Horse, or thy Arme of flesh! or commeth he that hath the prerogative of these, and of all first! For that that first offereth it selfe to the minde, tryeth it, and tryeth it to it selfe for the most part, and all the other be but secondary meanes; 1. is there first a calling of the minde to God? great hazzard it is, but that is the meanes of our confidence. Quid postre∣mum in men∣tem veniat co∣git andum, ob∣serve what comes last in∣to thy minde. If the effect will not re∣turne to the glory of God, non facndum, doe it not. God is our first and our last object. Our nature leaneth to this that so long as the meanes prevaile so long wee trust in them; and if not, then we give them o∣ver, and God too.Secondly, what we set downe last in our mindes; this is a com∣mon practise: The Wise man saith (Prov. 10.15.) that the riches of a rich man are his Towre or strong Citie: and they all expound it thus, that when the justice and goodnesse of his cause, when God and good men, and all things else shall forsake him; then will that sticke to him, and helpe him in his need: and is thus per∣swaded in his mind; that argento respondent omnia, pecuniae omnia o∣bediunt mony answers all things: therefore if a man in the plen∣ty of meanes, can say, as 2 Cor. 13.8. for we cannot doe any thing , against the truth but for the truth. With all my wisedome, friends, goods; and all the meanes I can make, I can doe nothing against a good cause, but for it; and there is my strength and my trust: Wee must not be like to them, Mich. 2.1. that give their minds to doe wicked things, and devise them in their beds, and will notwithstanding execute them in the day, because their hand hath strength. So when a man is so rich, that hee is poore to doe evill; or a man is so wise, that he is foolish in evill; that man hath a good warrant that flesh is not his arme, and that his trust
is not in his Meanes, but in GOD, though his meanes bee many. 2. The other is, when we can trust in God, though there be no meanes; the Greekes Proverbe is, , while their pot seetheth, their trust seetheth: And contrary, while the meanes hold, we can be content to hold forth, and no farther. And this is that provoketh God in his just judgement,God giveth meanes with∣out his bles∣sing, and a blessing with∣out meanes. as to give the means, without the blessing of them; so to bring many things to passe, without any meanes. For as where the blessing of God is, there it falleth, as Psal. 17.14. that mens bellies are silled with hidden treasure; there is thriving and growing, no man can tell by what meanes: So, where he curseth the meanes, as Hag. 1.6. they eate and drinke, and yet they have a privie hunger and thirst; they earne money, and yet decay; and as it were, put it into a bag with∣out a bottome; they add meanes to meanes, and yet prosper not: So we see in 2 Chron. 16.4. albeit Physick be the ordinary meanes to recouer a mans health: yet Asa the King, for seeking first to the Physitians, and after to Gods helpe; his Physick is cursed, and he pineth away. Now for the common estate, 2 Sam. 17.14. that Oracle of wisedome and pollicie Achitophell, he giveth wise counsell,God with∣drawing his blessing from his counsell. but because the Lord curst it, and determined to destroy his good counsell, Hushai the Archites counsell was preferred before his, and we see what befell him presently upon it; when he saw that his counsell was not followed, he sadled his Asse, and went home and hanged himselfe, after he had set his house in or∣der.The meanes of the wise men brought to nought. More plaine in Esay 19.11. the meanes of the wisemen are brought to nought, the wise counsellors of Aegypt, the Lord in fatuavit eos, the Lord hath made them give foolish counsell; and Psalm. 20.7, 8. Some put their trust in Charriots, and some in Horses; but we will remember the name of the Lord our God. They have stum∣bled and are fallen, but we are risen and stand upright. And as here are cursed by God the ordinary meanes, as cloth, food, Physick, wisedome, &c. So God to shew how little he de∣pendeth on his secondary causes; doth oft times bring his pur∣pose to passe without meanes:There is no defect of ver∣tue in the Lord though there be a defect of meanes in na∣ture. Yea, and sometimes contrary to the nature of the meanes; as Iosh. 6.20. in the fall of the Walls of Jericho: it is attributed to the blast of Rammes hornes. The like is Judg. 3.13. by the tale of a dreame of a Barly loafe, tum∣bling from above into the host of Madian, and overthrowing one of the Tents, and the exposition thereof, Gedeon with three hun∣dred men, with Trumpets in their hands, and empty pitchers, and lamps within their pitchers (very unfit weapons for the warres) put to flight all the Madianites, and made them to runne upon themselves: so 2 Kings 7.6. the whole host of the King of Sy∣ria was put to flight, none pursuing them; but a pannicus terror, a pannick terrour came upon them on the sudden; which was by a certaine imagination, that they thought they heard a noyse of Chariots and Horses, and a noyse of a great army, that the Hit∣tites and the Aegyptians came against them to helpe Israel. And
seing then God giveth meanes when he will, and worketh without them when he will: wee must trust in him, whether wee have the meanes or no:A Protestati∣on of the Pro∣phet David. and therefore that wee should be like affected as David was, Psal. 3.6. though he were in the midst of 10000. men of warre, compassed about with them on every side, yet he would not feare: but as it is in the end of the 4. Psal. lay him downe and sleepe, trusting in the safety of the Lord,How the chil∣dren of God ar to stand affected, when they have no meanes. and as Exod. 14.13. Moses counselleth the children of Israel, when the Aegyptians pur∣sued them with their Chariots: though their enemies were be∣hind them, and the Red sea on the one side, and the Wildernesse on the other, that there was no way for them to escape: yet to stand still, and to put their trust in the Lord, and they should see the power of the Lord, as they did. So Rom. 4.19.20.21. the Apostle being to shew a patterne of true faith, setteth downe before us Abraham, that had no meanes either in his wife or in him∣selfe; his wife was barren, 1. by nature, and 2. by age; himselfe 100. yeares old, past the age of getting children, yet neither conside∣ring the deadnesse of Sarahs Wombe, nor of his owne body, held fast by faith the promise of God, nothing doubting of the same: which God tooke not from him: therefore he received the bles∣sing in Isaac. The naturall man, if once his meanes be∣gin to faile, ei∣ther he falleth into despaire, or else flyeth to indirect and evill meanes.And as wee must thus trust in God, when wee see no meanes, so must wee be sure to be farre from the way of the wicked. Who, if God once faile, then do they not only lose their hope they have in his meanes: but cast him away too: and berake themselves to his enemie; and his evill meanes. Such meanes are of those, who in despaire of their health, leave God and his lawfull meanes: and flye to Sorcerers, &c. Esa. 8.19. it is shewed there,There is a re∣straint for see∣king meanes at sorcerers hands. that it is con∣demned: & 1. Chron. 10.13. the casting away of Saul out of his kingdome, and out of the favour of God, and his damnation, both in body and soule, is ascribed to that, that he sought and asked counsell of a Familiar. Beside these; if any do that which Esay saith (Esa. 29.15.) of them that turne Devises, and digge deepe their counsells, that men may not see them: but they know that it is but a turne, and a wrong Devise, and therefore Woe is pronounced against them: and God knoweth the deepe fetches of policie of such men, as thinke they deceive God, as they deceive men:Over reach∣ers in bargai∣ning this is common. so Esa. 8.12. there is another meanes, confederacie; a suppressing of those that have gifts, and that is their strength for bringing to passe of lewd things: an unlawfull meanes and condemned. Another, to make vantage of a mans oversight: as the money that many can get by that meanes, when they have once got it, it is their owne: wee must rather harken to his counsell, 1. Thes. 4.6. , that no man go beyond and desraud his brother in any matter; to be able to circumvent a man in dealing, it is condemned. And when none of these meanes will serve: then our last refuge is, that Jer. 18.18. come, this Jeremie troubleth us; wee must have a devise against him; and that is this: let us smite
him with our tongues, that is, let us raise up some slanderous reports of him, let us slander him; and so he shall not be better thought off, then wee: and so none will give eare to his words. But there is a bitter prayer of the Prophet against them: which God, no doubt heard, vers. 19. to the end of the Chapter. , Beleife in hea∣ly things. If in compas∣sing of earthly things, we can beare, we shall also beare in the compas∣sing of hea∣venly things: whether the means be with us, or not with us.Wee returne now to that wee said in the beginning; hereby wee shall know if it please God to blesse us with that , faith in heavenly matters, (i.e.) if in the compassing of earthly things, and in our earthly dealings, wee can put our trust in the Lord: wee must not be Leo in villa: Prov. 22.13. and think that our hornes can cast downe much: and so consequently that wee need not meanes: but if the meanes be with us, wee can trust in the Lord: so if wee have them not, yet to put our trust in God. Another thing is, they can be without them themselves: in re∣spect of themselves, they are very confident; but if it once come to semen nostrum; either flesh, or profit; there is a distrust: and it is to be feared, that many that might have beene saved in the state of single life, have fallen from God, and hazarded their owne sal∣vation by mistrusting that God will not as well provide for their children,Many for their children have brought them∣selves into hazzard of their salvati∣on. as he hath done heretofore for them: whereas God saith, Gen. 17.7. Ero deus tui & seminis tui, (i.e.) I will be thy God & the God of thy seed after thee: and Esaiah addeth to it, and saith, & seminis seminis tui, yea of thy seeds seed. Yet men cannot beleeve that he will be so. Ambrose, plausibilis excusatio est, liberi: praetexatis illos: sed dic mihi ô homo! an unquam petiisti à deo ut patier fieres an illud etiam petiisti, da liberos, ut ammittam deum? da liberos, ut peccem pro∣pter liberos? It is a plausible excuse to cry alas my children, I must provide for them, but tell me ô man, (saith he) didst thou ever pray that God would make thee a father of children, and didst thou put in that! ô Lord give me children that I may part with thee for them, give me children that I may sinne for my children? I am sure saith he, you never said so: and yet this is the common pra∣ctise, 1. King. 5.22. Gehazi, when he saw that his master would take no reward at Naamans hands, ranne speedily after him: said not that his master Elisha needed the talent, and two changes of rayment; but he told him that there were two children of the Prophets, come from Mount Ephraim, that needed them. But surely, as Elisha told Gehazi, v. 26. if it were not a time for him to take rewards, then it was no time for the children of the Prophets to take them: and it was not convenient, that Naaman an Heathen should be beneficiall to the Prophet of the Lord: therefore wee must trust in the Lord as well for our children, as for our selves, and Abraham, Gen. 17.18. hath his blemish for loving Ishmael so much (oh that Ishmael might live in thy sight) Ishmael must be for∣gotten of Abraham. Now the fifth; The signes of faith: though this be a great signe not to rely too much upon the meanes, though every one be ready to say, Credo in Deum, I beleeve in God: yet that is true, 2. Thes. 3.2.
non omnium est sides, all men have not faith; therefore that must be added, 1. Pet. 1.7. that , the triall of faith; is more precious then gold. , not to seeke excuses.The first signe, (Chrysostome upon Rom. 4.19.) is when a man is not wittie, ingeniosus ad causas, ready to seeke causes, quarells and excuses not to beleeve. What a sort of causes and exceptions might Abraham have alleadged,He did not : but wholly gave over himselfe to beleeve that which nature and reason could not be perswaded off. that it was impossible for him ever to have a Sonne! yet wee see true faith prevailed with him, so that he excepted not, either by Sarahs barrennesse, or by his owne weaknesse; but credidit, He beleeved. But amongst the rest, there was one especiall exception, to beleeve a great while, and nothing cometh. Abraham having no children all the time before, there was no hope for him to have any child in his old age. And so doe they conclude, Mal. 3.14. that there is no fruit to be had by serving of God, and therefore they would serve him no more. Against these, is that saying of Esa. 28.16. Qui credit, ne festinet, he that beleeveth must not make hast; hast and impatiencie of the spirit are unfit companions for faith: he that will see in hast, his faith is in vaine, and therefore wee must not give over our faith, if wee cannot see the blessing come upon us in haste: but, as was said before, wee must beleeve, though there be a wrestling for it, Gen. 23.28. the Angell of the Lord wrestled with Jacob; and as he wrestled, gave him a blow on the hollow of his thigh: and such a blow, that he halted of it; which was an evill preparative, for a blessing: yet would he not let him goe, till he had got a blessing of him, Mat. 15.28. Three repulses were abidden of the woman of Canaan (1. vers. 23.12. vers. 24.13. vers. 26.) yet not making hast, shee confirmed her faith to be true, and received the reward of a true faith. , not to run a madding after worldly preferment.The second also is by him set downe, and his ground is out of the great Scripture of faith, Heb. 11.13.25. , not to runne a madding after wordly preferment: and this he taketh to be a most infallible note of true faith. This scraping together of worldly wealth, so that every man seeketh to have his portion in this life, is an argument that wee are borne Citizens of this world: not as the godly men and Saints of God, that shewed themselves to be as Pilgrims in this world, and that they sought another countrey, an heavenly countrey; and so God was not ashamed to be called their God. But a more particular example of faith, and more speciall for choice is, vers. 25. Moses being in great possibility to be a Prince; (for he should have beene the on∣ly sonne to Pharaohs daughter) yet wee see his coldnesse was such, to the world and the preferment thereof, that he refused it, and chose rather to suffer affliction with his brethren the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sinne (for so he accompted of the preferment of the world) for a time. The third signe is taken out of Heb. 11.1. from the definiti∣on of faith, faith is called, , a subsistence; therefore the faithfull, they are called, . Now wee know that , it
betokeneth such a thing, as is able to receive a great masse of great weight, falling from above, and never shrinke, nor be crusht toge∣ther, nor broken in peeces; such are the servants of God, Psal. 46.2. wee see how  the Prophet is. Therefore will we not feare though the earth be moved, and though the hills he carried into the mids of the Sea, though the waters thereof rage and swell, and though the Mountaines shake at the tempest of the same, &c. yet the Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge, so Psal. 112.6. the Pro∣phet gathereth together all the words, that signifie in the He∣brue, to withstand and to suffer and beare a burthen, &c. speaking of the faithfull. And contrarie is the condition of him that wanteth faith, or is wanting in faith, Mat. 14.30. come there but a gale of wind, and Peter sinks, but Job. 13.15. wee see the very fulnesse of the  of faith in Job, though he kill mee, yet will I trust in him; though God should shew his heavy wrath upon him, yet he would not let goe his hold: These are the signes of perfect faith. Signes of a young & ten∣der faith.There be signes also of a young and tender faith; and the Holy ghost doth no lesse with signes of a young and tender faith then of a perfect. 4. A good faith estabisheth it selfe by the works of the law; if it bee not a working faith, it is ca∣daver fidei, but the carcasse of faith.But the fourth is that which is, Rom. 3.31. a signe also of the faith of the Law, a signe of a naughty faith, if it make voyd the Law: true faith doth establish the Law, first, if it be a faith that doth not strengthen it selfe, 2. Pet. 1.10. , by good works; , wherefore the rather brethren give diligence to make your calling and election sure, for if yee doe these things yee shall never fall, For if it doe not, then (Jam. 2.26.) it is putridum ca∣daver, a rotten carcasse;Faith is an a∣ction proper to the mind. and not faith. That which is, Rom. 10.10. , &c. that a man beleeveth with his heart; wee know that it belongeth to the mind, and so in Deut. 6.5. wee must love God with the mind; but that is not proper to the mind,If it bee once in the heart, it will come out and shew it selfe it speech, in actions, &c. but to the heart: yet if it come not into the heart, and kindle it also, from whence Prov. 4.23. come the springs of life, and all the actions and opinions of a man: there shall be no action, and consequently no true faith. If the heart be once pos∣sessed▪ then 2 Cor. 4.13. wee shall beleeve, and therefore wee must needs speake, Psal. 116.10. I beleeved, therefore will I speake: and as it is Psal. 35.10. not only the tongue shall speake, but all the bones, (i.e.) every member that wee have, Psal. 10. All my bones shall say, Lord who is like thee? The physitions have a saying, that judicium à corde fit per brachium, the hart will give a pulse to every part by the veines: but it may be sensibly percei∣ved by the arme, and by that pulse they know the disease of the heart they use a remedy for the diseases of the heart; so in the Gospell it hath a present remedie; so if faith be once in the heart it will spread it selfe throughout the whole man, but it doth e∣specially declare it selfe by the arme, (id est) in the operations and working of it, and this is not by little and little, or seven yeares
after; but as it is commonly said; when any beleeved in Christ, ca∣dem horâ sanatus est, he was made whole the same houre.This faith must appeare in life, and not in death only, for so every man, even the wicked will crust in God in death: be∣cause he  not otherwise choose. Esa. 66.8. Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seene such things! shall the earth be brought forth in one day! or shall a nation be borne at once! for as soone as Sion travailed, shee brought forth her children: the Prophet he wondreth at it, yet that is the signe of true faith, therefore no∣thing like to them, that have not the fruits of their faith seene till they die; for then they must trust in God whether they will or no, not all their life they will not, but at their death; but then there is no remedy: yet it is not said in the Scriptures, that justus mori∣tur ex side, but vivit ex fide, the just man dieth, but the just man lives by faith: his faith must live, and not die. I will not pray with Balaam, let my soule die with the righteous; I will rather pray the contrary, and it is the duty of a Christian so to pray, Let my soule live with the faithfull. For the sixt precept, of the affirmative,6. Rule, our a∣na cōmūa∣tio fide, to cō∣municate our faith to others. There is no mercy to be shewed to any of these. wee are willed to entangle others with the meanes, and use them to others profit, as well as to our owne: this sixt precept of the affirmative the Apostle Paul observeth, Rom. 1.11.12. he desireth, though strong in faith, that he might be strengthened and comforted by their faith; as on the other side, the contrary is not only for∣bidden, but a punishment also injoyned, Deut. 13. If any intice thee to follow strange Gods, if he be a Prophet, if he be thy brother, if he be a dreamer of dreames, if thine owne sonne, or thy daughter, or thy wife, or thy friend, thou art commanded not to consent to him, nor pitie him, nor shew mercy, but shalt put them all to the sword, and he that is seduced, his hand shall be first on the seducer. And doing thus, in extending thus our faith to the good of others; wee shall receive the end of our faith, the salvation of our soules,Credndo quod non videmus, videbimus quod non videmu-Timor Dei, the feare of God. Faith never accepted with God, before it come into the heart; it comes thither if we stirre up the affections. Cor sedes af∣fectionum, the heart is the fear of the af∣fections. When it com∣eth into the heart, it stir∣reth. Species affe∣ctionum in cor de nostro, the severall affections of the heart. 1. Pet. 1.9. and shall re∣ceive this answer with the Centurion, Mat. 8.13. Vade, & secun∣dum fidem tuam fiet tibi, goe thy way, and as thou hast beleeved so be it done unto thee; this Gods answer will be to us: & merces fidei est visio Dei, the reward of faith is the vision of God; for in rebus supra naturam, idem est videre & habere, in supernaturall things to see and enjoy is all one; so wee shall have him: credendo quod non videmus, videbimus quod credimus, by beleeving what wee see not, wee shall at length see what now wee beleeve. And thus of the duty of the minde. Now to the worship of the heart; Rom. 10.10. it is said, that faith must come into the heart, and the heart must beleeve; els there can be no righteousnesse. For there must be a mutuall affe∣ction of the mind and the heart; for if the heart love not, the minde will not long beleeve, and if the minde beleeve not, the heart will not love long. Now the heart is the place of affections, and being the place of affections, wee shall know that it commeth into the heart, if it stirre up the affections that are in that part, to the worship of God. The affections are partly such as are agreeable to our nature,
and such as wee wish for; partly such as wee wish to be farre from us: of the former kind are, love, hope, joy, &c. of the other, seare, griefe, hatred. Finis & usus affectionum in corde, the end and use of the affections in the heart.God hath ordained them both to a double use; for griefe, ha∣tred, feare, and those that are of the two sorts, are first either reines to keepe us from evill, or secondly after evill committed, they are our tormentors to punish us. So of the other three, are two uses also, for first either they are spurres and provocations to do good, and secondly if wee doe good, to be our comforters, to cherish the thoughts, of the heart, so there is a beginning of blisse here. The first of them is, Feare toward God; the reason, because the word of God being the object of faith.Timor inter affectiones pri∣ma, the prime affection is feare. Because the affections have their pri∣us & posteri∣us, their first and last. Looke what object is first, that affection is first; accor∣ding to this, conclude, be∣cause Gods justice was first proclay∣med, there∣fore feare first to be hand∣led. There is a faith in Moses (i. e.) the knowledge of Gods justice. 1. Moses his feare. And these 2. are properly attributed to feare. Why God set justice first to be apprehen∣ded. Whether wee take it whole and in grosse; or the five books of Moses before the foure Gos∣pells, or in the very beginning; wee see our faith apprehendeth in the order of the word; that, in what day soever thou shalt eat of the fruit of the tree, thou shalt die; before the other, the seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head. So the Justice of God offereth it selfe first to be handled, which justice, the knowledge that is by faith apprehending, armed with the other eight attributes, to make it seeme more fearefull; consi∣dering it with them; and the conscience telling us, that man hath taken of the forbidden fruit, necessary it is that feare come out of this consideration, and consequently be in us for our trans∣gressions. It is that which before was said, Joh. 3.6. si crederetis Moysi, crederetis & mihi, if yee beleeved Moses yee would beleeve mee; first Moses must be beleeved, and then Christ. The first is a faith in Gods justice. There is a most manifest ex∣ample of this, Jonah 3.5. crediderunt Deo, & timuerunt, they be∣leeved God and feared, which is nothing else but a faith in Gods justice. They of the later writers, giving to faith 6. motives; make the two first and especiall these, 2. contri∣tionem, a grinding to powder by feare, by that knowledge the law being apprehended, Psal. 119.120. the Prophet telleth us, what is the true object of feare; My flesh trembleth for feare of the O Lord, I am humbly afraid of thy judgments: this effect is of faith in the justice of God. The reason why it pleased God to set justice first to be appre∣hended, and feare, is that before any matter be brought to passe, that that hindreth must be taken away. Have God wee cannot, because Esa. 59.2. there is a separation betweene him and us, and as it is said, Ephes. 2.14. there is a great partition wall betwixt; therefore wee cannot have him.Causae prohi∣entes & ex∣pellentes p∣catum, The causes which hinder the growth of sinne are, 1. Timor, feare. Now as wee should looke for him that should breake downe; so if wee will have it broken downe, it is expedient that wee should not build it higher, there∣fore wee must cease to heape sinne upon sinne, and looke for Christ to breake downe that which is already built. That that causeth us to cease from sinne, is the feare of God, Prov. .13. expulsor peccati. timor domini, the feare of the Lord
teacheth us to hate evill: not saying as it is, Rom. 6.1. , What shall we say then? shall we continue in sinne that grace may abound? therefore this is the reason why God commandeth feare, because it makes to leave sinne. There are besides this, two other reasons, and two other affecti∣ons: but it pleased God to make choyce of this here; for not one∣ly feare, but shame, and griefe, or paine, cause men to leave an evill thing; but they that are moved neither with shame nor griefe, with feare are moved. For shame, Psal. 83.16. the Prophets pray∣er is, Fill their faces O Lord, with shame;2. Pudor, shame that they may seeke thy name: for griefe, Esa. 28.19. vexatio dabit intellectum, if a man smart for it, experience will teach him understanding.3. Dolor, griefe. Puder tollitur multitudine pec∣cantium dolorem tollit, aut certe mitigat volup terrena. But wee know, that in multitude of offenders there is no place for shame: therefore that cannot prevaile, seeing the world is full of offen∣ders: and for paine, we have terrenas consolatiunculas, some few worldly pleasures to beate it out, or at the least to season it: but feare, which it pleaseth God here to require at our hands, is that, when these faile, it faileth not, as we see it hath prevailed in evill men, yea in beasts. Gen. 3.10. Adam walked up and downe in Pa∣radise with comfort enough, though he had Fig-leaves, and was naked: his humbling came not to any perfection, till he heard the voyce of the Lord comming toward him. Acts 24.25. Felix the Deputy being a very ill man, and an Heathen; we see he fell into a trembling on a discourse of Pauls concerning justice and tempe∣rance, and other vertues, and especially of the judgements of God. This were somewhat, but that it moveth beasts also: and that beast, in which there is most brutishnesse: Numb. 22.23.25, 27. Balaams Asse being in feare of the Angel of the Lord, that stood in the way, while there was roome enough on both sides, ranne aside out of the way: when there was no roome,  that one might passe by another, he rubs the Prophets foote against the wall: and when there was no way at all to escape the Angel of the Lord, he falleth downe flat under him: and though he were sore beaten, yet he could not be made to runne upon the Angels sword: no stripes can drive an Asse where he seeth danger to be; to runne in∣to that danger, but he will be sooner killed with stripes, then move. Yet beyond these, as that Iam. 2.19. that howsoever all other things are not brought forth out of the Devils; yet feare com∣meth of their faith, Daemones credunt, & contremiscunt, the Devils be∣leeve and tremble: therefore this must needs bee a most forcible meanes: and he is far gone, and in a very fearfull case, that feareth not. You will happily say, but God speaketh much of love: that were a better way to be brought by love, to obedience and beliefe.Objection. Responded: It is true, It is a farre better way: but the case is so, that love will not prevaile with us; for he that doth love a good thing,Solution. must have a knowledge of it, and by his knowledge, a taste of it: and if his taste be infected, as in a Fever, they that are troubled with it, are delighted with nothing, but that which seemeth good to the corrupted state; and if wholsome meate be offered them,
yet they love it not,If the love be infected, there is no love of that which is profitable. unlesse it agree with their corrupted taste: and consequently cannot be brought by love to taste of the wholsome meate; yet this reason will be forcible enough to perswade them to take it; that if they take it not, their fit will be sharp, or their life shorter: so feare workes in them, in whom love prevaileth not. In the same state are naturall men; spirituall joyes, if they could be tasted,We have such a disease of sin, that let one talk of the joyes of the Saints that they have in heaven, an evill tast cannot ta it, and conse∣quently cannot love it. feare were superfluous: but we with vaine delights of earthly pleasures, and ease, and evill company, have cloyed our selves, and brought our soules to an evill taste, so that we are come to that, that we cannot desire that which is to be desired: and that which is not to be desired, we desire: onely now because we see, that course that we have taken, it wil bring us into sharper fits, or bereave us of our spirituall life; the feare of losing this, that may prevaile with us; therefore necessary it is that feare should be. Yet we may adde this, that to this love we are brought by feare. An Heathen man saith, odium peccandi oportet facias, non metum, man should hate,By feare we ab∣staine from evill. not feare sinne: and this odium peccandi, hatred of sinne commeth from feare. For feare maketh us to abstaine from sinne: abstinence from sinne, bringeth a good life: having a good life, we beginne to have a good conscience: beginning to have a good conscience, we shall be without feare, and have peace of consci∣ence: and then it beginneth to love, and to taste of God and god∣linesse. A timore, bona vita; a bona vita, bona conscientia; a bona conscientia, amor: therefore love and feare in this respect are com∣pared to a needle and a thread the needle, that is not to tarry, but to bring the thread through: so feare comes not to stay in the heart, but to bring mutuall love: therefore we must feare first, before we can come to love. Discat timere, qui non vult timere; discat ad tem∣pus esse solicitus,Finis & usus ti∣meris, the end and use of fear, Time ne timeas, feare that thou mayst not fear. qui vult esse securus, Let him learne to feare, that would live without feare; let him learne to be solicitous for a time here, that would be secure for ever hereafter: So the use of feare is, restraint of evill, and causing of love. Now to the Objection. The common definition of feare is Expectatio mali, an expecta∣tion of evill:Quomodo Deus summe bonus ti∣meri potest, how can God be said to be feared; which is the chiefest good? here now, may be some doubt to them that have not the deeper skill in Divinity, how one can be said to feare God, seeing in him there is no evill: for he is wholly goodnesse it selfe: and the Fountaine of all goodnesse: and consequently there is no evill in him; and therefore cannot be said to be feared. To this we say, that God is not first and principally to be fea∣red; but (as before hath beene said) his judgements:Deus ut objectum timoris. How God is the object of feare. that is, the effect of Gods justice, that is first feared, and God secundarily: the reason why it is principally feared, because in it concurre all the affections and qualities, that can by any meanes move feare: which the Philosopher calleth , things full of feare: and that is indeed objectum formidabile, an object altogether fearfull, in three respects: malum futurum, propinquum, vires excedens; First, it is an evill which is not yet past. Secondly, it is nigh at hand. Third∣ly, it is unsupportable.
1. It is to come, malum futurum: therefore Christ, Matth. 24.6. after he had reckoned up many calamities that should happen, he addeth, But the end commeth not yet, the greatest is behinde. Whatsoever we shall suffer in this world, yet the end is to come. Nearenesse in two respects, 1. in respect that all things are his, 2. whereso∣ever we come, there he is also: Deus ubique, God is every where.2. It is propinquum, neare at hand, the armies of God are al∣wayes round about us: wheresoever we are, God is with us, and we are in the middest of his hoste, as was said before: all his crea∣tures be armed to the destruction of the wicked. 3. It must be a matter of great difficulty, that it may exceede our power: which is the naturall course of feare, that there be defectus potentiae, a defect of power to resist: this also is necessarily inclu∣ded in Gods judgements. Psal. 130.3. If thou wilt be extreme O Lord, to marke what is done amisse, O Lord, who may abide it? 1 Cor. 10.22. Doe we provoke the Lord to anger? are we stronger then he? i. our strength is as stubble before him, nothing to resist: and we are not (as Job saith) of brasse or stone. In this arduum or difficulty are comprehended foure degrees of encrease: 1. that it be a punishment, malum poenae: there is a barre erected, and an arraignment: 2 Cor. 5.10. for we must all appeare before the tribunall, &c. Abel is elected, and Caine rejected. 2. It must be insolitum, strange, without example: Heb. 10.31. horrendum est incidere in manus Dei, it is a horrible thing to fall in∣to the hands of God. 3. It must be malum subitum, or repentinum: 1 Thes. 5.3. it shall come alway suddenly, upon them that feare not. Prov. 29.1. A man that hardneth his necke when he is rebuked, shall suddenly be destroyed, and cannot be cured. 4. If it be without remedy incurable: and that is in two re∣spects, as before was shewed: so is the judgement of God especi∣ally in the life to come: for as God will shew the uttermost of his power in providing rewards for his chosen:When God comes to bee considered, sub ratione personae, as a person, he comes to bee considered un∣der those per∣son; that ar most crible to us. God compareth himselfe to a King, and ther∣fore hee chal∣lengeth this fear to him. In eo qui time∣tur, tria conside∣randa, consider there are three things conside∣rable in him whom we fear. 1. Authoritas, his authority. so he will surely shew it to the uttermost in providing punishments for them that will not feare, and the wicked. So this is the object of feare, and this is it, that faith must looke for. Now secondly, as it is said in Philosophy, etiam timetur ille, qui potest malum infligere, we are said to feare him properly who is able to punish us; and so come to say, God is feared. In the party that is to be feared, there are three things to be considered. 1. Au∣thority: though a child be a King, and a woman beare rule over us, which of themselves are weake, yet in regard of their authority, they become very terrible unto us, Mal. 1.6. A sonne honoureth his father, &c. If I be a father, where is mine honour? if I be your Master, where is my feare? and he may by best right challenge it: for his authority is highest, and above all. Esa. 49.24. Shall the prey be taken from the mighty? or the lawfull captive be delivered? but thus saith the Lord, even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the tyrant shall be delivered, &c. And not onely a King, but as it is Revel. 4.10. such a one, as all the celestiall powers and
principalities shall fall on their faces before him, and cast their Crownes at his feete, and say: Thou O Lord art onely worthy to receive all power, glory, honour, and authority. 2. Potestas pu∣uend, his pow∣er to punish. The course and nature of might.2. Though he have no authority, yet if he have power, if he be a mighty enemy, and not onely that, but a furious person; hee is to be feared: might is fearfull, but especially the might of God, which as it exceedeth the course and nature of all other might, so it hath provoked them that were farthest of, to feare: as Dan. 3.26. Nebuchadnezzar, when he saw that by Gods power working above nature, the three men walked in the fiery Oven without any him, either to their body or garments: it so terrified him, that he made a contrary Decree to his former, and caused it to be published throughout all his Countries, and Regions, that whosoever blas∣phemed the God of Sidrach, &c. should be drawne in peeces with horses, and his house made a jakes. Dan. 6.26. When King Da∣rius saw how wonderfully Daniel was delivered from the Lions, he was stricken with such a feare, that he caused his accusers to bee cast into the Denne: and to make a Decree throughout all his Do∣minions, that they should feare and tremble before the God of Da∣niel. So we read often in the Gospel, obstupuerunt, they were asto∣nied at his power. 3. Fault. 1. Con∣scientientia in paiente deli∣ctorum nostro∣um. In that he is privie to the offences wee commit against him.3. That we leane upon him, in respect of some sinne wee have done, to which he is privie. Exod. 2.14. Moses, when he saw no man nigh, was bold enough to kill the Egyptian; but when he per∣ceived that some were privie to his fact, he fell into a feare, and fled, Heb. 4.13. There is no creature, but is bare in Gods sight; all our transgressions are naked before him: therefore to be feared, as privie to our transgressions: therefore our feare must be fixed on him also.Differentia inter timorem Dei & hommum. The difference betweene the feare of God & the fear of men. And this puts a difference betweene the feare of God, and the feare of men, which they call malum diuturnitatis custo∣dem, an ill preserver of diuturnity: for the feare of God is bonus custos diuturnitatis, the best preserver of it, because there may be no meanes used to put away Gods wrath, or to escape his jurisdicti∣on: whereas there may be meanes devised, that man; power might be resisted: or at the least to avoid his jurisdiction: therefore Ie∣rome saith,Rule 1. Quid hic praeci∣pitur. What is here commanded. Timor seorum initialis: filio∣rum, gratuitus. A feare of ser∣vants, at their entring: of children, free. Timor servilis non prosus re∣jiciendus. A servile seare is not altoge∣ther to be re∣jected. Ubi timor Domini est possessor animae, where the feare of the Lord possesseth the soule, there no hope to escape: and no feare, but it shall be with diuturnity. Now to our Rules, what is commanded, and forbidden: 1. what is commanded: 1. here is commanded both feares. The Schoolmen they divide it into two other kinds, (which is not so necessary) the 1. they call timorem servorum, a feare of slaves, which is a good feare, though some unskilfull men condemne it now adayes: yet is the one better then the other. It is true, Rom. 8.15. to them that are come to a grouth in Christ, that they have not received , the spirit of bondage to feare againe: therefore it is a thing to be received: It is inferior to the spirit of adoption: but yet this spirit is better then the spirit of Belial, and that of slumber, Esa. 29.10. which is either a dissolutenesse of life, and contempt of
God; which possesseth the most part of the world, or a blockish∣nesse in sinne, which is more diffused then the other. Actio per∣fecta non accipitur, nisi imperfecte primo, perfect Actions are at the first received with some imperfection. It is a good thing to bee a sonne: but yet it is better to be a servant, and as it is, Psal. 84.11. to be a doore-keeper in the house of God, then to dwell in the tents of ungodlinesse, and to be with Gods enemies; and to say with the prodigall sonne, Luke 15.19. I am no more worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy hired servants. It is good being in Canaan, the land of promise: but yet it is better to be in the Wildernesse, then in Egypt. Aug. writing on Luke 12.4. hath this saying: You will say, Timeo gehennam, quid dicam ego? male times, vane times; vi∣deo Dominum sustulisse unum timorem, posuisse alterum; porsus time. I am afraid of Hell; what shall I say? that thy feare is nought and vaine? No, I see the Lord hath denied thee one kind of feare, and left thee the other; feare and spare not: And in another place, he saith: fac si nondum potes amore justitiae, at timore poenae, If thou canst not doe it for the love of righteousnesse, yet doe it for the feare of punishment: and his ground is out of Deut. 5.29. nothing brought the Jewes to the Law of God, but the terror they con∣ceived of the strange sights they saw: and yet God wished that his people might have such an heart alwayes: yet that was but a servile feare, for it came of these fearfull sights and noyses, that did concurre at the delivery of the Law.The Clouds, Earthquake, & Thunder, no∣thing else but to worke feare. It pleased God to annex to his Law the Proclamation of his justice, to the end it might stirre up feare in the hearers; which is the proper effect of the Law. Timor filiorum. Filiall feare. The former feare is of a de∣fect of our selves, the lat∣ter of love.The other they call timor filiorum, a filiall feare: they use to make example of this in the sonne of the poore man, that hath a reve∣rend feare to offend his Father, though he know that he will doe him no good, nor can doe him any hurt: this is not that, that was before, it may be called reverence: the other commeth of the feare of the Law, this of love. This is that feare, Psal. 19.9. that endureth for ever, and Phil. 2.12. he chargeth them to make an end of their salvation with feare and trembling. Cum Dewn a∣mamus, timere debemus, ratio iplex. Our love to God is mixt with feare for a three-fold reason. 1. Reason. The doctrine of feare shew∣eth plaine, that it is vaine. 2. Reason. The reason why it pleased God, when love commeth to com∣mand feare, is threefold, 1. that the vaine dreame of many spi∣rits of error, dreaming of a perfection in this life, might be over∣throwne. Prov. 28.14. Beatus qui semper pavidus. If any have perfection in this life, he cannot fall: if he cannot fall, feare is su∣perstuous: but because we might know that during this life there is an unperfect perfectnesse therefore this feare is alwayes neces∣sary. 2. The children of God feele alwayes in themselves how feeble their faith, how doubtfull their hope, how cold and unsavory their prayers, how slacke their repentance, and how all the rest of the duties are weakened in them: in some more, in some lesse; as the Spirit in measure more or lesse communicateth to them, as they did in David: yet if feare remaine, we shall recover our selves to God againe: and he that loseth it not, Prov. 28.14. his heart shall never
be hardened: there is a good preservative for the heart. Though all other duties be failing, yet if this tarry, there shall come no de∣spaire. Bernard saith, In veritate comperi, that he knowes the truth of it by experience: that for the keeping, recovering, assuring of the vertues and duties that God hath commanded, there is not a more profitable rule then to feare, while the grace of God is present with us;The Fathers, Custos omnium virtutum est timor. Feare is the guard of all other ver∣tues. and when that is once departed, then there is nothing left but to feare, and never rest, till we have made our selves fit for the receiving of it againe: knowing this, quia si deficit illa, deficis & tu; if once thy feare decay, thou decayest with it: and when we have recovered it, then to feare lest we should lose it againe: for feare of relapse will make us more circumspect. Jerome calleth it Custodem omnium virtutum, the preserver of all other vertues. 3 That this excellent duty love,3. Reason. the effect of this feare, might not waxe carclesse: Cant. 3.1. Love fell asleepe with her beloved in her armes: and her beloved was gone: so if there be not a mixture of feare with our love, it falleth asleepe, and waxeth secure: and so it loseth her beloved: therefore that we may be sure we keepe love in our armes, and keepe her waking, there must be a mixture of feare with it. So in these three Reasons, feare is necessary, even in our perfect estate. And withall, this wee see, how that Solomon, Prov. 1.7. as also David, Psal. 111.10. how they call it the begin∣ning of wisedome:As feare is the first, so it is the last worke, and thus is timor castus, Col ha∣adam. This fili∣all feare, the whole man, or the summe of all. The Negative part. and Col haadam, the whole man. In the end of the Preacher the conclusion of all things, Feare God, and keepe his Commandements; Prov. 14.27. it is called, fons vitae, the feare of the Lord, is a well-spring of life, &c. Faith is the beginning of Christian religion, as principles of scien∣ces: so feare is the beginning, as the first worke: so the other, the reverent feare, that is the conclusion of all things. There is forbidden here, first want of feare: the effect whereof is, hardnesse of heart: and that is of two sorts, and the first is a way to the second. The first commeth of a false erroneous perswasion, Eccles. 8.11. Because sentence against those, that set their heart on evill, is not speedily executed; the children of men they harden their hearts: there go∣eth away feare: and the conclusion of this is, Psal. 50.21. they will say to us, God is like to us, that will suffer men to do wickedly, and let them goe unpunished; whereas, Rom. 2.4. they ought to have reasoned, that God doth delay his punishment, that we should not delay, but be brought to repentance Prov. 29.1. If we delay, and profit not by it, his destruction will be sudden upon us. By this meanes commeth it to passe, which the Prophet saith Psal. 36.1. that his heart giveth him, that there is no feare of God before the eyes of the ungodly: Gen. 20.11. as Abraham said, there is no feare of God in this place: therefore no care of the Commandements of God, no care of duty. According as thou art feared, so is thy dis∣pleasure.2. So secondly, because there must be still a proportion betweene the object, and the power apprehending, Psal. 90.11. our feare, if it be not according to the power of Gods wrath, we shall not have so
reverend an esteem of his judgements as we ought, not that we can feare God as much as he ought to be feared: Si contereremur usque ad pulverem, though we grind our selves to powder, though we should tremble, till one bone fell frō another; yet there is a measure:Our feare must goe farre be∣yond mans tra∣dition. Esa 29.13. when a man is sure he feareth God beyond mens precepts, Mat. 15.2. that he abstaineth from such things, as mans law for∣biddeth not, nor punisheth: if he goe no further then mans law, his feare is short. This then is the triall of our feare, if we make the like conscience of doing those things which mans law doth not for∣bid, as of those which both Gods and mans law do take hold of. This feare is in respect of an object that is not to be fea∣red, it pleaseth God to punish the feare of man 2. wayes. 1. In this life, Psalm. 53.6. 2 Prov. 10.24. that whereas they give over the feare of God, that which they most feare, shall fall on them, as Exod. 1. and 1 King. 12.11.Againe, as want of feare is forbidden, so on the contrary, to feare that we should not feare; Psal. 53. the reprobates have this for their punishment; v. 2. Corrupt are they, and become abominable in their doings. v. 6. They were afraid where no feare was, &c. Trepidaverunt ti∣more, ubi not erat causa timoris. So we see, where superstition, and the religion of God are mixed; there is small account made of Gods feare that he hath set downe: and of the other, what man hath invented, there is great feare of conscience. So likewise, Luk. 12.4. the feare of man is forbidden. Revel. 21.8. the fearefull, that for feare have transgressed, their portion shall be with the un∣beleevers. We have examples: Pharaoh was afraid of the growing of the Israelites into too great a number, and made edicts to kill the male children of the Israelites: 1 King. 12.27. Jeroboam feared the heart of the people would returne to their Lord Rehoboam, if they should go up and do sacrifice in the house of the Lord at Jerusa∣lem, and therefore he made two calves of gold, and so brought the people to Idolatry: Mat. 2. Herod was afraid that hee should lose his Kingdome, therefore he commanded all the male children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, to be killed, from two yeares old and under: Joh. 11.47. the Jewes were afraid, that if they suffered Christs doctrine so to prevaile, all would be∣leeve in it, and the Romans would come and take away the King∣dome from them. 2. Punishment Prov. 10.24.The second, the punishment: Prov. 10.24. Quod timet impius, ac∣cidet illi, the feare of the wicked it shall come upon him: so that thing that these foure most feared, that happened to them: the Ro∣mans came, and the Jewes lost their Kingdome: Herod mist of his purpose, and lost his Kingdome: Jeroboam was put out in the next generation: and the Israelites increased, and prevailed against Pha∣raoh and the Egyptians. 4. Rule. Media timoris meanes to be∣get feare.The meanes. Seeing how vehement a mover feare is, beside that that hath beene spoken before, the first way or motive to feare is, the weighing of such Scriptures as containe matter, that may give occasion of meditation of Gods judgements: Heb. 6.4. as that to fall into Gods hands, how terrible a thing it is. And if God marke what is done amisse, no flesh can be righteous in his eyes. Esay 66.2. And to him will I looke, even to him that is poore, and of a contrite spirit, and that trembleth at my words. There must be a trembling at his Words, else his spirit commeth not.
2 The consideration of the judgements of God, and examples in former ages, 1 Cor. 10.11.  &c. All these things (having named many) are examples for us, they are our monitors. Quot habetis historias judicii Dei, in Bibliis, tot ha∣betis conciones: so many examples of divine justice as thou meetest withall in the holy Bible, they are as so many Sermons of Gods justice, and severity, unto thee: to move you to feare God, and to be modest when we see his justice on his Angels, on man and his posterity, on the whole world in the deluge, on the Egyptians, on the Jewes, on his owne Church Jerusalem: and last of all, on his owne Sonne,Such was the bitternesse of sin, that was executed on Christ. it pursuing him to the fulnesse of bitternesse, insomuch, that one of the Fathers saith, Magna fuit amaritude propter quam tanta sustinenda fuit amaritudo: deadly was the bitter∣nesse of sinne, which could not be cured, but by the blood-shed passion of the Sonne of God. [And because the judgements afore∣time move not every one hath a great store of judgements in him∣selfe.] 1 Inhaerentia.3 So the present judgments in our age; and they are three. 1 Those that it pleaseth God wee should feele in some measure: as feare, sicknesse in our bowels,2 Impendentia. hunger, crosse; &c. 2 Those that are neere us,3 Excubantia. that we see not, yet they are hanging over our heads. 3 Kind, which they call, Excubans pro foribus, the horrour of a guilty and wounded conscience, which as God said to Caine, lies at our doore, it shall grind them to powder. Tria novissima; 1 the meditati∣on of the day of ones death: 2 Of the day of judgement. 3 The horror of the torments following. So the other three, which they call, tria novissima; which shal be at the representing of our death: Psal. 90.12. O teach us to num∣ber our dayes, that we may apply our hearts unto wisedome. The Prophet maketh the speciall meanes to bring us to wisedome, or feare of the Lord, to number our dayes. 2 The consideration of the judgement of God, and what account we are to give, and that wee are never able to make account if God assist it not: 2 Cor. 5.10. Wee must all appeare before the judgement seat, &c. 3 The terrour of the torments which follow the impenitent. Esa 66.24. Their worme shall never die, but be alwayes gnawing upon their consciences, the fire that shall never be quenched, the weeping, wayling, and gnashing of teeth after sentence of eternall death, shall passe on them,5 Rule. this made the Saints to passe in fear. Reg. There was never any apparition of any thing above nature, but presently a feare came upon them: Luk. 1.30. Then the Angell said unto her, Feare not Ma∣ry, &c. Act. 10.4. But when he looked on him, he was afraid, &c. The signes: there are so many questions and cavills of duties, as its an evident signe there is no feare among us. 1 The Heathen man saith, Timor est credulus, feare is lazie of beliefe, Deut. 5.27. that is, a true signe of feare, giving credit to that is taught by them,The true signe is to credit that which is taught that have authority and knowledge to give it: not studying after questions, and frivolous distinctions, and cavils: for this questioning is a signe that we have no feare. 2 An evill signe is negligence:2 Diligence. Wisd. 7.19. Qui timet Dominum, nihil negligit, He that feares the Lord neglecteth nothing. Feare
is the diligentest that can be. Gen. 32. Jacob being in feare of his brother, could not rest all the night before, but would be either sending messengers before to his brother, or ordering his hous∣hold, and his goods, or praying to the Lord, &c. 3 Humility.3 That wee must raise out of feare Humility, Gen. 33.3. Jacob hee falls seven times to the ground, before he comes to his brother. For (as the Philosopher saith) Timor contrahit, non extendit: Feare it shrinkes (not swels) the heart. Prov. 3.7. There is a plaine medi∣cine for pride: (Be not wise in thine owne eyes, but feare the Lord, and depart from evill) Nothing so bold as ignorance, but knowledge is ve∣ry fearfull, as the Prophets &c. (that having more knowledge; and lesse cause to feare) yet feared most. He that hath more know∣ledge, and lesse cause to feare, he most commonly feareth more. When the governour of the ship, or mariner feareth, then the pas∣senger must needs feare. 4 The feare of sinne.4 The surest signe is the feare of sinne: and that is all one with the feare of God. Psal. 34.11. Come yee children and hearken to mee; I will teach you the feare of the Lord. They joyne feare of sinnes, with the feare of God Job 1.1. Job was an upright and just man, one that feared God, and eschewed evill. Job 28.28. The feare of the Lord is wisedome, and to depart from evill is understanding. 5 To fly from sinne.5 Timor est fugitivus, ergo non potest armari, feare bids us not resist, but flee, though he put on never so much armour on his backe. A theefe being taken in the manner, runneth away: and if he be chased after, hee will, dimittere furtum, drop the thing that he hath stollen, in the way, so when God com∣meth, we must be sure not to have that, that thing will be to our condemnation with us: i. not to have sinne about us; if wee do hold it still, our furtum, we are very bold theeves: therefore it is a sure signe of feare, when we take heed of this, at least, ne eapi∣amur de furto, not to be taken in the very manner and act of sinning. 6 Rule to be accessary.6 For the sixth and last rule, Deut. 10.12. And now Israel what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to feare the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soule? And Psal. 33.8. we must wish with the Prophet there, that all the Earth may feare the Lord [Let all the earth feare the Lord, stand in awe of him, all yee that dwell in the world] So asso a speciall regard must be had, that we do not strengthen the arme of the wicked; EZek. 13.22. Not to discourage him from his wickednesse, but to embolden and make him stronger, is there condemned. (Because with your lies yee have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad, and strengthened the hand of the wicked, that he should not returne from his wicked wayes, &c.) Therefore that sinne by us, may be discou∣raged in others. Thus then we see that feare is the end of the Law. 2 It is the property of him that feareth to shrinke downe: therefore Humility ariseth out of feare. 1 Pet. 5.6. The Apostle writing, that wee should humble our selves under the hand of God; one of the Fathers saith, Tanquam securi venienti loquitur. the Apostle speaketh as if Gods hand
were lift up with his axe ready, and wee should shrinke downe: such a casting downe of our selves, is the first effect of that feare, Psal. 119.120. My flesh trembleth for feare of thee, & I am afraid of thy judgments. So that is before by the example of Good men:1 Casting downe of our selves. Iacob, Gen. 33.3. bowed and humbled himselfe seaven times for feare of Esau. So of the wic∣ked: 1 King. 20.23. Then they girded sackcloth about their loynes, and put ropes about their neckes, &c. Benhadad, and his noble men were smitten with the feare of Ahab. Such is the force of the feare of Gods justice, that we should be by it humiles, throwne down to the ground, untill we can say with the Prophet, Psal. 119.25. adhaesit anima mea pavimento, & pulveri: My soule cleaveth to the very dust: and still re∣member, that the Glory of God is the end of our Creation, & Redemption, and we shall never make this our end, untill man be cleane void of glory and made even to to the ground, which is at the lowest that can be, and it is that that David wisheth to be counted the basest thing of all, that his honour might become as the most vile and contemp∣tible things, and no better then that that every man treads upon; Psal. 7.5. yea let him tread my life downe upon the earth, and lay mine honour in the dust. So that when wee come to this case, that in truth we have that, which the Patriarchs, and Prophets bad in resem∣blance and figure, in forbearing meats and drinkes, and putting on of sackcloth, as judging themselves not worthy to be cloathed: in throwing dust and ashs on their heads, thereby even condemning themselves, and thinking so basely of themselves, that they were worthy to be cast under the earth, and not to tread on the ground: when we are thus humbled, and have given God all the glory, and our selves none, then our exaltation will assuredly follow. Ad tangenda in∣ferna. God ne∣ver leaveth us, till hee have brought us to the pit of hell.2 The second point, 1 Exaltation: for when he hath brought us to the nethermost pit, and as it were to deaths, and hels doore, that is, at the very botrome of humility, that we can goe no lower, then wee are low enough for a foundation to build upon: and wee may begin to build: (Luk. 14.11. , for whosoever exalteth himselfe shall be abased, and he that humbleth himselfe shall be exalted. And we shall cometruly to be humbled, by truly fearing: and truly humbling our selves, not by comparing our selves to that wee have beene, or with the Publi∣cans about us, but with the the Tables of Moses, Gods justice; this is the true , selfe-knowledg of every Christian, as the rule is to be commended in a true sense: so as the Heathen tooke it, it could not be commendable: for this was their , that a man should know the excellencie of his owne soule, and so it served to puffe up, but ours serveth for humility, and to know our wants. Pride never ariseth, but either through want of knowledge, or through false knowledge. Therefore the considering of the nobili∣ty, and excellencie of man in the heathen, and a false consideration of Gods justice, it was it that made them fall into that, 1 Cor. 1.13. that the Preaching of Christ crucified became an offence to the Iewes, and foolishnesse to the Gentiles; and it brought them to that case, that when Christ came to exalt and to heale them, they were high
enough, and sound enough: therefore Aug. Superbis Pharisaeis viluit Christus, the Pharisees pride made them vilely esteeme of Christ. The true way to know our selves, 1. there is humilitas memis: and of the understan∣ding part: when a man in his minde con∣sidereth the infinite excellencie of God, & his own basenesse: the belief in the minde must raise a quality in the heart the 2. ther∣fore is humilitas cordis, voluntatis, affectu∣um, &c. that he imagines he is not wor∣thy apparell, not to be above the ground a base minde, a base heart. Therefore this appetite be restrained, that seeing there is no excellencie in him, he should not seeke for any excellencie: Psal. 131.1. O Lord, I am not high minded, I have no proud lookes, &c. It is necessary that the appetite of every man should be measured by that which is in him.Not but that the nature of man is most excel∣lent, but remembring withall that which was said before, The more excellent a thing is, the mose base and vile it is, if it degenerate: there∣fore seeing our state, and it hath pleased God to vouchsafe us a more wise way: we are to take it, and not to goe against our owne nature: and so we come to our humiliation. Then we see the end and use of humility, to bring a man out of conceit with himselfe, and make him resigne all his glory to God, and so the building may be∣ginne: for, as the Heathen man hath well said, Superbus miser indignus est misericordia, a proud wretch deserves no pity: Ezek. 17.24. the course that God protest∣eth he will take; Bring downe the high trees, and exalt the low trees: make dry the greene trees, and make the dry trees to flourish: for this cause, Matth. 18.3. Christ saith, except men be humble, and have no more spirits of pride in them, then babes, there is no en∣trance for them into Heaven: for if any thing else were granted them, yet Gloriam suam dabit alteri, could not be granted, Esa. 42.8. no part of his glorie shall goe from him: therefore we must ut∣terly be emptied, that his grace might fill us. And this of the na∣ture of humiliation. 1. Rule. The thing commanded.The thing commanded here is, the making of our selves low in our owne eyes. They define it to be an opinion or conceit of a man pro∣ceeding out of true knowledge, qua quisque sibi vilescit, which makes a man vile in his owne eyes. And to be made thus low, hath this priviledge, it cannot fall; rise it may: It cannot fall; for there is nothing under it. If a man stood upright, he might happily fall: but this maketh him to fall downe flat on the ground; therefore all the words of destruction, in the tongue of the holy Ghost, are casting downe, hewing downe, cutting downe; which are so often men∣tioned: But when a man is thus, he neede not feare God and his judgement, to cast him downe, for he casteth himselfe downe enough: he may looke for exalting. Humiliaon hath a promie of exaltation.A further priviledge it hath, that God hath added a promise of ex∣altation: it is the course of God in all things. God, as he hath made all things of nothing, and light to come out of darknesse; so here, (as Basil saith) he hath made , humility the way to exaltation. As it was agreeable to Gods working to make ex ni∣hilo aliquid: so is it agreeable to the manner of his working, by ma∣king low, to make high. And in this humiliation, they comprehend three things. 1. Humilitas cordis, humility of the heart.1. Not onely a base conceit of our owne nature, that goeth no fur∣ther then the braine, the object whereof is the Majesty of God: but also (Matth. 11.29.) humilitas cordis, in heart: the humbling of the heart through feare, taking his effect there where his cause is, a de∣sire
of no glory for our selves; but that God may have all, and Luk. 15.19. to say with the prodigall sonne, confessing that we are not worthy to be called his sonnes: make us as thy hired servants. 2. A restraint of our appetites from the de∣grees of excel∣lencie: for our degrees must be proportionable to our gifts; if there bee no proportion, there is no measure: & if no measure, there is no reason: so that our degree must be answe∣rable to our gifts.2. Besides this, it comprehendeth in regard of our selves, a re∣straining of our appetite from that good in this life, that is above us, and to which the gift of God hath bestowed on us, is not propor∣tionable; for our degrees must be proportionable to our gifts: and every man should desire that place, that is answerable to his gift: but now there is nothing more common in the world, then to aspire, and account our selves worthy of high callings, and as Bernard saith, quod adepti sunt nummis, meritis attribuere, what preferment they buy for money, they would be thought to have attained unto by desert: and as this belongeth to the second, so that in Psal. 131.1. Domine non est exaltatum cor meum, neque elati sunt oculi mei, neque ambulavi in magnis supra me, neque in mirabilibus supra me: Lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty, neither have I walk∣ed in great matters, and hid from me, Psal. 131.1. But this is not proper to this place. 3. So the third is not properly pertaining to the first Comman∣dement, whereby we submit our selves to our brethren: Phil. 2.3. , &c. That nothing be done through contention and vain∣glory, but in meekenesse of minde, so that every one should thinke bet∣ter of others, then of himselfe. And in the first of these, because that especially is proper to this place: as in feare, there is a feare that beginneth, and a feare that continueth, and endeth: so is there an humility that beginneth, and another that perfecteth. The beginning humility, that we shall commonly see in the Saints of God: there never was any, that in regard of any excellent thing, that God did worke by him, but he did first prepare him by humiliation: as Jo∣seph was sold, first to the Ismaelites, then to Potiphar: and Moses was 40. yeares in Egypt, and 40. yeares after in the land of Madian, be∣fore that those excellent signes and wonders were wrought by him: so we read of David and others. This goeth before the beginning of Gods delivery; whether in regard of this life, or of that to come, as a preparative to make us more sensible of our future condition. The other is following; example and rules we have, that there must be an humility even to the end; as fear is continuall, so must hu∣mility be continuall. If not, then as Noah was preserved by his feare, in the middest of a wicked generatiō, in the generall floud: but when the floud dryed up, after growing into a carelesnesse, he remitted his watch: & being voyd of his former humility, and feare, fell so grossely, that he was scorned of his owne son: So we see the like in Lot; so long as he was in Sodom, and in danger, he had a low minde to the Lord: but after, when he came into the mountaine, thought him∣selfe to be saved there, and so fell into Incest with both his daugh∣ters. So David was free from all crime, during the time of his per∣secution under Saul, and his dwelling in the Tents: but comming to prosperity, and to dwell in his Palace, shortly after he fals into two grievous sinnes, adultery and murder: and therefore Gregory
saith, when we have got our vertues, perit omne quod acquiritur, si non humilitate custoditur, the vertues are soone lost which humili∣ty keepes not: and Christ in his prayer (placing, and leade us not into temptation, immediately after the fifth petition, and forgive us our sinnes) doth plainely shew, that in our greatest peace and safety, there is greatest danger: and therefore when our sinnes are remit∣ted us, we must then most of all take heede that we fall not into other sinnes. But for the affinity that these two humilities have with the two feares, though much more might have beene said, yet this may suffice. Of the contraries to Humility. NOw we come to that which is forbidden. 1. As humility is commanded: so pride is forbidden, the excesse of it. 1. Pride. Humility com∣pared with Pride.The comparison of it and humility may be thus: that come what sinne soever will come with humility, it weigheth it down: and ob∣taineth pardon for it: but come all the good workes that a man can doe, with pride, it weigheth all downe, and choaketh all the good things it commeth with: and this sinne is the last of the foure im∣pediments spoken of before, 1. ignorance, 2. unbeliefe, 3. secu∣rity, and the 4. is pride, and it hath taken deeper roote in all then any of the other. This, as it is Luke 3.8. is the high mountaine, that stands in Christs way; and unlesse John Baptist take paines to remove it, he cannot come to us. I finde that this vice through the Fathers is called morbus Satanicus (and it hath a resemblance to our diseases that have their names of the persons, as Morbus Gal∣licus, &c. the French disease, so this the Devils disease: it is high-borne, and so lightly taketh hold of them that are high-borne, for it was first borne in Heaven, and so no other can be concluded by the rules of Divinity, by Esa. 14.14. applying that to Satan, Ero similis Altissimo, I will be like the most High: because he would have a part of Gods glory, and be above his degree: therefore this was the cause that made him fall. The Devill hath knowledge and feare, but not humility: so the Devill tooke it first, and Adam took it from him: so we come to be heires of it: and as he said to him∣selfe, Ero, I will be: so in Gen. 3. he said to Adam and Eve, Eritis sicut d. i, i. similes Altissimo, ye shall be as Gods, i.e. ye shall bee like the most High, not suffering them to be content with that ho∣nourable place that God had assigned them, but perswading them to aspire to an higher. Christ (Luke 10.8.) when the Apostles were come home joyfull and proud that the Devils were made subject to them in his name, saith to them, that that may be profitable in meditation to us [Vidi Satanam cadentem sicut fulgur, behold, I be∣held Satan as lightning fall from Heaven; but rejoyce not in thisbecause they rejoyced there∣in, and gave not glory to God. but rather that your names be written in Heaven] for taking joy in that that we should not. And that which Christ said of them, may be fitly said of any, that this pride taketh hold of. This pride standeth specially in two things, which both are in
the speech of Nebuchadnezzar,All the heads of glory may bee referred to these two, 1. from our selves 2. to our owne glory. Dan. 4.27. And the King spake, and said, Is not this great Babel, that I have built for the house of the Kingdome, by the might of my power; and for the honour of my Ma∣jesty? If we ascribe to our selves either of these, that we doe any thing by the might of our owne power, or for the glory of our owne Majesty, i. either that it commeth from us, or that we doe it for our glory, this is pride. More particularly, as we say, it is a desire to have that excellen∣cie attributed to us, that is not in us: so 4. wayes it falleth out. 1. For he must first thinke that he hath a greater good thing then he hath, and often times that which he hath not at all: as Revel. 3.17. to the Angel of the Laodiceans; Thou thoughtest thy selfe rich, and wise: and behold thou art blinde, naked, miserable, and wretched: and there was no such matter in thee: and as 1 Tim. 3.6. none so sub∣ject to this as , young novices, that have greene shallow things in them: () not a novice, lest being lifted up with pride, he fall into the condem∣nation of the Devill: of which Chrysostome writing, saith, if they be humble, it is no commendation to them: for if the servant sub∣mit himselfe to his Master, he hath no commendation for it: but , if one have wherewithall to bee proud, and yet is humble; he is worthy of the commen∣dation. 2. When we have a little good, to thinke that there is a greater good in us, then we have indeed, Ezek. 28.12. that men are given to seale up great summes, above that that is in them: 2 Cor. 10.14. of stretching and setting on the Tenter-hookes; and the reason is, because that where a man hath a little, there is a stretching of that little by selfe-love, and the Devill he drawes up a false light, and shewing our selves to our selves in a myst, or when he hath made us drunke with selfe-love, maketh a little seeme very much: and so we come to see gemina objecta, & geminos soles, every thing will seeme double. 3. It is more excellent for a man to have a thing of himselfe,And that is of two sorts, 1. when he thinks he hath a thing growing from his own nature: or when he at∣tributes it to his owne de∣sert. then of another; if we have it of our selves, then our glory is the more: This is a great way in pride, to imagine that we are the causes of that good we have. But 1 Cor. 4.7. , &c. who made thee to differ, &c. Name one thing that thou hast not received: he abates that pride well. 2. But another is, Though a man have it not of himselfe, yet if he deserve to have it, and not upon curtesie of another, it is somewhat worth: and so commeth the 4. degree of pride, but that is laid flat to the ground, Gen. 32.10. If we will be heires to Israel, we will say with him, O Lord I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth that thou hast shewed unto thy servant: so we are to thinke that God is the cause, and that without any deserving of ours, but of his owne free grace. The Church of Rome is charged with these two degrees of pride in Nebuchadnezzar: and we are so farre from thinking that any good commeth from our selves, that wee
know we have received all from the Father of lights: but how true it is, that we thinke so, these two things will shrewdly try us. 1. If any one of us, mispending time or money riotously, or any abuse of any gift of God to be found fault withall, presently we forget that we have received it:So in our pra∣ctise we disal∣low that which we allow in our Theory. and all into the bias of our owne nature, and every one will be ready to say, Why? what tell you me of this? Is it not mine owne? In deed it should seeme by our spending, that we deale with it, as if it were our owne, not as if we were Stewards of it. 2. Another is this, that which is not our owne, but borrowed: wee know we must be willing to render it at the owners call. Let God visit us with a depriving of any of his gifts, there is such murmur∣ing, such grudging at it, as plainely sheweth that we are not willing to render freely as we have received it freely: and it is hard for us to be perswaded that it is borrowed, which is an argument that we account all as our own. These are trials concerning our judgement, and we commonly erre in these two. 5. The last is on this ground, though the gift in us be equall to others: yet if we employ it better, we thinke it more excellencie; Luke 18.11. it is the Pharisees fault, O God I thanke thee that I am not as other men are, oppressors, unjust, or as this publican: he did so as he saith, he fasted twice in the weeke, he gave tythe of all that he had, he was no robber, no extortioner, no unjust person: hee said not untrue: and on the other side, he was as far as we, he acknow∣ledgeth that God did it in him: for he saith, I thanke God; but then this, that he was not as other men were,His fault, be∣cause he gave more excellen∣cie to himselfe, then to others. and that he possessed the same gift as others did, but after a more excellent manner, the gi∣ving of this to himselfe, and in another manner bringing in the contempt of his brethren, this bringing in of singularity, hindred the justifying of his prayer, and singular men will have new wayes, differing from other mens: every man will have a strange way by himselfe; whereof that followeth that I spake of before. I would gladly make this sinne more hatefull unto us: for it is a singular impediment to hinder any grace of God. The Papists great praisers of humility.The common place of humility is very strange among us now adayes: and the reason is, because it is the Papists theame. There is no good thing they use, but I would wish we had it more com∣mon then they: and the leaving of this, hath brought our Religi∣on to this case it is in: whether we consider those that are without a feeling of God, or those that have eminencie of parts, or if wee looke to persons in high estate; the opinion of Rome, that there is a man that cannot erre; there is nothing more common in pra∣ctise with us, then that to hold, that a man cannot erre: and so that which we thinke so absurd in the Papists, to ascribe to man, that which is proper to God, we our selves ascribe to man. 2. Is a degree of excellencie, they will say as God saith, Exod. 33.19. I will have mercie upon whom I will: and compassion on whom I will: so they will favour whom they will, and preferre whom they will; and whereas God hath appointed with whom hee will
have preferred,But they hold this, that how good soever he is, yet it is not to be bestowed on him, but upon the cur∣tesie. they will preferre without gifts: and whereas there is no merit, but all is of favour, they will have all merit, and no favour: Ezek. 28.2. in all things they behave themselves not as if they were men, but God; but they are men, and not God: so non cu∣jus volo miserebor, it must not be, I will have mercie upon whom I will: but merit and favour, it must be pulled downe, it must not pre∣vaile, else are we guilty of this. Come to the common sort, take Bernards seven notes of pride, out of his Sermon an missus est: two of them are in our soule, 1. fol∣lowing and pursuing after our owne counsell,As there is a pride in those those of higher estate, so in those of low∣er also. 2. following our own will and pleasure. Two in our mouth, 1. either grudging at our bet∣ters, and condemning their speeches, and murmuring, 2. or speak∣ing swelling words of vanity against our inferiors, or commending our selves. Three in outward matters; Superbia habitus, pride of ray∣ment, tables,Those that should humble us, puffe us up: and wee care not whether we use them or no. Use the means that God hath set downe, and when y use them, use them with credit and estimation. and furniture. For the meanes that God sends us, in them also we shew speciall pride: Those meanes that God hath given us to beget in us regene∣ration, in many there is with them a pride of heart, and a cloyednesse, and so they are indifferent whether they pray, heare, or not. A de∣gree beyond this, and that a fearfull degree of pride is, if the word be effectuall, when it toucheth them at the heart; yet in a pride of themselves, because they will not seeme to be so moved at a Ser∣mon, they will suppresse it, and so put it away: and if they will have it be effectuall and move them inwardly, yet they will not shew themselves outwardly to be moved one whit: and so they will resist that good motion, thinking they can have it againe at their beck: whereas they know not whether that be the last time that it pleased God to offer it to them; and that he will never offer it after. This is an exalting of our selves against Gods ordinance. Now not only with the meanes, but with the graces of God also pride joyneth it selfe:The object of pride, most ex∣cellent things. where with further graces it hath pleased God to blesse, because that is the naturall seate of pride; there it will be more busie, and it is harder to resist it. In other sinnes we see the objects of them are base,Cineres reliquo∣rum peccatorum, fomes superbiae. There is a pride in the Crosse, even when wee are humbled under Gods hand. We may be proud, that we are not so proud. Where most bestowed, there most required: where the great est gift, there the greatest pe∣rill: and there∣fore ought to be the greatest watch. vile, and most commonly brutish: one∣ly pride will deale with nothing but with most excellent gifts, best exercises, highest offices; and when a man is highest, then will pride be most busie with him: and even when all other sinnes are burnt up cleane to ashes, yet of their ashes commeth pride: nay it ri∣seth oft times of the contrary to it: for humility it selfe begetteth pride, for he that is humble waxeth proud, because he is not so proud as others, or because he is not so proud as he was before: so that the ashes of one pride will beget another pride: therefore it is more to be feared, and so by pride they fall into such a secure qui∣etnesse, as that they have no jealousie or suspition, either of them∣selves, or of their doings: and so they are overtaken as Noah, Lot, and David were. For we must thus thinke, the greater grace God blesseth us with∣all, God will send the greater triall: and the richer the prey is, the more will the Devill bend his force to rob us: therefore the more
every man receiveth, the more he ought to humble himselfe, so shall he be sure that he will keepe it to the end. We will adde a few things of the punishment. Poena superbiae, the punishment of pride. Fiscus regalis, de ipsius gloria, to th Exchequer is due, not only the receiving of grace, but also preserving of it: so that man that forgers his returne for pre∣serving of his grace, is ingrat∣full to God, both for the receiving, and preserving. Pride breaketh the net, wherin we should be caied to God, i. humility.1. Gods glory (as one saith well) being fiscus regalis, his chiefe treasure, his Exchequer, the proud man breaking in upon it, is guil∣ty of treason against God, as [being not content to be the Steward of God, but] seeking to alienate Gods glory from him, and to in∣title himselfe to it; therefore he shall be punished, as Prov. 15.25. the Lord will destroy the house of the proud men, &c. even in the time wherein he magnified himselfe, he is taken away, as Haman and Herod, &c. or is punished with the losse of his gift, that was the cause of his pride▪ his tongue shall cleave to the roofe of his mouth, his right hand shall forget her cunning. 2. Because he will be singular, as Ierome calleth it, because hee will be an Vnicorne, one that will have no match: therefore as they rumpunt rete, break the net, i. humility, wherein Gods prey is: so hee delivereth them over to be people by themselves: and so they be∣ginne to be authors, and beginners of erroneous opinions and heresies: and as the Fathers of the Greeke Church say very well, , shall at length come to be , by abstaining from usuall things, they shall come to hold absurd things, and to be more absurd then they were, when they were young. Ratio. For when one is young, he is marvellous fearfull to stand to any thing: after when he comes to be a man, and hath found as he thinketh, some experience of his strength, then he cannot so much distrust as before; and consequently he commeth to be absurder: and there is never an Heretick, but may be an example that way. 3. Being once brought to this, that he is able by himselfe to deale well enough, and to leane on his owne staffe, the staffe of God, i. prayer, must needes give over: so not craving a supply of God; whereas in humility he could have withstood great assaults, in his pride hee is overcome with every little temptation. At a mans first entry into Christianity and regeneration, God giveth him great strength, for every little want; whereby he may resist great sinnes and tempta∣tions; because then he wholly relieth himselfe to God: afterward relying to himselfe, and leaving God, he prayeth not, and not pray∣ing, he taketh tge foyle. 4. When it pleaseth God to leave those three, and to suffer the gift to remaine, yet it is an example [that they are not fruitlesse;] we see, that where he joyneth them with this pride, he doth leave them fruitlesse, and no gaine returneth to God by them: excellent graces of God have beene employed, great eloquence hath beene shewed, and yet no fruit comes of them, not one soule gained to God, when as a simple man with his simple gift, well employed in hu∣mility, shall gaine more then a glorious tongue, that is as eloquent as ever Tertullus was. 5. Last of all, and that punishment which we ought most of all to feare [it is to be observed toward the latter end of a man, the
Fathers call it ,] There is a thing in the minde comparable to the Palsie,This dulnesse is so ordinary a punishment of pride, that it falleth on the children of God but of this dul∣nesse doe not prevaile, then followeth judg∣ment. or apoplexie in the body, and it is the state that the most part of the world passeth away in, a certaine numbnesse or blockishnesse, that neither reason can perswade them, nor all the threatnings terrifie them, nor all the promises allure them, nor any thing move them: then they passe to death without any sense of Gods judgements: so they perish and die as beasts, nothing differing from them, but onely for the furniture of beds and pillowes. This in them is in great measure, those that have their hearts as fat as brawn, that can feele nothing; and in small measure it is in all: thus God makes our hearts and state the punishment of our pride, while we not making use of pride in us, there shall a dulnesse come upon us: therefore 2 Cor. 12. God lest in Paul, , the best in∣terpreters interpret it, a privie wrestling or fighting and conflict a∣gainst his owne pride: keeping himselfe exercised, that those things might not fall out in effect, which he felt within him: he that fee∣leth any of these, he may ascribe it to the blessing of himselfe in his owne heart, and security of his conscience. The other extreme, and that is, Coacta or Spuria Humilitas. Alterum hi∣tita extremum Another ex∣treme is con∣strained humi∣lity.1. Either constrained humility, Exod. 4. in Pharaoh, the practise of it is in the 6.7, 8 9. chap. so long as Gods hand was on him, and his people, and he felt his plagues▪ so long he humbled himselfe to the Lord, and promised to let the people goe: Exod. 9.27. I have now sinned: the Lord is righteous; but I and my people are wic∣ked, v. 28. pray ye to the Lord, for it is enough that there be no more migh∣ty thunders and hailes, and I will let you goe: and ye shall tarry no lon∣ger, but vers. 34. when Pharaoh saw that the thunder, and raine, and haile ceased; he sinned againe, and hardned his heart, both hee and his servants; and in the next chap. he asketh, Who is the Lord, that he should let his people goe?There is in eve∣ry vertue beside the 2. extremes, an habit that hath the like∣lihood of the good habit, which they call sptam iu∣tem, a bastard vertue. Malum cna∣mentum humili∣tatis, veritatis detrimentum. 3. Rules how we are to stand affected in hu∣mility, and to know whether our humility be in the truth. Bernard expresseth it in one word, videmus multos, saith he, humiliatos, sed non humiles, we see many humbled, but few humble men. 2. The other is that which they call Spuriam humilitatem, a ba∣stard humility, common, and especially in some natures, that by disposition are humble; Ecclus. 13.9. we must not be humiles in sa∣pientia nostra, we must be humble in a good cause, not in our own conceits; if we know it is Gods matter that we have in hand, there must no humility be shewed in it: detrimentum veritatis non est orna∣mentum humilitatis, we must so be humble, as that we keepe our humility for cases unlike. In every man there is of God somewhat, somewhat of nature, and somewhat of the evill spirit: Ephes. 3.5. the Apostle warrants me to know the gift that God hath bestowed on me, and that it is not to give place to the gift of natureNature must give place to grace. In the gifts of nature he pre∣ferreth himself.. Gal. 2.15 of the gifts of nature, , We who are Jewes by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles: by nature he preferreth the Jewes before the Gentiles: the good gifts of nature, before the cor∣ruption of nature: onely this, 1 Tim. 1.15. , &c.
This is a faithfull saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chiefe. Every one may thus think, that in my nature there is so monstrous a masse of corrup∣tion, as is in no man else: and in another there is that good, and such a gift as is not in me: and so I to honour it,So is the place to the Philip. understood. or in regard of the great masse of corruption in me, may say with the Apostle, Quorum ego maximus, of whom I am chiefe. But to submit the better to the worse, as the gift of grace in me to the gift of nature in another; or the good gift of nature in me, to the evill gift of nature in another, that is not Gods minde. Meanes to Hu∣mility. There is no grace in us, that God might not have put in any other creature.The meanes are manifold, but they may be reduced to these. 1. From the state of our bodies, grounded upon good reason; Ba∣sil in his Hexemeron saith, that mans life is nothing but , a Schoolehouse of humility: his ground is out of Psal. 8.4. where the Prophet comparing his body with the body of the hea∣vens, and the spheres, falleth into an admiration, why God chose his body rather to put a reasonable soule into it, then any of the celestiall bodies; and out of Gen. 18.27. I have begunne to speake to my Lord, and am but dust and ashesOur nature is but an heap of dust and ashes,: and therefore Augustin cryeth out, Good Lord what should move thee to give such an excellent soule to my body, which is but a peece of clay, passing over the glorious body of the Sunne, the Moone, and the Starres, and all the celestiall spheres, and to bestow it upon a pottle of choler and fleame! and the Philosopher saith, O homo si considerares quid per os, quid per nares, per reliquas corporis partes exiret, nunquam tam turpe sterquilinium reperires. O man consider but what filthinesse comes forth from thy mouth, what from thy nostrils, and what from the other parts of thy body, and thou wilt easily see that there is no such dunghill as thy selfe. 2. From the state of our soules, Luke 18.13. Lord have mercie on me a sinner: and as a Father well mendeth it, mihi peccato, that am no∣thing else but sinne: for so it is with many of us, and such sinners as that, Rom. 7.14. we are sold for slaves to sinne: and that as it is in the 18. vers. in us, i. in our flesh, as of nature, dwelleth no good thing: in so much as we cannot once thinke a good thought of our selves. 2 Cor. 3.5. And not onely this, but if we consider that we have so multiplied our transgressions, as that they be more in number then the haires of our head: and as it is Psal. 38.4. beside the number,Psal. 40.15. David the flower of our nature, had both infinite sinnes for the number and intolera∣ble for the weight. that they are such a weighty burden to us, as is intolerable. The consideration of these will humble us; if the Devill carry us up into our owne mountaine, and shew us any good thing in us, we must resist him with these, and that we have no one good thing, but we have received; and that not of merit in us; but to confesse with Jacob, Gen. 32.10. that we are not worthy the least of his mercies, nor of all the truth that he hath shewed us: and if we use the gifts that we have received never so well; yet to say, as it is Luke 17.10. we are unprofitable servants, that no gaine can come to him from us: then shall we come to pray with Daniel, chap. 9. v. 7. O Lord, righteous∣nesse
belongeth unto thee, and to us open shame and confusion: and say with the Prophet, Psal. 115.1. Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but unto thine owne name give the praise, for thy loving mercie and truths sake. Even in the wicked a kind of humility. A blessing to a blaze of humi∣lity in Ahab. Adversity no great enemy to humility.3. Beside these, when we consider the crosses of God which he hath or may bring upon us, 1 King. 21.29. the crosse falling on the wicked,  Ahab: it brought a blaze of humility into him; and that was not unrewarded of God: Our conceit concerning adversity must be, not that it is an enemy to us, not to be humble: for the Prophet, Psal. 119.71. confesseth that it was good for him that he was in trouble; be∣cause he thereby learned the Statutes of the Lord, when it pleaseth God to send his grace with it, it driveth us to seeke comfort by the word, and by prayer; and to be willing to go to the houses of mour∣ning, and to them that have had a perplexity, and to be a discipline to our selves, in this want of it, and to speake to others to tell them of their sinnes. But the chiefe and best example, is the example of Christ: when he had many good things (no doubt) to be learned; yet this espe∣cially, and above all, he would have us to learne of him: humility, Discite à me, quia ego mitis sum & humilis corde. For his order and manner of preaching, John 8.50. , I seek not mine own glory, there is one that seeketh & judg∣eth: for his miracles, Matth. 8.4. , he chargeth the Keeper to tell it no man: he would all the glory should redound to his Fathers praise and glory: humble in his practise, (but especially that action was to commend humility to them) John 13.15. after he had washed his Disciples feete, he said, Exemplum vobis dedi, ut sicut ego vobis feci, & vos invicem faciatis, I have given you an ex∣ample, that ye should doe as I have done to you. His birth was humble, [his lifeLuke 2.51. be obeyed his Pa∣tents in all things. His first beati∣tude, beati sunt paues spiritu., humble] but his death more humble, as humble as could be, even at hell gates: inso much that he was faine to cry a lit∣tle before his death, Quare dereliquisti me? Why hast thou sorsaken me? so Matth. 5.3. his first Theame in his first Sermon is, Blessed are the poore in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdome of Heaven: the marke of his Church, Zeph. 3.12. Then will I leave in the middest of thee an humble and poore people: and they shall trust in the name of the Lord: and it is the marke of his Apostles, 1 Cor. 4. An ancient Father saith, Ne contemnerent homines humilitatem, placuit Deo plura largiri in humilitate sua,For in his Ma∣jesty hee made the world, and in his humility he remade it, & redeemed it. quam in Majestate: & qui veretur humiliare se, veretur ea facere quae Deus fecit. Let no man lightly esteeme of Humility, seeing it pleased God to effect more in Humility then in Majesty: and he that feares to humble himselfe, feares to doe that which God hath done. The signes. I dare not put Absaloms signes, 2 Sam. 15.5. which our humble men like very well of, wherein he went very farre be∣yond them: he a Kings sonne, every one that came neare him, and did him obeysance, he put forth his hand, tooke him and kissed him: there was no outward signe of true humility but he had it, low coun∣tenance, curtesie, &c. yet we see, he tooke a dangerous way: for as
it is in the next vers. he stale the hearis of the Israclues to him from his father. So, many are humble in show to those that they will seeme to beare a good will, or friendship to: whereas in their hearts they have warre, and privily shoote it out, and God will se∣verely punish it. But the true signes are these: 1 In speech (Basils eschelica) not delighting to talke of high matters, of matters of State, as Bernard noteth very well upon Gen. the reason of the writing of the Scriptures of base matters, as of shepheards, & falling ou about wells, is to delude the vanity of men [to shew us an example, not to attempt high matters] but that every man might have a mind affe∣cted according to his estate, without thinking of a higher condition, and yet of a lower: this, Phil. 4.12. :Ie 45.5.  seekest thou things for thy selfe, seeke them not▪ &c. I both know how to be abased, and I know how to abound, every where, and in all things I am instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need. Ie. 45.5. this quaerere grandia, seeking of great things, as God misliketh it in Baruch,Our sins must ver be before us, coneay with the proud If any evill come to any, we are ready to draw a cause from their evill lite, but wee never thinke of out own estate and we have no leasure. They were Da∣vids Juniper coales, tacul D∣mire, quia tu fe∣si. And it is of two sorts, I when he hath ofent¦ded God, to pray that thogh it please him privily to lay never so great a plague on him, yet that it may not publikely redound to the dishonour of the Church. 2 As if a man should stand thus resolute, that though he cared not what became of him, yet that his Church might speed well, and no evill, and hurt come unto it The seeking of glory at mens hands. so it is a certaine ar∣gument of no true humility. 2 From the commonest of mans thoughts: a mans commonest mediation is either to consider of that evill that is in others, or that good that he may do o others: [the pruds mans meditation] a wise mans object, is, omal ena, mala sua: illa, ut aemuletur; haec ut emendet atque corrigat, The good that is in others, and the evill that is in himselfe, that he may e∣mulate them, and amend himselfe: Psal. 51.3. For I knowledge my fault, and my sinne is ever before mee: but it is a common fault among us : giving reasons of our brethren. 3 An insallible signe, posse tractare contumeliosum; to be able to suffer obirectations and detrectations of sundry. Psal. 38.13. It is Davids argu∣ment: As for mee I was like a deafe man, and heard not, and as one that is dumb, which doth not open his mouth: 14. I became even as a man that heareth not, and in whose mouth there are no reproofes: 2 Sam. 16.11, 12. his humi∣lity at the malicious upbraiding of Shimei. Suffer him to curse, for the Lord hath biddem him: It may be the Lord will looke upon mine affliction, and do me good, for his cursing this day. 1 Pet. 2.23. Christ, when hee was reviled, held his peace. 4. The fourth is the surest, when a man is thus affected; if he be∣ing a sinner, desireth God that his glory by him be not impeached, and prayeth that that reproach that commeth by him, may not redound to his Church, nor to the opening of the mouth of the wicked. Psal. 69 6. Let not them that trust in thee, O Lord God of Hosts, be ashamed for my cause: Let not those that seeke thee be confounded through mee, O Lord God of Israel. 2 But especially this, that though a man were never so certaine of his owne damnation, yet to wish well to the Church of God, and that God may be glorified, though we be firebrands of hell. 5 Rule, Ioh. 5.44. How can yee beleeve, when yee seeke glory each of other, &c. Not to consent to any that seeketh to give glory one to another, and to have it, and to deprive God of his Glory. And Psal. 15.4. to be most abject and vile in his owne eyes, and that the proud
man be most contemptible in his eyes.Therefore we are not to seek it of men, but to looke for it frō God alone: and to returne it to God alone: and if not that, yet that the man that is proud may be most contemp∣tible in our eyes. Where this is, it is a necessary signe of grace approaching: evidentissimum signum appropinquantis gra∣tiae, humilitas, as it is Prov. 15.33. (and beofre honour goeth humility:) and on the contrary side, where there is pride, there is a fall also present∣ly at hand. Hope. NOw as out of knowledge apprehending Gods justice came feare and humility, so out of it apprehending mercy, commeth Hope; for if we conferre that strength that is in us, with the streight rule of Gods justice, it will seeme impossible to us, to attaine salvation by any performance of our owne. Now after Humility, it followeth, as it is Hosea 2.15. That the valley of Achor shall be to us the gate of hope. i. When we are first brought into the valley of mourning, feare com∣eth and despaire, then hee will open the gate of hope, and so instead of the first, i. the spirit of bondage to feare, we shall receive in measures and degrees the spirit of adoption to hope; and that after this manner. 1 By conference of our owne strength with the streight rule of Gods righteousnesse, we find our duties impossible to us to be performed in that measure that is required. But our Faith knoweth that a thing may be possible to us two wayes. 1. If we may attaine to it our selver. 2 If we may have it by another: And the former effect of faith, i. eare, (having his object Gods justice) serveth for nothing, but to shew that it is impossible to us, as of our selves: that so, as it is Rom. 3.19. every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may be found culpable be∣fore the Lord. Yet we are not left cleane in despaire: for though it be impossible to us of our selves, if yet it be possible by another, if he may be found, there is hope. For Faith thus reasoneth, as the Psalmist doth, Psal. 89.47. Hath God made all men for nought? If then, why then falleth not his wrath all at once? and why are we not in his wrath all at once swept away? and searching further for the cause of this, why we are not consumed, and in a moment swept away with the be∣some of destruction; we find Lament. 3.22. that it is the mercy of God that we are non consumed; And that the worke of the creation is not in vaine: and then consequently, as it is Esa 6.13. that a rem∣nant there shall be, and God will have a tenth part alwayes reserved to himselfe: yet playner, Luk. 12.32. That there shall be a little flocke, pusillus grex, but yet that our hope is, that of those few we are. If the Lord were sparing and pinching of his mercy, there were a great impedi∣ment to our hope: but when we read Esa. 30.18. Expectat Dominus ut misereatur vestri, the Lord waiteth that he may have mercy upon you; this setteth our hope in better forwardnesse: and so because that out of the gate of mercy all our hope commeth; Faith is set on worke to consider the persons upon whom God will vouchsafe to bestow this hope: Lament. 3.29. he saith, He will even thrust his face into the dust: i. humble his soule, If peradventure he may have hope. Esay 66.2. Hope is given to them that 1. heare, and rest not in ignorance and unbeliefe: and 2 tremble at his words (wherein feare is included) and that are
3 poore in spirit, (wherein humility is forced) of such God hath a care; and so consequently the faith of the Law, and the spirit of humility and feare, having wrought this (in the speciall promise) in us, we then come to be of the number of the hopers. But much more, when our faith findeth, Psalm. 17.7. the promise of God: (Shew thy marvellous loving kindnesse, thou that art the saviour of them which put their trust in thee, from such as resist thy right hand). And Psal. 34.21. Not one of them that trust in him shall perish, or be destitute. And Psal. 91.14. when we heare him speake in his owne person: Liberaho cum, quia speravit in me: I will deliver him, because he hath hoped in mee. When as the very act of hope shall have such a reward, there is good incouragement to it: & there may be great expectation if it. Now what it is to hope in God, the Prophet sheweth it, Psal. 13.5. to hope in God, it is to hope in his mercy, for that is porta spoi,Sperare in Deo quid? the gate of hope. There is no entrance to God, but by it: there is no issue of any good from him to us, but by it: so faith apprehending mercy, hopeth: and the rather, because there is such plenty of mercie promised, Psal. 32.11. he that hopeth in the Lord shall have such plenty of mercy, is that he shall be compassed about with it.Object. Quomodo fides precreate in no∣bis possit timo∣rem, & spem, own adversentur sibi. Now if one demand, how Faith begetteth in us both feare and hope, two Contraries, and doubt that it cannot belong to one man, both to feare, and hope in God. But seeing the Holy Ghost hath so neerly kt them together in divers places, wee are not to doubt of it, as Psalm. 147.11. & 31.19. & 33.17. Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that feare him, and upon them that put their trust in his mercy.Sol. Ps. 147.11. But the Lords de∣light is in them that feare him, and put their trust in his mer∣cie. So neither is the reason farre to seeke, because faith breedeth feare in us in regard of our owne weaknesse: Hope in regard of the mercy of God. So they being non secundum idem, are not contraries, and may be both together in one subject, in one soule of a just man. For distin∣guishing between faith & hope, because there may seeme to be no diffe∣rence betweene them; though much might be said,Reason. yet this is suffici∣ent, that it is faith that beleeveth the promises:The difference betwixt faith and hope. and hope that expectat credita, looketh for that that is beleeved: the meaning is this: A thing may be beleeved, and not hoped for; as hell, its a thing that every man beleeveth, but none will hope for it: and a thing may be hoped for, and not beleeved. So the gener all truth of God, being the object of our Faith, and that containing terrours, bringeth forth feare: and the matter of love and mercy in his promises, bringeth forth hope: so we see they are dislin∣guished ab objecto: for one hath Gods truth for his object, and the other his goodnesse. The three vertues, Faith, Hope, and Charity, Bernard very well di∣videth them by attributing to each her speech, faith saith, reposita sut bona: good things there are that passe the conceit of mans heart: Hope saith, mihi illa servantur: those good things are reserved for mee: and Charitie saith, curro ad illa, and I do so runne to them, that I may attaine them. Thus out of the faith of the Gospell hope ariseth, as feare out of
the faith of the law: and therefore hope is called of the Fathers, the Izhaak of faith. Thus we see the nature of hope. Uses it hath two.Vus. 1. Is in Heb. 6.19. when a man with feare of the wrath of God, and the conscience bewraying his owne unworthinesse, and in soule his cros∣ses and terrors feeling them in some part to light on him in this life, being tost up and downe,Hop our An∣chor. hope commeth to be his anker: that when the ship of faith being tossed to and fro, as Acts 27.29. the Apostles ship, when it was bereft of her loading, tacklings and all, the ship be∣ing yet tossed of the waves, when all else was gone, they cast out the anker.Hope our in∣terim. It is also called by some of the Fathers our Interim, i. that which stayeth us in the meane time, till the performance come: when we are tost in humility and feare, that that we first draw breath by, is hope: and giveth a certaine binding, i. religion. This anker must bee fastened in the inside of the vaile, which is Christ: and we tied to it by religion, and thither we shall come, being fastened there. The 2. Use is, not so much to stay us, as toretaine Christ: so they call it in their common precept,Hope cust Christs, that which retaineth Christ. Custodi spem, custodem Christi, custo∣dem dei: that Heb. 10.23. , let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering: we have a charge given us, to take fast hold of it: and as, when we are in dan∣ger, (as when we are under the hands and wrath of God, we are in the case of them that are ready to be drowned) or to fall into a pit) wee cast away gold, and whatsoever we have in our hands, and that that commeth first to hand, yea if it be a bramble bush, wee take fast hold of it; which otherwise we could never touch: such an use hath hope to us. Let us therefore keepe fast, as the Apostle saith, , that it be not gotten from us: for there is one that goeth about, so much as in him lieth, by flattering, bribing, or pricking and wounding us, to ex∣tort it from us. 3. And under this Use, that other may be, that thus keeping Christ, we have a possession of heaven in this life: and therefore as Basil saith, that it is , one heaven for another; and as one may be prae∣sens absens: so a thing absent, is present onely by hope. Thus as of the affection of feare it hath beene said, that it hath such an use for our humbling, that by it all impediments are removed, that grace might fully possesse us: so likewise of this affection of hope, wee see how great and excellent an use God hath made of it; and here, (that which the Philosophers never knew) these affections, feare, hope, and love, they are become Virtutes theologicae to his children: and those that they made but affections, are the perfectest, and excellen veriues that we have in Divinity: and the reason is, because they make good those that have them; and the reason of that is, because our na∣ture, being not its owne rule, but having it from a better, and higher nature:Whatsoever good thing was with man, it for∣sooke him. whatsoever it is that applyeth it to us, it must needes bring some part of goodnesse to us: but that hope doth in some part, in re∣spect of the promises: therefore it is a vertue to us, and as the Heathen man expresseth it in the box of Pandora, that at the opening of the box, all good forsooke it, and only hope remained under the lid: and therefore
Philo Iudaeus calleth it , an inborne comforter, that for∣saketh us not, when all the rest have left us: so that in the regenerate the very same use hath hope, as Psal. 27.13. that he should utterly have fainted, but that he hoped to see the Lord in the land of the living: and so consequently in the next verse, he professeth that this is the hope that must make all strong: and so this spes vitae immortalis est vita vitae mortalis, the hope of life immortall, is the life of that life which is mortall: and if we were without it, we should lose breath, according to the rule of the Schoolemen: and it is true in the spirituall life, Qui desperavit, expiravit. For conclusion of this first rule, to this, i. hope is given (Psal. 84.13.) that which is to faith and feare, (O Lord God of hosts, blessed is the man that putteth his trust in thee) the blessing in this life being indeed nothing else but the certainty that when the Bridegroome commeth we shall enter in with him, into the fruition that is reserved to the world to come. Thus of the nature, necessity, and end of hope. Now for the 2. rule, i. the thing, 1. commanded, and 2. forbid∣den:2. Rule our rule for faith and hope is contrary to that we said in humili∣ty, as Dan. 4.27. Is not this great Babel that I have built, for the house of the Kingdome, by the might of my power, and for the honour of my Ma∣jesty? i. that hope thus accounteth of God, as of the principall and sole ef∣ficient; and as of the last and principall end, which it looketh for, and whereunto it referreth the glory of the redemption. For the 1. that our hope is to goe out of our selves, 2 Cor. 3.5. that there is not sufficiency in us, as of our selves, to thinke a good thought: and thinking being the first, if that fall, the rest must fall: for, not think∣ing, we cannot will: Phil. 2.13. it is God that worketh velle in us, and so consequently perficere: and yet lest we should imagine some helpe might come of us betweene, Iohn 15.5. Christ addeth, sine me nihil potestis agere, without me ye can doe nothing: and as Austin hath well noted upon the place, it is not nihil magni, but nihil, no great thing, but nothing at all: and it is not perficere, but nihil facere, not bring to perfection, but not so much as to doe any thing: so our hope must wholly rely it selfe upon him, as sole efficient of all good to us. 2. And for the other, the last end, for the referring of whatsoever glory shall proceed from us for any grace of God bestowed on us; it is plaine, 1 Cor. 1.29. he hath done it in this respect, that no flesh should rejoyce before him: but (vers. 31.) that all should rejoyce in him. In the nature of hope, there are two things necessarily to be conside∣red, 1. a griefe, 2. a joy, or rather è converso. These two, if the hope be true, it never suffereth us to be secure: but we shall be in a continu∣all warfare, as 1 Thes. 5.8. where hope is, there is a fight: because it is compared to an helmet. And in Psal. 27. the Prophet is beaten down first on the one side, then lifi up, then downe againe: and so in sundry of the Psalmes, he is three or foure times beaten downe and raised up againe in one Psalme; sometime hope should get the upper hand, and joy, and anon feare: for in as much as dilatio boni, the deferring of good, must needs have rationem mali, some appearance of evill: and as in Prov. 13.12. hope deferred affligit animam, [it is a mighty affliction to the soule] it must needs be, that when a Christian man shall see no
accomplishment of Gods promises; and not onely that, but he shall see the cleane contrary to that which is promised, fall to him: (as when peace is promised, there shall happen tumult, terror, anguish) and hee shall be driven, not onely by the wicked men exprobating to us, as they did to David, Where is now your hope? but by the enemy also, or our owne reason, which shall make a probleme with our spirit, of the applying of it;Ʋ speestra? surely this must needs worke: for (Rom. 8.23.) it worketh even in the dumbe creatures, though they shall not be partakers with us of the Resurrection: yet because they see the deliverance of man is not yet performed, they grone and desire to be delivered. The onely remedy for this, is the consideration exprest by Auslin in his Sermon upon Ps. 36. Sustine illum, sustinuit te, dum mutares vi∣tam malam: sustine tu illum, dum coronat vitam bonam, Wait upon God, he waited long upon thee to amend thee, wait thou patiently upon him till he crowne thee: this hath great reasons of it, which after shall be shewed in patience. Spes quibus ∣us comparatur.Now on the other side comes in that which it is compared to. It is compared by the Fathers, to a corke in Fishermens nets: if that were not, downe would the net goe: but that suffereth it not to sinke: the certainty of both, Rom. 12.12. spe gaudenies, rejoycing in hope: there is the joy, Heb. 10.23. Let us hold fast the : there is hope holding fast the profession of our hope without wavering: for he is faithfull that hath promised: and all these are necessarily in the hope of God commanded. Another thing commanded, is in the Isaac hope, as it was in Abraham as God, Luke 16.10. exerciseth our faith , in heavenly things, by a faith , in earthly things: so doth he in the exer∣cise of our hope: And as it is said, he that will not understand earthly things, how much lesse heavenly? so that man that will not hope for earthly things, will not hope for heavenly: he that will not hope for that which is lesse, will not hope for that which is more: Matth. 6.25. Christ argueth, 1. from the greater to the lesse, 2. then from the lesse to the greater. God having given as a soule, and providing us foode to maintaine our life, how much more will he provide us raiment for our bodies? If we are bound to put him in trust with our soules, how much more for our bodies? how much more for apparell? If the Sunne shine on the wicked, and the raine fall on the ungodly, shall it not much more on the godly? Qui pascit contemnentes, non pascet colentes? Then he commeth to the beasts & birds, and sheweth (for food) that the Lord provideth for them; (for rayment) even the Lilies of the field, that have no other end, but to be seene, yet that they passe Solomon, for all his royalty: Shall not man trust in him for earthly things? will he neglect him for whom all things were made? therefore we must first cast our selves, and our hope upon him, and not as Psal. 40.4, 5. to turne our selves to the proud, and to such as goe about with les: or as Esa. 28.25. casting our selves upon his policie, that what religion so∣ever come, we will be at a league with it: wee will meddle with no true religion, wee will fall at an agreement with Hell, Devill, &c. (but as a Father saith, as Terrena bene curantur, nil male agendo contra
illa: so, bene contemnuntur, nil male agendo propter illa; as we are suffi∣ciently carefull for the things of this life, if we doe not waste them, so they are sufficiently contemned by us, if we use no ill meanes to get them) out common disease in these dayes. Objectum spei, Bonum futurum possibile.We come to that which is forbidden. The object of hope is bonum, good, & not every bonum, but futurum, the future good, Rom. 8.24. Spes, quae videtur, non est spes, hope which is seen is not hope: but yet that is the hope of the wiseman of this world; yet they may see that, that they hope for: whereas our promises are not in present things, but in things to come. 2. Beside that of futurum, (because all that we have in the Creed is remission of sinnes) it must be also bonum possibile, the good, it must be possible to attaine it: and yet that possibility must not be got with ease, but with some difficulty, else we shall contemne it: and indeed if we could get it at the first, we needed not hope for it. Extrema spei, extremes of hope. Presumption.Out of these two, there arise the two extremes of hope: for where∣as a man thinketh thus, that this good, i. eternall life, is possible, ar∣duum tamen, and yet difficult to get; there is in our minde an affecti∣on called presumption, and it apprehends it as possible and easie, and so labours and runnes after it accordingly. But as it is Psal. 147.11. there must be a feare in regard of the hardnesse, ne forte reprobi fiamus, lest we become reprobate, as Paul, after that he had beene taken up into the third heaven, yet he feared, lest he should afterward have be∣come a reprobate, &c. As there must be a hope and comfort in regard of the possibility; so presumption is forbidden, whether it be of our selves, (for in us there is no good thing) or of others: there is a preventing grace; (to beginne) and a following grace (to continue) the preventing grace, i. divinum auxilium, divine ayde. The Papists they say of the preventing, or first grace, that there is no preparation to it, but that it is freely given: but deny that the following grace is given freely: [but that we have it of our selves.] Seeing we must not onely be prevented, Psal. 59.10. but also followed Psal. 23.6. it is a signe, that we are not then to presume of our selves. And as not of our selves, so not of others, Esa. 63.16. not of Abraham, nor of Israel, Iob 15.15. the Saints are not cleane in his sight; and there is none that can resist his strength but God: and therefore saith Austin, solus fiduciam homini praestat apud Deum Deus hmo, It is he alone that makes man confident of the mercies of God, that is both God and man, Christ Jesus. Psal. 18.30. he is clypeus sperantibus in eum, our Buckler. God hath his Axe in his hand to strike us, no creature is able to beare off his blow; but God if he put his Shield over us, and set himselfe betweene us and the Axe, he may beare off the blow. As a man may presume 1. of himselfe, or 2. of others: so there is also a presumption of God: for as hope is the Isaac of faith, which is the Abraham; so hope is the Isaac of hope And:Hope is the Isaac of faith, faith of the promise, this of the word. so doth necessari∣ly poynt us to the promises, and these are not to be found but in the word, so that nothing is hoped for, but that which is beleeved: and nothing beleeved, but that which is promised: and that which is pro∣mised,
is onely in his word, so that there must be no hope conceived of God, but that which is in his word: so Psal. 119.49. secundum ver∣bum tuum, in quo spem dedisti mihi, remember the word unto thy servant, unto which thou hast caused me to hope: therefore that man that hath no warrant to continue in his sinne, without repentance, and hope for mercie, and that is, where there is no promise: his hope in God is presumption, which ariseth of a false knowledge, or ignorance, and of a great and intolerable pride, thinking that we are such trim things, that God will spare us, though we continue never so much in sinne. The other extreme commeth by another way,Desperation. contrary to that that hope conceiveth: for whereas it conceiveth that it is hard, yet possible; there is desperation that thinketh it to be so hard, that it is not possible. Despaire is made of two sorts. 1. The first is, Psal. 78.21. (he smote the stony rocke indeede, that the waters gushed out, and the streames flowed withall: but can be give bread also, or provide flesh for his people?) Greg. in the 31. of his Morals, giveth us a note of observation, because he did see it proved alwayes ex luxuria, because of their lust: as the Israelites, because they were not fed with Quailes, as their lust was, presently desperaverunt, they fell into despaire: and it is, when a man conceiveth either that it will alwayes be bonum futurum, a good ever in expectation: or that it hath no taste in the world with him, or that it is a thing not greatly to be esteemed, and so giveth himselfe to carnall living: as Austin faith, Quia non possum habere quae spero,Habeo quae pos∣sum, & quae sunt contra spem. because I cannot (at my owne will) have those things I hope for, therefore I will have those things quae sunt contra spem, which contradict all hope: those things that I can in this life: this is a desperate despaire, as the Epicure, Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas, eate, drinke, and be merry, for there is no good to be hoped for after death. 2. The other is, 2 Cor. 2.7. the Apostle he was afraid lest the incestuous person, by too great sorrow, should have beene swallowed up with despaire: it is more to be pitied, and yet no lesse erroneous then the other: because it imagineth that there can proceed such an evill from a creature, as that God should not be able to master it, but it should master him: whereas it is certaine, that Gods mercie exceed∣eth all sinne, and is stronger then all. This was Cains eror, Gen. 4.13. and Ambrose writing on that place, saith plainely, Mentiris Cain, thou lyest Cain: for if it be possible that there should be larger dimensions of any one attribute of God, then of another, it must needes be of mercie: because that only is proper to God; the rest are communica∣ble to other creatures with him; Psal. 36.6. his justice and righteous∣nesse standeth as the strong mountaines, and his judgements are like the great deepe: but his mercie, it reacheth up unto the heavens, and his faithfulnesse unto the clouds (i. heavens.) The Fathers they have ruled a case in the Schooles; for, disputing of the two faults of Iudas, his betraying of Christ, and his despaire in the mercie of God, and examining whether was the greater, they have certainely determined,
that his despaire was the greater sinne, because it was utterly uncura∣ble, and took his breath from him: Therefore we must be sure that we hope: and that our hope be in verbo Dei, in quo spem nobis dedit, in the word of God, in which he hath caused us to trust: so of this we must take heede that we doe not as the Devill, that will make God so poor in mercie, as if it served for small fins onely. Media spei▪ Meanes unto hope.1. The meanes: a speciall meanes to move us to look to our hope in due time, is that Prov. 11.7. a consideration of his end: when the wic∣ked man perisheth, his hope perisheth, i. we must be sure to extend our hope further then this life: Prov. 23.18. his advise is, that there shall an end come, and then thy hope shall not be cut off: but as it is Psal. 16.10. and Acts 2.26. thy heart shall be glad, and thy flesh shall rest in hope: and that at the houre of death no man knoweth, but onely they that are in like case, how much a poore soule will then set by this fee∣ling of the judgements of God. 2. Another is Psal. 22.4. our Fathers, they hoped in God, and were not ashamed, they trusted in God and hee deli∣vered them: the example of others, when it pleased God, that others that have hoped in him, should not want the fruit of their hope; that we might comfort our selves with the same hope: there was never greater engine laid of the enemy, then against this: for that is the De∣vils policie, to perswade us, that there are none so great sinners as wee be: and that there were never men in that case that we are in, but they have beene in the like case, and have felt comfort. 3. In the 1 Sam. 17.37. the remembrances of the graces of God bestowed on us, when we had power by his helpe, to resist the like sins, as David reasoneth there; the Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the Lion, and of the Beare, he will also deliver this uncircumcised Philistim into my hands: Argum. ab experientia nostra, an argument drawne from our owne experience. 4. But the chiefe is, that we alledged before, out of Heb. 10.23. For he is faithfull that hath promised: [the strength of this dependeth of that in faith] Gods great faithfulnesse is never wanting: and Rom. 15.4. there is an addition to it; There is nothing written, but it is written for our instruction, that by patience and comfort in it, we keep our hope: [and therefore considering that] the holy Ghost hath espe∣ciall aime at our hope, in writing of it so oft in the Scriptures, and that it is he onely, whose dixit, factum est followeth continually, his word and worke goe alwayes together; and example of the 30. great promises, there remaineth but one unaccomplished: and Ephes. 2.6. his manner in penning it  [Nathan] i. dedit, transtulit, non trans∣feret, not he will, but he hath already raised us, he hath set us in hea∣venly places in Christ Jesus; whereas it is not yet come, but yet is as certaine, as if it were now; de futuris in praeterito, if God bee God. Indeed, as Prov. 25.19. confidence in an unfaithfull man, is like a broken tooth, and a sliding foote: and therefore the Heathen, that are such scorners of hope, call it , a waking dreame: 2 King. 18.21. there is one good thing in the speech of Rabshaleh; He
that trusteth to [the King] of Egypt, trusteth to a broken reed, that will runne into his hand: and it is to be said of every one. Relation to this, is in 1 Pet. 1.3. our hope must be spes viva, a lively hope: the other, the worldlings hope is spes mortua, a dead hope; or at least, spes mor∣talis, it is a mortall hope, and if we trust to it, it will wound us, if not with harme, yet with shame. Erubescere, signum spei moriuae, to bee a∣shamed, is a signe that our hope was dead: as Iob. 6.20. when they came, they found nothing, and were ashamed: but our hope must bee planted on the mercies of God, and Christs merits: and then shall we never be ashamed: so (God having wrought this hope in us) we may be bold with the Apostle to say, (2 Cor. 5.5.) that we have the earnest of the spirit: so we may be bold to say, as the Prophet saith, Psal. 43.5. Why art thou so cast downe O my soule, and why art thou so disquieted within me? O put thy trust in God, who is the health of my countenance and my God. Signa, signe, of true hope.For the signes, to discerne our hope; As a man thinkes he beleeveth, when he doth not beleeve: and as he thinkes he hath a thing, when the species of it swimmeth in his head: so there is a fleeting hope, when a man thinkes he hopeth, and doth not: it may be tried thus. 1. The first is Hezekiah his signe, 2 King. 20.3. when he was in the time of his sicknesse, he prayed, Remember Lord I pray thee, how in my prosperity, I have walked with an upright heart, &c. this is a signe that our hope is good, this maketh us cheerefull, that in the time of affliction and danger, we may say that we have beene mindfull of him in (our) prosperity. 2. The second is Saint Iohns signe, 1 Iohn 3.3. it is a purger: not like the presumers hope, which is a very sinke to receive and main∣taine whatsoever corruption our hands, our eyes, our hearts, or any other member hath: But it must be resident in the conscience. So the Fathers say, that conscientia est custos spei, conscience is the pre∣server of hope: and if that be cleane [kept] then our hope is true; if not, then there is no true hope. 3. The third is of David, Psal. 37.3. hope thou in the Lord, and be do∣ing good. The Heathen call , labour, the husband of hope: there is hope the harlot, and hope the married woman; we shall know hope the wife, from hope the harlot, by her husband: for she is alwayes with her husband: Psal. 4.5. sacrificate sacrificium justitiae, & sperate in Domino, offer the Sacrifice of righteousnesse, and put your trust in the Lord: there must be a travelling and striving to doe good. 4. The fourth is, Rom. 5.3. And not so onely; but we rejoyce in our afflictions, knowing that affliction worketh patience, and Esa. 33.15. there must be tribulation, to bring a proofe of our hope: in siletio & spe erit fortitudo vestra, in quietnesse and in confidence shall be your strength:Such as we are in adversity, such we are in deed such as our hope was in adversity, such it is, if you faint in adversity, thy hope is fainting: and thererefore the heathen call , tribulation, the bud or blossome of hope: which you must passe through: if that be not nipt, there will be fruit of it: otherwise, if it bring forth no fruit, it is spurium vitu∣lamen, a bastard joy.
The 6. rule, for the provoking of it in others:Rule . not onely to have it in our selves, but as Psal. 40.3. that many may see it, and feare, and trust in the Lord: and as it is Psal. 62.8. that all the nations may put their trust in him: so farre as it is possible: and Psal. 115.9. that the house of Israel, 10. the house of Aaron, 11. and all that feare the Lord may trust in him. An encouragement & endeavour thereto, Ps. 51.13. Da∣vids promise, [to the wicked, & to sinners] that he would teach them to hope and Ps. 75.5. to the presumers, that he would plainly tell them, that they should not be so foolish, & so mad, and set up their horne. Invocation. The necessity and use of prayer.VNto every affection there is an action: as the action of faith is hope; so the action of hope is prayer: spei operatio, ora∣tio: so to come backe againe, as the fruit of faith is hope, and of hope prayer; and as the property of hope is prayer,Interpres spei orati. so the property of prayer is to be interpres spei: to make plaine the desire of the hope conceived. In which respect, as the Articles of our faith are summa credendorum, the summe of our beliefe; and the Law summa agendorum, the summe of our actions: so the Lords prayer is summa sperandorum, the summe of our hope: for the soule of man, by considering and beleeving the judgments of God, being humble and brought downe to the dust, [and as it were dead and buried] by it hath some life againe put into it, by conceiving an hope in his mercy: for which mercy wee must goe to God: and Prayer becommeth suiter for it. Aug. Precibus, non passibus itur ad Deum: therefore, that hope may be made pertaker of her object, . mercy; we must know that (Psal. 13.5.) mercy is of God. [And not onely prayer of words with the lips, but it must be from the heart, that it may ascend.] Austin writes on the 66. Psal. ut descen∣dat miseratio, ascendat oratio; that mercy may descend, prayer must ascend: and so there shall be a blessed exchange betweene our pray∣er, and his mercy. When we speake of prayer, lest there should be an errour, it is not to be conceived that the intreaty is made con∣cerning that prayer in the Congregation, which with lips and out∣ward gesture we deliver: such prayer, Hosea 14.3. calleth vitu∣lum labiorum, the sacrifice of our lips, that commeth not into the compasse of the first Commandement, which is only inward: but in the 1 Cor. 14.15. Orabo spiritu, orabo & mente; I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also;The growing of the inward (man.) when the spirit commeth to God: which howsoever it be not heard of men, [by the outward eare] how vehement it is: yet we know it hath its ef∣fect with God, for so Exod. 14.15. we read that Moses made so fer∣vent intercession to God, though there be no mention, nor signe of any word he spake: yet the Lord saith, Why cryest thou thus unto mee? So that this being the especiall part, and the soule of every prayer to God, without this inward prayer, the lips prevaile not, as Matth. 15.8. there is a drawing neere with the lippes: Matth. 7.21. a doubling of Lord, Lord, it prevaileth nothing, neither will it gaine him the Kingdome of Heaven. And therefore Aug. Hoc
negotium plus gemitibus constat, quam sermonibus: the worke of pray∣er consists more in grievance than words. And Rom. 8.26. The spi∣rit groaneth for us, with sighs inenarrable, as Esay 38.3. And so con∣ceiving of it, as of an inward oblation, or speech of soule to God: then whether it be of persons without the Church, as Act. 10.2. of Cornelius: or of those that are within the Church, and have cast themselves out of Gods favour by their sinnes, and so, as Psal. 130.1. be in the depth: whether it be of an Heathen, or of a sinner, it is no lesse acceptable to God in substance, [though not in degree] then the prayer of a just and righteous man. Now the applying of this to Hope, to the maine scope and end of it, i. Gods glory, as Psal. 123.2. it pleaseth God by the Prophet to account it a speciall honour done to him, that even as the servants eyes are alwaies on the hands of his Master, and the eyes of the handmaiden are on the hands of her Mistresse: so that our eyes should wait upon the Lord till he have mercy on us. Or as Austin in his fifth Sermon de verbis Domini, Magna est gloria Dei, ut nos simus mendici. God accounts it great glory done unto him, when we become beggers, and suiters unto him. And not only this glory, but also a double glory returneth to God by it: & so the action is so much the more to be commended to us, and so much the more to be esteemed of us: for both this, when we ac∣knowledge that we have it not from our selves, but from him, this is great magnifying of Gods bounty: as also when we have recei∣ved, thanksgiving, i. that homage that we do to him, that is a thing that he maketh most account of. Psal. 50.15. when he hath given commandement to call upon him in the time of trouble: and hath made promise that he will heare: [So I will heare thee, and thou shalt praise mee.] But more excellently in Psal. 107. it is five times re∣peated, and it is the keep of the song: he entreating of five sorts of men, that are especially bound to God, 1. those that goe astray in the wildernesse, out of the way, and find no City to dwell in. 2. Those that are at the point of death and escape. 3. Those that are delivered from prison, and from the sentence of death. 4. Those that be saved from the raging of the tempest. 5. Those that are de∣livered from the enemy; he saith, v. 6. So they cryed unto the Lord in their trouble; then commeth performance of promise: and he delive∣red them from their distresse: and then last, O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodnesse, and declare the wonders that he doth for the children of men. For when as the prayer of the poore afflicted is heard, then seeing both the humble mind by the having of his request granted, is raised up, and beginneth to be glad, Psal. 34.3. and secondly, forasmuch as sinners, when they see the fulfilling of their prayers, and forgivenesse of sins granted them, Ps. 51.13. are converted: and thirdly, Psal. 107.42. that the mouth of sin may be stopped all these three waies, there doth still glory returne to God. Then if it be so necessary, and God without it, is defrauded of much honour, it imposeth on us a necessity, diligently to consider of it; and to practise it in regard of Gods glory: so, in regard of our selves: thus Luk. 18.1. Christ being in exhortation, sheweth his
Apostles by a parable, that they ought to pray alwaies: , and not to faint: for the which end, he that never did any super∣fluous thing, being as the Apostles call him, our Advocate; (1 Joh. 2.2.) it is said Luk. 11.2. hee hath indited us a forme of prayer. In the use whereof that commeth first to mind, that Chry∣sostome hath in his 1. booke de orando Deum, out of Dan. 6.10. that death of hody being set before his eyes, on this onely condition, to abstaine from prayer 30. dayes, tanquam si, as if the forbearing from it for that time, could be the death of the soule: so he was content rather to hazzard his life, then not to performe his daily custome. As in that respect in Numb. 28.3, 8. there is set downe by way of figure, that God requireth of the Israelites, as a necessary thing, beside the hallowing of the Sabbath, a morning and evening Sacrifice. What this in truth is, it is expounded Ps. 141.2. the lifting up of his hands he compareth to the morning, and evening sacrifice: as the first is, burning of incense: so the morning prayer is nothing else, but as an incense, that goeth up into the nostrils of God, & the lifting up of his hands in the evening is the true evening sacrifice of the Christians. If a man should read what the fathers have written in this point; as Cyprian on the Lords prayer, Gregory in his booke of Prayer, Austin ad Probam, &c. he shal rather see them spent in perswa∣ding the necessity, then in teaching the manner to performe it; that being an especiall meanes to performe it, to thinke it so necessary. They call it Clavim diei, et seram noctis, the key that openeth the day, and the barre that shutteth in the night: Chysostome calleth it sig∣naculum diei, the seale of the day: Out of 1 Tim. 4.5. where the use of the creatures be noysome, without blessing by prayer and thanksgiving: and out of Mat. 14.19. and out of Mat. 26.26. Christs prayer before supper: and Mat. 26.30. his last seale, and the end of his supper was hymno dicto, after an hymne: it having beene no new thing, but the outward practise having continued so from the dayes of Abraham, as the Jewes record, their manner re∣maining, that the chiefe of the family taketh first the bread▪ and with that delivereth prayer, and then breaketh it; as the last thing he taketh is the cup, and then he delivereth the second blessing: this being so holy an use, as that it was used generally in the whole Church; from this generall custome of the Church, Christ transla∣ted it to his owne supper. In Eph. 6.18. for the necessity of it: as head, foot, breast, were armed before by the Apostle, there being no place to put it in: yet in all cases and times, he recommendeth it unto us. Prayer goeth through (out) all things, which the Fathers call armaturam armaturae, the very armour of armour: without which, all the armour we put on beside, is of no greater strength, then if we were naked: as in regard of the necessity of the spirituall enemies, they call it flag ellum Daemonum, a scourge for the Devills. Athanasius standeth very stiffe on this assertion, that at the bare,Psal. 68.1. Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered, &c. but hearty recitall of the 68. Psal. v. 1. it is a verse that makes all the devils of hell to quake: and as Maximus, another of the Fa∣thers, commendeth the 1. v. of the 70. Psal. to be that, which as an
instrument or meanes he found alwayes effectuall to deliver him from any temptation: Jam. 5.13. when he will commend it, he taketh no other course to shew the great strength that it hath: for as in hope it saw nothing of it selfe to be performed: but that which was impossible to us, was possible per alium, by another: so there be∣ing the same in Prayer,It hath its force in miracles. it is the more to be esteemed. That in Jam. 5.17. is nothing but a certaine miracle wrought in the aire by prayer, that the Prophet Elias shut up the middle region, that no raine could come downe for three yeares and an halfe. If we desire to see it in other elements, we may see it in fire, by the same Elias, 2 King. 1.10. at his call, fire descended from heaven, and devoured the Captaine with his 50. men: and in the earth, Psal. 106.17. at the prayer of Moses, the earth opened, and swallowed up Corah, Dathan, and Abiram with their Companies. In Water, Exod. 14.16. the division of the red sea. And we see the performance of it from Gods behalfe, not in elements onely, but also, as Josh. 10.12. it hath an efficacle on the heaven it selfe: at the prayer of Joshuah, both the Sunne, and Moone stood still. For putting to flight of earth∣ly powers, Exod. 17.11. When Moses held up his hands Israel prevai∣led, but when he let his hand downe Amaleck prevailed. The examples be infinite: but these seeme lesse: because it hath power on spiri∣tuall powers, on death, and hell; on death, Esay 38.5. in Hezekiah. [I have heard thy prayer, and seene thy teares, behold I will adde to thy daies 15. yeares.] on hell, Mat. 17.21. the Apostles being to deale with strong devils, and being not able through their unbeliefe to cast them out, Christ saith to them, This kind goeth not out, but by prayer and fasting. But that that drowneth all, is that in Exod. 32.10. where there was no violence done of Moses, but he onely gave himselfe to prayer, and yet we see a strange speech of God, Dimitte me, let mee alone; as that violence had beene done him, and he had beene mastered by Moses his prayer: and if it be able so to worke on God, much more will it prevaile in every thing else. And this is for the necessity and use of Prayer. The promises made unto prayer.Now for the Commandement, but first we will consider as it stan∣deth on Gods behalfe, both how willing he is, and what promises he hath made to it. True it is, as it is in Gen. 18.27. as Abraham [spake of himselfe] so wee being nothing but a handfull of dust and ashes, it were infinite presumption, once to presume to speake to him, being so excellent a God, without his warrant, and promise: there∣fore Gen. 32. Jacobs prayer to God. 1 King. 8. Solomons prayer, for a piece of earth to speake, they fence themselves, with a promise, whereupon one saith, non mea praesumptione, sed tua promissione. For the promise, and for the Commandement, we spake before, Psal. 50.15. Call upon mee in the time of trouble, so will I heare thee, and thou shalt praise mee. He commandeth it with abjecting externall sacrifices: so Joel 2.32. But whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved. For in mount Sion, and in Jerusalem shall be deliuerance, as the Lord hath said: and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call: alleaged
also Act. 2.21. . &c. And it shall come to passe, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved. As on the other side, Jer. 10.25. the curse of God is on all those that call not on him. There is nothing can be more required then that Ps. 91.15. God saith, He shall call upon me, & I will heare him, deliver him, and save him But the joyning together of those two places, Mat. 7.7. Petite, & dabi∣tur vobis: Aske, and it shall be given unto you; and Joh. 16.23. wherein the one place, i. Mat. 7.8. is, Omnis qui petit accipit: Every one that asketh receiveth: and in the other, Quaecunque petieritis à patre (meo) in nomine meo, dabuntur vobis: Whatsoever you shall aske the Father in my name, he shall give it you. This is very much, there can no more be required then these, that omnis qui petit accipit: and, quaecunque petitis, accipietis. [But we will expound it after.] And as he is ready to promise, so he is ready to performe. But that is the strangest, Esay 65.24. Etiam antequam invocaveritis; before ye pray I will heare you: so ready is hee on his part. And to testifie this indeed, Exod. 30.6. in the Law hee erecteth a Mercy seat: or if first (Esay 56.7.) he causeth a Temple, and that he giveth this name, as of the speciall exercise, The house of Prayer; and 1 King. 8.41. it is for the stranger also: Esdr. 7.3. so defined by the King, (the house of the God of heaven) and in this he sets a Mercie seat: before which (in the 7. v.) are Priests, and Levites, and Singers, and Nethimins; and the 1. part of the service, Incense: often as Psal. 141.2. inter∣preted Prayer; and that in the time of the Law. And so is it meant Luk. 1.10. that the people without were at their prayers, while the Priest within was at the Altar, at the typicall worship: i. burning of incense. And proportionable to this is that, Heb. 4.16. that God, as here he hath set a seat of mercie, so in heaven he hath set up a Throne of grace: from whence, si ascendat oratio, descendet gratia: if prayer ascend, gtace shall descend. Now because we our selves have no accesse unto it, therefore Rom. 5.2. order is taken that wee should have accesse per alium, by another: he, Heb. 7.26. that was Heb. 5.7. in his flesh, and offered up prayers, and supplications, with strong crying and teares, not onely for his Apostles, but also for all that beleeve in him, Joh. 17.20. and not onely then, but now also, Rom. 8.34. He maketh still intercession for us: and his intercession is from himselfe, not from another: but Revel. 8.3. he is figured by an An∣gell: where the prayers of the godly are received by the Angell, and there is incense put into them, to season them withall, that the smell of them may be acceptable to the Lord: and then offereth them up to his Father: so he not onely prayeth himselfe, but maketh our prayers accepted of God: and therefore, Revel. 1.6. every one shall be a Priest to God: and every priest must offer sacrifice: and there is no other sacrifice in the new Testament, but praise and thansgiving so he hath promised Zach. 12.10. spiritum gratiae, the spirit of grace: and that is accomplished, Gal. 4.6. because yee are sonnes, God hath sent forth the spirit of his Sonne into your hearts, which cryeth, Abba, Father. And Rom. 8.26. We have not any power to call upon God, neither do we know what to pray for, or how to pray, but the Spirit asketh for us
with sighes and groanes, that cannot be expressed: therefore there can be nothing required, but we shall have it. Thus we see that all is perfor∣med on Gods behalfe. Now to the duty. The duty of Paer com∣manded.The duty commanded, it is of two sorts; but first in gererall In∣vocation containeth them both: so Hilary, and Austin, 59. Epst. ta∣keth Invocation. We understand it by these two things: the first is, Psal. 25.1. a lifting up of our soule, i. a sixing of our minde on God, who is the author and giver of all good: secondly, as Psal. 6.8. a pouring out of our hearts, i. a full declaration of our desire, and that we require, Psal. 142.2. expounded to be our thoughts and me∣ditation. These two in generall concurre to the making of Invocation. This Invocation, as it is, 1 Tim. 2.1. doth receive a fourfold di∣vision: for it is divided into , Deprecation , Peaion. , Interaction. , Thanksgiving. The first we may divide into Prayer, & Thanksgiving. The other three are thus divided: prayer is made either for Our selves. Others, For our selves, either a Petition of some good to be givenus, Deprecation, , that evill things may be taken away from us. Thus it is interpreted by the Fathers. , depre∣cation of evill.For deprecatio, that evill may be turned away, it is certaineely, as Iames 5.17. the most essentiall kinde of prayer. (Is any of you afflicted? let him pray) And the reason is, for that the removing of evill, being sub ratione boni, though hope apprehend nothing but good, yet this com∣meth under the shew of good; and so commeth under hope. Ʋt avertatur, Auferatur, Minuatur, malum.It is in these three things. 1. As it is Dan. 9.16. that the wrath of God may be turned away before it come upon us. 2. Or as Psal. 25.22. Deliver Israel O God, out of all his troubles, i. being now in it; that we may be delivered: it is called liberatio, de∣liverance. 3. Or as Psal. 85.4. Mitiga iram tuam Domino: when we pray for a diminution, that we may be able to sustaine it. 1. The first part standeth alwayes in a confession of our sins, and defects in doing of that which we should doe, and that we might be justly punished for not doing of it. So the Prophet in sundry Psalmes runneth through all his sinnes, originall and actuall; those which he committed before his conversion and after, those that hee had done by omission or commission, those that he had committed in thought, word, or deed, against God, or against his brethren; either by instigation of himselfe, or inforced by others, Prov. 28.13. He that covereth his sinne shall not prosper; there is a dangerous saying; and Psal. 32.3, 4, 5. there is a dangerous example; till he had opened his sinnes, and made them knowne, his bones wore away, and his
moysture became as the drought in Summer. 2. That being done, then we come to the essential deprecation, to desire of God that he would divert his just deserved judgements from us: and 1. against that malum that is maxime deprecandum, that evill that is most to be prayed against. Luke. 22.31. the Sieve of Satan, cribrum satanae, that our sinnes in affliction winnow us not; as Satan desired that he might winnow Peter. Not wishing as they commonly wish, I would I were out of the world: but as Iohn 17.15. Christ, non ut tollas eos è mundo, sed ut liberes à malo, I pray not that thou wouldest take them from the world, but that thou shouldest keepe them from the evill: And desiring this, certaine it is, that that promise, 1 Cor. 10.13. cannot be voyd, He will not suffer us to be tempted above our strength: and that either our strength shall encrease, as the crosse encreaseth: or as our strength diminisheth, our crosse shall so diminish also. Then 1 King. 8.38. What plague soever any shall seele in his heart, and shall make prayer and supplication for it, it shall be removed. In tempo∣rall danger, (2 Chron. 10.12. Iehosophat) Cum ignoramus quid agendum sit, hoc solum restat, ut ad te oculos dirigamus Domine, Neither know we what to doe, but our eyes are upon thee: for as Prov. 18.10. that same nomen Domini, the name of the Lord, it shall be turris fortissima, the strongest Tower to us; as to the Saints it hath beene. But yet for this temporall evill, we must submit to Gods will in that, we must stand as the three children, Dan. 3.17. they answered to the King: We are sure that the Lord whom we serve, is able to deliver us out of this fiery furnace; but though he will not (because the covenant is in the remission of sinnes) yet will we not serve thy gods, nor wor∣ship the golden image which thou hast set up: and as Christ, Luke. 22.42. If it be possible, let this cuppe passe from me: and yet fiat volun∣tas non mea, sed tua, thy will, not my will be done; for those reasons alleadged. pre∣cation of good. Give to them that have not; Stablish them which have it weake in them; Increase it in them that have it but little.2. The second is , a desiring of something that is good: there is nothing more common in the Psalmes then this: 1. Give me a true understanding: 2. so Psal. 68.28. Stablish the thing that thou hast wrought in us; 3. so in Luke, Domine adaugenobis fidem, Lord increase our faith: so that in these three, 1. that it be given, 2. that it be esta∣blished, 3. that it be increased in us, is this kinde of prayer con∣tained. Concerning this petition of good, because we have it so seldome granted, Christs saying is verified, Mat. 20.22. his answer to the sons of Zebede is, Ye aske ye know not what: so it may be said of all such that desire that good which is more agreeable to their owne humours then to the will of God. Chrysostome reporteth of a thiefe, qui orabat Deum, (being not min∣ded notwithstanding to become true) ut non capereur: & eo citius capi∣ebatur, that desired of God that he might not be taken, and his pray∣er was an occasion that he was the sooner taken: therefore our rule must be that, 1 Iohn 5.14. Quicquid secundum voluntatem ejus petimus, whatsoever we aske according to his will, he will heare us: i. whereof we have promise in his word: and those in degrees too: as Psal. 27.4.
unum petii a Iehovâ, one thing have I desired of the Lord: i. one thing above the rest, , that I might dwell in the house of the Lord, all the dayes of my life; Luke 11.13. interpreted to be that that shall not be denied, the holy Ghost. Now with these, or after these, we may pray for temporall good things. Gen. 28.20. Iacobs prayer is, that he may have soode and raymeni: and Prov. 30.8. Give me not poverty, nor riches, but sufficientiam victus, a sufficiencie onely: and Austin saith, non indecenter petit, quia eam petit, & non amplius, it is no misbeseeming prayer, because he askes but for so much and no more. Else we must desire this with a condition, as, if it be possible, let it be; yet thy will be done: so 2 Sam. 15.25. King David to Za∣dok, the petition of a Kingdome. If I have found favour in the eyes of the Lord, (he will bring me againe, &c.) if not, (and if it be best for me to resigne) here I am, let him doe what he will. There is no way more compendious, nor sooner to obtaine, then to resigne over into his hands. For divising meanes, and strugling he suffereth not to ob∣taine, resignation is the best part. Now that we said before, (to fall into this omnis & omnia, what wee are to think of it) because it may be best expounded here: It seemes a strange thing, that every one that asketh, should receive; and what∣soever we desire, we should have: for it is certaine, many aske and have not: therefore we are thus to stand affected here, as Augustin saith, Iu∣bet ut petas, & si non petas, displcer? & non negabit quod petis, & tu non petes? Doth God command thee to pray, and is he displeased if thou prayest not? and will he not deny thee that thou prayest for, and yet wilt thou not pray? No, but it is to be feared, that the cause why we receive not, is not in his promise, but in our asking: there∣fore thus we are to thinke, 1. that it is not a marvellous demon∣strative argument of favour, to have all things granted: for Psal. 78.29. the Israelites, they prayed to God for flesh, and flesh he sent: yet with displeasure. While the meate was yet in their mouthes, the heavie wrath of God came upon them and slew them, &c. 1 Sam. 8.22. The people, they would needs have a King, and they have one: but the Lord granted it in his wrath, whereas not onely wicked men, but (Marke 5.12.) the Devill hath his prayer granted him. As on the other side, the denying of somethings to us, is not a sure signe of Gods displeasure: 2 Cor. 12.8. Paul, he prayed thrice, that the pricke in his flesh might be ta∣ken away, and was not heard. This being so, then wee come to the second. 1. That our prayer is either made aright, or not aright: then 1. ei∣ther it is not denied, (though we presently have it not) but defered, that we might aske it more instantly: and obtaining it, esteeme it the more: Desideria dilatione crescunt, & cio data vilescunt, delay increa∣seth desire, and easie things are sleighted: So in our prayers in desiring a good after an indirect manner, we are denied; or else if we pray for good things in a right manner, yet God oft slayeth his hand, because he loves our importunity: this our Saviour hath laid downe in two Parables, the one Luke 18.5. the Parable of the wicked Judge and the poor Widow, the other Luke 11.8. of the friend that was importunate for three loaves.
2. Or secondly, aut dabit quod petimus, aut dabit quod movit esse uti∣lius, either God will give us that we pray for, or that which he knowes is better for us: as to Paul, though he would not take away the pricke in his flesh, lest he should be puffed up; yet he gave him a better thing, i. his grace, and the perfecting of his strength in Pauls weak∣nesse. Where our prayer is not made aright, there is a new consideration, because as Chrysostome saith, there be , there be certaine childish and aguish prayers; childrens: as if you be a childe, and aske bread, you shall have it: if a knife, you shall not have it: so of sundry men, that will aske those things that will hurt: so they should be frustrate of their desire [though they be in an erroneous o∣pinion:] to these Chrysostome saith, in these cases thus perswade your selves, , ye receive it, in not receiving it, for to misse a mans benefit, is to have it. This is in the matter of our asking; the other, in the manner, shall be delivered after. But to come to the , interpellation for others, intercession:, Inter∣cession. the Fathers very seldome cite Fathers; but here Aug. citeth out of Ambrose his Exemption, i. fraer mi, si pro te tantum rogas, solus pro te rogabis; si pro omnibus rogas, omnes pro e rogabunt, if thou prayest onely for thy selfe, then thy prayers shall goe up alone; but if thou prayest for all, thou shalt have the prayers of all: so though you be not heard in your owne petition, you shall be heard in your petition for all in generall, [that these things may be.] After our selves, we must remember our brethren: Paul saith, we must pray for all men, but specially, Psal. 122.6. for those things that make to the peace of Ierusalem: and the Prophet wisheth his tongue to cleave to the roofe of his mouth, that forgets it: and in Ierusalem, [all in the Church have neede of this: but especially the chiefe Rulers and Governours:] Rom. 15.30. the Apostles needed the prayers of the brethren: and Ephes. 6.19. he commendeth himselfe to their prayers. And not onely to those that are in the Church, but to those also that concerne us in na∣ture, and those that are afarre off, without the Church: the ground of it is, 1 Iohn 5.16. Pray for sinners, that have not sinned unto death: and the promise, Iam. 5.15. he shall be heard. In which respect, in the ancient Liturgy of the Church, there is first a prayer for them that are without the Church; for Infidels, Idolaters, Jewes, Turkes, Hereticks, Schismaticks; then for those that be in the Church, that are not of us: those that are in ignorance, or those that know, and practise not: for those that are in temptation, those that are oppressed with the burden of their sins, and persecuted, and for the perseverance of the faithfull, and those that stand: there is a worse thing behinde, Matth. 5.44. Orate pro iis, qui vos persequuntur, Pray for them that persecute you, they must come in too. Gregory in his 27. Homily on the Evangelists, falling on that place Ier. 15.1. where it is said, Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet mine affection could not be toward this people, &c. he asketh why it pleased God to make choyce of them, and giveth a reason of it: and the reason is ve∣ry
good: for that his prayer is most effectuall, that can heartily pray to God after he hath received an injury of any wretch, and desire of God to bestow his grace upon him immediately upon the injury received, his prayer is most accepted. So Moses, Exod. 17.4. the people were ready to stone him, and presently after he prayeth for them to the Lord: and 1 Sam. 12.23. they deposed him from bearing rule over them; and yet he saith, God forbid but that I should pray for you: therefore such prayers are most effectuall. Certaine it is, that whereas our enemies, or sinners doe not per∣taine to Gods election: therefore some may say, that we shall in vaine pray for them. It is not so, for our encouragement we have example, Psal. 35.15. of the Prophet David, for his enemies, they continued, but my prayer returned to mine owne bosome; it purchased me a com∣modity. Qui pro aliis oral, pro se laborat, He that prayes for others, takes paines for himselfe. The 4. part is thankes, Invocation being a desiring of that wee have not,, Thanksgiving. and thanks for receiving of that we desire: so that whether we aske not and receive, as Esa. 65.24. when we have it granted before, or whether we aske and have, Matth. 7.7. both wayes it is reason that we enter into this consultation, Psal. 116.12. Quid retribuam Domino? What shall I render unto the Lord for all the benefits that he hath be∣stowed on me? the beginning, middle, end, and chiefe end (of it) is the glory of God. For this glory, all that is made, is made: therefore after the accomplishment of the dayes of his worke, presently he in∣stituted the seventh day, for his praise and glory, Gen. 2.3. this was mans state in Paradise: after man fell, all had perished, Esa. 24.13. but that God might have a company to glorifie him: and of those that perish, Prov. 16.4. they are kept for the day of evill, that his glo∣ry might beshewed. How God may be exactly glorified, it is shew∣ed in the Psalmes; and Psal. 50.23. he saith plainely, he that ossereth me thankes, giveth me glory: and yet more plainely and fully, 2 Cor. 4.15. all things are to this end, that most plenteous grace through the thanks∣giving of many, might returne to his glory. For as the Heathen said, it is certaine, that graius animus est meta benignitatis, gratitude is the end of bounty: and it is the Lords aime in penning: and therefore we see in the Obligation, wherein he bindeth himselfe and us, Psal. 50.15. Call upon me, and I will heare you: and if I doe heare you, you shall praise me, he that receiveth ought, receiveth it with this condition, (else he is but an usurper) and is to make account for it. This thanks∣giving by the learned of the Hebrewes, is made to consist of foure parts, according to the foure words that they finde usually set downe by them that give thankes. 1. The first is  a confession: and for that 1 Cor. 4.7. we have nothing but we have received it, Psal. 121.1. and that from above the hils, i. no inferiour creature hath given it us, and from above these hils, not to imagine as the Priests of Israel, 1 Sam. 6.9. that if the Kine went not with the Arke that way that it was wont, it was by chance: 1 Iam. 17. , from above: and how? from the Father
of lights; this is our confession: so neither are we to dissemble that which we have received; August. Qui habere se affirmat, quod non habet, is temerarius est: so qui non confietur se habere, quod habet, in∣gratus est, He that saith he hath that which he hath not, is rash; and he which confesseth not that he hath that, which he hath, is un∣thankfull: and so consequently, we are to use them as dans, and not as innatis, as free, not naturall gifts. 2. The second part  Psal. 16.6. it is, I like well, I am con∣tent he saith, his lot is well fallen unto him, it liketh him: and so consequently, whatsoever we have, that we finde a rich portion in it, and are content: this is the worthy valuing of Gods gifts, which ex∣cludeth the disease of the Israelites that could never be content, and were never well, though they received very much; but murmured 40. yeeres for all his promises. 3.  annunciabo, I will declare it, that we tell it to others: so Psal. 66.16. he cals them that feare the Lord, I will tell you (saith he) what he hath done for my soule: and Psal. 111.1. he professeth that he will tell it in the congregation, in a publike assembly: and Psal. 40.9. in magna congregatione, in the great congregation; and because that was not enough: therefore Psal. 56.5. omnibus gentibus, to all the Nations, as indeed he hath: and that being not great enough, Psal. 22.31. to his seede: Psal. 71.18. to all posterity: and Psal. 40.9.10. that which is contrary to this, I will not refraine my lips, I will not keepe backe, I will not hide thy righteousnesse, &c. 4. The fourth is,  Venue, (Come ye) but that pertaineth to the sixth Precept or Rule. This thanksgiving, is prayer made; as , for that good that we did want; so thankes for receiving that good: the first example is out of Abrahams houshold, Gen. 24.27. his servant gave thankes presently, after he had found a wife for his Masters sonne. Dan. 2.20. for a secret revealed to him. So for the deliverance of the Israelites from the Egyptians, Exod. 15.1.20. the song of Moses: Iudg. 5. the song of Deborah and Bara, after the victory over Sisera. As there is a deprecation for others,Dp, . so an interpellation for others, Act. 11.18. for the benefit of the Gentiles; It is called complementum oraionis, the perfection and end of prayer: because it is the especial∣lest thing in prayer which tends at Gods glory; it is especially to be commended: therefore we will speake a little more of the excellen∣cie of it, and how it pleaseth God. David hath this testimony, that he was a man after Gods heart: Chrysostome examining why he was a man after Gods heart, more then Abraham, or Moses, &c. he saith he can finde no other reason, then that he did perceive Gods desire to have his name praised, more then the rest of the Saints: and so labou∣red more plenteously then any other, and so deserved that title above any other: for Psal. 55.17. he protesteth for prayer, that he will keep his houres: morning, noone, and evening: (every day thrice hee will pray) but Psal. 119.164. it is not thrice that will serve him, but that must be done seven times a day: but vers. 62. Psal. 119. he would give thankes to God at midnight: according to that wisdome God revealed
unto him, that he knew Gods minde: (did he pray, Psal. 6.5. that he might yet live to give him thanks, for in death no man remembreth thee, and who will give thee thankes in the pit?) Ps. 118.17. I will not die, but live, and declare the workes of the Lord: this is his desire, that he may not yet die, and he giveth no other reason but this, if his body come once in∣to the grave, he cannot glorifie God. Thus ought every man desire to live: and therefore our life to be deare unto us for this end; Psal. 39.15. O spare me a little, that I may recover my strength, before I goe hence, and be no more seene: therefore this is the end of mans life, and con∣sequently it must not be slacked, while we live here; and it is not the end of mans creation alone, but it is also the end of the creation of the Angles: to put us in minde of an excellencie, that then we doe that the Angels doe: as Luke 2.14. their song is Gloria in excelsis Deo, Glory to God in the highest: Revel. 7.12. they cry and say, Let all praise, glory, honour, thankes, power be given to God, &c. In which con∣sideration David, Psal. 108.1. when his tongue was to be occupied in praise and thanksgiving, then he calleth it  his glory, his glo∣rious member, his best member: and in deede this is the way to make all our members glorious, to bestow them on Gods praise, in glorify∣ing him: so if any man be desirous to be occupied, as the Angels are occupied, this is the meanes. Now as this is a way to lift us up: so it is a way, if we walk not in it, to cast us down: Psal. 19.1, 2, 3, 4. Psal. 148. sheweth that the creation of the world (the duty of the creatures) is nothing else, but to de∣clare the glory of God, in so much as we see Psal. 148.10. he called the very worms, and basest creatures to their function and duty: and Chrysostomes note upon it is, that that man that is ingratefull, and a sin∣ner, his state is worse, and more vile then the worme, the basest, vilest creature, in so much as he will not vouchsafe himselfe to come into their number, to sing praise to God. This for the creatures. But for the Church, Psal. 29.9. there, in the Temple every man spea∣keth of his praise: the naturall duty of it. What is preaching, praedi∣care, but a declaring of his creation, and his benefits of his owne free mercie, then in electing us, of our Saviour and his redemption, and the shutting up of these per , To whom with the Son and the holy Ghost be honour, &c. as the Fathers use is. And for the Sacraments, the Sacrament of perfection, it sets down to us so much, that it is called Eucharistia, a thanksgiving: and it ends with Gloria, Glory be to God on high, &c. And for prayer, this is the complement of prayer; So all the exercises of the Church did tend to this. Psal. 133.1. Where the unity is not onely called a good, but also a pleasant thing, the Fa∣thers say, that many things are good, but not pleasant: and many things pleasant, and not good: but this hath an excellent commenda∣tion, that it hath both: and Psal. 147.1. there is a third thing: a thing may be pleasant and good, but not comely: but there it is said, that it is a good, pleasant, and comely thing to praise the Lord, and be thank∣full. Profit we see, is a great mover: if profit be not, all excellencie else is contemned: and Act. 20.35. Beatius est dare, quam accipere, It is more blessed to give then to receive: this is the onely thing, and there
is nothing else that a man can give to God. And August. saith here: If we will, we may be beatiores: but the Lord, he hath called it, magni∣fication, glorification, sanctification, &c. as if we made him greater, or more glorious, or holier then he is, by it: and there is never this given, but something is received. Luke 17.15. Ten Leapers were cleansed, nine came not backe to give God thankes: he which commeth back, and giveth God thankes, receiveth againe the second time, that is, for∣givenesse of his sins: so that it is never given gratis, but as there is first ascension of prayer, then decursus gratiae, a descending of grace: so as Bernard saith, after there is recursus gratiarum actionis, a sending backe of thankes; and then a new decursus gratiae, a comming downe of benefits: so there is decursus gratiae, & recursus: cesset recursus gra∣tiarum actionis, cessabit decursus gratiae: a comming downe of grace, and a returne of thankes, if thy thankes be not returned, grace will no more come downe; and if that come not, then as it is compared to water, so it receiveth the quality of water: which if it have not per∣peruall succession, it standeth still, and stinketh: so this standing still, it rotteth the gifts of God bestowed on us, and those graces that wee have received before. Bernard on the seventh of the Acts, in his book of minores sermones, hath this question, Wherefore the excellent gifts, and rare examples of all vertues and good things in the Primitive Church, and in the times before are not now seene. We have the same beginnings that they had, but we, if a man continue as hee hath begunne, wonder at it; but they did not onely continue as they be∣gunne, but went forward: and therefore they had the greater gifts, and he saith, It is not, because Gods hand is shortned, or his will altered; but because skant and thinne is our thanksgiving sowen: [and there∣fore our harvest and our reaping must needs be skant and thinne:] and therefore Vae aetati nostrae propier ingratitudinem, Woe to this age of ours, even for its unthankfulnesse: and there is no other reason else, why there is not the same progressus of graces with us, that was before with them. Prosper in his second booke de vocatione gentium; Gratiae nullum cerius est signum, quam gratiae: there is no surer signe of Grace then thanksgiving. There is one reason more. That worke must needs be excellent, that must not be left, though God willeth it: this though God should forbid it should be done, yet it must be done: Luke 5.14. Marke 5.20. there was a plaine Inhibition to him, that he should tell it no body: but he went and proclaimed it: and it is there set downe for his great commendation, though Christ was no way proud; yet this disobedi∣ence was a godly disobedience; and it was but a commandement to trie him, but nothing must hinder us. So for agenda, the parts of pray∣er to be performed by us; the next is modus, the manner how we must performe them. 2. For the manner of praying right, and giving thankes, (1) it is required that our thanksgiving be animata, alive: (a common fault a∣mongst us, that our thankes and prayers be exanimes, without life) Da∣vid, he chargeth his soule; My soule prayse thou the Lord, and all that is within me prayse his holy name: that it may have, not a tongue, but
soule: and we have a powring out of our lungs, not of our hearts. In 1 Sam. 7.3. there is a direct commandement, that in their prayer they should direct their hearts unto the Lord. In the 1 Cor. 14.15. I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also: I will sing with the spirit, I will sing with the understanding also: else it is dead, and returneth empty; that Bernard saith of himselfe, nihil in mundo est fugacius corde meo, they alleadge Psal. 40.1. cor meum dereliquit me, not so properly said, as our common translation hath it, (but yet it is Ieromes) the ascending thoughts come up so thicke, that they will not suffer our prayers to come to God: the plaine duty to civill men, and to our superiours, not to turne away our minde till our tale be done, may teach us how God in justice may judge of our dea∣lings and esteeme of them. This is much augmented by an humour of men in our age, that are delighted with long prayer, and so fall into a great offence, praying above the measure of their faith: and of pray∣ing sundry times, and to sundry purposes. Aug. in the 10. chap. of his epistles, speaking of the gods of Egypt, and their worships saith, dicuntur in Aegypto crebras habere orationes, sed brevissimas habere quidem orationes, sed raptim ejaculatas, the Egypians are said to make many, but very short prayers, and they shot forth, as it were on the sudden: and therefore such were called ejaculationes; his reason is, ne intentio quae oranti plurimum confert, per productiores moras hebeteiur & evanescat, lest the intention which availeth much in prayer, should by over-long continuance lose its edge and grow dull: therefore his note is, that as intentio is not obtundenda; si perdurare non potest: so, si perduraverit, non cito rumpenda, as the intention is not to be dull'd if it cannot hold out; so, if it can, we are not abruptly to breake off: and divers are troubled in conscience for this. For the breaking off this intention, sundry times it is broken for a better thing; if it bee so, it is not a thing to be repented of: if otherwise, as we are to with∣stand it, and if not that, grow into an indignation with it, as Vincen∣tius writeth of Anthony, Cupio salvus fieri, sed non permitunt me co∣gitationes meae, Lord I desire to worke out my salvation, but my thoughts will not permit me: and therefore he cryeth, Domine vim pa∣tior a cogitationibus meis, in Domine responde pro me, Lord my thoughts doe continually trouble and torment me, Lord doe thou answer for me: then the Lord will not observe our ascending thoughts, but our prayers, if it please us not, but that in our drawing neere to him, if we cannot drive these fowle from our Sacrifice; but yet if we have but a care to prepare our hearts, a short ejaculation will not be uneffectuall. See how it wrought for a whole assembly, 12 Chron. 30.18, 19. Where Hezekiah prayeth for him that prepareth his heart to seeke the Lord, though he be not clensed according to the purification of the Sanctu∣ary: this also pertaineth to us, though not to the exact rules of invo∣cation: Psal. 119. is full of these ejaculations, and in every one of them is a prayer. 2. The prayers that in I am. 1.6. that are called , that ebbe and flow; whereas prayer, it is nothing else but interpres spei, the interpreter of Hope; and Hope being the anker, it
must be stayed fast, and stirre no more then Hope: Psal. 145.18. hee distinguisheth them that call upon the Lord (The Lord is nigh unto all them that call on him, yea all such as call upon him faithfully:) that are not moved with the waves, Rom. 10.14. it is an especiall effect of pray∣er; beliefe, the roote of this: and I eriullian, Breviarium fidei, a bre∣viary of faith: Mar. 11.24. Therefore I say unto you, whatsoever ye desire, when ye pray, beleeve that ye shall have it, and it shall be done unto you: I am. 1.7. he that asketh not so, he shall be sure that he shall receive no∣thing. So there must be (1.) attention, (2.) it must be of faith: and Prov. 18.9. the triall of that is, that man shuts his eares at the preach∣ing of the Law: so he that hath light thoughts, at the preaching of the word, he hath no faith: ratio, because the word of God, being the seede of faith, he that will not receive the seede in, cannot bring forth the fruit. 3. The Hebrewes call  a prayer, no prayer, a proud prayer; where the spirit of prayer is, there is the spirit of humility: Luke 18.8.9. Psal. 63.1. & 42.1. it must be anima siticulosa, a thirsty soule: Psal. 102. the forme of prayer, vers. 17. he will give eare unto the prayer of the humble: Luke 7.38. Mary (And shee stood at his feete behind him, weeping, and beganne to wash his feete with teares, and did wipe them with the haires of her head, and kissed his feete, and an∣noynted them with the oyntment:) and Luke 18.13. the Publican: they had their suite. Dan. 9.18. We doe not present our supplcations before thee, for our owne righteousnesses, but for thy great tender mercies. True prayer, it hath no confidence in it selfe. 4. The fourth is that the Fathers call absurda oratio: oratio sine ra∣tione, an absurd prayer. Terullian, Quid est hoc? accedere ad Deum pro pace, sine pace; pro remissione peccatorum, cum reentione? What's this? a man come unto God for peace, that is an enemy unto peace; for pardon of sinne, with a purpose to continue in sinne? Matth. 18. what coherence is there betweene Forgive me, and Pay me? so this of being not consonant in our prayers; Prov. 21.13. He that casteth away the cry of the poore, his prayer shall be cast away: If there be a giving, there must be a forgiving, Mar. 11.25. Forgive others, and your hea∣venly shall forgive you. They call it Cains prayer, that did offer a Sa∣crifice to God, and murther his brother. 5. The last, 7. of Iudith 20. hath his name from the men of Be∣thulia, and is called the Bethulian prayer: helpe must come within five dayes, else farewell prayer: contrary to those Euchites, Luke 18.1. to pray , alwayes, 1 Thes. 5.17. , without ceasing, Col. 4.2. , all this for continuance: not continually, but interpolatim, and that in Luke 11.8. in his parable (of him that went to his friends house, to borrow three loaves) hee meaneth not that hee continually knocked at his friends dore, but successively, interpolatim. That then that is here forbidden, are the two extremes;The extreme. 1. of the Euchites; August. 57. heresie ad quod vult Deum, of them speaketh, that they never left; which was a brutish heresie. The other extreme, 1. Booke 22. chap. , sleepie heretickes, that held, that a man was not made to pray, but in the night: to see in
the day, and to the use of the creatures: our practise is the like, that use not to pray but when we are upon our beds, if then; This for the defect in the manner, 1. that we aske not unprofitably or greedily, 2. neither carelessely, 3. or proudly, 4. or grudgingly, 5. or not con∣tinually. So for thanksgiving that is commanded, as ingratitude con∣demned: the Heathen counted it all the evill that could be said against a man, to be called an ungratefull person: Cuncta maledicta dixeris, cum ingratum dixeris, call him an ungratefull man, and thou canst not call him worse: Gen. 14.21. the King of Sodome, though he were a wretch, yet the law of nature taught him thus much, that he should be thank∣full to Abraham; 2 Sam. 16.17. an unkinde sonne condemned an un∣kinde friend: here unkindnesse condemneth unkindnesse. So the de∣grees of it also; 1. When a man hath the benefits, and contemneth them, Numb. 11.6. But now our soule is dried away, we can see nothing but this Manna. 2. So the cold and carelesse thanksgiving, which commeth usu ma∣gis quam sensu, by a customary use of them, rather then of any true sense of the value of them. God be thanked, is of course, and with all. 2 King. 5.18. Naaman the Syrian had received a benefit by the Pro∣phet: he would be thankfull: but you must pardon him in this, when the King his Master should come into the house of Rymmon, &c. he will not hazard his place in Court, nor the Kings disfavour; a cold thanksgiving that a man should sacrifice to his net for God. 1 Chron. 21.4. and that of Ioah in a case of numbring the people, yet must be thankfull, and fals to it. 1 Chron. 10.5.6. When his Armour-bearer saw that Saul was dead, he fell likewise upon the swordand died. The meanes. Prayer it selfe is a meanes, and the meanes of all means: therefore it hath meanes,The Meanes. i. helpes; none to beginne it, but to helpe it: and they are these. 1. Psal. 42.14. A consideration of the state of our soule, as of our body, and so he hath a table before him, wherein he seeth what those evill things be, that he is most inclinable to, and what those good things are, that he wants: his soule brought a thirst upon him, it grew into heavinesse. Nothing more fit, then to have a perfect and true sense of our wants. 2. And on the other side, to have a Register of the benefits of God; David received great benefits, and there is not one of them but wee have a Psalme for it. This is his course, Psal. 40.3. Now when hee had a new benefit, he would have a new song: many times he wanted some singular benefit, and then he comes to reck on up meane benefits: for his new house, he wrote the 30. Psal. for his deliverance from the hands of Achish, the 34. Psal. Augustin calleth it colligere fragmenta, the collecting of fragments; When he came colligere fragmenta, and make great account of them: [and] as Matth. 15.27. the woman of Canaan counteth of the crummes, so to be thankfull for a small bene∣fit is meanes; sometimes when he had no new benefits, then 38. and 70. Psal. he takes an old benefit, and makes of it a new song, for the
remembrance of it: and rather then hee would bee idle, hee maketh Psalmes, and especially the 139. Psal. to give God thankes, that he had framed him in his mothers womb: and when he wanteth all these occasions then he hath meditations of the whole world: Psal. 8. & 19. & 104. he is thankfull for all the earth, and for the wilde Asses, that they have water in the wildernesse to quench their thirst. 2. The second meanes is that which the Fathers call alae orationis, the wings of prayer; that is, 1. fasting, as 1 Cor. 7.5. Defraud not each other, unlesse it be for a time, with mutuall consent, that you may give your selves to fasting and prayer: and August. upon that place, Iejuni∣um orationis robur, & oratio jejunium sanctificat, fasting strength∣neth prayer, and prayer sanctifieth fasting. 2. The second is almes, whereof Daniel was a Preacher, cap. 4. v. 24. to Nabuchadonoser. 3. The third is out of Matth. 18.20. and Lames 5.15. Si oratio tua fulminet, that it may come up into Heaven, then ora solus, pray apart by thy selfe: otherwise, esto gutia in imbre grandinis, thy prayer is but as a single drop in a shower: when our owne prayer is weake, then we are to desire the prayer of more, and the prayer of the Church. 4. Last, if none of all these helpe, yet there is oratio fidei, as oratio sensus, though I cannot have the prayer of feeling, yet I may have the prayer of faith: for these spirituall duties are likened to the seed: there commeth not harvest at the first, but they being laid up in the bosome of the Lord, will in time fructifie. Now for the signes of Prayer. 1. The earnestnesse of the soule,The signes of Prayer. Rom. 8.26. when it sendeth forth groans and sighes, that cannot be expressed by the tongue: plus gemi∣tibus plerunque constat hoc negotium, quam sermonibus, prayer is often better exprest by groanes then words. 2. The second is that in Psal. 6.9. where David being before cast downe, presently after saith, that God heard his prayer, and hee an∣swereth, habuit aliquem gustum divinorum, that he had some taste that God lvd forgiven him his sinnes: so if we feele a detestation of our sinnes, it is a good signe. 3. The third signe is for the fourth meanes: it is a patient waiting upon God, as the Psalmist saith, Psal. 101.2.  till thou comest, yet will I walke in no evill thing. The signes of thanksgiving. 1. Psal. 63.5. he saith, he feeleth his soule filled with marrow and satnesse; the children of God have beene rapt, when they have fal∣len into the consideration of Gods benefits. 2. The second signe, Psal. 66.18. when it breedeth in us a jealeu∣sie, that if I walke in sinne hereafter, God will heare me no more. 3. The third signe, Psal. 58.5. beneficia, be, veneficia, enchanters: when his benefits charme us, like a strong charmer: as in Gen. 39.9. Iosesh answereth his Masters wife; My Master hath bestowed these, and these things upon mee, and how then can I doe him this dishonesty? so it is a signe that we are rightly thankfull to God, if
we can say, God hath bestowed these, and thus great benefits upon us, how then can wee breake his Law? 4. The fourth (Levit. 7.15.) is, not to deferre thanksgiving; which is gathered out of the type of thanksgiving, where the people were commanded, that the flesh of the peace-offerings for thanksgiving should be eaten the same day, and nothing left till the morning. Nihil citius senescit gratia: we must not deferre thanksgiving. Rule 6.Now for the sixth Rule, the procuring of it in others, 1 Sam. 14.19. Saul, when he should fall to prayer, thought the enemies came too fast, and laid away the Ephd, and wilied the Priest to withdraw his hand: and we see what a censure the holy Ghost giveth of him for it: there∣fore we are to see, that as we are not impediments to our selves, so not to other: Iob 21.15. not of those that discourage others, and say, Who is the Almighty, that we should serve him? and what profit should wee have, if we had prayed to him? One of the Fathers maketh this an∣swer, that whereas a benefit projicitur ingrato, collecatur grato: is cast away upon the unthankfull and evill, as well as conferd upon the thank∣full and good, God doth hereby provoke us to the like to be benefici∣all unto all by his example, and so to be made sonnes of the Highest. Luke 6.35. And for the affirmative part,  the invitation of others to the same, Psal. 95.1. the beginning of our Liturgy, O come let us sing unto the Lord, let us, &c. and Psal. 34.3. Come let us pray, let us magnifie his name together: but especially, Psal. 148. he is not content to have men onely for company, but Dragons, Snow, and all creatures: not that they could praise the Lord; but this, that there is not the ba∣sest creature of them all, but if it breath, it hath cause enough to praise him. Amor Dei, the love of God. OF the love of God,Amor Dei. that that's said Gal. 3.17. we see it verisied: as the Law is said to have beene added for a time, till the Seed came: so here may likewise be affirmed, that the other affections and actions were onely till our nature received triall, till the love of God come. Of which love the Fathers say, that the having of that occupare amorem, (the being possessed of love) drowneth all other affections. For therefore we feare for a time, that being delivered, we may love: and being humbled, we may hope and pray: that we may say, Psalme 116.1. Dilexi, quia audivit Dominus vocem orationis meae: the coherence of prayer and love: I have loved, because the Lord hath heard the voyce of my prayer. From the beginning it was said, 1. that having of God, is in knowing him: albeit we have him naturally, yet if we know him not, we have him not: 2. in esteeming of him; this estimation is pro∣perly in this affection of love: and those that went before, feare and hope, are for no other end, but for this, that when God hath bestowed it on us, it may the better be esteemed of us, when we have beene in feare: and for this end it commeth, that as cito data vilesount, we com∣monly sleight that which we can but aske and have: so these things that
we have felt the want of so long, having beene humbled, when they come, we may have more regard of them. Concerning the object thereof, it is bonum, good; wherein the very naturall reason of man hath found two properties, 1. 2. , a communicative and an atractive property, whatsoever is good, it is such a thing as is desire us to communicate it selse to as many as will tae it, and are meete to take it: as we see in the Sunne, and other celestiall creatures, and in the naturall elements: and con∣sequently there being a quality of desiring to communicate good, in God, which is his goodnesse, no doubt it is in greater and excellenter manner; and that was the cause in deed, of the creation of all things, that he might have a Church, and shew his glory and mercie on it. So the minde of man seeing this nature in good consequently desireth it: and that desire goeth thus farre, till it come to a conjunction, and that conjunction to an union: ita conjuagi ut uniamur: Ratio, because by the union of two good things, there shall come good to the de∣sirer, that he had not before; and so he is made better. It hath bin said that the inferiour things, if they be coupled & united with things of more excellent nature, they are made more noble: as for a potsherd to be covered with gold: as on the other side, things ex∣cellent being joyned with viler things, are made more abject: as the minde of man with inferiour creatures; and there can be no greater ex∣cellencie of it, then by the conjunction of it with that, that is all good, and containeth in it all good things, and so as it containeth them for evermore. And so of this, commeth the 2. , the attractive force. In every good there is a force, and that allureth: and therefore it is, that faith and knowledge must necessarily goe before: so when a good thing, because we cannot take from it his good, if that the force be not, then as the Schoolemen say, Bonum quod non amatur, the good we love not, it is a signe quod non cognoscitur, that we know not: for if it were the naturall desire of all, being that it is to better us, we should love it, to be bettered by it: therefore it is well said, that to good things there is no greater enemy then ignorance: therefore it is the part of knowledge and faith, to show us this good, and that will stirre up love in us: and so having stirred up that in us, there will fol∣low here unio affectus, unio aus; and for sides, visio. This love is of two sorts, 1. mercenarius, 2. gratuitus: that love that beginneth, and that that is free not respecting reward, they are di∣stinguished. When a man saith he loveth his meate, and drinke; and his friend, and brother; it is certaine that these are not all one: the one is a desire to have it, to turne it to his owne benefit for the present time, not caring what become of it after: but he loveth his friend to do him good, and to wish him well: so in the one he secketh his own good; in the other, to doe good to other, and to him cui bene volu∣mus, whom we wish well unto. The Philosopher distinguisheth them by unde, & quo, whence and whither. In the first love, the question is made by quo, in the other unde: what good it hath in it, though it be
no benefit to us. So the one hath the eye inward in it selfe, the other outward to other: for as we see sundry times, the one is the beginning of the other: and after, those that have beene beneficiall to us, wee fall to love them for themselves, and not for their benefits. The first love ariseth out of hope, because the soule of man by feare being brought low, to the ground, then conceiving hope, and con∣sequently sending forth prayer, and then receiving the fruit of it, saith, as it is Psal. 116.1. I am well pleased, (or I have loved) that the Lord hath heard the voyce of my prayer, so Psal. 20.7. Now I know that God hath heard his anoynied, when he had received the fruit of it; and so was stirred up to this first love: so the first love of God is, be∣cause he receiveth from him: that which the Apostle applieth to that which he had in hand: That which is spirituall is not first, but that which is naturall, or carnall; August. Basil, Ambrose, Bernard, refere to saith and love, shewing plainely that Caesars vertues were in greater account then and Catoes; Caesars being curtesie, affability, clemencie, liberality, &c. Catoes, conscience, and faithfulnesse, and justice, &c. which were not to others commodity: yet because in the other there was sui & suum, they were of better account: for that which is naturall will be first, (i. to love that, by which we receive commodity:) concupiscentia be∣fore cupiditas: this love is the inchoation of the other: for nemo re∣pente fit summus, no man comes to the height at first: God hath taken order for it. Chrysostome, he marvelleth, how men can slip themselves out of this love of God: for if they will have amorem mercenarium, that love which is mercenary, he offereth more for it then any man: for he biddeth the Kingdome of heaven: but this is the state of this love, as before in feare; So the Fathers, they have compared this love and the other, to the land of promise: this to that part of the land, that is beyond Iorden: and the other, to that on this side, where Ierusalem and Sion stood. And for amor gratuitus, the love that aimes not at reward, as Bernard saith, though it be gratuitus, yet Deus nunquam sine praemio di∣ligitur, tametsi sit sine intuitu praemii diligendus, Our love to God shal not be unrewarded, though we should love without respect to the reward: and so they beginne, I love, because I have received. But Rom. 9.3. there is a strange end of it, where the Apostle respected his owne commo∣dity so little, that he wished himselfe accursed, that the glory of God might shine to the salvation of Israel. This distinction is profitable, that we may know we are not in the state of reprobates, though we love not God propter se, meerely for himselfe. Vsius ameris, the use of this love.Now we come to the use of this love: there is a chap. 1 Cor. 13. to end, where he plainely sheweth the necessity of it: he setteth it down thus, If a man for his knowledge were an Angel; and for his Faith, were able to remove mountaines; and for his liberality, had given away all that he had, and had left himselfe nothing; and for his constancie, had endured Martyrdom; yet they should not prevaile, they should bee no∣thing, except he had the love of God with him: and in the end of the same chap. there is a singular commendation of it: though not to shew the necessity of it, yet it may be a great motive to love. Faith, hope, and love; it is the greatest of the three: if we take it in quantity, it is the
greatest, both for the breadth and for the length: for whereas faith and hope consist in the bounds of mans person, and in singular men; this spreadeth abroad, and reacheth to God and man: and in man, to our selves and to others: and in others, to our friends, and even to our ene∣mies. Austin, Beaus qui te amat, & amicum in te, & inimicum properte, Blessed is he that loveth thee O Lord, and his friend in thee, and his enemy for thee: And this for the breadth. Now for the length, whereas the other are in us but in the forme of a lease, & but for the term of our life: the gift of charity shall be even as a freehold, and continue for ever in Heaven. In these respects, and of that honourable place that Christ and God vouchsafe it, is that of our Saviour, Matth. 22.40. saying, all the Law and the Prophets make two heads, and both these are love: and Saint Paul, Rom. 13.9. & 11. maketh but one head of all, and calleth it , the fulfilling and abtidgment of all: and that in this , thou shalt love thy neighbour, &c. Iohn 13.34. it is called mandatum novum, a new Commandement: ad∣mitting, that though all the old Commandements were cancelled, yet we have it in the new Commandement: and 1 Iohn 2.7. it is but the old Commandement: for both the old and the new are all one: there is in the old and the new Diliges, thou shalt love. But that which go∣eth beyond these, and which imposeth a necessity in this, that where∣as all other before spoken, as faith, hope, &c. or that shall be spoken, as patience, &c. none of them are mutuall, nay they are not in God at all: and when as he dealeth in them, we are not to answer him, as hee dealeth with us: if he promise or threaten, we must not likewise pro∣mise or threaten: but here in this, there is muua vicissitudo, a mutuall vicissitude: (if God love us, we must love him againe) and therefore most necessary. Gregory saith, Magnum est vinculum charitatis, que & ipse Deus ligari se voluit, strong is the bond of love, seeing God him∣selfe will be bound with it: this affection saith Bernard, Solus trium∣phat de Deo, doth onely get the victory over God: and as he also saith, Nescio quid magis dici debeat in laude tua O charitas, I know not what can be spoken more in thy praise (divine love) then that thou hast brought God out of heaven into earth, and hast lift up man from earth into heaven: hominem Deo reconciliasti, & Deum homini pacasti: Therefore as on this side we are to consider, how willing God is, that this should grow in us; so now we must consider what is on Gods behalfe performed to stirre us up unto it. The Heathen say, magnes amorisamor, nothing is more effectual to move love, then to love: and therfore that is it, that continually is first set down on Gods part, i. where the love of God is beaten on, that on Gods part is set first: which how great it is, it appeareth by nothing more, then that of Bernard: he in his booke de diligendo Deo, sets it down in these six, quod nos (1.) prius dilexit, (2.) tantus, (3.) tantillos, (4.) tales, (5.) tantum, (6.) gratis. For the first, the Priority, 1 Iohn 4.10. herein is that love,Prior. Prius. not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Sonne to be a reconciliation for our sinnes: and vers. 19. We love him, because he lved us first: for our prior, [it was] his love, because he loved us first. Aug. Nulla est major ad amorem invitati, quam praevenire amando:
nimis enim est darus animus, qui etsi noluit impendere, noluit repen∣dere, no more kindly atractive in love, then in loving to prevent; for exceeding stony is that heart, which though it like not to love first, will not love againe neither; neither first, nor second. For the second, Tantus. tantus, the greatnesse of his love, and the conside∣ration thereof: Aug. saith in the same place, tantus, ut non liceat cona∣ridicere quantus, it is so great, that it is not possible to say how great. For the third,3. Tantillos,, tantillos, for our estate, he loved us, when wee were wormes; our smalnesse is set downe, Rom. 9.11. applied to Iacob and Esan: and to all that are elect, Cum nondum essemus, when as yet we were not: we cannot be smaller then so, not to be at all: and yet he loved us, even before we were. For the fourth,4. Tales. Tales, what we were, Rom. 5.10. he loved us, when we were his enemies: we estranged our selves so farre from him, that we served his very enemy. For the fifth,5. Tantum, Tantum, i. for the exceedingnesse of it, we may say, as we said before; but yet we have great light in the Scriptures, God being not willing that it should be buried. The Fathers upon Iohn. 3.13. Sic Deus dilexit mundum, &c. So God loved the world; to that same , So, saith Chrysostome, a man may put all the adverbs, that will set up a comparison in the highest degree:Patru, Fil, Sp. Sancti, Tantum. How great? Rom. 8.32. it was so great, that he spared not his owne Sonne; and that for God the Fathers tantum: and on Christs behalfe, his tantum was, that for our sakes, be∣ing such wretches, he was content to leave the society of the Angels, and Saints, and to come downe here to endure such things: he suffered all Aristotles , five fearfull things: 1. ignominy, 2. neede, 3. sicknesse, 4. enmity, 5. death. 1. for the first, i. ignominy and reproach, he had it while he lived, and as it is Matth. 27.63. he was not free from it after he was dead: for they call him causner and deceiver; We remember that this cousener and deceiver said while, &c. 2. And for his neede, his owne mouth may witnesse, Luke 9.58. that he was in poorer case then the fowles and beasts. 3. For his infirmities, Esa. 53.4.5. he suffered wounds, and blew wounds, liores, for our sakes. 4. For his enmity, Iohn 15.18. he saith that the world hated him while he was in it. 5. But that which is the infallible signe of his love, and the greatnesse thereof towards us, Iohn 15.13.  there can be no greater love, then to die for a mans friend: but Christ suffered a most shamefull death for us, that hated him, and were his enemies: and as Cantic. 8.6. the love that is as strong as death, is perfect love, that he tooke upon him too. For the holy Ghosts tantum is this, that in stead of Christ, he descended: and Rom. 5 5. shed this gift of the grace of God, and all other good gifts among us: and is content to make his residence with us, to the worlds end. And now we may judge betweene God and our selves, as Esa. 5.4. Whether a man may not justly demand, whether there bee any thing that he hath not done and suffered for us? Now for the last,6. Gratis. i. gratis, the freenesse of it: as Psal. 16.2. he is like to have no reward of us, for we cannot helpe him, nor reward him:
nothing but onely this, amorem pro amore, Our love for His; and ni∣hil est decen, nothing is more feemely, their that all these which God hath bestowed upon us per amorem, by his love, should bee re∣quited amore, with love againe: 11. Wiseman 27. the Wiseman calleth to God, and that most justly and truely, all these wayes having testifi∣ed this his affection to us: and he enjoyning us nothing but this, to love him againe. Aug. Quid est homo, quod aar vis ab eo: & si non anat e, minaris ingeniem poenam? annon poena satis mag na: est, non ama∣ree? What is man that thou commandest him to love thee (O God) and if he love thee nor, thou threatnest to punish him? can there be a greater punishment, then not to love thee? For our naturall love of meate and drinke, there neede no threatning, nor reward: but this love that is supernatural, and should make us supernatural, must have threat∣nings and rewards; so untoward we are. This for that that God per∣formeth on his behalfe. Love comman∣ded.Now we come to that which is commanded, and that is love, whe∣ther it be naturall, and consequently by nature due to God: that we should amare cum a quo habemus potentiam anandi, bestow that affecti∣on of love upon him that gave it us, equity it is: or whether it be amor delectus, a love of choyce, For when we have made a summe of all our thoughts, we cannot finde that is more to be loved then God: or whether it be amore infuso; Rom. 5.5. he hath shed this love into our hearts; and it is reason, that he that hath scattered, should gather that which he hath scattered: for so the wicked and unjust servant can tell us. This love, and the measure therof is considered in it selfe, first either as it is hindered, or not hindered: As it proceedeth freely,Denre. it hath two parts, 1. desiderium, 2. gaud um, Desire and Joy. Desire, so long as we seele not the certifying of Gods spirit in our hearts: as the Pro∣phet David, he had Psal. 42.1. and joy when God giveth it: cum sustu∣lit gaudium, posuit gaudium: the Devils have a desire unto that good which they know they want, and shall never enjoy, which makes them breake out into malice and blasphemy; but the desire which is wrought in our hearts by the worke of the holy Ghost produceth the effects which the Apostle speakes of Gal. 5.22. But the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentlenesse, goodnesse, faith. When it is hindered, and resisted, that it cannot get a desire,Zelus ex ira & delore. then commeth zelus, zeale; ira est vindex laesi desiderii; it is called sacra ebullitio, a boyling of griefe and anger incensed against all impediments: and it is one of the signes of love: for qui non zelas, non amat, there is no love when there is no zeale: he that can see impediments to the glory of God, if he have not an earnest desire for the removing of them, hee hath no love. Modus amoris, the measure of love.For the measure, it must proceede thus high, as that we be ready to hate Father and Mother, Wife, Children, Brother, and our owne soule for it, i. as it is somewhat more gently set downe, Matth. 10.37. that
they must not be loved more then God, nor come in comparision with him: but when their Commandement commeth against Gods Comman∣dement, that must yeeld to this: and God alone must come to have our love. The royall law saith, that we must love him with all our soule, withall the minde, with all the heart, and with all the strength: As the heart is said improperly to beleeve, so the minde is said no lesse improperly to love: but it must be so forced in us, as that all [the powers of the body and minde] must yeeld to it, and shew forth their acti∣ons: else we come short. Quia fecisti me, because thou hast created me: therefore I owe my selfe to thee: si tantum; pro facto, quantum pro refecto? if so much for making thee, then how much more for making thee a new? saith Ber∣nard: For it is harder to make againe, then for to make. All things at the first were made with a word, but when it came to the remaking, there was not dixis & facta sunt, He spake and they were made: but there were many things spoken: Christ was faine mulia dicere, mulia facere, gravia perpeti, etiam indigne perpeti, to speake much, and to doe much; yea, and to suffer much, even cruell and unworthy things, be∣fore we could be restored: and with the second making, there came the gift of God himselfe: nisi dedisset se, non reddidisset te, He had not re∣stored thee, unlesse he had given himselfe for thee. Benard upon Da∣tus est nobis filius,Nam etsi millies pssem rependere me: tamen quid sum ego ad illum If he had but given me unto my selfe, I could have given my selfe to him againe: but when it commeth to this, that I must recompence him for giving himselfe; though I could give my selfe a thousand times, yet what am I to make amends for that gift? yet this is to our comfort, that followeth there, quod etiamsi non possum, quan∣tum debeo, tamen non possum ulira quam possum; sed si possem ulierius, vellem: and if I were able to render more, I would be willing to doe it: etsi minus reddo, quia minor sum, tamen quia tota anima ex se dilegit, nihil deest, ubi totum est, although he can give but little that hath but little, yet seeing it is the utmost power of the whole soule that is im∣ployed in this love, where the whole is, there is nothing wanting: and that is all that God desireth, and we must labour to come unto it. Now we come to that that is forbidden. The Negative part.1. For the first, Basil calleth it , a disordered loveri. where∣as God should stand highest, and nothing should be loved extra De∣um, beyond God; when it is not so, but we love other things more then God, then our love is out of order, and putteth all out of order: It was said before, that not onely the doing of evill, but deserti medi∣orum, est peccatum, the passing by of better duties is a sinne: so here especially in the love of God, it must be dilectio, and that with a choyce: and to make choyce of the abased creatures, whether we [doe] as they that make their belly their God, Phil. 3.19. or money, Ephes. 5.5. or 3. Epist. Iohn. 9. primatum gerere, i. to bestow the first honour due to God upon himselfe: here our love is out of order. Pro Deo colitur, quicquid prae caeteri diligitur: quia amo meus, Deus meus. We make that our God on which we in a speciall manner place our affections. Every man hath somewhat, that he esteemeth above all, and that is
his Idol, rather then his God: and they are all of two sorts, amor mundi, or sui, the love of the world, or the love of himselfe. August. saith, O si possemus excitare homines, & cum illis ipsi pariter ex∣citari, ut possemus esse amatores vitae permanentis, quales quotidie vi∣demus vitae fugientis! O that we could stirre up the hearts of men, and with theirs, our owne, to be as deeply in love with the things that con∣cerne eternall life, as we are with those which concerne that which is but transient and momentany! There are Philosophers which say, that the soule of man est in medio loco inter Deum & creaturas, hath a middle place betweene God and the creatures: and a thing that stan∣deth in the middest betweene two things, cannot move to both, but motibus contrariis, by contrary motions: certainely the soule standeth so, in regard of the world and God, and it cannot move to both, but by contrary motions: and because it is through the basenesse of originall sinne abased; it liketh well of bodily things: and because worldly things are neere at hand, therefore we take them, & illis nos ingurgi∣tamus, and fill cur selves with them, (and so have no taste of hea∣venly things:) and as it is Prov. 27.7. Anima saturata calcabit favum, the soule filled despiseth an hony-combe: so when we crambe our soule with worldly pleasures, we come to have no taste of God, and consequently despise him: therefore we must first jejunare, and weane our selves from these. And beside this amor mundi, there is amor sui, the love of ones selfe: it is harder represt then the other: and it is it that men are wilfully given to: and till a great measure of the Spirit come into their hearts, they will not ridde themselves; and therefore as Prosper saith, se amanies donantur sibi, because they love them∣selves, and lose Gods love, and reward too. Yet not so, but that in this disobedience of our affection, there be degrees: the degrees, they bee two. 1. When a thing is loved more, and above that it should. 2. When it is preferred above God. The first is a degree to the second: for when men have tasted worldly things, and are ac∣quainted with baser things; then nothing will have any taste with them but onely those: and so many come to say with him in Plauius, Malo me mulier ista plus amet, quam dri; so brutish are many in their heart, and their doings proclaime it, that they had rather have the fa∣vour of this man, or this woman, then of God. 2. The second thing here forbidden, is opposed to zeale, common∣ly called stupor, i. when we account of all alike, as if there were no difference betweene good dealing and evill dealing, God and Baal; and we can beare both: Aug. saith that this stupor,To beare with sinners. to beare with evill things, is pejor omnibus vitiis, of all vices the worst: this God punish∣eth with other grievous sinnes: for it is a speciall prejudice against the love of God. 3. The third is more rare, but yet in some, which the Fathers call nauseam spiritus: we may call it the hatred of God, when thinking of God is a burden to them, and dealers in good causes are odious to them, and they are glad when they have not successe. The case of these men is very perilous, and it is the extremity of mischiefe, that
a man can come to in his life. All these (both of sirmative and nega∣tive) are to be examined per contemptum, non apsius, by the contempt not of God himselfe, (for every man will say be is content to love God for his part) but per contemptum legis ipsius, by the contempt of the Law of God. The state of God, is as of an erthly Prince: as in earth∣ly Kingdomes, qui diligit regem, diligit lgem: so qui dilgit Deum, diligit ebum: he that loves the King, loves his lawes, so e that loves God, loves the word of God: this was David touchstone, Psal. 119.97. O how love I thy Law? and ideo mandata tua dilex, qua xultatio cordis mei sunt, therefoe have I lov'd thy Commandements, because they ae the delight of my heart. M  M  love.Now we will adde something of the Meanes. What meanes soever there are that move men to love, they are all reduced to these three, 1. plchrum, beauty, 2. conjunctm, neerenesse, 3. utile, benefits. 1. Beauty is of it selfe a meanes, promseuum argumentum, it moveth love, till we finde a deformed guest in a same house. 2. Vbi ego, & meum, illa trutina necesse est praepondeet, that must needs be the better end of the ballances that holds both me and mine. 3. He is good, because he doth us good: and so consequently ipso facto, he is good, because we thinke that what good soever we have, it comes from him. Visible beauty .1. Beauty: there is a visible, and invisible beauty. The visible is such as our eyes are drawne to: one of the Heathen calleth it radium divi∣nae essentiae,, a beame of the divine essence: another, florem divini semi∣nis, a flower sprung up of a divine seede. This visible beauty is not such as should move us much. One of the Heathen saith Damihi solem aestvum, bring it but into the summers sun it is done: da mihi ventum vernum, or to the March winde, it will marre it: duc unguem transver∣sum, scratch it but with thy naile, it is clean spoyled: or let all alone, yet it is soloccidens, a declining sun, it will set of it selfe; yeeres and sicknesse will abridge it. The beauty of God, if a man had a glorified eye, farre passeth all these streames: Psal. 16. last v. the Prophet saith that hee saw the likenesse of God but in a vision, and it filled him continually. For the invisible beauty, Augustin sheweth a good way to finde it. It may happily be that thou lovest a man because he is thy friend: may it not also be that he is an old man? and what lovest thou then in him? his head is white, his body is crooked, his face wrinkled. O thou wilt say, fidelis homo est, he is a faithfull honest man: Well saith he, quibus oculis videtur fides, iisdem videtur & Deus, God is seene by those eyes by which thou discernest thy friends fidelity. This motive is no where greater: in God we shall have most perfect rest: otherwise set thine eye or heart on any countenance or pleasure in the earth, thou shalt finde no rest: But, quicquid est per quod satigationi occurritur, whatsoever we take paines about, that same thing in fatigationem ver∣titur; it wearieth us, if it be but awhile. 2. For the other, i. for neerenesse, propinquitas: name any name of neerenesse, not the mention of Dominus & servus, of Lord and ser∣vant:
but there it is, and that is a great priviledge that we have, that the Angels are not our Lords, but our fellow-servants: but the name of a friend is greater nearenesse. Iohn. 15.15. I will call you my friends: and that such a friend, as we see that his glorious estate made him not thinke scorne of us, and in the pitch of our adversity he did most love us. Brother, Iohn 20.17. Goe tell my brethren, &c. and whereas in a na∣turall thing it is, that if there be many, it diminisheth: as the affection of Parents, when they have many children: Gen. 37.3. this, other∣wise. Luke 12.13. Brethren according to the flesh, they are a meanes that the inheritance commeth not whole; but this brother is so farre from keeping any portion of the inheritance from us, as that having two rights, he was content to part with one right, and to entitle us wholly with it. Father, Deut. 32.6. Dealest thou so with the Lord? is not he thy Father that bought thee? &c. not as thy father after the flesh, that hath begot thee, happily to a benefit, peradventure to a curse: if thy other Father take no better order for thee, then thy father after the flesh, especially the (Spouse) through the whole booke of the Cantic. Deus zelotypus, he is jealous over us. And that that goeth beyond all these: because hee was not neere enough, Heb. 2.17. that in all things he might be like unto us, he tooke upon him our nature, and made himselfe like unto us in all things, (only sin excep∣ted, which made us unlike him) that there might be perfectus amor, ubi perfecta similitudo, perfect love, where there was perfect likenesse. 3. Benefits: that motive is used Esa. 1.3. hang up a crib, and see thou put provender into it, and the Oxe and the Asse will know you for it. So is the state of benefits among men, Luke 7.47. he to whom is more forgiven, or given to, loveth more: and his love, it waxeth and waneth accor∣ding to the benefit. For benefits, that we are facti & refecti, our owne particular Table will instruct us how bountifull he is in serving up all the creatures to our use, so promotion, riches, and honour, they come not from men, but God: ipse est, qui inclinavit corda corum: what benefit soever we receive of men, we are accountable to him for all: and then considering that dedit filium, he hath given us his sonne,Deus, Filius pretium. Spiritus, pignus Pater, prae∣mium. for a price: & Spiritum Sanctum, the holy Ghost, for a pledge and earnest; & servat se tantum in praemium, and hath reserv'd himselfe for a crowne and reward of that love, that we shall afford him: therefore if we know not his crib, then let the Oxe teach us to know our Masters crib: and he is nothing comparable to God. The signes of love. The proper signes are obedience and patience: which are the proper effects of love: but others are to be recounted;Signa amoris, the signes of love. and they are particularly to be handled. 1. The first is, in Matth. 6.21. Christ saith, wee shall know where our treasure is, i. our love, by the heart: i. by the thoughts of our heart:The bending of a mans thoughts upon any thing. so that a man may know that which he loveth most if he can know the thing, that he doth oftenest thinke of; we have ex∣ample of it Mar. 8.14. if there be any thing that a man setteth his minde upon, he thinketh it is mentioned, when ought is spoken that may be taken that way: as it is said, that when our Saviour Christ be∣ganne
to teach them, to beware of the leaven of the Pharisces, and of Herod, their minde was on bread, and they thought Christ spake to them to warne them of bread, when he spake the Parable of Leaven: so then, that is a signe of the love of God, if our thoughts be upon him. Thoughts are of three sorts: either a thought Deepe, Long, Often repeated. Cogitatio Profunda, Prolixa, Crebra. The deepe thought is that which in the Saints of God is especially to shew forth it self:Cogitatio pro∣funda. so that sundry seemed to be in an exiasie in recoun∣ting the mercie of God, the matter of their love: and it is a signe of great love in them. The other a long continued thought: continuae cogitationes, though not profundaeWhen the minde runneth upon a thing continually, though it can∣not thinke of it seriously.:Prolixa. Ezek. 33.31. their minde ranne so much upon world∣ly affaires (as it is the manner of age to thinke of wealth, and cove∣tousnesse, so of youth, to thinke of pastime) that in the meane while they thought not of the word of God. So these continued thoughts shewed what they loved: so then, if our thoughts upon God may be continued, though they be not very deepe, yet they are a good signe of love. Now for the third, when a man hath neither deep nor long thoughts, yet if those that he hath may be crebrae, often repeated; if any man is thus affected to God,Crebra. it is a good signe that the love of God hath taken deepe roote in him: though they are not extaticall, nor continuall, yet at times with some intermission. 2. The second signe of love, is this: if we esteeme the pledges of that party to whom we beare love:2 Looke what estimation wee give to them, we give to God. if wee account of those earnests which he hath left us: as David, Psal. 119 97. saith, he loveth the Law of the Lord. Looke what estimation a man beareth to his word and Sacraments, and outward meanes of prayer, the same he bea∣reth to God if he love him: as on the contrary, Gen. 25.30. and it is afterward urged, Heb. 12.16. that whereas the primogenitura, the birth∣right was a pledge of Gods favour, Esau is called a prophane man, and one that loved not God, (and his reason is, because hee did forgoe that pledge. 3 If wee forgoe that that is most deare unto us, it is a signe of love. We have the picture of God in his creatures, Ʋbi amor, ibi oculus.3. So out of Gen. 25.30. that forasmuch as we cannot see him, and as the Heathen saith, ubi amor, ibi oculus; we love the party, that if wee have his picture, our eye will not be off it: yet so if we have an eye to his creatures. So this third also was in that profane Esau, we see his love to his brothers pottage was so great, as that hee cared not what he did forgoe, for that which he liked; the best thing that hee had, scil. the title of the eldership among his brethren, the pledge of God, it was not deere unto him: so great a care had he of his belly. This may be for an instruction to us, when we can accept of any con∣dition, though it be never so hard, that may set us into Gods favour, that may be to us a good and perfect signe. 4 Desiderium, an earnest desire that thinks the time thing, till it come to the fruition of that it loveth.4. Psal. 12.5. all these fall indesiderium, if as we have a desire, so if we can have a griefe, for the absence of God, as for the deferring of that we love, and for not being able to enjoy it; such is the saying of David, Psal. 42.2. When shall I come to appeare before the presence of
the Lord? Gregory saith, inauditu est hic amor, an unheard of love, that a man should love one, and not desire his presence: so he that desireth to live here, and never to be dissolved, hath no love. These are signes of that part of love that is called desiderium, or desire. Now follow the signes of the second part. Joy. A generall rule for those things that we love, if we be greatly joyful when we have obtained, when we feese in our selves, that which the Prophet, Psal. 4.7. protesteth. 1 When a mans affection is oc∣cupied in that thing that hee loves, he thinks the time short, so long as he is occupied about it.The second part is joy: an especiall effect and part of love, and a signe of it, as Gal. 5.22. But the fruit of the Spirit, is love, joy, peace-&c. as Psal. 4.8. when a man hath no lesse joy for the increase of spi∣rituall things, then the worldly man hath, that he hath a good seede time, or a good harvest. Of this love there are sundry signes. 1. Gen. 29.20. To thinke the time that we spend in his affaires that we love, a short time, though it be many yeeres: as Iacob served Laban seven yeeres for Rachel; yet because he loved her, they seemed to him but a few dayes: this if we can doe in Gods affaires, it is a signe we love him; as on the contrary, if a man thinke one houre three in doing good, surely he hath no joy, no delight: and so his love is not stable. 2. Againe, in the the true affection of love, when there is joy, it is shewed thus: the Philosopher saith, Quicquid cupis habere, times per∣dere: cuicunnque cupis conjungi, ab eo times separari,2 In regard of feare; whatsoe∣ver a man lo∣veth, he is a∣fraid to lose. Whatsoever a man desireth to keepe, he feareth to lose, and to whomsoever we desire to be united, from them we feare to be separated. Now if any mans heart can beare him witnesse, that he can tremble at sin, and those operations are marvellous fearfull to him, that he should be separated by from God, it is a good signe. All affections discover love, as on the other side feare, umor▪ occupat omnes affectiones. Iobn 19.3. Pilat had a good minde to Christ: but his love came to be touched when (notwith∣standing all the innocencie he found in him) he would deliver him up to the people to be crucified, and all was by reason of the feare he had of forgoing that that he best esteemed, namely Caesars favour, and so that feare was a signe that he loved that best. So Acts 19.25. the Sil∣ver. Smith being afraid that his Craft (whereunto his love was) should downe, he stirres up sedition, preferring his owne gaine before the dis∣quietnesse of all the people. 3 That that we love most, we will forgoe any thing for it: so if we be over∣taken, that we have lost it, to be in continuall griefe, til we re∣cover it.3. And as for feare, so griefe, when we have lost it: for if we bee grieved, when we feele not the ancient comfort and vigor of the spi∣rit, that we were wont to have, it is a signe that we loved it: as Luke 18.23. there was a good minde in that young man, that came to Christ, and our Saviour Christ was well affected towards him, but when he came to be touched in his love, he was grieved more to part from his possessions, then from Christ: so griefe will be a way to love. 4 If wee take great care for the recovery of what we lost, it is a signe, that we tooke joy in it.4. Againe, the care that we take for the recovery, to be marvellous carefull to recover it. Psal. 132.4. When a man will not suffer his eyes to sleep, nor his eye-lids to slumber, nor the temples of his head to take any rest, untill he had recovered it; and in the songs of Solomon. This care is in worldly men, Numb. 23. the care of Balaam, loving the wages of unrighteousnesse, though God said he should not goe, and
albeit he himselfe had said, vers. 19. God would not lie as a man, nor change as the sonne of man, yet he would trie againe, whether God would change his minde: so carefull was he to obtaine it. 5 If we stik last to God when all lse forsake him,  a signe of love.5. Againe, in Psal. 119. vers. 127. a certaine signe, it is a conclu∣sion, to set downe, that when all the world have forsaken God, there∣fore to love God the more: this is the nature of the worldly man, while there is a liking, his liking goeth with other mens liking: but when a man can continue his affection, so that his love is, when others mislike, and the more a thing is hated, the more he will love it, this is a good signe. 6 If we can say as the Church sah, Cnt. 8 7. Mch water cannot quench love, neither can the flouds drowne it, if a man should give al the substance of his huse for love, they would greatly contemne it: that it is strn∣ger then death, i. when any af∣fliction com∣meth, it is stronger then it He that loveth for his owne commodity, feareth est the quantity of that he loveth, be diminshed. In concui∣scence, quo quis vult lmen su∣un, there, the fewer, the bet∣ter, but in bno lniiae, in quo vult vlle atttus, there we wish that all had him. Deus omnibus eo inunis, cuique ttus.6. The last signe is out of Cant. 8.7.8. that the true love can a∣bide triall, and false love cannot abide it: the Heathen man saith, fal∣sus amor inde fugit, unde probatur, false love will not stand the triall: but when water cannot quench it, nor fire consume it, and we can bee contented to foregoe all, and our jealousie can wrestle with death and the grave, and overcommeth them, then we may say as Christ saith, Iohn 15.13. greater love then this cannot be. The sixth precept, As we must our selves love God, so likewise we must be desirous to bring others to his love: and here appeareth the difference betweene amor mercenarius & gratuitus, that love which is mercenary, and that which is free: for in the former, because a man seeketh his own profit, he is loth that another should love that that he loveth, and have any part with him, lest by the communicating of that thing to other, it should be restrained to himselfe; thereof com∣meth jealousie: but in the other, where our owne commodity is not sought, where we wish not our owne good, but good to him, whom we love for himselfe, there is a desire to communicate all the good things we have, so as▪ that all men may have them in commune: so they that love God, would bring all men to love that they love, for it selfe, and yet all in whole; Ps. 31.24. the Prophet shewing his good mind in this point, i. he desired to draw all to the love of God. Ps. 31.26. O love the Lord, all ye his Saints, &c. As on the contrary, Psal. 139.21. that is also a signe of love: Lord doe not I haue them that hate thee? Yea, I hate them with a perfect haired, as though they were mine enemies, and had done me injury; Psal. 94.16. he to draw all men into the hatred of the Lords enemies, there his challenge is, Who will rise up with me against the wicked, or who will take my part against the evill doers? and as he would take part himselfe against them, so he laboured that others would joyne with him. The second principall signes, as proper effects of love, are obedien▪ & patience:Obedientia, Obedience. there is no saying of all the Fathers, of greater use, then that of Gregory, Probatio dlectionis, exhibitio est operis: and that indeede is a true signe of love, when it worketh: for the Will being inflamed with this affection, and having the government of all the parts and powers of the body and minde, necessary it is, that wheresoever desire in the Will taketh hold, it must elicere motum, cause motion: as if a man be given to the love of wine, that love kindleth in him a desire to have it, and that desire doth elicere motum, that he may work and earne so much
money: and after still he worketh to get a vessell or bottle till he may have that too. This active part doth depend thus of love, Iohn 14.15. If you love me (as Christ said to Peter, Lovest thou me? Feede my sheepe:) shew it by your obedience, keepe my Commandements: 1 Iohn 2.3. if a man obey not, he is so farre from love, that he doth not know God. Obedience, the proper ef∣fect of love, a∣mong them that are unequall, but not equall.We must understand, that where the parties are equall, betweene whom love is, that mutuall affection is called amicitia, friendship: but where one party is superiour, there they are not called friends, though the Prince on her part and good will, call other so, but they properly call it observantiam, observance: the very naturall actus wher∣of is obedience. Iohn 15.15. Christ calleth us his friends, and by the nearest names of consanguinity: Matth. 12.49. yet Paul and the rest of the Apostles presumed not upon those titles, but acknowledged this observantia, and in the beginning of their Epistles, and writings, entitled themselves the servants of God and of Jesus Christ. Rom. 6.16. Paul saith, Looke whom ye obey, his servants ye are: so of this du∣ty, this is the perfect signe (of obedience.) The order of the petitions sheweth the end of the Commande∣ments: and so consequently, in regard of this glory, that God hath by our o∣bedienceNow the applying of obedience to the end of the Commandement: in our petitions that is first, that Gods name may be hallowed and glori∣fied: How? if he be a King: and if he beare rule over us: how shall this Kingdome and rule be established? if we fulfill his will here in Earth, as his Angels doe in Heaven: and so is his name glorified. And it is so necessary, as that Gen. 2.17. God for his glory appointed in Pa∣radise, the obedience of Adam; when he was in that state: and there∣fore ordained a Commandement, that he should not eate of the tree of knowledge, [that in the obedience of that prescript, his glory might be shewed.] The manners of the gory of God, two.The glory of God commeth either directly from us to him, or by others: from us, Psal. 50.15. Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will heare thee, and thou shalt glorifie me: this is for every one: that is for the first glorifying. But being not content with this, Matth. 5.16.God will have glory of us both mediately and immediatly Jam. 2. So let your light shine, that other men seeing your good workes may glorifie your Father for your sakes: there is that by other he may be glo∣rified for us, which is the second justification: the first is to him by faith alone: but the other before men, by such workes as God may be glorified by them; and so other by them, reconciled to God: this glory com∣meth to God. [Now for manners,] Augustin, Si mores Christianorum sint amabiles, neque quicquam facit bonos vel malos mores, nisi boni vel mali amores, for amor male inflammans, & timor male humilians, If the manners of Christians be any way amiable, we must know that our manners are said to be good or bad, according as our love is either good or bad; for that love which inflames, but not aright, and that feare which humbles, but not aright, are the causes of all evill in the world. Our love is never true, but inter similes, where there is a likenesse: therefore there must follow in God and us, idem velle, & idem nolle: this is obedience: our Will being moved by his Will: and suffe∣ring him to be the principall mover: for where two must Will, either
the one must be proportioned to the other,The Will of God, righte∣ousnesse it self. or they both to a third: and there is no reason that Gods Will should be proportioned to our; no more reason then a streight rule to a crooked peece of timber or stone,Mi, alie lun, est   not his streight Will must bee made proportionable to our crooked; but our crooked to his streight: so the speciall end and scope that God hath enjoyn'd us obedience, is, that he may have glory, and our love be truly expressed. The necessity of Obedience, Necessitas obedi∣ntiae.Now for the necessity of obedience, the necessity or excellencie of it we may consider thus: by the good weighing of that v. 1 Sam. 15.22. where God having ordained sacrifice an especiall thing in Religion; yet before this speciall part, he preferreth obedience: and it must needs be so. 1. For if a man will offer to any, that which shall be accepted, it is better if he offer somewhat of his owne, then of others: for that which we offer of our owne, is dearer unto us: and therefore hee to whom it is offered, taketh it better. In obedience, offertur propria vo∣luntas, I offer up mine own Will: and as it is, Heb. 4.12. the two ed∣ged sword divideth my Will, and pierceth it: and consquently I of∣fer it up to God. In a sacrifice offertur aliena caro, I offer up other, not mine owne flesh. 2. Againe, the better that a thing is, that is offered, the better it will be accepted; but what is offered in obedience, is better then that offered in sacrifice; because in obedience there is a live thing offered: a beast I cannot offer, but when it is killed. Againe, in a sacrifice, there is but a brute beast, and unreasonable: in obedience, there is a reaso∣nable soule, which is more acceptable to God. 3. The third is this, the more ye give, the better it is accepted: in obedience there cannot be more given, then is given: In sacrifice I give of the fruit of my cattell, a part of my fruit: but in obedience I give the fruit, tree and all. I offer my selfe and all that I have; as one saith very well, Obedientia non potest plus dare, quam dedit, dedit enmse. 4. Last, that that is offered, the longer continuance it is of, the bet∣ter it is. In a sacrifice, it is but two houres worke, while the fire is kindled, and the beast burned to ashes: but in obedience, when I offer up my selfe to God, it is a continuall sacrifice: it is a perpetuall morti∣fying of my Will, my Reason, and all my members. Obedientia est juge sacrificium: therefore it is plaine that obedience is better then sacrifice: not that sacrifice should be neglected or condemned; it is not condemned, when a better thing is preferred. Ier. 7.22.23. When the people was marvellous carefull that the Lord should not be defrauded of his offerings and sacrifices, God saith: I spake not to your Fathers, when I brought them out of the land of Egypt, that they should sacrifice: but this was the thing, that I spake to them for, that they should obey my voyce: that is, in respect of obedience: That thing is not denied simply, which in comparison to another is set far behinde it. Againe, the excellencie and necessity of obedience appeareth in this, that though it be a good thing, or though neither good nor bad; yet for
obedience, it must be restrained: obedience hath power to make of evill, good: and of good, evill; in observation or contempt: for had not God forbidden to cae of the fruit, the eating had beene neither a good nor an evill thing: but we see the disobedience, and the breach thereof, made it evill: A more plaine example we have, 1 King. 20.36. A Prophet comes to one of his neighbours, in the hoste, and willeth him to smite and wound him: the man knew it was unlawfull, and refused to doe it: but he delivered a message from God: (Because thou hast not obeyed the voyce of the Lord, behold as soone as ever thou art departed from me, a Lion shall finde thee, and slay thee:) and for this his disobedience a Lion slew him. Thus appeareth the excellencie of obedience, that it is able to change the nature of a good thing, and to make it evill: and evill, good. The last example is of Christ: who sheweth the great necessi∣ty of this vertue, in his Dilemma. Father, if it be possible, let me not obey: but let this Cup passe from me; if it be not possible, thy Will be done: and when one of these must needs have beene chosen; ei∣ther mori, or non obedire, to die, or to disobey: elegit potius mori, quam non obedire, he chose rather to die then to disobey: and so consequent∣ly shewed, that obedience is more necessary then life it selfe, and the breath we draw: and this his obedience recovered the world: 2 Cor. 10.6. as the obedience of the Saints, for it is the small number of the obe∣dient persons, that are the pillars of the world: otherwise without them, it could not stand but fall. The second rule is the pre∣cept of Obedi∣ence.Now to the second rule, to that that is commanded: here is comman∣ded obedience: not as it is the generall, as it is in the execution of every particular Commandement, but as it hath a respect to the intent of him that commandeth: an earnest endeavour that a man hath towards God to doe good, and hath a Will to answer whatsoever is prescribed. It is as the other are, of two sorts: either Unperfect or inchoate. Or Perfect. 1. For the first is an obedience of feare: as 1 Sam. 15.24. but that is unperfect obedience: and every effect is there to be discerned, where it is perfectly wrought. The perfect. Gen. 22.12. God himselfe by the obedience of Abraham concludeth his feare, not such as fals: [for the thing, it is nothing else, but the labouring of a mans soule.] Then that is here commanded, is obedire; it is a compound: and our rule is, that in compositis & copulativis oportet utrumque quaerere, non suffict alterum, in compounds and copulatives we must not take up with a part, but both must be performed. 1. Then we will take the simple first, audire, hearing; audire & sequ, to heare and follow, are Gods words for obedience. The Fathers in the Greeke Church call it , and in the Latin Church obadire, both which imply hearing and obeying. For audire, hearing, it is good reason that we performe it to God: if it be but for , quia audivit nos, because he hath heard us: when we were indeprofundis, in the deepe: therefore we should heare him: and not that alone, but we know not where to have a better guide to follow, and a better Counsellor to heare. If a man follow Lot out
of Sodom, and Noah into the Arke, he shall doe well: when a good guide, and Counsellor is set before our eyes, and wee neither follow nor heare, we shall have that punishment to follow naughty guides, and to heare evill counsell. And that is very hard dealing with God, not to performe that to him, which we will per∣forme to the absurdest here∣ke.The not hearing of God, maketh that there can come no man that shall hold never so absurd a thing, but he shall have some hearers: the absurdest Hereticke shall have some followers, and the reason is, be∣cause they will not follow the Shepheard: and one wisheth that all the sheep, ut incidant in lupos oves, quae nolunt sequi pastorem, they that will not follow the Shepheard to the pastures, shall follow the But∣cher to the Shambles. What is there in this our hearing, that makes the most part of the world so loath to it? even this, audire & sequi, this hearing and following discourage many: for they will not bee hearers of others, but devisers and inventors themselves, and leaders, and will be heard and followed: it is that that the great wise men of the world seeke after. Malus assecla ratio, pejor voluntas, our owne reason is an ill guide, and our will a worse; for reason, he must bee waited on, if there be a good wit: and Will is a tyrant, before grace cast him downe. In this respect, because auduus, it is sensus dsciplinae, hearing the sense of discipline: and men will not learne; therefore it commeth that this speciall and first part is neglected and denied: therefore this is first commanded, that we be cont to be led, and to receive rules of God. 2. Another thing in audire, in hearing, is this; that whereas wee said before, Quod cor non facit, non fit, hat which the art doth not, is as if it were not done at all: this audtu must not be▪ as Augustin saith, onely canorum per cartilag num, a bare sound in the eare: but unlesse the heart heare also, the eaes are bt aues aequivocae,  Idols eares, that have eares and heare not: such are the eares of him that when his heart is about strange objects, can be content to lend God an eare, and that's all, such are men of ucircumcised eares. Ier. 6.10. We see, that as there is a circumcision of the foreskin of the flesh,Circumcisio auriwn. so it is not there onely, but in every part: and there is a praepu∣tium auris, a foreskin of the eare, which the Devill useth: for he is Master of all that is superfluous: and so consequenty openeth it to those speeches, as make best for his purposes: and shutteth it to the contrary, unlesse men doe strive against it; and untill men may take away this praeputium, this foreskin, they are of uncircumcised aes. As we use commonly to say, he will not heare good counse, i. he will not follow, albeit it be sure he is one that will nor stop his eare at the advice of his friend, yet if his heart be not bent to follow it, his hearing profiteth him not. And the Heathen man saith, mens videt, non oculus; & mens audit, non auris, it is not the ees, but them de that seeth, nor the eare, but the minde that heareth: as this is true to lest men should thinke that obedience consisted onely in hearing▪ God doth use to put an & a copulative after it: as & custodiant, & alent, & faciant, &c. they shall heare, and keepe, and walke, and doe, &c. The best signe is the similitude of the fish-hooke, cum capit, capitur: & tum captur, cum artrahitur, when it taketh, it is taken: and that is a signe that hearing sticketh in us.
We come to the other part, to the preposition (ob.) as there is lo∣qui, a saying, & obloqui, a gainsaying: so there is an hearing, and an hearing against: or again-hearing: audire & obedire, i. that you shall never heare the word of God, but ever when he speaketh, there will be an oblocutor; neither shall you heate the world confirmed of all; but when he speaketh, there will be an oblocutor also: As you must have a hearing, so you must have a contrary hearing;We shall al¦wayes heate two speakers. Amor Dei, & sui, or mundi. there are two speakers: 1. amor Dei, the love of God, 2. sui & mundi, of our selves and the world: then you must not onely heare him what he saith, but also the other, what he saith: as in amor mundi & sui, in the love of our selves and the world, that make disordered love, there are two speakers; we must heare the contrary of that, that the world saith unto us: and of that we our selves say to our selves: For the world, Iohn 15.18. , &c. If the world hate you, &c. Christ saith, that the world could not abide him: so it is like to speake of him; but not to his good. Now as it is Gen. 5.22. Enoch, he is said to have walked with God; so must we doe: God and the world will not walke together, Amos 3.3. it is impossible that two should walke together, except they bee agreed: the world cannot walke with Christ, because it hateth him: Enoch gave over the worlds company, and chose to walke with God alone, and so was translated: the world, i. whatsoever evill counsell (we may receive) not onely of profane men, but of gainesayers, wee receive it of the world: 1 King. 22.12. the King, as he shall have a Micaiah to tell him true; so it is certaine, there will be a Zidkiah to speake against it: There shall be a number of Divines, and Preachers that will say to men, id quod volunt, sanctum est, that's the best way which they like best: that will loose, let other binde as fast as they can: therefore they are to be taken heede of: Then this is required, that we frame not our selves to the world, whether to the old world, as Ier. 44.17. (their reason, why they would burne Incense to the Queene of Heaven, was, because they and their fathers never did otherwise, &c. or the present world, as 1 Sam. 8.20. the people, they would needs have a King, and their reason was; We will be like other Nations, and other men. The other speaker, are we our selves, and we before God, put new notions in us: we are at as great oddes with God, as the world: Rom. 8.7. the wisdome of the naturall and carnall man is plaine enmity with God: and as he is a carnall man, Ezek. 13.3. there is a desire in him to follow his owne spirit: and Prov. 21.2. omnis via viri recta sibi, every way of man is right in his owne eyes: if he follow that, then he thinketh he hath followed a right way: And as we have this liking in us, so there is another liking in God; there is no such way in God; Ier. 18.11. revertatur quisque à via sua, returne every man from his owne way, they must come backe: therefore they were in a wrong way. Gen. 6.5. Gods owne testimony that mans thoughts are  rak rang col hajom, naught and exceeding naught, &c. therefore there is like to come but little fruit of this oblocutor, 1 Pet. 2.11. his fruit that doth follow them, that they doe militare , warre against the soule: above all, this is that that shew∣eth
us, that it is the punishment of God, Psal. 78.29. they had their desire, (he let fall Quailes round about their Tents) but lost his favour: i. with their desire they had the wrath of God: Psal. 81.12. he would have had no strange God to be amongst them, nor any other God wor∣shipped; but they refused to heare his voyce, and to obey him: therefore he gave them over, and let them fall away. What is the re∣ward? Such as Rom. 1.24. it is the punishment of the greatest offen∣ces of Idolatry: and yet 1 Cor. 5.5. there is a delivering of one to the Devill, & a good effect commeth of it: 2 Cor. 2.8. there is a delivering to a mans selfe: and it is better to be delivered to Satan, then to our owne desires. And it is the course of Moses, Exod. 4.14. whereas God required him a very plausible thing to man, to be a Magistrate, he being suspitious lest his will should beguile him, because he felt no oblocutions, so he made foure denials, before he would take it, till God was very wrath with him:The iudgments of the Fath vellous. for true obedience, it hath nothing de suo, of its owne, but totum de alieno, all from another: it is a continu∣all gainesayer of it selfe. 3. A third thing: and that is a joyning of these two together: for there are some that will heare God; and because they will have no gainesaying, they will heare the gainesayer too. This we are com∣manded from: for when they have heard what God can say, then Gal. 1.16. they call a conference, and heare what flesh and bloud can say, and they themselves will sit Judges. Paul saith, when I was to preach Christ to the Gentiles, I never consulted with flesh and bloud: As one saith very well of our affections, that they are like Lime, which where it should be coldest, as in water, it is there hottest: and there coldest, where it should be hottest: so a mans reason is never so su∣spitious and wary, as when it commeth to deale with God: and never so carelesse, as when we are farthest from him: as if he were persona ma∣lae fidei,They doe tran∣sige tanqm u homine pessimae fidei. one not to be trusted: where they neede least to feare. If they heard the Minister of the word, there they are most afraid, and are marvellous carefull for examining all circumstances, lest happily they should be seduced: whereas in worldly matters, where most perill is, there they are most secure. Of this proceedeth a partiall obedience, the Fathers call it delicatam obedientiam: for certaine things, to sit and heare an houre, and receive the Cup, the Sacrament; the flesh seeth no harme in it: but as 2 Sam. 16.18. Chusai then ready for another: this is specially to be taken heed of: we must be content to hear God, and so, that we be willing to gainesay his gainesayers, and never make a mixture of them. The last thing commanded, for the measure or qualtity of it: that it be ready and willing, as Bernard saith, though contra voluntatem, yet ex voluntate, cheerefully: Rom. 6.17. he commends them, that from the heart they obeyed; for there is an obedience that is coacta, con∣strained: Ier. 23.33. there the people, they were content to heare, but their account was, What is the burthen of the Lord? and God saith, I will even forsake them for this saying, I will visit every such one, &c. the burthen of the Lord shall ye mention no more: thus shall ye say, &c. Amor erubescit nomen difficultatis, Love scornes the name of
difficulty: it counteth it a light yoke and very easie: against them that doe unwillingly: Iohn 6.60. their opinion of the Sacrament, durus e hic sermo, this is a hard saying: Matth. 8.29. there is obedience in the Devill, he came out, but with great grudging, and renting, (and casting him downe) and he made much adoe before he came out: those that cannot doe cheerefully, shew their measure to be with the Devill: Psal. 19.10. this durus sermo, to him was as sweete as an hony∣cobe, whereas the Jewes counted it a burden. The last part that we have relation to that [in obedience] that God especially aimeth at; and will have done. The intent of the precept, is the object (of this precept) of obedience: yea, though they bee har∣der then Saul; for of Saul, 1 Sam. 15.20. the leanest he could have offered, and in killing of the poore multitude, he could have obeyed God: but Agag, and certaine of the Nobility, and the fattest of the sheepe and cattell he spared: whereas Gods intent was rather to have had his obedience in them: but because there was a greater difficulty, and a better estimation, he heard the oblocution. The end is to be delivered at the third rule: of things forbidden:Ng what is forbidden? it is called disobedience: the state whereof may be conjectured, if we compare it with that that it is resembled to, of the Teraphim; and see the effects of it in our nature, 1 Sam. 15.23. it is said that rebellion or disobedience is as the sinne of witchcraft: and the abomination of the Teraphim: The reason of the resemblance: as in witchcraft, we will yeeld obedience [so long] as God will answer us in any evill thing, we will obey him: and again, because it was noted in the law, that the Witches and Sorcerers, they should give false answers, so we see here in this place, his disobedience answered him like a Witch: for he disobeyed for fear of the people, lest he should be put out of the Kingdome: he did disobey, and yet the Kingdome was translated. 2. To the abomination of the Teraphim: Gen. 31.30. they had their di penates, their houshold Gods, about the corners of their houses, and in their high wayes; and such is the sinne of disobedience; for in the Temple all held obedience outward to the meanes; but abroad our Teraphim and our Gods. We see by pu∣nishing for it, what account he makes of2. In the effect, Deut. 27.26. we see that the curse of God, whose maledicere est malefacere, is due to this sinne of disobedience: for it is a very reproachfull thing to God, to account his Commandements, as the servant Matth. 25.24. I knew that thou wast an hard man, reaping where thou sowedst not. A signe of this, the Rainebow, which doth not only mind us of the covenant, but of the generall deluge wherby God punished the disobedience of the old world, the performance shew∣eth what effect it wrought in God, but especially Rom. 5.19. the cause of death is properly ascribed to this sinne of disobedience. Bernard: and that disobedience is the cause of our death, our daily experience tel∣leth us. Quotidie experimur, quotidie enim morimur: and God saith, by that a man sinneth, he shall be punshed: so that, as we withdraw our obedence from God; so (Rom 8.20.) the creatures, they shall with∣draw their obedience from us: and that is attributed to this cause. And not that onely [during this life we have not onely without us] but we
finde a disobedience in our selves, Rom. 7.23. the 2. lawes in us: in which the affections will not be subject to reason, and reason cannot have any government over them, because we disobey our Creator. More particularly, by Psal. 119.32. the way of obedience is the path of his Commandements: Deut. 5.32. from which way, we have a division of wayes; a way to the right hand, and a way to the left hand. Preach. 10.2. the heart of a wise man is on his right hand, but the heart of a foole, on his lest: from that place the Fathers fetch this interpretation, It is said that the heart of the wiseman is on his right hand: there is proba∣bilis inobedientia, a disobedience that is not voyd of some probable pretence: and such was Sauls here in Gilgal, his answer might seeme reasonable, but that it is not it that God commanded, which we should ever make our rule, and not the guidance of our owne reason; and in∣to this fall the opposites of those before, not subjecting our selves to heare and follow, the giving eare to the voyce of our owne reason, and of the world, and of mingling them: all these wayes leade ad dexiram, to the right hand. The way whereby we are led into the left-hand way, we may count their folly, that have no probability, that 2 Thes. 3.2. are called , wicked and absurdly wicked: insomuch as the course of life they take, beareth no colour: but whosoever shall looke upon it, shall presently see it debauched, with out all colour or excuse. The manner is opposed to Readily, Phil. 2.14. that their obedience must be  without murmurings and disputings.As in obedi∣ence, so in dis∣obedience, the two exor∣bitations, and the manner dis∣ordered. Murmuring was alwayes almost the fault of the Israelites; for making of dialogues, and asking of causes, Why for this cause rather then for that, and why now rather then at another time, as Luther saith well of the sect of the Quaeristae: they will goe with Why, in infinitum. Both these are to be removed: and under these you may include the fault of them in Matth. 22.5. or more plaine, Luke 14.18. they fell all at once to make excuses. The Angels yeeld no reasons why they should not obey, nor excuse, nor murmure. The last thing is in the degree: the degrees be two, 1. neglect. 2. con∣tempt: Neglect, Matth. 22.12. he that came in negligently without his wedding garment: 2. in the same place, vers. 5. of those that set themselves to excuses, and refused to come, contempt. This rule Austin giveth of them both, Neglectus ubique culpabilis, contempius ubique damnabilis, Neglect is alway blameable, but contempt is alway dam∣nable. The meanes. Heb. 11. that being in a good way, they gave over all possi∣bility, and yeel∣ded themselves wholly to God.1. The speciall to this is the consideration of the good service that God hath had of his Saints before-time, and how they had great of∣fers in the world, as Moses, Ioseph, Esay, &c. if they had listed to have followed and heard the oblocutor: but they were resolute that nothing should draw them from God: this is the first. 2. Our Saviour Christ his example may be as a second, as he was man,Et subjectus est llis quibusllis? pauperi fabro & foeminae. Luke 2.51. he went to Nazareth, and was subject to them. Ber∣nards question upon these words, Who are they that the Sonne of God should be subject unto them? faber & foemina, a Carpenter and a
Woman: as he was God, or rather as he was Christ, God and man, Heb. 5.8. where it is said, that though he were the Sonne of God, yet learned he obedience: and indeede by his obedience to the Crosse, he recovered the world. And if any will make exception and say, that we are not able to match with him, or with the Saints of God; 3. Then we may take for the third example, the state and course of all creatures: Matth. 8.27. the 2. unruliest creatures, the Wind and Sea obey the word of Christ; What fellow is this, cui venti & mare obediunt? that even the winds and the seas obey him? Take all the creatures, the heavens, the elements, &c. there should be no manner of , disorder in them, were it not that onely man hath broken it, and so hath put himselfe and all other creatures out of order: and this their obedience they have beene ready to give over, i. they have obeyed against their owne course at Gods will, as the Sunne stan∣ding still at Ioshuahs commandement, whereas it is his nature to move continually: and the fire not burning the three children, and Dan. 6. the Lions refraining from devouring of Daniel: the earth moving, be∣ing of her owne nature immovable: so that they are not onely audien∣tes verbo divino, but also obedientes, hearers of the word, but obeyers: which is the very true and perfect obedience, to obey in giving over our owne nature. That if any man be disobe∣dient, he is therefore diso∣bedient, be∣cause it cannot be convenient∣ly performed.4. Another may be taken from the nature of our obedience, for na∣turall reason saith, where there is one duty, there are at the least two extremes, and of the obedience of sinne is multiplicior, then the obe∣dience of God. It is truly said of the Heathen man, negligentia plus laborat quam diligentia, idlenesse is more toyle then imployment: and so we may say of every vertue, the adulterous man laboureth more then the chaste: and the covetous man more then the well contented man. 5. Now as this is true, that there is such equity in the Commande∣ment, as if there were no reward, yet without reward we should obey it; (yet which may be the 5.) there is so great reward annexed unto it, that though there were more difficulty, and lesse equity, yet it were justly to be performed in regard of the greatnesse of the reward: con∣cerning which reward, Gen. 15.1. it is an exceeding great reward, or as the Fathers say upon that place, merces magna nimis, too great for all the obedience we can performe; and such, as that one of them saith, that the Saints of God, they repent themselves that their obedience was so strait, and no more upon earth, and wish that they might come hither againe to doe more good workes, and performe more ex∣act obedience. The signes.Signa. 1. For the first part, 1. for audire, Hearing, the signes before would be sufficient, if we could once be perswaded that we doe it not ex ope∣re operato: but our practise doth so commend it, and confirme it, as that we thinke our bare hearing pleaseth God; for after we have heard, what care we have to gather and summe up our estates? how is our thoughts wholly taken up with the world? what griefe we have if we doe there∣by
by neglect our profit? againe, how easily we frame our selves reasons to absent us from thence? it is a signe that we are not aright, whereas that businesse we would leave at the call of man: but if we heare with fruit and profit, and doe it carefully, if in particular application wee apply it, and study to profit, it is a true signe of right Hearing. For the other, i. obedire, obedience: as it fals out, we have a very good triall of it: for in the dissolutenesse of this time, the onely be∣nefit in our want of discipline is this, that as there be divers punished, that would annoy the civill body, so those that they thinke the civill state will beare, are left, which should not be, as the Primitive Church; but then sundry would obey, as to the precepts having correctivam vim, rather then directivam, a correcting rather then a directing power: wher∣as now it is seene who doth it for conscience sake; when God gives us a rule of obedience, and the lawes inflict not any penalty for the breach of it, there our obedience is free and voluntary; when Gods forbidding and mans concure not, if we be obedient in as great mea∣sure, as if they doe concurre, then it is a good signe of the truth and soundnesse of our obedience. 2. The other and the best, when there fals out a question, wherein our nature taketh one part, and the Commandement another: [as Gen. 22. in Abraham, Nature bade him net sacrifice his sonne: God commanded him to sacrifice his son:] then we may know to whom we are obedient, if God have the victory and comman  come, and the flesh goe downe, then we know that ou obedience is right: on the other side, if God give place, the oblocuto gets the victory then we know what becomes of our obedience: so or the world, when that and the fashion take one part, and God and the Commandement the other; looke what we follow, there is our obedience. Aug. Si Dominus sit, si Domini amicus, while they two walke together wee cannot know the Dogs Master: but he that it followeth when they are parted, is his Master. 6. For the sixth rule, for procuring of obedience in other; the two words aedificatio & scandalum, edification and scandall must be it. For Edification, Rom. 14.19. for Scandall, Rom. 4.13. that which is lawfull, is not lawfull, as it is both in the first and second Epistle to Timothy, except it edifie, or if it be scandalous. Patience. But we make t an especiall ef∣fect of love, as when love is active, obedi∣ence, passive, patience. Qui amat tle∣rat: si desistis lerare, desistis amare.NOw we come to Patience; it may be comprehended under obedi∣ence: they use to call it obedientiam crucis, the obedience of the Crosse: it is a fruit of love, and the first of all very necessary. 1. Cor. 13.4. Charitas patiens est, Charity suffereh ong: the Heathen man hath a strange saying, Non amo quenquam nisi offendero, I love no man but whom I offend: the reason is, because eaing and forbearing is a great signe of love: he that loveth, will beare much; but if not, he loveth not: so that we see, patience commeth with obedence: for thus it is:This Telerare must necessarily have relation to evill, i. malum poenae. Of our nature, as we are naturall, it cannot be said ruer, than that it is durum pati, loath to suffer: especially evill, the object of it.
Amos 3.6. non est malum in civitate, there is no evill in a City but it commeth of God: Rom. 5.3. if we suffer sicknesse, poverty, &c. in the being ridde of it, we put our felicity: then this may be truly said, that that which is evill, is never patiently borne propter se, for it selfe; but thus, if the good we shall get by suffering be greater then the evill: learning is a good thing, so is ease: now without labour, learning can∣not be attained to: if any thinke that forbearing of ease is better then the want of learning, and he know that the privation of ease will so affect him, that he shall come to be learned, he taketh paines, and con∣sequently proveth learned: and so on the other side, that is the judge∣ment of the reason, that saith thus: I will doe this, because it is good: but I will doe that rather, because though I be deprived of a good, yet by the privation of that good, I shall get a greater good: so is the judgement of patience. The wants and troubles in this life, are lesse then the pleasing of God: Gregory saith well, Ardor desideriorum fa∣cit tolerantiam laborum, the ardencie of desire provoketh unto la∣bour. The end of Patience.For the end, or applying of it to the scope; it falleth into the same that obedience, not glorifying God from our selves, but from others. Another, He will have glory over the Devils by us: and it is a meanes whereby God useth to quell their malice by us, therefore is patience commanded, Iob 2.3. See the triumph of God above the Devill, in Iobs patience: though Satan afflicted him with sundry plagues, yet he continued, and so God was glorified in his servant, above the malice of the wicked adversary. The necessity of it, Heb. 10.36. is too plaine, [you must labour after patience,] for ye had neede of patience: a reason Christ bringeth, Luke 21.19. for there hee saith, we cannot possesse our soules without it. How? thus: if any crosse come upon us, either it is too great for us to beare, and we fall into exceeding great worldly sorrow: 2 Cor. 7. 10. , and the sorrow of the world worketh death: and consequently, that sorrow will deprive us of our soules, as Ahitophell, a wise man as any worldly man: or else, if wee have not patience, we shall fall to set our selves against that party, that wee thinke offered us injury; in anger,1 Cor 15.26. and so wee come to hatred, and then to injurious dealing, and so we lose our soule. Then in this respect that we see, when we have gone through the faire promises of the gaine-sayer; we are to deale with other ene∣mies, as anguishes of this life, &c. then with the last enemies: and then we are to make account, that when wee deale with the last ene∣my, i. death, if wee escape him, we shall be sure to keepe our soules. Patience the roofe of god∣nesse: tectum▪In consideration whereof, as we said in faith, that it is fundamen∣tum virtutum, the foundation of other vertues: so patience is tectum virtutum omnium, the roofe to keepe them from the stormes of afflicti∣ons: without which, showres would fall into the building, and rot it. And this may well be warranted, Luke 8.15. our Saviour describing the spirituall harvest, saith that they brought fruit in patience: the fruit
is the last thing: in the other the bud and the blossome; the fruit that must come through the blade: more plaine, I am. 1.4. that therefore patience must be, that we may be perfect and want nothing: i. that perfection may be added: Phil. 1.29. he joynes them both together, to beleeve and to suffer: Vnto you it is given, not onely to beleeve in him, but also to suffer for him. Heb. 6.12. , that ye be not slothfull, but followers of them, who through faith and patience in∣herit the promises: faith and patience, the first and the last, the begin∣ning and the ending. Sure it is, that when this vertue is come, and co∣vered the roofe, we have good cause to rejoyce, in so much as the A∣postle, 2 Cor. 12, 10. he will rejoyce in his patience, that he had suf∣fered reproaches, infirmities, persecutions and anguishes for Christs sake. Which patience [Rom. 5.4.] working experience, then hee hath spem solidiorem, more sure and solid hope: then he comes to that Rom. 8.35. that he throweth downe his Gauntlet to any thing that can separate him from the love of God: and he beginneth with the stoutest enemies, speaking by experience, as the worke being perfect in him. If n puni∣shment, it brings forth , if in .To the precept, what is commanded; that is patience: but we will distinguish it according to this object, to affliction, that is of two sorts: , precept for direction, punishment for correcti∣on: and accordingly [on both sides] there is a diverse patience. It is said, that in every law there is a directive and corrective force: if the first escape, the second will take hold: aut faciendum quod oporter, aut patiendum quod oporiet: either we must doe what is due, or suffer what is due; we must be either Active or Passive. 1. The first, patience, this whereby when we see that we are under the rod, we submit our selves to the corrective law, knowing it to be just for our deserts. The reasons be two, but one for suffering, 1 Pet. 4.19. [the maine reason of both these] because it is the will of God. Of his Will we enquire not the cause, but the reason it is revealed: therefore we are bold for the confirmation of our faith: one this, he will have the whole world know,The manifesta∣tion of his own justice. that sinne shall not be unpunished: partly plaine, Numb. 20.12. the waters of Meribah cost Moses his life: his wavering, that waters came not at the first, was the forfeiture of entrance into the land of promise: and many more may be brought, but they are all darkened by Christ, his punishment for sinne may shew how well God liketh it. Now albeit the maine punishment fell on Christ the Son of God, and this passio Christi, his Passion was the greatest sign of the love that he bare to us: so must it be reciproce, though that fell on him, yet so it fell, that there should still be a visitation of his Church: though it was promised in the beginning, God makes a covenant with us, and to this end, that his mercy may not be withdrawne from us; yet Psal. 89.31.32. (But if his children forsake my law, then I will visit their transgression with the rod, &c.) So it is a part of the league betweene him and us, that we shall endure the fatherly correction. 1 Pet. 4.17. , the time is that justice shall beginne at the house of God: an argument; if justice beginne at
the house of God: if God shew his justice in punishing those which he hath a speciall favour and love unto: therefore it doth argue, that he will punish the unbeleevers more grievously: Luke 23.31. It in me, that am a greene tree, what shall become of a dry tree? therefore the green shall downe too: Ier. 25.29. If mine owne house, where my name is called upon, offend, I will beginne to plague it, and shall you go scotfree? therefore there is a not sparing of the house of God. This would be very unpleasant unto us, but that, if we suffer not this, a worse thing [to be left] would follow, Heb. 12.6. Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth: Revel. 3.19. God doth castigare omnem silium, quem reci∣pit, he scourgeth every sonne whom he receiveth: so herein is our choyce, whether we will be disinherited or chastened: Aug. Si hoc tibi magis malum videtur, exhaeredari, quam non casligari, ist hoc elige: So that if a man will be of the company of the wicked, then Psal. 73. he may share prosperity with them, if not, then Ier. 12. he shall be of the afflicted heritage, and if our inheritance be magis bonum, a good rather then the other, we must passe under this. 2. The procu∣ring of out own benefit either by calling us backe when we are gone, or retaining us in the state we  in.2. Another reason of , correction; as the first was the decla∣ration of Gods judgements, so this for our owne benefit: 1. Esa. 28.19. vexatio dat intellectum, vexation gives understanding: Psal. 119.14. it was good for David that he was in trouble: i. many men can∣not be without it, Aug. saith of himselfe, that when he did follow with a full streame worddly pleasures; pectoris dolr, a griefe in his chest, was the first visitation that recall'd him: by Pauls unhorsing and smiting blinde, was his entrance: and so many have beene recovered to God: and unlesse we be thus smitten and awaked, the naturall folly, and the world ringing in our eares, will make us that we shall not heare. So in our continuance, of sundry, Hase. 2.6. Sepiam viam tuam spinis, I will hedge up thy way with thornes: if thou wilt out of the way, a thorne shall pricke thee, and bring thee in againe. Basil is said, that being a man much subject to infirmity and sicknesse, once in his sicknesse was very earnest with God for the recovery of his health: and when he had obtained it, he remembred that he had left out a con∣dition, that when he requested of the Lord, that he might recover his health, he should have put this condition in, if that the restoring of his health would not make him proud: otherwise, that his sicknesse might come againe, and he put it in: and as Nazianzen reports of him, it did so. So in regard of our owne benefit, this correction, or , wee see is needfull. Father in detai∣ning some good thing from us, longer then we would, o if malum pn he continued up∣on us.2. , triall, that is two sorts: 1. for there is either dila∣tio ou, a deferring of good, touched before in hope, which alwayes hath rationem mali, a shew of evill: Prov. 13.12. spes quae differtur affligit animam, hope deferred maketh the heart sicke: the bearing of that oft, is called , longanimity: [for the Commandement] Habak. 2.3. he will stay: yet waite, and he will surely come: Psal. 37.7. waite patiently for the Lord, and God will at the last come.This vertue in all the points of patience it said to be in God. This ought to be deare unto us, because this is the onely patience that is in God: whereby he doth expect, ut misereatur nostri, that he
may have mercie on us: Aug. de patientia: Dominus patitur neglectus, patitur contemptus, patitur negatus: the Lord, though we neglect, de∣spise, deny him, he still beares with us: ought not we therefore with the like patience waite for his approach? That man falleth into infideli∣ty, that thinketh him long a comming: for he seemeth to make this conclusion; it is long a comming, therefore it will never come. 2 Pet. 3.3.4. In passione mali it hath his ground, Luke 12.48. To whom most is given, hee must suffer most2. The second indeed is the bearing of some reall affliction [not for sinnes, as in , but for righteousnesse sake:] To whom more is given, of him more is required: the Devill shall have a larger licence to tempt him: And the Philosopher said very well, Deus non habet amorem maternum erga bonos viros, sed paternum, God loveth not as a mo∣ther, but as a father: i. he will not keepe them in his lap, and cocker them as a mother; but put them to triall as a father: (the triall is be∣tween facere malum, & pati malum: do ill & suffer ill:) and this is it that Austin saith, utrum velint malum non patiendo facere; or non faci∣endo pati. And this reall affliction, 1 Pet. 1.7. , the triall of faith is a thing which, as he expresseth it, is better then the fi∣nest gold of Arabia, i. in the eyes of God farre more precious then any thing. Now this is separate from the former, i. suffering for our sins: but this is a suffering for righteousnesse, because we will not be con∣stant, unlesse we be kept under the yoke. The reasons be foure, why God set downe this: 1. That commonly we see, that res prosperae, are mare mortuum; that lacus asphaltues, that dead and noysome lake (where once Sodom and Gomorra stood) that standeth and corrupteth, as armour contracts rustinesse; a body, evill humours; fallow ground, weedes, &c. So we quickly settle upon our lees, if not emptied from vessell to vessell: graces grow bright by exercise, and for want of use die within us; there must be a stirring up of them, else there will be a fogginesse of the soule by want of triall: [therefore necessary it is, that there should be a triall.] The right of desert was gi∣ven to us, and consequently we are to hold it by his right, of his desert.2. He setteth downe, Rom. 8.29. that betweene Christ and us there might be a conformity: Christ hath two rights in Heaven; first, by inheritance, as he is the first begotten Sonne of his Father; and secondly, in his desert by obedience. We see the clause that be hold∣eth it by, he setteth downe, Luke 24.26. Know ye not quod oporiuit haec pati Christum? that Christ ought to have suffered these things? so, he holding of the inheritance by Christ, includeth this condition, that we be conformable to him in his sufferings. In mans law it is a principle, that the inheritance goeth to no other, but by him which held it: and hath no other right, then he had which had it before: It is that that the Apostles plead, Acts 14.22. quod o∣portet per multas tribulationes pervenire ad regnum Dei, that we must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdome of God: and lest any should thinke himselfe excepted, 2 Tim. 3.12. Omnes qui volunt pie vivere in Christo Iesu, persecutionem patientur, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. And for this cause, whereas it hath sixe resemblances, 1. to a Campe, 2. to a Ship, 3. a
Building. 4. Corne, 5. a Vine, 6. a Flock: the nature of all these import a patience. 2 Tim. 2.4. To a Campe, the Souldiers life is no∣thing else but agere sub die, to lye abroad: to a Ship, Matth. 8.24. tossed with winds and waves: Matth. 9.37. to Corne, which com∣meth not to the table, but under the sickle, flaile, milstone, oven: un∣to a Vine, Esa. 5.1. and in the Vine-yard there is a Wine-presse, where the Grapes must suffer the presse: Iohn 10.1. to a Flock, they are to be shorne, and carried to the shambles: and in a Building there are Axes and Hammers daily heard, nails & such other things are required. 3. The third is that which we said before: when God gives great gifts, as the gifts are, so is the Devils sieve, Satanae ventilabrum: Luke 22.31. and the larger gifts one hath, the larger patience [and the larger triall for Satan] he hath: and where there are most gifts, there the Devill sueth most for his indulgences and licences: therefore every man must prepare himselfe, for Satan will have his Sieve: a Sieve is to make a separation of that which is good of the corne and the refuse: therefore it is that God doth permit evill, and evill men in the world, because God should not use good men as scourges for good men; therefore this benefit we have, [that there shall be a separation] and how?A note of se∣paration, Matt. 3.12. the sepa∣ration is this, that as we see that vituli tri∣turantes quoti∣die ligantur, &c. even by the Crosse. August. saith, vituli iriturantes quotidie ligantur (ad stabulum,) vituli mactandi quotidie in pascuis libere relinquuntur, the Oxen that are for use, are kept tied up, when those that are fatted for the shambles, are let loose into the pastures to feede at their pleasure. Generally most of the Fathers use the similitude of the Reds Sea, through which the Israelites were to passe to the land of promise, not without mire and dirt, and intangling their feete in the weeds (as Saint Gregory speakes:) so in our journey from earth to heaven, to the new Ierusalem, to the land of Canaan, there is something to passe through; to which af∣fliction is resembled: The reason of the resemblance: If you be a true Israelue, you shall goe through the Red-Sea: if an Egyptian, you passe not. The last is, the confusion of the Devill himselfe: to confound him, that he may not say, Doe they serve thee for nought? as in Iob 2. This is an especiall end of patience, to stop his mouth; God often rewards not at all, nay he often sends malam mercedem, an ill reward, to shew that we serve grataito, freely. The manner: there were in the Primitive Church a sort called Crcumcelliones (a sect of the Donatists,When it is not a senslesse thing but mixt of sensus doloris in the soule, and oppressio doloris in the body and it hath volunta∣tem liberandi sui, & volunta∣tem patienditui.) that hearing patience to be so much commended for such an excellent thing, they presently con∣ceived of it, as of the Stoicks doctrine, to be an  therefore they whipped themselves, and acquainted themselves so much with it, that they could beare any thing. We see Pauls disputation with Epicures and Stoicks: therefore we must understand, that Christian Religion, as it is not Epicurisme, so it is not any doctrine of the Stoicks. Chri∣stian patience is not a Stoicall . For we see in Iob, David, Christ, though they were patient, yet they gave notable signes, that they felt that which they suffered. But this is patience, when a man feeleth it, and would be ridde of it, and yet doth abide it to the pleasure of
God. It is not to have a will onely to be punished; patience is not a monothelite, as Christ saith, Luke 22.42. his will was to be ridde of the Cup: but yet he prayed, that not his will, but that Gods will might be done: and 1 Pet. 4.19. because it was the will of God, he should drink the Cup: therefore he conformed himselfe to it. August. in his book de patientia, chap. 7. sheweth the distinction betweene the Heathens patience, and the true: the Heathens patience, and the Hereticks, &c. was not for a good cause, nor for a right end: but possible it was, that they used themselves to it, and felt it not: this is, as he saith, stu∣por morbi potius, quam rebur sanitatis: so miranda est: duritia, quae magna est: sed neganda patientia, quae nulla est: an unsensiblenesse of disease rather then soundnesse of health; admire their hardinesse you may, which is great, but deny their patience you must, for it is none at all. The Negative part. Want of due regard of the Crosse, and the fainting under it. The first con∣cemeth all, the regard is after the Crosse: this they call pati∣entia panica. The second de∣gree, for awhile we regard it; the Prophets compare it to the morning dew, or the clouds.That which is forbidden, is in Heb. 12.5. comprised under  & , the small regard, and despising of the chastisement of the Lord: and a fainting under his correction: for the one is the one ex∣treme, and the other is the other. 1. For the first it is sure, that as we see Exod. 9.28. and as Chrysost. upon that place noteth: there is not in the wicked no regard, but a small and short regard: we see a momentany regard of the plagues of Egypt in Pharao a reprobate, he regarded it no longer then he was under it: and it is no other in Ieroboam, 1 King. 13.6. there was in Ieroboam, a present humiliation, till his hand was restored. But the common resemblance to that effect, which the chastisement of the Lord brin∣geth upon the wicked, is of the horror that is in Beares and Wolves, at the sound of a Drumme or Trumpet, they are as it were clean beside themselves; and are in a horror, which for a time continueth, so long as they heare the sound: or as they that are tost on the Sea, and being not used to it, fall sicke; but when they come to shore, they have no sooner footing on the land, but they are well againe, and returne to their former health: and that present forgetfulnesse is the first step; Ier. 12.13. he sheweth a kinde of them, they were sicke, and profited not by it: making it as a marke of wickednesse in them. Now by this and other degrees, we come to that which in the ancient Fathers is called stupor morbi, & duritia, non robur sanitatis: a numbnesse of soule, and hardnesse, not comming from the strength of health: in one word they call it animi paralysin, the Palsie of the soule: it is one thing to thrust in him that is in health, and another in dead flesh: this is of two sorts; the one ye shall finde, Prov. 23.35. he speaketh there of a person given to excesse of eating and drinking:Stupor contra∣ctus, is of drun∣kennesse, that are drunken ebrietate. They have smitten me, but I was not sicke: they have beaten me, but I know not when I awoke. Their life is like to theirs, that sleepe in the toppe of a maste; their ship is broken, but yet they continue: and so they come to a kinde of drunkennesse. Now this drunkennesse which is spoken of in Esa. 51.21. Ebrii sunt,Contractus is that that trou∣bleth the world sed non vino, they are drunke, but not with wine: it falleth out also even in other vices; as when a man is bewitched with any finne; he is smitten, but feeleth not. 2. The other is such, as we read 1 King. 18.28. for it is said there of
the Prophets of Baal, when their god would not heare them, that they cut themselves with knives and launces;Immissus stupor, whether the Devill possesse us in soule, of actually in body. and so they might seeme patient: this is not stupor contractus, but stupor immissus, not an acqui∣red, but an insensiblenes infused by the Devill: as we see in Mar. 5.5. in the man that could breake chaines, and cut his owne flesh with sharpe stones very pitifully: For in the Circumcellions, the Manichees and Do∣natists, and whosoever they were, that did, as Aug. saith, pati malum, ut facerent malum, sufferevill, the better to doe evill; we may see that this manlinesse, or rather hardnesse was in the soule of them all: it is a thing to be regarded. The reason of both these, ei∣ther because they consider not the true ef∣ficient, or the true end of afflictions.We returne to the former, first, stupor contractus; we come to that by two meanes. 1. Is a not considering of the cause from whence. 2. A not considering of the end whereunto. 1. When the afflicted doth not consider the cause from whence their affliction cometh, as Ier. 5.3. & 2.30. & Esa. 1.5. you shall see what he saith, Esa. 1.5. God saith, Why should you be smitten any more? &c. from the soale of the foot to the head, there is nothing whole, but wounds, &c. Where is there any place, where I should smite thee? and in Ier. 5.3. Thou hast stricken them, but they have not sorrowed, thou hast consumed them, &c. and chap. 2.30. he had corrected their children, but they sor∣rowed not. There is no doubt but the same examples are among us, and no doubt but God calleth before him, and arresteth them, with these his Sergeants, but they are no whit called nearer to the Lord, nor amended. These men are usually compared to Simon of Cyren, Luke 23. which was violently caught, and was forced but to beare the Crosse, whereupon, not he, but Christ should be crucified. Now these men that carry a Crosse, but are not crucified on it themselves, they are in the same case that he was: a Crosse they beare, but profit not: and the reason, because they ascribe it to a cause beside God: and that is it that the Divines call caecum tormentum, or caecus dolor, a blinde torment or griefe: a griefe they have on the sudden, and they are not able to say, for this and this cause, this heavinesse is come upon them: Purblinde Christians, that cannot looke up to the hand that striketh, nor discerne the intended end of their chastisement  if any alteration befall them, they ascribe it not rori gratiae, but humori naturae, not to grace, but nature: and so consequently they get them terrenas consolatiunculas, some poore earthly delight, as Bernard saith, pleasures and friends, and so drive it away. If the effect be not within them, but come from without them; then nothing is more common then this, insurgere in instrumenium, (August) to hack the staffe, & omittere percussorem, to let God goe: which is a great oversight, by reason of two concurren∣ces: for we must note, that affliction is just on Gods behalfe; on the behalfe of the instrument, injust: as the calamities of Iob, they were therefore just, because they were of God, cui nil nisi justum placet, that delights in nothing but what is just: More plaine, Matth. 5.11. it is said, that men shall be blessed, when they shall be injuried of men, persecuted and accused falsely: so they shall receive injury from men, but recompence from God: The not distinguishing of these two,
breedeth a desire of revenge, Psal. 7.3. when David saith, O Lord my God (speaking in regard of the instrument of Saul and Doeg) if I have done any such thing, if there be any wickednesse in mine hands, &c. yet he ascribed this to God; and though he ascribed it to God, yet that thing argueth not, but that he was injuriously dealt withall: even as he doth ascribe that of Shimei to the same cause; peradven∣ture the Lord hath striken with his instrument. As these two; when we looke not high enough to the efficient cause: so on the other side, when we conceive not aright of the end; that tribulation being of tribulus, August. Ideo mittitur, aut ut detineat, aut ut revocet, which is sent to keep us in, or to call us. When they consider not this, through these two, they begin not to regard it; and so get a numnesse of soule, and consequently they gather a thick skinne. 2. We come to , the cause of it is most commonly from thence,. Fainting under the crosse ei∣ther for want of due conside∣ration of Gods justice, or of his mercy. that men cannot distinguish (as 2 Cor. 4.8.) betweene , & : betweene being shaken, and cast downe: the Apostle he could say, they were often in trouble, but never in per∣plexitie, and cast downe. When a man imagineth that God affli∣cteth him in his wrath, and that he aimeth at nothing but his de∣struction, whereas the chastisement of God is not to drive us to de∣spaire, [but onely to bring us to a godly perplexity.] When a man cannot distinguish these, then he falleth to have an heavinesse, and that breedeth death: Psal. 42.6.9.11. he is cast downe: and there is a question between him and his soule, Why art thou so heavy O my soule? &c. but then we see he commeth to the other part: Put thy trust in God, for he is thy refuge: he is the light of thy coun∣tenance: and so standeth as Paul doth here: which thing, when it is not considered, men first feele their courage die: and as Prov. 18.14. fall into a wounded spirit, which cannot be borne: howsoever the spirit of an heathen man can sustain his infirmitie [& though the patience that appeared in the Heathen were great:] yet [as the Pro∣phet saith] A wounded spirit who can beare?Gen. 4.13. My punishment is greater than I can beare. or if not into that, then they fall to murmuring against Gods justice; Gen. 4.13. Cains mur∣muring, that they beare a greater punishment than they deserve; as on the other side in regard of the mistaking of his justice, they fall away, so for want of a due consideration of his mercy they are of Sauls mind, 1 Sam. 28.9. if God will not answer him, neither by Dreames, nor by Urim, nor by Prophets, then he will come to the witch: if this fall not out, then he will try by another way, he fal∣leth into another extreme, he lyeth flat on the ground, with a brutish kind of patience, and is not moved. These two they come either by a misconstruing of Gods justice, or by a miscontruing of his mercy: that because he correcteth like a Father, he will condemne like a Judge. The meanes, in that it is truly said of Jerome, that quot sunt causae, for God,Meanes com∣mon to us with the Heathen, 3 the other proper to Christians. ad puniendum, looke how many causes he hath to punish us: so many meanes are there to move us ad patiendum, to suffer; of the tryall of patience, we have handled before. It is sure that the examples of Scevola, Rutilius, Regulus, &c. among the Heathen,
they carried a shew of patience: and we have their reasons: if the heathen could say, Sis asinus, quemcunque asinum sors prospera fecit;1 The indig∣nity to call down a  all man, under any crosse whatsoever. there ought to be in Christians a more heroicall courage, seeing wee know the causes from whom, and the end why: and therefore this is one speciall reason, that as in unreasonable creatures, so much more in reasonable, it is an ignominious thing, and great shame to prostrate so excellent a vertue to these. 2. That the  of e mining of  ino a good ing, if they could not amend it. Seeing there∣fore we must needs do it, let us do it with commendation.2. Againe, this they saw, that quicquid corrigere est nefas, what cannot be amended, it were best to make of the necessity of it some commendable action, and turne it into a vertue; as Act. 9.5. it was hard to kicke against the pricke: that yeelding being necessa∣rily laid, even that that is laid upon us, wee may do it with com∣mendation, not like to those that have no hope. The 3. is this, that which the heathen saith, Quantum mercator pro lucro, quantum venator pro ludo, tantum ego nondum passus sum pro virtute: which was indeed nothing else but his ambition;3 The compa∣tison of that we suffer, with the suffering of that that is much lesse weighty. so much as the Merchant for his gaine, and the hunter for his gaine, so much had not he suffered for his honour, or rather ambition. To this we may adde, Quantum Mercator prolucro, quantum vena∣tor pro ludo, quantum Ethnicus pro vano honore, or, pro ambitione, tan∣tum ego nondum passus sum pro Christo meo: So much as the mer∣chant for his gaine, and the hunter for his game, and the Heathen for vaine honour, and ambition: so much have not I suffered for my Christ. But on the other side, if we consider our selves,Those that are more proper to us. as we are Christians, and are afficted with them, tanquam , or proved (with these) tanquam per , we have these meanes to be patient. For the first, Luk. 23.41. for punishment,1. . we see what the lesse unhonest theefe of the two said, before he was converted to Christ, It is no reason that we that are in the same condemnation with this man, should condemne him, seeing we suffer justly, and according to our deserts; he wrongfully: i. Whatsoever it is that we suffer, it is deserved; it is just punishment, it is not so much as we deserve; but this man hoth done nothing amisse: this course will take from us impatience. A second is Ps. 119, 75. he saith, that God of faithfulnesse hath thus afflicted him, that as the punishment is just; so if he afflict us, to ascribe it to God of very faithsulnesse: Psal. 89.32. if he visit our of∣fences with the rod, and our sinnes with the scourges, yet that his mercy may not utterly be taken from us, nor his truth faile, this is sent that we may be retained or recalled, and so because fearing God, and making use of his punishment, we are sure of his promise, Rom. 8.28. we are sure that within the compasse of that promise, all shall at length worke with them for their good: and hereof it is, that the Heathen man saith, patior ne patiar, I suffer here,Wee have strength here to endure it, wee have hope to be delivered, or the end will weare it. that I may not suf∣fer hereafter: that Abraham (Luk. 16.25.) make not that argument of me, that he made of the rich man, Now therefore he enjoyeth pleasure, and thou sufferest pains. Now therefore, that this conclu∣sion may not be, and that here we may suffer those pains that may be
bidden, mitigated, ended, and have patience and hope for the end; that we may not suffer those paines that have no patience to abide them, no hope to be delivered from them, no mitigation of them, the end without end. And indeed one of them calleth it a sea: continuus cursus temporalium, as of those, Psal. 73. that are said not to come in∣to misfortune with other men. There is none more dangerous signe of the purpose of God, and there is none more certaine then the contrary. Now for ,. for triall: a meanes for that: Christ com∣mendeth unto us Luk. 14.28. that before we build, or goe forth to warre, we sit downe and cast our accounts before, what it will cost us, and with what losse we shall bring our matters to passe: for want of this fore-casting, because they do not sit downe before they enter into a godly life, what troubles and temptations they may fall into, promising to themselves rest, therefore they are unprepared when the crosse commeth, and give over. Therefore, before-hand we must set downe what it will come to. 2. Another [that we shall know] we have set downe, Rom. 15. 4. and no doubt it is equally to be understood of other vertues: but there it is onely to be attributed to patience; that whatsoever is written, is written, that through patience and comfort we may have hopo: i. that we may see, what it hath cost the Saints of God, and what they have endured; and so by considering their cost, and their suf∣fering, we may see what it will cost us, and what we shall endure; in which we may include the sufferings of Christ: [but the especiall] Heb. 12.3. 1 Pet. 4.1. recogitate illum, consider him, that for your sakes hath endured such gainsaying of wicked sinners, that you be not wearied and faint in your hearts. Gregory, St passio Christi in memoriam revocetur, nihil tam arduum est, quod non aequo animo tole∣retur: do but seriously contemplate the passion of Christ, what he suffered for thee, and there will no sufferings seeme grievous to thee. For his heart, hands, seete, body, soule, &c. suffered so much for us, as it is impossible for us to equall him in his sufferings. 3. The third, 1 Cor. 10.13, that being in the fire burning, Marty∣res sine flamma esse possumus,In regard of the infinite reward, the greater the reward, the greater the means: he calls it not , but , and . this is the considera∣tion of the in∣finite reward that cannot be expressed. The reward the greatest meanes that no figure in the world is able to expresse si in anima patientiam retineamus: there it is promised that God will give us an issue: our triall shall not be above our patience: either he will give us more patience, to suffer greater afflictions, or as our patience decreaseth, so shall our triall be lesse. 4. Lastly, 2 Cor. 4.17.  [for our light affliction, which is but for a moment, causeth unto us a far more excellent, & eternal weight of glory:] , this is that that will by and by be calme, this is that that layeth up : it rewards us with an everlasting huge masse of glory, , from hyperbole to hyperbole, that no hy∣perbole in the world can suffer▪ it cannot be expressed by all hyper∣boles, Rom. 8.18. he saith there, that he counted all that man could suffer, and he knew that it was not worthy to be mentioned in re∣gard of the glory that shall be revealed to the Saints of God.
The Signes: thus he shall be able to examine, by having an eye to the Greeke word , to abide under: That so the sin that it is sent for, may be taken away, he can be connt to beare the pu∣nishment. a very effectuall and a good signe this is, when a man is thus affected to the Crosse, so that it please God to take away his sinne, the cause of punishment, that he is willing to beare the punishment still: so onely let me be assured that I shall have forgivenesse of my sinnes, the guilt taken away, and I am content to let the Crosse lye upon mee still: He that is contented, he hath laid up a good signe. 2. Tolerane & amare: i. When our bearing and enduring of paines, it worketh not in us a murmuring, or a discontented mind: but so affecteth us as we can notwithstanding love God with his cha∣stisement, and for his chastisement: Job in the end of his 2. Chap. saith, Blessed be the name of the Lord, even for his afflictions. When it is, Benedictus Dominus in donis suis, Blessed be the Lord for his gifts; then Jobs wife will say that Grace as well as he: but when it commeth to ablationibus suis; The Lord giveth, and the Lord taketh away: that is it that maketh the true note of difference be∣tweene the true patience and the counterfeit: and as it hath beene said of the affections, that that turneth it to the contrary, is a most sure and true note. So from mercy, feare, Psal. 130.4. Mercy, that thou mayest be feared: Mercy properly stirreth up love; and justice, feare. When an affection is stirred up, that properly stirreth up the con∣trary, that is a most true note, the love that is in us, provoked by the justice of God, and the feare by his mercy, these are true and un∣counterfeit: otherwise, they are in the wicked sometimes:That when  affection  wrought p∣rn lcum s∣n, that is, a ere affecti∣on but if it come from a contrarie object, that is it, as the heathen man saith, cum amare possis post injuriam, a man loveth him well, that can love him that hath injured him. So when that, that the world counteth injurie, is past, when a man can amare Deum, not post injuriam, though we count it so; he that can love after that, his love is true. 3. & 4. We have a speciall use of them, because the fathers in the Primitive Church had much adoe to make the people under∣stand how the patience of a true Christian, and a Donatist should be distinguished; and therefore they used these two notes: 1. that in the Donatists suffering (and you shall find it in them that suffer in our dayes) you shall find in them a spirit of vanity, and pride:The spirit of patience is the spirit of humi∣litie. whereas true patience is humble; as the Prophet saith, Tacui Domine, quia tu fecisli, I kept silence O Lord, because thou hast done it. That humblenesse and silence that appeareth in the martyrs sufferings, is a true marke: When a man falleth not into disputation concerning the causes, for which it is laid upon him, nor bursteth into speeches, how great torments he hath suffered, &c. but either tolerat & gemit, or else respondet pro Deo: he either beares it, and mourneth in si∣lence, or, if he reply, it is on Gods behalfe: as Job 1.22. and 20.10. In all this did not Job sinne with his lips: he did not give out that, that might bewray his impatience. The other is called alacrity: for this they cōmonly note, that in their Circumcellions sufferings, that they had not an alacrity, but , that they were not moved, but that not being not moved, was not
with alacrity: they grounded themselves upon Rom. 8.37. in all these,In some disea∣ses a mans flesh shall be able to suffer any thing , to over∣come, is to match them, but , to rejoyce for the suffering of them. 6. Reg. , we do more then overcome, he that not onely suf∣fereth, but rejoyceth; that which is noted in the Apostles, Act. 5.41. that they departed from the councell after they had beene whip∣ped, not grieved, but rejoycing that they were accounted worthy to suffer shame for the name of Christ: the other suffering importeth no feare, or griefe, but it hath no alacrity. Last, is the precept for procuring it in others: for it is not enough for every man to say in his owne soule, Why art thou so impatient O my soule; &c. but also Psal. 27.16. that we may be able to say to others, Sustine Dominum, wait on the Lord: that we do what we can by our comfort and gifts, to make them patient: as on the other side,Not to give any words or occa∣sion to move impatience in others. if there be any provocation in others to impatiencie, as his wife, Job 2.10. as if affliction be come upon him, and they coun∣sell him to give over, if we should continue in uprightnesse, till we suffered for it, we must answer them, as his answer was to his wife: that we set our selves against them, that hold that we are to beare good things, but not afflictions. And this is the knowledge, that every one is to have; so especially it concerneth them, Prov. 19.11. Doctrina viri per patientiam noscitur:Patience espe∣ally required in the learned. and as Gregorie saith, Tanto minus quisque [cognoscitur esse] doctior, quanto minus [convincitur esse] patiens. The lesser our patience, the lesser our knowledge ever. Thus much for the first proposition: 1. Thou shalt have a God. The 2. Proposition, Thou shalt have mee for thy God; and that con∣taineth but one vertue,Habebis me De∣wn. called True religion, or religion; the other are the extremes. The 3. Proposition, Thou shalt have none other Gods but me: 1. Thou shalt have one alone,1 True Reli∣gion. and thou shalt have me alone: and that also con∣taineth one vertue, i. sincerity, not mingling true religion with any other:2 Sincerity. Besides these out of the word gnal panai, there is grounded integrity,3 Integrity. that we be not hypocrites: and lastly, in regard of the verbe, erunt, which runneth through our whole life, Perseverance. The 2. Proposition,4 Perseverance. that it is not enough to have a God, unlesse he be the true God,1 That there is no man, but that he doth bestow all his affections, actions, and actions u∣pon some one thing. Aug. unusquis∣que comeditur ab ali quo zelo. which is Religion: for sure it is, that the affections of the mind, and actions of the body, in every one are all bent to some one thing, and that to him that is our God: for either they are bestowed upon an idoll, a falfe God, 1 Cor. 8. which is nothing: or else upon the God of this world, 2 Cor. 4.4. that is the Devill: or else as it is Phil. 3.19. , &c. (whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly,) upon the belly, the flesh: or else Ephes. 5.5. on the idoll of the covetous man: i. upon money, and wealth, the service whereof is, as he saith there, idolatry: there∣fore touching all these,Mention of 4. false gods. 1 Idols. 2 God of this world. 3 Their plea∣sure, & lust. 4 Their owne goods it is that the Prophet, Psal. 4.2. maketh his complaint, that there is a generation of men, that turne the glory of the true God into dishonour, i. are not carefull to deliver unto him his true honour. And therefore, 1 Tim. 6.20. to have scientiam falsi nominis, i. to follow vanity and lies: [and come to have the fruit,] as Hosea: they shall eat the fruit of lies. i. Griefe of
mind, smart of body, confusion of soule, therefore to have, it is not sufficient, but we must also have the truth. And indeed, that which the heathen man Plato saith of this, is true:  every man, if he will have a thing, he will have it according to the truth. Every soule, if it have not the truth, it is not because it is not de∣sirous of the truth; but if it find not out the truth, it is against the will of it: unlesse it goe against nature. Gen. 20.9. When as Abra∣ham had made answer to Abimelech, not in truth, as he thought;Every mn for knowledge, is desirous to have the truth. Abi∣melech, being an heathen, could tell him that he had done those things that he should not; so these men can say, that see meerly by the eye of reason, that truth is it which wee all seeke after. But that which is yet more strange, Gen. 3.1. the Devill begins there, Yea is it true indeed, hath God said indeed, Ye shall not eate of every tree of the garden? so that he himselfe being the author of lies,Now when t commeth to practise, Aug. distinction, bo∣num dulce, & bonum amabile, wee will first seeke after. yet this is his desire, that the woman should make him a true answer: So we see the mighty force of truth, that howsoever it is not sought in practise, yet in judgement, not onely good men, but also the wicked, the Heathen, yea and the devils themselves would not willingly be beguiled, but witnesse to it. This Comman∣dement is be∣cause of our triall, and our triall is, because it s precious in Gods eyes: and that is, because it is the course of nature.The end and scope of the Law, and the Lord the Lawgiver, it is in re∣spect of triall, which before was named, 1 Pet. 1.7. this , the triall of our faith is more precious to the Lord, than all the riches and goods in the world. This triall of us hath bin the cause why God hath permitted & doth permit so many errours, heresies, and false worships. Deu. 15.11. We may say in a fit cōparison, that albeit God hath plenty, and abundance of all things, that he could have made all rich: yet for the triall of a liberall, and a compassionable mind in the rich, he would suffer the poore alwaies to be. So it may be said of truth: it had beene an easie matter for him to have taken order for every one to have had the true profession: but onely for , our triall. 1 Cor. 11.19. Ideo oportet esse haereses inter vos: therefore there must be heresies among you, that there may be a triall, and that they may be knowne that are sound and true. He said, fiat lux, & facta est: let there be light, and there was light: As easie had it been for him to have said, fiat veritas, let there be truth, let there be great plenty of truth, & there should have bin nothing else but truth only. He hath given a cause, and a reason why he suffereth errour, that they may be tried, that seeke after the truth. The meaning is this,Psal. 138.. that forasmuch as it being set downe that God hath magnified his word and truth above all, i. that it is the highest thing that he maketh account of, and most highly esteemeth it: therefore he would have it diligently to be sought of us, that we should shew our estimation conformable to his, and that we likewise should esteeme it, and magnifie it above all things: and this is Pauls counsell, and this is the end, and he would thus have his glory sought. For the necessity of it: we need not speake much of it: for it hath partly beene handled heretofore. And for as much as truth, and true religion is a way, and is called so, 2 Pet. 2.2. and that way must bring us unto the right end, then necessary it is we find it: if
we find it not; aliquis erit terminus eunti in via, but error immensus est: if a man keepe the right way he shall at length come to the end of his journey,Jam. 1.8. but errour hath no end. Therefore it is requisite. By the spirit of truth, and the way of truth, we shall come into the truth.The thing commanded is Religion, or true religion, veri nominis re∣ligio: which Christ, Mat. 13.35. under the name of the Kingdome of heaven likeneth to a pearle, and him that sought after it to a Merchant, that sought many pearles, and at the last found one of inestimable value, and when he had found it, he sold all that ever he had and bought it. Herein are three things, 1. that we seeke the truth: 2. that when we have found it, we rest in it: 3. that it be to us a girdle. Then this desire is first: an earnest studie, and applying of the mind to find out the truth among errours, and falshood in the world, ought to be in us. Whereas the common manner is this, eve∣ry man in that religion he is borne in, he will grow up in it: and die in it: and we presuppose our selves to have found the pearle, be∣fore we seeke it: and so when our studies begin to ripen, we only sticke to some learned mans institutions. Deut. 4.32. Moses seemeth to be of another mind, it is not onely an exhortation, but commeth in the way of a commandement, that the Israelites, they should en∣quire into all antiquities, and in all parts, and ends of the world, whe∣ther there were any such religion as theirs: and that they had no∣thing but truth it selfe, and wisedome it selfe. So that this is the first thing,As there is in∣quisitio dubii, so there is exami∣natio veri. Esa. 65.1. Rom. 10.20. that no man do suppose that he hath found the truth, before he hath sought it: and Mat. 7.7. he that seeketh for it, he hath a pro∣mise that he shall find it. The promise of the calling of the Gentiles, that God would be found of them that sought him not, is not a pat∣terne for us in this case; but as we are to enquire into all doubts, so are we to examine all truths: among the pearles that sundry shew us, and promise us that they have worthy stuffe for us, we must take that course, that we can distinguish, that all those are not such pearls, as that a man should sell all that he hath for them: but that we in∣deed have the inestimable pearle that the Merchant found, and bought with all that hee had. Hereditary religion, religion upon offence, or religion upon a sudden, these three at this day occupie the greatest persons of mankind, and most of mankind: either be∣cause they are of Auxentius his mind, In hac fide natus sum, in hac item moriar. This faith was I borne in, and in this will I die. So we see sundry either to this, or to the other part inclined, because it was the religion of their Ancestors, and of their country, this they were taught, and this they will keepe. This religion findeth us, and we find not it. Or on the other side: when it is not sought, but because we find some griefe and crosses in some religion: and because we have sustained losse by it, we will be revenged of it, in leaving it. And the third [that which we find so Soone, as if we should stumble on it:] they goe over seas, and in one or two yeares they come and have sought and found the pearle, and are able to defend it, this is religio repentina, this is a stumbling upon religion. Now adaies Revelations are but few or none: we must have an ordinary time and study, and ordinary meanes, and according to them we
must addresse our selves to find it, otherwise he hath no promise. Now if any man will say, we have found it before we have sought: because we are borne in the true religion, I answer that there must neverthelesse be a triall of it, 1 Thess. 5.21. which answereth to see∣king. They that have it must either seeke it, or examine it: not as the Turkes, which make it a matter of Death to examine it. This order of seeking must be kept with the two precepts concer∣ning the manner of seeking. The Fathers make many points: but we may bring them to two. The first is Mat. 6.36▪ Quaerite primum, that it must be first sought: because the seeking of it will sanctifie to us all our [other] exerci∣ses, that come after: and if that be not sought first, neither that shall be sanctified: and it is very likely, that the other shall not.God is necreil at the first. Esa. 55.6. he saith, that God must be sought, while he is nigh: and at the first he is nigh. Phil. 2.21. When the question is made, An quae∣remus quae nostra sunt, an quae Christi Jesu? whether, quae sursum, or, quae deorsum? whether wee will seek our owne things, or the things which are Jesus Christs: whether the things which are above, or the things which are below? Now when it is come to this point when we give primum to things beneath, while they may be found, God may be neere; but when they have primum, God may goe away. The other, Deut. 4.29. a serious seeking with the whole heart, with an earnest desire to find: Jer. 29.13. They sought me and found me, because they sought me seriously, with all their heart: Now the con∣trary to this is, Esa. 21.12. If you do seeke him, seeke him indeed: for me thinketh you seeke him as if you cared not whether you ever found him or no: you do but trifle in your seeking. And though our state be miserable, because it must come to such a comparison as that in Prov. 2.4. Solomon noteth a seeker of wisedome, when a man seeketh for wisedome, as a worldly man seeketh for silver, and for hidden treasures: if we can come so farre, let that Comparison stand. Jer. 45.5. And seekest thou great things for thy selfe? Opposite to this in the mat∣ter it self, is the affection of those that thuk religion is he∣reditary, as th opposite to seeking, so to diligent seek∣ing, that of Esay, a seeking not worthy its name.2. Another, Joh. 20.15. When we stand weeping, and desiring him with teares to grant us his truth, though he grant us nothing else: as Mary did, when she could not see Christs body in the Sepulcher. So on the other side, as Jer. 45.5. when we do primum quaerere grandia, seeke first great things for our selves, and after Religion: or as Esay calleth it, a seeking, and no seeking, when as our seeking cannot properly be called a seeking: Sauls seeking his Fathers asses, and the woman in the Gospell, her groat, shall be with more care, than ours for religion. 2. The second point, 1 Tim. 6.3. as we must seeke, for the truth, when we have it not: or if we have it, examine it: so when we know that we have it, we must acquiescere religioni, rest in it. Thirdly, the use of religion, Eph. 6.14. that it may serve us in∣stead of a girdle, to gird our loynes: i. the truth must be hard ap∣plied to our reines, as the girdle. Regula distin∣guendi inter ex∣cessum & def∣ctum.On the other side, that which is forbidden: the two extremes, nimium, and parum; the excesse and the defect: the rule distinguishing
these in all: that the excesse is, where the negative must be set be∣hind, as if we yeeld honour cui non oportet,A rule of the Schoolemen▪ set your parti∣cula neg. after it, you have the excesse, contra the defect. & quantum non oportet, that argueth an excesse: and the defect, where the negative is set be∣fore, as if we honour, non quem oportet, non quantum oportet: they are both in Religion. Cui non oportet, where we honour whom we ought not: and there commeth in Idolatry: whether it be by ho∣nour, or by office and use, as August. de doctr. Christiana speaketh: and so it is, that we come in aliquod pactum, into covenant with the Devils, Sorcerers, Charmers, Starres, Dreames, and other inchan∣tings: all come into this: if a man yeeld any of the former affecti∣ons and vertues, as love, feare, &c. to the Devill: or if he feare the Starres, as the Genethliaci: and those that, quia usum non habent, &c. Or attribute to dreams, inchantments, to ligatures, lots, characters, &c. it is comprehended in this.1 Tim. 1.19. They shall make ship∣wracke &c. Esa. 41.23. God saith, that none can foreshew things to come, but himselfe: not meaning those things that are knowne by naturall causes; but where the cause is libera causa, free; therefore if that honour be attributed to any of these, they take a peculiar office from him. Deut. 18.10, 11, 12. there are almost all these forbidden, that were reckoned up before; Jer. 10.2. there is a plaine commandement, that we should not ascribe to the Starres the event; Esa. 8.19. EZek. 21.21. there is the same thing. Examples of these condemned, 1 Sam. 28.8. Saul consulteth with the witch of Endor. 2 King. 1.3. Eliah to Ahaziah, because he sent mesengers, being sicke, to enquire of Baal Zebub the god of Ekron, if he should recover his disease: Is it not because there is no God in Israel, that ye go to enquire of Baal Zebub the god of Ekron? And albeit, true it is, that in regard of the formers wisedome, the truth was told: As the death of Saul was shewed by the witch of Endor, and Act, 16.17. the Pythonisse said true, that they were the servants of the living God; yet God condemneth Sauls act, 1 Chron, 10.13. and the cause of his death is attributed to the seeking and asking counsell of a familiar spirit: and Act. 16. Paul rebuketh the spirit that spake in her, and made him to come forth: And Deut. 13.2. there is a commandement, though a Prophet foretell a truth, and say, Let us have another God, he must not be followed, but he shall be stoned. The other, i. Quantum non oportet, when we give more honour then is required, is commonly referred to superstition; but rather it is in idolatrie: as the other (in prophanesse) it lightly doth end in Atheisme.Superstiti. Quantum non: as it appeareth by the second Councell of Nice, they that brought up Images, their principall reason among all, is this, because God cannot be too much remembred: and there∣fore that it were good to have images, that we may have God al∣waies in our mind: which is no argument; for then there should be no superstition: Tully shewing the first beginning of superstition, he saith that certaine of the old Romans did nothing but pray day and night, that their children might be superstites, and survive them, and upon that occasion these men were called superstitiosi: and af∣ter it went to other things. In this respect also we condemne the Euchites.
It is true, as the Fathers say, that for quantitas absoluta,R  quan∣  ∣dum ara . We must  so, that we  continue Nn cut, n quantum. if we were as the Angels, there were no nimium, no excesse: but for as much as in an earthly man there is but quantitas ad proportionem: that he may still go forward in the worshipping of God: and so how an absolutenesse, ex¦conduione; he is but weake, and therefore not to consume himselfe in one day, but so that he may continue; this maketh that there is a ni∣mium in religion, and so consequently a superstition. For the other extreme, parum, the defect: they call it commonly prophanenesse: and it was a punishment in the beginning; that a man should be such a one, that he should not be suffered to come within the Church intra fanum: [but to stand extra fanum,] without the Church: but now in these dayes there are many, that account it no punishment, nay it is to be feared, that it hath a reward, and they are better thought of, which be such. We come to the second point, to non acquiescere, that proceedeth from a corrupt veine in us, a desire of new and strange things: , and therefore that God might make them more odious unto us, he hath made it a name for those things, that he hateth most of all: Num. 18.7. he calleth him externum ministrum, the stran∣ger that offereth: Levit. 10.1. Nadab and Abihu are said to have offe∣red strange fire to the Lord, ignis alienus: Prov. 2.16. an Harlot is called aliena mulier, the strange woman: Gen. 35.5. alieni or peregrini dii, and to follow strange Gods, Deut. 31.16. is called fornicari post deos alienos. And thus we come to that,That Witch being our  wi. Gal. 3.1. to be bewitched by this Witch, and desire of novelty, being the Witch. This putting to new devises is that, that hath changed the pure doctrine in the Primi∣tive Church, and it hath made our religion so as it is: Acts 17.21. these Attica ingenia, Academick wits, are lightly given to it. In both these, there be three degrees, according to our exceedings and defects. 1. Schisme in superstition, and in the way to superstition, and so in the way to prophanenesse: and to have such a conceit, that he should not, or not that, that he should. 2. Haeresis. 3. Apostasia. 1. A Schisme is, when a man upon indifferent things, and for trifles, will make a rent in the whole body, 1 Cor. 1.10. Heb. 10.25. 2. But, when it commeth to a point of doctrine, then it is an He∣resie, as 1 Cor. 11.19. Acts 5.17. haeresis Sadducaeorum. 3. (But if all be given over,) Apostasie, a denying of all the points of religion. Heb. 6.14. The meanes for finding out the truth and true religion,They be four. * The Fathers derive religion a religande, but Cicero & Varro a relegende, of often reading: and the Pro∣phet Daniel see∣meth to be of the same minde chap. 12. v. 12. we see what they be in the state of them that are Heathens: 1. in the Eunuch, Acts 8.28. his meanes was, that he read the Prophet Esay. 2. Acts 10.2. in an Heathen, Cornelius, a Centurion: his meanes were prayers, and almes, and fasting: and that which is somewhat strange, before he was called, he was said to be a man that feared God: but that the Fathers have well resolved it, that say, he was called so, quia non detinuit veritatem na∣turae suae in injustitia: by holding, (as contra, Rom. 1.18.) that truth of
nature, which God hath given him, and not abusing it to licentious∣nesse, but exercising it with good and godly exercises: therefore God bestowed a further light upon him: i. his feare, and such is the feare of God, that is in men before they are called: so then, if we use Cornelrus his meanes, and if we shall feare God thus much, that that light [and truth] we have, we doe not presse it nor detaine it in unrighteous∣nesse. 3. The third is in Acts. 18.24. [the meanes] of Apollos, that in that he knew he was ready to speake fervently, and teach diligently the things of the Lord, i. in the Baptisme of Iohn: [that we be ready and willing to speake for the confirmation of that we know, till more come. These are the principall meanes: the rest may be taken from the wayes of increasing knowledge. Signa. 1. Antiquitas. 2 Pugati nae. 3. Pgeius. 4. Exemplum morum. The signes of true religion, twenty and more, we spake before of them, and therefore we neede not to repeate them here: but onely this we say, that of them, 1. the antiquity, 2. the purgation of the soule, 3. the beginning and growing up of religion, and 4. the examples of ex∣cellent vertues in the professors: these foure Aug. de civit. dei, accoun∣teth to be the especiall. For longer life he moveth his ptition for this end.The sixth rule for the promoting of it in other. Psal. 30.10. Da∣vids desire there is, that he may not yet die, because the dust shall not declare his truth: and Iohn 18.37. Christ saith, that he was borne, and came into the world to this end, to beare witnesse of the truth: On the other side, as it is Rom. 16.17. whosoever cause strife and offences, we are bidden , to avoyd them. The third part, if we have him, it is not enough; but we must have him alone: the Chaldee, he addeth Barmin, [so have the 70. Interpre∣ters , but me:] Matth. 4.10. , Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him on∣ly shalt thou serve: [this maketh] the full affirmative of this, and is all one with that Deut. 6.4. or Deut. 10.20. onely there is not there , him onely: but by him is supplied, and all by the same spirit. The reasons were before touched: the reasons why, and the scope, that we may say Soli Deo,God onely can deliver us from evill, only give us good: there∣fore his alone is the glory. honor et gloria, glory be unto God alone: as the Apostles and other holy men did, in the end of their Epistles and Writings, as in the end of the Epistle to the Romans, of the second of Peter, and the last of Iude: and the reason, Esa. 42.8. because he will give his glory to none other: his glory is indivisible. If any will adde another, he shall see the conditions, 1 Sam. 7.3. If you seeke me onely, then will I helpe you, then you shall have helpe both of bo∣dy and soule by me: if others, then as it is, Iudg. 10.14. let them whom ye serve, helpe you. 2. Another is this, that the name wherewith God is intituled of a Father, and of a Master, Mal. 1.6. of a King, Psal. 5.2. (Hearken thou unto the voyce of my calling, my King and my God) of an Husband, Hoseah 2.20. all these can be but one: there is one Master, one King, one Father, one Husband: unlesse it be an adulterous wife: Luke 16.13.
you cannot serve God and Mammon: to this Et, you (as one noteth very well) may joyne any thing: Matth. 6.24. it is impossible for any to serve two Masters: so the same estate being of God, were see the precept standeth on good ground, that there must be no other God. In a conjuncti∣on of two things.3. The third was touched before, Esa. 1.22. if you joyne any with him, that is worse then he, (as he must needs be worse, whosoever hee be) then you abase him: if there were any matchable with him, then it were no abasing: and therefore you shall see a continuall course in Scriptures. Gen. 35.2. [by the light of nature) if you goe to Bethel, and make an Altar to Iehovah, you must put away other, and strange Gods. In the Law, by the way of a Commandement, Deut. 4.10. and by way of figure, Deut. 22.9. there are all mixtures forbidden: 1 King. 18.21. there is a reconciling humour in us: the Israelites they would halt betweene two opinions, and please both God and Baal: 2 King. 17.41. against the Samaritans, So these Nations served the Lord, and served their Images also: So did their children, and their childrens childrenias did their fathers, so doe they, to this day: and Zeph. 1.5. against them that would sweare by Iehovah and by Malchom with one breath: Luke 16.13. No servant can serve two Masters, for either he shall hate the one,Sincere religi∣on, sincere af∣fection. and love the other: or else he shall leane to the one, and despise the other: ye can∣not serve God and Mammon: 2 Cor. 6.14. there is a perpetuall enmi∣ty of this mixture of religion. That thing that is commanded,Mandatum. 2 Cor. 1.12. 1 Cor. 5.8. & 2 Cor. 1.12. , &c. that in simplicity and godly sincerity, and not with fleshly wisdome, &c. he alludeth to a figure, that we must keepe our Passeover in azymis, with unleavened bread: that figure of bread he applieth to immixtion of religion: there must be no mixture: and there must be ,. and that is here commanded, , properly signifieth a judging of such wares as have counterfeit with them: synceritas favi, mel syncerum. and carrying of them into the Sunne, and the Sunne-light must judge whether they be counterfeit or no. God saith, he will seeke us with Lanternes. This is synceritas mellis: when there is nothing but pure hony, and no waxe mingled with it: such an affection in religion is called synce∣ritas religionis. This is in two respects: 1. for the matter, Luke 5.36. a joyning of old patches with new garments, or putting new wine in∣to old bottles, making a corrupt religion to be an incorrupt and true religion: Revel. 18.6. the Whore of Babylon is said to have a mixt cup, of a perfect mixture: and in the Turkes religion, there is a mix∣ture of all paganisme: for they worship Iupiter, Minerva, &c. and they have a Temple dedicated to Minerva; and of the Nestorians, and of the Iewes, and beside he hath added devises of his owne: this for the matter. We must be carefull to pre∣serve our affe∣ction sincere.2. Now for the mixture of our affections; that as our religion ought to be sincere, so that we come sincerely to it: that in regard of the quality that commeth of the mixture of hot and cold water, which
is luke warme,Esa. 28.20 rea∣son of it, the heart to a strait bed. as Revel. 3.16. they that are affected with this quali∣ty, the Lord will cast them out, i. such men as come unto him with a narrow heart, that will not serve him in the full Latitude of religion, but will be sharers for themselves apart, though they be not wholly like them in Iohn 6.26. yet as he saith Esa. 36.16. [and] Esa. 28.15. Because ye have said, we have made a covenant with death, and with hell we are at agreement: they are at league with death and hell, if persecution come; they will not shrinke: if Iosiahs Statutes go down, and if Omries come, they are ready to receive them also: Iam. 4.8. he calleth them homines duplici corde, men of a double heart: and Iam. 1.8. he giveth a reason, because their affection is not sincere: because of their inconstancie. The other extreme is the defect: you shall finde it, Prov. 30.39. we must not be so affected, as he that will blow, till there come bloud: Qui mungit nimium, sanguinem elicit, he that will have his nose too clean maketh it bleede: that we must not desire purity in the Church so, and in so much measure, that while we seeke to make it too clean, we make it bleed, at the nose. The meanes. 1. There is no better thing then that Revel. 3.15. of luke-warme: Gods wish there is, that we would resolve with our selves, to be either hot or cold. So we shall come to the cera syncera, or mel syncerum; that reso∣lution must be: for men stand wavering. How much hee esteemeth it & how long hee will esteeme it.2. When we are resolved, and we say, we will be hot, then that wee come to our price: Iob 28.13. if it be the truth, it is said, there is no price of it: nor that it is to be found in the land of the living, i. though we give our selves, and all that we have, yet we must set no price: The Simile is taken from Merchants, that at the end of their clothes and wares, will set a marke of the lowest price, that they will sell them at. Otherwise, as it is in Zach. 11.12. the Prophet in Christs person saith; Let's see what you will value me at: & they weighed for my wages 30. peeces of silver: and what he esteemeth of the price, we see: he turneth it over to the Potter: a goodly price for me to be valued at of them: a price more fit to buy potsherds: there is not such a price set on us, God hath not valued us at so small a rate, whatsoever we esteeme of the truth or Christ.To know how God is to be e∣steemed, is how he and Christ esteemed us, 1 Pet. 1.18 as no corruptible thing, neither silver, nor gold could buy us. 1 Cor. 6.20. Empti estis precio magno, ye are bought with a great price, more then 30. peeces of silver: for it is certaine, that all should have gone, rather then he; if it would have served: therefore we must so price him, for he is the truth, that no corruptible thing buy us from Christ. The signes of [true religion] likewise were handled before: these foure, 1. If it ascribe to God alone all things; and give no part to any other: 2. If it favour not man in any of his corrupted desires, but urge the contempt of father, mother, friends, and himselfe, and all: 3. If it be meerely spirituall, and have no mixtures; that were the decay of religion:Mixtio theolog. um Philosoph. Judaismo, the 1. in Col. 2.8. the mingling of Religion with the errors of Philosophy: Aug. calleth them very well, orationes Philoso∣phorum acute abtusae: and thus, (as Clemens Alexandrinus, and Origen
witnesse,) Platoes , and Aristotles ,By divers Pla∣tonists conver∣sed to religion, so divers Ari∣stoteleans and other errors of the Philosophers crept into the Church, and at length prevailed. 2. The other is in Tit. 1.14. of Jewish fables: i. that part of Judaisme, that is abrogated: more plainely, Gal. 4.9. egena & infirma elementa, weake and beggerly elements: i. Jewish ceremonies, and Philosophers principles: for these did the Whore mingle in her Cup. Among the 20. easons. The signes of the sincerity of affection, if we have no end, or reward, but our eye only upon him.4. Last is, penetratio cordis, circumcisio cordis: that that taketh away the circumcised skinne of the heart; this in its full extent giveth a marvellous scope to Non concupisces. For sincerity of affection: 1. Psal. 73.24. Iohn 21.15. In the Psalme he saith: Whom doe I respect in heaven or in earth, but thee: i. that he had no other end but God: but the other place, Diligis me plus his? lovest thou me more then these? then these things here on earth, or else our heart is not aright: for if we come not to that, certainely look how farre short we come of it, so farre are we short of true sincerity. Of an example of a mixture that Peter would have brought in.The 6. rule, for the procuring of it in others: 1 Tim. 6.14. there is injoyned by the Apostle, that Timothy, and especially all those that are in the roome of Timothy, keepe the commandement , without spot, without wrinkle: Gal. 2.11. though Peter bring in Judaisme, withstand him to his face: to hinder whatsoever cor∣ruption is brought, or ready to be brought into our religion. [Lest any man should thinke that this coram me, were of no impor∣tance:] Aug. saith, that this [Coram me] magnam habet emphasim:Coram me. this addition coram me, hath a great emphasie, and force: and indeede so great force, as it maketh a distinction betweene this commandement, and the other three in this table. The first rule here is that, Rom. 7.14. the law is spirituall:1. For there is a great rule of it in Rom. 7.14. 2. It maketh two distinctions this rule is grounded on these words, gnalpanai, before me: coram facie humana, & coram luce, &c. in the sight of man, they fall into the exterior act: but coram tenebris, & coram facie Dei, in the sight of God, they come onely to the thought, to the inward part of the soule: and therefore properly pertaine to this Commandement, and come onely to the sight of God. Esa. 45.7. He hath framed the light and created the darknesse: therefore it is all one to him, to see in darknesse and in light: Psal. 94.9. he made the eye, and by vertue thereof he seeth whatsoe∣ver the eye can see: and by a further vertue [by creating and forming the spirit of man] Zach. 21.1. he seeth that the eye seeth not;It is against the nature of a Maker to make any thing pre∣judiciall to himselfe but onely the spirit of man: so that (as Aug. saith) whether the candle burneth, or be put out, he seeth: and that which is above all these, 1 Iohn 3.20. he seeth more then our spirit can see, in us: though the heart cannot condemne us, yet he can condemne us: for hee is greater then our heart. The other di∣stinction.Another thing touching this point, in the morall Philosophy of Christians, the distinction of bonum apparens & verum, good in ap∣pearance, and true good: this coram me, before me, i. God, maketh it: coram homine, before man, makes it not; for coram homine, or any other coram, it argueth nothing else, but every thing as it appeareth; but it cannot truely be so, except it be so to God: that that appeareth
so coram facie Dei, that is so: and for the better and plainer undestan∣ding of this, we must know how Ephes. 3.16. he divideth man: eve∣ry one is divided into two men: and the same words are used by Plato before him: whereby some gather that he had read him: there is , & , the outward man, and the inward man. Now whether of these two pleaseth God, he himselfe sheweth, spea∣king of himselfe: 1 Sam. 16.7. Samuel had a liking to Sauls counte∣nance, and high and comely stature: man looketh into the eyes, or face, or comelinesse of body: but God looketh not as man looketh, he looketh into the heart, and consequently, because he looketh into the heart, Psal. 51.6. for this cause it is, that he requireth truth in the inward parts: and for the same cause is it, that Luke 17.21. the King∣dome of God beginneth within us: and not as certaine (Pharisee like) who looke onely to the outside of the dish, and rest in some externall peeces of Gods worship. It is the integrity of the heart which God especially looketh at: for, First, there is the principal rule of the Scepter of Christ set, subduing our will unto Gods will: there is in us a corrupt affection of man , that our desire is contrary to the desire of God. We desire onely to seeme: as 1 Sam. 15.30. Yet honour me I pray thee, before the elders of my people, and before Israel: that he might seeme before them to be in good state still. Such is our nature: and in Saul our nature bewraieth it selfe: so then we see the coherence. To apply it to the glory of God: the common saying is, Every man is delighted with that especially, in the which he exceeds other: and because we know that gnalpanai, is a thing that God excelleth all other in, (for he only is a searcher of the heart) therefore 'tis that God delighteth so much in this. Another, and two more, they are both, Prov. 4.23. the wise mans counsell is to looke to our heart especially: there is his reason; be∣cause from thence commeth life, and all the faculties of soule and body: that is a cause containing a double reason; 1. because it is the principall member: therefore it must principally give glory to God. 2. If it be corrupt, there will be no glory by the fountaines. The necessity appeareth in this, that al those glorious duties before handled, take them and remove them from this, they are not onely not accepted before God, but an abomination before his eyes: there∣fore if our beliefe must be acceptable to him, Rom. 10.10. it must come from the heart; if our prayer, 2 Tim. 2.22. it must come from the heart; if our love, 1 Iohn 3.18. it must be in word and in truth, which is from the heart: so likewise our obedience must be from the heart, Rom. 6.17. and to conclude, whatsoever we doe, we must doe it , from the heart. Col. 3.23. Mandatum. Inward sound∣nesse, against in∣ward hallow∣nesse, sincerity against min∣gling.That which is commanded: it is called by the Fathers virius inte∣gritatis, the vertue of integrity: they ground it on Gen. 17.1. [when he beginneth the covenant of circumcision] Ambula coram me, walk before me: what is that? that is, esto integer:  be thou perfect: you shall finde it commonly used with another word: as in Iob 1.1. that Iob was  they properly sound thus, [streight and sound:]
the nature of the words is taken from timber, in which there must be streightnesse, that it be not crooked; that is coram facie humana: and soundnesse, that it be not hollow; that is coram facie divina: this is for God, the other man may see: Luke 8.15. Christ expresseth them under these words, , an honest and good heart. Na∣zianzen speaking of that place, in the person of God, saith, , give me the pith and not that onely; but streightnesse is requi∣red without too: so that without and within, we must be such as is re∣quired in good timber. In Exod. 25.11. & 37.2. all his embroydering and workes, they were both foris & intus, without and within: but for the distinguish∣ing other Kings daughters, from the Kings daughter, i. the Church, Psal. 45.14. it is said there, that her beauty is specially within: for the outward beauty may be counterfeit; and represented by them that are not of the Church: but the inward beauty is required: and that is it, that admitteth no hypocrisie. The defect, hypocrisie.That which is forbidden; there is forbidden here the fault of the Pharisees, Matth. 23.26. whose fashion was, to make cleane the out-side of the cup: quod intus autem est, non curare, and never regard the in-side: and we see hypocrisie, is the sinne of seven woes: more then ever any sinne had. Excessus, when a man is simple without wis∣dome.The other extreme is, as in Hoseah 7.11. i. soundnesse and plainnesse: [the Prophet calleth it] columba sine corde, a Dove without a heart. Matth. 10.16. Christ cals it columba sine serpenie, the Dove without the Serpent. It is of one that is, as we reade, Prov. 29.11. powring out his spirit without any manner of wisdome and discretion before every man: our integrity, it must be preserved with wisdome. The Meanes. Media. Where we are commanded a good thing, there is also the meanes of it commanded.1. Senecaes counsell to Lucillius (for he desired integrity) was, that whatsoever hetooke in hand, he should imagine Cato, or Scipio, or some other of the ancient Romanes, renowned for this vertue, to stand be∣fore him; and it is a good meanes, we have in Psal. 16.8. of the same kinde, but it farre better exceeds that: Let a man (as the Prophet there saith) say, I have set the Lord alwayes before mine eyes; i. imagining that whatsoever he doth, he is in the presence of God. And if that will not move him, then that in Rom. 2.16. possibly will, if he set not God onely absolutely, but as he sitteth, when all hearts and the secrets of man shall be opened: i. the adding to God the day of judgement: Preac. 12. the last vers. Every thing, though it be never so secret, shall come into judgement. 2. Another is, Ephes. 6.6. and it may be a forcible reason, if this , eye-service satisfie not God, no not to our earthly masters: if God will not allow that for currant to men; but will have it done even to them in singlenesse of heart: surely this may be a sufficient argument to perswade us, that he will much more exact it of us for himselfe. 3. The last is the dealing of Christ with us for the integrity of our heart: for he yeelded the integrity of his heart to us: he suffered it to
be ripped and pierced: therefore it is reason that we should yeeld up the integrity of ours to him. Bernard: Iuste cor nostrum vendi∣cat, qui suum pro nostro dedit, he justly challengeth our hearts, that hath given his owne for ours: he thought not his hands and feete, &c. enough, i. when he had given all his members beside, he thought not himselfe, that he had given enough to us, except he had given his heart too: therefore it is not our hands, and our feete that can requite it; for they cannot make recompence for his hands and his feete: but the integrity of the heart also is to be yeelded. The Signes. Nilconsire sili, nulla pallescere culpa: hic murus aheneus esto.1. You shall know it by that of the Heathen man: you shall know a sound heart by a wall of brasse about it: it is so full of courage, as we see what Paul saith, 1 Cor. 4.3. Mihi pro minimo est, at a vobis judicer, with me it is a small thing that I should be judged of you: i. that the soundnesse of the heart, it is it that will put courage to the heart: (if he be not conscius mali, conscious of evill) as that all the strength in the world cannot appall it: Contra, if we want a sound heart, our courage will fall. We have examples of both, Mar. 6.18. Iohns courage in a good cause, and in an heart accordingly affected, was exalted even above the Majesty of a Prince: contra, where the heart was false, in Peter, [Mar. 14.66, 69.] we see two silly maids out∣countenanced him, and he is faine to cast himselfe downe under them both: he becommeth a peasant. 2. Another signe like to this; but it is under the Crosse: Looke how we are there,When a man receives com∣fort under the Crosse, by that that hee hath done out of the Crosse, a good signe. so we are in deed: that will bewray what our heart is. 2 King. 20.3. there is a Crosse, that dismaieth not Hezekiah: Why? because he knoweth that in his health he walked aright before God: but contra, Psal. 22.14. it is in the middest of a mans body, like melt∣ing waxe. 1. A detestation of sinne in our selves, and in others.3. Gen. 38.14. by the example of Iudah: that if the like hatred of any sinne be in himselfe, or rather greater, when he doth no lesse punish it in himselfe, then in other: if it be the case of Thamar, then to crie, Away with her, to the fire, let her be burned: but we see a strange and sudden alteration in vers. 26. if it be his owne case, then he saith, Sure I am not so righteous, as shee is: this falleth much into the account as the Heathen man saith of Anthony and his fellow,Brutus & Cassius The true ha∣tred of sin must beginne at our selves. that they did odisse tyrannum, but not tyrannidem, hate the traytor, but not the trea∣son, &c. But the true hatred of sinne must beginne of our selves: yea, and that for the least, as Rom. 7.24. the Apostle for concupi∣scence in himself, we see what a great hatred and griefe he falleth into, that he crieth out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver, &c. 4. The last may be this: [it is somewhat an hard signe] if there be any man that can say the two last verses of Psal. 139. an excellent Psalme in this behalfe, if he can say it without panting of his heart, and feare, or changing of the affections: Prove me, and trie me, O Lord, &c. If any dare take this upon him, if he deceive not his owne heart, it is upright. But a gentler then this, Psal. 7.3. where he saith, If my heart be
not true and sound in this respect, then let me feele the hand of God, then let the enemy persecute me, &c. or when Psal. 4.4. when a man entring into his chamber, can say, As mine heart hath beene upright before thee, so I desire to be helped in my greatest neede, and to be comforted in the last gaspe: so to offer up obedience within us must needs be a true signe. 6. Rule, for the procuring of it in others:Reg. 6. we have the Apostles desire and commandement, Phil. 1.10. and the example we have in the friends of Iob, though after a corrupt manner. for though they tooke a wrong course, yet the desire was good, to see that his heart was upright: haec de integraute. Perseverance. THe knitting up of all is to persevere. Perseverance, it standeth first,Perseverantia. Non habebis, or non erunt, thou shalt not have, or there shall not be, but in the order of handling hath the last place, because it hath the shutting up of all: It is in the words non erunt, which will not be an∣swered with non sunt, or non habui, or non habeo: but this must an∣swer it, non habebo, I will never have any other God. And this is a greater matter then many doe imagine: fui, sum, and ero, are the notes of the three times: surely every man examining these three times, shall finde that fui, the time past, to remember is a sorrowfull thing; and as Bernard saith, Recordare praeteriti, & erubesce: it is a great shame for us to remember what we have beene: In sum, the present time, per∣adventure there may be comfort, because we strive to attaine: but howsoever it is, ero, the future time, must needs be a fearfull thing, for a man to consider in what case he shall be hereafter, and what his latter end shall be, whether God will forsake him, as he hath done ma∣ny that have beene in as good, and peradventure in better case then he is: and therefore non erunt is a sharpe commandement. We place it last; and this is the naturall order, for it to come in here: both because the Heathen have seene it, that say, that . and the end or last part of fortitude is perseverance: and because that all vertues are preserved by this, (or to allude to the phrase of the holy Ghost) poudred with it; as 2 Cor. 13.5. Abijam King of Iuda to Ieroboam of Israel, Ought you not to know that the God of Israel hath given the Kingdome over Israel, to David forever; that is, to him, and to his sonnes, by a covenant of salt, by serving him in a covenant of salt: and the truth of that is, [that every vertue should not be as summer fruit, but as a vertue con∣served and poudred.] There was no Sacrifice without Salt in the Type of the Law. Now the reason is in regard of the end that God looketh at in all our actions, by our persevrance is made knowne the truth of our per∣formances, otherwise the Hypocrite might goe for a true Pro∣fessour.2. It pleaseth God to make a propotrion in every vertue, to some quality in God. But another and peculiar to this; For there is in every vertue a con∣forming of our selves to some attribute in God; as in our know∣ledge,
to his wisdome: in our beliefe, to his truth: in our seare, to his justice: in love, to his mercy: in integrity, to his ubiquity: and in our perseverance, to his eternity: because he (Revel. 1.8.) is α and ω the be∣ginning and ending; which is the booke of perseverance: so we accor∣ding to our Quamdiu, begnadi, till I die, usque ad mortem, and as he saith to the Angel of Smyrna, Revel. 2.10. not onely to naturall death, but also to violent death: Heb. 12.4. there is another usque: and that usque includeth bloud: usque ad sanguinem. So doth the Apostle re∣solve it, Acts 21.13. I am ready not onely to be bound, but also to die at Ierusalem: this is our ω, and howsoever, or wheresoever our α is placed, this must be our ω: this must be our eternity, even till I die. Otherwise, as Bernard saith, Quid levitati, & aeternitati? there is no fellowship of God and man, without perseverance. So on the other side against our nature; as we had in regard of the last affection, a desire to seeme, rather then to be: because it is easier: and we love ease: so here we have an affection, that is, of a back-starting Bow, Psal. 78.5.8. as he describeth the nature of the Israelites,We have often a desire to start back, so that it commeth to be a paine to goe forward. and of all, to be like a Bow: that is bent almost: and let it goe never so little, and it starts back againe: or as Gal. 6.9. no lesse excellent, by , i. to feele a grudging in our bones all the while we are a doing good. Now the subduing of this naturall desire, and the conforming of it to Gods eternity, that is a thing that specially pertaineth to his glory. But this boun∣tifulnesse is but on this condi∣tion, si perman∣seris.The necessity of perseverance is plaine: Esa. 7.9. the like, Rom. 11.22. this is our first covenant, Nisi credideritis, non stabiliemini: here is the last, Tbi bonitatem Dei, si in ea permanseris, alioquin excidêris & iu: it standeth on the forfeiture of all. In the reason and lawes of man, it is set downe (for all bargaines) that nihil praesupponitur esse actum, do∣nec aliquid manet esse agendum: as in a building, it is not said to bee done, till the last stone be laid: so we shall be condemned even accor∣ding to our owne reason; for even by our owne reason perseverance is very necessary. Mandat. The heavinesse of the eye, and the heavinesse of the soule, is that that hin∣dereth us in our duties.That which is commanded here is perseverance, set downe Matth. 24.13. and in many other places; but metaphorically it is called watch∣ing, Matth. 24.42. and so the contrary is called in the Parable of the Virgins, Matth. 25.5. sleeping: , they all slum∣bered and slept: Matth. 26.43. it is not in Parable, but the very action of the Apostles, and the saying of Christ to Peter, Could ye not watch with me one houre? &c. It is is distinguished from patience: the object of patience is tristi∣tia crucis, the heavinesse of the Crosse: the object of this is taedium diu∣turnitatis. Perseverance is in regard of a longtime: and a certaine te∣diousnesse withall; which, he that overcommeth, hath it: it is to doe well of great continuance: i. as the Apostle saith, Heb. 3.13. While it is called to day: this hodie, to day, saith Ierome, it is quotidie, every day; when we have done with, to day, it is not blotted out, but when to morrow commeth, it is there still: and that is so long as we live: usque ad mortem. That which is forbidden. The first fault is of them that are cal∣led , wilfull continuers: as they that have taken an evill
course, as Esa. 5.11. there be some, that can rise early to the wine, and continue at it till night; even till the wine enflame them: and Prov. 23.29. there is a greater continuance set downe: till they get them red faces, and red eyes: It is the use of all evill persons, [to labour then most, when other labour least.] Mat. 26. When the rest of the Apostles fell asleep, it is said of Iudas, Iudas autem festinavit, Iudas was busie how to betray him: & Aug. upon that place saith, Petre dormis tu, & non dormit Iudas, sed festina? the night brake not his naughty continuance. We see it also in the drunkard, and in the glutton; that will not give out while their skinnes will hold: the avaritious, till he burst, he will sucke with the horse-leach: and the adulterer, while his loynes last: and the conten∣tious man, so long as his purse will last. In so much that Ierome saith, Infelx populus Dei, qui tantam perseverantiam non habet in bono, quantam improbi in malo! O unhappy people of God, which doe not so persevere in goodnesse, as the wicked doe in evill! The other extreme is more riese, and more usuall now adayes, i. to be like to the Romines, Rom. 1.8. What a glorious sort of profes∣sors speaketh he of there? I thanke my God, through Jesus Christ for you all, that your faith is spread abroad over the whole world: yet 2 Tim. 4.16. there, when he was at Rome, at his first appearing before Nero, he complaineth, that all forsooke him: This is the manner of those that want perseverance: for a while they are hot, and zealous, afterwards they leave Paul quite:The state of sundry Christi∣ans is like this Image. i. they have the just resemblance of the image that Nebuchadnezzar saw, Dan. 2.32. his head was of Gold, his feete of Clay: they beginne in gold, but end in dirt. Sure it is, there is none so evill in the whole world, but a beginning he hath in good: Iohn. 1.9. the light must lighten every one that commeth into the world: so that there is not the worst man, but sometimes he seemeth good: and then he falleth into his former excesse of riot again. These revolters are of two sorts: 1. either they will be as Demas,They beginne well, but give over. (Phil. v. 24.) of whom there was great account made in the Church, and was alwayes joyned with Luke: but 2 Tim. 4.10. Demas hath forsaken me, and hath embraced this present world: and either they doe fall together away at once, and without any signe of returne: or else in the 2. place, they are such as may well be compared to Pha∣raoh, from Exod. 6. to the 11. we read of many beginnings and inter∣ruptions that he had; come a showre of raine or haile, &c. come a new plague; then he cryeth, The Lord is righteous, and I and my people are sinners: then, pray for me, that this plague may be taken from the land, and I will let you goe: so there are some that have a great many beginnings, that have every day a beginning and never go forward: it is very fitly called a religion of brunts, or that commeth by fits; but hath no continuance: It may be thought not so fitly like∣ned to the Beast, Revel. 12.3. that had seven heads, seven beginnings, first, many beginnings. The second sort are they that out of malice set themselves to oppose the truth which they formerly profest, with a resolution never to returne againe; which is high Apostasie. The meanes in regard of the neere conjunction of patience with per∣severance.
1. The first in patience [for every man] to regard, and to cast, how long his time would be: so here in perseverance, knowing that he shall have many rubbes in his way, and the time will be happily long, so that the Lord will not in the first watch, nor in the second: yet that he prepare himselfe, not to be found asleepe, whensoever the Lord shall come: but consider what God saith to Joshuah, cap. 1. v. 6, 7, & 9. he was to undertake the possessing of the land: and such a thing do we undertake, Eph. 6. and in sundry other pla∣ces, an encamping against Captaines, the flesh, the world, and the Devill: and rather then we should want, God himselfe would wrastle with us: Be strong and of a good courage, &c. onely be thoustrong, &c. Have not I commanded thee? &c. This purpose, and acquainting of our selves with the difficulty of the matter, and so arming our selves against our stout enemies, is a speciall meanes to hold out in times, and things either difficult or dangerous: for this here thrice repea∣ted, sheweth, that there is great need of this affection in us. 2. Another meanes, if we consider our owne judgement in the case that is not our owne: touching those things which continue not: if we compare Christianity to a tree, what account is made of that fruit, that is bitten in the blossome, or that is wind-shaken? that is rotten, or worme-eaten, or that cannot come to the gathering? If we consider the hatred of the husbandman, Hosea 6.4. against the morning cloud, he knoweth it is a deceitfull cloud, and that it is not like to raine all that morning, Amos 8. of the summer fruit; that even it rotteth in the hand of him that beareth it: or as Luk. 8.13. of the seede that falleth on a stone wall, that groweth, but yet there returneth no profit of it: neither the mower, neither the reaper filleth his hand, or bosome of it: or thus; In our possessions, in our vessels we occupie: how glorious a shew soever there be in glasse, yet we better esteeme of peuter, and wood, then of it: or in our pos∣sessions, more of a poore croft, or a seely close, than of a faire house; rents: and all in regard of continuance. Seeing then it is our pra∣ctise, we must needs by that condemne our selves. It is the desire of all, not to beat the wind, not to runne in vaine: this vanity may be in two respects. 1. In the behalfe of the party of Christ: untolerable to make him, so royall a person,Pretium non vile laberis. to come downe from heaven, to be borne, to live amongst us, and to dye in so unworthy an order, being of great excellencie,Laber irrius supra emmen laborem. The want of perseverance makes a mans action ipso facto vaine. and that in vaine; and all because we continue not: whereas he went through all, and would not suffer the cup to passe away, but dranke it up cleane; this is the price of all his labours, mans continuance: otherwise it is more griefe to him, then it was for him to suffer; and that vaine suffering is more to him, then all the torments he suffered, that wrought so upon him, that hee cryed, Eli, Eli, &c. That is a thing may happily move us to perseve∣rance. 2. And for our selves, our case standeth thus, as 2 Pet. 2.22. our washing is but a vaine washing: for there is after a casting up, and we returne to our wallow and vomit: and what are we better for our
washing? Num. 6.12. of the ceremony, the Nazarite that vowed more particularly to Gods service, and lived a strater life, than all other, if he had at the last day of accomplishing his rite, but tou∣ched a dead body, he must have begunne all those daies anew: for all that was done afore, was counted as nothing. The same in fi∣gure, that Ezekiel in truth setteth downe, Ezek. 18.24. Looke in what houre he giveth over, his righteousnesse, it shall be as if hee had not done a righteous deed. Therefore if we will not lose the fruit of our former labours, we must looke to our perseverance:He shall not onely not b better for it, but be worse, other∣wise a worse thing shall follow: not onely Christ and we shall lose our paines, but that man that hath swept his house, and garnish∣ed it, keeping it empty, there shall come the same spirit, and not that alone, but seven more; and how? the end of that man shall be worse then the beginning. i. we shall make our state much worse, without hope of recovery. Intuitu praei.4. Last, to prevale with them that are the children of grace; that the reward which he purposeth to bestow on us, shall not be a reward of dayes and yeares, but it shall be an endlesse reward for ever,Seeing it hath pleased God, not to reward us as hirelings, but have the inheritance of sonnes, it is no reason that we should labour as hirelings. It is somewhat hard to find the signes of it, be∣cause it is a signe it selfe. and ever; and sure it is, (as the Philosopher saith) that our labour should be proportionable to the price of our labour; we should not serve as hirelings, for a yeare or tearme, but quamdiu, that our obe∣dience endure quamdiu nos, as the reward quamdiu ille: wee are to serve him in our eternity, seeing he rewards us with his. The signes; the principall signe is perseverance: the Gentiles could see this, that this is a signe it selfe à posteriori, that deceiveth not: so could the heathen say, Ante obitum nemo, supremaque sunera foelix Esse potest: but after that was past, they could pronounce what was in him. It is an especiall signe, for as much as in Joh. 10. it is Christs note: and indeed it is the note that doth infallibly separate the true profes∣sour, and the hypocrite. If you take this gratiam gratis datam,Praecipuum per∣severantiae sig∣num perse∣rantia. grace as a free gift; as sharpnesse of wit, &c. you shall have it in as great mea∣sure in the hypocrite, as in the true professor: if a glorious profession, they commonly goe beyond in that: if diligence, it falleth out alike, some∣times more. But when the wolfe commeth, Joh. 10.12. there is a distinction; for then continueth the true shepheard, and will lay downe his life for their safety: and the hireling betaketh him to his flight. In hearing we may make the like difference of seed: so whether a man be begotten with mortall seed, that is, whether in hearing of a Ser∣mon, (which because it is made of good words, peradventure he shall be moved for a while:) or of the immortall seed, when as not any thing in man moveth him, but the power of the word, the pure and immortall seed, that will continue: notwithstanding a man may have use of these two notes, to be able to judg of the like. So whether we be humbled before God, or before his judgements; if that, it will con∣tinue: if this, it will continue but for a while. But we may have two notes to judge of this: 1. If we have that, Phil. 3.12. which the Apostle so earnestly urgeth; . 13.  14. .
As if that he should say, I do not looke backe, but I still looke forward, and consider not how long I have continued, i. I flatter not my selfe in respect of my life past: non dicere, sufficit: si dixisli sufficit, defecisti: not to say, I have done enough, if we say, we have done enough, it is a signe we are yet farre short. So, whensoever we are moved to looke back, we must not hearken to them that would tell us, how farre we have gone, but follow on still toward the hope of the re∣ward, and presse to the marke. Whereunto Gregory on Gen. 28.12. his allusion of the life of a Christian man to Jacobs ladder: For there Jacob saw the Angels ascending and descending, but none standing still. Quando desinis esse melior, incipis esse deterior. When we cease to be better, we begin to be worse: for there is in us a nature like to the bow; as in the bow, if you bend it not forward, it will backe of it owne accord: and therefore it must be still thrust forward, untill the string be in the very nocke. 2. A 2. and a better is a marke, Revel. 2.19. of the Church of Thyatira, there the Angell witnesseth that her last fruits were more then her first;Psal. 84.7. We must grow from strength to strength. Ps. 84.7. they shall bring forth more fruit in their age. i. the true worshippers. Blessed are they that dwell in thine house, they will be alway prasing thee: Phil. 1.9. , that your love may abound yet more and more: Psal. 92.14. they shall also bring forth more fruit in their age, they shall be fat, and well liking. 3. For a 3. that may serve of the woulfe: if we persevere then, when the woulfe commeth. 2 King. 2.11. Elias was not afraid of the fiery charet. If we feare not the fiery charet, or the fiery horses, it is the last, if this make us not afraid, then shall we have that spo∣ken by God, of us (Job 2.) which God saith to the Devill of Job; What sayest thou now Satan? for yet he continueth in his uprightnesse, though thou movedst mee against him to destroy him without cause. 6. Rule. For procuring it in other: We see, Heb. 12.12. how it stan∣deth us upon to strengthen our ke brethren, that we be as to our selves, so to others: Act. 11.23▪ nabas, and Silas, exhorted all, that with purpose of heart, they would continue in the Lord. Act. 13.43. Paul and Barnabas spake to them, and exhorted them to continue in the grace of God; Act. 14.22. confirming the Disciples hearts, and exhorting them to continue in the faith, &c. As contra, Ezek. 34.4. not to provoke our brethren, to leave to strengthen the weake, not to bind up the broken, nor to reduce the strayers, is set downe there as the marke of evill shepheards, and evill sheepe. Joh. 19.30. as the receiving of the vinegar was Christs Consumma∣tum est: so perseverance is the consummatum est of the Christians. Ezek. 9.4. so shall we have the sure marke , the last letter: the let∣ter of perfection, the letter of endurance, and continuance: which whosoever have, they shall not be slaine, and they shall enter into the holy City: And they that have it not, shall be slain without pity. So much for the first Commandement.
The II. Commandement. Thou shalt not make, &c. Praecepti.THE Commandements of the first Table are divided into such as concerne the wor∣ship of God; either inward, as the first Commandement; or outward, as the second, third, and fourth. The outward, is either continuall, or for a time, on a set day: or, either private and publike, or publike one∣ly. That for one day, and publike onely, as the fourth Commandement: The other continuall and private, teacheth either the outward gesture, In honore, reverentia, in gestibus, as the second Commandement: Or in praise, which is exhibited in speech, as the third Commandement: Or else, concerning the manner of worship, in the second, or the end, as the third Commande∣ment. That part of outward worship which concerneth the manner of it, and behaviour, to behave our, selves in all parts of the body, and in externall signes, is distributed into the Precept it selfe; and the Sanction, which is brought in by way of a reason. v. 5. For I the Lord thy God, &c. And ye know in Princes Lawes and Sta∣tures, after they have set downe those things that they command, and that we should doe; then they set this downe, Qui secus faxit, punietur: He that doth not thus, shall be punished: And that is called Sanctio praecepti. i. the part of the precept that toucheth the corrective part, and sheweth how we shall be corrected, that will not be directed by the precept. The Precept is of two sorts; for first, either it prescribeth what manner of worship he requireth, in respect of himselfe: Thou shalt not make, &c. Or secondly, how we are to be affected to him in that manner so prescribed: Thou shalt not how downe, &c. That is as much to say, as God will have his honour in outward worship: but he will prescribe it himselfe: And secondly, he will require at our hands, that unto that manner of him prescribed, wee should every way behave our selves reverently. So first, he
will have modum à se praescriptum: And secondly, he will have re∣verentiam exhibitam to that modus. If we marke, as the other precepts stand, the other eight are very short: This and the fourth may for their length be called Sta∣tutes, containing a long summe of words; and you shall see it was not without cause. For an inward honour to be given to God, all Lawes tooke some order for it; as Solons, Deos castè adeunto: and then againe for the keeping of their oathes, they were exact, se∣vere, and strict. So the Heathen, they knew these two parts, but they knew not the other two. And for the second Table, they are altogether exact in it, the last excepted. But the outward manner of Gods worship, and the day of worship, were things blotted out in the time of Gentility; and were most grosly of all the rest, transgressed. Then it is, because these were in especiall feare to be violated; and ergo it is not for nothing, that he useth such order in them. For inward honour and keeping of the vow, we agree with Turks and Pagans: But this is it wherein we disagree, the outward manner of worship; and this makes the distinction betweene Christs Church, and Satans Synagogue. Let us come to the opening of the meaning of this Comman∣dement: Thou shalt not make, &c. And as all the rest, so this stand∣eth upon a Synecdoche, under one generall, comprehending all the rest. The generall thing forbidden here, is not the making of a si∣militude or graven Image; but a farther thing, set downe, Col. 2.23.  Invented worship, Will-worship, devised by man.Will-worship. For the energie or force of the Commandement, is in these words, non facies tibi; that is, wee must not invent any thing whatsoever: Non simulachrum, non imago damnatur, sed, non facies tibi. The invented, or will-worship hath two things in it to allure us unto it: they are both seene in the worshipping of Images. First, because it hath a shew of wisedome; that a man should invent such an excellent thing. When any man is thought to be wise, that he may bee taken to devise a worship for God. Secondly, it hath a shew of humility; that a man should not cast downe him∣selfe before God, but before his Image, and Angels, &c. as Paul setteth downe, Col. 2.23. But if we so run, it will make us lose our reward. The affirmative part, or generall thing commanded, is set downe, Heb. 8.5. cited out of Exod. 25.40. That seeing God hath pre∣scribed an order, we should doe after it. It is said, as Moses was warned, as Moses received an Oracle: See thou make all these things like the pattern of them that were shewed thee in the Mount, precisely in every thing; in the length, breadth and fashi∣on; swerve not one whit, but doe all things according to the pat∣terne received. i. Because God, after the delivery of the mo∣rall Law, shewed him every thing precisely of the outward wor∣ship
in every particular point; he giveth him a charge at his de∣parture, ver. last, that he square it according to the order that he had prescribed. So the affirmative is, that our outward worship be as hee hath prescribed it. We must make his word our pat∣terne. The negative, that we mingle none of our will-worship with his precept or worship; as it isThese words may be taken of the inward worship also, but especially it concerneth the outward worship of God. Deut. 12.32. God speaketh very generally; that hee will have a man Hoc tantum facere, quod tibi praecepero; hoc autem faciemus, si nihil addamus aut detrahamus. If we doe either, or both of them, it will follow, which is Mat. 15.19. Frustra colet is me; Worship him we may, but we shall lose our labour: Quis ista requisivit à manibus vestris? The reasons whereupon any thing is here denyed or comman∣ded: 1. Seeing there is an honour to be given to God, and he will be worshipped; the question is, Whether it should be given as wee, or as he thinketh good? And for this, Socrates in Plat. 7. Lib. de legibus, can tell us, that every god will be worshipped, , in that manner that best liketh him. Chrysostome also Homil. 51. on Matth. Qui honoratur, eo maximè honore delecta∣tur, quem ipse vult, non quem nos volumus; else, non est honor, sed de∣decus, si vel contra, velpraeter mandatum aliquid fiat. When it com∣meth to mans worship, we make no question of it, whether he be to be worshipped and honoured in that manner that best pleaseth him: but in honouring Great men, we endeavour to fit their hu∣mours: So then much more is it hard, not to allow God so much wisedome, as to appoint himselfe his owne honour, seeing we per∣forme it to man. This then may be the conclusion, that Jerome sets downe, that honos praeter mandatum est dedecus; that honour that we give contra∣ry to the commandement of the honoured, or that he doth not care for, it is a dishonour to the party, and no honour. This for the ge∣nerall; now for the particulars. This being set downe, our first question concerning that that God hath made choice of; is, Whether God will have us worship him with Images or not. In which there is a very meere transla∣tio scopi, as the Logicians terme it, betweene us and the Papists, or Church of Rome. For whereas God hath delivered his will in these two termes,  and  We see all the great stirre they make, is about  and , words that are not in the Com∣mandement. And ergo whosoever falleth into any stir with them about these words, must needs fall into a , a shadow-fight. This is then that I require, Whether when God nameth  sculptile, and after  a word very generall and large, and so generall, as neither in the Latine, nor Greeke, there can any word be found, that can answer to it, and containe it; it containing both exemplum and exemplar; and not that onely, but extracta notio, & inducta in materiam, whether it be in our braine, or brought into matter: and so many kinds of it, as it is very universall, whether he doe not rise from the Species to the Genus; It is true that Gregory
Martin saith, that there be thirteen Hebrew words here forbid∣den; and there may be added to them three more: and for avoid∣ing of tediousnesse are cast under one of them. For there is Sculp∣tile, any carved, or graven Image; and fusile, any thing that may be molten; and conflatile, a thing of the mingling of both these; and there is a picture, &c. In that Martin saith true and well, that Sculp∣tile was more common in those dayes, then the rest; and it was taken of Moses as most usuall, to comprehend all the rest. But when it pleased God to ascend to . i. as the Seventy interpret it, ; a likenes or semblance: albeit  doth not fully expresse it, and wholly: Let any man judge, whether in forbidding all kind of I∣mages, there be not a flat precept containing both Idola and Icones: These two have a plaine distinction; but so cannot  and  in regard of the use and abuse: so that we see what the ascension of the holy Ghost is here; that no kind of graven Images might be used. And to the other there is a speciall word joyned, all kind of Images; whether they be resemblances of true things, or false. So most impudently is that set downe in the censure of Collen, that God hath forbidden in no place of the Scriptures generally the use of Images. Now then after he had so ascended, to the gene∣rall, we see how to make all sure, what he doth. So because we should have no patterne to frame our selves to, he maketh an enu∣meration of heavenly and earthly things. The reason, first, to take from them the gods that then were worshipped. Secondly, that forbidding all manner Images, he might comprehend them under one generall word; so that it might not be lawfull to have any I∣mages, which the Nations about them had; neither any other at all. For he maketh sure worke, after this ascending; in taking a∣way al kinds of things, whose likenesse or Images they should have; as first, all that is in Heaven. Things in Heaven.First, for the deity; the Papists, as Hosius, and others of their late writers, begin utterly to disclaime us, and are weary to defend that an Image should be made to represent the Deity. Esa. 40. is wonderfull vehement that way. Secondly, Angels; a speciall cause why he should forbid them, because these , these petty gods, and these intelligences, there was none of the Philosophers, but he knew them, and wor∣shipped them. Thirdly, for our selves, and for the soule of man, no lesse ne∣cessary; because we know they were received up into Heaven, and an usuall thing it hath been, to deifie them. Fourthly, so for the Sunne and the Moone: Jer. 44.17. a wor∣ship given to the Queene of Heaven: The Sunne was so called, be∣cause in the Hebrew it is of the Feminine gender, and it was the god of the Persians. For the Starres, Acts 7.43. The Starres were their gods: And wheresoever there is mention of Moloch, there is nothing else meant by it, but the Starre of Saturne; and there is also mention made of the Star of the god Rempham. Fifthly, after those things that are in Heaven, then he commeth
downe to the earth: and there is forbidden the serving of any in earth, to men, as the Images of Baal Prizzim, Baal Peor, Baal Ze∣bus, Hercules, Antidotus Muscarum. Secondly, Women, as was that of Astarothe. Thirdly, of fowles, as Ibis in Aegypt; the Owle a∣mongst the wise Graecians. Fourthly, Serpents; as the Otter and Crocodiles, and Belus was one while worshipped in the shape of a Dragon. Fifthly, Wormes, as the Snailes among the Troglodytae. Sixthly, Plants, as Isis in Aegypt; and all other things whatsoever, even things made by art, as pieces of red cloth, as Strabo testifieth of them that were towards the East and West. Ezek. 8.14. 2 Kings 23.11. Jer. 44.17. Exod. 6.32. 1 Kings 12. Golden Calfe. Sixthly, All that is in the water, as Syrens, water-snakes, fishes, Neptune god of Philistims. Dagon his similitude was like a male watersnake. Aesculapius was worshipped under a watersnakes shape. There was occasion given him by the Gentiles of all those that are here forbidden; so that we are not onely forbidden our Simile, but also our Paterne. Now Deut. 4.12, 13, 14. Moses making as it were a Comment on this Commandement, saith; Remember this, that when God came into the Mount, ye saw no likenesse or simi∣litude, but onely heard a voice: and ergo a voice, say the Rabbines, because a voyce not being able to be painted, nor drawne into any shape, it was never like to deprive God any way of his honour. But the reasons they weigh thus much in the Chap: as if he should say, If it had beene the will of God that there should have beene any Image, he would have shewed you somewhat when he came into the Mount: but you saw nothing, but heard onely a voyce; take heed ergo that you correct not God, and make to your selves any Image. And as it is, Heb. 11.1. it is the nature of faith to be rerum invisibilium, not to see: Now to bring visible things into Religion and Faith, it is the next way to dishonour God, and the overthrow of Faith and Religion, Joh. 4.23. Christ himselfe tell∣eth the Woman, that the time was come, when all Ceremonies and invented places for worship should goe for nothing; and even the very Temple at Jerusalem God would not accept it: But this was it that should be accepted, that they should worship him in spirit and truth; whereunto nothing is more opposite than I∣mages, no truth being in them, but onely the shew of a truth and visible. Then they will aske, if all likenesses be condemned, why was then that of the Cherubims permitted? yea prescribed by God to be made; for that was a resemblance, Heb. 9.5. But yet it was no suchNum. 21.8. 2 King. 10. resemblance, as they define an Image to be, quod habet exemplar in rerum natura. For the Cherubims were made round like two young men or boyes, without armes, and in stead thereof with two wings. But for that matter it is plaine, that he made them, not to be worshipped; but if he would have had them worshipped, he would not have put them into the darkest place; but they were put into the Sanctum Sanctorum, where none ever came, but the high Priest, and he but once in the yeare. And they were made, as ap∣peareth, Exod. 25.22. to this end, that the high Priest might know
from whence God would give answer. But Tertullian in his Book De Idololatria, Tom. 2. pag. 447. answereth this fully. God saith not, that an Image may not be made: But, non facies tibi, that we make not any to our selves. But they say then; Why did Moses make an Image? and he hath that objection in the same place: Ait quidam, Cur ergo Moses ex aere fecit serpentem? His answer is there, Quod idem Deus & lege vetuit similitudinem fieri, & extraordinario praescripto aeneum serpentem fieri fecit. Tibi eundem deum observa: Le∣gem habes, eam observa; quod si post praeceptum factum, sine libidine fe∣ceris, & tu imitare Mosem. i. ne facias nisi & deus te jusserit: licuit deo legem ponere, licet ei quod vult; si idem deus diceret tibi, Facies, qui dixerat, Non facies, jure faceres. God by his generall law for∣bade that any Image should be made; then by an extraordinary cause, by an extraordinary priviledge of an extraordinary matter, caused an Image to be made: except you have particular comman∣dement from God, as Moses had, doe not you make any Image. Concerning this point we have shewed on Gods behalfe, what did move him to make this restraint: now it followeth that we shew that in regard of our selves, and our owne corruptions, it is ne∣cessary this restraint should be made. Tertullian in the same Book, De Idololatria, setteth it downe, that before the Flood, even during the dayes of Seth, the worship of God was corrupted with Ima∣ges: and that Enoch's restoring, was nothing else, but the resto∣ring of the true Religion unto her purenesse againe; and that he is ergo said in his dayes to have walked with God. This is it that Tertullian saith: For the likelyhood of it, since Adam, we have ex∣ample of it that it was true; for Jacob by being in the house of La∣ban, had learned to take Teraphim, gods of Images, to mingle them with God. The reason of this is in Gen. 6.3. God will trouble himselfe no more, nor set himselfe against man; and his reason is, because man is wholly evill, fleshly: i. though hee consist of two natures; one of flesh and bones, the other of the spirit; yet he suffereth the grossenesse of the flesh to overgrow the purenesse of the spirit, and to corrupt it, turning the spirituall nature into flesh: so that we wholly become flesh; and ergo love that with which the flesh is delighted, i. sense. Insomuch as the Apostles many times in their writings, and Paul giveth us warning to take heed of the flesh of the soule; . The meaning of this is, that we have an affection in us; and that affection is called , a desire to feele or see him. This was Saint Thomas his disease, that would not beleeve, except he did feele his wounds, and see him himselfe, &c. And it was the disease of Mary Magdalen, about the death of her brother: Master, if thou hadst been here, he had not dyed. And we see it was not hers alone, but of all the Apostles; they desired that Christ might stay to erect an earthly kingdome, and that they might be with him alwayes; insomuch that he was faine to tell them, that except he were taken from them, the Com∣forter could not come to them. Such a thing there is in Religion. In Exodus, Moses had been in the Mount but a few dayes, but there
is a generall cry of the Israelites, a little after they came out of Aegypt: Fac nobis Deos visibiles; make us gods that we may see, to goe before us. And this affection of mans nature to See, was the beginning of all Paganisme and Idolatry. So saith Lactant. Lib. 2. de Orig. Erroris. Verentur, they feare lest if they should not see what they worship, they should be thought to worship nothing at all. For Esa. 36.7. such was the conceit of Rabshakeh, touching Hezekiah and the people of Judah, that they had no god at all; be∣cause Hezekiah had taken away the Idols, &c. and there was no god to be seen. The very same thing in Serapion. They had a desire of visible gods; Where are your gods? You have no visible gods, but onely bare Altars, as you had in the beginning. This desire of sense, was the cause of all evill in the primitive Church. Now then this was a speciall cause. Secondly, the other dependeth on the first Commandement: For as in the first Commandement they had excesse, worshipping what they should not; so here in this Commandement they would not keepe a meane; they thought they could never have Monitors enow, to stirre them up to worship. So they would not holde themselves to that meane, that God himselfe had ordained, (viz.) First, verbum Scriptum, the Scriptures: Secondly, Praedicatum, the Preaching of the Word: Thirdly, the visible Word, i. the Sa∣craments: Fourthly, the great Booke of the creatures; of whom David saith, Psal. 19.1. Their sound is gone out into all Lands, and their words unto the ends of the World. These foure be Ca∣nori monitores: Yet they would not content themselves with them, thinking that there could be no Nimium in Religione & cultu divino: and consequently, no superstition. Thus they gave the honour due to God unto creatures, which were not Divinae, but Humanae, Rom. 1.23. This is certaine, that seeing God had such care of his peo∣ple, he would never have forbidden Images, if they had been good for them to move them to the duties of worship; it had been in∣jury to them if they had been so good teachers: no grosser peo∣ple then they. Let us ergo weigh this superstition, against the Euchites, and a∣gainst the private Masse, which came in by too much communica∣ting, and then they were weary of that, and came to have it privately in their houses. The writer of the Booke of Wisedome (which hath as great authority as any of the Heathen) Cap. 14. setteth downe the reasons how Idolatry grew before the comming of Christ; one of them was , a desire and love of sense; in∣somuch as there was nothing excellent in sight, but it was corrup∣ted. Rabbi Salomon of Labans Teraphim saith, that they signifie nothing else but an Astrolobe, or Mathematicall instruments of the Astronomers, having the proportion of men, as Dials, &c. And a Teraphim in the beginning signified nothing but an instru∣ment used in Astronomy. And the Syriake translation of it, is a Mathematicall instrument. Thus they were brought to turne them to Images. So the Symbola amongst the Aegyptians are armes and
Emblemes, to distinguish countries; as Isis, a clod with grasse: shewing that part of the country to be fertile, and Ibis a dogge, shewing the wooddy country, and Images upon the tombes of the dead, as the Statuae dedicated to Belus, and Minos. And the cause of it was, because they too much addicted themselves to the senses, as it is said in Wisedome. Though there came an occasion that did helpe them forward, in this (viz.) to please their Princes, Belus for his vertues, and Minos then living: and then they came to be tyrannicall; worshipping them at first of favour, as Belus and Mi∣nos; they were afterward by edicts of Princes constrained to wor∣ship them for necessity. And this was before Christ; about which we agree with them. Now since the time of Christ, they begin to straine, a speciall thing in the controversie wherewith they thinke to dash us, which is this, Shew us (say they) when Images came up first: And there is nothing more easie then to shew the beginning of Images. For Ireneus who lived not long after the Apostles times, the first two hundred yeares after Christ, Lib. 1. Cap. 24.27. and Epiphanius, 3.24. De haeresibus. Haeresi 27. rehearsed a kind of Hereticks called Gnosticks, one of whose errors is, that they had Images of Christ, Paul and Peter, &c. Which they said they received of Pilate; and Ireneus saith that they had the Crosse, which they faigned to have power against Devils, and many operations; and that the first founder of these, was Carpocras commonly called Carpocrates, and Ireneus Lib. 1. Cap. 1. against Valentine: That the Valentinians were the first men that found out any divine vertues in the Crosse; they attributed two vertues to it: 1. . 2. . Thirdly, Epiphanius, lib. 3. Haeres. 79. sheweth that the Colly∣ridians, Valentinians and others, had Images of the Virgin Mary; and he there speaketh against them that used to offer to her such outward gestures as were due to God; and there hee speaketh a∣gainst it very vehemently, even as a man may doe: And if they are able to shew more ancient Hereticks than these, their Religion shall be true, and ours false. Thus were they at first. There were foure occasions of the invention of them; two came up in persecution, the other two, when the Church was in peace. Aug. Lib. contra Adimantum. Cap. 3. sheweth that both the forena∣med Hereticks, and also the Manichees, had Images for a policy; Aequires sunt simulachris ut misereantur; They shew, saith he, them∣selves better friends to Images, then we; that they might make the Heathen idolaters, in their persecutions, more friends to them, then they are to us: So that it is a policy of them, to gaine the more friendship of the persecutors, and not be so cruelly handled, as were the true Christians. 2. After this, that which is forbidden, Levit. 19.28. (that which is an especiall thing for the bringing in of Images.) It is forbid∣den also in the new Testament; many men for the great love they bare to their dead friends, to expresse their love and griefe, and for remembrance, would with hot Irons set markes in their face and
other parts, that it might continue as long as they lived; which is forbidden by the Apostle, 1 Thes. 4.13. Yea, some of them would set up Images to remember them. Chrysostome saith, that Milesius a Bishop of Constantinople, very learned and godly, dying, was so beloved of the Citizens and Clergy, as that when he was dead, e∣very man would get his picture in remembrance of him, into their Parlors and Rings. And so he first came into their Rings, after in∣to their Parlors; but afterward, as appeareth by the Epistle of Epiphanius ad Proepiscopos suos, his Image was removed at last ad prae∣toria, to the common places of judgement, and the Images of such men; and from thence, as appeareth by the fifth Canon of Car∣thage, into the high wayes, as Crosses in memory of such a one that dyed; and from thence to the Church-yards, then to the Chuch-walls, then to the Church-porch, and doore, and so at last into the Church, and to the Altar. Here was magnum ex parvis, sed ex pravis principiis. And the like is to be feared of us; for we have them in our Parlors already. So we see the beginning and causes of Images in persecution; first, a desire to please: secondly, an in∣ordinate mourning. Now in the peace of the Church, there fell out two other causes: First, because they would have their Church as rich as themselves. For in the 2. Nicene Councell, Sect. 4. is an Epistle of a Noble man of Syria, that had built a Church for the Christians, to one Nilus; he had made the Wals white, but not contented therewith, thought thereupon to have all the creatures of God painted; whre∣in he desired his advice. Who answered, that his advice was, there should be no such thing; but that he would be contented with the simplenesse of the Christian Churches; but if hee would needes paint, he should write nothing but the story of the Bible, and sen∣tences of the Scripture; For it is seemlyer then beasts, &c. So that one cause was, by reason of their wealth, they desired things pleasant to the eye. Secondly, another cause, in the same place, was that of Paulinus, a Bishop of Nola in Campania: that having occasion of a Journey into Syria, and so into Aegypt, and having none to preach to his people in his absence; because he would his people to have some teacher in his absence, thought good to paint on the wals the whole story of the Bible; (and did so) that they might preach to them; and so their Preachers and Schoole-masters, were nothing else but painted wals. But this is not any way to be commended in him, and the effect was accordingly: For it so came to passe, that they grew to be ignorant, and had no other teacher but the very wals? And as Syrenus saith, because their Pastors began to wax dumbe Images, therefore their Images were their Pastors. But it is certaine by the writings, that to the dayes of Hierome there was none such. So is the reason of the second Commandement. A briefe re∣capitulation of what was said before.The second Commandement was divided into, first the charge, secondly the penalty; the charge of two sorts, concerning the man∣ner of Gods externall worship. First, Non facies, &c. Thou shalt not
make. Second, Non adorabis, &c. Thou shalt not worship. In the first is restrayned, 1. Exemplum, in these words, Sculptile & Imago; 2. Ex∣emplar, or the patterne, In things above, or in earth, or in the water, &c. The Exemplum, of two sorts; either particular, and then most usu∣all, Sculptile: Yet so, that whatsoever else there is of the same kind, whether fusile, or ductile, or conflatile, there are words in the Law for every one of them, and therefore God was so manifold in set∣ting downe all the words. Or for taking away all quarrelling, he hath set downe the common name, Temunah, and Col temunah, all likenesse; which condemneth the metaphysicall notions abstracted from all matter: and in the matter, all kind of likenesse, whether Idols or Images, true or phantasticall; and all are comprehended in Temunah; let Arias and Pagnine be their Judges. For further exposition of this, there was added out of Deut. 4.2. and John 4.23. the glosse of Moses, and Christ; concerning the generall re∣straint of this, there were seven reasons remembred. Now for the Exemplar; we shewed it was necessary, because there was nothing almost, but the braine of Man had abused it; which was declared by five things in Heaven, sixe in the Earth, and three in the waters. Then we came to the particular question of Images; handling these three points: First, what might be alleadged out of the Scriptures for them. Secondly, what reason there was for them. Thirdly, how, at what time, by whom, and by what meanes they came into the Church. For the first, in their Rhemish Testament, but one place found in all the New Testament, Heb. 9.5. Vetus arca habebat Cherubim: and that is taken out of the Old, Exod. 25.18. and so confesse none to be in the New. And in the Old, that of the Cherubims, and of the Serpent, is all they can shew for them; Unto which both, our answer is, ut ante, chiefly that of Tertullian. There were priviledges for them; if they can shew the like priviledge, for the Crucifixe, or any other Image in the New Testament, it is somewhat for them; Generi per speciē non derogatur: they have no expresse commandement for any Image. Againe, the ends of both are otherwise; the Cherubim was not to represent God, but to be a place out of the Church, from whence God would give his answers, Exod. 25.22. And the Brasen serpent being a point in Physick, not in Divinity; the end of it was health to the sting with serpents: therefore they make nothing for the worshipping of Images. But 2 Kings 18.4. when the Brasen ser∣pent began pati abusum, to be abused, we see how he used it; Which sheweth plainly how little affinity it had with this Commandement. So the Cherubs should have been served, if they had been abused by the people. But God had taken order for them; for none could come to them, but the high Priests, and that but once in the yeare. Secondly, for the reasons: 1. , not onely in the Israe∣lites, but also in the Apostles; and in Moses, Exod. 33.18. he de∣sired to see God, and he had nothing shewed, but his back-parts.
This being condemned, 1 Cor. 3.3. and being not onely in regard of the people of God, that this made them draw every thing to Idolatry, but even in the heathen: Aug. lib. 4. de Civit. Dei. cap. 21. saith that Varro spyed it, that it brought great inconveniences to Religion: his reason, quia facile contemaere divos in stoliditate simulachrorum. It was also shewed 2. nimium, is a broad way to su∣perstition; and it is a vaine assertion of theirs, that there can be no nimium in Religion. And Aug. in Psal. 101. scorneth it, and saith, that if we doe so, we may soone bring a rock into the Church, because it did represent Christ too. So for the time when, and the Authors by whom Images began: we have shewed out of Ireneus. 1. that the Crosse came first from the Valentinians, the Images of Christ and his Saints from the Gnosticks, 1. Iren. 24. in Epiphan. 27. heres. & Lib. 3. the Image of the Virgin Mary from the Col∣lyridians. August. in his 13. Booke contr. Adimant. giveth foure reasons. First, the policy of Hereticks, to claw the Heathen per∣secutors, being themselves inclined to them. Secondly, too much mourning for the dead, noted, 1 Thes. 4.14. Thirdly, the wealth of the Church. Fourthly, idlenesse of the Ministers; these were the causes of Images. Now for the full handling of this question of Images, we will see what can be further showed for them out of the Fathers and Councells. Their Fathers are either true, or counterfeit. Truely al∣ledged for them, they have none, but onely Basil and Eusebius. And Basils sentence deceiveth Aquinas, and the Schoole-men. For where he saith, that the honour due to the abstract, redoundeth and is due to the patterne; he goeth about to prove, that Christ is e∣quall with God, as he is the Image of God; and he speaketh there of this conclusion: that Christ is to be worshipped with the same worship, that is due to God the Father; out of Heb. 1.3. where Christ is called Character substantiae patris. If the Papists can shew us any such Image of Christ, as Christ was of the Father; we will ac∣cept of it, and worship it. 2. Euseb. Lib. 10. Cap. 4. in his Panegyr. to Paulinus; that he is with us: and in his Epistle to Constantia the Empresse; set downe in the second Councell of Ephes. the report he maketh there, is only of an Image of Christ that was set up by some of the Gentiles, for the miracle he wrought on the Woman of Syrophenissa. Which maketh nothing for the Papists. For it is absurd to say, The Hea∣then did it, therefore the Christians should doe so. Their counterfeit Fathers, are Athanasius, Damasus, Chrysostome. Athanas. in a certaine absurd Booke, not his, but going under his name, concerning a Crucifixe, that wrought miracles. It is easie to be seen, whether it is his, or no. If there be any man that shall read it, he will say at the reading of one of the first periods, that it is farre from Athanasius; nay, that it is farre from a man of com∣mon sense. Such another is of Damasus, in his Pontificall, in the life of Sylvester. There is no more to be done in this case, but that which is said, Noveris, oderis. To know them is sufficient to make
us hate them, and never like them againe. Read the Treatises them∣selves. So may we say of Chrysostomes Liturgy, as Juell noteth in it, that there an Emperour is prayed for by name, that lived sixe hundred yeares after Chrysostome was dead; for they prayed for Alexis, whereas Chrysostome lived in Arcadius his time. Councells there are none for them, but Concil. Nicen. 2. in which were more unlearned and evill disposed men, then in any that ever was. For the gatherer of this Councell together, was Jrene the Empresse; she an Heathen borne, daughter of an Emperour of Tartaria, nuzzeled up in Paganisme from her birth, till after matching with the Emperour Constantinus his Father, was con∣verted from her Paganisme to the Christian Religion; and so con∣sequently after his death, because her sonne was too young to take upon him the Empire, she tooke it, in his name, soone after her conversion. Constantine at the first, seemed not to stand against her; but after when he came to any small judgement, rather then hee would admit Images, lost both his eyes; for he was after put in∣to prison, and had his eyes pulled out: Whereby we may see that she was a woman without naturall affection; subject to that, Rom. 1.31. and 1 Tim. 3.3. The chiefe speakers in this Councell, were Tharrasius a Lay-man, Bishop but of one yeare, and Patriarch of Constantinople; all his life before, a Courtier: and John, Legate of the East Church; of whom we need no other witnesse, then him for whom he was Le∣gate, who testifieth, he was a good devout man, but of no great learning. The like may be said of Theodosius and Constantinus: These ruled the whole Councell; and it may be truly said, that in any one Councell, there were never such a sort of simple men, in respect of their gifts; and more evill disposed, in respect of their boldnesse and attempts, presuming above their gifts. There is not in all Durandus Scripture worse alleadged; there are not in the Legenda more fabulous Narrations, then in the second Nicene Councell. There are in it such errors, as they cannot defend. Action 2. there is a plaine conclusion, that the Angels are bodily substances. Action 6. that Christ was borne the five thousand and first yeare of the World; and in the third, fourth, sixth, and seventh, there is Ana∣thema against Honorius the Pope, for the Heresie of the Monothe∣lites: insomuch that they cry out, the Councell is corrupted in all those places. Lastly, the councell is ranker on their side, and saith more then they would. Action 1. and 4. Non sunt duae ado∣rationes, sed una & eadem adoratur, prototypus & idolum. And Action 2. there is a worse then this; Idem imaginibus honor debetur, qui & beatae Trinitati: That is, that the adorations of the Idoll and the prototype are not two, but one adoration; that the same ho∣nour belongs to an Image, and the Trinity. Now what they say on our side against Images. First, an heathen, Elius Lampridius, in vita Adriani, saith that he in a good affection was content to build the Christians according to the manner of their Temples, bare Temples without any Or∣naments:
Which were after denyed by the Senate of Rome; but it grew after into such contempt among the Heathen, that there∣of came a proverbe of them: If any of the Gentiles had built them a bare Temple, it was called Adriani templum. And for Fa∣thers.First, Ireneus 1.24. cha. abhorreth them in the Gnosticks and Euchits; they said they had the Images of Christ, and Paul, and Pe∣ter, and of Pilate; and that as he left them, of the drawing of the skilfullest men in Jury. This he disalloweth in them. Secondly, Clemens Alexandrinus, in his Paraenesis, goeth too far, Nobis vetitum est omnino fallacem hanc pingendi artem exercere; he is so farre from favouring Images, that he will have all painting and painters taken away; calling it the cheating art of painting: and he alleadgeth this Commandement. Thirdly, Tertullian, in Apologetico; Nos adoramus oculis in coelum sub∣latis, non ad imagines & picturas intentis. We adore with our eyes fixt on heaven, not bent upon Images and Pictures. Fourthly, Origen. Lib 4. contr. Celsum. Celsus nobis objicit, quod non habemus altaria & imagines; prositemur, inquit. Celsus upbraids us, That we want Altars, and Images; We professe, we doe so, quoth he. Fifthly, Arnobius, Lib. 2. contr. Gentes. Objicis nohis imagines; quid hae, nisi vilissima fabrorum opera? Thou objectest Images unto us; what are those, but the most base workes of Mechanicks? Sixthly, Lactantius, Lib. 2. de origine erroris, wholly: there is nothing alleadged, but you may find it there. Seventhly, Eusebius, Lib. 10. c. 4. Epist. ad Constantiam Augustam; set down in the second Ephesine councell. That she must now require no Image of Christ, not as he is man, because now his glory is much more, then when he was in the Mount; and yet then the Apostles were not able to behold him; much lesse can then his glory, as he is now, be expressed. And in the first Ephes. councell, Anathema sit, qui Christum ullo modo dividit. Let him be anathematized, who di∣vide Christ, one nature from the other; which an Image of him doth. And as Augustine saith, 34. de moribus Ecclesiae, Omnino errare meruerunt, qui Christum non in divinis codicibus, sed in pictis parieti∣bus quaeri voluerunt. They deserve to erre, who will seek Christ not in inspired bookes, but on painted walls. And againe, In stoliditate crucifixi, they easily bring Christ into contempt: In the Crucifixe they shew that Christ suffered no more then the Crucifixe sheweth; but he suffered in soule the paines of Hell, which no painter in the World is able to paint; neither doe they shew: and therefore they derogate from his passion, and the losse of that. Eighthly, Ambrose in his Booke de fuga seculi, chap. 5. Nostra, in∣quit, Ecclesia, non novit has, &c. Our Church knowes no such thing. Ninthly, Hierome, in Ezek. 4. & 16. Nos vero unam tantum ve∣neramur imaginem, Jesum nempe Christum, qui est imago Dei patris. We worship onely one Image, Christ, who is the expresse Image and character of his Father. Erasmus, in his preface to Hierome, saith,
That till Hierome was dead, there was no Image received. Epiphanius is one that they cannot abide, Haeres. 79. and in Epist. to John Bishop of Jerusalem; that comming into a Temple that had an Image of Christ, he rent downe the vaile, wherein the Pi∣cture was, and pulled it downe; and told them, it was against all Scripture and reason. Aug. 34. de moribus Ecclesiae catholicae; in that chap. he seemeth to say, that some among the Christians be∣gan then in corners to worship Images. Novi (saith hee to the Manichees) esse in Ecclesia nostra adoratores imaginum sepulchrorum: sed isti viri prosessionis haec nec sciunt, &c. So branding Image-wor∣shippers with ignorance, &c. So Lib. 1. cap. 10. De consensu Evang. against some that held Christ writ certaine Bookes of Magick, and that he wrote them in Aegypt; I thinke because Torrensis bringeth this to prove that Augustine allowed Images. But for Augustines mind, it is straight∣way added, Sic omnino errare meruerunt, qui Christum non in divinis codicibus, sed in picturis & parietibus quaeri voluerunt, as was now al∣leadged out of him. After when the five hundred yeares were ex∣pired, there was better hold for them, yet they had gaine-sayers; Cyrenus the Bishop upheld the matter, that he would not have them; so also in the yeare sixe hundred, and seven hundred, there were  Idoll Champions, and combatants both for, and against them; and about Ann. eight hundred, they were much used. But Claudius Bishop of Tarentum stood against them: saying, Amplexi sunt idololatriam permutatam, that the Christians embraced the same Idolatry, which the Gentiles did, but onely that it was changed somewhat (in name.) At the same time Constantius 4. Leo 3. Phi∣lippicus 2. set themselves against them; It had entrance then, but it never got sound sooting till the second Nicene Councell. We have foure Councels for us. First, The second Ephesine Councell, wholly. Secondly, The second Councell of Constantinople, wholly. Thirdly, Eleboris, where was Honorius the Bishop. Canon 36. Placuit, ut ne pingant in parietibus. It pleaseth us that there be no painting on walls, &c. Fourthly, for the taking of them downe out of the way, 5. Concil. Carthage: Can. 14. Whereat Aurelius and Augustine were pre∣sent. And so much for the controversie of Images. Now for our Rules. The third Rule, That not onely that that is set downe here, is forbidden, but all , whatsoever is like, to make to a mans selfe, is here forbidden, as our owne inventions. Hierom on Amos 5. God said well, quae fecerunt sibi; deus enim non fecit; They received them not of God, but themselves were forgers of them. So this is the rule of the Fathers, Idola ethnicorum exceperunt haereses Chri∣stianorum: meaning of the externall worship of the Hereticks. 2. That it be not against the spirituall worship; so that here is forbidden petitio cordis; a restraint of the first fancy, that riseth in the braine of man, concerning the substance of God, unreve∣rently
imagining a bodily shape of it, as Serapion a Monke; Reliq uo∣rum Praeceptorum concupiscentiae sistendae in corde, hujus vero secundi Precepti in cerebro. The breaches of the other Precepts have their first risings in the heart, but of this, in the braine. The fourth rule; Here is forbidden the meanes that bring in wil-worship; and they are foure, handled in the former exercise. The fifth rule; the signes. For if it be true that is Jude 23. that we must hate even the very garment that the flesh hath defiled, sure∣ly because the Idoll is an uncleane and abominable thing; no lesse abominable must the garment be unto us, that it hath spotted, and the pillars whereon they stand. Deut. 16.22. God commandeth that there be not so much as Macsevah, the pillar, or basis, or statue, to be raysed for them. Thou shalt set up no pillar, nothing that the Lord thy God hateth. And Deut. 7.25. he doth there protest that the very gold and silver, the matter whereof they are made, are abomination unto him: and therefore he commandeth them to burne it, lest they be ensnared therewith. Deut. 16.21. they must plant no groves, the place of their worship. He will have no such place neare his Atar, to have Temples among the heathen; and not that onely, but 1 King 15.14. even the very high places on which the groves were planted, in which the Temples were built. And he runneth along through the books of the Kings, with this, as a notable blemish against the Kings that would not dig down the high places, though they took away the Idols, &c. These things shew how God abhorred Idols. In the other part it is not expressed, if it come contrary to the act, if a conceit come to helpe the act, 2 Sam. 6.6. If there be a good meaning to save the best and fattest of the sheep, 1 Sam. 15.21. But the people took of the spoyle, sheep, &c. Because it is facis tibi, and because we are , selfe-taught to Idolatry, therefore the Lord abhorreth it. The sixth rule, we are commanded, as Gen. 31.19. not onely not to deale, nor to have them our selves, but even seeke to deprive, not steale them, (for the meanes is not so convenient and commen∣dable) but by all lawfull meanes to deprive Laban our Father of his Idols: Joshua 22.27. we see if it had been an Altar of sacrifice, as it proved to be an Altar of remembrance, there had been store of blood shed for it. Thus much for the negative, now of the affirma∣tive part of this Commandement. Affirm paThe affirmative is set downe, Heb. 8.5. All things must be done according to the patterne shewed in the Mount. Numbers 12.7. the commendation of Moses, that he was faithfull in every point, that is, he varyed not one whit from his patterne. And Heb. 3.2. Christ is said to be as faithfull as he: He might have beene an act above him, because hee was the Sonne, and the other but the servant; that is, hee was likewise faithfull in Gods house: his patterne must be precisely kept. It is commonly expressed by the phrase of the holy Ghost: Acts 3.22. by hearing of one Prophet, not adding nor detracting. A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up to you, like to me, &c. The acknowledging
of Christ to be our onely Prophet; and that he hath set downe whatsoever is necessary, and to which, as Deut. 12.32. we are nei∣ther to add, nor detract therefrom; nor to alter any thing. Deut. 2.11. nor of that that is commanded, to leave any thing undone, Deut. 5.32. Cultus Dei ex∣trnus parts ejus. 4.Of this affirmative part, the externall worship of God, we are to consider, 1. the substance of it, 2. the ceremony. The substance consisteth of foure parts, 1. Preaching. 2. Prayer. 3. Sacraments. 4. Discipline. First, Preaching the word. We see this hath been used alwayes; as 1 Pet. 3.19. he preached to the spirits that are in Prison:Preaching, a part of Gods outward wor∣ship; ever used in the Church Noah a Preacher before the Flood. Acts 15.21. in Moses time: Moses hath them that Preach him every Sabbath day. Deut. 33.10. the Priests office was to Teach, to burne incense, to offer Sacrifice. In the time of the Prophets, Esa. 61.1, 2. And the same continued in the time of the second Temple: Nehem. 8.4. there was a Pul∣pit of wood set up, and in it, Ezra preached. In Christs time, Luk. 4.16. Christ himselfe, annoynted to preach the acceptable yeare of the Lord: and as he himselfe preached; so Mark. 16.15. a com∣mission is there given forth to his Disciples, Goe, preach the Gos∣pell to every creature; and 1 Cor. 1.21. it is the foolish kinde of preaching that God hath made to overthrow the wisedome of the wise. Secondly, Invocation; as it is called vitulus labiorum, the calves of the lips, in Amos; is of two sorts: 1. Petition. Gen. 4. ver. last, in the time of Enoch, then began men to invocate the name of the Lord, Gen. 20.7. and Exod. 8.8. Abimelech and Pharaoh knew this; so Gen. 24.11. & 28.20. Abrahams servants, and Jacobs prayed. But when the Church began to be gathered, Numb. 10.35. the Army of Israel never moved nor stood still without Prayer; it never pitched, but it continued in Prayer. Rise up O Lord, &c. Re∣turne O Lord, &c. 1 Kings 8.22. At the building of the Temple, Salomons Prayer to blesse his Temple, that it would please God to grant a blessing. Psalm. 102. there is a generall Prayer. And Luke 11.12. an expresse forme of Prayer, taught by Christ to his Disciples. 2. Thanksgiving is the other part, commanded Deutero. 31.19. Practised privately, Gen. 24.27. after he had obtained his request: Publickly, of Moses, Exod. 15.1. a manifest forme of it. The ge∣nerall forme of it, Psalm. 95. And that Psalme, and many other, the holy Ghost beareth witnesse. 2 Chron. 7.6. the Kings used to sing them. After, Ezra. 3.10. in the time of the second Temple. Psa. 92. a Psalme of thanksgiving. In Christs time, Mat. 26.30. and when they had sung a song, &c. Ephes. 5.19. speaking to your selves in Psalmes and Hymnes, &c. Col. 3.16. Thirdly, Sacraments. The Word is the speech that God hath to us; Prayer is the speech that we have to God. This is the covenant be∣twixt God and us, Ge. 17.2. Circumcision, Exo. 12. the Passover, the Sacraments of the law, seals of things to come, Mat. 28.19. Baptisme Mat. 26.26.
the Supper of the Lord, the Sacraments of the Gospell, seales of benefits past. Fourthly, Discipline. Commanded Matth. 18.18. John 20.22. Executed extraordinarily, Acts 5.4. by Peter: Ordinarily, 1 Corinthians 5.3. by Paul. Rules for the full ordering of it, 1. Tim. 5. Secondly, the Ceremony. Of this we have foure Rules. First, that they be not many, and those necessary. Acts 15.28. there are onely foure set downe. Secondly, 1 Cor. 14.26. that they be to edification, Gal. 2.18. that the outward ceremony pull not downe that which the inward substance hath set up. And it is the reason, why Paul, 1 Cor. 14.14, &c. refuseth that prayer that is made in an unknowne tongue. Thirdly, that it be for order, 1 Cor. 14.32. 1 Cor. 11.33. with∣out confusion in the Church, 1 Cor. 14.4. , according to order, vers. 33. they broke order. Fourthly, , that it be for decencie: in which respect he commandeth them that they come into the Church with their heads uncovered, 1 Cor. 11.4. The fourth rule, The meanes: the rule for it; to keep the deposi∣tum, that which is committed to us, as Paul willeth, 1 Tim. 6.20. with∣out adding or detracting. It is strange that they of Rome alleadge it, that Religion is depositu, that is, a thing committed of trust: that we neither add thereto, nor detract from it; but we alleadge it, that we impaire it. And the meanes for that is, Josu. 1.8. that God was shouldred up, by not letting the Law be lost: Let not this booke of the Law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein day and night, that thou mayst observe to doe all therein. The volume was either gone, or else corrupt, as if it had never come forth; therefore that the Legend thrust it not out of the Church. They were wont to have the Legend read in the Church, and books of sentences, and o∣ther scholasticall sums of the Schoole-men read among them that gave themselves to Divinity, and none of the Scriptures. There was ambo in medio posita, and nothing else but volumen utriusque foederis laid upon it. 2 Cor. 2.17. As we must take heed that it goe not away; so that none come to it, that doe  of our cultus arbitrarius & praescriptus. 1 Tim. 6.13. the Apostle interpreteth himselfe; he chargeth him under a severe charge, that he keepe it ; that there be not a spot in it, like the Lepers skinne. 1 Cor. 5.6. a little leaven will sowre a whole lumpe; or as Nazianzen, a lit∣tle Wormewood will marre a whole Barrell of Honey. For the proceeding of this, the best way is, arcere coenaculis. 2 Kings 16.14. Uriah the Priest devised an Altar in all points like to that that King Ahab sent from Damascus; and being made, brought and set it hard by Gods owne, the brasen Altar; and after that, brought it in further, betwixt the Altar, and the house; and at length it got the North-side of the Altar, that is, the upper hand: and so it will be; therefore we must take heed of this. The fifth Rule, Signes. There is no better signe, then if wee
say, or prove nothing, but either as the Prophets did, Dictum Je∣hovae, or else as Christ proved the Resurrection, by a Syllogisme, Mat. 22.32. or as the Apostle, Quod accepistis; haud alterum quam accepistis: Quod accepi à Domino, &c. 1 Cor. 11. These three are good signes. The sixth rule, Be accessory to procure this, that others doe it, Exod. 34.12. Deut. 12.2, 3. We must stand so affected to it, as that we be ready to breake downe whatsoever is contrary to it. But this must be understood of those that be in authority; as Moses, Exod. 32.20. He tooke the Calfe and burned it in the fire, and grownd it, &c. It was Hezekiabs office to breake the Brasen ser∣pent. Secondly, the private mans office is, as Exod. 23.24. not to bow downe to them, and to doe as the three Children, Dan. 3.19. that is, Though they may not runne and pull them downe, yet they must not worship them. And so much for the first part, that is, the manner of Gods externall worship. The second part of the precept, is how we must be affected in this worship:2 Part. Thou shalt not bow down to them, &c. For whereas it may be said to the first part, thus; Where he saith, Non facies, I may an∣swer, Non facio: alius fecit, ego factum reperio; as we see, the Danites, Judg. 18. found in Michahs house an Idoll framed: and not that alone, but 1 King. 12. not a private man, but Jeroboam maketh a Calfe of gold. And Dan. 3. Nebuchadnezzar doth not onely erect an Idoll, but also commandeth it, on paine of death, to be worship∣ped. Enough for the answer of this objection, is that that followeth, Non adorabis ea, neque coles. Howsoever they were made as thou hast no part in making; so also in worshipping thou must not have any part. The first word is Teshtacaveh: and before used; and the second, Tagnabhodh: as * Pesel and Temunah. 1. To bow down: 2. To serve: that word signifieth that, that was then the usual manner of adoring. That it was the usual manner, it may appeare Gen. 18.21. as in Pe∣sel and Temunah. Now from this, unto a generall word, to Tagna∣bod, non servies, or non coles. For we know a man may Colere and Gnabod, unto that thing, unto which he may not bow downe him∣selfe. It is a diffused word; and therefore as you find, Psal. 97.7. Gnobed Pesel; so Gen. 14.4. you shall find Gnobed, of men, Genes. 3.23. Gen. 2.15. Gnobed adamah, Esay 19.9. Gnobed pishtim, a trimmer of Lyme. As in Latine, Colo, is not onely given to God, and man; but colore jus, vitam, glebam, hortum: And thereupon is Agricola called. So that the Papists are in an erronous opinion, that thinke the holy Ghost ascendeth from a word of lesse impor∣tance, to a word of greater importance: from the Species to the Genus. The like may be said of , and ; But if these two, non incurvabis te, non coles, will not serve; then we must take a third thing, which is, Exod. 23.24. doe nothing that any idola∣ter doth to his gods; doe nothing that pertaineth to the worship of them. For the making plaine of truth against error, and first against the error of the Romans.
We see the Commandement double, First, of making; Secondly, of serving and bowing downe to Images. The Romans therefore, which doe maintaine them, should not onely bring a general com∣mandement for making them; but also for the worshipping which they cannot doe, nor doe they goe about to doe: For though they bring for the making, that of the Cherubims; yet not for the worshipping: We must have a warrant for both. Now, for bowing downe, ye shall understand, that in their de∣fence, they are constrained to give us over. And as in the former▪ they went from Pesel and Temunah, and leaned to Idolum and Icon so here they leave the Hebrew Tishtacaveh and Tagnabod, and take them to the Greeke,  or , and  They pro∣fesse , but not , yet they breake the Commandement. Now for some shift, they say in the Rhemish Testament, on Mat. 4.10. because that  is not joyned with , but with , ther∣fore say they, wee may  to Saints, &c. But by looking to the verse precedent, we rejoyce that the Devill required no more of Christ but ; and therefore unlesse we make  pro∣per to God, Christs answer will not serve, nor be sufficient; and the Devill might have replyed, that he required not , but onely ; to which  was not joyned. Secondly, we come to . The distinction of  and , although it have beene long in the Schooles; yet in the Fathers it is not found: except in August. Lib. 10. de Civit. Dei. cap. 1. & 1. de Trinit. cap. 6. he sets it downe and holdeth it. But they doe falsly alleadge Eusebius. Lib. 14. cap. 4. and Hierome Epist. 52.53. cont. Vigilant. no such thing being to be found in them. For Augustine, we acknowledge him to have been a great and reverend man in the Church, and such a one as tooke paines. Yet this we may say of him without any irreverence,Augustine said of himselfe, he had no great know∣ledge in greek and Hebrew. that the best part of his learning lay not in the Tongues: And indeed he was very unskil∣full both in the Hebrew and Greek, which himselfe acknowledg∣eth in divers places; and therefore not a meet man to pronounce that by  is meant the service of men: and by  the service of God. But if we will distinguish these words wee may doe it truely thus:  is properly the service of our owne servant, and , the service of him that is hired; so  is our owne servant, and , an hireling: and so come in Latro, which, as Varro saith, at first signified nothing else, but an hired or stipendiary souldier, of , Merces: and after by the abuse of their calling, and by their evill behaviour, came into this odious name as it is now used. It is not the service of God, Heb. 8.5. but . The reason why for Lagnabod the Septuagints use  may be taken out of Tertullian in Lib. de Idolat. Because they would not have Gods people to bee hired for money to dresse, and a∣dorne the Images of the Heathen. It was the use of some Chri∣stians in the primitive Church so to doe, against whom Tertulli∣an inveyeth. And though the Papists thinke  to be for crea∣tures;
and  onely for God; yet it is certaine that they had  to the creatures; as you may see in Aquinas his summes, part. 3. q. 25. determined there, that the picture of Christ, and that every part of the Crosse is to be worshipped adoratione latriae. It is too manifest; but the Hebrew taketh away all these questions and controversies. Now the learneder sort among them, by a grea∣ter knowledge and use of the tongue, seeing that their distinction falleth to naught, have found out another shift; that they are no breakers of this Commandement, because non colunt imagines ip∣sas, sed Christum & Sanctos per eas; they worship not Images them∣selves, but Christ and the Saints by and through them. But how evill this succeedeth with them, it may appeare by the records of antiquity; for this indeed was (but 'its varnished over a little) the answer of the old Idolaters in the primitive Church. For the Heathen, Lactantius Lib. 2. de orig. erroris. cap. 2. saith, that when it was objected to the Heathen, Quid timetis, aut quid fugitis? What feare ye? What fly ye? they would answer, Non Idolum, sed Deum, sed numen aliquod, cui Idolum aedisicatur: Not the Idoll, but God, &c. and in that Chapter there followeth how Lactantius thinketh of it. 2. Chrysostome Hom. 18. in Epist. ad Ephes. saith to the Heathen, Adoratis simulachra; Non simulachra, inquiunt, sed Venerem & Mar∣temper simulachra Martis, &c. Still they same answer; not the Ima∣ges, but the Deities represented thereby. 3. Augustine, on Psal. 79. vers. 7. Confounded be they that wor∣ship carved Images, &c. saith of an Heathen Philosopher, Sed ex∣titit nescio quis disputator novus, qui sibi doctus videbatur, qui se non lapidem adorare dicit, novit enim tanquam Propheta, lapidem non sentire, nec loqui; sed illi numini se servire, quod non videt: Quis est iste? numen quoddam invisibile. To which Augustine answering saith; Hoc modo reddendo rationem de idolis, optime factum putant, ubi com∣probarunt se non adorare. Idola. And this error is as ancient, as the Calse in the Wildernesse, Exod. 22.32. and if we examine the case, it is all one with them. For the Israelites would not worship it, but God by and in it: For they did not thinke the Calfe to be God, or that God could be made, but they desired onely a visible repre∣sentation of God; which may appeare by these reasons: First, be∣cause they would have it to goe before them as Moses did; and that was to represent God unto them: For Moses was a visible repre∣sentation of God to them, and now they could not tell what was become of him. q.d. He whom we had as an assurance of Gods pre∣sence with us, is not to be found; therefore let us have in his stead gods to goe before us; Now either this reason must hold, or else Moses was their god before. And they made a Calfe rather then any other thing, because they knew no other shape of God, then they had of the Oxe, called Apis, in Aegypt. Secondly, The assent of Aaron; if he had not had somewhat in his minde beside Idolatry, he had not received that favour, but had beene destroyed with the rest: For vers. 4. the cry of the people,
This is that that brought thee out of the Land of Aegypt, cannot be understood but that they tooke it onely as a representation: and Aaron tooke great hold of these words of the people, and built an Altar, and consequently made a feast to be held to Jehovah. And there Jehovah receiving a feast of them, sheweth plainely that it was but a representation of Jehovah; so that this was the Elench, that deceived Aaron, that they might worship God in it; but it could not so deceive Moses, for he breakes it in pieces, and burnes it to ashes and gives it to, &c. Here the Romans fly to a third shift; they will not adore them, nor worship God by them; but they will be put in minde of God by them: the ignorant people must have somewhat to helpe them to remember God. This also is no new objection; but used of the old Idolaters; as we may see by Symma∣chus his words, Epist. 44.10. there must be something to put the ignoraut in mind of God. It is answered by Ambrose and Pruden∣tius, Omnia deo plena. The like we have in Arnobius, Lib. 6. contra Gentes, simulachrorum adoatores & assertores dicere solent; they knew there was no life nor sense in the Image, nor made any account of it; but for the ignorant people, that are put in mind of God by it. And Athanasius in an Oration contra Idola, Istiusmodi simulachra esse pro libris, quae dum legunt, cognitionem dei discunt: this he saith is , not . So we see there is nothing said in this cause, but hath been said before. Now if we aske them, that if the people must be put in minde, Of what it shall be? Not of the Deity, for they themselves began to be weary of that defence: Yet it was a very usuall thing a∣mong them, in shapes of men to resemble God. And Hosius cap. 66. in decalogum, saith and confesseth, that such Images crept in, dormientibus Ecclesiarum praepositis & pastoribus: while the Watch∣men slept. Then we must come to Christ; First, if they say, this is the pi∣cture of Christ, they must picture God; for he is God and man. They cannot as he is God, because his attributes are infinite, there∣fore as he is man only; Therefore they doe as Nestorius, divide the natures of Christ; and so consequently runne into the Anathema of the first Councell of Ephesus. Secondly, if they speake of his manhood, as now it is; then Eusebius his answer to Constantia, his glory is now farre greater, then in the Mount where the Diseiples could not looke on him; therefore neither of them can be exhibited by any Pensill. Thirdly, But they say, they will shew his shape as he was in the dayes of his flesh. We answer, that their remembrance is evill; and as it is Habak. 2.18. they be teachers of lyes: so this Image teacheth us to forget by it; for the whole Church hath taught us, that Christ suffered more then we can see painted; that is, piercing of naylos in his hands and feet; a blow in his side, and thornes on his head; the especiall paines and torments he suffered for our sinnes, are forgotten: the heavy wrath of his Father, pow∣red out in in most full manner upon him; and so consequently
the Image hath taught us to forget the greatest part of his pas∣sion. Then if they will come to a third point, that they will have a remembrance of the Sacraments; this is a new question: that is, for the Sacraments themselves, we must come to this; they are no better then the Angels; therefore, since the Angels have refu∣sed, as the Angel, Revel. 22.9. ; therefore it must be re∣strained from men: And Augustine, on Psal. 96. saith of this very well; Si audirent angelos, discerent ab illis non adorare angelos. And we must remember the second signes of feigned worship, Col. 2.18. they have Speciem , a shew of lowlinesse, but will at length beguile us of our reward. Thus much of the continuance of it with the other, and for the delivery of it from error. The affirmative part. The latter part of Exodus, after that Mo∣ses went up into the Mount, containeth the first part of this Com∣mandement; that is, the manner of Gods outward worship. And Leviticus containeth the second part, that is, how we ought to be∣have our selves in this worship. And as the first Commandement must have Internum honorem & internam laudem; so this second Commandement must have Externum honorem; and the third Ex∣ternam laudem, in word. So that Honour, whether it be signo or facto, is the thing commanded. The honour of the signe, in Tish∣tacaveh, in bowing downe; of the deed, in the word Servies, Mat. 5.15. A candle is not lighted, to be put under a bushell: the maxime the Fathers have gathered thence, is this; Bono debetur manifestatio; for candles, that have bonum lucis, are not to be thrust sub malo te∣nebrarum; so that our candle must be put on a candlestick, to bee made knowne: This is Gods will, that if we have the candle light in our soule and heart; that is, the internall worship; we must set it on a candlestick; that is, we must bring it forth, and shew it by outward worship: it must not be a chamber godlinesse. 2. We know that in copulativis, utrumque faciendum est; therefore we must next joyne that, 1 Cor. 6.20. , we must glorifie him al∣so with our bodies: glory being nothing else, but a conspicuous∣nesse and enlarging of honour and praise; as to glorifie, is to ho∣nour and praise externally; therefore it containeth honour in it. Then this is requred, that God be honoured both outwardly and inwardly; therefore he must be honoured as well with our bodyes, as with our soules. and the Devill knowing that God requireth both, doth therefore require the one, but the bowing of the body of Christ, Matthew. 4. because hee knew, that if God have not the Copulative, body and spirit; hee will have neither of both. The third is, Levit. 26.28. and Eccles. 4.17. or as it is in some Bookes, 5.1. in his Sanctuary, in times and places of religious exercises, wee must observe Utrumque pedem: if wee must have a care of our lowest parts, much more of our eares and hearts.
This externus honor, is, either signi, or sacti. For Tishtakebeh, the signes be two, as the Apostle proveth Christs humility, by these two signes, Phil. 2.7, 8. the first is to empty our selves, and deponere magnificientam nostram; as it is called in the wisedome of men; so he being equall to God, made himselfe empty of that magnificence, and gave the whole honour to God. For the magnificence of our selves is in reason and will: now if we can be content, though our reason shew us good reason, yet to submit it to the reason of God, and our will to his will, so out∣ward worship and magnificence. Job 19.9. he hath spoyled me of mine honour, and taken the crowne away from my head: then to take our crownes, the best things that we have, and our glory, and to cast it at his feet with the Elders, Reve. 4.10. is this sig∣num. So did David put off his Robes, 2 Sam. 6.22. and tooke the Ephod, and was contemptible in the sight of Michall; but hee said it was his duty to be vile in the service of God: So nudatio capitis, 1 Cor. 11.14. For pileo donari, was a signe of honour, and peculiar to Free-men: It was the magnificence of the head; for ever after, si cepisset pileum, he became free. Which signe, if he laid aside, he was said deponere magnificentiam; and it is the signe of a servant, when he honoureth his Master; and it is that, the Apostle urgeth men should use at Prayers and Prophecying. Secondly, the other is , Humiliare, to make us neare to the ground. First into this falleth Tishtacaveh: when we make that that is highest in us, nearer to the ground; this humiliation did the Devill require of Christ; God makes it a signe of his true wor∣ship, 1 Kings 19.18. in the seven thousand that had not bowed the knee to Baal outwardly. And Esay 2.9. this is his quarrell against them, because there was a carved Image, and a man bowed himselfe to it; so the contrary is condemned and plagued. 2. For honour facti, that is, service: wee have two parts set downe, Mat. 8.9. in the Centurions servant, and commended of Christ. First, I say to one, Goe, and he goeth; Come, and he commeth; that is, to be at commandement. The second is, Doe this, and he doth it; that is, to doe his worke. In these two respects Christ will say to some in the day of judgement, Nescio vos; But how can, or shall he say so, but as a Master to his servants, or a King to his Subjects? but onely as they come into his jurisdiction? and then this Nescio vos shall be pronounced either to those, which never came to his house of Prayer; or come of evill will, not to doe his worke: and so either they have nothing enjoyned them; or hear∣ing of him, he is not made knowne to them, nor have any part with him. The one is, of not being present; the other, not doing the Masters businesse. Gen. 22.1. God calling Abraham, he pre∣sently answereth, Ecce ego. This is that that God requireth; we must be present at his assemblies. David, Psal. 84.4. setteth downe his affection in himselfe; that before he was called, he had a great longing to goe into the Lords house: When he is called, then you know what Christ saith of himselfe, Psal. 40.7. Then said I,
Loe I come: the same readinesse ought to be in us; Wisedome, Prov. 1.24. Because I have called, and yee refused; therefore I will take pleasure in your destruction. So they that refuse to come, being invited, Mat. 22.8. are pronounced unworthy. The manner of comming Pro. 8.17. it must be mature, and vers. 34. quotidie, earely and dayly to waite at his doore, and so shew our selves de∣sirous to be called. For service, Luke 17.8. the property of a servant is to doe his Masters worke; and so as he preferreth his Masters worke be∣fore his owne: that is, his Masters worke shall be done first, and then his owne. And Gen. 24. we see the practice of it in Abra∣hams servant: Hee would not eate, till his Masters worke was done: and under this falleth the commandement of the ser∣vice of the great worke, Deut. 18.5. God saith he hath cho∣sen the Tribe of Levi, to serve him at the Altar; so that service, is the service of choyce; howsoever some account of it. That de∣sire ought to be in every one. The outward behaviour in the outward worship was in bowing downe, and in service; that is, for gesture, honor signi, which we call a reverent behaviour, it had two parts: First, the laying downe of whatsoever signe of excellency is in us: secondly, a drawing neare to the earth. The other, honor facti, which is in service, which is properly called devotion or devoutnesse; that is, the prompt∣nesse and readinesse of our will and of our selves to serve God. By the service of God, we shewed what was meant, by a division not given, but yet approved of Christ: first in going and comming when we are bidden: Secondly, in doing his businesse, preferring it before our owne. For the making of this more manifest and plaine, and applying it to the former parts; you shall understand, that the Prophet, in Psalm. 95.6. (which our Church hath used as an antepsalm, or introduction to the service of God) that there is placed, first, a comming; secondly, a worshipping; thirdly, a falling downe; fourth∣ly, a kneeling: whereby we may see, that in the substantiall parts of the service of God, first, in Prayer; secondly, hearing the Word; thirdly, administration of the Sacraments; fourthly, in the execu∣tion of discipline; but in the two former especially, there is re∣quired a due gesture and manner of behaviour. And first this, as we have our direction according to the councell of James, Cap. 5. vers. 10. to take the Prophets for examples: And 1 Pet. 3.6. that Women are to attire themselves, as holy Women in old time: Then laying downe this, and it being the approved practice of the Church; we shall finde that they never came without exhibiting some reverent externall behaviour both in accessu & recessu, both in comming, and going; For their comming together, 2 Chron. 6.12, and 13. Salomon comming into the Temple of God, and stand∣ing upon the Altar, they all worshipped toward the Prince, and he himselfe before all the Congregation kneeled on his knees, and stretched out his hands towards heaven and prayed. For their
departure, 2 Chron. 29.29. Hezekiah a devoute King, and the peo∣ple departing; they all bowed to the earth and worshipped: And so they went to the Lords Temple, and returned: Then this is the first; there must bee a reverent behaviour in accesse and re∣cesse. Now in particular, for our presence. 1. in prayer, seeing it commeth, as was said, partly from humility, partly from hope; the outward behaviour is to bee conformed to the inward af∣fection; therefore in prayer, there is an outward signe and be∣haviour. Behaviout in Prayer.First, for humility; there must be depositio magnificientiae, which is, 1 Cor. 11.4. With uncovered heads; in prayer and prophecy∣ing; and that , it came in this respect. The other part in humiliation, making our selves neare to the ground, in kneeling at prayer, Gen. 18.2. Abraham first did it to the three men, and his servant, Gen. 24.26. taught by him, per∣formed the like duty. In the Law, Exod. 12.27. the people bow∣ed themselves and worshipped. In the Prophets time, Solomon and the people, 1 Kings 8.58. the Prophets, Dan. 6.10. Daniel knee∣led three times a day and prayed. After the second Temple, Ezra, 9.6. Ezra fell on his knees, and spread out his hands to the Lord. Christ, Luke 22.41. The Apostles, Acts 9.40. Peter kneeling downe, prayed. Paul, Ephes. 3.14. For this cause I bow my knees, Acts 20.36. When he had thus spoken, he kneeled downe, and prayed; there, the whole Church of Ephesus, Acts 21.5. Wee kneeled downe on the shore, and prayed. So we see our patterne; if we take the Patriarchs, or Prophets, or Christ, or the Apo∣stles, or the whole Church; and if we doe thus, we see what our duty is. The word in Hebrew signi∣fieth service, which is also in standing.True it is, that because not onely in kneeling, but also in stand∣ing before another, there is a phrase of servitude; because they are both signes of service; therefore in many places we reade, that the gesture in prayer was standing; and that some prayed standing; we speake now of it, as it is a part of service; as Gehezi stood be∣fore Elisha, and Samuel before the Lord; and in no other respect. Abraham, Gen. 19.27. And Abrahams servant, Gen. 24.13. Loe, I stand by the Well of water. Exod. 33.10. All the people rise up, and worship every man in his Tent doore, Numb. 23.10. Balaam to Balak, Stand by the burnt offerings and I will goe, &c. Psal. 135.2. Ye that stand in the house of the Lord, and in the courts of the house of our God. 2 Chron. 23.13. And when shee looked be∣hold the King stood by his pillar, at his entring, &c. These are commonly read for publick prayer. In private prayer, if he be so affected, a man may prostrate himselfe before the Lord; as did Moses and Aaron, Num. 20.6. Deut. 9.18. and Christ, Mat. 26.39. fell on his face and prayed; but this to every man, as he is affected inwardly. Sitting at prayer time, is not warranted by the word. Balaam willed Balak to stand by his burnt offering, Numb. 23.15. and being set, he willed him to rise up. vers. 18.
Secondly, for the signe that hope bringeth; Oculus elevatus expectat; manus elevata petit, & postulat, a lift-up eye hopeth and expecteth, and a lift-up hand beggeth and asketh; therefore we lift up our eyes and hands. The first is the effect of hope, the second, the effect of prayer; therefore these two gestures are used in prayer; and it is used in that part of prayer which is called Petition: otherwise in depreca∣tion; for herein our eyes may be cast downe, with the Publican, Luke 18.13. Else when we are to aske or to give thanks, Psal. 123.1. Unto the Hills lift up mine eyes; and of Christ, John 11.41. and John 17.1. He lift up his eyes to heaven; which shew that it was the usuall behaviour so to doe. So for the hand, Exod. 17.11. When Moses held up his hands, Israel prevailed: Psal. 141.2. Let the lifting up of my hands be an evening sacrifice: and 88.9. I call dayly upon thee, I stretch out mine hands unto thee. 1 Tim. 2.8. lifting up pure hands. These examples are set downe for our instruction. In this part there is an evill and corrupt custome come up in our Church: Baalam would not suffer Balak to sit, but to stand by his burnt offering. To pray sitting and covered, not war∣ranted by any place or example in the Scriptures; In regard of the Angels, we should be reverent. For outward behaviour at the ministery of the Word, it is plaine, that in the Old Testament, Ezek. 33.31. my people sit before thee; so in the New, Mar. 3.32. the people sate about him. Luke 5.17. and 10.39. Mary sate at Jesus feet, hearing his preaching: and Acts 20.9. there sate in a Window a certaine young man, &c. that it was lawfull for them to sit; as also, standing, Nehem. 8.5. When he opened it, all the people stood, &c. But this hath been a thing alwayes indifferently used; and permitted to all estates at the prea∣ching of the Word, to stand or sit. Thirdly, for the administration of the Sacraments; the very action sheweth plainely it selfe, what behaviour ought to bee used. Fourthly, for Discipline, and the executing of it, it is plaine; the judge is to sit, the other to stand; and so it is manifest by the course of the judgements of the Law. It pleaseth God to set downe these things for us; one end may be taken out of 1 Cor. 6.20. that we might glorify God with our bodies: And a second end, Psalm. 16.7. that our outward gesture might stirre up our soule; and that our hearts might learne the duty of our outward parts: And a third, out of 1 Cor. 14.25. and Tit. 2.10. not onely to stirre up our selves; but also for the mo∣ving of others; that they seeing our reverent behaviour, may fall downe with us, and be moved to doe that, which at any time they shall see in us. So we have gone through two parts of the Com∣mandement. Now the negative is nothing else but the opposite of this that hath been taught and delivered. As if a man come with a proud eye, and behave himselfe proudly in his service: as it is, Pro. 6..
a proud eye is the first and chiefest of the seven things that God hateth. And if hee hate it at all times, much more at that time. To the second is stiffenesse, When wee are not willing to fall downe and worship, and to give him the honour and reverence of our eye, head and knee. In the other part of service, for not com∣ming. Chrysostome saith, Ludus jubet, & facis; vocat, & venis; cultus dei jubet, & non facis? vocat, & non venis? and whose servant art thou now? The Centurion will teach thee, whose servant thou art: even his that saith to thee, , Goe and come, and thou goest and commest. For the doing of the worke, and in the first place, (for the chiefe part of his ministery is of purpose declined, because it hath beene long time in controversie, and is as yet:) to the ser∣vice of our worke, and behaviour in the same worke, five points are considerable. First, the service of God in the Liturgie: i. whether it be not the will of God, as his rule is, 1 Cor. 11.33. to stay one for ano∣ther; that inward unanimity, and outward uniformity, be not a delight to God: Matth. 22.12. he without the wedding garment, when he was found unlike his fellowes, and not uniforme in his ap∣parrell; therefore he was separated from them, and condemned to be cast into utter darknesse. So at that time that the Church doth pray or sing; when any one doth not pray or sing with the rest; it is a separation and breach. Psal. 122.2, 3. Jerusalem is a City compact in it selfe; and the spirituall compacting no doubt is an especiall commendation of the Church: and it is that, that is so often set downe in the Acts. Together with one accord, Acts 2.1. They were all with one accord in one place: When they heard, they did it together; when they sung, they sung altogether, Psalm. 34.3 and let us magnifie his name together in idem. As if the whole Church were one person; and had but one lippe: The separation of tongues and lippes, a curse of God; and the earth was blessed in this respect, when it was said to be Unius labii, that it had but one lippe; as this was a curse. So that in Revel. 14.2. And it shall be an especial bles∣sing of the heavenly Jerusalem; that the Elders and all that stand before the throne, shall lift up their voice together, and with one consent, sing. This is a thing that the Fathers in their ages have much beate upon. Wee see how highly it is extolled, by Chrysostome: That it smiteth upon Heaven and the Lord, as a showre of Hailestones; and Augustine concerning the singing of praise, saith, that it soundeth in the Lord eares, tanquam re∣sonantia Maris, even as the Sea: And hee seemeth to take it out of Revelations 14.2. and I heard a voyce from Hea∣ven, as the sound of many waters, &c. Then this is the first thing. The second, that whereas the service of men: therefore much more, the service of God, ought to be, as the Apostle saith, Eph. 6.5.
in singlenesse of heart, 1 Peter 2.18. , in all feare, and Paul,  with feare and trembling: even to men. But in our exteriour service of God there is so little feare, or ra∣ther such want of feare, that commonly we see that thing, which is contrary to feare; namely, sleepe: which cannot concurre with feare; and our service cannot keepe us from it: like the Apo∣stles, which could not hold up their eyes, being with their Master in Horto. But Jacob, which feared his brother Esau, slept not all the night. The example of the Apostle was remembred as a spe∣ciall thing in the primitive Church, Acts 20. that the Christians watched and heard Pauls Sermon media nocte. Of which Chryso∣stome saith, Ad hoc commemoravit eos, qui vigilabant media nocte, ut condemnet eos, qui dormiunt medio die; and that we may know how farre we are from them, whose seed we follow. Now the actions of a naturall man, being first, cibus; secondly, potus; thirdly, somnus; meat, drinke, and sleepe; sleepe condemned by the same reason of the Apostle, by which he condemneth the o∣ther two, 1 Cor. 11.22. because we have houses and chambers to sleepe in. His reason there is, The Church is not appointed to that use, that is in private houses; therefore ye ought not to eate and drinke in the Church: Have yee not houses to eate and drinke in? What, contemne yee the Congregation? Apply it to sleepe; we have our chambers and our houses, to that end, to sleepe in: Despise yee the Church of God? And as from the place; so wee may reason also against it from the time; 1 Thes. 5.7. he exhorteth to wake; Nam qui dormiunt, noctu dormiunt: but wee say and see, Qui dormiunt, die dormi∣unt: Naturall reason telleth us, that Actio vestita indebitis cir∣cumstantiis, mis-circumstanced actions are unlawfull. Esay 5.27. there the Prophet, as his manner is, after the denouncing of a curse on a carelesse people, falleth into a blessing of the new Church: Non dormiet quisquam nec dormitabit. Marke 13.36. Take heed, that the Lord, when hee commeth, take you not sleeping. As also we may see what losse the Church hath by sleepe: Cantic. 3.1. shee slept and awoke, and found not her Beloved; and wee know not whether God will forsake us ut∣terly in it, or not. As after this, of the Apostles, Matth. 26.40. some departed; nay, all left him, some forswore him; this measure of apostasie is to be feared. But howsoever it standeth in respect of Gods punishments and mercies; yet the for∣mer reasons doe condemne it; but especially, Luke 24.32. The heart rightly affected, is, ARDENS COR, and a Father saith, It is not possible that Sub gravi Oculo should be a burning heart. Againe, seeing every sinne is to bee weighed and esteem∣ed, In primo partu, & prima poena; as of disobedience in A∣dam; Murther in Cain; unlawfull marriage in the old World; Pride in Sodome: so in the New Testament, unreverent hea∣ring, punished in Eutiches, Acts 20. vers. 9. and in the Apo∣stles,
that after it forsooke their Master. And this is the second signe. The third is, that our hearts be present; Many there be, that outwardly watch, yet their gesture testifieth to all that looke on them, that they are praesentes absentes. Where the heart is absent, it is impossible but that the outward members should give a signe of his absence. If we have Cor fatui, Eccles. 7.6. it will be in the house of mirth; the minde runneth on the place where his sport lyeth: and so as Prov. 15.7, & 14. Non dilatabit sci∣entiam, non quaerit scientiam, as the wise heart doth, which doth not let knowledge passe: but Eccles. 21.14. the inner parts of a foole are like a broken vessell, they can keepe no knowledge; it runneth out as fast as it is powred in: the wise, not so; Eccles. 21.17. They inquire at the mouth of the wise man in the Con∣gregation, and ponder his words in their heart. That the fooles heart is such, as ante, will be testified by some signe, Proverbs 17.24. by having his eye in all quarters and corners; not as they, Luke 4.20. that fastned their eyes: nor an eye searching out the places of Scripture, Acts 17.11. and his hands and feet will tell you that he is not present, Proverbs 6.13. And when he heareth his fault reproved, it is but a laughing matter, Pro∣verbs 14.9. to behave himselfe in this sort, Patrare scelus hoc. And it is nothing to heare, except we looke how we heare, and be attentive, Luke 8.18. or be affected, as Lydia was, Acts 16.14. To give an eare, is nothing; but to give a wise eare, Pro∣verb. 18.15. and 3.13. and happy is he that speaketh to a wise and understanding eare, Proverbs 25.12. it is compared to a gol∣den earing. The foolishnesse of the eares of this Generation is such, that you shall see the same attention given to him that gi∣veth out a sort of words, as to him that telleth us the message of God. It is a sore plague and often repeated in the Scriptures, Esay 6.10. a fearefull place, repeated by Christ, Matthew 13.15. Mark 13.12. Luke 8.10. John. 12.40. Acts 28.26. Rom. 11.8. beside three times in the Prophets: Give this people an heavy eare that they may heare, and not heare; give them a fat heart. This is the extremity of his wrath, and a heavy curse: and so to be accoun∣ted. If it be true, and the heathen could say, Pietas non est vultu lae∣denda, sive serio sive simulate; then our owne reason will lay on us an hard rule of framing our gesture, when haec pietas is in place. The fourth, That we talke not in the time; for that is cleane opposite unto it, not to allow unto it so much as silence. Prea∣cher 4.17. When yee come into the house, be ready to heare, and not to offer the sacrifice of fooles; to prate and talke, Joh 29.21. If I spake, every man gave eare, and there was not a word: a note of reverence in them; for if any man should turne from us, to talke with another, whilest we tell him a tale, wee will thinke hee maketh little regard of us: and
that is to offer the Sacrifice of fooles. Zephe. 1.7. When the Lord speaketh, let all the earth give eare and keepe silence: and he speaketh, when his messenger speaketh; for that, Qui vos audit, me audit: therefore Deus loquitur. And the Fathers say, that that place is taken out of Esay 32.17. Cultus justitiae silentium. So in the primitive Church, the first word was ; and that is out of Paul, Act. 13.16. he made silence with his hand. The fifth, not to depart from it, till it be done and ended; set downe Exod. 33.11. and may be gathered out of Tit. 2.10. ; said there of Joshuah, that hee dealt faithfully in the Lords service: because he departed not. Used in Psalm. 119.118. they had a relation to the departing out of the Congregation, when the Law was a reading. As preaching is the speaking of God to us: so prayer is a speaking of us to God. We pray that hee would heare us: Psalm. 30. and 38. Goe not farre from us, O Lord: Why then should we goe farre from him? The Law is equall: as we deale with God, Psalm. 130. so will he deale with us; and if we be attentive to him, he will be attentive to our complaint; and so there shall be talio, Psalm. 38.21. we shall have occasion to say, Goe not from me, O Lord: Why then, goe not from him; for∣sake him not: Else, when we say, Quare dereliquisti me Domine? he will say againe, Serve mi, quare dereliquisti me? that sentence, Discedite à me, Mat 25.41. shall be a punishment for them that goe farre from him here, in this kingdome of grace, where he is willing to keepe them. In the primitive Church, from the first word, , unto the last words, , none might depart; for the punishment of it was no lesse then Excomunication, Concil. 4. Carthag. 24. so that none might goe out till the end. The fourth Rule, the meanes. The first, in Eccles. 4. ver. last; well considered, and with it, Heb. 12.22, 25, & 28. These by me∣ditation well digested before the service of God. Take heed to thy feet, when thou entrest into the house of God; Give not the sacrifice of fooles; Be not hasty. In the other place; Ye are not come to the Mount that might not be touched, but to Mount Sion, &c. Despise not him that speaketh. He maketh it more to come to the Church, then to the Mount. Secondly, to consider that the Angels are present among us, 1 Cor. 11.10. and 1 Pet. 1.12. the Doctrine of the Gospell is such, as the Angels of Heaven desire to behold: Therefore if they see any not to esteeme it, which they so much esteeme; shall they not be ministers of Gods wrath, &c? therefore the Angels presence, another meanes. Thirdly, we live to glorifie God by our worke; and how shall we doe that, if we heare not? Ut audies, ita facies; for glorifica∣tion commeth from instruction, and instruction from hea∣ring. Fourthly, but if you put too, Ut audies, ita audieris; of God and men; it may be a fourth meanes: therefore this is the punish∣ment of God upon Ministers, that they shall fall into such a com∣pany,
that will not heare; because they had dull eares themselves in hearing before; and not onely that, Pro. 28.9. but also to speake to a dull people. The fifth Rule, of signes. The Commandemnt it selfe is signum, i. Mal. 1.14. a way to examine us. God maketh there a very ab∣ject, and as Augustine saith, an unlawfull comparison; to compare himselfe to a great King on earth: and vers. 8. he reasoneth, If you should offer such a gift to your Prince, would he accept thy person? If we would heare him, as we would heare a great Prince▪ 1 Sam. 19.8. Jonathan to David. To morrow is the day of the month, you will be looked for; for my Father will see your place empty. And our place may be empty, that is, we may be absent, for di∣vers causes: First, 1 Sam. 19.14. sicknesse,Lawfull cau∣ses of absence: from Church. for so Micholl an∣swered to Saul, for David: Secondly, 2 Sam. 20.28. the answer of Jonathan for David; He went to Bethel; for my family, said he, offereth a sacrifice to day; so if a man be to offer a sacrifice himselfe, he may be absent from Sauls sacrifice; for it is best to be the principall agent in Gods service: Thirdly, Mat. 9.13. Misericordiam volo, potius quam sacrisicium: the workes of mercy, to visit the sicke, is lawfull, &c. because they be meanes ordained for the duty of charity: therefore for such a duty we may depart and leave the other duty. The second signe, Judg. 9.7. the meditation of this talio; Looke as you heare, so you shall be heard: Heare what I say, and I will heare what you say. It is a good signe if we can say, Even as I heare, even so heare me, O Lord. The third signe, Psalm. 119.63, & 79. If we be companions of those that worship God, and if those persons be more deare to us, because they are reverent and zealous in Gods service; and the other more odious, because they be cold; it is a good signe. The sixth Rule, Accessory, to procure it in others. Hierome on Numb. 36.13. no man may be a curtaine in the Lords house, un∣lesse he hath a hooke and a tache: Quilibet verus Christianus est cor∣tina patris, to draw on another brother. Psalm. 42.4. Davids af∣fection. I remember it with joy. John 1.41, & 45. of Andrew to his brother; We have found that Messiah: and of Philip to Natha∣niel, We have found him of whom Moses in the Law did speake, &c. 1 Cor. 11.33. the Rule spoken of before, one to stay for ano∣ther, and one to bring another, that they may by , of the same mind, and one accord. The contrary condemned and punished, Acts 13.8. in Elymas, for seeking to hinder the Deputy from receiving the Gospell; he was stricken with bodily blindnesse, &c. Order is taken Com. 1. for the inward worship; and Com. 2. for the outward: now he proceeds to the Commination or San∣ction, which containeth a penalty on the breakers, and a reward for the keepers of the Commandement. Every Commandement, sancitur praemo & poena.
If it be asked, why this Commandement is the first that hath this punishment set downe, as the fifth Commandement is said to be the first with promise, Ephes. 6.2. We have three reasons for the justifying of Gods worke in it. First, because that as Deut. 25.2. the punishment must be pro∣portionable to the fault; and the sinne against the first Comman∣dement is hidden, and in the wombe, in our hearts and bosomes, that God onely can see it, and view it: therefore the punishment of it also is left to God; and Acts 17.30. he is content to over∣see it. But this, because it comes into the light of the Sunne, and is to be seene of every body; in this respect God hath more parti∣cularly pronounced a punishment against it, 1 Tim. 5.20. that o∣thers may feare. According to the rule of justice: Malum ubi con∣tingit ibi moriatur: if the fault be open, so shall the punishment also be: if private, so also. And seeing this is committed in the sight of all, therefore to be punished in the sight of all. The second is, that whereas every punishment is brought in, Ut prohibeat impetum ad turpia: and our impetus or inclination be∣ing marvellously whetted to the breach of this, by profit and safe∣ty, the best Oratours, annexed to it; I speake of that corruption, wherein every head is full of new platformes, that it will devise to it selfe; and that we cannot be vile in our owne eyes, as David was, 2 Sam. 6.22. but of this, that sometimes it falleth out as God fore∣told, Revel. 14.9. that the Beast getteth place, and then he that will not receive the marke of the Beast in his forehead, he shall neither buy nor sell; and not that onely, but hee shall be rent in pieces: Here then is the motive, that man can be content to leave God, and bow downe to the Beast, if they can be perswaded, they may thereby enjoy temporall commodities, and security of this life; for come what Religion will, they are ready for all. And in regard of the comming with these reasons, not onely of that the Devill counted a great thing, Job. 2. the saving of mens Skinnes, but the Fleeces also, peace and tranquillity; so because this pro∣fit was annexed, it was necessary there should be a punishment, co∣hibere impetum hunc, to stop our inclination. Thirdly, because we see, Dan. 3.6. & 6.8. and Acts 4.18. E∣dicts and Commandements contrary given out: i. for receiving of a false invented worship; that men should at the sound of the Trumpet fall downe and worship the golden Image; else to be cast into the middest of a hot fiery Furnace: And that who so should pray to God within thirty dayes, should be cast into the Lyons denne; And an edict that the Apostles should speake no more in Christs name. Therefore it was necessary that God should give a countermaund, and a contrary edict: And that as Princes say, Qui secus faxit, he that transgresseth, shall forfeit this and this: So God should say, If you will not bow downe and give me this worship, you shall forfeit you and your children after you, and your childrens children shall be subject to mine indignation. This for the reason, why God hath made it a penall Statute.
The Sanction or establish∣ment is divided into Commination, visiting the iniquity, &c. Promise, and shew mercy, &c. The preface was touched before, in the beginning of the Law, Of Jehovah thy God. Now of fortis & zelotes, strong, and zealous, the two words that remaine; they containe the certainty of bring∣ing to passe that which he threatneth or promiseth here in this Commandement: For mighty signifieth that there is no hinder∣ance in performance of it: He is able to doe it. It falleth out that where men, whose armes and hands are shortened, conceive mighty wrath and indignation, but there wanteth strength; and therefore are not feared; as 2 Sam. 16.13. great malice and ha∣tred in Shimei, yet it was nothing but an handfull of dust; and because he wanted might, it was faine to end in words onely; Whereas if hee had beene mighty, his anger would more have prevayled: So the want of might is many times the hinder∣ance. : Mighty; so in Esay 31.3. and in other places of the Scrip∣tures, it pleaseth God, when he opposeth himselfe to men; Ae∣gypt is not  but : there is such strength in God, that mans weaknesse is not able to match it. In Hebrew there be two words given to God, that comprehend the whole nature of strength; first, Gnoz; the second, Cayl. The first is that we call Robur, inter∣nall strength; the other, externall strength, either of Weapons, or Armes, &c. 1. For the first, as when it pleaseth the H. G. to debase the strength of man, 1 Cor. 1.25. that the weaknesse of God is stron∣ger then the strength of men; so Exod. 8.19. when he speaketh of Gods strength, and the mighty wonders which he wrought in Ae∣gypt, he compareth it to the finger of God: Which finger, Psal. 144.5. if it doe but touch the Mountaines, it will make them smoake; and not onely his finger, but more; the puffe, the winde of a mans mouth, is the least thing and weakest; and yet he saith, At the proceeding of it out of his nostrills, the foundations of the Hills were discovered, and the ground removed, Psalm. 18.15. This is positive; and not onely this, but also privative: Psalm. 104.29. If he doe but hold in his breath, all things perish; or he cast his eye a∣side, the World comes to an end in a moment. Secondly, for fortitudo, strength or munitions without him; albeit this is sufficient to move us, yet that, Jer. 23.29. Is not my Word even like a fire, saith the Lord? and like an Hammer, that breaketh the stone? And Psal. 7.13. Except a man returne, he will whet his sword, he hath bent his bow and made it ready. For the other, his powers and Legions of Angels, Psalm. 68.17. twenty thousand: but in Dan. 7.10. they are said to be more; Thousand thousands, and tenne thousand thousands of heavenly souldiers; Luke 2.13. Legions of heavenly souldiers. Besides in the 8, 9, 10. of Exodus, Armies of the basest creatures, Lice, Frogs, Caterpil∣lers,
Grashoppers, &c. By which he brought mighty things to passe, against the great princes, as Psal. 105. 2. Zelotes, Jealousie; that seemeth to import thus much: It might be thought all one for God, whether we did afford him this outward worship or not; and that he careth not, nor regard∣eth this outward manner; and therefore conceiveth no anger a∣gainst the breach of it: therefore he, to take away all such doubt, setteth this downe, that he is a regarder, and a jealous regarder of this. Psalm. 10.13. he ascribeth to the wicked, this speech: Tush, God, he regardeth it not: The other possibly will make us regard, yet there are but few that make regard, whether he can; therefore he hath taken upon him that, that implyeth the speciallest regard, that can be; and betokeneth such an affection as is in them, that have a regard. Jealousie is the excesse of love, whereby every man regardeth a thing so, as Numbers 5. that he cannot abide it to be common to any with him; as he that is Impatiens consortis, and cannot abide to have any one part common, but he must have it whole himselfe. 1. For the first, Impatiens consortis; when he will have no fel∣low: 2 Cor. 11.2. the Apostle saith, he was jealous over them, with the zeale of the Lord, that he might present them a pure Vir∣gin to Christ onely. 2. For the second, that he must have the whole: Psalm. 69.9. The zeale of thine house hath even devoured me; and Christ hath applyed it to himselfe. It is an affection, that it must devoure the whole man, and eate him up cleane, and separate him so, that he have no fellowship with any other; such regard then hath God to his out∣ward worship. This affection in it selfe is good, else God, Numb. 5.14. would not have given that Commandement, allowing the spirit of jea∣lousie: Yet by reason of hitting or missing, in us it is joyned and mingled sometimes with other affections; and when we misse of our purpose, wholly, then it is Zelus amarus, ex laesa concupiscentia, as James calleth it, Quia extra non sentit; quod jutus concupiscit: and this griefe stirreth up another, Vindicem laesae concupiscentiae, Nahum 1.23. such anger as will have revenge; and further then that, Prov. 6.34, 35. a raging and universall revenge. Now then if this fall into , it proveth not to be like a sparke in a stack of Straw, or falling into an heape of Chaffe; which maketh a flame, and vanisheth away; but like a sparke of fire falling into a barrell of Gunne-powder, bearing up all before it. According to mans strength is his anger: The Kings anger is death, and the eternall Kings, eternall death, of body and soule, Luke 12.5. For avoyding error, touching this that  is affirmed of God: what is to be thought of it; and what profit we may have of this affirmation. Whether there fall any affection of man in∣to God? It is certaine it doth not: if a man speake properly, if he speake not by a metaphor. And to them which say, Indignum
est haec de Deo dici; we must answer with Augustine; Indignum cer∣te est, si quid quod de eo diceretur, inveniretur dignum; but we cannot: for our great and glorious titles; of Majesty, magnificence, glory, are nothing to his glory: Magis congrua & accommoda sunt humanae imbecillitati, quam divinae majestati: so this is spoken for mans in∣firmity. The applying of it to the Scriptures. 1. Whereas it is said in many places, God is not as man, that he should repent him; and in other places, that it repented him that he made man, &c. For reconciling of such places, his rule is: Cum negantur istae affectiones de Deo, significari immutabilitatem; cum dicuntur de Deo, efficaciam; that he will worke effectually. So that these affections here, shew that God will doe, as men doe, which have the like affections; not that he hath these affections; but that he produceth these actions that they doe, which have those affections. Secondly, also, as Augustine saith, that those things are affirmed of God and man, eodem verbo, sed non eodem modo. For jealousie in man may be light and for no cause; but in God with knowledge and wisedome: mans jealousie knoweth no order, it is disordered and raging; in God it is tranquilla justitia. Thirdly, to these two, we may add the end; that it is conve∣nient to the same nature, these two being observed; that he will worke the like effect, as men doe for the breach of Wed∣locke. Out of these we have three commodities. First, we learne, that we are of dull spirits, not feared with Gods proper names, of justice, &c. but he must take other, of raging men; so jealousie we feare: but when we heare that God is just, we heare it without any great motion. Secondly, that of Tertullian, Lib. 2. contra Marcion: Utitur Spiritus hoc vocabulo, ad exaggeranda ejus scelera: that sinne is so odious a thing, and so vile; that if it were possible, would make God an∣gry, and to be, that he cannot be. Thirdly, it is the Apostles use, that he maketh of the justice of God, as we see in 1 Cor. 11.29. he protesteth himselfe to be jea∣lous, that we our selves might be jealous: that is, that every man enter into his owne heart, and consider what God is; and say thus: What saith God, that he is jealous? let us consider what God is; and againe, what we are; how excellent hee is, and how vile and wretched creatures we are. Why then, it should appeare, that this should pertaine to us, and not to him; and rather of our selves and our owne salvation; there is nothing worthy in us, that he should be jealous of. And this for the entry to the thing. Now to the thing it selfe: Visiting the finnes, &c. This commi∣nation hath two things: 1. The censure of the sinne: 2. The punishment. The censure is by two names: First, by hatred; for if it bee love that maketh us to keepe the Commandements; then it must be hatred that maketh us to breake them. But can any thing hate God?
The nature of God is essentially good,Solut. nay goodnesse it selfe, which can no way come to be the object of hatred. Againe, sundry of his effects come from his love; and they are such, as the very wicked love them; and him for them, because he bestoweth on them their being, life, sense, moving. But there is another kind of effects that proceed indeed from his love; by which he would have us preserved; and so consequently he giveth us Commandements, Cohibentia voluntatem inordinatam: that bridle our licentious will, and these are they that make him to be hated of us. For when a man is given to his owne will, and is drowned with the zeale of him∣selfe, then he must needs hate those Commandements, because they are adversaries, and contrary to his will and affection: and in∣deed, God commeth to be hated, by too much love of our selves. For it would have all our desires to be free to our selves; and any that doth oppose it selfe, it hateth it. So then, as God saith, Mal. 1.5. Your eyes shall see it, and you shall say, The Lord will be magnified upon the borders of Israel. Secondly, I have loved you, saith the Lord: And ye say, Wherein hast thou loved us? Was not Esau Jacobs brother? yet I loved Ja∣cob and hated Esau; and made his Mountaines wast, &c. Expoun∣ded Rom. 9.13. to be nothing else, but that he did not choose Esau. Then are we said to hate God, when there standeth a case betweene his will, and an inordinate affection of ours; when his will is not chosen, but our inordinate affection is preferred, and our minde: Hoc est odisse deum, deum non eligere. For God loving us, it is the will of God, that when the question commeth, his loving being so exceeding good to us, as that it challengeth us wholly; and that love is Vinculum conjugale, and therefore the love of the Lord should be Amor conjugalis; which hath no third thing: but aut a∣mat, aut odit; non est medium, Mat. 6.24. either he must love, or hate: Deut. 22.16. the Maids father shall say to the Elders; I gave my Daughter to this man to Wife: and he hateth her, &c. and chap. 24.3. And if the latter husband hate her, and write her a bill of divorcement, &c. treating there of love betweene married per∣sons: he saith, If a man marry a wife, and hate her: that is, cease to love her, and begin to be weary of her. If shee be not onely and wholly loved, she is hated; because these duties are joyned to one alone: there can be no third thing. 2. The other name, which God calleth  iniquity, pervers∣nesse; peevish and perverse: the having of it, is to meete with the opinion and censures of men: as Dan. 3.14. Nebuchadnezzar, to the three Children: What disorder is this in you, that you will not serve my god, nor worship the golden Image that I have set up? For the observing, and not transgressing of this Second Comman∣dement, they were called perverse fellowes, and disordered Sub∣jects: because they obeyed not the Kings decree. Therefore God sheweth the truth, who are disordered; even those that are breakers of this Commandement; and so it shall be found at the judgement of judgements at the last day of judgement.
God saith, Exod. 23.2. A man must not follow a multitude to doe evill: his reason is, because in doing so, he shall become per∣verse. But the voice and judgement of the world is cleane con∣trary. But the resemblance of it, that is commonly made of the Fathers, is of a pond full of Crabs, a perverse swimming fish: for she swimming backwards, and a fish that were cast into the pond, should swimme right: they would charge her of not swimming right; because she swimmeth not backward, as the rest. But God, Christ, the Prophets and Evangelists, the Apostles tell us it is not so: but that they are disordered that breake this Commandement. And this for the censure. 2. Now for the punishment. It were enough to be found among the hated of God: but God moreover addeth here a visitation: the meaning of it we haue, 1. Sam. 7.16. the word betokeneth the Circuit of a Judge: as Samuel went his Circuit year by yeare: to Bethel, Gilgal, and Mispeh: and judged Israel. And out of our owne practise, or as we our selves terme it, the Visitation of a Bi∣shop. And because visitare, is to goe to see, it presupposeth ab∣sence, and so an intermission: and it doth very fitly resemble the judgements of God. For the forbearing of them, as it is Luke 19.44. Dominus requiret de manibus vestris, he will require it at our hands, to know the time of our visitation. As there be some that say, the Lord is long a comming: so there be some that say, he will not come at all. That say, Non requiret Dominus, as Ps. 10.12. therefore, for the patient waiting of the just, for the judge∣ment and glory of God, that they may know that it's a sure thing that he will come as a Judge: and though he be long a comming, yet at the last he commeth, and then he taketh order: so certaine we should be of the requiring of our sinnes, at our hands, though he seeme as though he would not come at all. The visitation of God we find to be fitly resembled to this his judgement: as Ps. 69.25. a visitation in outward goods: Let his habitation be voide, &c. Againe for transgression, a visitation vpon the body. 2 Sam. 11.14. vpon the child. In the taking away of Gods benefits, Matth. 21.42.43. And yet a more greivous pu∣nishment, quando paena odii est odium. And as God saith thus, qui sordescit, sordescat adhuc; so he may say, qui odio me prosequitur, odio me prosequatur adhuc. For it is the moth and consumption. He visiteth the sinnes of the fathers on the children, &c. that is, where∣as the Devill playeth the Sooth-sayer in Peter, Matth. 16.22. parce tibi Domine, let none of these things come to thee: whereas they thought to haue saved themselves by this means: God saith, As neither they, so neither their sons after them, nor their sonnes sonnes, their sonnes nephews shall escape. For the first, for himselfe; They thought the Devill had given them good counsell: but Deuter. 7.10. God protesteth there, that he will pay it to his owne face that hateth him. 2. And on his children, when he thinketh he hath best provided for them, then he pulleth downe evill vpon them. The which craft of sinne, to make
us beleeve we avoyde such an evill, by that, by which we bring it vpon vs. The Devills prophecie, good counsell: so that when the wrath of God hath consumed him, it taketh hold on his poste∣rity: Ps. 79.5. he will be angry still, like fire: and shall goe along to the third and fourth generation. Now to consider the grievousnesse of the punishment, we mea∣sure it by three things: 1. a Gravitate. 2. a Multiplicitate. 3. a Pro∣lixitate. For the greatnesse & grievousnesse of it, it's said, that it shall be upon the children: which are in accompt with the fathers, as themselves: Luke 8.41.42. he fell downe at JESUS feet, desiring helpe; because his only daughter lay a dying; and Luke 9.38. mise∣rere mei; for my sonne is sicke: and 2. Sam. 18.33. they were so deare, that the father would redeeme their life, with the losse of his owne: as there David could for his rebellious sonne Absalom: vtinam pro te mortuus essem. This sheweth that the thing is very deare to them. They are our worke, and not as Abrahams well, Gen. 21.25. (werein, when it was taken from him, he thought he had wrong:) but a part of our substance, as Gen. 2.23. bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh. Gen. 3. and not that alone, but a prin∣cipall part of the substance: Zerang, the seed and the beginning: as though it were but the chaffe, after the children were borne. Againe, Prov. 17.6. Childrens children are the crowne of their Elders, our crowne while we live: and as the heathen man saith, our image and remembrance, when we are dead. For multiplicity; that, that is, Luke 12.47. the distinction there by many and few stripes: is here for the multiplicitie, and mani∣foldnesse, three or foure generations. For the continuance and length. Mar. 12.40. They devour widows houses, under pretence prolixae orationis: ideo erit eis pro∣lixum judicium. Long judgement shall wait on them. So it is here: the whole memory of man: a generation. So long as a man can remember: so long as the mind of man can endure, he shall be punished: and as he can have any abiding in this life, or as he can have any to beholde it after him. Hereby wee see it verified, Hebr. 13.20. that it is a fearfull thing to fall into GODS hands. And Ps. 44.20. we see how the godly accompt of it. It is so fear∣full, that the godly had rather abide death, then breake this Com∣mandement. That is, that martyrdome is rather to bee chosen, then to transgresse that, which he hath prescribed in his Com∣mandement. Here may be a question concerning the justice of this visita∣tion? Whether one may justly be punished for anothers offence? Where we note, that the very word, which proceedeth out of the mouth of GOD, is not free from mistaking minds: and therfore let not this discourage any. And those words, Ezek. 18.2. Jer. 3.29. They shall say no more, Our fathers have eaten soure grapes, &c. Rise they not as a scoffe of these words? That which seemeth to stand against this, is Deut. 24.16. every
one must suffer for his owne offence: and he saith not here, he will punish the child for the fathers offence: but that hee will visit the fathers offence on the child: so neither the contrary, he will not punish the father for the child: set downe, Ezek. 18.20. anima quae peccaverit, morietur. Gal. 6.5. Every one shall beare his own burthen: and 2. Cor. 5.10. Every man, at the judgement seat of CHRIST, must receave the things done in his body, &c. For the making of this plaine. Understand, that this is the course of many learned men, especially of the Schoole-men; They say, as to the place of Esa. 38.1. to Hezekiah; Put thy house in or∣der: that as there is meant, non quid suturum esset, sed quid ex despositione naturae futurum esset: by nature, thou art to die: so here GOD speaketh, non quid saceret, sed quid ex dispositione meriti ne∣stri saceret. But this would make neglectummandati: and the com∣mination would be vaine. On the other side we will proceed on this order. Whether it be a thing unjust, that one man offending, another should be punished? I say not for his offence: for so it is not. There be three respects in punishing: 1. Satisfactio. 2. Medicina. 3. Correctio. By these three a man may justly be punished; and yet no offence committed by him. First, for satisfaction: as in suretiship: when the debt pertaineth to one man, and his friend taketh it upon him, and beareth the pu∣nishment: is this injustice? Absit. For then that which CHRIST hath done for us; to wit, our Redemption, should be of none effect. But voluntarily one may satisfy for another, yet no wrong done to justice, nor yet punishment taken for the offence of the other. Secōdly, for medicina; may it not be as in the body? For the eye & the head is sicke, and the arme is let bloud for it: for otherwise the whole body might be brought into danger. So then it is not only a just thing, but also a necessary. Therfore, If punishmēt be sent prop∣ter medicinam, as a medicine, another may beare it, without breach of justice, as it is in Physicke; that that is deprived must be lesse then the thing for which it is deprived: as a Finger to be given for an Eye: this is a good medicine. So temporall things are to be given for the recovery of spirituall: temporall punishment may be taken on the sonne, for the recovery of the father spiritually. 3ly. For correction. In that (as before) there is a respect to this: the amendment of the equality broken. A man should desire no more than GODS will is: but we see daily he doth: Therefore, hee breaketh equality, and is to make amends for it. Therefore, he must break somthing lesse, that he desireth; and so there is equality, when nimis is punished with minus. For this equality of it, it must be in the father, and in the child: if equality be not broken in them, here is no injustice. For the Fathers say, frustra requirit debitum, qui non impendit indebitum: to require a debt, and not to pay that that is
due is no justice: as GOD saith, Deut. 32.6. Do ye so reward the Lord, O foolish people, and vnwise! Is not he thy father that hath bought thee! He hath made thee, and proportioned thee: and qui contri∣stat patrem suum, merito contristatur à silio suo: that is, If we being GODS children grieve him, it is a good right we should be grieved of ours. Another is that Gen. 17.7. in regard of the visible Co∣venant in the Sacrament: he is the GOD of vs and our seed: so when the father breaketh the Covenant, he saith out of Matth. 27.25. Let this mans bloud be super nos, & filios nostros, upon us, and on our children. 2. To the sonne: first sure it is, and all agree in it, that in a tem∣porall punishment, because filius is res patris, a possession of the fa∣thers: therefore, he may temporally be punished, the body may be punished. Deut. 1.1. in regard of the Covenant made with us and our seed; it must suffer as we doe. But for warrant of the equali∣tie; his nature is it that GOD findeth, as Cantic. 2.15. the Church findeth a nest of young foxes, they have yet destroyed no vine∣yards, nor worried any lambes: but if they grow up, sure it is, they will doe both. Now the question is, Whether the Church may say, capite nobis vulpeculas, &c. take us these young foxes. Because there is a poysonous nature in the scorpions eggs, therefore, we may tread them under-foot. And it standeth with justice. For Ps. 51.5. As soone as ever the seed is warmed, it conceaveth sinne, as∣soone as sinne commeth, there is no way to recover it: DEUS tui, & seminis tui, he is not only our quod, but the quod of our seed. There∣fore, justly may it be destroyed. Then there is no way to recover it; but by contract of marriage; for that, as Hose. 2.2. GOD hath sent them a bill of divorcement: Plead with your mother; for she is not my wife, nor I her husband: but let her put away her fornications out of her sight, & adulterers from betwixt her breasts: And so conse∣quently they have no interest in the Covenant: because, as its Deut. 31.6. They have gone a whooring after them that are no gods: after gods of strange lands: and Job. 31.12. it is said, It should be a fire, that should devour to destruction, and root out all his increase. Then there is a third thing to be put to both these: name∣ly, a propagation of this sinne: by an education, whereby every one is delighted to bring vp his owne children, as he himselfe was, as 1. Pet. 1.18. . we doe like our fathers. Our fathers have worshipped Baal, and we do so also. Symmachus saith: That Religion that commeth to us, having continued thus many yeares, let vs keepe it still. And the propagatian of this sinne proceedeth as it were a leprosie. If it once take hold in the father; it continueth in all the posteritie: yet GOD, when he executeth this judgement, exequitur chirographo suo, non paterno; it is for his owne debt, not for his fathers. But in this case, jus meriti is left, and we flie to jus beneficii; we plead not merit, but mercie. And it is the obliga∣tion betwixt the child & GOD, and not the father and GOD: it must be gratuitum, his free Covenant that we must hold by. Therfore,
we must remove from the the Court of Justice, to the Court of Mercie: where we have, not jus meriti, but jus beneficii: By the which as Augustine saith well, good fathers have wicked children, ne virtus videretur esse haereditaria, least virtue should seeme here∣ditary. And againe, wicked fathers have good children, ne mali∣tia serperet in infinitum, least naughtinesse should grow on to be in∣finite. To resolve these; First it is certaine, here is no punishment for the grapes that are in the fathers mouthes, but in their owne. 2. This punishment is only in respect of Justice: but miseretur cujus vult, he will have mercie on whom he pleaseth. And he have mercie once; then this which Gregorie saith, only he; qui imita∣tur gravatur, he that imitateth sin, it is he that feeleth the smart of it. The bond of this Commandement is agravated, as Ezek. 18.28. it is said, If he turne from all his sinnes that he hath done, he shall surely live, and not die. But now the matter is removed from the former question. GOD saith, Jer. 8.7. I will speake sud∣denly against a nation to destroy it. But of this nation, against whom I have pronounced, Turne: I will repent, and it shall stand, (i. e.) I will speake suddainly, I will build a nation: but if they keepe not my precepts, I will not: as we see, 1. Sam. 2.32. There is a good purpose to have established Levi his house in Eli: but now there shall not be an old man in thine house for ever; but Jonah 3.10. God said, Nineveh shall be destroyed: but by a new decree, re∣versed. These come from other Courts. And this serveth for all Gods commandements. The use to be made of this. First, to breed a carefulnesse on both sides: in Fathers to their children, and in children to their Fathers; but 1. Sam. 11.15. the punishment is upon the Fa∣thers. For their children, why? that we Secondly, may learne, (as Deut. 26.5.) to acknowledge our selves to be sonnes of Idolatry, and every one sayd, before the Lord his God, My Father was a Syrian, who being ready to perish, &c. and all to say with David, Psal. 106.6. Wee have sinned with our Fathers, wee have committed iniquity and dealt foolishly; and as Dan. 9.8. to pray that wee may not beare our Fathers sinnes. And as backward, so forward, Gen. 18.19. It is said of Abraham, that he would take order that his Family should serve God after him; a mutuall care, for the building up one of another. The promise is mercy: it proceeds from zeale. There is a zeale for a thing, and against it; a zeale to doe good, Esa. 9.7. the increase of his government and peace shall have no end, &c. Ze∣lus Domini exercituum perficiet hoc, the zeale of the Lord of hostes will performe this; and as it is said of that zeale, Cantic. 8.6. it wrestled with the grave and death: so that the taking away of that part of zeale, is a great paine; and Ezek. 16.42. the promising of that jealousie is threatned by this, he promiseth mercy: A great promise, because it containeth all promises and benefits of
God; and therefore, if wee be purged from sinne, or what good soever wee doe, it cometh from his mercy. Againe, for Mercy; as visitation is for justice: so here should have beene merces, and not misericordia, not Mercy but wages; but our reward doth argue, non mercedem, but gratuitum amorem, not wages, but mercy. Now that it is called a work, & operans misericor∣diam: and the other, (i.e.) his justice: but a visitation, (i. e.) a thing intermitted: that is also a speciall thing to bee observed; the na∣ture of his justice is restrayned to the fourth generation: and his mercy is extended to thousands; so here is a proportion, the one containing the other, two hundred and fifty times; not that the mercy of God is greater then his justice, but because he is more delighted in the action of the one, then of the other. The reward is promised to them that love him: the manner of love, is according to the love of God, because he is jealous for us, that wee might bee jealous for him; that wee may say, as 1 King. 19.20. Elias, zelo zelatus sum, I have beene very jea∣lous for the Lord God of hosts sake: zelantes potiùs quàm amantes: The triall of this love consisteth in keeping the commande∣ments, (i. e.) that if it be not a commandement, it is not from him; and therefore whatsoever was without them, was not from love. Another, it is very certaine, that the righteousnesse of speech, and the true signe of loving him, had beene the keeping of him: but he saith not so, but the keeping of my commande∣ments; the reason is, because he is able to keepe himselfe, and needeth not our keeping; therefore he hath set our love to bee tryed by two things; First, by mandata or praecepta mea, his com∣mandements; Secondly, & minimos istos, his little ones; for the commandements it is said,Wee keepe him in his par and his love, in mandata. Hosea 4.10. that they kept them not. 2. for the other, Mat. 25.45. quandiu uni ex istis minimis non feci∣stis, neque mihi, &c. in as much as yee did it not to one of the least of these, yee did it not to mee. And the third thing is this, that our estimation of them must be such, that wee thinke them worth the keeping, as Psal. 19.10. David accounteth of them as dearly as of much fine Gold of Ophir, and Psal. 119.72. Thy law is dearer to mee then thousands of gold and silver. For keeping, by this word Keeper, wee must understand that God hath made us keepers of his commandement. Now the pro∣perty and charge of a Keeper is to preserve that thing that he kee∣peth, as from himselfe, so from others; and to see and have regard that it be neither lost by negligence, nor cast away, nor broken, nor hurt, but kept sound, till his comming, that gave them to him in charge. For the losse of Gods commandements, 1. King. 20.40. For the breaking of them, Mat. 5.19. Whosoever shall breake the least of these commandements, &c. shall be called the least in the king∣dome of God: but a contemptuous threatning is, Psal. 50.17. Now that they may be safely kept, and as it is, Prov. 4.21. it is best to
lay them up in that place that is surest, even in the middest of our heart. For the keeping in regard of others, wee must not say as Cain of Abel, sumne ego custos? &c. am I my brothers keeper: for as Caine should have beene keeper of his Brother, that others kill him not; so wee should be keepers of Gods commandements, that others breake them not. Wee must have the commande∣ments of God, not only observanda, but also consenvanda, not on∣ly observe, but conserve them. And if wee performe this duty, wee shall doe as they doe, Prov. 16.17. he that keepeth them, keepeth his owne soule by them. So much of the 2d Commandement.
The III. Commandement. Thou shalt not take the &c. THe object of this commandement is the Name of god, or his glory. The thing commanded, is a reverent taking of his Name, comprehended in this word praise. And the proper place of Gods glory is in this commandement, by reason of the object, which is his name, by the which he is glorified. And this his glory is such, as for it, Esa. 43.7. he created all things: For mine owne glory I created them; and for this, that which was before his Creation, his predestination, Ephes. 1.6. unto which wee must joyne our praise. Now if they must be made like to their creator; if the worke must be according to the minde of the maker, it is well; therefore, that end which moved him to make us, must be our end; and therefore all our actions and thoughts must come to this, to be as it is, 2. Thes. 1.12. That the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you. In the second Commandement be these two respects, First, that the honour exhibited in outward behaviour, is exhibited to one that is present; Secondly, that the honour exhibited is given to the party himselfe, for to him alone it must be done. Now the wor∣ship of the Tongue, which wee call Praise, goeth beyond these, and is most excellent; for it is of him that is absent, and to o∣thers; and not to himselfe. Though God be present every where, yet when wee in our actions and speeches speake of him to others, there is praise; and so it goeth to him. And yet there commeth a further portion of glory. So that it is not only true, Luk. 14.8. that honour is given to the person, but also to his Name, Psal. 29.2. Give to God the glory due unto his name, which giving of glo∣ry is properly called praise: for the worship of God is made an especiall glorification of God, Psal. 50. vers. last, he that offereth me praise, glorifieth mee; which sheweth that it is allone, to give glory to God, and to give him praise. Now this praise hath his proper place in our mouth, Psal. 34.1. With my mouth will I praise thee, the instrument chiefe in this
office, is the Tongue, and by performance of this, our tongues are made glorious: Psal. 37.30. The mouth of the righteous will be talking of wisdome, and his tongue will speake of judgment. The manner how this praysing is to be performed is set downe in Moses, Deut. 32.3. I will publish with my mouth, give yee glory to God, (i. e.) one must report, and they that heare, must give glory to God. Now, as was said before, in the word Glory, according∣ly as it is taken both in divinity, and out of divinity; there is more, then either in honour, praise, or worship, because all these are directed, that the party on whom they are bestowed, might be glorified. And the matter of glory hath proportion to Cla∣ritas, the brightnesse in glasse, and in other such visible things; that as they are seene a farre off, so that party to whom such ho∣nour is given, it is in such sort, that he might have a name a farre off, and knowne. Therefore for this cause in Psal. 66.2. the Pro∣phet having exhorted men to praise, he goeth further, and ex∣horteth them to make his praise glorious, that is, doing as he sheweth us in the booke of Prayses, that is, the Psalmes, as Psal. 71.8. First by filling our owne mouths with it, and then with filling other mens eares; as Psal. 66.8. O praise our God yee people, and make the voyce ef his praise to be heard. And this is to be done, Psal. 34.1. continually: and so continually, as that there be no staying, but ever more and more: as Psal. 71.14.15. But I will waite continually and will praise thee more and more. My soule shall dayly rehearse thy righteousnesse and thy salvation: for I know no end thereof. In the duty of praise, touching this point of it, that when wee have resolved our selves thus to fill our mouthes with it, it must be as it is, Psal. 66.16. before them that feare him: and not before them alone, birds of our owne feather, but also before the Congregation, as Psal. 149.1. Let his praise be heard in the congre∣gation of the Saints: and not only before every assembly, but before the great assembly, as Psal. 40. I have declared thy righteousnesse in the great Congregation. Gather all into one place, and one as∣sembly: yet this is his wish, Psal. 71.18. that he might fill all the World with his praise: and that he might speake to a com∣pany of all Nations: Forsake mee not untill I have declared thine arme to this generation, and thy power to all them that shall come. And that that goeth beyond all this, that he is not content with this, but is desirous to deliver over this affection so, as Psal. 22.31. and 72.17. it should continue so long as the world endureth. So much of the end of this Commandement. The necessity of this Pre∣cept.The necessity of this, was handled before, and standeth upon 12. Reasons, and as wee have heard before, that therefore man was made, and therefore consequently, wee must exercise it. Then he is in vaine, if he have not his end. 1 The Hebrue sheweth it,  and  creare & benedicere, to create and blesse: because the element added, is nothing els, by reason of the affixe, but an effect of the Creation. 2. They gather the necessity of the end out of the word Crea∣tion,
by Gen. 2.2. It may be better gathered out of the words following. The first thing that he did after his Creation, was the sanctifying of a day to that end, to be wholly spent in his praise. In which respect of favour Christ delivering to us a forme of Prayer; though God in the first place (commanded,) that the internall worship should be first, yet having regard to the end, and knowing that the end in our intention is the first, he giveth it for the first petition, and teacheth that we might first desire Gods name to be hallowed. 3. That was said before, it was the worke of the Sabbath, and that is a figure and resemblance of all the actions wee shall be oc∣cupied about in patriâ, (i. e.) in Heaven. This is a third thing that commendeth it unto us, that it shall be our continuall, opus, in our Countrey, and therefore if any be desirous to participate the Celestiall exercises here, let him spend his time in glorifying God while he is here. 4. The setting of us while wee are here in earth, being some∣what lower then the Angells in their estate. Their delight is, as Luk. 1. to sing Hallelujah, praise to the Lord. It is the exaltation of the nature of man, while he is yet in the way of corruption, and while he is on earth, to be made equall to the Angells in this worke of praise. 5. The casting downe of a man, when he is not fit to do it, as Chrysostome on Psal. 148. saith, that seing the basest of them are called to doe it; then he is baser then the vilest creatures, that will not doe it. 6. From the exercise of the Church militant, it is best acceptable to him, as Psal. 29. vers. ult. it is the worke of the Temple, and so consequently, to be preferred before the work of the Market place: The reason of the place, as that place is the place of all pla∣ces. 7. This is alone the thing that distinguisheth a man from all other creatures; all other creatures have but one sound, they have no voyce. And as he is a Reasonable soule, he is distinguished in regard of the first commandement, so his voyce, in regard of this commandement, man alone hath a distinct voyce, and there∣fore can praise God with the tongue, and therefore ought to be delighted in that, wherein he excelleth all other Creatures, (i. e.) with the glorifying of the name of God. 8. Not onely because it is a proper worke of Man, but that which is next, that by this meanes, whatsoever is occupied a∣bout it, whether it be tongue, lippe, or penne, &c. it getteth a dignity by it. And as James 5.8. casteth downe the tongue when it is lewdly occupied; so David extolleth it when it is thus occu∣pied. It is in the highest degree of dignity. 9. For the reverence of the great commendations and motives that this yeelding of praises hath, Psal. 147.1. It is not only good and honest, but also pleasant. Davids soule, at the praise of God, was as delightfull, as his mouth filled with marrow, and that it is
seemly and profitable, honorisicantes me honorificabo, they that ho∣nour me I will honour; God will bestow what he can upon him; and for the reward, it is to be chosen. 10. Whereas the excellency of man standeth rather in dare then accipere, in giving rather then in receiving; and rather in facere quàm in fieri, in doing rather then suffering; here is only our facere & dare. In all other things wee are made, and wee receive: but this wee give: glorify to God, magnifie him, sanctify him. There is as it were magnifying, and as it were an holinesse wrought in him by our praise. 11. This duty lyeth so straite on us, as that though Christ commands the contrary, (as in the man delivered from the De∣vill,) yet he must not be obeyed: whereas all other precepts are such, as the contrary of that commandement, is not to be done; there is no such thing here: there can be no precept against this precept. 12. That which is Prov. 12.14. A man shall be satiate with good things by the fruit of his mouth, and Christ, Mat. 12.36.37. not onely mens workes, but even their words shall justify or condemne them. The employing of our tongue, will either receive fruit to life, or gall and wormwood to confusion; and so consequently there lyeth a necessity of this duty on us to hallow his name. Wee see by the petition what is here commanded, (i. e.) that Gods name may be hallowed inwardly by our intent, making it the end and scope of all our doings; outwardly by making it the matter of our speech and writing, and that our tongue be an in∣strument of speaking his praise, and that our lipps be, as Psal. 45.2. the pen of a ready writer; and our tongue a Trumpet to sound his praise. And not only these, but also in outward action. It is that , that light, Mat. 5.16. that our works may be as the works of him, that our tongues may be declares of Gods glory, as (Psal. 19.1.) the Heavens and firmament are. Now wee come to the commandement, which hath two parts, 1. a Precept, 2. a Penalty. To declare the precept, we must learne what these three words meane, 1. Name of God, 2. Take, 3. In Vaine. For the Name (of God) which being a word, as properly be∣longing to the Tongue, so the duty of the tongue is commanded in it.) it is a word as the Heathen saith, per quod cognoscimus alios, & ab illis cognoscimur, by which wee both know, and are knowne of others: and consequently it is a word of distinction, whereby wee distinguish a thing from all other things. And that is the proper use of it, and the first: according to which use, the Name of God is set downe diversly in the Scriptures. (2 uses in the Bible,) It is best set downe in Exod. 34.6.7. he protesteth to proclaime his name when he cryeth Jehova, Jehova, &c. his name there is of three sorts, 1. in respect of his Essence, Jehova; 2. in respect of his Attributes or Adjuncts, which be of two sorts, affir∣mative,
as misericors, omnipotens, aeternus; mercifull, omnipotent, eternall; 2. egalize, as infinite, invisible, incomprehensible, &c. and all those names that made Dionysius to write de Theologia ne∣gativa, of negative Divinity; and those that belong to his quali∣ties, as they doe denominate, 3. in respect of his works, Creator, Re∣deemer, Sanctifier, &c. and they are vers. 7. And to these three may be referred whatsoever may be read of his name. Now this very Name is reverently to be used; Of every of these names may it be said, as the Angell said to Manoah, Jud. 13.18. that it is most fearfull; And if the Angell, Jud. 13.18. appea∣ring to Manoah, sayd to him inquiring after his Name, Search not after my name for it is fearefull: much more is the name of the Lord fearefull, and cannot be knowne. It is no question, as it is Deut. 28.58. so it is. If thou wilt not doe all these words that are written in this booke, if thou wilt not beare reverence to this name, The Lord thy God, then there followeth a Catalogue of Plagues in that place. Now if that be reverenced, then the second use of his name is much more to be reverenced, because men are onely knowne or distinguished by it, that some duty might some way be done to them, that is not done to any other. We must take heed of the Pha∣risees distinction, Matth. 5.33. concerning this name; that except he did sweare by the Lord Jehova, and take the very Name of God in his mouth, he was safe from this commandement, but there a man might sweare by the Heavens, or Earth, or Jerusalem, because they were not the Name of God, therefore that that maketh this Name, is that wee call a Good name in English, or Credit in private men: but those that are in higher places, as the dialect of Princes is, their glory, magnificence, majestie, &c. as in Jer. 13.11. that they might have a name, and praise, and glory. For the name , of praise and glory, and the common phrase of that tongue is this, that if a man be in credit, he is called,  a man of Name, a man of credit, a famous person. This good name hath a more extra or∣dinary commendation annexed to it; according to the glory of the person, so riseth this name: as the Apostle reasoneth, Heb. 1.4. that Christ was so much above the Angells in glory, as he had received a more excellent Name then they, and Gen. 17.5. it is the practise of God; when he would exalt Abraham from an Harlot to his Church, and establish the church in his house, and make him Father of the faithfull; then because he was more glorious, he giveth him a more glorious name: Thou shalt no more bee called Abram, but Abraham, &c. And wee see the like, Gen. 35.10. Jacobs name is changed to Israel, a name of more dignity. Then the second use is of good report, if it be of private men: For a private man, it is a pleasure to have a good name, Eccles. 7.1. A good name is better then a good oyntment. The especiall thing to keep a mans name; because it was it, that was most usuall and most esteemed in those dayes; and for treasure and profit; Pro. 22.1. A mans name is better then either silver or gold: The other
name may be changed, as Abrahams and Jacobs: but this is such as may not be forgon for neither pleasure nor profit. And it is not onely of Gods Law, but also of mans: the Heathen could see the excellency of this; for they say, Interesse famae est majus omni alio interesse, the weight of a mans good report goeth beyond and above all weight: And further as a Father saith, Fama pari passu cum vita ambulat, goeth cheek by joll with his life: Man seeth this, that it is greatly to be magnified; so Psal. 138.2. Thou hast magnified thy name above all things by thy word. So that indeed it is the glory of God that is chiefly here intended, and secondly his very name. 2. Non assumis, &c. thou shalt not take. To understand it ful∣ly; it is the scarcity of our tongue,Take. that the word is no better expressed: For the word  from whence it commeth, hath a double use; and to these two, may be referred whatsoever is bor∣rowed. It signifieth properly to take up, to lift up; and that two sorts of things; First, it is applyed to a standard or banner; and secondly, to an heavy thing, as a burthen: And indeed, these two kindes of things are they, that wee take away or remove. If any thing be glorious, we are content commonly to take and lift it up: And on the other side, if there be any thing that is necessary, and that we have use of, though it be heavy and weighty, yet we will lift it; so that the one is in rebus gloriosis, the other, in rebus necessa∣riis. On the contrary, if they be neither glorious nor necessary we let them lye; the first use, the glory of it is set downe, Exod. 28.37. God saith there must be a Plate, and in it must be written, SANCTITAS JEHOVAE, Holinesse to the LORD: and it must be removed to Aarons forehead, as it must stand in the Myter of Aaron. And Moses, in Exo. 17.15. called the Altar, Jehovah nissi! from a word of great affinity, The Lord isour stan∣dard; that is lifted up as glorious things: as the badge of any Noble∣man, it is lifted up on the shoulders of their servants to be seen. For the other use, for lifting up of a weighty thing, for the neces∣sity and use; Gen. 29.7, 8. of the great stone before the Well, Ja∣cob did not lift it up, till all the sheepe came together, till there was great need. The first of these pertaineth properly to all the rest of the duties of praysing, to all that take Gods name: The second onely to the duty of Swearing; for that is an heavy thing. Under these two, are comprehended all other takings of his name whatsoever. But to take them as they are under the first; namely, in lifting it up as a thing glorious; as the Standard of Moses, and the Plate of Aaron: the first thing enjoyned is this, The being called by his name, Gen. 48.16. as a great dignity and priviledge, Jacob granted to Ephraim and Manasses, but denyed it to the rest; and it is part of the glory that children take of their Parents, their name: So we are called Gods children, by his name; and not that alone, but Esay 4.1. Seven women come to one man, and say, We will eate of our owne bread, and weare our owne gar∣ments, onely let us be called by thy Name, to put our shame from
us. And in marriage the woman honoureth the Husband by lea∣ving her owne name, and taking his; and it is a glory to her, that she may so doe. In the truth of this it is said, Esay 43.7. They shall be called by my name, for I have created and formed them, &c. How is that? That is no otherwise, then as it is, Acts 11.26. the Dis∣ciples at Antioch were first called Christians; for that is the most excellent name that is. That glory that becommeth Christ is given to Christ. The second is, that the servant by lifting up on his shoulder his Masters Badge or armes, lifteth up his countenance, but with service; that is, to his Masters glory there is joyned a service of his: and therefore to his glory, all his doings from that time forth, must be referred: and so we must be at Gods commande∣ment, to doe his businesse, having his Badge; which is plaine, by 1 Cor. 10.31. God can receive no profit, but glory; therefore, to his glory we must referre all that we doe. For if you once come to that, Gen. 11.4. Paremus nobis nomen, I will get my selfe a name. Then we see it is accounted Bellare cum Deo, to wage warre with God; and he will visit them with the confusion of tongues and mindes: not onely that, but if a man doe not referre, but take glory to himselfe; as 2 Sam. 15.8. of Absalom. Thy servant vow∣ed, &c. If the Lord shall bring me indeed to Ierusalem, I will serve the Lord, and 1 Kings 21.9. of Iezabels fast; the one setting the name of God on a bloody murther; the other, the vow upon a wicked and lewd conspiracy. To abuse the name of God to our owne wicked inventions, is a monstrous thing. These are within us, now without us. 1. In our tongue. The 1. thing is, as Gen. 29. vers. last: of Iu∣dah, of whom were the Jewes, he was called  because his mother said, she would confesse Gods name. To God we are not Iehudim if we take to our selves a name: but we must weare our name to Gods glory, and not be ashamed: but when we are ashamed of it, we care not for it, we confesse it not, Mat. 10.32. the duty is plaine, Will ye confesse me before men? I will con∣fesse you before my Father: Are ye ashamed of me before men? I will be ashamed of you before my Father. Revel. 3.8. When there come many evill workes, yet this weigheth them all, that they had not denyed his name: as on the contrary, Revel. 14.9. When a man commeth to receive and weare the marke of the Beast, and his name; then a portion is given him in the Lake that burneth with fire and brimstone. The second, of the outward, may be comprehended under Con∣fessing, and it is called defending, when we heare it blasphemed: God saith, Esay 59.16. his truth went downe into the judgement seat, and through the streets, in every place, and none would open his mouth to defend and speake well of it: and therefore, when he saw none would doe it, he will make his owne armes to serve; and therefore we see how terrible and fearefull a judgement hee threatneth them in the end of the chapter.
3. That that is contrary in his part, is the doing as the Scribes and Sadduces doe; they come to Christ and say, Thou art a good man, how sayst thou, is it reason to pay tribute to Caesar or no? Some say, for disputations sake it is lawfull for them to defend wicked opinions and assertions in Religion. This may be done in necessity. Now out of the case of necessity, a man is bound, as David saith, to make mention of his name; that is, to use it, in his speech, to shew himselfe mindfull of him, Gen. 50.3. because of the great mourning the Aegyptians made for Jacobs death; there∣fore in recompence, the Inhabitants called the name of the place of his buriall, a place of mourning. Though it be said, Deut. 4.9. Take heed ye forget not. Forget, saith Jerome, it is impossible they should; but he telleth how; If you forget me, and behave your selves so in your speeehes, as that there is no man but would thinke you have forgotten him. When a man shall live so, that nothing concerning the praise of God cometh into his mouth in seven yeares. It is the fault of many: And though they say they have not forgotten, yet there can be nothing gathered, but that they have: and so, rarum erat nomen Jehovae, a reverend mention∣ing of the name of God was rare in some mens mouths: Prov. 10.31. it is said, that the just mans mouth, doth meditari sapientiam, meditate wisedome; that is, speake of something that may re∣dound to Gods glory; and Prov. 10.11. & 12.18. he calleth the tongue of a wise man, venam vitae & ipsam salutem, a veine of life, and health it selfe; out of which there may returne glory to God, and health to himselfe. But of a fooles mouth, he saith, Pro. 15.2. it doth ebullire, it bableth and foameth out vanity and foolish∣nesse: The word he useth is vanity, that is, there is no good nor profitable use of it. So that mentio, and not onely that, but hono∣rifica mentio, an honourable mention; out of the case of neces∣sity, must serve the turne: for a man to speake of the name of God, as God, Exod. 9.16. he will therefore shew his judgements upon Pharaoh; because he will have men speake of him through the World. That is the first, it shall be sylva orationis. In this mentioning we must have three things. 1. It must be often and greatly spoken off, , for this is the end of the great wonders, Exod. 9.16. narrare nomen ejus, to declare his name; of this hath been spoken before. 2. That it must be well spoken off, , 3. Reverently, . For the second, . for blessing Gods name, Psal. 72. ver. ult. Blessed be his glorious name for ever: for the revenge of the wicked; as the Fathers, when they talke of this, they say it is the Epiphonema: David expresseth it, Psal. 70.4. they shall say al∣way this Epiphonema, The Lord be praised, and Psal. 58.11. there is an Epiphonema after a judgement: Surely there is a God that judgeth the earth; and Psal. 124.5. when they are delivered, they shall say, Praised be God, &c. but, praised be God that hath not given us over for a pray to their teeth: and Psal. 35.27. when he sendeth a bles∣sing, and prosperity; then Praised be God, which sheweth himselfe to
have pleasure in the prosperity of his servant. This speaking well of God, and converting the judgement or blessing into an honorable mention of his name is commanded. Contrary to this, when a man receiveth mercy, and it is not great enough, he grudgeth, and is not thankefull for it; and a judgement, and it is too great; and then commonly he murmur∣eth; and every thing he converteth to the dispraise of God: he learneth not to blesse God, whether he give or take away; as Iob did. 3. ; A reverent speaking of a thing; whose contrary (as the Hom. maketh opposition betwixt sanctifying and prophane∣nesse) is, making common. Whereas, Levit. 22.32. a man coun∣teth of it, as a common thing, and giveth it no more reverence. When a man maketh account and useth the name of God, as a stone lying in the street, that is to be looked at: when a man talk∣eth of serious matters, as of Gods Predestination, &c. without any sense of it; there is no , reverence in their talke; much lesse in those, 1 Sam. 28. that use his name to Sorcery and Witch∣ery, &c. but least of all, Levit. 24.15, 16. in Blasphemy. This for the respects out of the case of necessity. There commeth a third thing, in regard of applying Gods name, to the Actions; which be, first, either our owne; secondly, or other mens. 1. To our owne, there is a commandement, Col. 3.17. omnia quae∣cunque facitis, &c. and whatsoever ye doe in word or deed, doe them in the name of the Lord, that is, every action you take in hand, sanctitfie it; how is that? as David, Psal. 124.8. our helpe is in the name of the Lord that made heaven and earth. 2. To others, Deut. 10.8. applyed to the Levites; Imponetis no∣men meum illis, & benedicetis illis, yee shall put my Name upon them and shall blesse them: how that is, David sheweth, Psal. 129.8. Wee wish you good luck in the name of the Lord: Contrary to this, is to curse, Iam. 3.9. Therewith blesse we God the Father, and therewith curse we men. Ephes. 4.3. When we curse God with his name: that is, as Augustine saith, Quando faciunt Deum carnifi∣cem suum, when they make God their Executioner, and say, Now God confound them; he must be their Executioner. For God hath given his name for a strong tower of defence. And thus much for our Speech; now for our Actions. There follow two for our outward actions, making them glo∣rious: that is, Mat. 5.16. that we deale so in our actions, that they may see our good workes and glorifie our heavenly Father; that is, 2 Tim. 2.19. Every man that taketh the name of Iesus in his mouth, let him depart from iniquitie: for the wickednesse of the Child polluteth the Father; Levit. 21.9. If the daughter of a Priest commit fornication, she polluteth her Father: So do the wicked the name of God, Psal. 50. he is our Father, when we take his name upon us, and doe not glorifie him as we should, nor de∣part from iniquitie; we doe what we can to make him polluted.
There are many carelesse and notorious men; and yet Psalm. 50. they will take the covenant of God in their mouthes, and talke of points of Religion. This must not be done, Rom. 2.24. to wound Gods name by our evill conversation, and cause others to sinne. The second in this point, is the commandement of a Free Vow, Psal. 119.108. Lord I beseech thee accept the free offerings of my mouth, and teach me thy judgements; and Psal. 76.11. that a man should make a freewill offering to God; insomuch as God hath done so many things for us, we should not onely doe the things comman∣ded of God, but vow our selves. Now as touching the use or necessity of Gods name in an Oath, the commandement is, Deut. 6.13. Thou shalt feare the Lord, and sweare by his name; and Deut. 10.20. Thou shalt feare, serve, and cleave to God, and sweare by his name. In Vaine] To understand this, we must note in every action, Three things; the 1. End. 2. Agent. 3. Worke. These three being marked, we shall soon know what it is to take Gods name in vaine. First, we know, in the chiefe signification, that which wanteth an end, and is done to no end, is said to be in vaine: as Levit. 26.16. You shall sow your seed in Vaine: you sow your seed to get a harvest; and you hope for it: You shall have no harvest, your e∣nemies shall eate it up. So it is of Gods name; he that for no end lifteth up Gods name, doth it in Vaine: Therefore wee must looke cui bono? what fruit have ye of it? the fruit and profit, is our end: So if we doe no good, it is done in vaine, Prov. 26.7. All other faire shewes, are like streight and well fashioned leggs, which yet cannot goe. Frustra pulchras habet tibias claudus; if it be not the due end. Now the great and chiefe end is the glory of God; it is that that he requireth; he would impart all the blessed∣nesse he hath upon us; and requireth nothing againe of us, but glory. To which if we bring no profit, we must be accounted of him, as Nabal was to David, 1 Sam. 25.21. David had done ma∣good turnes for Nabals shepheards, he desired nothing but a lit∣tle meate, and could not have it: Therefore he said, All that I have done for him is in vaine. So it is in the case of Gods glory; God doth all for his owne glory: so if that come not by us, then all that he hath done is in vaine. Secondly, under this greate end, is next, the health of our selves, and our brethren, Phil. 2.16. he saith, he hath laboured in vaine; so if there be not sought things tending to Gods glory, to our neighbours edifying, and our owne soules health, it is in vaine, and to no end. The first, Vaine is ex privatione finis, when it wanteth an End. 2. Yet if there be an end, we must looke to the Agent, that is,
the swearer, the person; consequently upon that part in him, that is the principall agent; that is, his soule and heart: For if his soule be  Rhachah, that is, a vaine soule, it commeth not with due advisement and reverence: as Prov. 21.6. if it be Actio erroris, an action of errour; that is set against constancy, though he have a good end, yet if he doe not so stably as is said, it is in vaine; that is, lightnesse: if any come to take the name of God, and if he be not res stabilis, and he come not with due reverence; there is ano∣ther taking in vaine: When it is  Hebhel; a light thing, as smoke, or chaffe; and so fit to bee carried away with every blast. 3. In respect of the Worke;3. Worke. in that there is a third vanity, when a thing beareth a shew of that it is not this, vanitas opponitur veritati, this vanity is opposed to vertiy; want of stability, want of truth. So Jer. 10.15. It is a vaine thing, a thing of errour, (i. e.) when the thing is taken from a Lie, for looke what truth is in naturall things, the same is truth in morall things. If it want his justice in action, it is vaine; if it want his truth in affection, it is vaine. Of the two manners, whereby the name of God is lifted up by us, the one was as a burthen, which is applied to the necessary use of it; and being necessary, it commeth first to be intreated off and handled, I meane that taking of Gods name up by swearing by it; wherein albeit God be not more, nor so much glorified, as in the other kind, yet in regard of our necessary use of it, the precept hath almost taken up the whole commandement, as little mention of it. For the duty. As first for the necessity of it, upon what occa∣sion, after this manner it is expedient that all controversies, (Heb. 6.16.) and strifes should not be continued, but have an end; and this cannot be, except one part have a confirmation above the o∣ther. And for confirmation of these, wee see God, Gen 18.21. when he in his judgment will goe downe, ut certò cognoscat, to know it surely; that he may proceed on a sure ground. Now this pro∣ceeding where it may be had by argument or proofe, it is best: So, if it can be, as wee see the practise of Joseph to his brethren, Gen. 42.20. this was his triall of their truth, if they brought Benjamin. Where Argument and reason wanteth, there wee must come to witnesses, which is the second course, Deut. 19.15. where argu∣ment or proofe wanteth, that the matter should be established in the mouth of two or three witnesses. And because many times it falleth out, that not only proofe, but also witnesses want; then, as Numb. 5.13. the man being in jealousy upon a suspition of his wifes adultery, the woman not being taken in the very deed, then as it is vers. 19. shee shall sweare that shee hath not defiled her selfe. This necessity, as many times in regard of the action, it is hidden: so alwaies in these two respects it falleth out that when there is an assurance to be had, de occultis cordium, of the hidden secrets of the heart, which cannot be knowne by any externall
proofe, Jer. 17.9. who knoweth the heart? there is no knowledge of it. And secondly, when it is concerning things to come, Eccl. 8.7. who knoweth that which is to come? then commeth an Oath to men: they cannot be wise, because they cannot know what will come hereafter; so for promises: of these three cannot be by witnesse and argument any , or confirmation had. Now in regard of the secrets of a mans heart, and of uncertaintyes in things to come, here commeth in the division of Oaths. Of secret things, some are de facto, past, here is jus jurandum assertorium, an oath of assertion; some are to come, and there jus jurandum promissorium, an oath of promise. Then when as the argument of a mans will, and testi∣mony of his mouth falleth out, in these cases there is no way but to fly to God, (i.e.) to make him a witnesse; and not only a witnesse, but a Judge and a revenger, if he be called to an untruth, for it is nothing els, but calling him to witnesse. In this place falleth the two parts of an oath according to these two, First, where God is called as a witnesse, whether it be true; Secondly, the other where it is called forth as a Revenger, if it be false. The first is called sub Deo teste: Contestatio; a taking to witnesse; so did God himselfe, Numb. 14.21. vivo ego, as truly as I live; so the Fathers in the old Testament began to use it, Judg. 8.10. vivit Jehovah, as the Lord liveth; and so I shall see the effect of that I promise. The second part, Sub deo vindice, this is called Execratio, that is, the curse of themselves, if it be not true, as he may well witnesse to it. And againe, Levit. 26. and Deut. 28. he taketh this order; but this also in relation to that place: where are all the threat∣nings of his revenge, Sic faciat mihi Dominus, & addat, the Lord doe so to me and more also, if that they have not spoken the truth. The first plague and the second, it commeth in those termes, God doe this to me, and add this also. So it is used by Ely, 1 Sam. 3.17. God doe so to thee, and more: And when he is brought to this, that he hath affirmed it, and God is his witnesse, and if God be called to an untruth, that he hath desired against his soule: then (as in Greek) it is called , an hedge or inclosure, he hath hedged and inclosed himselfe with the truth of God, and his judgement to performe it; so in the part of the swearer: he that hath sworne, is holden as it were persistere in dicto, & praestare pollicita, to persist in his saying, and to performe his promise. Now contrà, in regard of the party to whom it is sworne; it is called in Hebrew  or  that is, a safety, or satisfying; which sheweth that he must be contented and satisfied, and that he must be filled, that is, satisfied: And therefore it signifieth to Sweare, and to fill to Satiety, and the Latin translation of Ierome, pro jure habere, that is, now that I have promised, I have bound my selfe to it, even es it were done by a Law; here is , an end of contention. And so of the necessity of an oath, and upon what causes oathes were first: But our necessity is small, except
God have glory by it. Then to apply this to the scope of Gods glory; there commeth a great portion of glory to God in an Oath: For first our rules of reason tell us, that Nihil confirmatur nisi per certius, there is no confirmation but by a thing more sted∣fast. Then there is a great honour to God, when Demonstration and all faile, that his name should be Turris fortissima, the most strong tower; more certaine then all reasons and witnesses, &c. so that we count it as Prov. 18.10. The name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous runneth to it, and is exalted. (And the Heathen man saith, , of all things men set most by their faith) When all faile, we may take Sanctuary here: This is the first part of the honour of God. 2. In regard of the cause, as before, his greatest honour, the ground of all honours, Faith; that this proceedeth from a great Faith. In regard of the former part of an oath, that is, Contesta∣tion; that we beare witnesse with tongue that are present: that we beleeve as 1 Cor. 4.5. that God will lighten all things that are in darknesse, that God will make all manifest: He seeth all things, even the very secrets of the heart. And secondly in regard of the execution: as Rom. 12.19. that he will punish: mihi ultio & ego retribuam, Vengeance is mine and I will repay it: Herein we be∣leeve that God hath power to bring his judgements upon us. This beleife, that he hath vengeance to execute, turneth greatly to Gods glory; and therefore was it, that God was contented as it were to lend his name to sweare by it, to make an end of their questi∣ons. Thus we see how God hath his glory hence. The next thing is to see what we are commanded and forbidden. 1. The affirmative part, that we shall take his Name to end our quarrells, his name shall come as a sanctuary to quit or condemne, in which we shall enclose our selves, and satisfie our Law. The first is jurare to sweare; that is commanded flatly, Deut. 6.13. set close to that which was the affirmative part of the last Commandement, but more effectually and vehemently, Esay 45.23. I live, and have sworne by my selfe, that every knee shall bowe to me, and every tongue sweare by me. For this cause there cometh another division of Oathes: he hath not onely taken order that we should be willing that the oath should passe, Exod. 22.11. which they call , a voluntary Oath; but also, 2 Chron. 6.22. that if they still not be willing, there shall be  an oath of imposition: conrstictè jurare, to make him sweare precisely and punctually: And Levit. 5.1. if any man heare an Oath, that should returne to Gods glory, and doe not utter it but hold his peace, it shall be accounted to him as sinne. So we see what Gods will is herein, what he commandeth; and then the great end of Gods glory, and necessity of men. Now for examples of these; David, Psal. 63.12. Laudabuntur omnes & laetabuntur: qui jurabunt per eum, every one that swear∣eth by him, shall glory and rejoyce: Therefore we see this com∣mendation.
All the Saints have passed under it. 1. God him∣selfe Gen. 22.16. I have sworne by my selfe saith the Lord; because thou hast done this thing, &c. vers. 17. therefore I will surely blesse thee. 2. After God, the caelestiall spirits, Revel. 10.6. The An∣gell lifted up his hand to Heaven and swore by him that liveth for ever more. So the division concerning the case first, of Gods glory, to be confirmed; and secondly, the benefit of our brethren. For the glory of God, a famous Oath, 2 Chron. 15.14. of Asa and the people. They sweare to the Lord with a loud voyce, for the observa∣tion of Dauids Religion. 4. Likewise, Nehem. 10.29. The chiefe of them received it for their brethren, and they came to the curse and to the oath, to walke in Gods Law, &c. For the other part, in regard of mans benefit; the wealth of mankind. First we see it in mutuall leagues and confae deracies; the example of Abraham, Gen. 21.24. betwixt Abimelech and him. Secondly, likewise for a conspiracy publike, Judg. 21.1. Moreover the men of Israel swore, saying, None of us shall give his daughter to the Benjamites to wise. Thirdly, for the receiving or uniting of Nation to Nation, Ioshua 9.19. To the Gibeonites Io∣shuah made peace, and league with them; that he would suffer them to live, and they sware: and the breach of it was punished, 2 Sam. 21.2. 2. For obedience and reciprocall duties betweene the Prince and Subjects; we have examples and commandements. First, of the Prince, 2 Kings 11.12. of Ioash. Secondly of the Subjects, 1 Kings 1.29. For the succession of Salomon, Davids oath: And the King swore, as the Lord liveth, &c. For Subjects to him, 1 Sam. 24.23. David swore to Saul: And all the Subjects tooke an oath for the preserving of Davids life, 2 Sam. 21.17. And the men of David swore to him, &c. Thirdly, in a case of safegard of a mans life: Ioshuah 2.12. And in regard of Marriage, Abrahams example, Gen. 24.2. therefore Abraham said to the eldest servant, &c. Put thy hand under my thigh, and sweare by the Lord, &c. Fourthly, in Litigious Suits and Causes, Exod. 22.8. & 11. And as these come under the forme of a Publique oath; so for Private oathes in the New Testament, in remembrance, in pray∣ers, and in love. Paul seareth not in Rom. 1.9. and Phil. 1.8. to call God to witnesse for a matter of suspition, 2 Cor. 1.23. Now I call God to record unto my soule, &c. all this tendeth to this end, that we seeing the two maine reasons; the exact Commandement of God: his owne example, and the Fathers in the Old Testament, and the Apostles in the New: We might be farre from the vaine opinion of the Anabaptists, that are gain sayers of this first part, and hold that we may not sweare at all; grounding on Christs words, Sweare not at all. For Mat. 5.17. wee know that Christ
came not to breake the Law, nor to undoe the least jot of the Law; and if it had beene his meaning to have had us not to sweare at all, he would have said, Non assumes nomen Dei omnino, thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God at all: For Christs words, , they should not sweare at all: Sure it is, that you must marke the scope; for it must bee referred to the scope of the place: which is to reconcile the Law from the Pharisees corrupt interpretation; for they thought if any man swore by any other name, so that he sware not by the name of Iehovah, sumere nomen Iehovae, and onely frustra, in vaine; that hee might sweare by any other name. Some take also jurare to be put for pejurare. Au∣gustine in his 27. Homilie, and 30. de verbis Apostoli, handleth it sufficiently and largely. To sweare is commanded, and to consent to Anabaptisme is forbidden. The second point Affirmative, the word added here, Thou shalt take the name of God: that is, our swearing must be by the name of God, and by no other, Esay 48.1. There are they that will sweare by the name of the Lord, but not in truth and righteous∣nesse. They that sweare not by his name, take away his praero∣gative; I have sworne that every tongue should sweare by me. This is his Prerogative royall; this it one of his priviledges: therefore it is often called, the Oath of the Lord, Iusjurandum Iehovae; So dignari alios honore hoc, or to translate the praerogative of God from him, that is the thing that is forbidden: and that is two wayes. First, if we leave out the name of God, and in stead of it take another, as Amos 8.14. they had forgotten God, and swore by the Sin of Samaria, and said, Thy God O Dan liveth, &c. Secondly, when we can be content to name him, but so, as to add another name to it, Zeph. 1.5. Vivit Iehovah, & vivit Malcham, that sweare by Jehovah, and that sweare by Malcham; this joyn∣ing, whether it be false god, or any creature: they are both un∣lawfull and forbidden. The first, Exod. 23.13. You shall not make mention of the name of other gods; and Ioshua 23.7. the very same is, Psal. 16.4. But they that runne after another god, shall have great trouble; their drinke and blood offerings will I not offer, neither make mention of their names within my lipps. Hosea 2.17. I will take a∣way the name of Baalim out of their mouth, they shall forget him. Zach. 13.2. and Ier. 5.7. If any sweare by that that is no god, it is an abhomination. For in this there is a three fold injury: First, to God, that requireth his glory to be done to himselfe. Secondly, to our selves, Hebr. 6.16. hee that sweareth, must sweare by a greater: And therefore he setteth it above himselfe; and if he sweare by a creature, hee maketh it greater then him∣selfe. Thirdly, and to the Creature it selfe, which is contented with his owne place: So by the Law, which God hath set in it, and would be avenged of us.
This is the second, when any Idoll or creature hath beene abu∣sed, as by this Bread, we confirme our controversies. The third is in vanum, in vaine: And that that is opposite to it, is commonly in swearing, taken out of Jerome, Hom. in Jer. 4.2. for he speaking there of a people that should sweare aright, he saith, they should sweare, in veritate, judicio, & in justicia, in truth, in judgement, and in righteousnesse. These are saith Jerome 3. comites juramenti, the three comitants of an oath: If we have not these, the other may be refused. First, for truth: Wee have a commandement, Levit. 19.12. that is opposed against perjury. To call God to witnesse to con∣firme falshood. Augustine, Vt hic est detestanda bellua! Whosoe∣ver doth this, seemeth to bee a man, and becommeth a beast that thinketh so. The Heathen and the Jewes, as saith Diodorus Siculus, Perjurii paena, capite plectatur, Doth he call God to witnesse to an untruth? Let him lose his head. This is done; First if a man doe testifie falshood: Secondly, or if it be of that he doubteth of. Secondly, False, either when we know it to be false. 2. Or per∣haps it is true: but falsum; commentitium, putativè, when a man will affirme it will fall out otherwise; he is guilty. And this in As∣sertorio Iuramento, in an oath of assertion: When any of these is done, there is Perjury. In Promissorio, in an oath of promise; when there is not cer∣tum propositum, we doe not purpose, si non statuat, aut si non perstet, either not to purpose then, or not to purpose when it should bee performed. Examples of it, Mar. 14.71. for affirming of falshood, Iura∣mentum Petri, Peters oath; a fearefull thing, it cost many teares. For the other, not performing, in Promissorio, under an oath of promise; 2 Sam. 21.2. There was an oath made, and by covenant, Josh. 9.15. So Joshva made peace and league with them, that hee would suffer them to live; also the Princes of the congregation swore unto them. Secondly, for justice; that holdeth either altogether, or for the most part in Iuramento promissorio onely, in an oath of pro∣mise; truth holds in both, Esay 8.2. that is, when a man sweareth to that which is possible and honest; it is a just oath, else it is unjust. If it be inhonestum, dishonest; then it is not Ius, in justice; if impossible, then it is not Iurandum, an oath to bee sworne: Examples, 1 Sam. 28.10. Saul tooke counsell at the Witch, lent her an oath, which was inhonest and unlawfull. Impossible was the oath of them, Acts 23.4. that swore they would neither eate nor drinke, till they had killed Paul. After a man hath taken such an oath, there doth, emergere aliquid impossibile, some impossibility arise. This impossible it may be, è principio, a thing that alwayes was impossible; or secondly, emergens post Iuramentum, or an im∣possibility emergent after the oath. Augustine on the oath that Herod tooke, Mark 6.23. saith, That of it selfe it was not unlaw∣full
nor evill, and might have been performed if a thing possible and lawfull had been required: therefore when she asked his head, it was emergens illicitum. For there is no oath of promise, but it doth elicere, it is a drawing out; or understand these two: as Ioseph to his Mistresse, How can I doe it? that is, How can I ho∣nestly doe it. In malis promissis nescire fidem, unlawfull oathes are better broke then kept. The reason is, there is exitus sine tertio, when the oath is past; he must choose whether to keepe in that sinne, or fall into two other; First, into unlawfull murther; Secondly, superstition in the foolish keeping of the oath; into superstition, if hee thinke it not to be broken, or murther if he doe it. 3. In judicio, in Judgement, that is, as Hierome saith, In dis∣cretione, in discretion; it standeth upon this point, to know the nature of an oath to be, not bonum per se, a thing good of it selfe; but bonum necessarium, a good in necessity: and necessarium extra terminos necessitatis, non est necessarium neque bonum, a necessary good, but in case of necessity, is neither necessary nor good; as a Potion is necessary, but when a man needeth it. So consequent∣ly, in judgement, a man must so stand in it, that hee come to an oath necessarily: And that is naught, extra terminos necessitatis, when there is no necessity; as not because the oftner he doth it, the better it is; but propter defectum: The case is made plaine by Davids doing, Mar. 2.25. when hee had need, hee fed himselfe with the Shew-bread; which, if he had had other bread, he would not have done; necessity makes things good, which otherwise were not good to doe. So in case of necessity a man may come to sweare, else not: In a case of necessity we may come to the Sanctuary, not to fire a Beacon;To take in this necessity, there are two things: First to take it re∣verently, not rashly, Preac. 4.5. and Eccl. 8. Secondly, to take it as an holy thing, and therefore Levit. 22.23. , &c. this is a judgement then to be heard of: and consequent∣ly because this includeth both vanitatem finis, the vanity of an end; opposed to profit, and opposed to soundnesse and stedfast∣nesse; withall, as he must know the time, so a man must know what it is, Psal. 111.9. The Prophet sets downe (holy and reverent is his name) to holy, is opposed pollute, Levit. 22.32. Neither shall yee pollute my holy name. And to make common, Acts 10.15. Re∣verence, that is, Feare; against that commonly is opposed Rash∣nesse, whether it be of anger, or griefe, or an headdy affection, outgoeth an oath, Eccles. 5.1. Be not rash with thy mouth, looke well to thy feet; and they need lesse looking too: these two offend, in judicio, in judgement. If a man use it commonly, if rashly in the case of necessity: So Preach. 8.2. I advertise you, that yee have a due regard to the word of a King; but much more to the Oath of God: Out of the case of necessity, we must not sweare a truth; but we must have it in price and reverence. Preach. 5.2. A reason why rashnesse in swearing is condemned; God is in Heaven, and thou in the Earth: and in the sixt of the same, he sheweth commonnesse in swearing should be condemned; and the times of necessity, are not com∣monly sine judicio, without judgement.
In publico juramento, in the oath of imposition, there is good or∣der taken: by taking order in regard of breaking judgement, that nulli impuberes, none under fourteene yeares of age, should bee ad∣mitted to sweare; that were not, nor that had beene proved to for∣sweare himselfe before. That men should not sweare, for feare of the inconvenience crept into the Sacrament, as 1. Cor. 11.21. men should not sweare after any meat taking, lest that might haue overthrowne their discretion. 4. Lastly, that they should sweare vncovered, and with an admo∣nition before; and the Booke of GOD laid before them; onely to incite the inward deliberation, or judgement concerning this fearfull action wee have in hand. In the voluntarie oath, there hath bene no order taken, but rash∣ly upon every vaine perturbation stirred up in us, there commeth an oath, & herein we are so rash, that we make Gods Name our pa∣renthesis. 1. Sam. 25.33. David moved with the affection and griefe of unkindnesse, sweareth upon the sudden: but after being let to see what an oath it was, he blesseth God for sending Abigail to him on the other side, 1. Sam. 14.28. Saul touched with a grea∣ter desire of the victorie, then to the request of God, sweareth, that if any touched bread or drink till sunne downe, he should die. And we see the great evill successe that followed on it. Eve∣ry foole useth this in every foolish speech: wee may speake of it with griefe. For the commonnes of it, and the doing of that to him, that we would be loath to doe to any other, i: e: every halfe houre, and for every trifle calling him out of Heaven, to confirme our quar∣rels: and so one sayth, Wee turne Gods Sanctuarie into a bro∣thell house: making the Name of God like an harlots house. Aug. lib. 1. confessionum, Cap. 16. touched with an holy griefe, breaketh out into these words; Vae tibi flumen moris humani, cur∣sed bee the streams of the customes of men; quis resistet tibi? quando non siccaberis? quousque evolues Ecclesiae silios in mare magnum & formidolosum? quod vix transcendunt? when will this dry up? it carrieth them even as a strong streame, into that fearfull lake, that they which are in the Shippe, can scarsly escape it. Per te aguntur flagitia, & non putantur flagitia: by this customary swea∣ring detestable sinnes are committed, which are not thought to be sinnes. And as he saith, Serm. 30. verbis Apostoli: it is as the slipperinesse of the member: quia lingua in udo posita est, the tongue is seated in a moist place. And therefore, James. Cap. 3. gi∣veth great charge of it especially. For the hand and foot not so much. And saint Aug. counsell vpon that place is, Quanto illa citius movetur, & facilius, tanto tu adversus illam fixius ito. doma∣bis, si vigilabis: vigilabis autem, si timebis: timebis si te Christia∣num esse, recorderis, &c. The more quick and nimble the tongue is be thou the more steddie, and resolved against it, thou shalt tame it, if thou watch over it, thou shalt watch over it, if thou fearest it, thou shalt feare it, if thou remembrest that thou art, a Christian.
Si cras factum non fuerit, non fiat juramentum hodie, pignus fiet cras, cras non omnino, & triduo moritur pestis illa â die qua laboramus. Sicut vigilabis, sic vinces. And of himselfe hee addeth: Juravi∣mus, & nos passim incidimus in istam teterrimam consuetudinem: sed ex quo die DEO servire incepimus, & quantum malum sit vidimu, timuimus vehementer, & veternosam consuetudinem timore excussimus. I have bene a swearer my selfe, I have had this custome very riefe, and it would have brought me to death, but since I fixed my heart to serve GOD and considered what great evill is in it, I was set in a trembling. Then for these voluntarie oaths privately taken upon us, it may bee inquired, whether they are not in cases lawfull: we doubt they are. Then as Augustine saith, for private oaths: quantum ad me attinet, non juro: sed quantum mihi videtur, magna necessi∣tate compulsus, cum videam nisi sic faciam mihi non credi: & ei qui crederat magnum, & ei qui non crederet incommodum: then, hac per∣pensa ratione, & consideratione librata; cum magno timore & reveren∣tia coram Deo dico, & novit Christus, quod hoc est in animo meo. For my owne part, I sweare not, yet I conceave were I necessarily thereunto compelled, as when I see if I doe not sweare, I shall not bee believed, and that my word would bee profitable to him that would believe mee, and prejudiciall to him that would not, in this case this reason truely wayed and considered with what feare and reverence I use this forme of speach, Before God, or this, Christ knowes I speake from my heart. And after hee saith, quod meum est, est est: quod amplius est praeter est, non est jurantis, sed non credentis. For mine own part, I would never wish to say, but est, est; non, non; yea, yea; nay, nay. But it is the incredulitie of the other partie. The fourth Rule, is in the Psal. 24.4. Et non juratus est dolose proximo suo, and hath not sworne deceitfully unto his neighbour, it must bee spirituall. Our case must not bee, juravi linguâ, mentem injuratam gero, my tongue swore, but my minde never meant it: it was so odious, that the whole companie hissed at it. Man must not take Gods Name in guile, but meane it from his heart. The heathen men saw it, that lex est spiritualis, that it must bee a spiri∣tuall oath; the whole judgement and will must submit it selfe to it: otherwise (as Isidore saith) his rule is: looke which partie it is that meant the deceit, God will understand, and take the oath, as the other partie tooke it: if hee that swore, had a fraudulent minde, non vt ille, qui juravit, sed vt is, cui juratum est; so it shall bee. The fift Rule. The meanes wee have before Aug. cave facilita∣tem:The Meanes. hee beginneth with it there: de facilitate nascitur consuetudo: ex consuetudine perjurium: ex perjurio, blasphemia. By easinesse wee come to a custome: by a custome, to have no Religion in swearing, for from that sometimes to bestow it upon a lie; and by a lie to perjurie: and by perjurie you shall be in a way to blasphemie: as Jobs wife: Blesse God, and die: id est, curse God. And if higher, to the fear∣full sinne, the sinne against the holy Ghost: obstandum igitur initiis:
we must therfore looke to it betimes in the beginning. These are the links of the chaine of an oath. 2. Againe, as hee there saith, beware of that which is not a perfect oath, but a way to an oath, as per fidem nostram, per salutem meam: by my faith, by my salvation: not as CHRIST said Amen, amen. But when a man saith, and commeth to sweare per fidem meam, , id est, an execration, that is, a part of an oath: It is, as Augustine saith, obligo me per fidem meam Deo: so when a man saith, per salutem meam, he doth obligare salutem suam Deo. If it be not true, the gift of beliefe, and the salvation of his soule, hee desi∣reth to be taken away from him. And God may take it away, if it be his will, in that houre. This is a way, whereby Gods Name commeth to be porfaned, and God first displeased. 3. The third, is the reading and the abridging of two infirmi∣ties or evills. 1. Impaciencie of spirit: 2. Vaine-glorie. These bring us ad facilitatem juramenti, to an easinesse of swearing. Ps. 4.4. Be angrie, and sinne not. The same Fathers: The first sinne is Anger; if a man be of an angrie spirit, it commeth not without an oath: in an angrie mans mouth, nothing is so soone as an oath. Therefore, one way to rid our selves of it, is as GOD sayth, that wee bee slow to wrath: that our spirit be long within us. In glory men will seeme magnificent, to sweare, to make their oathes as true as Gospel.2. For the second; a vaine credit, or glorie; every man desi∣reth that every word he speaketh should bee esteemed as the word of GOD, as an Oracle, or to bee as true as the Gospel: or els there commeth an oath. It is well said of one, There is nothing that they desire so much, as that they make so light accompt of their faith, as doe they that make shipwracke of it at every blow. That they should not bee lightly accompted of; and so they come to bee lightly accompted of: ideo leviter aestimant, ne leviter aesti∣mentur: & leviter aestimando, leviter aestimantur. 4. Lastly, the judgements of GOD particularly considered: there have bene Sermons of them: there hath no commandement had so manie visible judgements, of GOD, as the breach of this, in no age. 5. The Signes. To stand in the due consideration of an oath,The Signes. as it is [massah] a burthen, a taking it up as an heavie thing: if an oath bee unto us as an heavie thing: as wee would marke what signes there may bee drawne of it. There is the first part of a burthen, wee put not more vpon you, than you can beare:Act. 15.28. the avoyding of it, every man is loath to take more upon him than needes hee must: but otherwise more burthens than hee must beare, hee will not take upon him. Then the first is, when wee come to it very hardly or vnwillingly. 2. The second is, 2. Chron. 15.15. When a man must take up an heavie thing, hee goeth to it with all his strength, vt bene fera∣tur onus, that hee may the better carry it. For they did sweare to GOD with all their heart and soule, &c. id est, their understan∣ding was occupied in estimation of GODS Law: id est, every part of their soule was occupied, their members trembled: to
sweare with all his heart, his affections being striken with a due feare. 3. The last, Matth. 11.28. CHRIST saith there, from the nature and propertie of those that are laden, that they would bee refreshed, and bee desirous to bee vnladen: so if our desire bee to bee rid of it so soone as wee may bee: If when wee have entred an oath, presently: I have sworne, saith David, Psal. 119.106. and will performe it. Ps. 15.5. though it be to his owne disadvantage. Last point for the keeping of this Commandement, being kee∣pers of it, Psal. 74.10. he speaketh there of those, that doe irri∣tare nomen Domini; when the name of God is provoked (a thing that we are to take heed of;) if we know the persons to be vaine∣glorious and heady, in their oathes; yet we seeme to consent, and as it were irritare nomen Domini. Therefore these two are to be taked heed of. First, either to deale so, as that we wring not our an oath, nor that may be provoked. Secondly, when it is pro∣voked and is not kept, as Ezek. 17.12. malicious and fraudulent interpretations. Next to the nature of an Oath, commeth juramentum promisso∣rium, the Vow; and for the affinity of both, the one is to be hand∣led after the other;A Vow. because the same conditions are annexed to the Vow, as to a Promise. The difference is this, that the oath is necessary, the vow is a thing of our owne accord voluntarily offered. And againe, that an oath is betwixt man and man; but a vow betwixt Us and God. This vow is, when by the particular con∣sideration of Gods graces in us, we bind our selves, either secretly in heart, or else outwardly in word before others, to yeeld him any duty, which by necessity we are not bound to doe. It may be performed ma∣ny waies; and they may all be reduced to two. The limitation of some generall Commandement, to a parti∣cular; as this, To give almes, it is a generall commandement; but to restraine my selfe to this person, or to give this quantity of my goods, yearely, and weekly; we know it falleth not under any pre∣cept; neither is commanded specially: So these particular re∣straints fall under the Vow. Againe, for the second he handled before; that we call sepes man∣dati, the enclosing or fence of the Commandement. When a man can be content to abridge himselfe of any lawfull thing, which Christian liberty maketh common to all, least he fall into unlaw∣full things. Or thus, When a man by the use of any lawfull or indifferent thing, findeth himselfe lesse able and lesse meete to sanctifie the name of God: and so entreth into a vow with him∣selfe, to abstaine in that behalfe. Such a Vow seemed that of the Rechabites. Jere. 35.6. So wee see howe the matter of a Vow standeth either in binding of generall commandements, to a particular person: or in using or not using those things which Christian libertie maketh lawfull: according as his owne expe∣rience shall find most profitable for him, that his course in godli∣nesse may be more swift. It is true that David, 1. Chron. 29.14.
saith, quae de manu tua accepimus, ea offerimus tibi. When the people had offred willingly to the LORD, this is his Vow and Confes∣sion: that they gave nothing, but they had receaved it. And a Fa∣ther saith, Dedit autem sua Dominus, vt reciperet sua: & recipiendo sun daret se: the LORD gave his owne, that hee might receave his owne againe, and receaving his owne, that hee might give himselfe: and with himselfe, all that hee hath: a greater gift than wee can possesse in this life. Thus wee see the ground of it in the Prophet, Psa. 76.11. vovete Domino & reddite: Vow unto the LORD, and pay. To him that promiseth, and to him that performeth, in both respects there is a thankes due: even for a bare promise some thankes is due; though the bare promise bee but as a blast of wind out of a golden paire of bellowes: but the great thankes is to the performance. So is it in these two words, vovete & reddite, Vow and pay. The great and generall thankes pertaine to reddite, to our paying: be∣cause we bind him to our selves: that is, for it he accompteth him∣selfe debter to us, only for the Vowes sake. Now to come to the necessitie of a Vow for our partes, where our hearts are to doe good, lutum DEI, as GODS clay:The Necessity of Vowe▪ yet they are caera diaboli, the devills wax, easier turned to evill then to good: and for perseverance in evill, mala voluntas est plus quam voluntas, a will unto evill, is more then a will: but in doing and conti∣nuing in good, it is minus quam voluntas, it deserves not to bee called a will: it is a volo, nolo; I will, and I will not: Therefore, it is expedient, yea, necessarie to make Vowes, to set our mind and will in a stay, that wee cannot go backe: to stay our minds in good, and keepe them from evill. Augustine confuteth those, that thinke a man should never doe any thing by Vow: because Vowes being of necessitie, the Vowers being bound, deserve lesse thankes. In deed, saith hee, if it were an outward necessitie, and not assumed, it were somewhat they said: but concerning necessitie hee saith, foe∣lix necessitas, quae compellit ad meliora: that necessitie is true happi∣nesse, that maketh a man doe that that is best for him. This is best done, when it is done, either voto simplici, by a bare and simple Vow; or in a solemne Vow before others. Now then besides this, that it strengtheneth mans will in goodnesse, and so maketh our deedes the more acceptable to GOD, as the stiffe and setled purpose of the sinner maketh his sinne worse; so this resolution, that hee will not goe backe, it worketh yet further, and maketh his good thing the better: For there is nothing that wee doe under a Vow, but in this respect it becommeth a Sacrifice. That we doe it vowing, because wee have pledged it to GOD: And not onely that, but also be∣side the Vow, which is acceptable to GOD; there is a Sacrifice made to him of our owne freedome and libertie: yea, of our power. So then a man resteth not on his owne person, to doe these actions which hee will: but hee hath made over his power to GOD, and bindeth himselfe to it: so that now hee resteth not of him∣selfe. So then certaine it is that men have freedome, and libertie: as
it is plaine by▪ Deut. 23.22. If a man doe not vow, hee shall not sinne: neither shall hee loose his freedome: but that to good natures, the rule lyeth more straitly upon them: Pauciora licent il∣lis quam vllis, quibus licent omnia. Their libertie is lesse then any other libertie, that have it to doe as they list. So is the nature of the children of GOD: where they are let loose, there they strain themselves. And so consequently in the nature it selfe, it must not bee imposed upon us by others; but wee must bee content to take it, and leave it our selves. So wee must know, that if there be any that thinke,Wee see that those vowes should flourish in the time of the Gospel: Esa. 19.2. . .24. Rom 10.1. dedicated their goods, &c. because it is a matter of freedome, that Christians are to bee exempted from it; hee is confuted by Esa. 19.21. hee showeth plainly that GOD will looke for the service of Vowes: and Nahum. 1.15. more plaine, applied Rom. 10.15. to the Preachers of the Gospel. Wee see in Act. 4. and 5. in the Apostles time, that the consecrating of their possessions to common uses, and the laying of their money in common, it was nothing els but the performing of a common vow. Such is the necessitie. The next thing is this, to enquire what thinges GOD accep∣teth best in this service; and how the children of GOD have be∣haved themselves in this point? and how wee must. 1. Wee see, that they have begunne with themselves, and that in two respects. A man imposeth a vow on himselfe, either as it is Numb. 30.14. for the humbling of his soule, for some sinne past; id est, The suffring of some temporall affliction; as fasting, or otherwise. 2. or the vowe of the Nazarite. Numb. 6. which was nothing els, but a straight and perfect kind of living, straiter than any other. When they were to enter upon their calling, or any such weightie thing: and it is concluded of the Fathers that it grew especially afterward to bee an holy and solemne thing. For every one, before hee gave himselfe to studie, and entred into the Schooles of the Prophets, he was wont to separate himselfe by the Vow of a Nazarite. So secondly wee find, that a man may vow suos, not only him∣selfe, but his: as his children as Anna, 1. Sam. 1.11.28. vowed Sa∣muel. Psal. 119.108. Levit. 27.2. Revel. 2.1. And these are personall vowes. The other, 1. Votum reale, a vow of some thing: is either fructus labiorum, as Psal. 61.8. I will alway sing prayses to thy Name, that I may dayly performe my vowes. Hee saith, that the vowes of GOD, were dayly upon him. id est, hee had enjoyned himselfe to a taske concerning prayer and thanksgiving, which dayly he was to performe to him, even by vertue of a Vowe. 2. So when we depart from that, and come to substantiall thinges, as Davids vow, Psal. 132.2. for the building of the Tem∣ple, Levit. 27. A man may vow to GOD, an house, as Colledges. So likewise erection of Lands to the maintenance either of Reli∣gion, or of the seeds of Religion; in the same Chapter in the end. In Exod. 36.3. Offerings and Free-gifts: and Gen. 28.12. a cer∣taine portion of his goods. And further, Levit. 23.38. a certaine
number of dayes, and of times. For besides their Sabboths, they had their dies votivos, dayes vowed to the Service of GOD. These are the chiefe heads, and all Vowes are comprehended un∣der some one of these. The easinesse of a promise (as the Proverbe goeth) when a man is not master of his owne tongue, but of his purse: hath made that now the former part of a Vow, if it were nothing but vove∣re, meerly to vow. It were easie to doe, and nothing easier than vovere, to make a vow. But as Augustine saith upon Psal. 6. Quia audivisti Reddite, non vis vovere; modo voluisti vovere: all the while wee talked of promising, you would vow: now yee will not: why! because yee heare of Reddite, that you must pay your vow. For as it is no sinne not to vow: and yet it is a diminishing of perfection: because, if any vow, and performeth it not, hee sin∣neth, and that grievously: insomuch as Preach. 5.4. hee saith, A man had better never to have vowed, then not to thinke seriouslie, and perform speedilie, that which he hath vowed. For it is nothing els but a grosse dilusion, and scoffing at his Majestie, when his pro∣mise is not kept. Prov. 20.25. it is said, that for a man to devour a thing that is sanctified, it is a destruction: as Solomon, he had those about him, his courtiers, that would doe so to those Treasures that hee had layed vp, for the building of the Temple. And when a man hath made a Vow, and doth not seeke to pay his fayth, it is a thing that will choake his soule, and shall ever cleave to him as a snare. Therefore, the performance must needes bee thought on. And because it is but one of the conditions, wee will joyne the rest with it. With the purpose of performing we must have these conditions. 1. In regard of him that voweth: Numb. 30. that hee bee sui juris; a free person: and one that may promise without the con∣sent of another: as there, the child without the consent of the father, cannot vow: nor the wife without the husband, nor the ser∣vant without the master. 2. And the second is, of the affinitie of the nature of a promise, it must bee licitum & possibile, lawfull and possible. Now what is possible, & what impossible? There are divers that make an hard mat∣ter to define: and therefore have abstained from vowing. And of that commeth a disallowing of vowes made in former ages: as that it were not possible for a man to vow singlenesse of life. As to say that all men may doe it, is dangerous: so to say that none at all may doe it, is no lesse dangerous. Wee must take heede least the heathen man rise up against us in judgement, that saith, Nol∣le in causa est, non posse praetenditur, the true cause is wee will not, when wee pretend wee cannot. So wee say, wee have not the gift: in deede wee want another gift, that should goe before it; the gift of great abstinence in meat and drinke, which they had in the ages before: and then came a generall possibilitie, to vow, and to per∣forme. But now in our dayes Tertullians saying may bee verefied, that multivorantia and multinubentia must needs goe together; be∣cause
there are many feasts and drinkings; therefore, there must be many marriages. And the heathen man said, that libido is spuma ingluvi∣ci, lust is the froth of gluttony. Therefore, men must straine, and not say they are not able. 3. The third. Vt sit licitum: that it bee lawfull and honest: not a frivolous matter: such as was the shaving of the head: but such a thing as it shall bee verified of it, non debet voveri DEO, quod dis∣plicet DEO. That it may bee worthie of the LORD; to whom it is vowed. As their oath to kill Paul, it was unlawfull: if GOD would not have it payed, hee would not have it vowed. This for the matter. 4. For the time, it is set downe, in Psal. 66.13. When I was in trouble: and a practise of it, in Numb. 26.2. For the time of affliction, binding our selves to some generall action. There the Israelites in time of danger vowed a vow: and it was allowed. But that Jonah 1.16. a vow, not before, for deliverance, but after deliverance; those vowes that are vowed in tranquillo, in a Calme, are most accepted of GOD. 5. The last; That before, id est, The rendring or performing of it: and that presently, without delay. Levit. 7.15. If the Sacri∣fice bee a Vow, it shall bee eaten the same day. And fully without commutation, or detracting from it. Levit. 22.28. and carefully in every respect in performing it; to goe rather further then wee have promised, then to come shorter. Numb. 6.11. The rest of the duties for the Glorie of GOD, are before handled. 4. The fourth Precept and Rule, is; That this Law is Spirituall: That is as much to say, as, Because in the beginning, the Name was but an object of speech: Esa. 29.13. That this swearing, vowing, speaking of the Name of GOD, it returneth to that place, that all those things, if they bee done with the lipps onely, and our hearts bee farre from them: wee are in the number of those, that with lipps come neare; but are farre off with their hearts. A sort of people, that pervert the true worship of GOD: That the heart shold first come, and the lipps attend upon it. Au∣gustine in his tenth Booke of Confess. Cap. 33. saith flete mecum fra∣tres, & flete pro me; and in that place hee confesseth those infirmi∣ties that were in him, and what is the thing that hee desired to bee moved from: It is, That in finging Psalmes in the Church, hee did more set his mind upon the Tune, than to please GOD in the matter. Animus enim meus magis erat ad cantum, quam ad id quod cantabatur. Which hee confesseth to be a great fault. The summe or effect is this: That the exercises performed to GOD with the mouth, when as there is nothing else but a noyse, as the crac∣king of Thornes burning under a pott, there is a lowd voyce, but a dumbe affection, it is a thing lamentable; and therefore, to bee left of us. Yet it is not to bee doubted, but the man had many good mo∣tions:
as he saith, Ita saepe facio non sentiens: but postquam feci, sen∣tio, I doe so often, and I perceive it not; but after I have done it, I perceive it, that I have done it. And this might be wished that we might feele it, when we have done it, we be farre from these sayings. The Meanes, the inducing meanes:The Meanes. For a man to esteeme Gods name Holy, may be the consideration of Phil. 4.3. that he hath likewise magnified our names greatly, insomuch as hee hath re∣gistred them in the Booke of life. And not onely that, but as it is, Heb. 11.16. even as we were his owne in the World, so he is ours: and he is not ashamed to be called Deus noster, our God; that we should not be ashamed of his name; and that he hath ex∣alted our names to so honourable a Booke; these be wayes and meanes to induce us unto it. 2. A second way or meanes how to performe it; that before we can come to glorifie him, we must be perswaded that the acti∣ons which we doe, are for his glory; and wee must learne what actions please him: and before we have assurance of them, wee must have them before us; but we have none, but in examples of those in former ages, before our time: And they little affect us, because either we thinke that they pertaine not to us; or if they pertaine to us, we are in doubt whether they be so or no: or else if wee thinke they are true, wee thinke that God had glory and praise enough in those dayes; and we have but little present use of it. And therefore counsell hath beene given, that as it is writ∣ten of every man of God, of Nathan, Gad, and the rest of the Children of the Prophets: that every man had annales, from the beginning of his time, that he might see the visible judgements of God that he had shewed upon his enemies; and a Catalogue of his mercies on his Children, to be reverenced among men: and joyning the present examples with those that are past, one shall not be an impediment to another; neither those that were before shall seeme incredible, because wee see them, or the like done in our dayes: and on the contrary, ours shall not seeme strange, because we see the like done before. 3. Another is, a Dexterity which we see in Christ, and in the servants of Christ; wherein they had so inured themselves, from every action and creature to the glory of God; so that there was nothing could be spoken, nothing done, nothing heard, but they would make use of it to returne to Gods glory: as Luke 8.12. Christ, by occasion of being early in the Temple, and the Sunne shining bright, tooke occasion to fall into large discourse of the Sunne of the World, and Heavenly light; and concerning the Naturall darknesse of man, and made a fruitfull speech of it. And John 6.26. upon the inquiry of them how he came thither; and his answer, that that question was moved rather because they would have their dinner againe then for the Miracle they saw, and upon some small speech of Manna, there was an occasion of his great Sermon of the Sacrament, and the Bread of life. Most
notable Luke 14. in one dinner three occasions: 1. of the stri∣vings of guests for the highest places. 2. for the substantiall and chiefe persons invited: 3. of the speach of one at the table ut∣tered, Blessed is hee that eateth bread in the Kingdome of GOD: CHRIST there entreth into three very fruitfull Exhortations or admonitions, directly tending to the Glorie of GOD. Esa. 5. by going downe to the Vineyard, Jer. 18.1. by going downe to the potters shop. Act. 17. by a blind altar, by Esaie, Jeremie and Paul, occasions were taken to confound the Jewes, and to convert the Gentiles. When every man studieth to attaine to this aptnesse, no thing can bee offered, but some seasoned talke would bee rai∣sed from it, and GOD daylie glorified. The last is, by a reverent behaviour in our speech, not only of GODS Name, and credit: but also of that which hee hath gi∣ven us, as a meanes to it. Whatsoever the Name of GOD is printed on, id est, whatsoever is called by the Name of GOD. For there is no name that CHRIST had, as JESUS, and SA∣VIOUR, &c. there is none of them, but Men had and were called by them. Onely this Name Verbum, the Word, none ever had it: that men might know, that that Name was most est emeed of GOD; and in the highest degree. Act. 9.15. by the judgement of late and best Writers, where Paul is said, hee should carrie GODS Name before the Gentiles; that is nothing else but his Word. Because it is an especiall meanes for the magnifying of His Name. And Zach. 10.12. the abominable and cursed practise of sundrie ungracious persons, condemned by all the sacred Coun∣cells, that ever have beene, and anathematized, and accompted so grosse a fault in Poperie, as that the Counsell of Trent, 4. sect. last, punished it: that is, for applying sacred sentences of this Word to prophane libells and jeasts. What shall wee say, saith Augustine: but onely that these men set themselves in a way, by neglecting GODS Gift; id est, His Word, after to neglect His Name: so by neglecting GODS Word, not to sticke to sweare by great and blasphemous oaths. The Signes.The Signes. As in the first signification of a Burthen, and ap∣plying it to a Christian Oath; so here, when our Necessitie is not sought, but the Glorie of GOD, when a Burthen. As it is compared to a Banner or Standard, the example of the Name, and the behaviour of a man to that, may shew us, whether wee bee aright. For in the Hoste, they stood still when their Standard stood still, and they moved, when their Standard moved. So if there bee any man that for his actions, meditations and en∣terprises, that standeth so affected, that hee can goe, and will goe so farre as the Banner goeth: so farre as GODS Glorie leadeth him, and that standing, hee will goe no further. Howso∣ever flesh and worldly powers and reasons would allure him to goe further. If wee bee at the Commandement of the Glorie of GOD, then wee have the first Signe. There are many, that when
that standeth still, goe; and when that calleth backe, goe further; and yet neither come to leave off nor to doe: When Gods glory is to be sought, they sit still; and when it calleth them backe, they goe on. These men are farre from the first signe. 2. A second signe, and that was a part in the Graecians & Romans oathes, at the entring of them, first, into the Campe, when they were sworne Souldiers: Pugnabo pro sacris, & solus, & cum aliis; he would fight for it alone, and with company also: This is a plaine signe, whereby the World is condemned of not seeking his glory: if all turne, he will turne; he shall have no glory, â solis: for it is, cum aliis that getteth God the glory: but if they shrinke away, there are but few that will keep the second part of their oath, that will stand soli, themselves alone by the standard, when the whole Realme runneth to Apostacie. 3. The third is this, That whosoever belonged to one standard, or had once professed that hee was of that band, it was present death, if either in mouth hee had hostile symbolum, or about him, hostilem tesseram. If he had the enemies Watch-word, or their Badge, it was death. Now I would know (but every one may know by seeing and hearing) there are some that professe Christ in outward behaviour and shew, that in their gates and apparrell are opposite to this; there are plaine Tessarae, Badges of the ene∣my; and if you heare them speake, they have the right Watchword of the Devill: Worldly speeches and worldly signes; and that we doe militari carni & sanguini, we weare them daily; and so by this we may examine our selves. 4. The fourth, The perishing of a righteous man in his righteous∣nesse. It was the manner of the delivering of the standard among the Lacedaemonians, ; My name I deliver unto you, eiher bring it home, or be brought home upon it. This is confession of the name of Christ; that we bring our Shield sound to God, or else dye for it, rather then lose it; that is, he must not onely be bound at Jerusalem, but dye for Christ Jesus. 5. Last, How to others, we may be perswaded for the procuring of it in them also. The Apostles precept, Col. 4.6. our speech must be such, as the hearers may receive grace, and have profit by it. It hath a place in the second Commandement; and not onely in speech, but also (as Christ saith) in Workes, &c. And as Rom. 2. Esay 52.2. that men blaspheme not the Word of God by your unreformed lives; that men say not, this word is a word, not of power, but may say it is a Religion of strength; that they say not, that our Religion is Unweaponed, or a Favourer of Vice. The Penalty of the Commandement,Penaltie. God will not hold him guilt∣lesse: that is, as before in the second Commandement; he saith, hee will fall downe to an Image, because hee will spare him∣selfe; he shall not need to begge: therefore he will fall downe: but God upon that saith, they shall all fare the worse for it; hee
will visit him and his children to the third and fourth generation: So here is a Frustra, quod non erit frustra, here is a taking of Gods name in vaine, which will not prove in vaine; for he will come in judgement: they to save themselves from some present danger, will take his name in vaine; but here cometh not an holding Guiltlesse, but a Condemning for it. It shall turne to his de∣struction, where he thought to be saved. The reason why God annexed here a penalty, as before, the great gaine a man might reape by changing his Religion. So here, when there is a great profit, then there is a great penalty set upon them, that breake it. So here, Ubi lapsus est, in procliui, as a mans tongue (as Augustine saith) Posita est in udo, is set in a glio and slippery place: There∣fore as it is, Psalm. 141.3. God must set a doore and a lock upon our lips. And that doore is, Thou shalt not be held guiltlesse: that is, if ye be called Christians, and take upon you a vaine professi∣on, and make frustrate Gods name. For a Christian must depart from wickednesse, 1 Sam. 2.3. Psalm. 75.5.I said to the fooles, deale not so madly, and to the ungodly, set not up your horne. If you take upon you any other name, if you defend not this, or defend things opposed to this, in Disputations maintaine false Doctrine; if in your speech you bury the name of God; or if you bury it not, but talke of it foolishly and vainely, and without feare and reverence; if in talke you forget it, if you speake evill of Gods name, by disliking of his mercies bestowed upon any, or his judge∣ments; if you, when you should blesse his name, you take it and apply it to Witchcraft and Sorceries, and evill things: If when you should blesse others, ye make it a By-word to curse them by it. If in swearing you take it in vaine; if you vow and doe not performe; if any of these wayes you blaspheme God; How then? Then it is said, The Lord will not hold him guiltlesse. And it is well said: for it is he indeed that must doe it; for the World will hold him guiltlesse; as swearers now a dayes are not punished. For a man that should empaire a mans name, I have better remedy for it, then for the blasphemie of the name of God: He shall not goe scot-free, for slandering my name; but Gods name findeth not so much favour of our Law. Therefore because the World regardeth it so little, it is necessary that the Lord should take it into his hands: the Lord will looke to it. Not to be held Guiltlesse, is the whole matter: for who is there that shall not fall into intollerable and endlesse trouble, if the Lord hold him not Guiltlesse: For every man is guilty before God; and if he found him guiltie, yet he will not be accompted guiltie; but this name shall not be holden guiltlesse, Hic est totus fructus, ut auferatur peccatum, this is the whole fruit, that our sinne may be taken away; else we are the most miserable creatures, if we lived alwayes in Vaine. Because Gods threatnings in the Law pertaine as well to this life, as to the life to come; and we said before, that there is no Commandement that ever God hath set downe, that there is so
fearefull judgements in this age, and in the age before, and in eve∣ry age, as this hath had. Zach. 5.4. The Prophet setteth there a flying Booke, and that was to take hold of the house of the Swea∣rer, and to consume the Posts, Tymber, Stones, and all. For stoning, Levit. 24.11. to stone the Perjured person to death, Num. 5.21. Then the Priest shall charge the Woman with an oath of cursing, and he shall say to the woman, The Lord make thee be accursed and de∣testable for the oath among the people, and the Lord cause thy thigh to to rott, and thy belly to swell, vers. 22. And that this musty water may goe into thy bowels, to cause thy belly to swell and thy thighes to rot. And not onely in these private persons; but Jer. 21.7. the plagues of God against whole Nations, 1 Sam. 21. the plague of a Famine. Shall hee prosper, shall hee escape that doth these things? or shall he breake the Covenant, and be delivered? Ezek. 17.16. Destruction and Captivity on a whole Land. And there are bookes of this thing alone: and of particuler persons and whole Nations God hath shewed manifest judgements: And this cannot otherwise be, because we are so zealous and carefull of our name, how much more is God of his? For his name passeth ours. We say, and it is a common By-word among us, What is a man, but his good name? 2. They say, Crudelis est sibi homo, qui famam suam negligit, aut inultam sinit, He is a cruell man that neglecteth his name: that God should be negligent, if he should not punish it. Et solius laesae famae causa duellum est permittendum, quia fama ambu∣lat pari passu cum vitâ, the taking away of a mans life, that taketh away his good name. Then if we for our owne names sake be thus zealous: and so, if it be for the name of our Father, or any of those that we receive benefit by, wee will thinke ill of our selves, if we take not the quarrell upon us: God is not to be accused, to punish those that take his name in vaine. To conclude, as it is most certaine that Gods name is glorious in it selfe, Psal. 8.1. How glorious is thy name in all the World? So it must be in every one of us. If thou wilt, it shall be glorified by thee willingly; if thou wilt not, in spite of thy teeth, whether thou wilt or no, he will be glorified, Exod. 14.4. And I will har∣den Pharaohs heart, so I will get me honour upon Pharaoh and upon all his Host. Deut. 14.2. Thou art an holy people unto the Lord. We must be as the Israelites, or wee shall be as Pharaoh. Hee that will not glorifie Gods name with the Israelites, shall glorifie it with Pharaoh; that is, by suffering Gods punishing hand. For the Lord will not hold him guiltlesse. The end of the third Commandement.
The IV. Commandement. Remember that thou keepe holy the Sab∣bath day, &c. THE outward worship was divided, into the generall, or state and temporall wor∣ship. The reason is this; because, where∣as God commandeth the inward worship of the Soule, in the first Commande∣ment, both of knowledge and will; and in the second, hee would have manifest and knowne outwardly, the submitting of our knowledge, wisedome and reason, by reverence, a worship; the submitting of our affections or will, by yeelding reverence of gesture; and for this outward gestnre, because it could be performed onely to him, he would not have it done then onely: but when wee were dealing with others, and to others, that the glory of his name might be magnified in speech; and therefore the duties of the third Commandement are injoyned; and these three, perpetuall and generall: besides these three; in the fourth Commandement he taketh order, that there be not onely a generall profession, but also, a set day, a solemne profession; wherein there should be a publique profession of these duties and those: and wherein they should all be brought to ight, Levit. 23.2, 3. The feasts of the Lord which ye shall call the holy assemblies, even those are my feasts: Six dayes shall worke be done, but the seventh shall bee the Sabbath of rest, an holy convocation, ye shall doe no worke therein: It is the Sabbath of the Lord in all your dwellings. The end of the Sabbath. A great and holy assembly, for this end; either that they might be sanctified and all taught; or that they might practice them to his glory in the great congregation. It is true, and that the Heathen man saw well, Publicorum cura mi∣nor, the common care is not the best care: But that that is looked to of all, is cared for of none; and cometh to be regarded of none: and so no doubt would men have dealt with God, had not he pro∣vided a particuler day for himselfe, and setled it by a Commande∣ment; and that in very particuler manner. By that continuall and
generall Sabbath, they have no day of rest. The drift of God in adding this Commandement, shall be seene. For the Commandement it selfe; generally it is full out as long and longer then the second Commandement: of many words, and therefore moveth us to a due, and no lesse considera∣tion of it. We see for the duties of the second Table; foure of them are ended in a word: because common honesty, and writers; as Philosophers, politick and civill Lawes, have taken order for them: as in manslaughter, whoredome, and theft, &c: but the fifth, because God seeth there is an humour in us, that will not willingly yeeld to subjection; therefore it was necessary that God should fence it with a reason: So likewise in the tenth, there is a great particularity used in it; because men thinke that their thoughts are free, and not to come into judgement; and there∣fore they may have their Concupiscence and Will free. But now in the first Table, every Commandement hath his reason: but a∣bove them all in particular, this Commandement, it includeth six respects, that are not found in any of the rest. 1. That where the rest runne either barely affirmative, as the fifth, or barely negative, as the rest: in this both parts are expres∣sed: Affirmative, in these words, Remember thou keepe holy, &c. Negative, In it thou shalt doe no manner of worke, &c. So that our desire and inclination to the breach of this Commandement, is both wayes met withall. 2. That not onely to our selves, but to all others that pertaine to us, which in a full ennumeration, and a wonderfull kind of par∣ticularity God proceedeth here to reckon them up, that with us, or by us may be violators of this Commandement. 3. In the other, we see how the case standeth; they all are im∣perative, and they runne peremptorily: the word here used, though it be of the Imperative Moode; yet it is rather a word of intrea∣ty, Remember; and may be a note of separation from the rest: this Commandement therefore, imperat & persuadet, doth both com∣mand and perswade, in the word Remember. 4. Againe, beside the Commandement, it yeeldeth a reason, and perswadeth; but not with one reason, as the other: but with one maine reason indeed, and three others; so that this exceedeth all, by the multitude of perswasions. 5. Another is this; that we see in the former Commandement, the reason is fearefull, so it is in the second Commandement. In this it is a farre more easie and reasonable; for the great and maine reason is this, that we should doe no more then God hath done. 6. That as we see by the preface annexed, Recordare, Remember; when we know it is that word, that we expresse an especiall charge by; because we thinke that it maketh no matter, that it is but a trifle, whether a duty be broken or kept: and therefore he wil∣eth and chargeth us to have an especiall regard of it, and not for∣get him.
The Commandement, as it standeth, is divided into the 1. Pre∣cept; and 2. Aetiologie: that is, the reason or perswasion. First, the Precept; Remember that thou sandine a day unto me: a day of rest to the Lord. For the understanding of it, wee must know what is meant, first, by day of rest, or Sabbath; secondly, what by sanctifying. A day of rest or Sabbath, properly in the Originall tongue be∣tokeneth such a rest, as there hath a worke gone before it: Cessai, such a rest is plainely set downe, Levit. 25. When the Land hath beene laboured and tilled six yeares; he chargeth it to be suffered to rest the seventh yeare, and lye fallow: a politick Law. So that after a labour of six dayes, this is it that God requireth, that there should be a day of ceasing. Sanctifying is here attributed to two in this Commandement; in the end, that the Lord sanctifyed the Sabbath; here in the beginning, that wee must remember to sanctifie it. The rule in Divinity is, that where any word is given to God and to Man, that to God is applyed, Sub modo destinandi: to Man, Sub modo applicandi. When God doth appoint a thing to an holy use, he is said to sanctifie it: when a man applyeth it to that end, whereunto God hath appointed it, he is said to sanctifie it. It is sure that by nature all are alike before God; and men dif∣fer not by nature: and so may it be said of Water, Bread, Wine, and Dayes, &c. by nature all are alike, and of it selfe, one is not more holy then another; but Levit. 20.26. the first action, God saith, I have put you apart from all people, that you should bee mine. When God putteth a man apart, that he should be his, whether his in the common wealth, or in the Church to doe it there; ei∣ther Magistrate or Minister, then this separation is the beginning of a sanctifying. So of that Water, that is separated to Baptisme; and in the creatures of Bread and Wine, there is no more in them naturally then in others; till they be put apart, from the rest of the Water and Bread and Wine, and made Gods, that is, appoin∣ted to an use in his Church. And so likewise of dayes naturally, there is not more holinesse in one of them then in another; onely it is the Ordinance of God that maketh the separation of it, from the other to become his. The common use, that a man doth sepa∣rate to the Lord of all that he hath, whether it be man or beast, may neither be sold, nor redeemed; for every thing separate from the common use, is most holy to the Lord. Now the nature of such things is, as Levit. 27.28. Every thing that is separate from common use, is most holy to the Lord; and it must neither be sold nor redeemed: therefore we see that Exod. 28, 29, 30. Chap. For his Tabernacle, the fireforks, pothooks, fleshooks, made for the Sacrifice, and the basest instruments made for the fire to stirre it up, and the meate in the Caldrons, whereof a libamen, (or offering) should not be put in any other fire; and the Snuffers to no other Lamps, but those of the Ta∣bernacle: all onely to this. So this is the nature of a thing sancti∣fied,
and how it differeth from other things. Other things may serve, if they be done in part; this it must not be done in part, but onely and wholly, Psal. 1.2. Meditation every day and every night doth well; Psal. 145.2. Every day he will praise God: and Psal. 55.17. he will do it thrice a day, in the Evening, Morning, and Noone: and Psal. 119.164. he will doe it seven times a day, because of his righteous judgements: Yet all these are but in part; for in these dayes other things may be done joyntly with it, and they may take also a part of the day lawfully; but here is the dif∣ference: This day the most holy day and separated to Gods use, this it must be done onely and wholly, not in part, nor joyntly with any other exercise. Now the question is, wherefore it pleased God to deale thus with that day to sanctifie it, (as we see it was) before any sinne came into the World? as Gen. 2.3. whether it be for himselfe, Tit. 1.25. To the cleane, all things are cleane; to the holy all things are holy. God is most holy and needeth nothing to be sanctified to him: if not for him, therefore for us. 1 Thes. 4.3. Our sanctifi∣cation is the will and pleasure of God: And consequently to the end we might be made holy, he hath hallowed the day, his Word, &c. So by the second way or part of sanctification, by annexing a blessing to them, he blessed it; and in the Bread of the Sacra∣ment; as Mat. 26.26. he blest the bread; and his dicere is facere; that is, he gave it a power of doing good. As to his bread, so to his day; and hath it in two sorts of holinesse: First, for whereas the place is said to be holy, as the place whereon Moses stood, and all that belonged to the Tabernacle, because they were meanes unto holinesse. Secondly, so the fruit is another use; when as holinesse is wrought and brought forth in practice (Sanctificamini, & sancti estote) then it commeth to thus much, God hath put apart this day, to the end that it might bee applyed wholly either to the meanes of sanctification, or to the practice of his sanctification begotten in us. Christ, Mark 2. did a good Sabbath dayes worke, and he hath given it a blessing; that is, that what meanes of sancti∣fication we use in it, the meditation that wee have in it, it shall be of more effect and force to us, then it should be on any other day not sanctified. Then if we see how God hath sanctified it, wee must see how we must doe: (i. e.) As he by his blessing sanctifieth it, so we must sanctifie it by our obedience. In two parts; first, in estimation or account, that is for our judgement: secondly, in our use, that is for our practice. First, we must account of it as a day holy to God; Acts 10.15. we must not count it common. What God hath cleansed, that must not be counted common; our judgement must be of it, that it be not common; but as a Magistrate is among men, so that must be a day of dayes. Secondly, our use that we so use it: The use is excellently set
downe, Esay 58.13. that wee doe not our owne businesse, that thinking of common thoughts, take not up our braines, nor com∣mon communication; and that our behaviour be sanctified, ten∣ding to the practice of holinesse. Hag. 2.14. It is plaine, that if that that is sanctified, touch that, that is common, it imputeth not holinesse to that that is common, but it receiveth unholinesse from it: So that the touching of an unholy action in our life that day, is a polluting of the day of the Lord. This wee must take heed to, as much as in us lyeth: else, Mat. 5.25. as our Saviour there sheweth, a woman may be chaste, and yet adultery may be committed, if a wicked eye looke on her, to lust after her; there is adultery, though the party remaine chaste: so in respect of holy things, they remaine holy, yet we doe pollute them, when as by touching profane things, we labour as much as in us lyeth to make them unholy. Here are two things, and both commanded; but not equally, but the one for the other: for sanctification is the last end and drift of God, and the meanes and practice of it onely and wholly is his chiefe end, and is the end of the other. Now the other, the rest, is a subordinate end, because without it, this matter will not be brought to passe in that order that God requireth. To the making it plaine, thus much; that the Heathen men by the light of nature have seene, that every thing is then best order∣ed, when it hath but one office, and is ordained to doe but one thing; that is, whatsoever is done, it must throughly be done; it must be alonely done, the reason is, because we are res integra fi∣nita, finite creatures: and if two things be done at once, one part of our thoughts will be taken from the other, we cannot wholly intend two things at once; this is our case. But it was the case of our Father Adam in innocency; because he had a naturall soule, and finite, therefore he was not able wholly to intend the dressing of the Garden in six dayes, and to intend the whole sanctification of the day of rest, commanded Gen. 2.3. now because of this, God would have a solemne profession of body and soule; and there∣fore this was the end, why God instituted, blessed and sanctified the seventh day; so that it commeth for a remedy against distracti∣on to be intended to any other use, especially in the solemne wor∣ship of the Lord; that takes up the whole man, and necessarily suffereth no distraction; therefore it doth not suffer him to be intended to any other use. Now, if being then in that case, he could not: we that have more impediments to withdraw us, we had need of a remedy against our distraction. And thus cometh the rest in, because that this totall solemne sanctification cannot be performed without ceasing from the rest of our workes, and labour; because unlesse we doe rest, we cannot sanctifie. There∣fore is it, that this is commanded, with our sanctification, a day of rest; otherwise, whereas our resting hindreth our sanctification, it must bee taken away. And indeed Christ doth acknowledge, Mark 2.27. that man was not made for the rest, but for sanctifi∣cation.
Sanctification was his end, and man was made for it: rest is a subordinate end, and man was not made for it, but rather that for man; and as it is, 1. Tim. 4.8. a mans bodily labour, so his bo∣dily rest profiteth nothing, but to this end applyed, God liketh it not. There is beside in the commandement another word Remember, and because that is properly of a thing past, therefore it referreth to some place or time before; and there is mention of the Sab∣bath but in two places before, one is Exod. 16.23.24.25. but that is not it; for God in the end, adding (God blessed it) referreth us to that place, where the same words are: Gen. 2.3. and so we know that we are referred thither: And by this occasion falleth in that first question, that many thinke it is a Ceremony, and sundry are so perswaded, and hold that men are not bound to sanctifie it since Christ. Our Saviour in the case of difference, and resolution of Polygamie; hath taken a good course and order, hee goeth to the beginning; how it was ab initio, non sic ab initio, from the be∣ginning it was not so: to call it to the first institution; for that is it, that giveth the best judgement, and the last: first end is the true end. A thing is not said to be ceremoniall, if a ceremoni∣all use or end be annexed to it; for then not one of the tenne mo∣rall Commandements, but it should bee ceremoniall: for they have some ceremonie annexed to them: but that is a ceremony, whose first and principall end is a ceremonie; which this day of rest cannot be. The reason, because Paradise and mans per∣fection, and a ceremony cannot agree, in the state of a mans inno∣cencie. The reason is, because that before there was a Saviour, there could not be a type of a Saviour: and before there was sin, there needed no Saviour: So consequently, needing no Saviour, needed no ceremony; and needing no Saviour, nor ceremonie, it could not be ceremoniall. But that was it, that Adam having in the six dayes a naturall use in his body of the creatures, should for the glory of God on the seventh day, have a spirituall use and consideration. So that this remedy against Distraction is the first and principall, and generall end; though other ends were after added: as Deut. 5.15. it pleased God to add this reason, that they might remember the benefit of the deliverance out of Aegypt; but this was but finis posterior, a particular and after end, and ne∣cessary. So it were well if we might add to our dayes of rest the memory of our benefits. And Exod. 23.12. God yeeldeth a po∣litique end; the ceasing of beasts and men that they may returne more fresh to their labour: there is moreover no better nor cer∣tainer way to keepe off our enemies: those , Ephes. 6.12. those spirituall wickednesses, the preaching of the Law then is a meane to enable us to withstand the crafty and subtile suggestions of sin and Satan. And if any will say, that beside these ends, there was figured by this rest, that rest we shall have from sinne by Christs death: True, but yet it is an accessorie end; in the Sacrament of Circumcision, Circumcision is ceased, and
the Passover, so is the Sabbath: but the Sacrament of initiation is not ceased, there were two ends of it. 1. The first, was to seale us, to his preventing or following Grace. 2. The other to bee a figure of the circumcision of the Heart: of the Sacrifice of the world, this is ceased. So the seventh day is ceased; but there is another day: there is a day remaining; because the end of it was immutable from the beginning. The reason of it selfe is so forceable and plaine, that without bringing in a mani∣fest absurditie, it cannot bee avoided, when they see these endes to carry us to the Institution, and that in Paradise. But you will say, Adam never kept it, neither was it kept till Exod. 16. Which should in the very misliking, seeme an absurd thing, that GOD two thousand yeares, before a thing should bee put in use, should consecrate that thing to Sanctification: and all that while it should bee to no End: And indeed the sort of the Heretikes that held, that materia prima, was so made of GOD a great many yeares before the world, and it abode by him till the world was made. They are confounded by the Fathers, by this, that no man of wisdome doth make any thing to stand by him, many yeares before it can bee put to any use: Therefore, GOD useth not so to doe: but when hee shall have use of any thing, then to blesse it. This prooveth, that this day resteth on the consciences of men, and that the institution riseth from GOD immediately, even in Adams innocencie. Wee must understand, that Deut. 4.13. GOD maketh there a plaine distinction betweene Ceremonies and the morall law, by this manner. That the one proceedeth from him immediatelie: the other by the ministerie of Moses, and that very same is Deutere∣nom. 5.31. Againe, beside the Confusion and breach of Order, a thing which GOD misliketh; one of the Fathers, on these words saith, Nun∣quid & Saul est inter Prophetas? What is Saul amongst the Pro∣phets? Not a Prophet by profession: they wondred at it, that hee should bee amongst the Prophets: one saith, that Saul is hetero∣geneum amongst the Prophets: it will fall against order for a Cere∣moniall precept to stand in the middest amongst morall comman∣dements. For every Ceremonie or Type, because it was a fore∣telling of the Gospell: therefore, must bee referred to the Gospell, as the shadow to the bodie: for indeed Ceremonies are Evangeli∣call. So there is not onely this, but also a Confession of the Law and the Gospell in the Decalogue. Againe, this being helde as a principle, that the Law of Moses is nothing else, but the Law of Nature revived, and that a resem∣blance of GODs Image; if that wee say that this Precept is Ce∣remoniall, then must wee say, that in the Image of GOD some thing is Ceremoniall. , not to abide, but for a time. But all things in him, and in his image, are eternall according to his na∣ture. And so consequently in the Law of Grace.
Againe; when CHRIST delivereth to the Scribes the summe of the ten Commandements, Thou shalt love the LORD, &c. It is no question, but it is a summe of the Commandements. Then in that part of the summe, Thou shalt love the LORD, &c. Wee must finde the religious observation of the Sabbath, and so Morall the love of GOD in which it is contained: else our Saviour had delivered an imperfect summe. Lastly; a dangerous way is taken for bringing in one Ceremo∣nie: and the Papists, as Parosius and Politian, they will bring in another; for they will have the second Commandement also to bee ceremoniall: and there is no reason why there may not bee as well three, as two, and so foure and five, and so all. Therefore, the best institution, the best way for upholding the duties Eternall and to keepe them without blemish, is to hold that part of the ten Commandements, to deny all Ceremonies in the law, as comming of the nature of the Commandement: but they are plainly Morall. 6. To come to the time of the Gospel, Eph. 2.15. wee hold that all ceremonies are ended, and abrogated by CHRISTS death: but the Sabbath is not, which is plaine, by Matth. 24.20. for there CHRIST denouncing, the overthrow of Jerusalem, bids them pray, that their calamitie befall not in the winter, or on the Sab∣bath day. Wee know this destruction fell out long and many years after CHRISTS death, when all ceremonies were ended, the Vaile rent, &c. Now then if hee should have prayed that their flight might not bee on the Sabbath; and that were abrogated as a Ceremonie, hee should have prayed that it might not have beene on that day, which indeed should have beene no day. Therefore, it is necessarie that it bee counted no Ceremonie. 7. Another is, that to chop and change one day for another, is not abrogatio, but commutatio Judaismi. 2. So the Seales of the Covenant of their owne nature are thinges morall, though in regard of some other respect they bee ceremoniall. Yet in the other that are meere typicall; there is no manner of commutation, but they are cleane taken away: for if wee grant that the waxe candles, the copes, &c. are not the Jewes, but changed, where as Judaisme is not to bee: but as it is Eph. 2.15. Hee hath broken downe the wall, hee hath taken away, &c. It is manifest that in stead of the Jewes seventh day, in the Apostles dayes another seventh day was ordained. Therefore, it was not as the Ceremonies, but as the Ministerie of the Covenant, and Seales of the Covenant, and the Day of the Covenant. For wee see Act. 20.7. where as the Apostles called together the Disciples in the first day of the weeke, (which is our Sabbath now) to heare the Word, and breake bread. And 1. Cor. 16.2. hee willeth them in their meetinges they should every one in the first day of the weeke, put aside by him, and lay up as GOD had prospered him, that there might not bee ga∣theringes when hee came. And Revel. 1.10. it is plainelie called , The LORDS Day. So then we see plainly, in the whole time the Apostles lived, it
being changed by them, and not taken away. Therefore, not of the nature of the Types of the Law. But when the old Covenant cea∣sed; then ceased the Ministerie of the old Covenant. The Priest∣hood of Levi was changed, and given to all Tribes: and in stead of it is our Ministerie. And as the Seales of the Covenant cea∣sed, the Ceremonies of the Covenant, as Circumcision and the Pas∣chall Lambe, and in their place, our Sacraments Baptisme and the LORDS Supper: so the Day of the Covenant is taken away, and in place of it, is put the LORDS Day. None of them being in his first end ceremoniall, but as having a continuall use, the Sab∣bath lasteth as long as the Church militant. The reason which might seeme to have moved the Apostles to change this day,De ratioue mu∣tationis Sab∣bath. may bee fitly taken from the institution of the Sabbath in the time of the Law. For as then nothing was more memorable then the day of his Creation: so when it pleased GOD that old thinges should cease, there was a benefit that did over∣shadow the former. Therefore, from that day, wee now celebrate the memoriall of CHRISTS Resurrection, and became of the other worke also concurring fifty dayes after, the great and ine∣stimable benefit of Sanctification, and the people by speaking with strange tongues, and the memorie of the benefit of creation being as well shewed in the first day of the weeke, as in the last: and so have wee it by great reason established of the Creation, Redemption, Sanctification, of the three speciall benefites wrought by the three Persons. And so much for the clearing of that place. The three Verses that follow, 9.10.11. they are thus divided: First, they give light to the Commandement, thus; the 9. and 10. is nothing els but an expounding what the LORD meaneth. And secondly, at the eleventh Verse. There is a reason yeelded, why they should yeeld obedience to this? And in the first there is an order taken as well concerning Works, as concerning Persons. For works, sixe dayes shalt thou labour, and doe all thou hast to doe. For persons, thou, thy sonne, &c. Againe, in the first part, there is an affirmative, six dayes shalt thou labour, &c. and a negative, In it thou shalt doe no manner of worke, &c. 2. There is a permission; sixe dayes thou shalt worke, and doe all, &c. Sixe dayes hath GOD bestowed on thee; but the seventh day hee hath kept to himselfe; hee hath bestowed sixe dayes on thee, the seventh is GODS. Now in these two oppositions, there are two by-reasons inclu∣ded: for the maine reason is in the 11. Verse. 1. By right of Creation we are GODS, and all ours; for he made us of nothing; and so might challenge us, and our dayes: so that standing in this case, we could not challenge one day to our selves: insomuch as if it had pleased GOD but to give us but one day, and had reserved the other sixe to himselfe, wee had no just cause of complaining. But if hee had dealt thus liberally with us, to grant us day for day, wee should not have murmured, but have opened our mouthes to prayse Him: then the order hee hath ta∣ken
now, if we be not cleane voyde of good nature, must needs con∣tent us: in granting to us six, and reserving to himselfe but one. Wee see likewise GODS bountifulnesse with Adam, Gen. 2. When hee granted him all the Trees in the Garden except one: then presently the Devill was at him, and upbraided him with GODS niggardnesse; that he had not granted him all the Trees of the Garden: may yee not eat of all the trees? &c. And so no doubt the Devill useth this pollicie now a dayes in this; May yee not doe what yee will all the dayes of the weeke? The consideration of this, the great bountie of GOD. That wee cannot say, but that wee are well dealt withall, having granted to us two times and a time, six dayes, to his one time: and consequently that wee bee carefull to give him his. And that by this great liberalitie wee may learne to make him a better answer then Adam did: and say as Joseph to his Mistris, Gen. 39.9. All that is in the house, my Ma∣ster hath granted mee; onely thee hath hee reserved for himselfe; how then can I doe this thing? So that our answer bee: all the dayes of the weeke hee hath granted us, onely one day hee hath reserved to him∣selfe: how then can I bee so unkinde, as not to let him have that? Hee having granted so richly and largely: And if not that; then to paterne our selves by David, 2. Sam. 12.5. hee being so richly provided, for of GOD, if that one sheepe the poore man hath, he will not suffer, but pull it out of his bosome: so we if we cannot suffer that one sheepe, but plucke it out of GODS bosome, and make it common to our selves, having many of our owne, making it onus servile, that because wee deale so, wee are worthie a thou∣sand times to bee the children of death. And this is one first rea∣son that might move us. 2. The second is the greatnesse of the permission of GOD: of these dayes, one is permitted to thee, to doe as that in Gen. 2. of all shalt thou eate: there is not a necessitie. Though one thing bee handled in divers Commandements, as prayer was handled in the first Commandement, as a part of inward worship in the se∣cond, as a part of outward worship in the third, as a sacrifice of the lippes: and heere as it is an exercise of the Sabbath. Where in there is an vneven proportion: Hee hath but one to our six. And there∣fore, the seventh day to that one. So that the vice of idlenesse of forbearing of worke is forbidden in the eight Commandement: and so doeth Paul put it Eph. 4.28. to stealing is opposed pain∣full working. So then this liberall permission of GOD, wherein there is such an vnequall and vneven proportion; if it bee broken, wee are to bee charged of great wickednesse. That that followeth, (And doe all thy worke,) The meaning of it is this, that indeede GOD might have dealt with us, as before, hee might have made all our life, to bee bestowed on musing of his will: but hee is content to forbeare us, and to spare us the rest of the weeke: that in those dayes all our businesse might bee dispatched, and none to bee done on His day. As Nathan said to David, So much have I given thee, and more would I have done, if this
had not beene sufficient: so certaine it is, hee saw in his wisdome that this was sufficient; Therefore, hee willeth us to remember: when it is a comming, that wee may ende all, according as the thing sanctified requireth. Then, in the tenth Verse, there followeth another opposition, which comprehendeth a second reason; But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the LORD, &c.] idest, If as GOD hath permitted you sixe dayes, so likewise Hee had made the seventh day yours to; then in it yee might have done, as in the other: but now hath hee reserved this seventh day from you, and hath kept it to him∣selfe: and therefore, you cannot without open stealth breake up∣on this day to doe your worke, wherein you have no manner of right: as much as if a man should say, You may weare that which you have bought; but this that I have bought with mine owne money, you cannot without violent injurie plucke it from mee. So because his dealing is liberall, you cannot without manifest injurie to GOD, take it away from him. And because this is his, hee will keepe it, and wholly to himselfe. Therefore, is it that followeth; In it thou shalt doe no manner of worke. This for the first part of the tenth Verse. Now to the other, to the Persons; They stand in five rankes: 1. Thou; 2. thy children; 3. thy servants; 4. thy cattell; 5. strangers within thy gates. 1. Thou.] Matth. 24.45. it is said, that it is a preferment to one, to bee set over the familie of the LORD: and therefore, Cui plus datur, plus ab eo petetur: Luke 12.48. unto whom much is given, of him shall much bee required. Therefore, the first charge is in this; Even upon him that is Chiefe. As there is in this, upon Jos. 24.15. so long as a man is alone, in the state of a sonne, or servant, hee may answer, Ego serviam; I will serve: but if hee come once to have a charge, a familie, then hee must say, Ego & domus mea; I & my house will serve the LORD. Because CHRIST, as Luke 19.9. When hee had once converted Zacheus, sayd, This day is salvation come to this whole house: Why? Because this man that is chiefe, is become the childe of Abraham. Eexmplum dedi vobis. So Gal. 2.13. Whereas the principall fall away, there all the other, even Barnabas himselfe will bee drawne away: so though hee discharge the dutie himselfe, yet if hee see not that other discharge it, hee is a debter: id est, hee ought to bee so farre from giving occasion to others; and not onely that, but from sitting them on his businesse, that hee ought to see, that both hee and they discharge it. 2. Concerning Children: The argument of Augustine is good, on Deut. 20.15. After a man had builded a new house, the manner was to consecrate: If a care lye upon him to consecrate the workes of his hands; much more to consecrate those which are the fruit of his loynes; as his Wife, Sonnes, Daughters: and the affecti∣on of Abraham. Gen. 18.19. Where the greatest love is, there is the greatest desire, as well of conjunction in Spirit, as in Body.
It is true naturall love, Curare liberos, to have a care of our chil∣dren as of our selves. 3. Concerning Servants; because Col. 3.11. God knoweth no servants, that is, he hath no respect of persons in this regard: all bound to worship him; therefore it is that he bringeth in, that thy man servant and thy mayde, may rest as well as thou. Another is added, Deut. 5.15. the estate of servants; Gods care of the Common-wealth: and we know that in the Spartane, and other Common-wealthes, there hath beene Insurrection, by reason of overburthening of servants: therefore is this put in, a preservation of the Common-wealth. Gods providence is great in providing of this. 4. So likewise of the next member, of Beasts, Psal. 36.6. his mercy and providence is extended to the beasts; so Prov. 12.10. to the soule of the beast, that is, he will take order that the beasts be not tired; because the earth shall have her Sabbath. One end of Gods providence for them, is the restrayning of our covetous humour, who rather then we will omit any little gaine, we will put our land and cattell to the uttermost; and wee care not to what paines. Againe, another, that by beholding the beasts doing their duties, we might be the more moved to the doing of ours. We must therefore note, that God commands not their rest, as de∣lighted therewith; even as Jonah 3.5. the beasts commanded to fast, not that God was delighted with their abstinence, or was accep∣table to him: but onely this, that as the Ninivites seeing their beasts pyned before them, they might consider of it, and be mo∣ved the more: so here, seeing the beasts to keepe Sabbath, they might remember to keep it. 5. The last is the stranger within thy gates. The Gates of an House or a Citie in Scripture, signifieth Jurisdiction, or Defenced protection: That as then he is in his Gates, so he is in his Jurisdicti∣on; so whosoever commeth under anothers Gates, as he cometh for protection if he be be injured; so he must confesse that hee must be under his Jurisdiction, that for any godly duty hee may command him: and Gen. 19. Lots intercession for the Angels; Therefore came they under my roofe, that they might receive no harme: and as he had a care that they might receive no injury; so ought we have a care of their soules. As Nehem. 13.19. the men of Tyrus and Ashdod, so long as he had any hope to reclaime them, he suffered them to bring in their Wares: but after hee saw they would bring in their Wares for all his warnings and threatnings, he tooke order that the Gates of Jerusalem should be shut against them in the end of the , or preparation of the Sabbath. And so we see both for Workes and for Persons, in severall and particuler. The maine reason is, vers. 11. For in six dayes the Lord made Heaven, &c. As wee said before, that a rule for discerning pre∣cepts is, Ratio immutabilis praecepti, facit praeceptum immutabile, if the reason of a Commandement be immutable, it maketh the
commandement to be immutable: and so consequently, because the reason is to sanctifie Gods name: when we shall be glorified in Heaven, we shall there doe it, we shall there onely intend it: untill we come thither, we have but finite soules, and canot intend it wholly; this reason being immutable, that it shall there be done of us in the state of glory, when we shall be , One to One: So may we likewise say of this, it being a reason abexemplo, from Gods owne example: For concerning that, this axiome. The Crea∣tour is to be followed of the Creature, in that he commandeth: it is an immutable reason; for as much as it is the example of God, nor can receive any time of exception; because I have rested, I pro∣pound the same to thee: Therefore it pleased God to use this reason, as most forcible. He maketh use of others besides this, Exod. 23. and Deut. 5.15. those he useth as proper to the Jewes: this reason of the benefit of the Creation is here forced being greatest, as well for the use, as the duties which God that day cals for to be performed by us in an especiall manner; (the consideration of his goodnesse, wisedome, power, and eternitie.) So also for the meditation of it in that day: as the 92. Psalme was made for that day: As for the continuance of the memorie of the Creation, and keeping men from Paganisme; for if it had been duly kept, then that great doubt that troubled all the Philo∣sophers so much, Whether the World had a beginning, had beene taken away. And therefore this day being one especiall meanes, that men might not fall into Atheisme, is therefore sanctified of God to be a day of Rest. Augustine on Genesis, intreating of the Creation, saith, That it is true, that it might have pleased God to have said, Fiat totus Mundus, let all the World bee made in one moment; as Fiat lux, let there be light: in the first it had beene all one to his Omni∣potencie, to have made it as well in a moment, as in six dayes: his in∣quisition is, What then should move God? and hee findeth no reason but this, that men might proceed in the musing of, and meditation of the Creation in the same order that God hath ta∣ken in the Creation; else they should have been in a maze. There∣fore, Psal. 104. David when he entreth a discourse of the Works of God, he useth an order: and Basil and Ambrose have written bookes of it; that men might begin to thinke, and give themselves to necessary thoughts, and wholesome cogitations. And this is thought to be the course that was in the Primitive Church. For the substance of the reason it selfe, generally to move all, to doe as God hath done; nothing moveth a man so, as a nota∣ble example: as Christ, John 13.16. Exemplum dedi vobis, I have given you an example. When he saw his Disciples given to pride, and would have them brought to Humility; What way taketh he? He taketh up a bason of water, and a towell, and putting off his upper garment, washeth their feet: and when he had done, vers. 15. he saith, Wott yee what I have done? Exemplum dedi vobis, Yee call me Lord, and ye doe well, for I am so. If I that am your Lord wash
your feet how much more ought you to wash one anothers feet. And in the 1 Cor. 11. Paul propoundeth a marveilous example: Be yee followers of me, as I am of Christ. And therefore he himselfe may doe that I have done my selfe; and because I that needed not, have rested: therefore must thou rest, that needest it. The last reason of the three; Therefore the Lord blessed the se∣venth day: he did not onely rest himselfe, but he hath consecrated it also; and besides his example, hee hath annexed a solemne In∣stitution: So that it shall be to us a Mercatura animae, the market day of our soule; both for amendment of the weeke that went before, and for a better life in the weeke to come. But this is not the reason: the force of the reason is in this, because God hath blessed and hallowed it: therefore this is a marveilous strange kinde of opposition. Seeing I have done it, see you doe not re∣sist me; but see yee submit you selves to my ordinance; that is, God is resisted, if his Ordinance be resisted; and Rom. 13.2. he that despiseth his ordinance, despiseth him: therefore that God hath hallowed, we must not pollute. We see then how farre this rest is to be kept, and what is required to the sanctification. The substance of the fourth Commandement, consisteth espe∣cially in these two things, 1. in the outward rest of the body; 2. the other, the End, to Sanctifie it. As before, we must Remember it both in the weeke before the day come; partly, because then we are to yeeld account of the former dayes workes to God, In singultu & scrupulo cordis, with sorrow and trouble of heart: partly also, as Augustine saith, Ne quid operis rejiciatur in diem festum, that we put not off any busi∣nesse untill the Sabbath: and when it is come, as Gregorie 11. Mor. 3d. Epist. because there are two things; the one, Aliorum exempla, the example of others will make us forget duely to sancti∣fie it: The other, Ludorum & spectaculorum studia, the desire we have after sports and pastimes; wee are therefore then the rather to sanctifie it, for Esay 58.13. Delicatum Domini Sabbatum, the Sab∣bath of the Lord, is a delicate thing. Because these two therefore engender a forgetfulnesse, we must both remember it aforehand, add then also when it commeth. The thing that we are to remember, is a day of rest; to sanctifie it. Augustine in two words comprehendeth it well, Otium sanctum, a Holy Rest, or returning from labour. And if we aske, A re∣turning from what labour? the words following shew from what workes. A Canon of the Church sheweth it. Quod ante fieri po∣terat, & quod post fieri poterit, What might have beene done be∣fore, and what may be done afterward, must be rested from: And whatsoever is meant by the labours and works of the weeke dayes, that must be ceased from of us: on the contrary Ab eo quod nec ante fieri poterat, nec postea poterit, non est ita avertendum, that which could not be done before and that which cannot be done afterward may on that day be done by us. The reason why it must be thus; Aug. Epist. 157. ad Optatum: and Jerome upon Ezek. 20. con∣cerning
that the distinction of the bodily rest is for sanctification: For out of Eccl. 3. they take this for a ground; that there is nothing but must have his time: and consequently, that we appoint cer∣taine times for our bodies, for repast, as of sleepe, &c. in which time we take such order, as that we be not let by any thing; and as he saith there, the more serious a thing we are to deale with; the more we seeke that nothing be done with it, but that onely and wholly;The cheifest care to be had of the soule, that nothing trouble it frō his whole meditation: but to this end it is meet wee be even solitarie as Augustine saith. and we thinke we take a good order in it so. So in the Law of Nature, there is a time for the soule, and the build∣ing of the same, for procuring holinesse to it, for declaring ho∣linesse in it; and so consequently, that wee are (because it is a serious matter) to use no lesse diligence in the cases thereof, then that there may be no other thing to hinder us. And it is a matter so plaine, that we see even the councell of Trent (taking order for keeping of holy dayes) hath set downe, Quae abhis qui humanarum occupationum negotio detinentur, omnino praestare non possent, that this body entermeddle not it selfe with worldly affaires. So many of the Fathers as write upon that, Psal. 46.10. Vacate & videte quod ego sum Dominus, be still and know that I am God: shew by the course of wisedome, the same that the Philosophers require; that Postulandum secessum, ut me∣lius intendamus, a full Vacation from cares, that a mans head be not occupied with thoughts in worldly matters, but that his soule might wholly intend this day; and the body might be at command with the soule: therefore the forbidding of workes in this Commandement, is not therefore, because the workes of themselves are evill, but onely because they would distract the minde; and would not suffer the whole man, wholly to intend the workes of the Sabbath. The substance of this Commande∣ment, I sayd, consisteth of these two parts, Rest, and Sanctifi∣cation. The Rest, is the first part, otium. It is a very strange thing, that the nature of man is so altogether given to be contrary to Gods will and wisedome; so that it falleth out on both sides contrary. Where the precepts are laborious,Nota. and of travell and paine, there they will be idle: and where the precepts are not laborious, and of no paine, there, rather then they will not breake the Com∣mandement, they will take paines, and wee will even against our natures, make our selves businesse: and we will pick out that day of all dayes of the weeke, that he hath chosen: so that we make it a kind of pollicie, to make advantage of that day, and to find labour in that day, which hee hath denyed us to labour in. This for the easinesse of the Commandement, and perversenesse of man. Concerning this rest there are six Countermands. The first thing that wee finde Countermanded here, is Exod. 16.26. there God taketh order in Elim, before the Law was gi∣ven, that from their very necessary labour, from gathering Man∣na they should cease; the reason is, because it is mercatura animae,
the soules Market; there is a better thing then Manna, John 6.58. and 1 Pet. 2.3. speaking there of the heavenly food, of that day, doth preferre it before Manna. 2. A second forbidding in Nehem. 13.15. not onely the gather∣ing of Manna, or the going out to gather; but though it bee brought us, yet a plaine countermand and execution upon it, sheweth that it is unlawfull. So we are forbidden, as from ga∣thering of Manna, so from buying of Manna. To this be∣longeth Buying and Selling; all Markets and Faires on that day forbidden. 3. From carrying burthens, Jer. 17.21, 22. there is a great com∣mination against those that carryed burthens on that day, that made it their carriage day, that hee would bring a plague upon them; and that such as is there mentioned, that is, Captivity: So we must not carry on that day, except we will that God give us a burthen, that is, Captivitie. 4. A fourth thing forbidden, Exod. 34.21. because this carriage and inninge of harvest and grapes might seeme to be a matter of great necessity; therefore he saith, that both in Seed-time, and Harvest, and Vintage, his Sabbaths should be kept; that is, so as that the provision of the whole Common-wealth, must give place to the Rest of the Lord. And that is for carriage. 5. For journeying and travelling on the Sabbath day, Exod. 16.29. Cras erit Sabbathum Jehovae: maneat unusquisque in loco suo, ne∣que egrediatur quispiam, to morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord, abide ye every man in his place, and let no man go out on the seventh day. Which is a great abuse with us. 6. In Exod. 31.13. there is a matter that goeth beyond all these; neither may the contrary course be taken: for there in the Chapters precedent, in the 28, 29, 30. God having set downe this platforme for the building up of his Tabernacle, and willed Moses presently to goe in hand with it, yet he saith in that thir∣teenth verse, Notwithstanding I will have my Sabbath kept: which is as much to say, that in that worke that might have best shew, and might seeme the best and lawfullest, and make most to his glo∣ry, yet he would have his Sabbath kept, and not broken for it; because in other matters ye may refraine, in this ye may not: And so vers. 15. he taketh order for the universall day. Whoso∣ever he be that doth any manner of worke, on the Sabbath day, is judged worthy of death: Nomanner of worke, the universall terme. And Numb. 15.35. it is executed upon one that brake the Sab∣bath. Jer. 17.27. he there protesteth for polluting the places of his rest, that he will visit them with a plague of fire, and such a one, as should burne up the Pallaces of Jerusalem, and should not be quenched. The Prophets are great urgers of this Comman∣dement above all other Commandements: and where this plague of fire is threatned, there goeth before, a prophaning of the Sab∣bath: and we may observe that there hath not beene any strange visitation by fire, but some notable profanation of this day hath
gone before; and it is usuall among us also. So when it shall please God to visit us with the like judgement, wee know where to have the cause of it: Therefore to conclude this place; those that goe out to gather Manna, that carry burthens, that buy or sell, that gather in harvest or vintage, that journey and travell up and downe, and to speake as it is Exod. 31. generally; let not them thinke, it is otium, or Sabbatum Jebovae: that it is the keeping of the Sabbath. Augusline 3. Serm. de quadrages. non sabbathum Do∣mini est, sed sabbatum Tyri: The 37. Canon of the councell of Ments, tempore Caroli: The 35. Canon of the first councell of Tri∣buria. The 1. Canon of the second councell of Mascon; injoyne a holy observation of this day: In the 37. Canon of Ments, there is a deprivation of the Communion for three yeares, against that party that goeth to pleade causes, or keepe Markets (belike it was their custome in those dayes to pleade causes on the Sabbath) So in the councell of Triburia, the like order was taken; and like∣wise Concil: matisconense; it was larger for the fault, milder for the punishment; for it was but for halfe a yeare. And (as one saith) God commanded the rest, not for the rest it selfe, but onely Quia toto die hoc Deo tantummodo vacandum: and to give o∣ver himselfe body and soule to God. Here then falleth in the question concerning the strict observa∣tion of the Sabbath,Quest. 1. which was injoyned the Jewes, and whether the same also doth lye upon the Christians. Unto this Commandement,Resl. as to every Commandement, there were ceremonies: Two, the one for not dressing their meate; the other, for not building their fire on the Sabbath day, Exod. 35.3. which are both ceremoniall. The reason, for there is no externall duty of the Law, but it may be performed of any man, of any Nation throughout the World. But it is well knowne, that those that are under the Poles, they cannot live one day with∣out fire; and to let their fire goe out, it were the utter destructi∣on of them all: and therefore because it is such an externall acti∣on, it is certaine it is not morall. The like may be said concern∣ing the provision of meate; for they that are under the hot Zone, under the Equinoctiall, their provision will not last them but one day; therefore these Acts cannot be kept in the whole World; therefore ceremoniall. So the Christian is released, not but that they could be performed of the Jewes; and therefore a peculiar precept to the Iewes, because they had no hinderances. To make yet a further question.Quest. 2. Whether all those six rests are absolutely to be holden or not; and whether on the Sabbath, all of those before mentioned, as to gather Manna, to travell, &c. be simply unlawfull▪ We answer to this, No: no further then the precept Eth hasshabbath, &c. for that our rest must be a sancti∣fication: the outward rest is Destinatum sanctificationi: ideo qui∣escimus, ut sanctificemus. So whereas our quies is not destinata sancti∣ficationi, where the sanctification can be cum quiete, with Rest; there it is lawfull; where it cannot bee, there it is unlawfull.
Certaine it is, that a man may rest, and not sanctifie; and so he may sanctifie, and not rest: and therefore it is said, there are many resters, and few sanctifiers. In these cases the sanctification stand∣eth thus, either upon the meanes of our sanctification; or else in the declaring of our sanctification; that is, in the practice of it. Whereas a mans rest cannot agree with both these; the rest, because it is not destinated to them, may be left; the rest being a subordinate end. And the rule is, in Logick: Tantum destinati sumendum est, quantum ad finem prodest, so much of any thing ap∣pointed is to be taken, as conduces to the end wherefore it is ta∣ken; as if you will take a purge, you must take so much as will serve to purge; and where his end riseth, there must also the de∣stinate arise, Mat. 12. for the meanes of sanctification, Christ defending his Disciples against the Jewes, which indeed were al∣together urgers of the bodily rest, he sheweth that the rest in re∣gard of the sanctification, may be broken; as of the Priests in sacrificing; and indeed it is the most laborious time for the Mi∣nister; but hereby they are blamelesse, because they are in opere cultus Domini, exercised about divine worship. And so shall you reade, Acts 1.12. mention made of a Sabbath dayes journey; out of 2 Kings 4.23. for there the Shunamite comming to het hus∣band for her Asse, he saith to her, Why should you goe to him to day? it is neither the Sabbath day, nor the new Moone. The meaning is this, that the Shunamite was wont to goe out to heare the Prophet; and because she had not meanes, shee would ride forth: Therefore where the meanes of sanctification are wanting, a man may take a sabbath dayes journey; he may goe where they are used to be gotten: Thus for the first part of sanctification. Now of this first part of sanctification, the meanes is lesse accep∣table to God; then the second part thereof, which is the practice of the worke of sanctification: For Christ, Mat. 12.9. out of Hosea 6.6. when as he was there reproved for a worke of healing, he defends himselfe, and biddeth them goe and learne, what that saying meant, I will have mercy and not sacrifice. Mercy being here indeed a worke of sanctification, is preferred before the meanes. So in regard of the practice of sanctification to shew a worke of mercy, a man may leave the very meanes of sanctification; for if in Sermon time, there should happen a fire, or man or woman sounding or travelling; the meanes may be left, because by this meanes they shew a worke of mercy, saving those which should have perished: therefore this is the thing that maketh that for the second part, the bodily rest may be omitted. It shall be convenient to consider this point, that as God is glorified in his Creation, and the memory of this from the be∣ginning was the cause of this Institution; so hath he glory in the preservation of his creatures: and so consequently by the pre∣serving of them. As Iohn 6.12. Christ bids the fragments to be taken up; his reason, that nothing be lost: and if the least things may not be lost, much lesse the life of any thing; much lesse mau
or the life of man. And wee see for mans life, Matth. 12.13. and for beasts that serve man, Luke 13.15. that hee will have workes of Mercie practised on the Sabbath day, as contra, for other perill, Matth. 12.11. and 13. But wee must with all understand this, that those cases of shewing mercie, must bee onely praesente neces∣sitate, and not impellente, or imminente necessitate. When any pre∣sent danger is offered to my life, I am to defend my selfe, and save my selfe, without the helpe of the Magistrate; yea, even with the the taking away of the life of the other: in casu praesentis necessita∣tis, quisque magistratus est, & personam DEI gerit, vt occidat po∣tius quam occidatur. But if the perill bee not present, but immi∣nent, as if it bee tolde me I am way laid, &c. I may not take the matter into my handes; but looke to the Magistrate; so for the present perill, or necessitie, there is exemption, and the LORD hath given his right into our handes: but not for imminent pe∣rill. And on the other side, wee must marke another thing: that because wee have to deale with GOD, who searcheth the heart, though happily men bee borne in hand, that it was a present neces∣sitie, and could not bee prevented, nor differred, whereas before hand, wee might have either prevented or differred it, it must bee so, that wee bee able to justifie our hearts in GODS eyes: but that wee have beene carefull and laboured by all meanes possible to prevent that businesse: and could not have prevented nor de∣ferred it, but that wee were overtaken with present necessitie. Else it is no necessitie; but we draw it unto us with coards. For this ende, tell them abroad, touching their working in har∣vest, on the Sabbath, by what authority they doe these thinges? presently they will have their answer, that it is not GODS will, that any of his creatures should perish. And it is true. And therefore, that which they doe, is onely for the preserving of the creatures, and not for their gaine. Therefore, for this case a pro∣viso must bee had; and there was a good proviso in the Canonicall Church made for it: that because they should make a distinction betwixt the workes of that day and other, as 1. Cor. 16.2. Every first day of the weeke, let every one as GOD hath prospered him lay up by him, &c. That whatsoever was then gathered, it should bee given to the poore; to the Glorie of GOD. And by this meanes the Church shall come to take good order. And this shall try with what heart they doe it. Wee see then what is com∣manded, and in what cases, and how farre in these two points. The other,Sanctification by what marke it may bee knowne? When wee have our rest, have wee all wee should have? It is sure wee have not. Leo hom. 3. de quadrages. Our people, saith hee, will hene vesti∣ri & nihil agere. They thinke they have got enough, if they have on their best apparell, and doe nothing. Whereas 1. m. 4.8. GOD knoweth, that as it is not the labour of the bodie; so not the rest of the bodie that pleaseth him. Hee that can give accompt that hee hath done nothing, this the Fathers call Sabbathum boum
& asinorum &c. The oxe and the asse keepe as good a Sabbath as hee. Besides, there bee yet two sorts they bee neither idle, nor well occupied. That neither buy nor sell, nor yet are idle. Augustine in his Booke de decem chordis. Cap. 3. and serm. 1. on Psal. 32. Sheweth who they are. 1. Such as did vacare nugis, theatris, spe∣claculis, & choreis; such as did spend the day in toyes, in running to playes and sights, and dancing: and 25. hom. hee putteth ano∣ther kinde in Carthage; that spent the Sabbath in venatione, in hunting. Leo. serm. 3. de quadrag. (in this behalfe, worth the reading) hee putteth more to it: for hee saith, they did vacare chartis & aleis, rationibus & commessationibus; they spent it in play∣ing at dyce and cardes, in discourse and feasting. But yet so, as the LORD knoweth they were not occupied in any worke of san∣ctification. These mens Sabbaths, as Augustine alluding to the people Exod. 32. that said cras observabimus sabbathum JEHOVAE, they would keepe a sabbath to the LORD, it was to eate and drinke and play: Sabbathum aurei vituli: this is the Sabbath of the golden calfe. Against this carnall Sabbath severe order was ta∣ken. Concil. Gangrense, in Paphlagonia: 5. Can: 18. and last: and the Councell of Agatho: in France, 38. Can: 1. For the other, it was for the worldly sabbath: but this for the carnall sabbath: Con∣cil: Grangren: 1. Can. 18. That the people, the true Christians, they gave themselves so wholly at that time, to celebrate the Sabbath, and to the sanctifying of it, that they would sit all day in the Temple, praying and doing other exercises without eating or drinking any thing, so as that there grew diseases amongst the people, insomuch as the Councell was faine to give such an Edict, that hee should bee anathema, quicunque remaneret in templo in die dominico, that no man should fast so, & sit in the Temple till night, if hee did, hee was given over to the Devill. These as they fall not into our time: so certainly they shew un∣to us, the excellent examples of Abstinence. 2. The other sort, for if the affaires of our calling bee not lawfull, and the recreations, at other times, and at other dayes beeing lawfull, may not bee used; then the workes of our owne na∣ture, such as Esay speaketh against, Cap. 58. much lesse; as Glutto∣nie, Lust, Grunkennsse, and such like. Where such are, no doubt there is a double Iniquitie: 1. Because hee breaketh this Com∣mandement of the Sabbath: and 2. the other of the Comman∣der. And that people that hath picked out this day, of all the dayes in the weeke, to deale exceeding despitefully with GOD, as the other did celebrare Sabbatum Tyri, &c. did keepe the sab∣bath like the man of Tyre. So these doe celebrare sabbathum sata∣nae. Doe serve the devill in their sabbath. But Esay 58.3. the right Sabbath is called Deliciae JEHOVAE, that wherin the LORD taketh great Delight and pleasure: and that is kept, by ceasing from our owne workes. Whether it bee from our owne nature, and will, or calling, on the six days, or ceasing from that that is Pleasant in our eyes: from our owne pastime; then wee shall
keepe Sabbathum JEHOVAE delicatum; and GOD will make it a day, to learne his will in; and learning it, to practise it, and pra∣ctising it, shall blesse us: and so wee shall come to the inheritance of our crowne. And on the contrarie side, if, Lament. 1.4. and 7. he complaineth, that the high ways of Sion shall complain, That none came to and fro to GODS Sanctuarie: or if it fall out, as it is Verse 7. that the enemie mocke at her sabbaths; if order bee not taken; GOD himselfe, Mal. 2.3. will take orde: projiciet stercus solemnitatum vestrarum: hee will make them as odious to us, as dung: and wee shall loath it, or as Jer. 17. the last Verse; hee shall punish it by fire: But if yee will not heare mee to sanctifie the sabbath, &c. To sanctifie it: It is well, sayth an heathen man, if one alone doe it, but better, if many together, or an whole citie, Psal. 40.10. The speciall reason of the instituting this day, was that his trueth and glorie might have the prayse thereof, and that in the great Con∣gregation hee might have the Glorie. In this sense, Joel. 1.13. Gird your selves, and lament you Priests: howle yee Ministers of the Altar: for meat-offrings and drink-offrings are taken from the house of your GOD. And Joel. 2.15. Sanctifying is taken from assem∣bling together. The reason, in regard of the Church was; 1, vni∣formitie: That they might bee knowne all to keepe one profession of fayth, and to bee in one bond of obedience, that did meete in one place, at one time, in one day, to glorifie GOD. And 2. The Meanes, Prayer. And 3. for the Common wealth. Psal. 68.6. Hee is the GOD that maketh men to bee of one minde in an house: and as the heathen men saw, that this , meeting together in one place, was because of , it was a way to maintaine amitie. Therefore, those that set up tyrannie, seperate men. 4. For each private man, that (as was said before) from these nundinae animae from this spirituall faire, they might carrie com∣meatum animae, provision for the soule, for the lightening of their understanding: For the restrayning of their will; even as in the market day before men gather for their use to serve them the whole weeke after: And so consequently beeing thus stored, and provided for, the great ende may bee gained, in Ezek. 38.23. That GOD might bee sanctified: id est, That hee might bee magnified. Exod. 31.13. The Sabbath was a Signe betwixt GOD and us; whereby wee may know that it is hee that sanctifieth us. So when this is wrought, wee might bring forth fruite of this sanctification. Whereas GOD, Gen. 2.3. did first make holy this Day, out of the proportion of it, John. 17.19. hee sanctified it for our sakes, and not for his owne: and his sanctification was, as it is, Jer. 1.5. The ordaining of it to an holy use, and that as Zach. 7.3. appointed by a separation to that exercise, from other dayes; and then as 1. Cor. 10.16. by giving a blessing to the exercise, that is upon that day: And that that was his, to make holy; is our dutie to keepe holy: For if a thing bee destinated to an use, and bee not applied to it, it is perverted. See Ezechias his course, 2. Chron. 29.5.
whatsoever God hath sanctified or made holy, that the fruite thereof may redound to us; it needs not that we should sanctifie the thing, but we must first sanctifie our selves. We cannot make it holy, but keepe it holy; as the destination is of God, so the application is of our selves; but Exod. 30.29. what thing soever is holy, he must see he be holy that toucheth it: So he that liveth in that day, that he doe not touch it, nor looke upon the Sunne that shineth in it, but that hee be able to make it, and himselfe holy: all that looke on the sunne that day must be holy. For the use of the meanes. For this cause, Rom. 15.16. it is plaine, that we are sanctified by the Holy Ghost: And there is therein a resemblance to (Levit. 8.10.) the Leviticall sanctifying: There was nothing could be sanctified, but it must first be annoyn∣ted, 1 Iohn 2.27. it is said, to be as the figure of the spirituall Un∣ction; which is nothing else but the spirituall working of the Holy Ghost in our hearts. So then first we must see that the Un∣ction be in us, then (as before) Luke 11.13. because the Holy Ghost which onely can sanctifie us, is the gift of God, and is not denyed to any, to whom hee hath given grace to receive it; the spirit expresseth it in this manner, and compareth himselfe to fire, the sparke is given by God; so that the matter must be ga∣thered and prepared by us, that wee (1 Thes. 5.19.) doe not quench the spirit, that is, Prophesies, or the ordinary meanes which God hath ordained. Deut. 12.8. That sanctification shall not come to any man by his owne braine, by doing that which is good in his owne eyes; but onely the prescript method that God hath set downe for the gathering of Matter for this Sparke; which the Holy Ghost must set on fire; that so it might not goe out. The Fathers in the Councell of Gangara, last Canon, have set it downe thus; That if any man keeping his house that day, be never so fruitfully occupied, and thinke he pleaseth God, they give him Anathema for it, especially at those times. The meanes of sanctification. In which nothing else can be said, but that was said before in knowledge; how the true knowledge might be come by. Onely that that Augustine saith, of the often iteration: that this is the fruit of iteration, that he that speak∣eth may say, Domine scis, quia dixi, Domine scis, quia iteravi, Do∣mine scis, quia contestatus sum, Lord thou knowest I have sanctified thy Name because I have preacht thy Name, I have talked of it againe and againe, I have beene witnesse unto thy truth. In 1 Tim. 4.4. the Apostle attributeth the sanctification of every thing to Prayer that is used before: and therefore they have termed it, the Preparative to all the duties of a Christian: More plainely, Mar. 1.35. Christ in the morning before day, arose and prayed so long, and came into the Synagogue; which may necessarily be gathered to be the Sabbath day. Then we see here Christ, for the meanes of sanctification tooke order, first beginning with Prayer: For the exercise thereof, that is, Prayer; it hath two parts, ei∣ther it is before, or after. Before, either private, as of the faith∣full,
Psal. 111.1. and Mark 6.46. of Christ: Or publick, Acts 16.13. that even the Heathen themselves went out to pray at the rivers side: But especially by 1 Cor. 14.16. that to the prayers of the Congregation every one should joyne his owne Amen. And secondly, After, Numb. 6.24. because, as before we be not fit to receive, so after wee have received unlesse God cover his spirit which he hath given unto us, the enemie will seeke power against us to take it away (as Luke 8.12.) except we desire the Lord, that his word may remaine with us still, and bring forth his worke. 2. After that succeedeth the use of the word: that is sanctified for sanctification. Esay 42.21. more plainely, Deut. 4.10. Gather me the people together, (for this end) and I will cause them to heare my words: Therefore the end is, to heare the word. The word in that day, hath a double use: First, as it is read or heard, read onely: Se∣condly, as it is Preached, or heard preached. 1. The first; the Church in great wisedome alwayes thought best and most necessary, that it should goe before, that men might not be estranged, when the word was read; that the other should not be strange to them. But it is a strange thing, that we at the hearing thinke we have done enough, if wee can apprehend it; whereas if before we would meditate well of it, when it is reade, wee might make better use of it: and at the hearing afterward, might be confirmed in the same. The ordinary course and time of reading the Scriptures, among the Jewes was their , the preparation to the Sabbath; at the ninth houre, at rhree of the clock: and was told them before, that they might be acquainted with it the better. 2. To come to the publick reading in the congregation; it is warranted by Acts 13.17. and 15.21. by the Gospell, 1 Thes. 5.27. I charge you that this Epistle bee reade to all the Brethren the Saints. Then for private reading, after the congregation is broken up, because Christ sheweth plainely that his witnesses be the Scrip∣tures, and therefore will have the Scriptures to be searched, be∣cause they were Prophecies of him: and Esay 8.20. for threatning; and Esay 34.16. Seeke in the booke of the Lord, and reade, none of all these things shall faile, none shall want her mate; for his mouth hath commanded, and his very spirit hath gathered them. And for the ex∣amination of that that is taught, Revel. 3. a practise, Acts 17.11. for the acquainting of the Berreans to examine the Apostles doctrine. There are two more uses in reading, Revel. 1.3. There is a blessing pronounced to them that reade, or heare the words of the Prophecie, because it exciteth men to praise God: Men seeing the Prophecies fulfilled and executed, they may not doubt, but consent to God: For which cause these were monuments of the Church, of the fulfilling of any promise or threatning; yea they suffered in the old Church, the Monuments of the Warres of God, for the Israelites, Num. 21.14. their liber bellorum Dei, and
their verba dierum, of Nathan, Gad, Shemajah, &c. they suffered them privately in an holy use to be read, that seeing his promises with the denouncing of his threatnings, they might be excited to the greater praise and feare of God. Another use is, as they gather by the Analogie of Daniel 2.2. and Acts 8.28. Daniel was occupied in the exposition of the Prophet Jeremie; so the Evnuch reading Esay, asked the expo∣sition of it of Philip: and no doubt, if Philip had written on that day, he might have had use of his writing, as of Preaching. There∣fore God hath ordained Expositors, such as the booke of Iasher, Ios. 10.13. a commentor of the Law: his workes being for this end, to make knowne the hard texts of Scripture, and expound them unto us. The second part in the meanes of sanctification, is the Word preached; that is it that Rom. 10.15. the Apostle speakes of,For Sanctifi∣cation. which is the ordinary meanes of Faith; and Christ in his Prayer, Iohn 17.17. Sanctifie them in thy truth: and thy word is truth. Christ himselfe, Luke 4.16. by his Preaching hath sanctified it: and the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.21. hath pronounced, not to receive any other alteration to the Worlds end. 3. The third followeth, the pondering of that that wee have heard read or preached; as Luke 2.19. according to the exam∣ple of David, Psal. 119.97. O how love I thy Law; it is my medi∣tation continually; the occupying of our mindes and meditati∣ons to apply it hereafter, and make fruit of it. Beside the medi∣tation of the word, that wee shall heare read, or preached; the 92. Psalme (which was a Psalme made for the Sabbath, and is sung as on that day; and if credit may be given to the Jewes traditions, they tell us, that the two first verses came from Adam, and hee used to sing them in Paradise:) giveth three further points to consider. First, vers. 4. which is indeed that which God here urg∣eth, the consideration of the workes of his hands, the making to our selves a contemplative use, as we have made all the week long an active of them; so wee should have a spirituall. And the se∣cond is, vers. 7. a meditation of the judgements of God: The third is, vers. 10. and 12. a meditation of the mercies of God; of the mercies and visitations; taking judgements, for the genus to both. These, whether they extend to our owne persons, or come on our Fathers house, or the place wherein we live, or the Church round about us, there is none of these, but they afford us an object of meditation; and as we see the meditation of the creatures of God, of the wild Asses, Sparrow, Crane, Lillies, &c. they yeeld still meditation from tha lesse to the greater; if they be thus thankfull, how much more are wee bound to him? So Rom. 2. he sets downe his judgements to move us to repen∣tance, and his mercy to move us to thankfulnesse; and thus, when we are wearied with prayer, and reading, and preaching is ceased, our meditation remaineth to continue the whole day and stil find∣eth matter to worke upon.
4. The fourth; Which is not a beating within our selves in our counting house, of any great calamitie; but the examining of it betwixt us and others; and that is done three manner of wayes. 1. With them that have taught us; as Luke 2.42. it appeareth plainly, that after the solemnitie in the eight day, the last of the feast, it was the manner, the teachers sate them downe at the Table, and the Auditors propounded Doubts and Questions, to bee resol∣ved of them. And so was CHRIST no doubt, not an appo∣ser, but as in the the state of a Learner: and yet shewed a great gift that way above his yeares. And if points of doctrine faile, Luke 3.10. and Act. 2.37. what other points were to bee re∣solved of: as there were divers questions moved by some, how they might live accordingly: id est, by the Souldiours and by the Pub∣licanes. Now, because there are no doubts, it is a signe that feare is cleane extinguished out of mens hearts: and if there bee any, it is not of doing, or leaving undone, but of detracting. 2. Betweene equalls, Gal. 2.2. 2. Kings 2.11. Luke 24.17. Mal. 3.16. When as hearers, or two of like calling, whether they bee Teachers, as in the two first places, as Elias and Eliseus went talking: The word in the originall, beareth a further signi∣fication; and as Paul with Peter, and the disciples in Luke, with CHRISTS approbation: and in Malachie, it is accompanied with a blessing: id est, because that thing in the preaching of the Word doth good to one, which doth not to the other; by the laying together as it were a symbolum in a common shot they re∣ceive a more generall benefit. As on the other side, those im∣perfections, and infirmities, that hinder mee, happly the same may fall into the minde of my brother, and I may shew him how his case, and how I was delivered out of it. The third, is Deuter. 11.19. Where it is sayd; Of the exercise of the Law, there shall bee an examination in families, and the father or chiefe thereof, hee shall question with the younger; and that shall enter, and whet them more, and make it sticke faster. So these three make a full member. 4. Concerning the fourth, and last; It is not to bee passed over, Aug. lib. 10. de Civit. DEI, accompteth it totum opus Sabbathi; as if the Sabbath was made for nothing else. But onely for thanks∣giving and prayse. For this ende was (as is aforesayd,) penned Psal. 92. for that ende appointed. Howbeit, they have drawne Psalmes generally to these three points; That the Church of GOD publikely, that every man particularly may make use. Either of those that containe generall matter, or of some particu∣lar custome. For generall instruction, Psal. 91. the generall (Psal. 103.) of some particular benefit, as Psal. 68. When as wee have had too much raine, and pray for faire weather; or when there is too much drought, the latter part of Psal. 65. Then for these particular benefites, particular Thanksgiving: or as Psal. 35.18. (the neglect of which is a blemish in our Church.) Hee desi∣reth deliverance, and promiseth that beeing heard, hee will
sing His Praise in the Congregation. So Psal. 65.1. the very word there, is due: There is due to thee an Hymne: The reason is because thou hast heard our prayers. Tibi debetur Hymnus à SION. These actions are so generall, as that they may serve, for every action of the Sabbath. In wicked exercises wee can never bee frequent enough; God requires, that wee should bee as faith∣full in his worke. The celebration of the Sacraments, Exod. 12.16. and performing of the discipline of the Church. It is the Sabbath dayes worke: The order doth pertaine to all; and it so pertaineth to all, that least any man should thinke it is enough to doe it once, Revel. 22.11. Qui sanctisicatus est, sanctisicetur ad∣huc: Hee that is holy, let him bee holy still. There is still a neces∣sitie, every Sabbath day wee must continue, 1. Cor. 13.9. Our knowledge is but in part, and our prophecying but in part. There shall still remaine scrutamini scripturas; search the Scrip∣ture; Revel. 7.14. That wee should still wash our Robes in the bloud of the Lambe: id est, Come still nearer, and nearer to cleannesse: so farre forth, as 1. Tim. 4. If wee continue there in, wee shall save our selves. This for the Meanes. The Meanes are for the Fruit: and therefore, hee that planteth a Vineyard, hoc est vltimum fructus ejus. Though hee hope when it is yet aframing; yet last is the Fruit. This is the fruit that GOD looketh for; the great ende of the Commandement, that His Name may be sanctified in us, We must not use the Meanes only: For the Meanes the phrase is set downe, Numb. 20.12. Because ye beleeved mee not to sanctifie mee in the presence of the children, &c. Levit. 20.7. Sanctificate & sancti estote: Sanctifie your selves, and bee yee holy. Such wordes, because of the two folde glorie that redoundeth to GOD, have a double use; GOD is glorified. 1. either by us directly, or 2. from us by others indirectly, Matth. 5.16. That they seeing our good workes, might glorifie Him. Therefore, commeth it to passe, that these wordes, as sanctifica∣tion and justification, &c. have a double sense: First, it signifieth a making holy. When wee are indeed made holy, and that is by Meanes: for this cause sanctification is a making holy. Second, in regard of the other, a declaring of this made sanctification: And of our selves, The first beeing 2. Pet. 1.10. And second, shew∣ing it to all other men to bee so and so; wee may glorifie GOD our selves, and GOD may bee glorified in others. Whereby it falleth out, that because good workes make this. Therefore, CHRIST, Matth. 12.12, sayth, That a good worke is lawfull on the Sabbath day: What worke soever sheweth Regeneration is lawfull, 2. Tim. 2.21. for there the Apostle sayth thus; : id est, Prepared or made fit to every good worke. But because that the day is specially instituted for the remem∣brance of his great Mercies, as 1. Making us, when wee were nothing: 2. Redeeming us, when wee were in a worse case: and 3. The beginning of Sanctification, for these three great Mercies.
Therefore it is, that no worke doth so well agree, as Thanksgiving for these Mercies. Hee is so delighted in no worke, as in the worke of Mercie. And therefore, commeth it that there is an espe∣ciall affinitie, betwixt sanctification and workes of mercie. Ose. 6.6. When hee had sacrifice without this, hee abjecteth all. There∣fore, to compare this with the rituall sanctification of the law. As you had annointing: so you had the second part; every thing was sanctified by two meanes. First, If hee were a person: his hand was filled by Aaron; implevit manum ejus Aaron. And if it were an Altar; then there was somewhat offered on it. So ob∣lation or filling the hand, is the second: Deut. 16.16. There is a charge to Aaron; that whensoever they came to appeare before the LORD, none of them should appeare emptie. Therefore, Levit. 8.31. There is mention made of a Basket of sanctification; in which were reserved those thinges, that afterward they would consecrate to the LORD. The very same order was taken, 1. Cor. 16.1.2. On the LORDS Day there should bee colle∣ction for the poore. There is nothing that so setteth out the mat∣ter, as Deut. 26. wholly. The workes are either outward, and performed to the bodie; or inward, and performed to the spirit of man. For the first Matth. 25. our Saviour certainlie as hee is CHRIST, when hee shall come to judge, it shall be happie for six works that he there recko∣neth; and the seventh may be added: three in Verse 35. first, the feeding the hungrie: second, giving drinke to the thirstie: third, the mercifull dealing with, or good entertayning of the stranger. And three in Verse 36. first, cloathing the naked: second, visi∣ting the sicke: third, succouring them that bee in prison. Se∣venth, is the care of the dead. 2. Sam. 2.5. Wee see that the Prophet David desireth a blessing of GOD for the men of Ja∣besh Gilead; because they had buried the bodie of Saul. Ioh. 12.7. CHRIST commended Maries worke: Joh. 19.38. Nicode∣mus and Joseph are commended; the one for begging CHRISTS bodie of Pilate, to burie it; the other for enterring it with linnen cloathes, and with spices. Augustine, lib. de cura pro mortuis, giveth this reason, that this care of the dead, is a worke of mercie. It is done, ne pateat miseria sua, to make that this miserie of rotting, may not bee seene of every man. It would grow both loathsome to the eye and nose. As also because every man loveth his owne flesh so well, that hee would have it well, and honestly dealt withall. And therefore, this is a benefit done to him. Now, for flesh and bloud, it is easie to reason against this: They say, wee know not whether a man bee hungrie or no: and wee see none go naked, &c. Therefore, the Fathers in a Generall Counsell have set downe this; Idem, est occurrere necessitati, quod succurere: to keepe from misery, and to helpe out of misery is all one. For this case of necessity, the monuments that they have left behinde them: show, that they were more given to this, than wee. Their
rule is this, In di Domini extende ad DEVM, ne extende ad pauperem: stretch out the hand to GOD, on the LORDS Day; and stretch it not out to the poore: and yee shall stretch it out in vaine. Augustine. For he asketh nothing, but his owne, that which hee gave you: and that which yee cannot keepe long: doth hee aske of thee, but pauxillum, a morsell, to reward thee centu∣plum, an hundreth folde? and but caducum, that which fades, to reward thee eternally? And then, because there were then, as there are now, that would talke of their unablenesse: and therefore, their answer was, Si ti∣bi non susficiunt res tuae ad Christianos vsus, parandum est, vt tu suf∣ficias illis: If thou hast not an estate to bestow vpon thy poore Christian Brother, bestow thy selfe vpon him. And further, because they allead∣ged, that they had but little; they would answer, that GOD doth not regard quantum, but ex quanto: what I give, but what I have to gives: as the Widdowes mite, multum obtulit, qui parum sibi reliquit: hee parts with much, that leaveth himselfe but little. Last, there were some, that were able to give, and when they had given on the Sunday, they would recover it on the other dayes, either by dea∣ling hardly, and oppressing them; if they were under them. Thre∣fore, The last caution was that Esa. 15.16. as that his mercies must not make him vnrighteous. Esa. 58. So the conclusion is this, If a man doe, dare rem suam DEO: & se peccato, or Daemoni: Give his substance to GOD, and himselfe over unto sinne and the De∣vill: and so give quod est minus DEO creatori, & quod majus est, inimico: The lesse to GOD, and he more to the Devill. Howsoever, hee doth looke for the mercie of the LORD, hee shall not keepe his Sabbath. Augustine: Est quaedam charitas, quae de sacculo non erogatur. All charitie commeth not out of the purse. There are spirituales eleemosynae, or misericordiae: Spirituall Almes. And they are so much better than the other, as they doe mederi partis principalioris miseriae: They take order for a more principall part: id est, the Soule. 1. They bee seven: 1. Amongst which if a man shallPsal. 51.13. Dan. 12.3. teach the ignorant: 2.Prov. 27.9. Give good and christian advise to one that is in doubt: 3. or2 Cor. 13.11 exhort him, that is slacke in soome good duetie. 2. The second: The comforting of those that are in perplexitie, and in distresse of minde, 1. Thes. 5.14. Flere cum slentibus: to weepe with them that weepe. Rom. 12.15. Rejoyce with them that rejoyce. Such was made, Job. 29.13. The blessing of him that was ready to perish. 3. The third, is the duetie, which CHRIST, (Matth. 18.15.) made as a part of Discipline, the reproving of our brethren betwixt vs and them. 1. Thes. 5.14. 4. The fourth is Matth. 6.14. The forgiving: The perswa∣ding with our selves to forgive, whatsoever is committed against us of others. Greg: qui dat & non dimittit; hee that giveth and doth not forgive, (upon Matth. 5.23.) doeth a worke unacceptable, that GOD liketh not of: sed si dimittat, etiamsi non dat, yet hee
shall bee forgiven of GOD; so often as hee forgiveth others. Si tu ponas limitem, DEUS tibi ponet limitem: but if you forgive, sine limite, nor put limites to the offence of thy brother, GOD will not limit thy sinne. 5. The fift, is Rom. 15.1. Wee that are strong, ought to beare the infirmities of the weake brethren, Gal. 6.2. Alter alterius omnia portate: beare yee one anothers burden. 1. Thes. 5.14. Beare with those that are weake. 6. The sixt, Jam: 5.16. praying one for another. Here was a worke: but the especiall thing is Matth. 5.44. to pray for our enemies: as (Luke 23.34.) CHRIST did: and his example must bee every mans imitation in this kinde. Augustine; Fortas∣se causaberis te non posse docere: It may so happen, that thou canst do no good by thy advice.. Some are as forward to advise you as you them: Perhaps you have not the gift of comforting; and if you tell them of their fault, they will contemne you: nunquid dices, non pos∣sum dimittere offendenti: But to forgive one that hath offended thee: to beare with, or to pray for him, this may alwayes bee done: vt malitiâ ignoscatur, nullâ excellentiâ, nulla sapientia, nullis divitiis opus est: To pardon a wrong done vnto us, there is neither excellencie, nor wisdome, nor riches required of us. Therefore these take hold of all. 7. Last, Matth. 5.9. Reconciling those that are at variance, making peace. That so wee may shew our selves to bee Children of GOD. Now, because here falleth an objection likewise; What if they will not? Aug: lib. 2. contra Parmenian: If thou hast done thy good will, thou art a peace-maker: Tum si aequitate improbas, pacificus es. These are the seven fruites of spirituall mer∣cie. Further then these, whatsoever is a worke of the law of GOD, is also acceptable: but especially these. The third Precept, is the Rule of HOMOGENEA. Where any thing is commanded, there all things are commanded that are of the same kinde. And wee finde Levit. 16.31. and 25.32. That the day of Humiliation, or a Fast, is called there a Sabbath, an ordi∣nance: or as Augustine sayth well; If the estate of Innocencie had continued, then there had beene but one onely day to have beene observed of Christians; and that had beene wholly spent in the giving of Thankes, &c. But since the Fall, there commeth by the wants wee feele in our soules, that GOD is not onely Glorified: Sacrificio Eucharistiae; with the Sacrifice of Prayse, and Thanksgi∣ving: but also, Sacrificio spiritus tribulati & humiliati; with the Sacrifice of an humble and contrite heart: Quia bonum perfectê vt volumus, non possumus. And so alleadgeth that place of Paul, the bond that lyeth upon us, cannot bee so accomplished of us, as it ought to bee: and so consequently, wee have ofter occasions to glorifie GOD, in this forme, or way of Humiliation for At tonement, then wee have of the other, and the portion of this Sa∣crifice, Rom. 12.2. is greater then the portion of the other, so that as the other tendeth to the initiation of the joyes to come; so this ten∣deth
to the mortification, in this present life. It is the Ordinance of God, that there should be a day of both. It is strange thing, that whereas some doe agree that the exercise of fasting is morall and not a ceremonie, yet they will not grant the same performance to the Sabbath it selfe. And the reason that it is morall, is, because whatsoever was a ceremonie, it might not at any other time be used, in any other place or order, then was prescribed of God in the book of Ceremonies: but this of fasting hath been otherwise; in Joel 2.15. and Zac. 7.5. in the fifth and seventh month they had both upon an extraordinary cause: And Zachary, not that on∣ly, but also in the tenth month: which, had it been a ceremonie, had been unlawfull to doe. But a ceremonie in the time of the Law was tyed to certaine places and times. Againe, that our Sa∣viour, Luke 5.35. as he doth there give a reason, why his Disci∣ples should not fast; so he sheweth plainely, that after the Brid∣groome was taken away from them, after his taking up into glory, they should fast; and so consequently when he should be taken up into glory it should continue. Lastly, the practise of the Church, Acts 13.3. at the sending forth of Barnabas and Paul; of private fasting, as of Paul, 2 Cor. 11.27. In muli is jejuniis, in fasting often; and his precept, 1. Cor. 7.5. even of those that are Marryed, that they might sever themselves for a time, to give themselves to Fasting and Prayer; shew plainely that it was accounted lawfull then, and therefore practised. And for the later part of the Primitive Church, the Bookes of the Fathers, are exceeding full of the praise of this exercise, herewith they did so consume themselves, that they might say with David, Psal. 109.24. Their knees were made weake with fasting, and their flesh had lost all fatnesse. This Sabbath of humiliation or day of fast, receiveth the division of a publike exercise, or private. Publike, as to which the silver Trumpets must be blowne, Joel 2.15. Private, which none might know off, Matth. 6.16. it must be done as privately as may be: so that this is onely the difference; for the ends and parts, they concurre, and are the same, no difference. The ends and reasons of a publike fast are these: 1. Either for the turning away of some evill, or for the procuring of some good; and because malum is paenae or culpae, evill is either of sin or of punishment, for both these, and speci∣ally the punishment, either our owne, or upon some other: Our owne, either present, mali grassantis, or impendentis, hanging o∣ver our heads: For present evill. When the Church or Com∣mon wealth hath any of the shafts of the Lord sticking in their es, (as Chrysostome saith very well, on Joshua 7.6.) a publike f, and upon the overthrow in Judges 20.26. and consequently  he time of Captivity, under the Philistims, 1 Sam. 7.6. and in  time of dearth, Joel 2.13. When as the judgement of God  as not yet come, but onely imminent, 2 Chron. 20.3. and Jehoso∣hat feared, and set himselfe to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah: a publike fast, Hester 4.16. Goe and
assemble all the Jewes that are in Susan and fast ye for me, and neither eate nor drinke in three dayes, neither day nor night: and I and my Maids will fast liken ise, &c. Jonah 3.5. When Ninive was threatned with destruction within forty dayes. When this pu∣nishment lyeth not upon us: but upon the Churches about us, Zach. 7.3. Solemne Fasts for the Churches dispearsed in Babylon and Chaldea. To come to Malum culpae, to the Fault: because there is a great affinitie; therefore we see, though there was no visitation to the Jewes, they matching themselves with strange wives; yet therefore, Esra 9.12. they are forbidden to match their sonnes with the daughters of the Gentiles: And though it be an evill example, 1 Kings 21.12. At the command of Jezabell a Fast is proclaimed. Last, for procuring of some good, Acts 13.3. and 14.23. The one at the ordayning of the Apostles; the other at the ordayning of the Ministers; that it would please God to make them sit for the worke unto which they were called. In this duty of fasting, if we respect the punishment onely, or the visitation of God, no doubt it is hard to make it Statarie; at a set time, a prefixed day; neither hath the Lord appointed so for that Jom appormi, a day of expiation, Expiare peccata sua jeju∣nio, and so consequently it hindreth not, but that there may be set dayes, and a set fast: and it is more expedient it should. And as these are the causes, which when they befall, the whole people ought to make a solemne Sabbath, to move all: so the same causes, when they concurre but to a private man, then cometh out the second, the private exercise of it. 2. The causes are the same; either when we are under the hand of God, 2 Sam. 12.16. there David himselfe alone fasteth: when it is not upon us, but threatneth us, and hangeth over us; 1 Kings 21.27. Ahabs Fast, though not inward, yet not unrewarded of God, when as the Prophet Elias threatned, for the unrighteous putting of Naboth to death. When it is not our owne case, but pertaineth to others, it may be lawfully used: as Psal. 35.13. Da∣vid saith, That when they were sick, hee fasted: When it is no punishment, but a fault onely; so that it be Propter languorem boni, 1 Cor. 7.5. When the prayer loseth some part of his fervencie, when it is not so fervent; or when there is any tentation. Christ saith, there was such a kinde of spirits, as that without pray∣er and fasting they could not bee cast out, Matth 17.2. with∣out prayer and fasting, some kinde of tentation not to bee a∣voyded. Last, for the procurement of some good; and that either in generall, Acts 10.13. Cornelius himselfe when hee was to enter into the generall vocation of a Christian. Or particu∣lar, CHRISTS owne example, in the entring of his Me∣diatorship, Matthew 4.1. It is the opinion of the Fathers. 13. and 14. of the Acts; before the Inauguration and calling of
the Ministrie: This, whatsoever the Magistrate doth, ought to be done of our selves. The Parts are of no other nature then the parts of the Sabbath: and they are two. First, the externall, as the rest; outward sorrow: Secondly, internall abstinence, as Sanctifi∣cation. The outward, they call abstinence, or fasting: the inward, sorrow, or mourning, or humiliation. First, in the outward, it is required of us, that from Even to E∣ven, we doe wholly celebrate the Sabbath, Levit. 23.32. wholly abstaine from meate and drinke; Ezra 10.6. , Whatsoever is to be eaten, and  whatsoever is liquid, a generall restraint of both. Secondly, in Joel 1.13. Gird your selves and lament you Priests, howle ye Ministers of the Altar, come and lie all night in sackcloth, yee Ministers of my God, &c. An abridgement or breaking off the or∣dinary course of our sleepe. Thirdly, in Exod. 33.4. of laying aside of the best apparrell; which in Nehem. 9.1. and in sundry other places, is expressed by wearing of sackcloth. And that we should be without that too; but onely for the commandement of God, for nakednesse. And generally, Zac. 7.3. separating our selves from all that is commo∣dious or pleasant to the senses: from all commodities and de∣lights of this life. Et quia non peccavit sola gula, ne jejunet sola; Bernard. Because the taste hath not sinned alone, therefore it must not keepe a fast alone; but the rest of the senses must have their separation also. And as we are forbidden and restrained all these; so Levit. 23.28. are we forbidden any labour, or worke of the six dayes: and so falleth in, that the same rest is required then, as on the Sabbath. Last of all, as we finde, Esay 58.10. the precept, an example, Acts 10.3. the Centurions fasting, that it was joyned with almes: Canon. Quod ventri subtrahitar, illud pauperi addatur, that which we spare out of our owne bellies, must be given to the poore. But now, because as we said before, it is not bodily labour, or bodily rest, (so Rom. 14.17. the Kingdome of God is not in meate and drinke:) If there we stay and goe no further, it will not serve: Therefore the Prophet telleth such fasters, Esay 58.3. though they lay in sackcloth a whole day, yet it was not that God required; because the outward action is but ordained for the in∣ward, the account that God maketh is of that; it is instituted for humbling; Matth. 9.13. what is there said of Sacrifice, may be said as well of outward mourning: And as it is, Joel 2.12. not the rending of apparrell, but the heart: and the fast that he allow∣eth off, must be accordingly. And 2 Cor. 7.11. where the Apostle describeth the full course of whatsoever is required of us inwardly in this fast. And Rom. 8. it must come from the spirit, with such sighings, as cannot be expressed. Of the sorrow, there cannot be an exquisite method; but as he
setteth them downe there, they are in two companies: either a working of seare, and consequently a sorrow: and after that, a sor∣row, that we have been so unkinde to offend so mercifull a Father; and then after that we have a while remained, that we proceed to a desire of amends, and that we be carefull: and that care sheweth it selfe zealous; and if we chance not to proceed a right, then that we be ready to punish our selves. In a word, the fruit of those actions, they tend to this end, 1 Cor. 11.31. that we may judge our selves, that so we may escape: As his policie was, 1 Kings 20.31. and as we see the common practise of the rebellious sub∣ject, if by any meanes he may make the bowels of his Prince to yearne within him: But alwayes except the seale of humiliation and fasting be added, all is naught. Nehem. 9.1. and last. Where after a great vow before the Congregation, protested that after an exhortation foure times; and after a solemne reading of the Law at that time: When as ordinarie readings was but twice. This was the order for the furtherance of this: and when hee had drawne a Covenant, they set their hands and seales to it, and so bound themselves by an everlasting Covenant. Which vow if wee can keepe, if we can bring our selves to the vow of obe∣dience; if we can doe this unfainedly, and doe it so effectually, as we promise readily, ever afterward; it is very certaine that this hath taken a good root in us. The fourth rule. The spirituall part of the Law. Which, be∣cause Esay knew the value of it in the Fast; as Cha. 58.3. and in his Sabbath, at the 13. verse of the same, nothing did so belong to them, as if they would give over their owne corrupt Will: if mans corrupt will could be brought under: This is that he shew∣eth, 1 Pet. 3.15. Sanctifie the Lord your God in your hearts; It is a thing that may be performed of man; and such as the Lord de∣lighteth greatly in. The meanes in which the lord throughout the Scriptures com∣prehendeth these: that whereas there must be a solemne prosessi∣on of thankefulnesse, and our sorrow for our unthankefulnesse there must be a place also, and persons chiefe in these actions of Sanctification: And these persons, not Ex tumultuario grege, they must not be men of the common rout; but such as must be trayned up for it. And because the trayning up will require cost; there∣fore the order for the maintenance of the Ministers, and the Uni∣versities, which are the places to prepare them for Ministers, and Schooles, they are commanded alike of God. For the place, Leviticus 19.30. and 26.2. in both places, is this sentence: Yee shall keepe my Sabbaths, and reverence my San∣ctuarie: making the observation of his day, and reverence of the place to runne in one verse; and making them of one na∣ture. The Sabbath is the day of rest, and when we hallow it, we call
it the Lords rest; so Psalm. 132.14. we see the Lord will give the same name to the place. This is my rest: Concerning which, as the Apostles tooke order, as that the exteriour part of GODS worship might be performed decently and in order. So on the other side, that the place of GODS worship should bee so homely, and so ordered, that the Table of the Lords Supper, where (one saith well) Tremenda Dei mysteria, the dreadfull my∣steries of GOD are celebrated, that it were fitter to eate Oy∣sters at, to be an Oyster table, then to stand in the Sanctuary of the LORD, this is so farre from Pompa, that it is farre from , Decencie: that every thing should be . And it is a thing that would be thought off: it is not Gravior pars Legis, the weightier part of the Law, yet not to be neglected. As our working, travelling, &c. shew that we esteeme not that day; so the Walls and Windowes shew, that we are not esteemers of his Sanctuary. From the place, to the Person (the Minister.) Concerning which person likewise we know, that GOD hath appointed him to be the chiefe dealer to stand betwixt Him and Man, Tanquam pater patratus, and so farre forth excellent in their owne natures are the Ministers of GOD, that are his Embassadours not to the people, , but to the highest Princes upon earth; yet it falleth out with them, as with the Day and Place: they are disesteemed and neglected. In the old time, wicked Princes thought meanely of the Ministers, as they to whom it pertained, as they thought then but to burne a little Incense; and the Priests office to be nothing else, but to offer Sacrifice. So now most thinke that it is nothing else, but the reading of certaine prayers, and going up into the Pulpit of Wood, and speaking there an houre, without sense and reason; yea, many times, without any reverence: In this respect GOD hath taken order, that where∣as, Levit. 10.11. and Deut. 32. there he sheweth, that it is not that alone; that he shall set Jacob to schoole, and learne Israel his lesson: but he shall teach the King also, even Joshuah the Prince, and at his bidding he shall goe out and come in. It is not a thing that pertaineth so much to the outward cele∣bration; but the workes of sanctification: and so consequently, that is not wrought by statutes of Princes, but by the Lords Law. But the Counsellor at the Lords Law must bee esteemed. If a Prince be but onely (as the Heathen man saith) Tanquam subul∣cus, or like an Heardman that keepeth heards, and looketh that one beguile not another, and have no charge of the soule: there were somewhat that might be said. But it is otherwise; and so consequently as he must looke over the soule; and the soule is a chiefe part, and requireth a chiefe care: and the chiefe care re∣quireth such, as be fit to be Doctores gentium; that is, to teach whole Countries. And againe, if it were our outward and bodily
enemies, that fought against us, as Spaniards, and Frenchmen: somewhat it were, that the cases might be so. But seeing, Ephes. 6.12. it is a spirituall combate with spirituall enemies, with , which will breake out to the overthrow of the Prince, and the wresting of the Law; therefore such must bee chosen, that may set themselves against those, that are Currus & auriga Israelis, the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel, to keepe and beate backe this spirituall Hoste. Therefore it should be better maintained, 2 Chron. 24.17. the Holy Ghost sheweth there plainely, that the life of Jehoiadah the Priest, and his wise∣dome, was the meanes that kept the King from Idolatry, and consequently from destruction. In Psalm. 82.5. there is a poli∣ticall use, he sheweth that the want of knowledge is it, that bring∣eth the foundations of the earth, all the Lawes, out of course. In a defect of all statutes, the maintenance of knowledge, is that, that would, Servare Legem â fraude, keepe the Lawes; as Prov. 29.18. the wise man and the wise King saith, that that did Servare gregem ab interitu. That which did keepe the people from perish∣ing, is Prophetia, the carefull looking to Prophecie. For if a man doe but looke into the estates of mighty Common-wealths, whose wisedome and policie hath beene great, yet wee see that Ryot and the sinne of Gluttony, and diseased bodies, and weak∣nesse; and on the other side, Adulterie, bastard-slips, and last Translation of Inheritances; these were the decay of the Assy∣rian Monarchie. Againe, looke into the Persian Empire, Idlenesse, neglect of Tillage, and of Mechanicall Arts, and Merchandise, and there∣by every man growing to be Patricius, a Gentleman; they were the ruine of that Empire. And the Greekes had never the over∣throw, till then that Covetousnesse got footing among them, and so needlesse dearth; and that the greater men begunne to vexe the inferiour, and the Prince to burthen his Subjects. So the Romans, by their owne Pride, Envy, Emulations, Heartburn∣ings, Seditions, were brought downe. And thus was it with all those Monarchies, for those vices, which GODS Law would not have suffered; and it is not possible by other Lawes to amend them. To come to our owne; in the time of Brittains often injuries, and a bringing in of delayes of Suites, and making of Lawes one∣ly for the Fine; the Lawyers they were desirous to maintaine Causes and Suites, onely for the Fee. So that the Land was over∣runne with oppression, and GODS Law not heard amongst them, they were brought to destruction. And we see by experi∣ence, that our enemies would invade us at such places, where the people are least taught the feare of God. Now how is it possible by any Statute, or Act of Parliament, to provide and take order, that a man should not be Covetous, that there should be no Idlenesse, no Ryot, Pride, &c. the causes of the decayes of those Countries?
Sobriety must first be begotten in the mind: else politike justice will not be. Judg. 17.7. In those daies the state of the people was such, that they could keepe nothing. Chap. 18.600. men of Dan came into Michaes house, and tooke away his graven Image, and his Ephod, and Teraphim, and a molten Image, and his Priests: and Ch. 19. What a monstrous example of lust is that? and it is at∣tributed to this, because saith he, In those daies prophecying was rare. So 1 Sam. 4. after it was once setled, and they had a Judge, yet the corruption of that calling was the overthrow there, for suffering Hophni and Phinehas to be such, as brought them under the Philistins: but yet more, 2 Chron. 15.3. where is it possible in any Common-wealth to find 7. such notable changes in so few years, of the state of Kingdome, as in the 16. and 17. Chap. of 2 of Kings? and whe∣ther all that time it is not ascribed to that, because Israel had beene without a Priest, and a Law. It is Moses his wish, Num. 11.29. that if it were possible, all the people were Prophets; and the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.5. wisheth that all might speake with tongues, but rather that all might Prophecie: knowing this, that it were the perfect estate of knowledge so to be: Malice, and all manner of sinne is soone brought in there, where there is no prophecying. It is our shame that we make not provision for the increase, and propaga∣tion of Prophecie to posterity, but leave our children in danger to be nuzled up in ignorance: We are right of Hezekiahs mind, Esa. 39. v. last: and 2 King. 20.19. Then Hezekiah said to Esaiah, The word of the Lord which thou hast spoken, is good; for said he, Shall it not be good, if peace and truth be in my dayes? Tantum sit pax in diebus meis: it makes no matter, so long as there is peace in my dayes: If that were taken away, and a care were had of posterity, so well as is in other things, and order taken for the government, there is no doubt, but this must needs be seene, that the observation of the Civill Law would be the better maintained, by the observation of the Spirituall Law of God. 3. The next is, that for the maintenance of this, there must be such places, as where these kind of persons must be maintained,Maintenanc. that are for to spend their dayes in the ministery: and for giving of oracles, it is necessary, that there should be order taken for educa∣tion: and so consequently for the education of such, there ought to be institution of Schooles, and Colledges. As soone as the wor∣ship of God ceased in one familie: in Egypt, 1 King. 4.31. that in Egypt these, Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman, and Chalcol, and Dar∣da the sonnes of Maholl, foure men famous for learning and know∣ledge above all the rest: they were raised by God: Ethan, as we read, 2 Chron. was Judahs sonne by Thamar: and the other three being his brothers children, Mahols sonnes. And as those were du∣ring the time of the captivity; so Moses is said, Act. 7.22. to have been brought up , in all arts and sciences; as in the Ma∣thematickes. Josh. 15.15. before the Israelites comming into Canaan, they came to a City called Debiroth: afterward, v. 49. made a Ci∣ty of learning, it was called Debir, their Oracle: their places then
were infinite greater then ours. 1 Sam. 3.9. There were studies round about the Church, to occupie themselves: and 1 Sam. 10.5. there was familia Prophetarum, a whole company of Prophets. The first Colledge we read of there, where the garrisons of the Phili∣stines lay: which the Philistines so reverently used, that they pas∣sed to and fro by them, and never endangered them: 1 Sam. 19.18. that he himselfe built Naioth in Ramah: i. the Beauty of Ramah: and so consequently to the times of the latter Prophets, 2 King. 4.38. that Elisha had a great number of the children of the Prophets, daily sitting before him: and the very ceremony of powring water on Elias his hands, is not pretermitted. In 2 King. 3.11. in the time of captivity, there was Daniel and the rest: afterward there was the magna synagoga; called Sanedrim, of the Greeke word corrupted . After that, as Philo Judeus reporteth De vita con∣templativa, concerning students in Alexandria in Egypt, Act. 13.3. & 2.3. & 6.6. that there were Colledges in Jerusalem; And lastly, we may see Pauls good affection, Act. 19.9. that disputed daily in the Schoole of one Tiranus; and that which is above all, 1 Tim. 4.15. that he should be altogether conversant in the studie of those things: which cannot be, except there should be a place. And this doth shew plainly, that there should be such a calling. And as this is, so is the next part of it, that concerneth maintenance of these both. Neh. 10.33. The covenant taken, that they would take order for the Tenths: which standeth alwaies as of a stipend, so of free oblation. For a set stipend, 1 Cor. 9.7. the Apostle proveth it suf∣ficiently: and the Law of the Lord, for the tenth part to the Le∣vite, to be of the same part of the commandement. But the Apo∣stle reasoneth thus: that every man that laboureth for another, must eate of the fruit of his labours. He beginneth with the oxen first; then he riseth to the souldier; from thence to the spirituall Sower: that it is nothing to bestow of the bodily harvest upon him, that worketh in the spirituall harvest. And for Tenths, 1 Corin. 31. lesse then a tenth part cannot be by these reasons. 1. By the annexing of it to the Priesthood of Melchisedek: to whom Abraham gave Tithe of all that he had. Gen. 14.20. Hebr. 7.2. 2. Gen. 28.21. The promise of Jacob 1 Tim. 5.3. is made morall. 3. Because the reason of it was not particular to the Jewes, and therefore that to pay the tenth, was not particular to them, but lasted to us, Num. 18.3. Lastly, by Christs deniall, Matth. 23.23. to the Scribes and Pharisees: And the Apostles bidding to communicate all things with order. Non est respicienda analogia, ubi non habenda. Come to oblations,Oblation: Deut. 26.19. God hath taken order, hath made it free. So the practise of the godly: Samuel, Abner, Joab, 1 Chron. 26.28. And after, Salomons answer to the Rabbins. In the opinion of the Rabbins, that whosoever did so, he did certainly: and the answer made by Christ, Joh. 12.8. He accounted it no
defrauding the poore of that that was bestowed on him. So likewise Pauls testimony, Rom. 15.16. That I should be the minister of Jesus Christ toward the Gentiles, ministring the Gospell of God, that the offe∣ring up of the Gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost. They are commanded, Ezek. 48.14. not to sell, nor change, nor alienate their first fruits; Levit. 5.25. Zach. 5.4. I will bring it forth, saith the Lord of Hosts, and it shall enter into the house of the theefe, and into the house of him that falsly sweareth by my Name: and it shall remaine in the middest of his house, and shall consume it with the timber thereof, & stones thereof. Because it is a booke against theft, therefore it shall be in their families, but it shall eate and consume that familie. The signes are two. first, Esay 66. vers. last save one,S where he saith, 1. The people shall be so carefull, that they shall take order, that from Sabbath to Sabbath, from moneth to moneth, they shall give of their owne: From Sabbath to Sabbath all flesh shall come to worship be∣fore mee. 2. Ex superabundanti. If that day, every nation be like mount Sion, and every mans house be instar templi, as a Church: and the whole people, every man be instar Sacerdotis, as a Priest. The last rule for procuring it in others;6 Rule. plaine in the Commande∣ment, Thou and thy sonne, &c. example for families, Job. 1.5. and for the Common-wealth, Nehem. 10.31. he would suffer no wares to be brought in Sabbato, upon the Sabbath. Contrary to all these is he, whosoever he be, that maketh many Sabbaths or holy-daies to his pleasure, or that maketh no Sabbath, as they of the Family: but every day a Sabbath, and so none. If either we so account of it, as the Pharisee, Matth. 12. not to thinke it lawfull to do a good worke on the Sabbath: or contra, of we indeed do abrogate, i. if either we be given to the meanes alone, Ezek. 33.3. but never the better: or contra, if we thinke the meanes not to be esteemed, Hos. 6.6. or if we thinke mercie to be such, that the knowledge of God is to be neg∣lected: and last, for doing wholly and onely, according to Ezek. 28. Hag. 2. So for fasting, 1. the negative, Matth. 24.38. if we eat or drink, &c. or Amos, 6.6. they never fasted, but drinke wine in boules, and annoint themselves with chiefe oyntment. Contrary to those Ezek. 9.4. The Papists fast faulty:N to shew therefore in how many points the glorious fasters erre: in six points. 1. Levit. 23.31. The right fast is from even to even: theirs is but till noone. 2. Ezra. 10.6. In a true fast, an abstinence from all that is to be eaten and drunken: they abstaine onely from flesh, and that that comes of flesh. 3. Levit. 23.27. That it should be an holy Convocation, if the fast be publike; they make none. 4. We should do no weekes worke on that day: they do. 5. It is without any prayer or humiliation, contrary to Levit. 23.27. 6. It must be secret, if it be private, Luk. 18.12. They tell it to God, and thinke they merit by it: and they tell it to men: and are like the Pharisees: i. contemne others that are not so exercised as they, Luk. 5.33.
For maintenance of Schooles, &c. 2. transgressors: 1. One which by corrupt manners, and lewd behaviour, turne them to Schooles, and Colledges of Libertines, Act. 6.9. 2. The other of Ahabs crew, that drive the Prophets to bread and water, 1 King. 18.13. They are in fault that spoyle the decimae of the Lord, Mal. 3.8. or that convert them to Civill uses, as 1 Sam. 8.15. And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and give it to his Eunuches and to his ser∣vants. For plaine oblations, Psal. 83.12. those that said, Let us take the houses of God for our owne possessions. Last, against procuring, Jer. 17. from 20. to the end, against the Princes and chiefe of the families. So much of the first Table.
THE SVMME OF THE SECOND TABLE. THe Summe of the second Table is Matth. 22.39. out of Levit. 19.18. Love thy neighbour as thy selfe. It is like the former, for in this we depart not from the love of God, but rather love him more. The similitude is in three respects. 1. As first he commanded his owne love: so here, the love of man: that he thereby might be the more loved. August. De doctrina Christiana, saith: It is as if we should love the child of our friend, though wicked; even for our friends sake. So we may love the children of God, though we see little in them to be loved. This respect is 1 Joh. 4.21. This commandement we have of the Father, that he which loveth God should love his brother also. Brotherly love necessarily im∣plyeth the love of God.2. As Gal. 5.14. 1 Joh. 4.20. this is a signe of him that loveth God, Rom. 13.9. Jam. 2.8.10. All the law therefore is contained in this, as by reason of effect, or signe. For if we love not him whom we see, how shall we love him that is invisible? And if we love man, that giveth often occasion of hate, how should we not love God, which is alwaies doing good? 3. Quia similis est necessitas in praemiis & poenis earum: so that he that breaketh the second Table, doth also breake the first. The scope of this Table is, 1. that God may be loved more by our love to other. And the second scope is, that mans society may be kept according to policie: the ground whereof depends on Gen. 2. Man cannot be without an helper: so that one must love another, and so love invicem. Three things are here to be observed, 1. The Commandement, Love. 2. The Object, thy neighbour. 3. The Manner, as thy selfe. For these in this summe there be three words, Thou shalt love, &c. There be three words in Hebrew, Greeke, and Latin, that signifie love. 1. The generall Latin word, Amor, which is in all,1. Amor. extending it selfe to all Gods creatures; with a desire that they may remaine in the course that God hath set them: yea and justum Dei judicium: by the just judgement of God, in the devils themselves.
2. Benevolentia,2 Benevolentia. in reasonable things onely: it is rash, and may be with errour. 3. Dilectio with consideration,3 Dilectio. and without all errour, August. De doctrina Christiana, verus amator debet esse verus aestimator: he that lo∣veth aright, must estimate aright. Ambr. Ne erret judicium, ne pereat beneficium. Though we do good, and be hated for it: yet we must remember we are in no other case, then Christ in the deceit of Ju∣das. And that our love might be strong, it was best to begin, so that our love might reach to them that are furthest from us: as our ene∣mies, Luk. 6.5. Matth. 5. And here, as Aug. saith, then we might say, Non possum vigilare, I can∣not watch: we cannot say, Non possū amare, I cannot love. And this ma∣keth difference betweene all the duties of the Heathen and Christians, for take away, amare alios, & propter Deum, to love others, and to love them for Gods sake: and then the Heathen be as good as we. Gre∣gory therefore doth well set downe the (first duty of the second Table) first thing in our love: ut rivus justitiae ducatur à fonte pietatis, That every duty of the second Table come from the first. And consequently, as we must looke to the soundnesse of our understanding, that we erre not in that: so that our affections be right. And though Rom. 9.3. be an high measure, as August. saith; yet we may come so farre, as to wish that others may be saved with us: and to desire that to every man, which is to his salvation, and wish away the hin∣dering evill. In Gal. 5.22. be three workes of that love. 1. To rejoyce when good commeth to our brother, Rom. 12.15. not to be envious; to hinder others from the partaking of our good: the fault of the servant, that hid his masters talent, Matth. 25.26. And if we have not the talent, we must not envie that others have it: for this is the devils fault, and the cause of the first temptation; that would not have any better then himselfe. 2. To procure peace, Rom. 12.18. Agreement with all: yet seeing the Angell saith, Luk. 2.14. that peace was come: and Christ, Mat. 10.34. saith the contrary. This must be distinguished thus. In bonis nil optabilius pace, nil odiosius discordia: in malis, nil optabilius discor∣dia, nil odiosius pace: with good men nothing is more desirable then peace, nothing more odious then discord: with ill men, no∣thing more desirable then discord, nothing more odious then peace. And peace-makers according to this order, are blessed, Matth. 5.9. And as August. contra Donatist. Aliter sapere, quam res habent, non est contra pacem hanc: but rather like to that, Prov. 27.27. for the sear∣ching out of the truth. 3. To have a care one of another: Levit. 19.16. Matth. 18.17. and therefore we must not give any scandala: but if any be given, bring help, Levit. 19.17, 18, &c. In this dilection we must marke two things, First, to hurt no man, Levit. 19.13. Secondly, Rom. 12.14. Matth. 5.44. not to recom∣pense evill. Three particular actions of this Love. 1. To succour the needy and hungry, Prov. 22.12. Matth. 25.44.
1 Joh. 3.17. If any man have this worlds goods, and seeth his brother have need, and shutteth up his compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him? Which are defined to be those, which we give out of the abundance of sufficiencie. 2. To pray, Rom. 12.14. Matth. 7.14. to pray for all. This is radius charitatis, the beames of Charity. 3. To performe our vocation: as the Lawyer, to give good counsell, Luk. 6.27, 28, 29. To part with our clothes, &c. is a thing to Gods glory, and the health of our neighbour. 2. Objectum, Thy neighbour.2. Proximum.] They take this word strictly, for their friends on∣ly, Matth. 5.43. but Luk. 10.37. Christ maketh the Scribe confesse, that it reacheth to the Samaritanes, their greatest enemies; which would not entertaine Christ, because his face was toward Jeru∣salem. Seeing that he is Proximus, a Neighbour, that hath mercie, and proximus is proximi proximus, therefore he is a neighbour, that can receive mercy. So that misericordia, non loci differentia facit proxi∣mum: a worke of mercy, not difference of place maketh a neigh∣bour. And the Law confirmeth it, Deut. 22.5. If thy brothers oxe, &c. which brother, Exod. 23.4, 5. is said to be our enemie. This hath for it three words, 1. That which is here, fellow, or friend, A∣micus. 2. That which Christ calleth it, and that is plainly a neighbour, Proximus. 3. Johns word in his Epistle, brother, fra∣ter. Reasons why we should love all these, are strong, and of like force, so that the words are all one. 1. Frater: naturae identitas: as beasts of the same kind do love: and children their faces in a glasse: originis identitas, all of one blood. 2. Proximus. 1. Usus, one hath need of another. 2. Unitas propo∣siti: all tend to one end, to be partakers of the reward. 3. Amicus, or Socius: 1. by precept of love: Amor, amoris magnes, love is the loadstone of love. 2. Societas ejusdem periculi, per eundem liberati. And we had all one perill, hell: delivered by one Christ, 2 Tim. 1.6. So we may use any of these words. In this proximo, neighbour, be two things to be had. 1. We must beware, that we take not the sinne of our neighbour for our neigh∣bour: for, Omnis peccator, quatenus peccator, odio habendus: omnis homo, quatenus homo, diligendus: sic homines, ut non errorcs; quia facti sunt, non quia fecerunt. Every sinner, as a sinner, is to be hated; every man, as a man, is to be loved; we must so love the men, that we love not their sinnes; love them we must, because they are made men, not because they have done this or that. The reason is, for that I shall therefore love him, because he shall be partaker with mee of the good; but how then should I love that that hinde∣reth him from this? that is, his sinne: Proverb. 29.24. He that
loveth evill company, hateth his owne soule, for he loveth those things that are against his soule. 2. For degrees, whether alius be alio propinquior: Whether one be nearer to mee then an other. That there be degrees, it is plaine: because omission of duties to parents is worse then to strangers: so that there must needs be a greater duty to one of these, then to the other. As in naturall things, where the greatest action is, there is the greatest inclination: so here must be with the greater dutie, the greater affection: and so a greater love. Where all be not alike, there is some primum; and that which is nearest, is prius: so there is ordo: which ordo is such, 1. God, for he is that bonum, that good, by participation of which, all other are bona, said to be good; and the universall nature, to which all the other give place: as in policie, bonum publicum. 2. Our selves: for we are unitas with our selves, which can be but united with our brethren. 3. The soules of our brethren, before our owne bodies. For any soule can directly participate the universall good: but no body, except by the soule: therefore every soule to be preferred before the body. 4. Our owne bodies. 5. Then the bodies of our neighbours. And of our neighbours, first we must looke whether they have need: if not, we are detai∣ned from doing this good for them. If they have need, before o∣thers, we must do it familiae fidei, to the houshold of faith, Galat 6.10. And of those, to our Country-men, Psalm. 122.8. of these to those which are nostri, 1 Tim. 4.8. of these, our houshold, and kindred: and first the wife, Gen. 2.24. 1 Sam. 1.8. Am not I worth tenne sonnes? And of strangers, to the poore before the rich. And if there be two equall every way, and the thing cannot be divi∣ded: cast lots, quem sorte Deus elegerit. August. whom God shall choose, take him. For the manner. There be three respects in this love. 1. Dilecti: of the thing beloved. Excellentia bona, those things that are excellent, and good, must be most neere unto us in a case of justice, done by law or precept. 2. Diligentis, of the partie loving: propinquitas in gratuitis, quae sunt judicio nostro: he may have respect to propinquity of kin∣dred, &c. 3. As thy selfe: non quantum, sed sicut: not as extensively, but as sincerely. And that in foure things. 1. The end: sicut te: i. propter quod amas teipsum: as thy selfe: i. e. for that that thou lovest thy selfe: that must be, quia Deum a∣mas: ideoque omnia quae sunt Dei: ob hanc causam dilige fratrem: be∣cause thou lovest God, therefore thou must love all that are of God, and for this cause thy brother. 2. Meanes: application to this end; ad quod teipsum, chiefly to his
soule: so we must tollere impedimenta, remove those impediments which do hinder our soules from this goodnesse: and so, non con∣sentire ejus voluntati in malo, not to consent to him in evill. So that as August. saith, aut ama me quia sum Dei, aut ut sim Dei: either love mee because I do pertaine to God, or that I may pertaine to him: and so we must love our brother. 3. Manner: not for the use of him, or because we hope to have a good turne of him: but gratuito, freely. 4. Order: first God: for the second Table must helpe the first, and not cancell it. And thus must our love be ex fonte pietatis, justus, verus, & ordinatus: it must flow from piety, in justice, truth, and order. This is the summe of the second Table.
The V. Commandement. Honour thy Father and Mother, &c. THe last Commandement is the fountaine, whence all of the second Table doe come: as a streame beginning at the Conduit-head. This fifth Commandement hath all those pro∣perties, which are due to any man with respect. And in those two things which must be seene in love. 1. In respect of God, the excellencie. 2. In respect of us, conjunction or nearenesse. Whereas in conjunction we must rather love the faithfull, our countreymen and kinsfolke; here, in the case of excellencie it is not so. For sometimes wee must give more honour to an infidell: as Acts 25. Paul to Nero, and Dan. 6.3. to a stranger, as they did to Daniel: and Gen. 41.40. as Pharaoh did to Ioseph. And to give this to men indued with gifts, is in regard of their nearenesse to God: for by his benefits they are neerer his end: so, as for this cause they are to be preferred, and made nearer to us al∣so. And they are also nearer to us, in respect of the greater profit we shall receive of them: according to that of the Heathen, , (He as God;) for God setteth as much by that which is his his owne, as by himselfe: so that being nearer our profit, we may love them: and being nearer to God, we must performe all other duties unto them. Why are not all men excellent alike?Quest. Sol. Gods wisdome wonderfully appeareth in this; For seeing Gen. 2.18. the occasion of the Woman was, that she should helpe: because that though it were good, yet not the best, that Man should be alone: for he being finite, and therefore of a finite power, might with helpe performe better services unto God. Now, seeing they were plures, more then one: the question is, whether they must be one body or not? And if there be one body, then must there be diversity of members, 1 Cor. 12.21. But if it be said, there should not be one; that is con∣futed here. Also, God being most excellent, and having all other things under him, would in his creatures have a patterne of that excellencie and subjection: so that for that cause, 1 Cor. 15.41. he made every star dif∣fer from other inglory. So also, that they might be those divers vessels, 2 Tim. 2.20. And by this Commandement doth all power stand: And hence it is, that he hath called them Gods, Psal. 82.6. And therfore this
Commandement possesseth this place, as in medio, in the midst, as Philo Iudaeus saith, because God would have him first to looke to his worship, and then to his owne honour in the second Table. Gen. 17.9. This Commandement hath two parts. 1. precept, Honour, &c. 2. Reason: that thy dayes, &c. This division proved, Ephes. 6.2.3. The precept containeth the duty of Inferiours, Honour. Superiours; to be Fathers and Mothers. For God includeth in one word, the most especiall things. And because, as Chrysostome saith, first they must be, before they can be honoured: therefore first, What is meant by Father. What is here ment by Father1. That is true, Matth. 23.9. We have but one Father: for all o∣thers, as the Heathen said, be but instruments. Whensoever therefore any thing is attributed to God and man; God is the first, Ephes. 3.17. so he is the first Father: Psal. 27. which tooke us out of the wombe: and the last Father, Psal. 82. which taketh us up, when all other have forsaken us. So that, seeing to be a Father, commeth from God, and our superiours are made partakers with God, as his instruments, they must also have their duties from him. The word Father signifieth him, that hath a care or desire to doe good: for which Iob, cap. 25. was called a Father: so that he is a Fa∣ther, by whom others are in better case and estate. 2. Mother. This hath the name of a faithfull keeper: as we may see by the end of her making; which was, to helpe. And the same word was so used, Iob 12.20. Ruth. 4.4. And the Heathen themselves know this, that a good governour differeth nothing from a good Father. 3. Honora, honour. The word  signifieth aggravare: so where excellencie is added to the thing, it is of weight: and in precious things, the heaviest is the best. So that addere pretium, is addere pondus; and so by translation, honorem, (honour:) for when a man hath received the person of God, it is more to be esteemed. It was a miracle among the Heathen, that so many Kings should give their heads to one, sometimes to a Woman: sometimes to a child: which argueth plainely, that they knew a divine power therein, that might not be resisted, i. Gods ordinance: and so worketh a reve∣rence in our hearts. And as in the former word; so for , honour: Solon in his Lawes, and Plato, and the Romanes, doe make choyce of this word; and other that write of Lawes, and that matter. 1. Now what the estate of them is, this is to be set downe: as 2 Cor. 4.13. All things are for your sakes: i. for the Churches sake. Politia est propter Ecclesiam: set downe, 1 Tim. 2.2. For there the Apostle goeth thus to worke. God would have all men saved: that they might be saved, he would have them live in all godlinesse and ho∣nesty: that they may doe thus, he would have them taught the know∣ledge of God; this necessarily requireth a rest; (for in the warres there is nothing rightly ministred:) That men might intend thus to live, it is said, vers. 2. it is expedient they should , leade a
peaceable life, in regard of outward invasions: and ,quiet, in re∣gard of minde, and inward tumult and troubles. Now if the naturall Father and Mother could have performed this, (as a while they did, to Gen. 9.) there had needed no other. But Gen. 10.8, 9. there comes one Nimrod with a company of hounds at his taile, (the same metaphor it pleaseth the holy Ghost to use) i. sons of Belial; and he taketh upon him to be an hunter: i. a chaser of men, to disturbe. So because the naturall Father cannot performe it; and because we cannot in deede doe fully the duty of our soules: therefore there is a Priesthood in the Tribe of Levi: a spirituall Father in the Apostles, and their successors: For this cause, Heb. 13.17. to soules, and bodies, 1 Tim. 2.2. was it, that God first allowed; and after in∣stituted, that men should have government: both for resisting of out∣ward foes, and quieting of inward strises. Rom. 13.1. . Let every soule be subject, &c. There it is said, that this binding of men into one society, this power is of God; and so to be accounted of us: for vers. 4. he saith, God hath delivered him a sword, to the end, that he should be vindex malorum, against the evill, and distur∣ber of this quietnesse; by which men might intend the former rest: and consequently, that he should be a comforter and cherisher of good men, and those that love to live quietly, to learne to know. Dan. 4.9. the civill estate and government thereof is compared to a huge tree, under the shadow whereof, &c. and Esa. 32.1. to a great Rock in the Wildernesse, giving shadow and water. And consequently, Ier. 29.7. quoniam in pace ejus est pax nostra: In the generall peace is eve∣ry mans particular peace included: therefore every man is bound to hang his weight upon it, to establish this authority. Hn u noted in three words.Now this same is noted to us by three words in the Greeke: for it is called, 1. , 1 Tim. 2.2. an excellencie of a gift: when a man hath somewhat above others. 2. , Rom. 13.1. a power. 3. , Tit. 3.1. principality. There is an affinity betweene these three. For first, God giveth a man a gift and excellencie in the gift, then a power, a sword, and then a place of government, to exercise his gift in. In this order we must marke, sometime there is , without the other two: because there might be a choyce of them that have maximam , the greatest excellencie of gifts; that they should be called up as Assistents; and to doe good in private, when it plea∣seth God to cease a government. 1. In this order, the government is either of pater naturalis, of the naturall father within a family: And there be three governments; Of the Wife, Sonne, Servant. Of the Sonne, it is plaine: so of the Wife; for he is pater familiae, the father of his family, whereof she is a part: and of the Servant; by that reason: and 2 King. 5.13. an example, Naamans Servants call him Father. 2. Father. We come out of the family, and then in patriam, a∣broad into the countrey: which is the people, among which wee are
borne. And that is intituled with one of these names, 2 Sam. 20.19. The woman of Abel saith, that that City wherein they dwelled then, had beene a mother in Israel, because God committed the government first to the people themselves: so Gen. 23. Abrahams curtesie and ho∣nour to all the people: and Psal. 58. to the whole people. This com∣pany, as it is to be honoured, so it compromitteth and setteth over his honour to some party: and thereby commeth it, 1 Pet. 2.13. that he calleth the Magistrate, humanam creaturam, the ordinance of man: and he did give them light to doe it. But indeede, magistracie is cal∣led mans creature, to distinguish it from Gods creature, against the A∣theisticall contempt of the Ministery, , he that will disanull or abrogate that which my selfe have enacted, he doth make a Law a∣gainst me, and doth abrogate and disanull me. First, to consider, that Divina creatura, Gods Ordinance in the minister, as it is solemne: as he is to receive the Fatherhood. 1 Cor. 4.15. Though ye had a thousand Schoolemasters, yet ye had but one Fa∣ther, &c. More, the very Heathen, Iudg. 17.10. Come and bee my Priest, and my Father. And because under this Ordinance of God, is another, the erecting of Schooles, 1 Sam. 10.12. 1 King. 2.12. Elisha cal∣leth Elias his Father, when he was taken up into Heaven: Phil. 2.12. Paul commendeth there their obedience unto him in this kinde. And when the sonnes of the Prophets came from the hill, one asked, Who is your Father? meaning Elisha. And Acts 5.34. honour is attributed to Gamaliel, he is counted honourable. In regard of this, Paul calleth his Scholler Timothy, his sonne. Come to the Magistrate: which was first by man: Exod. 18.21. Deut. 17.15, 16, 17. &c. There are rules for making them: Gen. 45.8. the man Ioseph, was a Father unto Pharaoh in Egypt: Iudg. 5.7. the wo∣man Deborah, a Mother in Israel: and this honour was not to be given to the Supreme power onely, but to every subordinate governour: 1 Pet. 2.13. the division there is into the King and Governours sent by him: so he that is Dux militiae, a Captaine, may be called Father of the Camp: and whoso hath authority in any other sort, may be so stiled, that is set over others for the good of the publique: so that rule in the Canons, Quaeque res in conjunctione, in every society that thing is to be taken, and esteemed, and preferred, pro bono conjunctionis, that makes for the publike good of that society: as among schollers, for learning, he that hath that bonum most, he that is most able to teach, is fittest to rule: for the honour of excellencie was not , nei∣ther principlity nor power. Come to the other part, when it is alone, honour is to them due also: and this , is of foure sorts, 1. ratione annorum, in regard of their age: 1 Tim. 5.1. old men and old women, as our Father and Mother: 2. Inregard of some gift of wisdome and counsell: so that hee bee able to direct others, and to invent more then they that are above them: so attributed to Iubal, and to the inventors of instru∣ments, Gen. 4.20. 3. In regard of a degree either in Church or Common-wealth. Because that money is nervou politiae, the nerves of policie: therefore rich and wealthy men the land doe most esteeme.
And so to men of wealth she giveth a degree, if they be called to As∣semblies, more then to others: because in her neede, she shall be more helped by them. So Nabal for his wealth, 1 Sam. 25.8. is called by David, implicitè, Father: (and to thy sonne David, &c.) And it must be done no otherwise then in respect: else if one should doe it, Iam. 2.9. it were , to have respect to persons. 4. In regard of a be∣nefit: when he is able to doe another a pleasure: as Iob. 20.16. hee had the honour, that he did pleasure the poore. [Honour thy.] The duties first in generall, after in particular. The duty standeth in the 1. Action. 2. Manner of the action. So both to be handled. And because certaine duties are reciprocall, mutuall betweene su∣preiour, and inferiour; to avoyde needlesse repetition, it shall be good to have spoken thus generally of them. 1. The first then is love: but in a higher degree, then that that is due to every man: therefore the name of it is , a naturall affection, either ascending from the Sonne to the Father, or descending from the Father to the Sonne: either naturally proper, or by analogie. The Apostle shewing what degrees this love standeth in, expresseth it by this terme, . There is a common love, and a peculiar love, which we have with our friends: and it is but  but this is , because it is in a more speciall degree: and the want thereof, Rom. 1.30. 2 Tim. 3.3. is imputed as a great crime: and it is a prophesie for the end of the world: that then men shall be , without naturall affection. 2. The second is the property of love: to wish well to him whom we love: and because Christianum vorum est oratio, a Christi∣ans mans wish is his prayer: therefore in this respect we bring it to prayer: which is a mutuall unity or affection of love, betweene the Fa∣ther and Sonne: 1 Tim. 2.2. a Commandement that prayer be made for Superiours. The like, Ier. 29.7. for Babylon, the Countrey: and backward and downward. 1 Cor. 29.18, 19. David prayed for the peo∣ple, and for his sonne Solomon: and Iob. cap. 1.5. was wont to pray dai∣ly for his Sonnes. So for the duty reciprocall. [Come to Honour] (which is the duty due from Inferiours to Su∣periours:) what it is in particular. As there is a Father, Matth. 23.9. So we have exactly but one Father; viz. God: so, as truely is it said of honour, 1 Tim. 1.17. honour exactly belongeth onely to God; But that he himselfe hath vouchsafed to resigne part of it to some men: 2 Tim. 2.20. he created some vessels to honour, &c. and con∣sequently, Heb. 5.4. out of the generation of mankinde, he calleth some to be honourable: and as Matth. 25.24. his calling is knowne by his gifts: for he giveth them parcels and portions of his goods, whereby they excell their fellowes. It was said that the Scripture useth three words, , Excellencie; , Power; , Principality: unto this Excellencie, honour pro∣perly belongeth: and it is twofold, 1. outward, 2. inward. 1. Inward honour, as Prov. 5.9. Meddle not with a strange woman,
&c. so Prov. 20.3. for he shall lose his honour,Inward honour that good opinion that men have of him: And opinio honesla, and honest and good opini∣on is defined to be, testimonium excellentiae; whereby wee witnesse that there is in this man a certaine excellencie above us: or somewhat above us by nature. Paul, Col. 3.18. 1 Pet. 2.13. expressed this by , subjection: to be subject: as Luke 2.51. Christ went, &c. and was subject to them: i. in respect of his manhood he acknowledged himselfe a childe: and so consequently, somewhat more to be in them, then in him. The contrary will make it more plaine. Numb. 16.3. Corah, and his company: his thesis was, The Lord was among them, all holy to the Lord, and equall: therefore Moses should not be so excellent. The contrary of this is, when men doe not onely confesse, that there is not any equality, but that some excell: and that not by chance, (nor as the Poet saith, ) but by Gods appointment: and this is the first and inward part of honour. But 1 Sam. 16.7. God and man looke not one way: God looketh on the heart; which man cannot: therefore he cannot see this inward excellencie. And this maketh the exteriour honour, as it is taken,Honour exter∣nall. 1 Sam. 15.30. where Saul saith, Yet honour me before the elders, &c. Matth. 23.67. the desire of the chiefest place, chiefe roomes, greetings, &c. the honour that the Pharisees longed for. What the exteriour honour is, what kinde is to be exhibited, and due, it is better determined and knowne by the manner of the Countrey; because all are not alike in fashion. For our selves, they may be redu∣ced to these seven heads. Every one hath a warrant from the practise of the godly. 1. To rise up: when the person of excellencie, (which either by na∣ture, analogie, or property is our Father) is in presence: done to Iob cap. 29.8. and a greater, by Solomon to Bathsheba his mother, 1 King. 2. he rose up and met her. 2. Nudare caput, to uncover the head; which was ad honorem, in token of honour: in use with the Saints; as 1 Cor. 14. 3. Genuflexio, the bowing of the knee: practised Gen. 41.43. the cry of Pharaoh made to be proclaimed before Ioseph, Abrech. i. bow the knee: And thus farre proceed the first salutations. 4. Afterward, it pertaineth to exterior honour, to Stande: Exod. 18.13. Moses, quia Iudex, because Judge, sate: the people stood: 2 King. 5.21. Gehezi stood before Elisha; and indeed it is the common expressing of service. 5. Silence: to give eare when he speaketh: Iob. 29.9, 10.11. so they did to Iob, when he was in presence. 6. When we are by necessary occasion to speake, to use words of Submission: as 1 Pet. 3.6. Sarah called Abraham, my Lord, or Sir. Gen. 31.35. & 43.28. See it in Iosephs brethren, Thy servant our Father, &c. And they bowed downe and made obeysance, Gen. 31.25. So Rachel to Laban, Let not my Lord be angry, that I cannot rise up: and give testi∣mony of honour: because it is with me after the manner of women. 7. The last, is dispersed throughout the Scriptures, and is compre∣hended
under the word ministrare: Luke 17.8. when we waite upon, and when we performe any duty, which mens servants use, by that action, whatsoever it be, we testifie a suprority and excellencie in that party. It comprehendeth many duties. And thus farre goeth honour. For when ,, Powe To Power be∣longeth feare. power, is added; then another thing (viz. feare) doth belong to it: as Ioh. 19.11. power, it is not but from above, from God: and so consequently commeth there unto them that have power, part of that feare that we owe to God. To this belongeth an awe, a standing in awe, a reverent feare, Levit. 19.3. Every one shall feare his Father and Mother. Ephes. 6.5. With feare and trembling to our Masters, secundum carnem, after the flesh. Prov. 16.14. A great feare belongeth to the King: because his anger is the messenger of death: and Iob. 29.8. that the people stood in such awe of him, that they, when he came forth, conveyed them out of the way, as if they had done some unseemely thing, &c. And this properly belongeth to the Superiour in regard of his power. , Prini∣pality. To , is due obedience.3. In respect of his government: unto  is due, 1 Tim. 6.1. obedience: expressed by , to goe under a yoke; that is, when they bid us doe this or that, we be contented to put our neckes under their commandement: Prov. 23.22. & Ephes. 6.10. plainely, Obey thy Father and Mother, &c. , & , both set forth this obedience: examples of which we have, Gen. 22.9. of a Sonne to his Father: Isaak even to the death obeyed, &c. of a Servant to his Ma∣ster, Gen. 31.6. Iacob served Laban with all his might; and Iosh. 1.6. Ioshua by Gods commandement, is made servant to a Kingdome. Now for the protestation of this obedience, and for the expressing of it, order was taken for a second government: as Prov. 3.9. he willeth men to honour God with their substance and goods. It is the wanting of , the lawes of grarefull retaliation; that Mar. 7.11.12. a man saith to Father and Mother, Corban, i. by the gift that is offe∣red, thou mayest have profit: he shall be free: and so suffer him no more to doe any thing for his Father, and Mother. Wherefore, Rom. 13.7. we are commanded to give tribute and custome: that is to shew, that we are not onely ready our selves, but also our goods are at com∣mand: partly with protestation, that we doe give it as stipend; and partly, that we are ready at the commandement of the Common∣wealth, by that commandement of imparting. The last is, to the other part of the Law: of that which is ours. Now because the Law hath two parts, 1. directive, 2. corrective: if we breake our obedience; then Heb. 5.8. & 12.8, 9. to submit to cor∣rection: and so farre stretcheth obedience. Now touching the second, the manner: it is, that it be done in sim∣plicity, in conscience,The manner. from the heart: Col. 3.11.2. that we doe it alacri∣ter, with cheerefulnesse. And lastly, 1 Pet. 2.29. that we doe indure, and continue therein; we are not given by nature to this: therefore they yeeld six reasons, to induce and exhort men; and they place them upon the duty. 1. That the place of the Commandement moveth: that it hath plea∣sed God to give it roome before our goods, yea before our life shew∣ing
that the maintenance of this superiority ought to be dearer unto us then those. 2. The Name it selfe, Father, and Mother, which is by nature a name full of love, and very amiable: insomuch as unreasonable beasts, they owe this duty and performe it more exactly, then reasonable men. 3. The third is no lesse amiable, the promise of long life; and death is a thing to mans nature most repugnant, and consequently, God maketh choyce of this Commandement, Eph. 6.2. and doth an∣nexe the promise to this rather then to any other. 4. 1 Tim. 3.4. it is , a good thing to see to: it is : ac∣ceptable: and Coll. 3.20. , a thing that God is specially delight∣ed with, and pleased withall; because they are to have a speciall regard, that they be , & , excellent, acceptable and wel-pleasing men. 5. Ephes. 6.1. it is also , a right thing, we cannot forbeare it without injury: and therefore Christ, Matth. 22.21. saith, , Reddite quae sunt Caesaris, &c. render unto Caesar the things which are Caesars: it is our Duty to do it. 6. Heb. 13.7. Expedit enim vobis, it stands you in hand so to do: the reason, because where honour is detracted, there care of preser∣vation is diminished: and by reason thereof, the power, wickednesse and impudencie of wicked men is increased upon us, and the more it is increased, the more is our estate troubled: and so is our unqui∣etnesse the more: therefore better it is that honour be given them, that they may be encouraged in their places. So he that breaketh this, goeth about to bring in an Anarchy. And besides, Gen. 11.4, 6. they set themselves against God. It doth argue a great rebellious pride, even against God himselfe. As Rom. 13.2. If you set your selves against power, you resist God. By weighing these reasons we may rapply be induced to give unto them that are set over us, that honour and obedience that is due unto them. Now to superiours duties in generall because in Gods law these are alwaies conjoyned, , & , to have worth, and to be re∣verenced for that worth: as before, 1 Tim. 6.5. Saint Chrysostome upon that place maketh it an Axiome. And because this honour is due unto them for their worth; therefore before they have this ho∣nour, they must mereri, be worthy and deserving men. And worthy they shall be, if they be fathers and mothers. The neernesse of the two significations of  which signifieth heavinesse and honour; and in greeke  honour, and a losse; and in latin onero, and honoro, to ho∣nour and to burden; shew that God would not have this neernesse to goe without a meritum, some desert: nor meritum, this desert, without a charge: therefore they must have meritum, and by conse∣quence honour is by them justly required at our hands. 1. First then their duty is, 1 Pet. 2.13. Rom. 13.4. to know, that the office is propter Dominum, that they be Gods ministers, , and therefore must their song be of mercy and judgement, Psal. 101. as they are his ministers, and have received power from him, and ho∣nour due to him, so this must be their speciall care, that they that are under them, may come to be Gods vicegerents: as they are
said to be by Jehosophat, 2 Chron. 19.6. The judgement is not yours, but the Lords. They must serve, and you must command. Therefore for the Lord it is to be used. So 1 King. 21.7. when that Jezebell thinketh he is not a King, except he can command, and have a thing wrongfully, it is a naughty opinion: & omnium seminator malorum: it is that which soweth all mischiefe in the world, not to acknow∣ledge , that they are for the Lord, but to blot it out, and set in place thereof their owne will: whence breakes out all injustice. God giveth no authority prejudiciall to himselfe: but because some have set downe this for a maxime, that he is no master nor superiour except he may do what he will; therefore, 1 King. 22.8. if Micaiah the sonne of Imlah, or any man say, that he must looke to , that he is for the Lord, he cannot abide him: and so falleth it out, (as it is in Proverb.) He becommeth an enemy to them that speaketh just things. Superiors were ordained for inferiours.2. Then there is a second, making more weight, Psal. 78.71. and 2 Cor. 12.14. The children are not for the fathers, but contra. David, taken from the sheepfold to be a King: why? to feed Israel. The heathen also say it, that superiority is ordained for inferiority: and the Prince for the benefit of the subject. For God in the beginning considering the want that was in children, ordained a duty to be first shewed to them, before they were able to give honour: and af∣ter they are to returne and exhibit honour as a reward. 2. Under this is that Eph. 5.29. They must nourish, and cherish and count those that are under them, their owne flesh: as Moses, Num. 11.12. he carried the people in his bosome, and made their welfare his scope: and as Christ, Mat. 23.37. example of the henne, which to defend her chicken, fighteth against the fowle, that is mightier than her selfe. This loving, cherishing, and defending is the end and whole scope, why governours were ordained. Againe, it is added in Exodus, That it may be well with thee, and that thy daies may be long: If thou do thy duty, well; otherwise, it is a shortning of thine owne time and prosperity. For Deut. 17.17. Go∣vernours are not potare in rosa, nor colligere auream messem, to gather for his owne profit: though they make it their end, to gather and scrape gold together, and to seeke their owne ease, as they in Ezekiel, 11.3. who account the City as the caldron, and us the flesh: to be in it till we be sodden. The security and ease that evill rulers take, the profit of the inferiours being not a whit regarded, this maketh them evill. But the wealth of the inferiour is their dutie and care. 3. Because God hath made them Fathers, and Mothers, and the rest children: and consequently hath brought into nature a different degree of high and low; that they should not pervert this difference, and make them equall. As Nathan to David, 1 King. 1.26. Nathan the Prophet, and Zadok the Priest, and Benaiah the sonne of Jehoiadah, and Solomon thy servant. He knew well enough where to give him place: and not as men do now: for now is Solomon first, &c. Mal. 2.9. God hath made the Prophet vile in the peoples eyes: the rea∣son
goeth before, 1 Sam. 2.29. Inhonorasti filios tuos, thou hast ho∣noured thy sonnes: whereas Eli should be honoured by his sonnes, he honoureth them, and intreats them, as an inferiour his superiour: as it is plaine there. It is said there, that God would make their seed abjects, because they gave away their honour from themselves. Esay 34. He will set children to be their Princes, &c. the meaning is in the next verse: The children shall take upon them against the ancient, and the vile person a gainst the honourable. This presumption comes at first by perverse inverting of the difference. 4. As this order is thus established, and we must retaine it: so it must not be a resemblance, or dead Idoll, but put to use, 1 Thess. 4.11. he must see that such as be under him, be put to their worke and busi∣nesse: and if any breake order, then Rom. 13.4. he hath not autho∣rity in vaine, but propter vindictam malorum: he is a revenger to execute wrath upon him that doth evill. If they do well, Mat. 25.23. he must encourage them with Euge serve bone, Well done good and faithfull servant, &c. Gods ordinance must not be an Idoll, but for the countenance of the good, and discountenance of the evill. It is a shame for Governours, when men that worke iniquity, and for the same are condemned, Prov. 10.29. The way of the Lord is strength to the upright man: but feare shall be for the workers of iniquity. Prov. 10.29. they that should feare, feare being for them: yet are they not in feare, because an Idoll is in place. But contrary, Rom. 13.4. that is a worse shame, if he be terror bene agenti, a terrour to them that doe well: & if they of all other be most persecuted. Potest as non mandatur, nisi adversus vitia, contra quae homines nolunt esse potentes: God giveth not power against mankind: he will have that preserved: but it is set up for the punishment of vice, against which men will not shew their power. So then these are foure generall uses that concerne the superiours. 1. The manner is set downe, Psal. 101.2. shewing there how he will governe his inferiours: he saith, he will walke himselfe perfect∣ly, and be an example before them. Gregory makes the right use of power; ut sit potens in seipso, vel potius miro modo contra seipsum pro seipso: that a man be powerfull over himselfe, or which is more, for himselfe against himselfe: that is, against the rebellious affections of his owne nature. And so he shall bring himselfe to goodnesse. 2. This being done, Lev. 25.43. then he will have moderation, as well knowing, (as the heathen man saith) this , this power, is not , to carry themselves loftily above others, nor , to have others in a base esteeme: much lesse for , to constraine men thus in proud manner, with contumelious words, and tyrannous deeds, as Eph. 4.31. in every Christian, all , ex∣cesse of anger, and , bitternesse, and , crying out, and , railing, ought to be farre from the meanest: therefore consequently from him that is in higher place. Solomon, Prov. 28.15. counselleth the governour ut non sit tanquam Leo in vi sua, that he be not like a lion in the way, and Zeph. 3.3. describing a naughty government,
saith, her Princes are like roaring Lions. But God saith there, If thou sittest over thy brother, do it with moderation. 3. The third is, that he be not as Saul, to begin well, and end ill, 1 Sam. 13.1. Saul was King over Israel above 20. yeares; yet there it is said, he raigned but two yeares. As now many are mar∣vellous carefull at the first: but post quinquennium Neronis, after foure or five yeares good government, like Nero afterward they come to be like flesh in the middest of a caldron. There are sixe reasons more concerning superiours in their du∣ties, whom as in Dan. 4.4. God exalteth, that men may have rule for themselves: they are in Psal. 82. 1. His charge, v. 3. do well, How long will you give falfe judge∣ment, and accept the persons of the wicked, seing God is among you? v. 2. nay, more he is a Judge among you, v. 1. and will have a reckoning, and will that men should have a Father. 2. In the the 3. & 4. v. the end of the power committed to them, to defend the weake, not to oppresse them: contra vitia, non contra ho∣mines, they are not to oppresse men, but vice. 3. Vers. 5. Choose you: if you will be ignorant, and that wilfully ignorant: and continenter ambulare, walke on, and continue so: it is the overthrow of all the foundations of the earth: All will goe to wracke: concutientur omnia fundamenta: you will bring all things out of order: there will be no good thing. 4. Verse. 6. I have said, ye are gods: indeed ye are none, the mea∣ning of this place is expounded, Joh. 10.35. The word of God came to them. There came not onely a Commission from God, but a delegate power: therefore ye are not to rule absolutely, but by Commission: you have therefore a superiour to whom you must give account. 5. Verse 7. For abusing your commission, yee shall die like men; no difference in your death from others. And straight he correcteth himselfe; ye shall die like Princes; not like meane men, but like Kings, as it is said, potentes potenter tormenta patientur, the greater men shall endure the greater torments. 6. Verse the last. For all the heathen pertaine to thine inheritance: that is, all the earth is thine: and thou hast made them thy children, and hast given them the earth to order it, and they to come in part of thine inheritance; and they have abused thine inheritance, and made it full of brambles and thistles; and so seased: and therefore have made themselves uncapable of honour. It is better set downe, Ezek. 34.5. ye have not performed the service and dutie, therefore he saith, Arise O Lord, and take the inheritance into thy hands; thou wilt performe the charge. Before we come to particular duties, here be two questions to be handled, for the understanding of the duty of obedience, hereafter to be handled. Quest. 1. Answer. First, whether we owe honour to one that is evill? I answer, yea, Rom. 9. where the Apostle reasoneth in a like case; that the unfaithfulnesse of a man cannot frustrate Gods promise: so the wickednesse of the person cannot take away the commande∣ment:
nor make Gods ordinance void: Rom. 13.1. All power and ordinance is from God, so no evill can make it void. Evill is twofold, either which runneth to the punishment, or to the fault. 1. For roughnesse, or oppression, 1 Pet. 2.18. Obedience must be given to the crooked and froward, i. to such as Holofernes, Judith 3.8. such as nothing will please; example, Gen. 16.6. of Sarah, and Agar. Although Sarah dealt roughly with Agar, yet the Angell willeth her to returne to her mistresse, and submit her selfe to her. And as in the familie, so in the Common-wealth. It is knowne how Saul dealt with David: yet Psal. 120. v. last, he saith, He sought peace with those that loved not peace: i. acknowledged submission, of∣fering no violence neither in the cave, nor in the bed. 2. For the other wicked governours, be they never so hard, it is plaine likewise, that to them obedience, and honour is due. For as it is true, Hos. 10.3. that God in ira, in his anger, denieth us a Prince: so also, Hos. 13.11. he giveth a King in his wrath: expounded, Job. 34.30. that it is the peoples fault, for their sinnes, Hos. 8.4. It is his doing, because the people would have it so: For when as they in election proceed not in timore Dei, in the feare of God: and things are not respected in themselves, Hos. 8.11. Because Ephraim will have altars to sinne, they shall, &c. and because they will have a wicked man, I will plague them, &c. so it cometh often by the peoples fault, though the Prince be evill: seeing Prov. 21.1. his heart is in the hands of God, and he can rule it as a vessell in the waters, he may, as he hath moved divers evill Kings, and them that have no feare of God, to good decrees, and purposes: as Belshasser, and Darius: so though the Prince remaine good, yet, 2 Sam. 24.1. he suffereth Satan to prevaile over him, as over David here: and as it is temporall; so 1 Sam. 16.14. he taketh away his good spirit continu∣ally, and an evill spirit is sent of him on Saul. So this is all one, to make of a good Prince an evill: and to set up an evill Prince at the first. Which though it be thus, yet Jer. 27.7. the Monarchy which the King of Babylon had, was his owne Kingdome: & all other coun∣tries willed to serve him: as likewise Esay 10.5. The rod of his wrath, the King of Assur, was by him purposely sent. This being Gods doing, Jer. 29.7. they must pray for Nebuchadnezzar: and cap. 27.7. they must submit themselves to him, and obey him. So in the New Testament, 1 Tim. 2.1. prayers for governours, though no Christians, and 1 Pet. 2.18. Obey the King, Nero: and Act. 25.11. Appello Caesarem, I appeale unto Caesar: Paul useth the benefit of his government, refuseth his Deputy, and appealeth to Nero him∣selfe. Onely this adde out Chrysostome, . The honour we give, is done, not to man, but to God himselfe. We reverence the ordinance of God in men, not man, so that ho∣nour is due not , to the person, but , to the vizard that God hath put upon the mans person: more plaine, Ester 6.8. Haman counselleth the King, Thus shal it be done to the man whom
the King would have honoured: he shall put on a robe of estate, &c. And Mordecai, a base man, was so honoured, and yet returned to his private estate. The honour there, was done to the Kings robes, and Crowne, not to the private man. Thus we must conceive of evill men: that they are invested in the Lords robes and Crowne; to which we give honour, not to the man. The Heathen Embleme is, . There is an Asse laden with the Image of Isis, a goddesse: and the people fall downe and worship: But the inscription is, Non tibi, sed religioni, we worship not thee, but the goddesse. This is one thing: Every one may bring downe himselse: yet he is clothed with robes of estate. Another is this, and that is plaine by Hose. 13. Because, be a go∣vernment never so bad, yet it is better then none at all. Oligarchia, better then anarchia. If in his wrath he gave them a King: yet in the fury of his wrath he tooke him away; and made their plague greater, to leave them without a Prince. So much of this question. Quest. . The second question goeth a degree further. Vtrum malo in malo, or ad malum sit obediendum? Whether a man doth owe absolute o∣bedience to the wicked commandements of a wicked Prince?Sl. The resolution is negative. Absolute obedience is due only to God. For the making plaine of this place, we must understand, that now it commeth to the point. For here he commeth to be nobis Rex, he now sheweth himselfe a King; while he was in his robes, though he had the ho∣nour, yet he was not nobis Rex, a King in deede: for he is no further a King, then quatenus imperat nobis, then so farre-forth as he comman∣deth and ruleth over us: therefore great heede is here to be had, lest we be entangled in the action. For the first entrance into this question, the saying of the Fathers is to be embraced; for they say, that Lex charitatis Deo, the Law of God which commandeth us to obey him, did not take away the Law of nature: therefore it is very good reason, that this Law of nature, (by which is Father and Mother) should not weaken, but strengthen the Law of God. We cannot say, when we doe evill, that the Law of nature is cause of it. The second thing is this; that because, as we said before, the word of God came to them, and therefore their power is not absolute, but delegate from God: So we may say out of Prov. 8.15. there Wis∣dome speakes it, (which is the Word of God: the second Person in Trinity:) that it is the word, per quod reges regnant, by Which Kings reigne. Now, per quod est, by which any thing is, that is the es∣sence. Every Superiour, he hath something that giveth the essentiall part: and that is the word. Now, 1 Sam. 15.26. when he casteth away the word, he ceaseth to be our Superiour. Because thou hast cast away my word, &c. And if altogether he disclaime the word, every man is bound to disclaime him, as they did Iulian the Apostata. For the plaine seeing of this, it were good to consider that word in Hebrew  which signifieth gradus, a degree: and in Greeke , which signifieth an Order. In order there be two
things: for there is summum principium, the toppe, in respect of whom all the rest are staires, so the step is better, which is next the toppe; and then there is series, a row or order, in a line comming downe from the toppe betweene them: which series hath in every calling a latitude; and is not infinite, but in God onely: as superiours for soule matters, for the soule: for bodily matters, for the body: for instructi∣on, such matters as are for instruction. The series hath bounds: and they may be referred to two, to which every transgression may be re∣ferred: for when a man goeth aside from that summum principium, that is, Ne superior excedat aut recedat, lest the Superiour shoud exceed, or swarve aside: when any one doth recedere, as he doth, when he goeth from the order, if he goe out further, then he breaketh. We are to re∣maine in the ascending line, to the toppe; for that we shall be  keepe order still: So we are not to goe out, we must keepe our sitting still. Againe, because the series hath a certaine breadth, having his bounds about on both sides; he that passeth the bounds, and pre∣scribeth any thing without the bounds, he goeth from the nature of a Superiour. It is as if the Prince of this land should command things to be done, in other lands where she hath nothing to doe. First then, he must not forsake his seriem: secondly, he must not recedere a principio suo: If the King or Ruler observe these two orders, we are absolutely to obey him. Ob. Matth. 6.24. No man can serve two Masters: God and manare two. Sol. It is resolved thus, Dominus & servus, Master and servant, make but unum agens, one agent; where there is a subordination, there they are all but unum agens, one agent: so there be not two Masters, till he breake order himselfe, and be a Master himselfe against order. Erigere altare contra altare, and erect an Altar against an Altar. For it is in order, as in nature. The Prince he mo∣veth heavie things, and it is inclinatio gravitatis, the naturall propensi∣ty of heavie things to descend: yet as their nature is ad conservationem universi, to the conservation of the universe, to breake their naturall course, according to the will superioris magistri, of a higher Master, and ascend: Such a thing it is in matters of the Common-wealth: if any inferiour Master command somewhat, I must not obey him: the higher place, hath the more honour; and the greater is to it. Acts 25.11. Festus was an honourable man; but Nero more honourable: and Paul, when he feareth that Festus would breake order, doth refuse him: and so consequently useth the benefit of appeale. By which place wee may see, that when one dealeth with an inferiour officer, it is easie to procure a Supersedeas: the superiour taking the matter into his hands. Then when the highest mover of all, and Prince moveth, there is no more Fathers: that is, when his word commeth, it giveth a Supersedeas to all commers, underneath: and Appeale is to be made unto him. These two dissent often: as Matth. 6. For our Saviour speakes there of obedience to be given to them that have power of the body: so he saith, Feare not them that kill the body: It were a caveas needlesse, if Princes had not broken order, and if they had commanded nothing contrary: but he then telleth them, whom they should feare most. The conclusion is Acts 4.19. Deo potius quam hominibus, to obey God rather then man.
The reason of this standeth thus. God hath taken order for the inaugurating into his politia and government every sonne: as Phil. 3.20. our , our , and conversation is in Heaven: Ephes. 2.29. we are Citizens with the Saints. A childe is no sooner borne, but fertur ad baptismum, he is brought to be baptized. So he is no sooner in the world, but presently hee is sent out againe: for there he renounceth the world; and there is his first oath, Sacramenium militare: therefore men cannot goe from their first oath: nor must he swarve from that, whatsoever inferiour Prince biddeth: therefore Iam. 2.4. in heavenly matters, if one man be re∣garded more then another, (because there, they are all paris juris, of the same authority) it is respect of persons: therefore the Prince is not superiour, but equall, in Gods matters: he must not command con∣tra seriem suam, against his owne order. And in naturall things, as eating, drinking, mariage, he cannot com∣mand, as Ambrose proveth, Epi. 43. and consequently in naturall things, there is par jus, the same right: therefore when the case doth come to this, we must disobey him. So then in regard of this first, whereby we have thus set our selves apart unto God by a solemne oath, we owe him chiefe and speciall honour. 1. It is Christs owne saying, Luke 14.26. He that commes to me, and hateth not his father and mother, &c. He expoundeth it himselfe, Matth. 10.37. by plus quam me, if he love them more then me: or if they love them not lesse then Christ. As minus malum, a lesser evill is called good, in respect of the greater: so minor dilectio, a lesser love, is lesse, in respect of major dilectio, a greater; and his lesse love is this: because bonum quod impedit majus bonum, in eo minus diligendum, that good that hindereth a greater good, is for that cause lesse worthy of our love. 2. Example of this in the second Commandement. To this Ne∣buchadnezzar a Prince, is contrary: he will out of order: there disobe∣dience is in him: he is disobeyed; and disobedience is there to him, and no disobedience: disobedience is not but in , in order: hee went out first, Dan. 3.18. Another example, for prayer, betweene Darius commandement, and Daniels order in the same, Dan. 6. 3. For the third Commandement, Iosh. 9.15. an oath taken be∣tweene Ioshua and the men of Gibeon. They preferred the religion of their oath, before their over-sight, till Sauls time, 2 Sam. 21.2. he, to remove them, would have the Israelites breake their oath: which they did, unlawfully obeying: thererefore punished fame iriennii, by a trienniall famine. 4. Example, for the fourth commandement. Against which Antiochus commanded, 1 Macc. 1.28. and he died miserably: but Maitathias, that disobeyed him, prospered. 5. In the fifth Commandement. A Commandement of God for the preservation of the Ministery and Prophets. Abab, 1 King. 18.13. commands contrary, all Gods Prophets to be slaine. Obadiah saveth one hundred, and thinkes not himselfe disobedient. So he comman∣ded, Honour Father and Mother: yet 2 Chron. 15.16. Asa deposed his
Mother, &c. and justly. And Mat. 15.5. the Pharisees Corban a∣gainst this Commandement, was not to be obeyed. 6. In the sixt Commandement, Pharaohs commandement was, Kill all the Males; the Mid-wives disobeyed it, and were rewarded. And Heb. 11.23. Moses Parents kept and hid him three months by faith, and disobeyed; and if they had kept him three months longer, it had been a stronger faith. God commands, kill not an innocent, 1. Sam. 22.17. Saul commanded to slay the Priests of Nob, his servants would not doe it: and they are justified in it. For it is no disobe∣dience, if the Superiour going out of the line, the Inferiour keep∣eth it: Nay, the Inferiour is partaker with his Superiour in the of∣fence, if in such cases he obey him, as 2 Sam. 11.16. Joab obeying Davids letter, and putting Uriah only to chancemedley, is condem∣ned, and Mat. 2.16. the souldiers for executing Herods command, in killing the Infants: and Acts 23.20. the Ministers of Ananias for smiting Paul contra justiciam, jussu Ananiae, against all right and Law, by the command of Ananias. 7. In the 7. Commandement, 2 Sam. 11.11. Davids command to Uriah to ly with Bethsabee, disobeyed and praised: and contra, Absalom obeyed to goe lye with his Fathers concubines, 2 Sam. 16.22. 8. In the eight Commandement, Mich. 3.3. oppression of Prin∣ces, and taking away of every mans goods: Elias was not disobedi∣ent to Ahab, when he reproved him for the Vineyard, for the holy Ghost also threatneth him, 1 Kings 21.19. And Naboth refusing, disobeyed not, 1 Kings 21.3. 9. And for the ninth Commandement: Jezebels device for the witnesses, 1 Ki. 21.10. and Mar. 14.55. the high Priest setting up false witnesse, &c. both condemned, Pro. 17.7. Lying, least becom∣meth men in authority: and Pro. 12.14. it is interpreted, using deceit, that is, bearing false witnesse: and Pro. 29.12. the Prince that is a lyer, shall have servants enough to sooth him in it; and conse∣quently, ca. 19.28. he that maketh a lie, & scoffeth at judgement: his servants also will come to make a mock and scoffe of judgement. One example more. Christ, who most perfectly fulfilled the law, yet disobeyed his Superiours, in both respects. Christ diso∣beying.First, Luke 2.49. Christs defence of not going down at first, cum patre & matre, with his father and mother: Aug. Ubi nihil impedit ibi conveniens est; sed quando impediunt, cave ne feceris: haec enim non est obedientia; when the Superiours hinder not, it is good to obey; but if they command contrary, take heed you be not deceived, in this case obedience is disobedience: To such it may be said, Wist ye not that I must goe about my Fathers businesse? Secondly, at the Marriage, John 2.4. Augustine there makes this objection; Venerat ne ad nuptias ut doceret matres contemnere, what came Christ to the Marriage for, to teach us to contemn our Mo∣thers? And he resolveth it thus, What Christ took of his Mother, wherein he was subject unto her, it was his Flesh. Now she would have him shew a Miracle: could hee doe that by his Humane nature? No, but as he saith, Miraculum facturus, non potuit fa∣cere secundum humanam naturam, sed secundum majestatem divinam,
being to worke a miracle, hee could not doe it by his humane na∣ture but by his divine Majesty: and that was out of her latitude: therefore he goeth on in the person of Christ. Quod in me tu geu∣isti, non potest facere miraculii, that which I have from thee as my Mo∣ther, cannot work a miracle: and it is that only you may command: in rebus divinis, mulier quid mihi tecii, in divine matters, woman what have I to doe with thee? Therefore you are not now intra seriem, within your order. But when he suffered on the Crosse, he acknow∣ledged her to be his Mother, being as a man; and so to provide for her. Augustine, I will say to my Superiour, Ne praetereat jussio tua terminos professionis meae, let not not your command extend further then the warrant of my profession: that is, the promise I made in the state I am in. So this it it in effect, In nullo mihi parcat superior, eorum quae promisi neque plus exigat quam promisi: Wherein I have sworne obedience, let him not spare me: In other things he hath no right to command me, we must beware also that we be not inti∣ced by them unto evill by the allurements of preferment. Solomon, Pro. 25.16. saith well; Mel invenisti, hast thou found honey, eate not too much. Indeed this is the Commandement where hony fal∣leth. And this is it, 1 Sam. 22.7. that Saul braggeth off; Can David give you Vineyards, can he promote you? I can. The hope of prefer∣ment is often the cause that we sooth up our superiours in evil, and teach them that because they are Princes, therefore, quod libet licet, their will may be a Law, as 1 Kings 21.7. Ahab accounts not him∣selfe a King, except he may have what he would: and 1 Kin. 22.13. they must come and speak that the King liketh off, and will accept for good. This setteth the first Commandement out of doores; As we must make heavy our Superiors, so we must take heed wee make them not nimis graves, heavier then God. Christ saith, that this  and , this defying of Superiors, is abominable; and it shall consume the government: And so detestable it is, as Hos. 5.11, 12. it shall be a Moth, God saith there, Israel is oppressed, and broken in judgement, conteritur ibi judicium, the reasons; quia pla∣cent, quae sequuntur mandata, because they willingly walke after the commandement. Now there are but two commanders; God and Superiors. God would not have punished, if he had commanded: But because they follow their superiors, and not God, and cry pla∣cet to him; therefore saith he, I will be a Moth in Judah, and I will consume them. To conclude, 1 Pe. 2.23. this honor must be propter Deum, for God, that is, Eph. 1.6. in Deo, in God; that is, Tit. 3.1. In every good worke: so that in a case of justice, we must not respect any superior, nor de∣cline one whit, Levit. 9.13. Jerom. honorandus generator; sed praepo∣nendus creator honor thy Father, yet thy Creator more. Notwith∣standing all this, it shall be expedient, non , not to carpe at every little thing, but to obey rather, if it be in our powers, as when the thing is doubtfull. So 2 Sam. 24.4. Joab though hee could see no reason, yet obeyed; and would not therefore discom∣mend it: So likewise in an unjust Commandement, th
be just obedience, Mat. 17.27. Christ for quietnesse, payd tri∣bute, more then he needed. So for quietnesse must we part with our goods. Augustine, Ut illum reum facit iniquitas imperandi, ita me innocentem facit ordo parendi, as the injustice of his command mak∣eth him guilty, so throughthy obedience art thou made innocent. Particular duties are betweene 1. Husband and Wife. 2. Father and Childe.Particular duties. 3. Master and Servant. First, Husband and Wife, because first ordained, and a nearer bond betweene them. Of this duty, there be two ends.2. Ends of marriage. First, in respect of God, Gen. 1.28. that all be blessed in his seed. Secondly, in re∣gard of the Church, 1 Tim. 2.4. to shew a care to bring one ano∣ther to godlinesse. First then of the mutuall duties of these; to be seen in three words, used herein. 1. Conjugium. 2. Matrimonium. 3. Nuptiae. 1. Conjugium, is the fellowship of a Yoke: that they might be better, then if they were alone. But we may, 1 Cor. 7.1. by diverse circumstances in these dayes of corruption, be alone better, Gen. 2.24. is the greatnesse of this conjunction; in our departure from our dearest things, to be united in this conjugio: which conjuncti∣on, is a covenant, Mal. 2.14. not to be broken of man, Mat. 10.16. And in this respect is made an helpe, therefore are all such conjugia condemned, as be a hindrance to Gods Religion, or contrary there∣to; and those that be unequall, not bearing the same yoke, and are not in Domino, they marry not in the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.39. 2. Matrimonium: ut fiat mater. This was before sinne; the first end whereof, Gen. 1.18. is propagation, not as of other things; but Mal. 2.15. of the holy seed of Gods Church: for though Woman was the instrument of sinne; yet as 1 Tim. 2.15. if the children be faithfull, there shall be a meane to save her. So these children must be proles sancta, a holy offpring to build his Church. 3. Nuptiae, after sinne. So as Ambrose saith, Nubo signifieth first to cover; as we may see by the compound of it, obnubo. There∣fore as Augustine saith, aliquid sit celandum, by this some thing is done which ought to be concealed: For so it is said they were nak∣ed, which was because of their sinne: which sinne made their ap∣petite irregular, and by that the Devill taketh occasion of tempta∣tion, 1 Cor. 7.3. for by it we are made opposite to that, Heb. 13.4. Lectum immaculatum, undefiled bed; and to that, 1 Cor. 7.7. avoyd∣ing of fornication: and to that, Prov. 20. avoyding of strange Women; and to that, 1 Cor. 7.14. that they should be as though they had none. In particular, 1 Pet. 3.7. the husbands duty is set downe,1. Ossic. viri. to dwell with them as men of knowledge, seeing that Gen. 3.6. she was decei∣ved by the serpent, as she confessed, Gen. 3.12. he beguiled me, &c. and therefore Gen. 3.16. she must never follow her owne will here∣after, but be Subject. So that his duty is to governe her, but so, as to beare with her, Col. 3.19. for she is coheire with him, and also for his own quietnesse; for who troubleth his own flesh? So that hee, 1 Cor. 14.35. because shee must aske him, must bee able to answer her, her inquisition enquiry of instruction; and must not
be carried away with her affection, but exhort her wisely, as Elie his sons, 1 Sam. 2.23. and Ioh his Wife, Cap. 2.10. not to be over credulous as Potiphar, Gen. 39.9. Moses his Wife also stomached against the Sacrament, Exod. 4.15. So Iezebell, 1 Kings 23. 2 Sam. 6.2. Davids Wife also found fault with him: So that the Husband must be able to rule his affections, and not yeeld to them. And here the duty of the Woman is,1. Offic. uxoris. submission. She must not stand to her owne will: therefore subject, which subjection must be, Ephes. 5.25. as to the Lord; and that with feare, shewing that they have authority, 2 Pet. 2.10. 1 Cor. 11.4. Man is the Womans head: And because the sense of seeing is there, she must see by him. So also as Augustin, Non ê pedibus, neque ê capite facta, est sed ê latere, ut fere sit aequalis, the Woman was not made out of the head, nor feet, but the side of Adam, to shew that she is almost equall with him. The Heathen could see this to be absurd, that Women should not be subject. Hest. 1. The second duty of the Husband agreeth with the generall duty,. Love, yet in a particular and speciall respect, as it appeareth by Gen. 2. we are to forsake that that is deerest to us for this; And as this love taketh hold in outward things, Prov. 5.18. so specially in inward things, Ephes. 5.29. to be such as Christ to his Church, to forsake all and unite himselfe to it, and spiritually to make it with∣out spot; so that our love being such, must not be fleshly, but in the spirit, to care that they be fellow heires with us in Christ. And for the Woman, Prov. 31.29, 30. she is above all, that is timens Ie∣hovae, if she be one that feareth the Lord: therfore is Lidia set for a pattern of this, Acts 16.14. So in outward things, that she have an amability, to be modest with humility, Prov. 11.16. 1 Tim. 2.9. 1. Pet. 3.3. And all these to that end, 1 Tim. 5.4. to give no offence; but to convert the very enemy, 1 Pet. 3.1. 1 Tim. 3.8. To provide for his family, an honest care for him and his: that is, meat and cloths, such was Iacobs care, Gen. 30.30. When shall I provide for mine owne house? This is that desire, Ephes. 4.28. to be chargeable to none, but rather to helpe other: Set downe metaphorically, Prov. 5.15. To drink water of his owne Cisterne; so he sends the sluggard to learne of the Ant, Pro. 6.8. and calleth him a sonne of blessing that gather∣eth in Summer, Pro. 10.10. Thus did Ioseph lay up, Gen. 41.40. And this blessing must be onely to them, which provide thus without a∣ny grudging of conscience, Pro. 10.2. And the Woman,2. Offi. uxoris. 1 Tim. 5.4. must look to this and preserve it, Iohn 6.12. Gather up, that nothing be lost: This is commendable; for though Christ rebuked Martha, Lu. 10.40. yet Iohn 11.5. he loved her: and those houses are happy, where Martha complaineth of Mary. This duty of the wife is set down particularly, Pro. 31.27. She overseeth the waies of her houshold, and eateth not the bread of idlenesse. That they must keep at home, & carry their houses on their backs, Tit. 2.5. A patterne of this we have in Sarah, Gen. 18.6. 4. There must be officia resultantia; in regard of this marriage knot, there must certain duties result from both parties to each the others friends and parentage: an honor & love of their friends mu∣tually:
Of the Man, we have example of Moses towards his Fa∣ther-in-law, Exod. 18.7. &c. Numb. 10.29. And for the Woman, very excellently, Ruth 1.16. Mutua paren∣tum & libero∣rum officia.2. The second between Father and Sonne. And this is from the second mutuall duties, of this duty there is also two ends; First to the end that there may be proles sancta, that they may teach their children; and againe, they, theirs, &c. Psal. 78.6. And secondly, Pro. 17.6. Ut sint corona patrum, their Fathers crown: a comfort in age, Psal. 127. that through them they may not be ashamed. 1. The first duty of Parents to Children, is in begetting them; marke here the manner of the generation of the most excellent servants of God, Isaac and Jacob were of the Promise: Joseph in the affliction of his Father, Gen: 30. Samuel in the lamentation of his Mother; Solomon, when David was cast downe with the death of the other child, Psal. 31.18. The Fathers say, Non tam generatio spectanda est, quam regeneratio, in this act we are not so much to look after the generation as the regeneration of our children. Neither is this duty to be performed with a brutish appetite, but by san∣ctifying themselves to the propagation of Gods Church: Be∣cause that there are whole Generations of evill, Proverbs 30.11, 12, 13, 14. And for this duty, the duty of a childe cannot answer, Ephes. 6.4. he hath begotten me,Offic. libero∣rum. but it is impossible I should doe so much for him: therefore as wisedome speaketh, Eccles. 3.18. They must be honoured, be they never so base: as Mat. 12.30. . Luke 15.29. the Prodigals elder brother stileth himselfe his Fathers ser∣vant. Yea, 2 Sam. 14.33. wicked Absalom could doe this, bowing down to the ground; so Solomon in his royall estate, to his Mother: If then any refuse them, or be ashamed of them, Prov. 10.6. & 30.10. look on them with a scornfull look, as Cham, Gen. 9.22. this is to be accursed. But if any come so far, as Pro. 20.20. to curse them, he is filius mortis, he must die for it. Levit. 20.9. Exod. 21.15. It is as much as murther, to hold up the hand against them. The second duty of Parents to their children, is Ephes. 6.4. , to nourish them, being begotten: And herein, if Exod. 21.22, 23. the child be hurt to death; or Gen. 21.11. forsaken of his Parents, or neglected, 1 Kings 3.19. or hurt, as Mephibosheth, 2 Sam. 4.4. all these are great offenders. For 1 Tim. 5.9. we must nourish them as our selves, and not against nature, give them a stone, Mat. 7.9. The third duty of Parents is, 1 Tim. 3.18. , to bring them up, that is, continually to nourish them, 2 Tim. 1.4. Deut. 21.15. laying up for them, and dividing the Inheritance. And if there be no inheritance then that (which Augustine saith) differeth no∣thing therefrom; they are to provide them such Trades as every one is fit for; as Jacob espied in his sonnes, Gen. 49. particuler inclinations: and the choisest of them they are to dedicate to Gods service, 1 Sam. 1.11. And to answer this, The sons duty is,Offic. fil. Pro. 17.13. Remuneratio, requitall, Pro. 18.14. not to detract falsly from them
as wicked children doe. but 1 Tim. 4.16. to maintaine them: and Mark 7.12. let Corban alone, rather then they should want. Such was Christs care of his Mother, being on the Crosse, John 19.26, 27. . and as the Storkes carry the old ones (that are worne with age) upon their wings. The neglectors of this duty are not onely to be , without honour in the Common-wealth: but sometime manifestly punished, as Homer the Heathen could say. But the duty of the godly is such, as Joseph performed, Gen. 50. to bury them after death. Genesis 25.9. as did Jacob and Esau, Gen. 35.29. 4. Duty of the Parents.4. , that they bring them up in Religion, as Mark 2.6. If it were for goods, wealth, or honour, we could be carefull, and sorry of the contrary: but in the LORDS cause we are lesse care∣full: and for the offending of him, lesse sorrowfull. But this is required of Parents as an especiall duty that we be made Christi∣ans by them in . Was Abrahams care, Gen. 17.14. 1 Cor. 7.14 Sanctifycation of children. So Esay was so carefull of this, that he tooke witnesse at the receiving them into the Church. And when they are made members of the Church, they must be instructed, Prov. 22.12. Deut. 4.9. and 11.19. to make GODS Word knowne to them, that when they come to heare it, it may not be strange. So did Abraham, Gen. 18.19. and David, 1 Chro. 28. and so did Pauls instructor, 1 Tim. 3.15. 5. Duty of Parents.5. Fifthly, they must add to these, Exemplum, their example, with due and fit correction, for it is with a Childe as with the ground, if untilled, it is soone overrunne with thornes and nettles, Prov. 24.32. and because didicit obedientiam ex eo quod passus est, Prov. 29.15. The rod and reproofe, give wisedome; the Rod is , to put a soule into them; and to lose the bundle of folly: Pro. 21.15. for so, Prov. 3.12. Qui non corrigit odit, He that doth not correct his childe, hateth him: and Prov. 22.13. Non morietur, si corrigas, If thou correctest him, he shall not dye. This maketh against them which love over foolishly. Yea, there is a blessing for this correction, Prov. 13.14. for it delivereth the soule, and bringeth rest if it be with this condition, Dum spes est, Prov. 19.18. while there is hope; while the bundle is not too fast bound. This is Abrahams worke that every man must sacrifice the , the young and budding lusts of their children. 6. Duty of Parents.6. Lastly, a particular kinde of prayer and blessing, which sancti∣fieth all the rest: else all other meanes be cursed, Gen. 17.10. and 49.48. 1 Chron. 2.19. Childs duty.The childs duty to answer all this, is his obedience; if he will not bring shame and discomfort; he must be wise, Prov. 27.11. Viz. such as mocketh not at good counsell, Prov. 10.1. as also Prov. 6.20. Imitatio exempli, We must imitate them in their good ex∣ample, as did Jacob. Againe, subjection to discipline is also requi∣red, which distinguisheth a naturall sonne from a bstard, Heb. 12.9. (See the obedience and practise of this in indifferent things in the Rechabites, Jer. 35.6.) For it is an honour to them, to re∣ferre
our selves to their counsells. So here is condemned such mar∣riages and contrais, as the Parents consent not too, Numb. 30. No vow can stand without their consent, much lesse this: and 1 Cor. 7.13. the father is said to give his daughter: so the Sonne must be given also: And the contrary to this was alwayes a note of the wicked. Gen. 28.9. Secondly, they doe not performe this obedience, that are such as one described, Deut. 21.18, 19, 20, 21. which is truely thus translated, Commessator, or cauponarum frequen∣tator, A riotous eater and an hunter of Tavernes; if any have such a sonne, and he will not heare his Fathers counsell, let him be sto∣ned. So the Heathen would have the Father, Dicere sententiam, to give sentence against his owne sonne. Solon thinketh, and saith, he hath proved by experience, them to be Bastards, that will not obey. And so every of them had their Eridnis, as the Heathen said. So not much unlike is that, 1 Sam. 2.25. Elies sons could not obey; for God was purposed to slay them, wherefore he hated their disobe∣dience. He that will not obey his Father and Mother, shall once obey the Hangman, or worse as the Poet saith. The duty of children to∣ward their Fath kin∣dred, &c.This duty must yet reach further on both sides, Levit. 25.29. to his Brother, his Fathers brother, and his Fathers brothers Sonne, (Numb. 35.51. he that is next of the kinne, is alwayes called, vin∣dex sauguinis, the revenger of blood.) This of Father or Superiour to his Inferiour, we fee in Abraham to Lot, Gen. 13.11. in Morde∣cai to Hester: Cap. 2.15. so that in this respect is the precept of the Widdow, Deut. 26. and the fatherlesse, 1 Tim. 5.4. that first they looke to their owne house, to helpe such. And for children; though Caine be wicked, yet as the Elder, he is to be honoured of his brother, Gen. 4.7. Acts 10. Cornelius sent for all his friends, to be partakers with him of Gods word. So we have, Judg. 4.11. a deed of love in Israel: Of Kinsefolke, Luke 1.9. Mary to Eliza∣beth. So 1 Tim. 5. the Inferiours must looke to their Superiours, as Prov. 27.10. Thine owne friends, and thy Fathers friends, forsake not: but as 1 Sam. 15. Bee friendly, even to the friend of thy friend. Dominii origo The Masters power over the Servant.3. The third duty is of Master and Servant. This is , a humane ordinance; but the approbation of it was from God; and it depends on 2 Kings 5.13. where Naamans servants call him Father. Dominii finis, The end of that power and govern∣ment.The end of this is, first, Luke 19.9. that the regeneration of Zacheus should be the regeneration of the whole house. And second∣ly, Eccles. 8.9. Dominari in bono, The mutuall good one of ano∣ther. Seitutis or∣gonalis, The instituti∣on of the Ser∣vants duty.For the institution of this: As, if man had continued in inno∣cency, we should have had no servants; so wee read of none, till Gen. 9.25. and afterwards of Esau. Now after this curse, came that which the Fathers call Depressio intellectus, Darknesse of the understanding: Whereby men became more fit to be ruled, then to rule: And Prov. 11.29. Solomon there sheweth, that by nature, insipiens, the foole, shall be Servus sapientis, Servant to the wise. So
did Jacob prophecie of Issacar, Gen. 49.14. that he should have this Depressionem imellectus, this darknesse of understanding; as also God hath shewed, in making the body sit to beare, rather then to governe. So we see how naturall servitude and service came in. Then, Gen. 13.38. and 10.18. after, this plague of God (though it were under all) began first to bring men under subjection: so that Nimrod and his crue, oppresseth the Kings of Sodom, and the Pentapolis about them. Gen. 14.4. And thus came Servitus ex ne∣cessitate. servitude forc't through necessity: Necessitas enim dat legem legi. From this necessity came servus pacti, a servant by Co∣venant; for men would willingly make a covenant, and bind them∣selves, that they might be free from those their oppressors. And hence it was that Abraham had so many servants, as the Jewes note, 318. Because they seeing his equity, were glad to be with him. And Gen. 17.29. it turned to their great good, receiving thereby Circumcision, the freedome of their soules; and for this cause, none of Israel might be servant, for God by their service, might gaine the more of the Heathen. Yet after, other respects drew e∣ven the Saints of God to be servants. Gen. 27.29. Jacob served Laban twenty yeares; so that in this respect, where poverty is, that a man may be made rich; Where ignorance is, that a man may learne knowledge; he may be servant, Deut. 13.12. (And thus came this service, by Gods goodnesse; turning the punishment in∣to a blessing to his. So that when we can have no freedome, it is generally for all, 1 Cor. 7.17. and particularly for every one, verse 20. and 21. to abide service. And 1 Tim. 6.2. though they were Heathen, yet obey them.) So Paul sends the servant againe to Philemon, to teach him with his knowledge, and to be willing to impart to him of his riches: so then is service, eopacto, permitted by the Gospell. So must servants respect two ends. 1. Gods glory, 1 Tim. 6.1. 2. The Masters profit, Phil. 11. So did all things prosper un∣der Josephs hands. Particular duties. 1. Duty of the Master.1. For the Master, ars imperandi, knowledge to enjoyne them their worke: and herein there must be foure things. 1. That it be lawfull, else it will displease , thy Master according to the spirit; and though we have , A Master after the flesh: Yet Praeponendus est Dominus secundum spi∣ritum, the Master after the spirit must alwayes be preferred be∣fore him; so did Joseph set God before his Mistresse, Gen. 39.9. Therefore we must walke integre, uprightly; Psal. 101. and there∣fore command them nothing but what is lawfull. 2. It must be Possible, For a thing may be lawfull and not possi∣ble. And therefore Abrahams servant puts the doubt, Gen. 24.5. What if she will not come? and is in that case set free.
3. It must be profitable: David sheweth, 2 Sam. 13.17. by not drink∣ing the water, that it was an unprofitable commandement; and might as well have been left undone. 4. It must be proportionable to person, time and other circum∣stances: Pharaoh, Exod. 5.7. went above all proportion, and this is the Masters duty. 2. The Servants duty answering this, is set downe,1. Duty of the Servant. Mat. 24.45. Faithfulnesse and Discretion. 1. For Faithfulnesse, the Heathen can say that servus is totus alterius, a servant is wholly another mans; therefore, Mat. 6.24. he can serve but one Master; and the rea∣son is, because his duty is infinite: he cannot set downe any time, when he shall have done; but must worke all the day, Luke 17.7. and at night too, till his Master set him free. Yea, he must spare from his owne meate, to doe his Masters businesse; as Abrahams servant, Gen. 24.33. Opposite to this faithfulnesse,Opposites of faithfulnesse. 1. Wasters. is First, when they will doe some thing beside, or let some thing stick in their fingers, Tit. 2.10. Filchers, Luke 16. Wasters; such as spend in vile company, Mat. 24.49. Secondly, lying, 2 Sam. 16.3. such was Ziba,2. Lying. 2 Kings 5.22. Ge∣hezi was grievously punished for this. Thirdly, slothfulnesse;3. Sloth. when he will not give to his Master all his strength: non accuratè agere, as the Poet saith; but be servus glis, not like to Jacob, Gen. 31.40. nor to them, Prov. 31.15. rise early, and verse 18. get up in the night. Therefore, Matth. 25.26. the slothfull decrease; but Prov. 12.24. the diligent increase. 4. Unwilling∣nes and mur∣muring.Fourthly, Ephes. 6.7. when they doe it unwillingly; which when they must doe it, will not doe it with commendation: Therefore they must doe it , with all thine heart; Col. 3.23. not mur∣muring, Tit. 2.9. but as the Poet saith, . doe as the Centurions servant, Matth. 8. hee heard Goe, and hee went presently. Fifthly, deceitfull diligence, onely at their pleasure, eye-service,5. . Ephes. 6.6. Col. 3.22. but it must be done with singlenesse, least the cheife Master be displeased. And if they doe it so, he will reward them with another reward. 2. For Prudentia, or Discretion,2. Prudentia. the distinctions of servants which the Philosophers have, First, one can doe no more, then that which he is taught to doe; and this is like a bleared eye: of which a man would gladly be ridd, but that he cannot spare his sight. Secondly, the other is such, as Luke 12.42. knoweth his Masters will; and then as the Steward would doe for himselfe, Luke 16. so must he cast for his Master in due time and season, Gen. 31.38. as did Jacob, so shall he prosper with Joseph, Gen. 49.2. 2. Duty of the Master.The second duty of the Master is, not to be asper, rigorous, Levit. 25.43. but Col. 4.1. he must governe with justice and equity; for they are conservi, fellow servants also; and servants are humiles a∣mici humble friends (as one calleth them:) And though it can∣not be said to us, as to the Iewes, Remember that yee were servants:
yet as the Poet saith, in futuro, remember that you may be servants: and therefore Quod tibi vis fieri, doe as you would be done by. But if the servant will not understand, then Pro, 19.29. he must be corrected:Offi seve: and thereto be subject, 1 Pet. 2.8. 3. Duty of Master.The third duty is, Pro. 31.27. to provide for them abundantly, meate and cloth, Pro. 31.2. Mat. 25.27. When he hath done well let him be preferred: and before the going downe of the Sunne, be partaker of the fruit of his hands, Deut. 15.12. &c. Exod. 21.6. & Jer. 34.14. Levit. 25.39. after he is free and the time of his service expired, his wages must not remaine in thine hand: so that on both sides, there be mutuall duties to bee performed on both sides. The contrary to which is, that Pro. 29.4. Bribery and not friendship; which prophecy of Solomon was fulfilled in his servant Jeroboam to his sonne Rehoboam. And thus much of these three duties. Now to the other division: For This  (or ordinance) is either , divine preparers, or Masters of Schooles; Pastors for the Soule. , Humane. Teachers and Schools, their institution, &c.For the Preparers and Schooles. The ground of this is in the Prophets, where as 2 Kings 2.3. one telleth Elisha that his Master shall be taken from him; and verse 12. he himselfe calleth him Father. This is to be a Father by Regeneration. And it is that, which the Heathen make their eloquence: so saith Philosophy, . And as Elisha being for the Ecclesiasticall use, called him Father; so the young King being for the Politick use, 2 Kings 13.14. calleth him Father. So seeing he is the Father, both of those that are in the Church, and in the Common-wealth; he hath his maintenance from both; from the Church, 2 King 4.42. from the Civill body, 2 Kings 8.9. Pnis schola∣ru, &c. The end of Schooles.The end of this is, Esay 8.16. That the Law might be sealed in the Disciples, 2 Pet. 3.16. There bee those that be unlearned, that corrupt these seales: and those, which be not grounded, which counterfeit others. So, that his Seale might remaine, he will set it in the Schoole, Hosea 6.5. that men might hereby be made fit to build the House of God, Ut dolentur homines, bee made fit matter. For as it is, Ephes. 4.18. there is a naturall blindnesse of heart in every one; so that the taking away of this, is a speciall part of this function. So saith Balaam, Numb. 24.14, 15. that he was borne, clausis oculis, with his eyes shut, Jer. 10.14. Every man is a beast in his owne knowledge, &c. But Audiendo verbum, sentiebat artem: sic veniebat, vidit & locutus est. At the first they were called Seers, 1 Sam. 9.8. yet they would not be so called, but Dophim, that is Speculators, seeing in a glasse some things that others saw not. Institutio hu∣j antelg.Institution of this; before the Law, Numb. 10. toward the
end, Gen. 8. and Num. 11.28.14. There must be Elders, they must have the spirit put on them; that is, nothing else, but to take the spirit which he hath, and to give it to another. The word in Hebrew, Esay 58.9. signifieth a peaceable learning; as Rom. 10. Plentifulnesse of wisedome: and that is, 1 Cor. 14.3. to edifie, exhort, and comfort; not to foretell things only, for that was extra∣ordinary, and is now ceased; and so is not the prophecie there meant: for then we should perish that have it not, as the wise man saith. Then they had both Levites, and Nazarites; that is, such, as of any other Tribe were given to the service of GOD in his Church. And of these, their Colledges stood, Amos 2.11. and also of many other good Students, such as was Moses his servant, Joshuab; which tarried alway about the Tabernacle; that is, plying his stu∣dy, and so became so excellent, Exod. 33.11. when they came to the Land of promise, they found a City of Bookes, which after they called the City of God, least the Bookes should be thought the cheife cause of Prophecie. After, they had Mispat, Gilgall, and Bethel, 1 Sam. 10.11. where Saul was wondred at, for being among the Prophets. It is manifest that they acknowledged it to be ex∣traordinarily: and so, that there was an ordinary meanes to Pro∣phecie. After this, when Samuel left the Rule, he went againe to his Fathers calling, and built a Colledge at Rhamah, and was Ma∣ster of it himselfe. And this continued till the Captivity. When they had places likewise to study in, and left behinde them there, that learning that was there to be had. So that it hath beene from the beginning, to Christ; and Christ accepteth of that name, which was for a Teacher, Rabbi, and calleth his Disciples Scholers, John 15.8. Mat. 12.4. Mark 10.42. he will reward a cup of cold water, that is bestowed on these. And by that , how he came to be so learned, that they wondred at it, John 7.15. it is sure that Christ was learned in all, and taught so. After. Christs in∣struction, it was necessary, 1 Tim. 1.13. to keep the true patterne, 1. Cor. 4.13. to teach it, and read it, verse 14. to write it: and Mat. 23.24. to meditate it, to shew our progressus; and , and to make our fruit knowne to all men, 1 Tim. 4.5. 1 Cor. 6.5. to be Wise and Learned: and Paul denieth not of himselfe, 2 Cor. 11.6. and Festus confesseth of him, Acts 26.24. For though Peter and John were unlearned men; yet Luke and Marke were learned, when Christ chose them: And the , or free gifts; are five:Charismata doctoris quin∣que. 1. Of Nature. 2. Doctrine. 3. Education. 4. Exercise. 5. Laying on of hands. After, in the Primitive Church, when they were all moved a∣gainst it, Acts 13.1. it removed to Antioch: and there were learn∣ed men, and thence to Alexandria, where Mark was cheife; whence it were easie to bring it to us. For the duty of the Teacher:Offic. doctoris. The Teachers duty. Christ chose but one out of three so he must know and choose them that be fit for this, as Lucas would discerne Joseph to be fit for a Nazarite: For all be not apart, Luke 10.13. so there must be a choice in the behalf of this Teacher.
For there must be a Cephas as Peter, Mat. 16.22. in that he gave counsell; and in his courage and willingnesse to heare of his Fault, Gal. 2. And James and John were called the sonnes of Thunder, Luke 9.14. And this is such a name, as hath in it some signe; and such as Job 23.33. Unus inter mille, one of a thousand; And thus a choice must be, in the behalfe of the Teacher, and the Learner. The Learners duty.Of the Learner; for as Zach. 13.5. such as acknoweldge them∣selves neither to be Prophets, nor sonnes of Prophets: For Pro. 17. what should cost be bestowed on them, that are not apt? Pro. 26.1. And he that teacheth those Dolts, is as if he should lift up a lame man from the ground; for he will fall againe. Therefore as Plato would have those that are to be of the Schoole or Com∣mon-wealth, to be either Gold or Silver at the least: for Pro. 27.2. and Jer. 6.28. they turned his bellowes, and wearied his arme, because they were but Brasse, so that in vaine he melted them; therefore, Esay 28.9. Quem docebo? Whom shall I teach know∣ledge? Not such as must have precept upon precept, and be ever in the Principles: but those that can take stronger meates. And if they cannot doe thus; then must Zacharie say, they are more fit to be Husbandmen.The Popes o∣pinion for choyce. The Popes opinion of this choice, which they have in the Canon, is thus: That it is better  strict in it, then otherwise: for it is better to be a wiseman in the Church or Com∣mon-wealth, without this dignity, then to be foole with it The neglect of this choice, Mal. 2. to take into this place of Prophe∣cie all that commeth; was the cause why the Sunne was darkened. For thus the Prophets became Bardi, stupid blockheads, Jer. 23.13. without common sense o it. Thus Prophecie faileth, and so the people perish. Signa eligen∣dorum. The signes of such as are to be chosen.There be therefore three signes of them that are to be chosen, Pro. 16.7. First, in the Ant is noted a naturall quality to provid without gaine; which is called Solertia, the duty of the active part of un∣derstanding; together of it selfe: As we see many of the Fathers, Ambrose, &c. were very wonderfull men this way. The second is, 2 Kings 4.29. Docilitas, To be able to conceive; which is the duty of the passive part of the understanding; to have cor latum, a dilated heart, to conceive so, that Solertia, the active part of the understanding may have matter to be occupied in. Thirdly, Eccles. 11.6. Instanter operari, to take paines; which made Paul more excellent then all. So that we have that cor latum, and solertiam, with this diligence; to shew both at morn and at even, and never to rest: then are we fit to be chosen. If we have not these, there will rise between the Teacher and the Scholer, Difficultas quaedam, quae arguit errorem, some kind of difficulty, and consequently, errour. And if there be so in this first step, it is like the errour in the first concoction; which cannot be holpen by those that follow. So for all that follow, we must pre∣suppose that the choice is made aright.
Then seeing some things have outward principles, as res artificiosae, things artificiall: & some inward, as naturall things: and some both, as health: And that these that are done extraordinarily, are done without these Principles; sometimes, as health, procured by na∣ture it selfe, without medicine; so is Prophecie extraordinarily gotten without teaching: And as in medicine, it addeth nothing to nature, but ministreth to it, and helpeth it; so teaching addeth nothing to the internall Principles of Prophecy, that is the light of our hearts, but helpeth it. This light is that, which John 1.9. is in every man: and this teaching helpeth it by sensible things; , and similitudes, as by bringing conclusions into, or by the right disposing of the medicine. So that to make knowne that which is unknowne; and bring to order that which is confused, is the effect of Teaching. Generally then for mutuall duties: Mutua docto∣res, & discipu∣li officia. Mutuall du∣ties of Tea∣cher and Scholer. First, we must be perswaded, that this lumen, this light com∣meth from God; and therefore we must goe to Heaven for it. Psalm. 36.9. in lumine tuo lumen videbimus, in thy light, shall we see light, &c. 2 Cor. 4.6. his light must shine into our hearts: And the way to this, is prayer, Psalm. 6. toto: and Psalm. 119.66. Teach thou me, &c. Secondly, we must have regard to the Commandement wherein it is; that is, his Law; that is fuller of all knowledge, and in better manner, then all the works of the Heathen. Thirdly, we must, Ephes. 5.14. wake out of sleep; that is, sinne: for wisedome will not come in cor malevolum, into a heart malevolent: by the avoyding of which, the Fathers were farre more excellent, then we, in all their meditations, though they had not so good meanes as we. Thus, as Aug: saith, there must be magister intus, a teacher with∣in us; which Esay 30.27. stands behind us, and tels us, when we are right; without which, our study and care is bootlesse. The Teachers duty.Particular duties. First, of the Teachers; set downe wholly, Pro. 22.10, 20. to make known to them, to write it for them; to coun∣sell them in the practise of it. But particularly this is done: First, by parables, as did both Balaam and Moses; and Matth. 13.3. by sensible things make knowne such things, as are more removed from the understanding. Secondly, this must have with it an order, and no interruption; as Luke 24.27. he began at Moses when he expounded unto them the Scripture; and John 15.12. he had other things to teach them, which he did not at that time, be∣cause they were not capable of them. Some must have stronger meat then others. Now for this, there be foure wayes to teach by, 1. Precept, Psal. 119.31. Teach me thy precepts. 2. Example, Pr. 24.32. the field of the sluggard, &c. 3. Experience, wch we cal our Genesis, Gē. 30.27. 4. Ex eo quod passus est, Heb. 7.8. , Correction is good instruction.
Christ, the most perfect paterne of a Teacher in all these, and of all names, he accepted of this, to be so called. 1. Concerning precept, Mark 4.34. he expounds every parable privately. 2. Example, John 13.15. Exemplum dedi vobis, I have given you an example. 3. Experience hath taught them practice, Mat. 16.13. John 4.2. in increasing in knowledge, Mat. 17.14. in casting out spirits, Mat. 10.1. in preaching; of the first order of the seventy, whereof twelve were after chosen to be Apostles. The difference of these are, 1 Cor. 3.2. that some are cheife builders; which lay the foun∣dation; as were the twelve, whereon the other must build, as the seventy. And thus then remaine distinctions in the Church, by Christs first Order. 4. Ex iis, quae passus est; for teaching by reproofe, Mat. 15.16. know ye not, &c? Mat. 16.12. in their ignorance of the leaven, and v. 23. he reproved Peter for his counsell, Mark 10.14. for keeping children from him, Mat. 17.7. when the spirit resisted them. Thus they learned by reprehension: for so Pro. 17.16. as sharp words to the wise are better then whips to the foole. Christ could teach by stripes also, when it was needfull; as Joh. 2.15. when they made the house of God, dens for theeves. And there is a theft in not labour∣ing, as well as in not praying: we shall find all that are held up with sufficient allowance, and yet idle, to be such theeves. Learners du∣ty.The Learners duty answering to this, is Pro. 22.17. Bow downe thine eare, &c. and Lam. 2.46. it is set downe to be 1. , Stu∣dious in hearing. 2. , to aske questions. First, , opposite to this, is Heb. 5.11. dulnesse in hearing: accompanied with dulnesse of heart, Luke 24.25. Therefore this must come, as Pro. 22.17, 18, 19. in aurem into the eare, and then, in cor into the heart, and hence again, ad labia, unto the lippes; and for weaknes of memory, we must do as the Scribes, write it in tables of paper, and by oft reading, bring it into the tables of the heart, Proverbs 7.3. Secondly, , to inquire, Exod. 13.14.6.20. to shew it to all: and Deut. 23.1. all commanded to aske, John 16.17. Mat. 13.10. & 15.5. Every Scribe must have both new and old pa∣rables, to teach them that enquire: For they bought Christ by Interrogation to expresse many things which could not be left unexpressed, without great doubt to the Church: as Matth. 23. concerning the Kingdome of Heaven; and John 9. in rendring the cause why he was borne blinde; hee shewing the cause of all defects of nature. 2 Sam. 20.8. We must enquire at Abel, the towne of learning. And withall we must add to this conference, spoken of before. Salomon likeneth it to two Irons, one whetting on the other, Pro. 27.17. 2. Duty of the Teacher.The second duty of the Teacher, which Aug: would have in his sonne; is vitia morum, magis quam verborum vitare: the Solecis∣me in manners chiefely to bee avoyded. Quintilian saith
well, Quid prodest, si studiis prodesses, moribus autem obesses? potior ast bene vivendi, quam optimè dicendi facultas. What availeth it, that thy instructions be profitable, if thy example and manners be hurtfull, it is farre more praise worthy to live well, then to speake well. Luke 10.20. It is our Saviours advice that we onely rejoyce in our salvation, not in any other knowledge, 1 Cor. 15.2. For without charity the foundation of all good manners, all the tongues and knowledge are but as Brasse. 1 Corinthians 13.1. Therefore Christ, Si scitis haec, beati estis, si faciatis: aliter non, if yee know these things, happy are yee if yee doe them, and not else; John 13.17. This did John rejoyce at, John 3.4. The Scholers duty answering this, Lam. 3.47. Is to perswade themselves, it is a blessed thing to beare the yoke of Christ in youth: Therefore thou must, Rom. 12.11. redeeme the time: If thou loose any of the Day, take up as much of the Night, Ephes. 5.10. And Numb. 6.13. that there is a day of Consecration, and thou must study for it. 1 Sam. 10.11. 1 Tim. 3.6. hee must be no young Scholer: for these are they that bring all out of course, which take that upon them, that they are not able to discharge. Of these complaine the Prophets, and the Fathers; and themselves also fall into temptation. 2. Also they must he willing to be directed, not without leave to doe so much as bury his Father. And this is it that maketh a Disciple in the estate of following; that is, to be enjoyned, and not to depart without permission. And then the Apostles coun∣sell, 2 Tim. 2.22. He must flie the lusts of youth: one noted, Tit. 2.6. by the opposite, , to be sober minded. How is that? Esay 51.21. there is Ebrietas è vino, a drunkennesse through wine; and a drunkennesse that commeth not by Wine. For Wine and com∣pany, they that are given to it, delight in it, Pro. 23.20, 21. avoid such. The avoiding of such as are amatores pinguium, lovers of commessations, and of ease; of slothfull and drunkards. Dormitatio vestietur panais, nunquam sapit amator vini, sloth shall be covered with rags, and the drunkard may not boast of wisedome. The other, that is not with wine, in Esay; to be drunken with his owne conceit and opinion; it is in them that know least. When a man hath a fume in his head, and thinks he can doe as the drunken man, that thinks he can overcome all the World, Pro. 30.12, 13. he speaketh there, of a generation pure in their owne eyes, not so indeed: yee shall know them by their outward behaviour, as by haughty eyes, holding up the head, shewing the breasts, &c. Pro. 11.2. With the lowly is wisedome: It is the first discite of Christ, Matth. 11.29. and John 13.16. expressed in example. And it is his Maxime: No Disciple is higher, or to check his Master. The heathen say, they are protervi & petulantes, impudent and saw∣cy that doe so. Deut. 32.15. the Holy Ghost saith, If two be scho∣lers, and taught together, and one of them had a conceit of him∣selfe: and the other were a foole, there were more hope of a foole to proove a Scholer then the other, Proverbs 26.16.
It is incident to those that are nothing but Lumpes, enformed by abuse, that thinkes himselfe wiser then seven that can give a reason. The conclusion of this part: seeing Eccl. 7. there is a time to be si∣lent, and a time to speake; the first is, when he is a learner. And Christ was conversant in hearing and inquiring; not setting downe Po∣sitions of his owne: so we must not be such as are conceited of their owne wisedome; but such in whom wisedome doth dwell. We must be humble: contra, Pro. 5.13. when a man will not heare his teachers, he shall after say, How hath my owne conceit rent mee in peeces as a mad Bull, how hath it brought mee to no∣thing. 3. Duty of the Teacher.Come to the third: It is tueri, to defend, according to the name of Tutors: practised by Christ, Mat. 9.14. and Mat. 12.2. & 15.2. defending his Disciples; and thereby shewing, that in every matter wherein they transgressed not, he would stand with them. Scholers duty.The first duty answering this, in regard of defence; God saith, The Nazarites, Numb. 6.14, 15. shall bring besides, every one what he is able, 1 Sam. 1.22. Anna carryeth up her Sonne, and three Bullocks, &c. that she might not be chargeable to Elie. 1 Sam. 9.7. Shall we come to the Prophet, and bring him nothing? was Sauls care when he went up to Samuel. So Luke 2.29. we read the entertainment of Christ by Levi. Matth. 8.14. by Peter: and likewise of a counsell that was held against the Hereticks, fra∣tricelli, where it was concluded against them, that Christ lived of his Stipend, and not of begging, as they make him; (and so of his Disciples:) and hee had of his owne, and Judas had the Bagge. The second duty is to minister to them, 1 Sam. 2.11. Samuel to Elie, coram Domino, before the Lord: 1 Kings 19.21. Elisha, though elder then Elias, yet ministred to him; and 2 Kings 3.11. powred water on his hands: the like we have in the Gospell of John, towards our Saviour. So Mat. 11.2. he sent two of his Disciples of his er∣rand: Mat. 26.17. he sent two of his Disciples to prepare him the Passeover, Mar. 3.10. to provide him an Asse to ride on, &c. Iohn 4.8. to provide meat for his Dinner. Thirdly, there must be that resultans officium: So Iohn 19.27. he chargeth some of his Disciples, that were best able, with the main∣taining of his mother: and more, after his death, they brought odours, &c. for his buriall, Mat. 14.12. Iohns Disciples did the like; and more, they spake of him with praise, and a perpetuall memory of him. Luke 24.19. He was a Prophet, mighty in deed and word, before God, and all the people: Therefore they must not be forgotten after death: Death must not end the duty to them. But there is another duty: that is, though we be not in charge to them, if he be in the roome and calling of a Prophet, we are bound to owe honour unto him: and so 1 Sam. 9.6. as Sauls servant ho∣noured Samuel, so eo nomine, as he is a Prophet, he is to be ac∣counted of them that bee not under his charge, an honourable
man: as Gamaliel, Acts 5.34. and this being performed, 1 Tim. 2.2. we shall have men faithfull; and such as are able to teach others: that is, the University shall bring forth such, as shall be fit for the Church, or Common-wealth. The end of the erection of Schooles.The end of the erection of Schooles, is to bring forth men, , able to teach: 2. , able to governe; the first in the Church, the later in the Common-wealth; first of the former. The Ministers of the Church.First, they are called Fathers, both ab Ecclesia Dei, by the Church of God, 1 Cor. 4.15. and also, even among the Irreligious, Judges 27.12. and after that, cap. 18.19. And because (as before) all pa∣ternitie that is, cometh from Christ, and there was no other Fa∣therhood in him, but only that he was the only Priest and Prophet of the New Testament: (reserving that that was before in the be∣ginning said; that God, because he is fons omnis boni, the fountaine of all good, he must needs have this quality of goodnesse, to be , Communicative and make others partakers of it; which was the cause of the creation of the World: even as it is called, the Mysticall incorporation; and that , that coelestiall policie, is partaker of all that goodnesse and glory, that God hath. The earth made for man with his three divisions.Now God purposing to make this created World, with the three divisions in it: 1. Heaven, as his , His place of reward: 2. Earth, as his , His work-house: 3. Hell, as his , His prison: To the end, that men exercising here, in the place of worke, as they receive grace and increase the talent given them, so they might be rewarded, either with blisse in Heaven, or damnation in Hell. So the earth, and all that is in it, being a place of exercise,All things made for the Church. was made for the Church; and Heaven for reward. For this cause hath he ordained the whole World, and consequently, these former paternities: the naturall, to beget holy seed; and all oeconomicall, for education: and this last, the Fatherhood of the Families of the Pro∣phets, for instructing and making them fit for the principall pater∣nitie, to the worke of the Ministery. So that those that follow, are nothing else but Pales and Railes for the Church, to make that this worke may the better goe forward. In Ephes. 4.12. is this or∣der set downe: All that Christ did, his comming downe, suffering, &c. all was, first, for the gathering of the Saints; which was to be effected: secondly, , by the worke of the Ministery; and then the third, to build them up in the knowledge of faith and vertues, ver. 13. they being, 1 Pet. 2.5. living stones: and consequently partakers of the  the growth, ver. 13. unto the stature of Christ, to be coupled with him, here by a spirit, and after in Heaven by pre∣sence. This is the great work of all, because it had all other works ordained for it, 1 Cor 3.21. And so because ye boast in men, ye la∣bour your selves in vaine; all things are yours, Paul, Apollos, Cephas, the World, &c. (speaking to the Church) that yee might be Christs, & Christ Gods, and so consequently that union performed spoken off, Eph. 4.1. Then we see the institution and ordaining of, and withall, the end of all those that take on them to be these Fa∣thers; and so we see, what we are to thinke of their worke.
There is nothing more plaine then this, that both Families and Schooles, and Common-wealths, and the whole World was crea∣ted to the worke of the Ministery, that the knitting and building up of the faithfull, might be effected. It is the not duly considering this, that bringeth the perturbance and confusion in the World, that now is: For whereas it is ex∣presly set downe, that this ought to be a thing, for which we ought anhelare, to breath after: And Esay 49.24. this should be the whole drift of the King, to be nutritius pater, a nursing Father; and of the Queene, to be nutrix, a nurse to the Church; and their duty to be wholly, nutrire, to do the part of a nurse; that the Churches estate might be more glorious: (And by these they may be in best estate) in stead of this (as before) they that be in high places, Ezek. 11.3. such thinke it to be for nothing else, but to soake in their breath, and seek their owne ease, and others thinke with Je∣zebell, 1 Kings 21.7. they may doe what they list: and because Forraine envasions, tumults and broyles would hinder this take∣ing and using their commoditie: Therefore the next thing that cometh to be provided for, 2 Kings 20.9. is onely to care, ut sit pax tanti in diebus meis, to keepe peace; and so consequently, the Church of God lyeth troden under foot and neglected. And so on the other side, where the Subjects also be such, as Psal. 49. last, being made to be in honour, yet come to be without understanding; that is, doe know no other, nor further bonum, but sensibile, their bellies, table, and regard of furniture for their house: it is as Col. 3.2. , to minde earthly things, to have their conceit onely on them: or Mat. 16.26. so they can find a commutation for their soules, they have no minde of this minde of Gods, or of God; but onely follow their senses, and sensible things. And so, having such a minde, are willing to be go∣verned accordingly; and so the purpose of the Lord doth come to be of none effect: so that he himselfe must lay to his hand, and if he should not set to his hand extraordinarily, hee should get none. For when as 2 Cor. 10. Paul had given out great words there, of the Ministery, that it was able to cast downe, &c. then verse 7. he beginneth to say, you looke on things after the outward appea∣rance, and pompe; and then there is no such thing in it. For the sensible glory, and sensible signes of that glory, as a sword, &c. they strike a terrour into mens mindes; but here it is not so: Because they measure, , according to the outward appearance; this is the cause that they contemne them: and so they dealt with Christ, Esay 53.2. the Prophet saith, they looked on him, and he seemed to them to have neither forme nor beauty, that they should desire him; and so they despised him, and were ashamed of him: And so they are ashamed of the calling wherein he lived, and was so greatly magnified.Contempt of the Ministers most com∣mon. So then there is nothing more familiar in the World then this, Luke 23.11. Herods account of Christ; he did , set nought by him; and , scoffe at him: so that it
is called a Calling not to be set by, and to be scoffed at; whereas God had advanced it. And so under the Law, 2 Kings 1.9. Aha∣ziahs his men in denision called Eliah, The man of God; for why else should he call for fire to consume them. So 2 Kings 9.11. Ahab his Courtiers, when the Prophet came to Jehu about the King∣dome, &c. they said, What did this mad fellow with thee, &c? So shall you see it to be, where Religion hath not taken deepe root; he which hath the greatest worke, is payd with the greatest score. Only we are helped in this, with the distinction of David, Psal. 52. verse last: That there is a bonum, a good; by the contrary member, as it should seeme; that there is a bonum coram mundo, and a bonum coram sanctis, there is a good which seemeth so in the eye of the World, and a good which is accounted so onely by the Saints. I will praise thee O Lord, &c. for thy Saints like it well, saith the vulgar translation; but not so properly, as bonum coram sanctis, it is good in the eyes of the Saints. The World would thinke as Pharaoh did, if a man should sing or give thankes to God, he is idle, as humour raigneth too much in him: Therefore hee saith, Thy Saints like it well. To this is the the judgement of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10. last: It is not the well thinking of man, that maketh it to be well thought off; but Gods liking, and the bonum coram sanctis. Duties of the Pastor.Come to the duties of the Pastor, where we will passe over the duty before; that is, bringing of the gift; which was handled un∣der education. The end and scope of the calling to the Ministery.The Apostle, Heb. 5.1. , in things pertaining to God; sheweth the end of the Ministery; he is for men, in stead of us, wherein we are to deale with God, he standeth for the Church. Now this being an honour, no man must take it unto him, unlesse he be called, Mat. 25.14. Gods calling is knowne by his talents that are given. Thus being inwardly by Gods talent called, and ha∣ving (here is bringing up, and having, 1 Tim. 4.14.) , the gift of Prophecie; then we come to his duties. We shall find them in John 10. 1 Tim. 3. Tit. 1. and from thence, John 10. there be foure degrees of Ministers, three bad; first, a theefe: secondly, mercenarie: thirdly, a Wolfe: one good, the good Shepheard. He distinguisheth them thus, into Calling, first lawfull, and se∣condly unlawfull: A Theefe hath no lawfull entrance, as the second and third have; for he saith there is an usurpation: and we all hold, that usurpation and abuse is not of God. For he saith there, that if he come not in according to Christs Institution, by the doore, by the ordinary way, and not bring his talent; he is an usurper and theefe; as Jer. 23.21. They runne, and I never sent them; they Prophecie, and I bade them not. For the Law and ordinance of God, Deut. 16.19. being perverted and wrested (as there) two wayes: first, per gratiam, by favour of some great man, or friend: second∣ly, per munus, by a bribe; that is, as one saith, the Bishop for the one falleth downe for a reward; and he goeth over his back, and the other goeth in at the lower hole, as alluding to that of Danae,
the showre of Gold that fell into her lappe, &c. These two wayes pervert this Ordinance. Hence, 1 Tim. 5.22. is Cita impositie, the suddaine and unadvised imposition of hands; that because he hath not the gift of the heart to commend him, he is loath to examine him: but for the gift of the hand, they will let him goe: Quae∣cunque malo incobantur principio, difficulter hono persiciuntur ex∣itu. God blesseth not the ends of those, that come not in by the doote. The Merce∣y taor.Now the two other markes doe make a distinction againe: For they that follow, come in right, but there is an abuse of it. There∣fore there is a thing called  or , a Purpose, 2 Tim. 3.10. O Timothy, you know my purpose, you know what you have to doe. It is well expressed, Phil. 2.20. by  ▪ a natu∣rall care: as if there were some, that had spuriam curam, a bastard care: And that germanam curam, that naturall care; one of the Fathers calleth zelum animarum, a zeale of soules. They that have not this purpose of heart, John 10.13. be called mercenarii: for they have no care of feeding, Zach. 11.15. they are not instru∣menta pastoris boni,Inirum pis stulti. but stulei, they are not the instruments of a good but a foolish Shepheard: which the Fathers make forcipes & mul∣clram, a paire of Sheeres for the Fleece, and a Paile for the Milke. And so after, whatsoever occasion befall, that there come danger to the Flock, for the soule, they reward it not; but when there is but the least danger of the wooll or milke, then every one, sumit, instrument a pastoris stulti, takes the instruments of a foolish Shep∣heard, and bestirreth himselfe. The Jewes call them such as draw neare to the Arke or Temple for the Corban, for the offering box, Mat. 15. they care not for the Law, so the Corban speed well. A∣biathur, of the offpring and posterity of Elie, being a wicked man it is prophecied of him, 1 Sam. 2. last: that Elies posterity should stand thus affected, they should come to some of the Priests, & de∣sire a place to serve for a peece of bread, and a peece of silver, this was their end. But Abiathar was displaced by Salomon, and Zadok put in his room. Christ, Job. 10. sheweth a way, how this should be dis∣covered. For if there come a Wolf, or fall Teacher, with authority a persecutor, they will flie to him: And Acts 20.29, 30. they will also become as bad as Wolves, Heb. 13.17. the Apostle would have them marke the issue of their conversation. Now this , or issue marreth all here; for if the Wolfe come, either he will give over, Iohn 10.12. or worrie the flock too: The A∣postle saith, that even of your selves shall rise men, teaching per∣verse things. So you see, that whether he continue the care for his belly, or degenerate into a Wolfe; yet he hath his lawfull in∣stitution. And this discerneth them that come in right, but yet are Mercenary. Now though this duty every minister ought to looke too; yet quia obediendum est malo, the people must obey an evill shepheard, if it be not ad malum, unto evill. But this question is before, Page 378. &c. Come to the second, that as care is to be had of their comming,
Mat. 22.12. in; so of their abuse. And that there is no abuse, but where there is a duty, it is plainely set downe, Ezek. 34.3. that (as the manner is now) they did eate the fat, and cloth them∣selves with the wooll, and killed them that were fedde: but the sheepe they feede not: Where there is an abuse of a dutie; and the duty here is of foure parts, which may be subdivided in∣to two. The first, they call Exemplum, example; it is here of Christ, John 10.3, 4. expressed by going before the sheepe. And their manner was in the East countries, they drave not their sheep be∣fore them; but their sheep followed them: More plainely, 1 Tim. 4.12. he must be Typus, that is, such a thing, as maketh a stampe upon the coine: and the Iron that giveth the forme and impression to the money. So it is used againe, Tit. 2.3. and 1 Pet. 5.3. And it is Moses his order, Deut. 33.8. first Thummim, integrity of life, then Urim, learning: and Num. 17.8. which is by way of figure, it pleased God to make it a signe of Aarons calling, that his rodde was virga fructifera, a rod bearing fruit, by which, as by the fruits of the spirit, good workes and vertues bee often meant. So of Christ, Acts 1.1. his order, quae caepit Jesus, 1. facere, 2. docere, first what he did, and then what he taught: and where it is ex professo, handled, 1 Tim. 3. Tit. 1. that he be exemplum, unblameable; that for manners he be not rebukeable. So that is first, that he be typus, and that he may facere, doe; and then afterward that he may docere, teach: He may be exemplum, an example, two wayes: First, in him∣selfe: Secondly, in his Family, 1 Tim. 3.4. 1.  1 Tim. 3.2. without spot: so there is a relation to Levit. 21.17, 18.22. none of Aarons seed, if he were mishapen, or had a blemish, shall come neere to offer the sacrifices of the Lord made by fire. That is it, that the Apostle saith here, If he have any notorious sinne or crime, (for he speaketh not of in∣ward crimes, but of outward, onely of such as may be laid to a mans charge) he may not take on him this Fatherhood, the reason is, because, 2 Cor. 6.3. there must no offence be given to the weak, (to thinke that they may doe so) , that the Mi∣nistery be not blamed; that there might be no slander, no Momus, no slander for the adversary to laugh at. For the taking away of these slanders (according to the Apo∣stles interpretation, 2 Cor. 8.20.) we must beware of all things which comprehend occasionem scandali, occasion of scandall: This was the Apostles care concerning the almes, that should be car∣ryed to the poore brethren in Jerusalem, he would not meddle with it, except he had another to goe with him; because he would be without blame, least some should suspect him of defrauding: because he did , provide for honest things before God and men: He would not give the adversary occasion to speak evill of him, so John 4.27. when the Disciples found Christ talking with a Wo∣man, they marvelled; shewing, that it was not his custome: Hee eschewed as much as might be, all occasions of slanderous suspi∣tions.
Thus of the Genus: Now of the Species, foure: and the soure opposite vertues, which he must have in himselfe. The first is, that he be, Tit. 1.8. , temperate; and 1 Tim. 3.2. opposite to this, is non habere unam uxorem, not to be content with one Wife onely: So continencie, or single life, is the vertue. Secondly, 1 Tim. 3.2, 3. the vertue opposed, vers. 2. Sober, for his dyet: opposed, vers. 3. , transiens ad vinum, sitting by the Wine, for the lust of the body, and the pleasure of the taste; they must be in this order qualified. Thirdly, 1 Tim. 3.2. , by Chrysostome distinguished from , vigilant: it having not an opposition to those we spake of before; but to the parts called , and it doth signifie to the part , but to the affection, anger. The opposite, 1 Tim. 3.3. no striker. And Tit. 1.7. , soone angry: and the ver∣tues: 2 Tim. 2.24. a milde man, not furious, one that will beare injury, no striker, pertaineth to this. Fourthly, habitus, , modest; and is by the counsels refer∣red, ad habitum, gestum & incessum, to the habite, gesture, and gate: and is not as Ezekiel complaineth, A light sellow in his outward be∣haviour. The opposite vice, 2 Tim. 2.22. Not to eschew youthfull∣nesse. These foure vertues he must have in himselfe, . And more, 1 Sim. 3.7. he must have a good report of those that are his enemies; and without the Church, he must not goe to birds of his owne feather, but to his greatest enemies; they must be able to say, Surely he is a man fit for the calling; that they, by his example, may become Christians. Secondly, for his Family, vers. 4. He must governe his owne house well: which duty is in three points. First, Tit. 1.6. those that be under him, must be religious and faithfull. Secondly, 1 Tim. 3.4. , having his children in subjection; and the vice, , unruly: if hee be not able to keepe in his owne, it argueth a presumption of negligence, or that he is faint hearted, or carelesse; and so unfit to rule the Church. Thirdly, 1 Tim. 3.4. , with all reverence, gravity, modesty; because that that is opposed to it, Tit. 1.6. , that he may not be accused of ryot, surfeiting drunkennesse, gluttony: Thus must hee bee Exemplum gregis, an example to his Flocke: And these bee the duties of the Pastor. People duty.The duty of the People, conformable to that of the Preacher, if he must be typus gregis, their type, then it must be their duty to be  pastoris, his antitype: as the Iron and the coyne are of the same signe, as Heb. 13.8. they must  he imitators: Ut domus Presbyteri sit magistratus disciplinae publicae, the Priests house should be the rule of publike dicipline. 2. Come to the next, the applying of his gifts, that he learned
in the Schooles: because nemo accipit donum propter se, no man re∣ceives a gift for himselfe: as it seemeth by the parable of the talents. So he is there called , or , apt or fit to teach: Now it is well said, that the word docere, to teach, govern∣eth two Accusative cases, Esay 28.9. Quem docebo scientiam? whom shall I teach knowledge? Whom and what they should teach. For the first, there be many that have quem, a people to teach, but they have not scientiam, knowledge to teach withall. So they are not teachers sent from God, but of the Devill, whe∣ther they be in the Colledges, or in the Church. Therefore this he must have. It is a strange thing, but yet it pleased the Fathers, the great hatred that God bare to the Asse, Exod. 34.19, 20. E∣very first begotten of all beasts, but the Asse, must be separate for God; but that must not come into the Sanctuary,Asinus illust∣ratus non ad∣mittendus in Sanctuarium but rather then so, the neck of it must be broken. Hesychius, and others intepret it, illiteratum, the illiterate man; and sure it is . that is, con∣cinnitas, an apt exposition. Consequently, he that hath not this, is not to come into the Lords Sanctuary, Hos. .6. quoniam repulisti scientiam, ego repuli te, ne scis mihi sacerdos, because thou hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shalt be no Priest to me, Deut. 33.10. the teaching of Jacob his Judgements, and Israel his Law, is his first duty; not offering and burning of incense: And Mal. 2. he stands altogether upon it. The later Canons, the later Schoole men, and Aquinas questi∣oning what the Holy Ghost should meane by these words, ABI∣LITY TO TEACH: they have brought a distinction be∣tweene competentem & eminentem scientiam, betweene competent and eminent knowledge: therefore we must know of the Holy Ghost, what this competens scientia, this competent knowledge is: We have a convenient place for this, Tit. 1.9. he determineth, , esse quid sit? he must be , by learning he must be able to defend that he hath been taught. Secondly, he must be able to exhort and comfort by wholesome Doctrine. And thirdly, he must be able to confute and overthrow all that shall gainesay it: And this is the comment on this, as I take it. Pastors must profit in their ability.Now to this, is opposite that, 1 Tim. 3.6.  he must not be one newly come to the Faith; but as 1 Tim. 4.6. he must be brought up many yeares, and long time in it. And after he is or∣dained Minister, he must, vers. 16. , proficere, he must stu∣dy more; and 2 Tim. 1.6. he must blow and stirre up his charis∣maeta yet more,Must . and make them burne yet lighter: by the practise of this it is, that he challengeth, and holdeth his honour by () that he puts it to use: and 2 Tim. 4.2. he must Preach:Must preach. and 1 Cor. 9.16. a necessity lyeth upon him; and Vae mihi si non E∣vangelizem, Woe be to me if I preach not. But now, there is another word that commeth between, that is,Must instare.  And so, being instant out of season, and in season; it is not as some of our people will have it, to Preach; but the Apostles
meaning is not so; but onely, he must be instant in season, &c. and this , being instant, a man must not use continually; but instancie is in season, upon ordinary dayes; and out of season, is upon extraordinary occasion; if a greater matter fall out in the Church, as calamity, affliction, or any greater benefit. If any such befalleth them, if his time come, he is to doe it upon ordinary dayes; else, if it will not serve, to make a new day, and a new course, but not as the others doe, making the duty of the Mi∣nister infinite. And besides, it is one thing to bee instant, and another thing to Preach: for a man may be instant, and not Preach. Three faults Doctrine.Now for the manner of the Doctrine, there be three faults that the Apostle saith, fell out in the Church. First, , 2 Tim. 4.4. a desire of fables; it springeth hence, when a man is soone full, and cannot abide to heare of one thing often; but will have a new. Secondly, and when that commeth, 2 Cor. 11.4. it cannot be, but they must needs have alium Jesum, another Jesus preached unto them; and then Tit. 3.9. , questions of no profit, and deciding of high and nice points, of discipline, they will have predestination preached: Therefore there is a desire of these un∣profitable questions. And the third is, pruritus aurium, itching eares, 2 Tim. 4.3. a de∣sire to heare a declamation out of a Pulpit; to have a period fall roundly, pleasing the eare, and doing the soule no good: having conceptum naturalis hominis, they have the conceit of a meere na∣turall man. Against these the Apostle setteth downe a forme; that that which he preacheth, be necessary to be taught: that it be  and . Tit. 2.3. that it be sound and healthfull, not corrupted Fables or false Doctrine; hee must be perfect in this: and 2 Tim. 2.14. hee biddeth them in the contrary, not to strive about things of no profit; and that doe no good by preaching. 2. Against the second (,) is Tit. 3.8. after soundnesse he must teach these things, quae sunt bona & utilia, which are good and profitable. 3. Now for the delivery; because it is against the third point: as it must be learned; in learning it is required, 2 Cor. 11.6. that he give not place in the stuffe it selfe: it must be of knowledge; Though in word I be rude, yet not in knowled. Secondly, and for keep∣ping of his Auditors, Mat. 13.52. he must have vetera & nova, new and old things: not new Doctrine, but new waies of expres∣sing, new arguments; the Doctrine may be all one, yet the man∣ner may be diverse, he must have new parables; because they will loath them: and so there will be a . And the third is, 2 Tim. 2.15. a perspicuous order, and orderly deliverie: , Heb. 4.13. his preaching must have two edges, and that is a very especiall point in preaching. For, as Augustine saith, it is common that their Sermons and preachings have but
one edge, and the backe commonly doth as much hurt, as the edge doth good: they meet not with both extreames; as when they speake of obedience, they speake so of it, as if they took the contrary quite and cleane away, and would have a man never to disobey. And when they speak of peace, they speak so, as if they took away all contention. 4. And the last is, Tit. 2.7. , delivering of it with authority, gravity, and modesty; as knowing it is not his owne, but the everlasting truth of God: and therefore, if he deliver it , with gravity, and their practice be contrary, they shall answer for it. 2. Exhortation how to be u∣sed.2. The second point is exhortation: There is a fault in some that exhort. First, the Apostle, 2 Tim. 4.2. adviseth that it be done, , with Doctrine; a mans judgement must first be convinced; and the second thing, , a true exhorta∣tion must be with Doctrine and long suffering. There be some, if they speake twice in exhorting, and they amend not, they give over, 1 Tim. 5. and the two last verses. A man must thinke thus. Many men are now in sinne, and may hereafter come out of it: and many men seeme glorious now, and may hereafter miscarry: fearing them then that already stand fast, least they fall; and many that are fallen we must waite patiently upon them, 2 Tim. 2.25. proving if at any time God will give them repentance. 3. Reproving, how to be u∣sed.Then for the third point, Reproving: first, argue, prove the fault: then secondly, redargue, reprove; and not as the common manner is, first reproving, and then proving. In regard of the per∣sons, his way is, first, in 2 Tim. 2.25. if they be onely led by a dis∣position to a fault; then we must reprove in humility, , 2 Tit. 2.13. If it be done in contempt, then , with all authority. Thirdly, if the parties be slow of nature, Tit. 1.13. then , roundly and sharpely. And fourthly, if it be a publike fault, 1 Tim. 5.20. publickly, that others may feare. 4. Refuting, how to bee done.4. Tit. 1.9. for improving or refuting the adversarie, we come into foure degrees: first, vers. 11. if it may be, that we may stop his mouth: secondly, if that cannot be, yet Tit. 2.8. , that he may be confounded: Thirdly, if not that, yet Tit. 3.11. that in∣wardly he may be convinced, and say within himselfe, that his con∣science doth rebuke him, and tell him the contrary: Fourthly, if that cannot be, 2 Tim. 2.9. that the hearers may plainely see his folly. The application of this is out of Ezek. 34. ye bound not up the broken, &c. And Zach. 11.16. For loe I will raise up a shepheard in the Land, which shall not look for the thing that is lost, nor seeke the tender Lambs, nor heale that that is hurt, nor feed that that standeth up; but he shall eate the flesh of the fat, and teare their clawes in peeces. 1 Thes. 5.14. there be infirmi, such are , feeble minded; and they need com∣fort: some are broken, and they must be bound; such as Paul cal∣leth
, weak men, they must be upholden and born withall: there be some depulsi, strayed away, called by the Apostle, ; unruly, they must heare of it and be admonished: And those that are led away with Heresies and Schismes, must be sought out. The fourth point, his conversation with other men; , or . for this is the , the communicating of spiritu∣all gifts; 1 Tim. 3.2. he must be , hospitalis, given to hospi∣tality: and Tit. 1.8. , very friendly to those that are well given; and just to all men: Tit. 1.8. and for holding of justice, when it is his owne right. 1 Tim. 3.3. he must be , no brawler; and so consequently, , patient, one that can remit of his right. And Tit. 1.7. opposed to this, : selfe willed; one that will not give over. Now because the questions of right be of tempo∣rall things: therefore he must not be , set upon money, 2 Tim. 2.4. neither by intangling himselfe with worldly things, nor by seeking them by evill gaine, . This ought to be the Pa∣stors duty. Peoples duty.The peoples duty answering to this. First, John 10.4. the sheep must know the shepheard: and so that they can discerne his voice.1. To have judgement to discerne. Here a certaine judgement is required in them. The people now a dayes have no judgement at all. Let a man come to them, and deliver excellent things, and let another come, that is volubili lingua, of a ready speech, that bringeth nothing, but (as the Fathers well call it) veram spumam verborum, very froth; there shall be a like commendation of both; and commonly the la∣ter shall be preferred. 1 Thes. 5.12. he willeth them to know , them that labour among you, and what they say; and that you can say indeed, That is well said, in this there was some stuffe, the others was but spuma verborum, the froth of words. 2. Obedience.The second point for this, is Obedience, John. 10.4. whether it be by following, as here it is said, They will follow him: or He. 13.17. , they be perswaded, and give over themselves to be ruled by them; and not only that, but they will, , give place, though they be not perswaded, till they be better perswaded; for without this, the other is but a fained obedience. He that said he would not goe, and went afterward, did his Father more honour, then he that bestir∣red him, and went not; though he had borne never so much in outward shew. This following, it is another thing; it is plainely by 1 Pet. 3.2. All interpret the principall effect of baptisme, a que∣stion of the conscience; for the conscience is to aske the que∣stion of God; and if a mans conscience never aske of God, the baptisme of that man hath no effect in him; but if he can, it is certaine that it is effectuall; there would be a great inquiry of this. Numb. 27.21. peruse it: It is said there, when Joshuah was substi∣tute in Moses roome, he should come to Eleazar; and looke how Eleazar did bid him doe, so he should doe. They should goe in and out according to his saying. This was the first substituting: this was not abrogated since of any order: but not regarded, it comes now utterly to be neglec▪
3. Double ho∣nour.3. The last point, 1 Tim. 5.17. double honour. First, of reverence, Philip. 2.29. in judgement, , we are to honour such: and in affection;1. Reverence in judgement and in affecti∣on. that love onely to the Minister is is applyed in most singular manner, 1 Thes. 5.13. That you have them in singular love, or their works sake. Secondly, the other, the honour of maintenance, that is, a worthy maintenance, 1 Tim. 6. Gal. 6. ,2. Mainte¦nance. that they should commu∣nicate in all their goods. Zach. 11.4. God hath broken one staffe; and if the Prophets wages be not mended, he will break the other staffe too: and then all will goe to wrack, and then a certaine Barbaris∣me must needs follow. It is very well set downe, Hosea 7.14. when a man is sicke, he sends for the Minister; then he thinks on Hea∣ven, when he must needs leave the earth: and when there come great droughts, or raine, they can remember God for a while, else never. When they got in their corne and wine, they rebelled a∣gainst him. But the Lord abhorreth this, and saith, Eccles. 12.1. Remember me in the dayes of thy youth, and in thy wealth; or thou shalt have no answer of me, when the evill dayes come. We will conclude with the Apostle,  Cor. 10.15. the want of performing this ho∣nour proceedeth of the want of faith. That is all the hope we have, that when it shall please God, as your faith groweth and increaseth, that we shall be magnified, and have excellent love performed; if that do not increase, faith shall not. Now of those whom nature, and men lumine naturae, by the light of nature, have called patres patriae, fathers of their countrey: the Magistrates: of whom it is shewed, that the men are Fathers, as Gen. 45.8. and the women Mothers; as Deborah a Mother in Israel, Judges 5.7. Now because there is no person that beareth rule, but by vertue of the people that is under them; they have power over themselves, and power to appoint and choose one o∣ver them: Therefore it is that God first commends the countrey it selfe; and willeth us to have regard to it first of all, Gen. 12.1. God giveth it the preheminence, and sets it before the kindred, and the Fathers house. And we see, Psal. 137.1. the teares of Gods Saints were shed, when they were constrained to go into a strange Land: and being desired to sing one of the Lords songs, they would not: and when they were restored to their countrey, Psal. 126.1. their joy made them so extaticall, that they thought it was not a true thing or action; but that their returning had been but a dreame. This is not onely in the people, but the same affection is also in men of excellencie for gifts, as in Nehemiah, cap. 1. vers. 4. To this we are first led, to procure the good and health of it, and especi∣ally of the Church; because it was for it, that we were borne and appointed. The reason is plaine of that, which we call bonum partis & totius, the good of a part, and the good of the whole: that bonum partis is not without bonum totius; and is for the good of the whole. And we see the body that is in danger, that some member is seared,
some veine opened, and sacrificed onely, that the whole body may receive health: so there have beene detriments of singular men, for the benefit of their Countrey; some have displaced themselves of the place, wherein they were borne; some of their owne life. Magistracy, properly and principally belongs to God.For Magistracy, we see that plainely in three judgements: In adjudging the Angels that kept not their estate; and for not standing, they received a punishment: the two other in adjudg∣ing the Woman and the Serpent: and the third, God himselfe punished Cain, for the murther of Abel: So it pertaineth to God properly, principally and especially: After it came to man, by permission first, and then by Gods approbation. When Caine, being cast out, and being generative, had many children, it is said, Gen. 4.7. that he was the first that built a City, and ver. 23. in his posterity, Lamech, by reason of his sons, Juball and Tuball, the in∣ventors of those crafts, that the Common-wealth shall have need off, grew to so great insolencie, that he would beare no injury at any mans hand: so we see it is the disposition of wicked men, to be like him. Now then it was Cain's City that made the godly first to band themselves, and consequently to take order for their defence, as we see, cap. 4. vers. ult. in fine. After the birth of Enos, Seths sonne, when Seth also began to be generative, he made an open profession of the name of God.Why the ec∣clesia sticall government not sufficient There was city against city; and that was the occasion of the Civill government. And indeed this Ecclesiastica potestas, the Ecclesiasticall government, would have been sufficient to have governed the whole World; but that as David saith, Psal. 32.9. there is in some another nature. They are like the Horse, and wild Mule, that will runne upon men, and offer violence and injury, and consequently, there must be ano∣ther power to bridle those. Now then the great reason of the Common-wealth; why they would be under one man: and of gi∣ving potestatem vitae & necis,The great reason of the Common-wealth. power over life and death, to one man: their maxime is, Praestat timere unum, quam multos, better to feare one Wolfe, then to have every Wolfe to be his controller, and to have his life continually in hazard. Gen. 9.6. A magistracy and the sword was appointed by God: and so consequently, Gen. 14.18. Melchisedech (whom the best writers agree to be Sem) tooke up∣on him a Kingdome; and tooke upon him a way to defend the Church and people of God. The chiefe end of a Common-wealth is to serve God,Praecipuus fi∣nis re publicae cultus De. 1 Tim. 2.2. Which Abraham not finding in Cal∣dea, where he was pars patriae, one of the countrey, chose rather to live solitarily, by himselfe, Exod. 5.13. the same end is noted, Israel being under a strange King in Aegypt, that knew not Je∣hovah, desired to goe and serve the Lord in the Wildernesse, out of the Land of Aegypt. Psal. 122. the Church and Countrey are both joyned together: and 2 Chron. 11.13, 14. the Levites ran from Jeroboam out of all the suburbs, and possessions and came to Juda, and Jerusalem: For Jeroboam and his sons had cast them out from
ministring in the Priests of sice before the Lord, Deu. 17.18. as soon as the King is set in his throne, he must get him a copie of the Law. For this a man may forsake his Countrie, if his end be gone, that is, the service of God. 2. End, peace.After this end, came in the other, as the second end, quietnesse: That is in three points in this order. Because Pastor is applyed to the Minister, much adoe there is,Pastor in the word more of∣ten applyed to the Magistrate then to the Minister. in urging great and extraordina∣ry diligence in them. But it is strange, that Pastor in the Scriptures being oftner attributed to the Magistrate, no such diligence is re∣quired of him. The first metaphor from that signification is given to the Magi∣strate, Gen. 49.24. to Joseph: and Psal. 78.71. to David. Secondly, Num. 27.17. metaphorically. So also: provide a man over them, that they be not as sheep without a shepheard. Now that they might not stray as sheep; because it is good for sheep to keep together, for feare of the Wolves, therefore it is first, that they might be fedde. And then, for that there falleth dissension among them, Ezek. 34.18. & 21. I will judge betweene sheep and shepheard. vers. 23. And I will set up a shepheard over them, even my servant David, &c. There are the fat and the leane sheep; and what doe they? The fat sheep having fed, and drunke, trample the grasse, and trouble the water, that the leane sheep can eate and drinke nothing but such: and vers. 21. they will strike one another with their hornes, &c. Now for the keeping of the fat from the leane, in the inside of the fold, that they may feed quietly. This is the second end. 3. Now besides, John 10.12. because there is a Wolfe with∣out the fold, an outward enemie, that is, forraigne invasion: here is the third end, to be quiet from forraigne invasion: from the great Goats and Wolfe. We see how the causes depend one of ano∣ther: The first end of Princes, to be nutricii ecclesiae, nourishers of the Church: pascere nos, non seipsos, to feed not themselves, but us: The second is to be procurers of peace at home: The third, to keep off forraigne invasion: plaine in exemplo regis non boni, by an example of none of the best Kings, Saul. 1 Sam. 11.5. he lookes there, ne quid sit populo, quod fleat, that the people have no occasion to weep: they be not disquieted by Nahash the Am∣monite, &c. so we see the end. Now to the duties.Usurpation. An usurpation is here too, as well as in Ecclesiasticall govern∣ment, Judges 18.7. In Laish men were quiet, because there was no usurping, Prov. 8.15. Per me reges regnant, By me Kings raigne, saith Salomon: As hee is the doore,Practises of usurpers. so they that en∣ter rightly, enter by him; but he saith contra, Hosea 8.4. Reg∣naverunt, sed non per me, they have set up Kings, but not by me: So there bee some Usurpers of Magistracie. Videlicet, such as be not called: as Hebrewes 5.4. but doe, as Amos 6.13. Assumpserunt sibi cornua, (that is,) potestatem, &c. take unto themselves hornes: by hornes is meant power. We
have an example in Abimelech, Judges 9. Ambition is the usurper; his meanes be, verse 2. his friends. But now they are growne more impudent, they will say it themselves. Abimelech had more blood in his face; he desired his friends to say for him, and he doth by humbling of himselfe, seeke friendship: and verse 4. When they had little better consideration of them, he getteth him a few light brayned fellowes to ayde him, verse 5. and 21. those that had right to it, he drove away. These are the three practises of Usur∣pers; which Jotham, verse 15. and 16. telleth them in a Tale, and so sheweth them what manner of fellows they are, &c. The Magistrate being set in his charge rightly by God, the divi∣sion of 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. commeth in , a King. ; under Officers: as in Warre the Captaine, in Peace the Judge. The cause of under officersThe reason of Under officers, is Deut. 2.9. Moses confession, Exod. 18.13. Jethro telleth him he is unable to beare the burthen of the whole government, Numb. 11.16. is Gods approbation; Deut. 17.16. they have authority to make a King; and Deut. 16.10. to make under Officers. Here note, that these under Officers are given to helpe the King:Underofficers must not bee too many. therefore that there be no more granted then will serve to help the King; that the Realme be not clogged with too many, Nehem. 5.15. They themselves handle them not hardly; but their servants, their under Officers oppressed the peo∣ple: Therefore that is gravamen reipublicae, a burthen to the Common-wealth; which the people cannot beare: So it is a∣gainst policie, and against justice too; for they must have their Fees to them. Generall du∣tyes.So the duties in generall of both, What manner of men they should be. What manner of men they should be.And the first is this, Whom God calleth: All elections must be according to that rule, Deut. 17.15. Quem Deus eligerit, whom God shall choose, else nought and injust, ipso facto, 1 Kings 1.20. Bethsabees speech to David, The eyes of all Israel are upon thee, that thou shouldest tell them who shall sit on the throne of my Lord the King after him: and verse 33. he chooseth Salomon. And 1 Chron. 28.5. he saith, Among all the sonnes I have, God hath chosen Salomon. And indeed it is all one to choose a man for his gifts, as if God had chosen him: Every one must be chosen for their gifts of wise∣dome, &c. that shall be acceptable in the sight of the Lord. A second forme, Deut. 27.15. & 1.13. generall to both; he must be some of their owne Nation: The first reason is, because of naturall affection, grounded on education. Where a man hath been bred, he will be most profitable. The second reason is, Acts 26.3. the reason of Pauls joy, in that he should answer before Agrippa: a great matter, to bee acquainted with the customes of the Countrie. These in generall. Deut. 27.1. In any wise, he shall not prepare him many horses, nor bring the people againe into Aegypt,4. Particular duties of the Prince. for to encrease the men. The particular duties of the Prince: Deut. 17.16. foure duties are set downe.
First, he must not be affected, to Aegypt, which is Nutrix idolo∣latriae, the nurcery of Idolatry; he must not favour false Religion; and if he doe, he ought not to be a King: ver. 16. Secondly, ver. 17. not uxorius, it is a Synechdoche: whereby is meant, he must not be voluptuous, given to pleasure, Pro. 3.3, 4. they must not meddle with Wine and Women. Salomon pro∣nounceth woe against the Land, where Princes be early at their Banquets, yea and late too. Thirdly, ver. 17. No hourder of Gold and Silver; not cove∣tous, 1 Kings 12.4. it was Salomons fault: for he, by his seven hun∣dred Wives, and three hundred Concubines, made such an impo∣sition on the Land; that when his sonne came to raigne, the Sub∣jects come and tell him plainely, he should not raigne and be their King, unlesse he would ease his Fathers burthens, 1 Kings 12. Thy Father made our yoke grievous; make thou it light, and we will serve thee. And ver. 16. seeing themselves not regarded, said, What por∣tion have we in David? Wee have no inheritance in the sonne of Ishai: to your Tents O Israel; now looke to thine owne house David. The Prince to have a copy of the Law, & therein to learne three things.Fourthly, vers. 18. which is the first to be done, because it is provision for all the rest, he must have a copy of the Law; in which he may learne three things: first, to feare God: Secondly, to shew the practise of it; 1. in himselfe: 2. in the Court: 3. in the whole Country: And the third thing, to be humble. And keep∣ing this Law, his throne shall last for ever; as Pro. 29.14. that will make sure succession, as Samuel told Saul, 1 Sam. 10.6. dedit Deus cor aliud, God gave him another heart: How? Because he was there among Prophets. The meanes be plainer, Psal. 2.10. Eru∣dimini Reges, be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, &c. Christ, Mat. 10.21. gave one that he liked a lesson, but his possessions choaked all; so they choake learning and all other good things: Hinc illud Christi: How hard is it for rich men to enter into the Kingdome of Heaven? He that is thus qualified, is meet for a kingdome. Now being in his seat, he must not thinke he is there by him∣selfe; according to their stile, Caesar Dei gratia, &c. Caesar by the grace of God, &c. So whereas the Law distinguisheth, potestas into arbitraria & delegata, power is either Arbitrary.The Princes duty delegate not arbitrary. Assigned. He must acknowledge the later to be his; and say with the Cen∣turion, Mat. 8.9. I am under authority of Claudus Lisias, he under Faelix, he under the Emperour, he pro Deus, under God: and so he is under authority also. The Heathen man said, Kings are our Countries, and over Kings is God. Being Gods Viceroyes, they must rule as God would, if he were on earth: How is that? Even se∣cundum verbum ejus, according to the prescript of the Word: So must Princes rule: and Numb. 27.21. because the Prince hath no perfect skill and deep cogitation in the Word: therefore this ruling must bee at the mouth of Eleazar. And this is the first duty.
The peoples duty answering to this: To acknowledge him Gods deputie,1. Duty of the people. 1 Sam. 10.26. whose heart God touched, they are obedient. Obedience, as Principality, is of Gods spirit, Mat. 22.21. by Christs answer there, it appeares how he stood affected in his obedience unto Caesar. Two sorts of men were then in Juda: There was one Theudas that made an insurrection for Tribute, that was commanded, some there were that would not pay tri∣bute; and Theudas, Captaine of them, he tooke on him to defend them; and to prove that no tribute must be paid. On the other side, there were certaine spiritus aulici, court spirits, Herodians; they would have every thing given to Caesar, even Gods part too: And therefore they and the Scribes aske Christ tempting him, Is it lawfull to give tribute unto Caesar, or not? To whom he saith not, omnia sunt Caesaris, all things are not due to Caesar: but Caesar hath his quae, and God hath his quae: So he goeth from Theudas to O∣bedience, that is medium & mediocritas, the true meane. 2. Duty of the Prince.The second duty is, because God hath dealt so liberally with Caesar, as to make him his Deputy; Quod dicitur de Deo & crea∣turis, derivatur a Deo in creaturas, that supremacy which God hath over his creatures, he hath derived and given to the creature: So it comes from God who was able to have done all himselfe alone; if he had followed that, which some worldly men say, Author ali∣enae potentiae aufert de sua, & perdit suam, he that sets up another, puls downe himselfe; he had not bestowed his dignity upon any. But he imparted of his honour to Caesar. Now Caesar must not requite him with breaking into that that is Gods alone: for there is a , a division, quae Caesaris, quae Dei, Caesar hath his, and God hath his: therefore he must let God have his owne. And so Caesar must not dominari conscientiae, beare rule over the con∣science: none but God keepeth court in conscientia: Therefore he must not command a man against his allegeance in baptisme, that sealed his conscience to God. So he must not goe against the Word, from which faith proceedeth. Jerome saith, That that is payd to Caesar against the Word, is not Caesaris vectigal, but dae∣monis, not Caesars but the Devils tole: So he knowing Gods glory to be his end, he must be (Deut. 16.17.) custos legis, that is, omnium operum legis, a keeper of the Law, that is, of every worke com∣manded in the Law; and all is for the prohibition of externall violence. For doe the Minister what he can, some will use vio∣lence. Judges 17.6. No King in Israel, and then every man did what was good in his owne eyes: explained in this Chapter, in Micha's attempt, cap. 18. in the dealing of the Tribe of Dan; and cap. 19. of the Tribe of Benjamin: Therefore for the prohibition of these externall injuries, he must be custos utriusque tabulae, ob∣serve and keep both the tables: Augustine, lib. 3. contra Crescon: Gram: In hoc sciant reges a Deopraecipi, ut Deo inserviant, in quan∣tum, &c. they are to governe according to the adaequate rule which God hath prescribed, and not to meddle so farre as to doe all for and to themselves. 2 Chron. 26.6. Ozias tooke on him a
supremacy; and 2 Chron. 29.8. Hezechias taketh on him a supre∣macy: he will order things to himselfe: The former, as a King of late did, whatsoever he purposed, it should be good Divinity: Now Hezechias he claimeth one, and rightly; but he looketh but for the provision of Religion; it is only to see the Altars downe,The primacie that a Chri∣stian Prince should have. he medleth not with the action: And this is all the primacie that a Christian Prince ought to have: This care they must have: to see Religion provided for, 1 Kings 15.14. But they put not downe the high places; never the lesse, Asa his heart was right, &c. 2 Kings 18.4. Hezekias tooke away the high places, &c. he did prohibere, quod attinet ad divinam religionem, for providing of true Religion. Under this, is that Compulsion,Compulsion. Luke 14.23. to come to the service of God: as he saith to the servant, Compell them to come in, &c. Augusline, contra petil: he was resolute at first, that no man should die, or be troubled for Religion, but after he changed his minde. There must be soris necessitas, a necessity from without; that there may be intus voluntas, a willingnesse within: As there were diverse Donatists, that being compelled, and turned to Christs Religion, thanked the Emperour for compelling them: There∣fore let the Papists sit at Sermons; and so this outward compul∣sion belongeth to the King, and is one part of his duty. Because the people were Gods instruments to choose him: therefore that he in love, and care for them (1 Sam. 15.2. as he is made their head, and as the head provideth for the body,) so he ought pascere eos, like their Pastor to provide for them, and feed them. One of the Fathers, on Hosea 7.5. where it is said, there was a company of Wasters at the Table, and them he fed till they were sick; that same is pascere histriones & canes, but not subditos, to feed a company of Players and Hounds, and not his subjects; but his own belly is the distruction of all. In 1 Sam. 8.11. is the true descrip∣tion of a Tyrant:Descriptio ty∣ranni. he holds opinion that all were borne to be his Drudges, Pages, Horse-keepers, &c. Pro. 28.16. A foolish King is a great oppressour; the reason is, because he is onely given to sen∣sible things, to pleasures, &c. So they are given to oppresse, as did Salomon: Then are they, as Zeph. 3.3. Lupi vespertini, evening Wolves; they gnaw every one so neere, that he that comes in the morning, shall get nothing. The Heathen say, that Aristides wished, that either his hous∣hold were the Common-wealth, or contra, the Common-wealth his Houshold; because indeed he regarded that onely. Examples in Scripture, Jos. 19.24. (Our Rulers and Governours will choose first, but) Joshuah made division for every Tribe; and at last he de∣sired but a small portion to himselfe, and was served last, Nehe. 5.28. a notable example; he did not as the former Rulers, nor as he might: The rulers before took forty shekels of the people; he for his part, from the 20. to the 32. yeare of Artaxerxes, for twelve yeares, took not that he might: And besides, there were 150. Jewes and Rulers at his table.
In this Provision, 2 Chron. 7.9. they must begin at the soule first, Jehosaphat sent Preachers into all the Cities of Judah, ver. 7. and that our soules may be provided for,The Princes chiefest care must be of Religion. 1 Sam. 19.18. there must be looking to Naioth; for from thence Preachers are sent into Israel. Then secondly to the body: here he must have a care too, as Pharaoh, Gen. 41.49. to lay up corne for scarcitie, and see that there be plenty, 2 Chron. 9.41. sending shippes abroad for for∣raigne commodities; and for inward lacks. Provide Judges, 2. Chron. 19.5. Jehosophat set Judges, &c. And not onely that, but for outward. He must see there be souldiers, 2 Chron. 17.2. Garri∣sons put in Judah and in the Cities of Ephraim, which Asa his Fa∣ther had taken. 2. Duty of the people.2. The peoples duty answering to these: That they be not breaking into Gods right, Pro. 24.21. that they be not seditious or disobedient to the Prince: or , quarrell about trisies. There be diverse shires and incorporations in this Land by them∣selves; and there is over every one of them Magistrates and Justi∣ces; but there is but one Politia under the Prince. So the Princes and Kings of the earth, are but as Justices of Peace in severall Shires: there is but one cheife over all, God. Now if one of these should goe and rebell against the Prince, and should say, I am set over you, you must obey me; he is a Rebell both to Prince and God: therefore if I hearken to him, I rebell with him. In re∣gard of their care over us if they take that order that God hath done, Rom. 8.28. that bonis omnia bona, that all things may goe well with them that are good and honest, wee must obey them. And in regard of their care over us, it is not a giving, but a rendring, Mat. 22.21. he saith not date, but reddite: And by the rules of justice we know, that cuique reddendum est, quod suum est, we must restore to every man his owne. We have in our hands some thing of theirs: Augustine, Non illicita quaedam requirit, dum requirit quae sua sunt, it is no unjust demand for a man to de∣mand what is his owne: Christ, though he was Caesaris conditor, Caesars maker; yet Caesari censum retribuit, he payd tribute to Cae∣sar; having some thing to render, being borne under his jurisdi∣ction, and living as a man: They keepe tillage safe, therefore they have , tribute for Lands: and because they keep the Sea safe; therefore they have vectigall, custome: and censum; and besides, Nehem. 5.15. that which he calleth the Governours bread; dona∣rium; called canon regis or regni. And then indiction, in time of necessity, and in Warres, his Oblation and his Subsidies. 1. Kings 11. 3. Duty of the Prince.The next duty of a Prince is in cases of appeale, to give Justice, Pro. 16.12. Justice must especially be commended; for by it he hath his solium sirmum, his throne established: Augustine, Sine ju∣sticia magna regna nil aliud sunt, quàm magna latrocinia, without justice great Kingdomes are but great roberies: Therefore, Pro. 16.10. Et os ejus non declinabit in judicio, he must see that his
mouth transgresseth not in judgement: In so doing he shall exalt his kingdome, Pro. 14.34. and shall make it flourish: that is, by making all things for the best. And that is, Pro. 11.11. When the righteous flourish, then the Kingdome flourisheth. Psal. 97.2. In his dayes shall the righteous flourish. 2. As on the other side, Pro. 20.8. his looks shall be so terri∣ble in the seat of Judgement, that even by them shall he drive a∣way all evill; and Deut. 13.8. for those capitall sinnes and crimes, he saith, Non parcat illi oculas tuus, thy eye shall not spare them: and Psal. 101. in Davids justice against the evill we have an ex∣cellent paterne. Pro. 23.4. the wicked are like drosse in the repub∣lick. Take away the drosse from the Silver, there will be an excel∣lent cup for the Fyner: So there will be an excellent Common∣wealth, if you take away the wicked from it. 3. Duty of the people.The peoples duty in regard of this Justice is, to feare him, Pro. 20.2. knowing that the feare of the King is like the roaring of a Lyon; and Pro. 16.24. faire words are a sweetnesse to the heart, and health to the bones: therefore we must feare if we doe evill, Rom. 13.5. otherwise, though he have power over the body, Luke 12.4. Heb. 11.23. if we doe well, feare not the kings comman∣dement or edict: seeing he is therefore appointed, ut omnia coop∣perentur bonis in bonum, that all things may work together for the good of them that are good. 4. Duty of the Prince, hum∣blenesse in governmentThe last duty that procureth them honour, is their humble and meek ruling, the meek usage of the poore; not having the spirit of Saul, 1 Sam. 22.7. I can give every one of you fields and vineyards, and make every one of you Captaines, &c. nor of Pilate, John 19.10. Knowest thou not that I have power either to crucifie or release thee. An insolent bragging of their power; and as the Septuagints inter∣pret it, Heb. 5.11. they cannot , and digest that God hath sent them; but all the World must know it. 2 Cor. 10.8. A good lesson for every Magistrate: no man hath received power to hurt, but to doe good; none to destruction, but to e∣dification: And he shall answer it, that useth his power otherwise. The Heathen man makes this distinction between a Tyrant and a good King. A good King, when he is to doe any thing, will say, , I must doe it, I pray you pardon me; it is my duty to doe it. A Tyrant will say, , I may doe it, and I will doe it; therefore I will doe it. Therefore his counsell is there, that they be , though they may doe it alone, yet to take some unto them, this makes their authority lesse envious; and to depart sometimes from their right: And so of Wisedome, as Eccles. 4.13. better is a young man of good discretion, then an old King that is foo∣lish. Why? Because hee will not receive counsell and admo∣nition. It is a speciall point of Wisedome to receive coun∣sell, as Naaman did of his servants, a Kings 5. though not of the Prophet. The conclusion of both is, Pauciora licent illi, quam ulli, oui li∣cent omnia, he that may doe what he will, must doe lesse then any
man; and let him thinke so: And thus to thinke, is a part of that humility. The Heathen man saith, this , this feare may bring , adulation, but it will never bring , true good will. 4 Duty of the people, to fear for their Prince.Now on the other side, according to that saying, Esto quasi u∣nus ex illis, be thou as one of them; cap. 32.6. then the peoples duty is, , not to feare him, but to be a∣fraid for him, least any hurt come to him. Example, that feare of Davids men for their Master, 2 Sam. 18.3. and againe, cap. 21.17. They called Abishai, and he succoured David, and killed the Phi∣listim. And Davids men sware to him, thou shalt no more goe with us, &c. least thou quench the light of Israel. This is honour, or good will. Another part, 1 Cor. 12.23. a bearing with their infirmities, so that he covereth them (a covering of an uncomlinesse, Exod. 22.28. 2 Pet. 2.10. , &c. they that despise government, presumptuous are they and selfewilled, &c. And Jude, vers. 8. we are not to speake evill of them; unlesse they be of that Quorum, 1 Kings 18.18. I have not troubled Israel; but it is thou, and thy Fathers house, in that ye have forsaken the commande∣ments of the Lord, &c. or unlesse it be ob unum ex enormibus peccatis, for some enormous offence. Inferiour offi∣cers what they ought to be.The under Officers: what manner of men they ought to be, and what is their duty, Exod. 18.21. There be two properties of theirs: first, they must be men of courage; and they must not be tossed with affections: they must be constant to doe it, and stand to it. How is that? If they feare God: this taketh away all vaine feare and affection. Secondly, true men; they must hate Bribes, and not be perverted with consideration of them. Thirdly, besides these, there is another, Deut. 1.13. to be wise: and not onely that, but intelligens; that is, he must know whither he must goe; and when he must goe from the generall rule. And not onely that, but he must be a man famously knowne to be such a one, throughout the Tribes. And Numb. 11.25. that commeth by taking of Gods spi∣rit, and putting it upon him. Where this is not, but when a foole is preferred to beare rule, it is even as if we should gild a Pot∣sheard; which is indecorum, an unseemely thing: and Pro. 26.8. there is no worse thing, then to give honour and glory to a foole; and so to close up a precious stone in an heap of stones. The second inconvenience is: Put a pellet into his Crossebow, and he will say, Have at you, and let it flie. And then by conse∣quent a majore, if the great King may not be an upbraider of his power, much lesse doth it become them, that be but Kings of little molehills; the under Magistrates to be proud. First, Deut. 16.18, 19. their office is set downe, what they are not to doe: And if he be not a man of courage, this will move him, Si non facias non eris amicus Caesaris, if thou dost it not, thou art not Caesars friend: So he will accept persons. This must not move him. And then, as the Eunuch will have him make a lye for
the Prince, I pray you lye, for the King? As he must not accept a face; so neither a gift nor bribe in the bosome. It was Acts 24.37. Faelix his fault, he called Paul the oftner, because he hoped to re∣ceive some reward; but when none came, verse 28. willing to pleasure the Jewes, he left him bound still. There was acceptio per∣sonarum, accepting of persons. And the man that will take Bribes, Prov. 29.4. there is no trusting of the Common-wealth in his hands; he will destroy it. He must judicare justiciam justiciae; id est, justiciam justissime: that is, if there be one juster point in it, then other, he must judge by that: And Psal. 94.20. he must make inquiry for solum aerumnarum, if any grievance or injustice be ob∣truded upon the people, it must be withstood, and complained off; as in an house, Luke 16.1. the Steward is complained off, for wasting his Masters goods; and put out of his Steward∣shippe. So there must bee complaints carryed: And this is the griefe. Let there be a complaint carryed, that is never so just; and then our state shall bee as Pauls, Acts 25.19. you shall see what cold comfort he had there, to the end of the Booke; though he were an innocent, yet was hee never de∣livered. Now for the obedience due this way (that rule is good, latitude jurisjurandi sumenda est ex latitudine faederis) it must be acccording to the degrees of the Law that we are governed by. If the Queene command, not to eate flesh, on the Monday, there being but three dayes in the week for it, Wednesday, Fri∣day, and Saturday; She commandeth out of the latitude of the Statutes. We sayd in the beginning, that it was a generall rule, That any duty, which belongeth to any propter rationem peculiarem, is re∣ferred hither; and plainer, when we distinguish the , the excellencie of the person, from , and , power and prin∣cipality: some are in office, and have them; some are without them: yet because honour is nothing else, but testimonium excel∣lentiae, of that excellencie they have: therefore they are to be ho∣noured, though they want the other two. Dignitas signifieth both the Dignity it selfe, and the worthi∣nesse of it. If he have the excellency of the gift, he is in the later signification; though he be not in the present estate, and want the other. And according to these two parts dignitas debitum. The Canons make two degrees of debitum: first, legis of the Law, to be given to Fathers, Masters, &c. Secondly, debitum honestatis, the other of Honesty: in which there is no compulsion: yet if we will be such as we ought to be, we ought to doe it. This being well un∣derstood, we come to them that have excellencie separated from dignity: which because of their excellencie are to be honoured. In this kinde there is a threefold excellencie, of the three kinds of good: viz. of the 1. Minde, which they call excellentiam doni. 2. Body, as Age. 3. Outward estate, as Nobility, wealth, &c.
And fourthly, the applying of any of these to our selves; it is called well doing, or to bee a Benefactor: as we receive the gift of the mind from one that hath it; or a benefit from weal∣thy men, or Rulers of experience, from the aged: or we bestow a benefit. 1. For the gifts of the mind: Juball, Gen. 4.20. and the rest to whom God had given gifts of inventing crafts, were therefore cal∣led Fathers. In no other respect, Gen. 45.8. is Joseph called Pha∣raohs Father, but onely because there was a greater portion of wise∣dome in him: otherwise he was Father to the people. Then this, which the Schoolemen call Gratiae gratis datae, , free gifts of God, (not gratia gratum faciens) these are they which wheresoever they fall into any man, are to be honoured; and he for them: because they be the effects and gifts of Gods spirit, 1 Cor. 12. And they are given to men, verse 7. , for the profit of the whole body. And though that this be not the Feare of God; that is, (gratia gratum faciens) and so con∣sequently, the more sufficient man, though not so holy, nor the more religious; yet a company may use the benefit of it. These comming from God, must have honour; and the vessell wherein he putteth them, for the gifts sake, must have some honour. Concerning the reverence we owe to him. The first part is, the acknowledgement of the excellencie that is in him, we freely con∣fesse it to be in him, and in that degree and measure that it is in him. And we must commend ir, and praise God for bestowing it on him, even as if he had bestowed it on us: and desire and pray that he would encrease it, and make it as fruitfull in him, as any gift in us, or that is be bestowed on his Church. The Prophet, Ezek. 28.3. though Daniel lived at the same time with him, yet he giveth him an honourable title, ot testimonie; saying, Art thou wiser then Daniel? If he had thought as others doe, that he that auget alienam famam, detrahit suae, he that adds to another mans fame, detracts from his owne: he would not so much have impaired his owne credit, by commending another, 2 Pet. 3.15. he confesseth there is a greater measure of wisedome in Paul, and in his Epi∣stles; and yet in those Epistles Paul telleth them that he had re∣proved him to his face. And we see in Paul, Gal. 2.9. For there speaking of James, John, and Peter, he calleth them Pillars of the Church, and of the Apostles. It is that that Saint John Bap∣tist said of Christ, Mat. 3.11. That he was not worthy, &c. And Joh. 3.31. Hunc oportet crescere, &c. he must increase, &c. The simi∣litude is, as the light of the morning starre, when the Sunne is up. This is not onely betweene our selves, but even to evill men: Judges 8.2. Gedeon plainely confesseth his insufficiencie to the Ephraimites: that a Gleaning of Ephraim is better then a whole Vintage of Abiezer. And not onely in outward matters, but in in∣ward also, 2 Sam. 16.23. Davids testimony of Achitophels wisdome,
Davids enemy; that his counsell was as the Oracle of God. Then this is the first. 2. And the contrary to this we doe commonly, being moved by Sauls evill spirit, 1 Sam. 18.8. we cannot abide that any mans thousands should be more then our owne. And because Saul had but his thousands, and David his ten thousands; Saul had but a squint eye at David from that day forward. So we must not deny the gift of God that is in him, to be in him. And secondly, we must not extenuate, that which is in him in∣deed; as to say, but it is not so much as is thought, Job 1. the Devill saith of Job, he is righteous indeed, but not throughly, and as he ought. And when we cannot doe that, that we can∣not either deny it to be in him, nor to be in that measure that it is in him; then we wreake our selves upon the gifts; and we come to extenuate the gift it selfe. Tush it is a base gift, it is not so good a thing, there doth not so great good come of it: it is better to be well read, &c. And then a fourth way; per∣haps the gift is such, as all cannot but see, it is a rare gift, then we begin to shew a defect in another gift; in that part of learn∣ing, wherein he is defective; he is no body, he can doe nothing in such a thing: And then we goe to the use and usage of it. But he abuseth his gift; at the least wise we will finde some fault with some imperfection in his life; one thing or other ever standeth awry: So was Christ dealt with, Matthew 9.34. when the power of God was seene to be great in him, in cast∣ing out Devills, &c. they said he did it by Beelzebub, &c. And Matthew 13.35. Why was it more in him then in another man; there can be no great matter in him; we know his bring∣ing up, he is but the Carpenters Sonne, &c. and then Matthew 9.11. they fly to sift his conversation; he was an eater and drinker with Publicans, &c. Now his part, that hath the gift correspondent hereto, is, 1. Corinth. 15.10. to know who it is, that hath separated him, and that there was nothing in him naturally, but it was given, Ezek. 28.17. there be many that will prodere sapientiam indecore, with too well thinking of themselves, they loose all they haue: there∣fore it is best to acknowledge the giver, and to be humble. And he may humble himselfe thus; as the Apostle, though not with the defect of other gifts, Rom. 7.24. with the body of sinne, that he carryeth about him: and so if he can bring himselfe, 1. Coriath. 15.10. if the grace of God be in him, and not in vaine. for it may be in vaine, in respect of doing good in the Church. for it is commonly seene, that there be many great gifts with∣out fruit in many men. Secondly, it may be in vaine, in respect of himselfe; that as the Preacher saith, he may be wise and never doe himselfe good by it. And last of all, not onely for this life, but for that to come, 1. Cor. 9. he may Preach to other, be a Minister, and at last be a cast∣away himselfe, if he be not humble. And as Eccles. 6.2, 3. mans
conceit will rend him like a Bull, like a wild Bull; so that neither he himselfe, of himselfe, nor any other shall receive any profit of him, or his gifts. The duty is set downe, Rom. 12.10.16. that he goe before other in giving honour; that is, to make himselfe equall to those, that be his inferiours, vers. 16. The second of the Inferiour, seeing God (1 Cor. 4.6.) doth , separate men by their gifts, not that they should live alone; but he giveth them a degree of separation from others, in bestow∣ing on them a more excellent gift, for the good of others; there∣fore cometh the second: The duty is, praeferre, or praeeligere, to give it the place of preferment before another, which is not so great a gift as it is. For certainely where God hath placed his greatest and best gifts, there he hath pointed the finger, that that man should have the greatest preheminence: The Apo∣stle willeth them, 1 Corinth. 12.31. study for the better gifts. Why so? Because verse 7. by them they shall doe the greatest pro∣sit. And so consequently, he is summo jure, and even by lex talio∣nis, to have the best place, to doe the most good in: So meane gifts God giveth for meanes places; great gifts, for great places. This is his order, Pro. 3.15. 4. If there should be an election between gold, silver, preci∣ous stones, and learning; learning is to be chosen before the o∣ther, Pro. 8.11. Therefore he would have the greatest regard to be had of it. It is strange that this being the second point in all morall Phylosophie, the first being Bonum eligendum, malum fu∣giendum, that which is good is to be chosen, and that which is e∣vill to be avoyded: this, the second, Quod melius est eligendum, of two goods the best is to be chosen: and the third, ê malis minimum, of two evils the least: that that being a principle of morall Phy∣losophie; yet now we must prove it, though it be a ground: and when we have proved it, men cannot obtaine it. But the reasons are, 2 Sam. 7.14. A fort of wicked men is met; and they cry, the counsell of Hushai is better, &c. therefore we will follow it. Esay 40.20. The Idolater that is to make an image he will choose, lignum forte, & lignum melius, the best timber he can get; It is a sensible thing by naturall reason, yet we cannot be brought to practise it. 2. Now then there cometh another sinne, by another reason: Those that founded such places as these are; had this reason saith the Lawyer, that they would give their goods to a Colledge, and not to their Kindred: because if they made of their owne kindred heires, they should have haeredes promiscuos, they knew not whe∣ther their posterity should be good or bad: but here they should have haeredes ex optimis; the best should be heires of the whole land. This was the institution: but now it is otherwise. Now besides this, a third: For when as they gave their statutes, many things run bare affirmative; but the Canon of the Law saith, Clarissimè exponunt legislatores, se summevelle, quod maneant sub vir∣tute
sacramenti. I charge thee to deale faithfully with me, accor∣ding to my will in the statute. This is summe velle mandare sub vir∣ture sacramenti: yet this is disapointed. There is an evill opinion of some, which thinke that we are in such cases, like Potters; be∣cause these matters are res premii: And so whatsoever we doe, we may doe it ex mera gratia, as we will. But God was not of that minde: for if he were, to what end in making under officers, mo∣derators, such as Masters of Colledges, should he appoint them their qualities of knowledge, understanding, &c? If these qua∣lities be set downe, it is very certaine such elections should be, Esay 49.2. We are to pick them as chosen shafts, and hide them in the Lords Quiver. It is thought to be spoken of Scholers: more plainely God himselfe, 1 Sam. 15.28. Samuel saith, But now he hath taken thy Kingdome from thee, and given it to thy neighbour, that is thy Better. This is no injurie. It is the Devills election, to take from the better to give to the worse. 1 Kings 2.32. David moveth Salomon of a scape in his time, touching Joab, that had killed Amaza, a man better then him∣selfe: he commands he should be killed, though he were allyed to David. Yet because Amaza was his better, 2 Sam. 19.13. hee would have put out his Kinsman, and put Amaza in his roome, &c. 2 Kings 10.3. Jehu his message to the Governours, &c. Among all your Masters children, choose out optimum & aptissimum, &c. the best and meetest of your Masters Sonnes and set him on his Fathers throne: there is a plaine direction. So if there were a case of perill we should doe. But the case of Justice over-ruleth; in that, we should doe more then the Heathen: because Hester was bet∣ter then Vasthi, Hester 2.9. thorefore the King deposed Vasthi, and set her up. Gen. 41.39. It is Pharoahs reason to Joseph: Because God hath endued thee with greatest wisedome, &c. Though hee were a stranger borne, yet hee sets him before all o∣ther. 1 Sam. 16. The matter there passeth: For Samuel being to choose a King, at first began to be a little overseene in choosing Eliab: but after, when God bade him not regard the stature, but the gift; that is, Gods choice: then he comes in roundly, neque Dominus elegit hunc, neque hunc, &c. the Lord hath not chosen this nor this: All denyed, till David came: and then he saith, hic est ipse, this is he, Esay 58.6. Because yee keepe my Sabbaths, and choose those things that please me, therefore I will bring you to my holy mountaine. So on the other side, Esay 41.24. Behold these things are of no value, and yee have chosen them that be abomination, &c. and chap. 65. he sheweth what punishment he would bring on them, verse 12. Because yee choose them, that I would not, therefore you shall leave your names as a curse, &c. Sowe see what God deci∣deth in this case.
Now to give the reasons set downe by the Counsels, in their Canons in the Primitive Church; this is one reason: He whom God calleth not, ought not to be chosen; and he calleth not, but when he calleth to a better: otherwise he will not blesse them in their calling; and therefore when he blesseth them not, they are ventres, meer Bellies; and that is their care, and they study for nothing else, Zeph. 13.3. they are there called light persons; the blessing of God not being with them: because they were not called of him. Note moreover that it is worse to make an Hophni, then not to correct an Hophni. Ely was blamed for not correcting, in that place: therefore much greivouser had his sinne been, if he had put in an Hophni, whose minde is all on the Pot. Thirdly, this is one of their Maxims in Divinity: Indignum promovere est decipere, to promote an unworthy man is to deceive. They deceive the party, that gave his goods to be bestowed on them that were worthy: and they make a lye to the World, and they beare an evident false witnesse: For they doe as much as say, This man is meetest. And if any should come to a temporall Lord, and set him an unprofitable servant, promising one that should serve his turne; this were plaine deceit: and there might an Action in Law be had against him. And so, more treacherous is their dealing, that in GODS service, place unprofitable Servants. Fourthly, by these meanes they doe ponere sub periculo, they bring into danger the soules committed to them. Set an unmeete Workman to any thing, and the work will be in danger of mar∣ring. The danger is foure fold. First, the persons that come in thus, know they come in by fa∣vour; like clay, because the Potters will so have it; and they are meere creatures: and consequently they must needs be servile; and hold that rule for doctorem ballatum;Dunt que∣dam. the Doctor made by the Popes Bull. Such men sew pillows to their Patrons elbows, and sooth them up in their sinnes, as he that would hold with the Pope, because the Pope held with him; therefore seeking to require the Pope, he kept this rule, Quod Papa approbat nemo potest improbare, that which the Pope approveth, no man may dislike: and so by keeping this rule, yee shall bee sure to make him this recom∣pence. The second perill is, that they have not two Accusative cases: they have a quem, whom to teach, but not a scientiam, knowledge whereby; and so privately, all that are committed to them, are spoyled: and when they come to doe any thing publickly, they are scoffed and laughed at of their Auditors: and so there is great pe∣rill of losse of time and charges. Thirdly, that there shall nothing be well done, Zeph. 3.1. For when the City is ingluvies onocratili, compared to a maw, there is sordes & nutrimentum, both filth and nutriment: you shall have a good and a bad joyned together, in an exercise; and so it cannot
be well done, but be spoyled: For so Philosophy teacheth us, be∣cause both cannot doe their part. Fourthly, a perpetuitie of a miserable estate: for they cannot but take in such, as are like themselves; and they cannot for shame, take a better then they. They will say, I was no better. It is an haz∣zard of the estate for ever. Thus of the second dishonouring, not to choose his neighbour that is better. The duty of the Superiour in this regard, 1 Sam. 9.21. to think of himselfe as it becommeth him. Our Tribe is the least of all the Tribes, &c. I and my Fathers house, the least Familie, &c. he thinketh that all that is bestowed on him, is more then he deserved, 1 Sam. 18.18. What am I, and what is my Fathers house, &c. So there is in him appetitus, & contemptus also honoris, there is a desire, and also a resusall of honour, There is laudabilis appetitus honoris, a lauda∣ble desire of honour, in that he doth nothing contra ipsum, male a∣gendo, he hath not committed that evill that should barre him of it. And there is laudabilis contemptus honoris, a laudable contemning of honour, because he doth no evill thing for it: nihil male agendo propter ipsum, ad assequendum ipsum, no composition. But to pre∣ferre one because he is kinne to me, or because he is my owne by education, or my friends, or spes lucri, the hope of gaine; or last, the despight of one that is good; a despaire, not that he will not be good, but that he will not be good for our turne; these shoulder out the gifts: so he must doe nothing evill, whereby he may pro∣cure it. 2. And when he hath it, he must not thinke he is fallen into the Pot, that is, into a place of rest; but that greater preferment may befall him: and so may use it as a way to profit more then he could in lower place. This ought to be his duty. The third point of the Inferiour is, to make use of the gifts of one that is better then he: or se conferre, ubi Deus est, to come un∣to God, Exod. 18.15. the people come to aske of God, when they asked of Moses; and 1 Sam. 9.9. when they came to aske of God, they came to the Prophet; because he was brought up in rebus Je∣hovae, in the things concerning God: to make use of the Prophets. So their account was, that God was in the gift; they made use therefore of the better gifts, Deut. 1.17. heare you, you under Of∣ficers: If any thing be hard, bring it to me, &c. And the duty of the Superiour, is utendum se praebere, to offer himselfe unto the people; as the Philosopher said to Antisthenes, he made a long preface to him, I would come and aske you, but that I should be troublesome to you; and his answer to him is, Why man, , I live to this end; now I have gotten some thing my selfe, to be used of others? So Christ, John. 1.39. to them that asked him where he dwelt, he saith, Come and see, &c. Pro. 9.4, 5. Wisedome saith, Come hither thou that art simple, and wantest understanding, I have sent my Maides, that is, under Arts; as if they were gone abroad to call them. None doth receive a gift, propterse, for himselfe alone.
Senes. The duty to∣wards old men.The duty of the body, that is between the Old and the Young; the Apostle willeth the younger to be dutifull to the Elder, as to Fathers, 1 Tim. 5.1. The first duty is, Job 32.6, 7. The young must have their mouthes locked, and must hold their tongue, so long as their el∣ders were in presence. Elihu, though he were an excellent young man, yet he held his peace, because his elders were in place: the reason, Job 12.12. because among the ancient there is wisedome; and in the multitude of yeares there is understanding: they have gone through more. The Philosophers counsell is, that when we have gotten our owne demonstrations, we should give eare to the inde∣monstrable positions of old men, that they have had by experience. And it was the confusion of Rehoboam, 1 Kings 12.6. When he should have dealt with the Ancients, he did the contrary, and took counsell of the young men. And the duty that they are to returne back againe; that they be not, as Esay 65.20. pueri centum an norum, children an hundred yeares old. Jerome translates it Elementarios senes, old men which have not as yet learned their A. B. C. but it is required that they have canum intellectum, as they have canum caput, that their intel∣lect be as grave as their haire. Jerome saith, there is aetas temporis, and aetas meriti, an age of time, and an age of merit. Jude speaks of arbores autumnales, trees that begin to blossome in the end of harvest, when their fruit should be gathered. This is the shadow of an old man without understanding. But though they be such, yet (ut ante) we must honour them: though they be not worthy hoc pati, to receive this honour, yet it is meet for us, hoc agere, we must give it. The second duty to old men, Levit. 19.32. assurgere, to rise up in signe of reverence: because they have (as in Dan. 7.9.) the i∣mage of God: that is called antiquus dierum, the ancient of dayes: and Pro. 20.29. they have the crowne, whereby they resemble eter∣nity: So they have a double resemblance of eternity, senectus est vestigium aeternitatis, old age is the print of eternity, Pro. 16.31. it is a crowning of a man, if he have lived righteously, Tit. 2.2. There are six qualities set downe for them. The third duty of the Younger: We must consurgere, that is, provide for their ease, for they are weake: young boyes are not to sit, when ancient men stand. Numb. 8.20. When a man is past the age of fifty, he must not travell in the Tabernacle; yet he must have his allowance, Esay. 3.5. his prophecie, that children should presume against the ancient; and old men to stand, and they to sit, a thing against sense: surely, sic nobis fiet, so shall it be done to us, when we come to yeares: & sic fiet nostris, so shall others of our humours doe to our Fathers, as we doe to others: And we shall not make their age (which is a burthen unto them) to be light; as we should, by a reverence in young men. And if we doe pro∣cure this, they shall blesse us, and pray for us, and we shall pro∣sper; else we may have a curse from God and our Fathers too.
GOD heareth the blessings and cursings of FATHERS and MOTHERS. Come to the three degrees in the Common-wealth, as Nobili∣ty, Gentry, &c. they are by the Holy Ghost stiled Fathers, and con∣sequently is there a correspondent due to them, 1 Sam. 25.8. Da∣vid calleth a wealthy man Father: I pray thee give unto thy servants and to thy sonne David, whatsoever commeth to thy hand. The reason of the duty they have, is, because there may proceed a common benefit by them, to the Common-wealth; as for Warre, the ner∣vus reipublicae, is argentum, round pay for Souldiers is the nerves and sinewes of a Common-wealth; and it is especially in their hands: Therefore it is, that because God hath blessed them more in their oeconomicks, the Common-wealth doth account of them more; and giveth them a degree above other. In the 1 Tim. 6.19. is their duty: To be willing to impart their goods, for a common profit; as Nehem. 5.17. he had beside his owne Family, a hundred and fifty of the Rulers which he main∣tained at his owne table. It is better exemplified, 2 Sam. 19.32. Barzillai a very rich man; and David all the time he was at Mahanami, lay at his charge: there∣fore he rewarded him for it. And 2 Kings 15.20. the King of Assur would overcome Juda, if he had not money presently: but that Menahen being then King, tooke of every man of wealth, a great benevolence, &c. So for provision of Armies and things ne∣cessary; and then their duty in the Common-wealth in regard of this, Pro. 31.23. is to preferre them, and to set them in prefer∣ments, and to place them among the Elders in the gate, the rea∣son is, (and it is a good reason) if they have beene carefull in their owne house; they will be much more in the Common-wealth. The second duty is; that when a man hath wealth, there be some vertues that he may exercise excellently, that others cannot, magni∣ficence, liberality, almes, &c. and if he be allyed to a Noble man, to helpe forward good causes. So because they are to be helpers in good causes, they must venire in partem honoris, they must have their honour, vers. 18. We have an example of this duty, 2 Chron. 31.6. voluntary oblations for the Temple; so as there were great heapes left: great provision for the maintenance of the Le∣vites. And 2 Kings 4.10. the wealthy woman saith to her Hus∣band, I pray, lets furnish a Chamber, &c. There was a care of helping the Church, of helping Prophets, Schooles and Colledges, Mark 6.41. Some cast in a great deale into the Treasurie. This is the second duty. And then consequently, the Common-weale contra, back againe, is to deale, that these men may be especially good; and so doe good, Acts 13.8. There was a great care lest Elimas should have corrupted Sergius Paulus, the cheife man in that coun∣trey: therefore Paul dealeth roundly with him, vers. 10. 1 Tim. 6.10. when he had made an end of all, he would have him take or∣der, that rich men may be good, and doe good to many. The
Heathen man saith, If I were to make Amphions harpe, I would bestow greater paines in making that, then if I were to make a common Harpers harpe. The third duty of Rich men downward, 1 Tim. 6.17. not to be high minded, nor to trust in their riches, Pro. 18.11. they com∣monly count their riches their strong City or Towre; that is, when they have any cause, though there be no right in it, yet they will doe it, Pro. 31. they will undertake evill matters, trusting in their wealth: and so likewise, 1 Sam. 25.17. Naball was such a surly fellow, that no body could speake to him, Pro. 16.2. The rich and the poore meet, and the Lord hath made them both. The rich must not despise the poore: And then the duty, 1 Sam. 18. of them that be under, is to account themselves their Sonnes, and them their Fathers. 4. Of receiv∣ing benefits and thankful∣nesse.Fourthly, of receiving benefits, and of thankfulnesse, Job 29.16. he shewed himselfe a Father to the poore, &c. Whatsoever is sub ratione beneficii, may be considered as a benefit or good turne, of any thing done to any man, it cometh under here. There are three duties of the Benefactour, and three duties of him that ought to be thankfull. First, Rich men must doe it: They are not bound to any one in particular; in officib they are, but not in beneficio: They may make their choice, but to some they must doe it; they must give wheresoever they are; they must not marke mens ingratitude. And the Heathen man giveth a reason, why they should not give nothing: melius est ut pereat beneficium apud illum, quam apud te, it is better that he should abuse thy benefit that receives it, then thee in not giving it: that is, they must doe it freely. And these men that say our preferments are benefits, yet they doe not give them freely: They looke not, as the Phylosopher saith, ubi optime, but ubi quaestuosi ssime, where they may doe it for the greater good, but where they may bestow it for the greater gaine: so they be∣stow upon men, as a man alloweth his Horse, when he is to ride forth; he alloweth him so much bread, because he should ride on him, &c. So they bestow on such a one, because they be to use him. So the Physitian looseth his honour, now a dayes, perdit honorem gratiae propter praemium; for sure it is, he cannot suffici∣ently be recompenced, that saveth a mans life: but now because he prostituteth his Art for gaine; because he doth now as it were buy and sell, he looseth his great honour. Dignus est decipi, qui de recipiendo cogitavit, cum dedit. He is well worthy to be cheated that when he giveth, thinketh of receiving; and feareth least the party should not fulfill his expectation. I thinke the World will shortly make Indentures, when they give Benefits, to bind men to be thankfull. Secondly, another property, it is the rule: it is not now as it was. Apage homines, quorum lenta sunt beneficia, praecipites injuri∣riae, away with those men that are quick enough to doe one an in∣jury, but will consider on't before they will doe you any good: but
now, prosande odium simul, & infunde beneficium. They will not let him have all the benefit at once; bu first weary out his pati∣ence, and then a little pleasure or benefit. Seneca sheweth it very well: They will have longum spectaculum potentiae suae, it must be, Your worships, your honours pleasure, and many such circum∣stances: and be forsooth must be prayed; and they looke for an , some gratuitie: So their benefit is like lapidosus panis, as gravell in a mans mouth: and it cannot be without griefe and tor∣ment, to any ingenuous nature, while he receiveth it. Thirdly, that when you have done the benefit to any, you must forget it: If a man bestowed a benefit on me, and I know that he should bestow it ut ducat me in triumphum, to make me the object of his Vaine-glory, I would never thanke him for his benefit: nay, I would thanke him more, if he had never bestowed it: so he had not done this. Therefore it must be done, and they not know of it. Now the Receiver oweth a Recognisance. First, that such a man was Gods Instrument, or principium, by whom such a blessing of God came to him; and so to acknowledge. There is nothing that the Fathers have concerning this, but they take it out of Seneca. And surely but for some points that the Sto∣icks hold, his seven Books, De beneficiis, are very excellent Books, and worthy the reading. Seneca would have eandem hilaritatem ac∣cepti beneficii, quae fuit petiti, the same cheerfulnesse after the re∣ceiving, as there was in asking a benefit. Because gratia doth so soone senescere, because a good turne doth so soon wax old: there∣fore that a mans value or estimation should be all one, that he made before that, or when he received the benefit. Secondly, not onely this is required, but also effusio affectus, the effusion of this affection; and this is testimonium excellentiae exter∣nae, a testimonie of his externall excellency, that God hath exal∣ted such a one, to be a Benefactor. If he remember it, I need not: as exprobatio is satisfactio pro beneficio; so, if he forget it, I must not, but must tell it; and not extenuate it: but be benignus inter∣pres, interpret it well; as that it was a great benefit; or if it were not, that it was a great one to me: if it were not neither, yet I know he did it, with so good an affection, that I cannot but think of it highly. Thirdly, if happely ever he shall need (but we must not desire, or wish it) that we be ready to doe the like for him: and interim to acknowledge that we cannot recompence it. Though now they call finem injuriae beneficium, they thinke they doe a benefit by making an end of their injury; and it is a pollicy now a dayes, they will mergere eos, ut extrahentur, throw them into the water that they may pull them out, and when they have pulled them out, they thinke that they are beholden to them; such benefits must not be. I am not to wish that he were in need; but if ever he stand in need, my assiduity, and diligence about him, and the best counsell I can give him, he shall be sure off. I will alwayes wish him well, and ac∣knowledging
that I shall never be able to recompence him. And this is recompence. Now Unthankfulnesse is a great vice.Unthankful∣nesse. But there is one kind that is now thought unthankfulnesse, and yet it is not. Every one that receiveth a benefit, he must not onely requite it with the like, par pari referre, but he must trudere in manus, requite that, and doe an∣nother: or else it is not beneficium. And when he faileth himselfe, tranfferre in Deum, he must desire God to recompence him. But when as a man bestoweth a benefit upon his Inferiour, and afterward doth looke, that he should like what he liketh, and mis∣like what he misliketh, and to be at command; and if he will not follow, then to be accounted unthankfull: this is not unthankful∣nesse. For first, unthankfulnesse is res gratiae, not res officii, is in matters of favour and not of duty: therefore it is unthankful∣nesse in the other. And secondly, it is injustice: For that is a benefit, quod licet non dare, or dare, which I may give or not give; but in a matter of Ju∣stice I cannot requite him; because there is not non facere, or fa∣cere, l liberty of doing or not doing: therefore I will say, That that I may doe, or not doe, if he require it, I will doe it. But now he cometh to me in a matter of Justice: let him come to me, in re gratiae, in a matter of curtesie or favour, and I will be thankfull: let him not come to me in re officii, in a matter of duty. Another (and that is better then this) is this: He would havo me follow his appetite, to doe an injust thing; I will not consent to him: Is this unthankfulnesse? The rule is, quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne fcceris, thou mayst not doe that to another, which thou wouldest not have done to thy selfe; a man is made the rule of duty to his neighbour. If my appetite would lead me wrong, or to any injust thing, should I follow it? No, for I should wrong my selfe; because thus doing, I doe consentire peccato in me, con∣sent to the motions of sinne within me. And so in like manner, if I consent to him; he would have me to doe him a displeasure, for my pleasure: he would have me doe evill for good; he would have me to doe his soule hurt, to consent to sinne. The heathen man calleth it, occidere amando, a killing love; and so not to doe this, is species injuriae, & species ingratitudinis, quae saepe incidit in virum bonum, it hath a shew of injurie and ingratitude, which is often many a good mans case: But a good man, per mediam infa∣miam hujus ingratitudinis, will tendere ad officium, this reproach of Unthankefulnesse, maketh him looke the narrower to his duty. The second Rule: of , let that suffice, which was spoken before. The third Rule: concerning the working of all this in the heart; this law also is spirituall. For the Superiour, Psal. 78. vers. last. That he must feed them, not onely intelligentia manuum, by the skilfulnesse of his hands; but also in simplicitate cordis, in the in∣tegrity of his heart. And 1 Peter 5.2. it is in two wordes ex∣pressed,
willingly, and , diligently, readily. And as this pertaineth to him: so on the other side, because not onely (before) the abuse, but the usurpation was touched; and the u∣surpation of the place, being either lawfull or unlawfull: There∣fore against usurpation, David, Psal. 131.1. non est exultatum cor meum, mine heart is not haughty: likewise, Rom. 12.5. , id est, , there must be a sober appetite in the mind; because it falleth out, as the Heathen man saith, that there is often purpureus animus sub radi panno, a high minde under a beggers cloake: and Judges 9.15. some are of the brambles na∣ture; and of that thistle, 2 Kings 14.9. that he would needs match his sonne, with the Cedars daughter. In regard of the Inferiour, Judges 5.9. The people must be of a ready and willing minde, as Barach and Deborah testifie in their Song; and because their faults are comprehended, either under the spirit of Theudas, or of the Herodians, or tumultuari spiitus, or of those tumultuous spirits, Job 30.11. he findeth sault with some, that as soone as the Cord is losed; they them∣selves lose the Bridle; and so, as it is shewed plainely, be the sonnes of Belial. And for a second for a too much servile spi∣rit: we have our rule, Joshuah 1.17. tantum si Jehovah fuerit te∣um, onely if ye depart not from Jehovah, wee will not depart from you, but hearken to you in all things: and that tantum, that Onely must bee our direction, if they command further, and we disobey we are still good subjects. This for the spirit of the Commandement. Media bufut mandath.The fourth Rule: The meanes: partly handled before: In the behalfe of the Superiour, they be foure, our of the hundreth and first Psalme. First, a meanes, whereby a Superiour shall be able to call up himselfe; vers. 2. quando venies ad me? O when wilt thou come unto me? Therefore his thought will be of his end first; because he must give an account how he hath behaved himselfe, and must answer to that (Jerem. 13.20.) God shall say, Ubi est grex tuus? What is become of thy slock? The second meanes, is in the same verse: For the well order∣ing of his whole Kingdome, he will begin with his House. And if he be in a Family, with himselfe. John 8.3. Qui facit pecca∣tum, servus est peccati: & qui servus est peccati, hee that commit∣eth sinne is the servant of sinne, and hee that is the servant of sinne, should hee bee over the Creatures of God? Who are indeed therefore committed to him, that he may deliver them from it. Thirdly, vers. 6. another meanes. He professeth that his eyes shall be alwayes on the Lord, to pick and choose out integros, wise men, that be worthy that he might set those in the places, as per∣petuall looking glasses: as well to see, as to know those that are to be called ad praemia, to places of reward. Fourthly, and vers. last: this shall be out of the City of the
Lord; the price of those, over whom he is. The Heathen man said, Remember ye are over free men, and over the Athenians, &c. shewing that there was not so great odds between him and them. And so beginning with himselfe; and so considering the excel∣lencie, and having ever his eyes over the Realme, to pick out fit and worthy men; and last, having alwayes before his eyes: when hee shall come before the LORD, may breed a care∣fulnesse. Now on the other side: For his usurpation: it shall be good if he thinke of himselfe, as David, 1 Sam. 24.15. the account he makes of himselfe there: Art thou come to pursue a dead dogge, and a stie? and as 1 Sam. 26.20. a Partridge, and a Worme and no man. The Fathers say, in that respect it may be he is Dominus iugenii & liaguae, he may have wit and eloquence at command; but if he be servus peccati, subject to sinne, it will be sufficient matter to humble him: And so consequently, seeing want of gifts within him, or with them, his unthankfulnesse, which makes them of no fruit nor account; it cannot but quiet such as∣piring thoughts, and bring the heart into better temper that he may follow the Apostles counsell, Phil. 4.11. This is that I have learned; in what place soever God hath set me, I am well contented with it: And 2 Sam. 15.2. David: If God will have me come againe, &c. if not, here I am, let him doe as seemeth good unto him: So to say, If I be for the place, the Lord will provide it for me: if not, what dignity soever it be, I can be as well without it as have it. And so consequently, Psal. 131.2. there will be ablactatio a wean∣ing; because there is in us a spirit, and a lust longing after ho∣nour; even as the Babe doth lust for the pappe: And David, he hath weaned his soule from such thoughts. Indeed he could set such before his Fancie, and they were delightfull to him: but he weaned himselfe from them. And 2 Sam. 6.22. a degree further: he was too low, as Mi∣chall thought; (indeed for such a Kings daughter as Saul, shee thought he had disgraced himselfe:) but he saith, hee had not onely prepared himselfe to be so low; but also to be yet more vile and low; so farre was hee from thinking of an higher e∣state, that he would demeane himselfe according to those of the lower sort, and exercise as it were how hee should be able to prepare himselfe, if it please the LORD to set him in a low∣er estate, if he become more vile: This were good to prepare our hearts before, and to answer as Numb. 24.11. Balack did Ba∣laam; though he were a wicked King, I was purposed to have promoted you; but God hath denyed you. Mat. 20.23. Zebedees sonnes would needs sit one at Christs right hand and the other at his left: Christ answereth; It must bee for whom God hath prepared it. And so confequently that greedinesse, Ezekiel. 13.4. the Prophets were like a sort of young and old Foxes: hungry,
in a desert: Schooles, like Foxes, hungry and ravening; every man desiring a testimonie of that excellencie that is not in him: And so he will not give place, not bee in lower estate. But whereas Christ, Luke 14.8.9. counselleth, not to take the highest places; and Luke 12.42. saith, my Steward shall answer according to , a Portion: Hee will have more then his , and so requireth Injustice of the Lords Ste∣ward. Signes of good Inferi∣tiours.The fifth Rule, The signes. First of Inferiours, herein we will take no other course to measure this honour, then the Heathen men have done. One of them saith, non dicto, aut facto, aut vul∣tu laesi pietatem, I have not; forgot my duty to him either in word or deed; no, nor of an ill looke can he accuse me. And for Vultw, it is a common saying; that Vultu saepe laeditur pietas, a man may by a wry countenance breake this duty. And for deeds, Heb. 13.17. Our outward deeds ought to be such, to our Superiours, as they may take pleasure, and rejoyce in them: and they that may not governe us with sorrow. Exem∣plum, 1 Sam. 24.6. David did not hurt Saul in the Cave; but onely cut the lappe of his coate: yet his heart touched him; it being a disgrace to the garment of Saul. The Apostle, 2 Cor. 9.8. exhorteth Christians to abound in every good worke; they must shew forth a fruit of righteousnesse: and he saith there, it must be abundans fructus, a fruit that aboundeth. We must doe our duty, and more oftner then our duty; in more places, fur∣ther off then our duty enjoyneth us. The Apostle, Phil. 4.17. speaking of a duty likewise: It is not the matter wee esteeme, or weigh so much; the paying of Taxe or Tithes; but this is that we speake, , the Fruit, that shall be counted an o∣verplus, at the reckoning day. This is a good signe; to doe more then duty. By this meanes (as wee see in a contrary in Jacob, Gen. 34.30. they had made him stinke among the Inhabitants of the Land, &c.) We shall cast a good comfortable smell to the Superiour: as Esay 9.17. so as God and the Superiours shall take delight and pleasure in our young men; doing not onely that they should, but also those duties that are not necessary. Secondly, for Dictum, Words: Exemplum, 2 Kings 2.23. When the Prophet came by the children of Bethel, they had their termes for him: and were there executed: An example, Luke 16.14. Christs auditors knew themselves in a fault: yet it is sayde, , they scoffed at him: it is the uttermost part of de∣rision; a drawing together of the Nose: they made a nose at him; this ought not to be: But the Wise man saith, Proverbs 25.12. Blessed is hee that speaketh to an understanding eare: And he sheweth there, how an understanding eare will make use of it, and will lay it to heart: and will not goe away and scoffe at it. This is not that eare, to which hee may deliver that Wisedome.
Thirdly, For Countenance, Gen. 4.5. Cain being angry, &c. his countenance sell, &c. he hanged his countenance, Gen. 31.2. Labans countenance, not to day, as yesterday, toward Jacob, &c. So contra, as Jerome saith, on Psalm. 80.16. there is vultus incre∣pationis, a rebuking countenance, and that by looke: and there is vultus detraclionis, a detracting countenance: how is that? Pro. 21.29. to strengthen the face, when he is rebuked: to put on a good strong face: or as Psalm. 131.1. an high looke, an hardned countenance; which signifieth that inwardly as much as in him lyeth, he doth laedere pietatem. Elisha, 2 Kings 3.4. saith to Je∣horam, But that I reverence the face of King Jehosophat, &c. So that their presence, who be not infected with I do latry, is to be reve∣renced of us. Signes of a good Gover∣nour and go∣vernment.For the duties of Superiours; because, as they say, their power is bottomlesse, so their abuses are bottomlesse: There be certaine signes of a good government. First, Esay 32.3.5. In a good government, eyes that can see, shall not need to winke, &c. and he that is flagitiosus, a wicked lewd man, shall not be called a good Superiour, &c. So he giveth to understand, that an ill government, quod scis, nescis, you must see, and not see; you must Sir him, that is not to be Worship∣ped: you must bring your termes crosse. Example in Esay and Amos: the one living in the dayes of Uzziah and Manasseh; the other of Uzziah and Jeroboam: Amos 5.13. In that day shall the wise man hold his peace, he shall not dare to speake; his wise∣dome shall doe him no good: if he speake, he shall be served as Michah, Judges 18.25. was. Tace, hold thy tongue; else one of us shall runne thee thorow: this is no time for a Wise man to speake. But in the dayes of Hezechiah, Esay 22.16. Esay durst say to Shebnah, Who are you? Whence come you? God shall deale thus and thus with you. And their mouthes and eyes shall deale thus and thus with you. And their mouthes and eyes shall be open. Christ, John 18.22. standing before Annas; for saying, I am not bound to accuse my selfe; presently for say∣ing so, a Catchpoll layeth him on the face. So it was done to Paul, Acts 23.2. hee beginneth to cleare himselfe; and Ananias saith to one that stood by, Strike him on the face. A∣mos 6.10. We must not say what is right or wrong: This is the first signe. Secondly, another: Paul, for all his appeale, could get no Justice; because Nero was upheld by his Governours; and he must uphold them. The same was the case of David, why he might not goe and fight, 1 Samuel 29.9. There the King perswadeth David to bee gone: then David saith, What have I done, that I may not goe and fight against the enemies of the LORD and the KING? And hee saith, Truely I finde no fault in you: You have beene good and upright in my sight: but my Lords and the Governours, they like you not; my Princes will not have it so.
The third signe: His speech. The Heathen man. A good Go∣vernour saith, , it is my duty and I must doe it; and an evill Governour will say, , I have power and I may doe it. 1 Sam. 22.7. Saul, I can give you Vineyards, &c. John. 19.20. Pilate, I have power, &c. Fourthly, another out of Menander; whose eye brows swell grea∣ter then their estate: proud Governours. If there fall out a fault, and ye tell them not of it before; they will say, Why told ye not us of it? Tell him of it, and he will say, , or , Wee will consider of it. And it shall be as much amended, as if you had not told them. This maketh a fourth signe. 2 Sam. 18.13. one telleth Joab of Absaloms hanging; and Joab said, Diddest thou see him, and not kill him? Thou shouldest have killed him, and I would have given thee a reward: The other said, You see what strict charge the King gave you and Abishai, and It∣tat, not to lay hands upon him: But you would have happely said to the King, He is worthy to dye: if I should have done it, you would have beene against mee your selfe. Hee coun∣selleth him to have done that, which he himselfe would have re∣proved in him. Fifthly, another (and it is greatly complained of by the Fathers, and was wont to be in the Primitive Church:) It is not Chri∣stianity that abrogateth Justice. They would have their Rulers doe wrong to a Christian Bishop: then hee must have Justice: and when it commeth to the Emperour, Why, saith he, you shall have Justice. A day of hearing is appointed, if it be plaine, and when it commeth to the point; then the Deputy commeth to him, and saith, You are a Christian, you ought to be patient; you need not follow your suit; you should rather forgive it, &c. So they, rather then to shew their folly, would give over. So the Christians were dealt withall, and loaden thus, till their backes were broken. Such is that; Acts 16.39. They goe roundly to worke with Paul, they whip him, and his fellowes; and the next day would have let them goe privily. Paul among the rest, tak∣eth this courage to him and saith, They would not; because they had corrected them openly without a cause, he would have them come themselves and fetch them out; so that they were faine to fetch them out themselves. So when men desire not that Christi∣anity should drowne Justice, it is a signe of a good government. Sixthly, the thriving of the righteous: a good signe, Psal. 72.7. In a good mans time the righteous should flourish. Contra, as the Hea∣then man saith, where it is not , the Flatterer is best: , then the Sycophant: , and then he that is naughty and lewd: 1 Sam. 26.16. Da∣vid saith, If God have done it, let him smell the savour of a sacri∣fice: if men, cursed bee they before the Lord. So hee knew there were Sycophant talebearers, as Doeg: that tolde Saul of Da∣vids being at Nob, and in the Cave: He was the cheife of all his servants, over all his flockes: a great office in those dayes.
My meaning is this, Eccles. 29.9. that these putrid members be cut off, and the righteous be releeved for the Commandement sake. Beatus qui non suit subjectus indigno, as the Heathen man saith: When Caesar first entred into his tyranny; he gave pre∣ferments, sic ut bonestaret hornines, & tamen inquinaret ornamen∣ta. So places of good credit are discredited by placing such Of∣ficers as discredit the places. There be many moe signes, but these may suffice. The sixt Rule: The procuring of it to others. A precent, Pro. 24.21. an example, 1 Sam. 24.10. and 26.9. That for dehor∣tation. Now for exhortation, 2 Kings 25.24. Feare not to serve the Caldeans, let us serve the King of Babel, and wee shall be well. This is to be understood out of Numb. 16.3. when the Gover∣nour is meeke, and commands that which is right in the Lords eyes: not such as the gainsaying of Corah was. But Psalm. 44.16. if the Chaire of Justice doe singere molestiam, doe cause heavie commandements, praester statutum; then, quis consurget mecum. In unjust commands, I will not doe: then are we both to harden our selves and others: and wish them not to doe it. That thou mayest prolong,The reason. &c.] In generall it was said, that it was to all a generall promise; as in the second Commandement, To them that love me, &c. But this is particulerly to one, and hath a particuler promise, Long life. So that is true, Ephes. 6.2. it is the first Commandement with particuler promise. Now the reason to this Commandement. It is a common pro∣verbe: Adorant plures solem orientem, quam occidentem, more wor∣ship the Sun rising then setting: our parents be compared to the Sunne going downe, Job 12.5. When a man is toward his end, he is like a candle that burneth within the socket. Therefore we neglect them; but hope for somewhat to come by them to us; if they grow up with us, and so may profit us hereafter; but when they are one foot in the grave, we have there done with them, we esteeme them no longer: therefore here is a reason or motive from God that if we give due honour unto them, we shall be rewarded our selves with honour and long life. Secondly, the convenient proportion of the promises; and that it is most just; for that it is said of the Heathen, Si reddide∣ris benesicium gratis, tuere tu beneficium: if he become thankfull, orna quantum potes. In our birth we received a benefit from our Parents: that is, life: being thankfull to them, this benefit shall be preserved. Therefore God will have life to be preserved of them, of whom we had it. 1 Tim. 4.8. Piety (one of the speciall parts wherof this is) hath promises of this life, and of that to come. The Heathen man saith, if all the Adverbs were linked together, and bene & male, well and ill, were out, it were to no purpose. Therefore God, Deut. 5.16. addeth an explication of this: That thy dayes may be long: And that it may goe well with thee: Augustine, ut non solum vita longa, sed laeta, that thy life may be not onely long
but chearefull. Now the means he saith, shall be our Parents; that by their blessing they may prolong our dayes: he hath annex∣ed his blessing to the blessing of the Parent. For this blessing of life in the Scripture, came from Noah; the blessing first was to Sem, of the life to come; and to Japheth, of this life: God shall perswade Japheth, &c. shewing that the Parents giving it from the soule, and Faith (Heb. 11.20, 21. making it a fruit of faith: By faith Isaac blessed Jacob concerning things to come, &c.) It will worke miracles; Sem and his seed had a great priviledge, for the World to come: Japheth, for this life: and a curse to Cham, both for this life, and the life to come: his seed hath alwayes beene in subjection, and they have had small light of Religion, and small sparkes of the Gospell: Againe, in the blessing from Isaac on Jacob; legatur lo∣cus perpendantur circumstantiae, Gen. 27.7. &c. He blessed him with &c. and he was blessed. He loved Esau more; and so no doubt the blessing had been his; but that by Gods providence, it was carry∣ed to Jacob: Gen. 48.20. A strange blessing (for the manner) and mighty (for effect) was that of Jacob on Josephs sonnes: and Gen. 49. He to Joseph; because he had fed his Father, blesseth him with the blessing of the Heaven, the Ayre, the Deepe; and that Tribe continued longest in prosperity. Psal. 115.15. Vos estis be∣nedicti Domini, ye are the blessed of the Lord: and so consequent∣ly, the blessing being of the Lord, of which Parents be instru∣ments; it is instrumentally to be ascribed to the blessing of the Parents; because it is they that have made it, by their blessing. All this is to provoke the prayer of the Superiours. Whether is this promise fulfilled?Quest. A busie nature may supply ma∣ny objections; and our experience will shew us the contrary: o∣bedient and dutifull Inferiours have dyed betimes: disobedient, stubborne, and contumacious children have prospered and lived long: Therefore it is certaine that the wise man saith, Eccles. 9.2, 3. that all thing in this World be alike to all men; the reason is this, Gen. 27. God shall give thee of the fatnesse of the earth: Isaac he could give it to Jacob; and after he giveth it, vers. 39. to Esau: so God shall give to thee, as to thy Brother: Pro. 13.16. they are distinguished. Immortality, length of dayes, are the gifts of the right hand: Glory, riches, and preferment, are the gifts of the left hand; and prosperity is common to both: and the reason is, Ne homines cupide prosequantur,Sol. 1 lest men should be set too eagarly upon getting. And adversitie is common to both: Ne illa turpiter effu∣giatur: For, why should a man sweat, if he thought he might not get out of adversitie? More reasons. There is common adversi∣tie: Why? God giveth to some of his, adversitie; and not to some of the wicked; because, if he should give to all the wicked, 2 Pet. 1.3, 4. there would be no judgement: contra, if he should give all adversitie to his children, then Psal 11.12. certe Deus non respicit nos, Gods providence should not be in this World: there∣fore that he may shew that he hath a providence; he will give to
some of his, these good things: And that he may shew that he hath a Judgement, he will give them to some of the wicked. He would not have these good things to be altogether in the wicked; because then they would thinke, that God had not the disposition of them. And as Habak. 1.16. they would sacrifice to their Not, and to their Yarne: and contra, if good men should have all, and the Devill none, then the Devill would say, as he did, Job 1.19. Nunquid servit Deo gratis? Doth Job serve God for nought? How then? First, bene & male must come in; it is not so much long life, as the comfort and delight which we enjoy in our life, which is here promised as a blessing. Wherefore 1 Kings 19.4. Elias he quits God with his promise, I pray thee take away my life, for I am not better then my Fathers: and Deut. 5.16. it is expounded: They shall prolong your dayes, so long as you can live prosperously and well. It must be a benefit, if a man have a promise of a long life; if it come to be a displeasure, it were better not to have it. Life may be a displeasure in two respects.Now in two respects, life may be a displeasure: First, in regard of the evill time, 2 Kings 22.20. Huldah saith, Josiah was a good King; but there were evill times over the Land: therefore shee saith, That to take him away from this evill time, God would shorten his dayes. Secondly, Esay 55.1. In regard of himselfe; lest he should be corrupted. The time shall not greive him, but shall corrupt him, Raptus est ê facie maliciae Enoch, Enoch was ta∣ken away from the earth, because else he would happely have been corrupted: or contra, would have fallen into a marveilous griefe of minde. And this is one answer. Another answer they say,Sol. 2. is this: That although he take them away upon this condition, yet it is not a sufficient compensation. But as out of Mark 6.23. When Herod had promised halfe his Kingdome, it is certaine if he had given her his whole Kingdome, it had beene no breach: And so, if God promise vitam prolonga∣tam, a prolonged life; and give for it, vitam perptuatam, eternall life; here is more then halfe in all. As he that promiseth twelve peeces of silver, and giveth twelve peeces of gold: or he that pro∣miseth to give a Vessell of Beere, and giveth a Vessell of Wine; breaketh not his promise. But the last and most sufficient answer is this.Sol. 3. There is no tem∣porall thing of this life, that doth cadere in promissum Dei, fall un∣der a promise of God, but onely as it shall helpe and further the next life: This life is but via ad vitam, the way unto life; so that whatsoever he promiseth in this way, he promiseth but as it shall helpe to the end. Infima pars faelicitatis perfectae est terrena faelicitas, this earthly felicity is no felicity, except it dispose us to that feli∣city in Heaven. Because (as we said) it mu cooperari bonis in bo∣num, Rom. 8.28. it must worke together for their great good, else it is not Gods promise: Ut ita disponatur de minimo, quemadmodum convenit summo: or, Ne peri culum fiat de maximo. And so it is very certaine, that as it is not prejudiciall to the life to come, God keep∣eth it: And therefore as one saith, we lose our life pro Rege, Lege,
& Grege. for the King, the Lawes, and the People: David he hath cases. When there cometh a case of Gods; then Psal. 69.7. for thy cause suffer we reproach: and the zeale of thine House hath even consumed me. Or when the case of the truth cometh; or of faith: then 2 Tim. 4.3. fidem sequere; lose thy life to keep the faith. Or when we are in a case, pro grege, for the people, we must be made an example for the ages to come, James 5.10. as the Prophets were. In these cases falleth it out, that if a man doe yeeld to this life, he shall live: but yet this life shall be derogatory and preju∣diciall to his other life. And yet God doth, when we lose vitam nostram, this life, not onely reward us with vita gloriae, a life of glory, but also with vita memoriae, a life of memory. Psal. 112.6. the righteous, erit in memoria aeterna, shall be in everlasting re∣membrance. And how? Pro. 10.7. memoria ejus erit in laude sancta, his memory shall be blessed: they shall say, Praised be God that e∣ver such a man was borne. It is noted (Esay 22.16.6.) by one of the Fathers, that there is an unchoosing, when a man is chosen, as when a question is asked, Quis est ille? Who is that? or how got he in? by that very question it sheweth a fault. As contra, Quomodo non venit ille? Why cometh not he? this is a plaine e∣lection in foro justiciae, in a court of justice. So they say; quomo∣do mortuus est iste, Oh how bravely hee dyed! this maketh his praise to bee glorious. And Quomodo mortuus est iste? How chance he turned his Religion? this sheweth that he was unwor∣thy to live. The prolong∣ing of wicked mens dayes, not of the pro∣mise: yet 4.. reasons be of it.Now againe, as before, the prolonging of evill mens dayes, it is  of the promise: yet GOD rendereth foure reasons of it. First 2 Tim. 2.25. , if God perad∣venture may give them repentance: that not cutting of them off be∣times, is the meanes of returning backe againe. We see it in Pauls conversion: if he had been cut off in the time of his per∣secuting, what an excellent Apostle had been lost? Againe, by not cutting off of Salomon, what an excellent Saint he came back againe to God? This is the first. Secondly, 2 Kings 21.24. and 16.20. he hath respect to their Progenie: as not letting Achaz live, he had lost Hezechiah. And not letting Ammon live, he had lost Josias: and so consequently, that these may come, he suffereth them to live Thirdly, Esay 10.5. because God must have rods of his wrath, therefore wicked men may be. Ashur may be the rod of his wrath, for the tryall of his Church. Fourthly, and lastly, It is an universall Document for all that will doe it, Rom. 9.22. that God, to make his power and wrath knowne, suffereth his vessels of wrath, that we might learne to be much more patient and long suffering in our injuries. And yet God is even with them. First, Esay 66.24. the godly shall come forth, and looke on their condemned carkasses: They are condemned persons, and
shall condemne one another, 2 Kings 9.31. Jezebell, she con∣demneth Zimri and Absalom, 2 Sam. 16.17. shewed himselfe un∣kind, and grieved his Father: and yet he could condemne Hushai, for leaving his friend. Secondly, and the second punishment, vermis eorum non morie∣tur, their worme shall not dye; so their life is not laeta vita, a life that hath any delight in it. Augustine, eorum consciencia paena, their conscience is a continuall tormenter. Thirdly, and ignis eorum non extinguetur, their fire shall not be put out; their name shall be an abhorring to all flesh; it shall be put out, Psal. 34.16. or else, Prov. 10.7. it shall be a rotten name: And so consequently we may see how the Preacher, Cap. 8.12. saith, for all their long life, it shall come notwithstanding without the compasse of the promise. The end of the Fifth Commandement.
The VI. Commandement. Thou shalt doe no murther. ITt was said, that whatsoever duties were be∣tweene man and man in particular, pertained unto the fifth Commandement. Now these duties that are commonly called promiscua, pro∣miscuall duties, follow in the foure next Com∣mandements. The sixth concerning the life of man, the preservation of it: the seventh con∣cerning chastity, or the preservation of wed∣lock: the eighth concerning his goods: the ninth concerning his good name. The Commandement is exceeding short, God providing for the memory of man; therefore, he hath made choyce in one word,The commen∣tary of the Commande∣ment. to sig∣nifie a great catalogue of sinnes; making choyce of murther, which is almost the highest: that hee might shew the under affections are to him no lesse odious then murther it selfe: which if they had not beene expressed in this word, would have seemed light. The Commandement then is expounded in the Law it selfe, Lev. 19.17.18. By murther he meaneth tale-carrying, that may redound to mans bloud: standing against the bloud of his neighbour, hating his brother, not rebuking, suffering him to sinne; revengement, or mind∣fulnesse of wrongs: Our Saviour Christ also, Matthew 5.22. and so from thence to vers. 27. at the 38. vers. and so by the end, giveth a large ex∣position or commentary on this Commandement. The like hath Saint Iohn almost through his first Epistle, and espe∣cially, cap. 3.14.15. where he saith plainely, that whosoever hateth, is a murtherer: and so consequently doth shew plainely, that God rather giveth his Law to the heart, the fountaine of the affections, then to the actions, that man doth take order for. Those places we must weigh and consider: when we have weighed them, we shall finde it true that the Apostle saith, Ephes. 4.27. that this affection of anger and hatred, is the gate of the Devill, whereby,Anger, the De∣vils gate. as Iames 3.16. there is way made for strifes and debates, and to a great many of evill workes. 1. The order of depending of it. The fifth Commandement was concerning the beginnings and authors of our life:The order. therefore no object commeth next, better to be entreated of, then life it selfe, which floweth as an effect out of the other: that every man should highly
esteeme it in himselfe, and other. And it must necessarily stand here; the next cannot stand before: for we are made partakers of wedlocke, goods and good name, by being first: and they cannot be without life: therefore it must necessarily stand before. Omnis iniquitas mentitur sibi.2. Another reason that is in the last Commandement, the ground of it was a conceit of himselfe: omnis iniquitas mentitur sibi, all wic∣kednesse deceives it selfe. We shall see that the very consequence of sinne came from that originall; as the first murther was, Gen. 4. of in∣nocent Abell, and vers. 5. the beginning of it was, because Caine thought his brother had a dignity, and 1 Iohn 3.12. he saith plainely, hee did therefore kill his brother, because he was better then he; his brothers workes were good, and his naught. And againe we see Gen. 27.41. Esaues anger brast out into threatnings of the death of his brother, for his prerogative, for taking away his blessing. And Gen. 37.4. because the rest of the children of Iacob saw that Ioseph was more made of then they, therefore they hated him exceedingly; and afteward, vers. 9. when he came to tell them his dreame, that he should be a Ruler over them, and that his father and mother should worship him: it is said, their hatred exceeded yet more. And generally, the conceit of our selves, that nothing ought to thwart us, or that we deserve to have facilitatm actionis nostrae, our do∣ing well entertained; this maketh us, when we are crossed (1 King. 21.4.) doe as Ahab did, because he could not have his desire of the Vine∣yards presently, he was exceeding wroth, and after fell to murther. True it is, & . that (as divers well note) the power in the minde, that is called , fervour of spirit, proceedeth alwayes of , desire, from our desire: and these affections are called , vigorous fa∣culties, for so the Divines. Yee see in naturall things, when as fire doth know his place to be above, it hath a desire to be there: and it hath a quality given it, that is lightnesse, to go up: now if it be hindered in his course, it hath a second quality, which is heate, and that will make it way, if it be able to burne through, it will scorch and snatch, and would remove it, if it had strength: and thereby doth make plaine, that the nature of it is so to doe.Fire in the soule. Such a thing is in the soule of man: for God having given us light to know what we are to doe, he giveth us also a desire to doe it: so we make towards it, we go up: then hath he given us that part of the minde, which is called : and that is answerable to the lightnesse of the fire: so in this he hath given us answerable to calor, heat, our , called of heat. Then in good matters, we are by the zeale of it, to re∣move whatsoever will hinder us in the course of godlinesse. Now be∣cause Ira, which is the first motion, is vindex laesae concupiscentiae, an avenger of a wronged desire: index laesae concupiscentiae. for which cause, that being the first hin∣derer, there is naturally ebullitio sanguinis, a boyling of the bloud, and after that , ire, a desire of removing the impediment. Now this we are to understand, that as there be some affections, as envie, that doe sonare malum, sound evill: as soone as a man heareth them, he hateth them: so anger is none of these: for it faileth not in the object, but it faileth two wayes, 1. in the cause, 2. in the quantity. Eph. 4.26. a di∣stinction.
Irascimini, & nolite peccare, be ye angry, and sinne not. Then belike there is an anger which is not sinne, and the sinne commeth not in respect of the object or effection it selfe, which is indeterminate: but when we are angry, either for no cause, or for a light cause: or if we be angry for a just cause, we keepe no measure in it, but our anger grow∣eth too great. To be moved with indignity is very good, and a vertue called , indignation:Ira per zlum  when a man doth see that it ought not to be done; and is angry if it be done; if it be not for Gods glory, or the good estate of the Church: this is , and ira per zelum, indignation and anger kindled by zeale: and is called ira spiritus sancti, a holy anger. Iohn 2.17. It was our Saviour Christs anger, and of Elias: and the other called, ira per vitium, or ira carnis, a vitious and carnall anger: thererefore we must looke to these two conditions. 1. Matth. 5.22. he that is angry with his brother , without a cause, &c,How to be an∣gry. it must be for a cause: 2. That it be intra modum, within measure: as Rom. 12.19. not avenging, but giving place to wrath, not resisting it, i. sup∣pressing it: Resiste irae si potes, resist anger as much as possible. When the affection is not thus ruled by reason, and is not affectus ancilla, the hand-maid of passion; but falleth out otherwise: then is it that the Apostle saith, Heb. 12.15. radix omnis amaritudinis, or venenum Ser∣pentis, the roote of all bitternesse, or the venome of the Serpent, that is in us, and infecteth our nature. Gradus irae i. nosae, & fuciusNow of this (as was said before) there is first this sinfull wrath: the spawne of these vices that Iames reckoneth up: And this poyson is either at the first rising in us; or it is Suppuratio vitii, an impo∣stume, or inward rankling of it: and then,1. Suppuratio vitii. if it be against a Superiour, it is called a grudge; if against an equall, a rancor; if against an infe∣riour, it is disdaine. And the grudge, if it continue a little longer, it will grow to an impostume of envie, and rancor to hatred, and disdain to contempt: After they will breake out, and they have two issues.An impostum of envie. 1. In the tongue. 2. In the countenance. 1. That that breaketh out at the tongue, they call Spuma vitii,1. Spuma vitii. the foame, or froath of the vice: which if it be to our Superiours, they call susurrus, whisperings, detractings: and to our equall , contenti∣ous speeches, railing, brawling, &c. and to the inferiour, taunts, scoffs, and reproaches. 2. Now, when it breaketh out into the eyes, it is called Icterus vitii:2. Icterus vitii the jaundis. the jaundise of sinne: We shall know it, to a Superiour, per obliquos ocu∣los, by a squint eye: to an equall, it will be over all the face: it will be pale, sweate, he will foame at the mouth: and to an inferiour, per su∣spensum oculum, hanging of the eyes, and high looke. Now then, besides these two, it commeth into the worke, into ex∣ecution, to the hands and feete; and then it is lepra peccati,Lepra peccati. the leprosie of sinne. They called it Rixam, fighting, warres, bloudshed: and from this lepra, there commeth not onely this, but an infection to others: as Ier. 18.18. Come let us smite him with our tongues, let us not hearken to any thing that he saith. These are murthers cousins. This is a briefe declaration of that, that shall hereafter be set forth at large. But because it was said in the beginning, There are in the Commande∣ments
of God, not onely negations, but also affirmations: there is not onely somewhat forbidden, as murder, and his kindred: but there is also somewhat commanded in generall; as that we should study to preserve the life of our neighbour.We must be ginum citae to our neighbors. The Hebrewes called it, esse lig∣num vitae proximo, to be a tree of life to our neighbour. What it is to be lignum vitae to him, we see in Prov. 11.30. that fructus justi, is lignum vitae: to deale justly with him, and offer him no wrong. Prov. 13.12. There is another lignum vitae, desiderium expletum: that is, the ver∣tue of beneficence:A wholsome tongue is a tree of life: but the frowardnesse thereof break∣eth the minde. these be ligna vitae, and Prov. 15.4. lingua placabi∣lis, that is lignum vitae too, a gentle tongue, by giving of gentle spee∣ches, and by fulfilling his desire, and Prov. 14.30. We shall make him, if we doe these, cor sanum, a joyfull heart: that is indeed the true lignum vitae. For this life otherwise, is (as the Heathen saith) , a comfortlesse life, without this. For a foolish opinion is of some that thinke their body and their senses is the best thing that they have: and so consequently, they imagine murther to be onely of the body: But it is of the soule also, and the murther of the soule is referred to two lives. 1. To this life. 2. To that to come. As indeed, the word in the Common Law counteth it murther, if the body, or the good estate of the body to endammaged. The good estate of the body is Incolumitas, is incolumity, which is in threethings.Incelumitas in 3. things. 1. In interigty; besides the life, if a man lose an arme, there may be an action for it. 2. In incolumitate sensus, in the safety of the sense: when we are at ease: as on the other side, if any man strike us, it is made a battery. 3. There must be libertas metus, a freedome from feare: as on the other side to binde one, or to shut him up, this is prejudiciall to inco∣lumity, and commeth under murther: and there may be an action for these. Now, as not onely the body, but also the incolumity of the body is not to receive dammage; so likewise there is such a thing in the soule which may not be hurt, and it is called , tranquillity. The incolumity of the soule also standeth in three things. 1. Dilectio,The incolumi∣ty of the soule. lovingnesse: and here, against this commeth in odium, hatred, with all his crue, and retinue. 2. Gaudium, joy: against this commeth that, when a man is so dealt with, that he falleth in , in torporem animae, into a drowsinesse of the soule, that he taketh no delight in any good thing: or if hee fall into envie. 3. Peace. Gal. 5.22. and that either 1. Within himselfe, his thoughts: against that commeth scandalum, scandals. 2. Outward, betweene him and other, and there commeth desire and contention. So (as was said in the beginning) he is not onely an offendor, that commeth against the body, or the incolumity thereof: but also he that commeth contra animam, against the soule: so he that commeth contra  animi, against the tranquillity of the soule: Gen. 27.46. where∣as Esau matcheth himselfe against the consent of his Parents, Rebecca
saith, taedet me vitae, I am weary of my life: because of the disquiet∣nesse, and vexation with the Hittites. This doth Iob call amaritudo animae, the bitternesse of the soule. Iob 10.1. But there is no place plainer for this, then Gen. 45.27. for there Iacobs soule being dead by Iosephs death, and Simeons keeping in prison, and Benjamins departure: it is said, that when as newes came that Ioseph was alive, the spirit of Iacob revived within him: as if before by torments it had beene dead. The Hebrewes know what it is percutere animam: we know not; but doe commonly expresse for it, percussit animam: when any griefe com∣meth to one, we call it the killing of the soule. And it commeth some∣what neer to it, Prov. 17.22. this spiritus exiccat ossa, a broken spirit dry∣eth the bones: and indeed it is the very diminishing of the naturall heate, and shortning of this life. Then this is it that we say,Latitudo husu, praecepti. what so∣ever is contrary to  or , life, or the welbeing of life, God meant it here. The scope of the Law; (as before) It is not one private thing,Why God would have none killed. but the good of all, that God in this Law commandeth. 1. In regard of himselfe, Gen. 9.6. hee would have none killed: why? his reason: he will not have his Image destroyed and defaced. It is counted treason to earthly Princes, to deface their Image. 2. In regard of the Church. 1 Cor. 12.13, 27. he saith there, that how many soever are Christs, they are become one body, and that in one unanimity: and so consequently that man, that shall take any part of this, he maketh a rupture into the mysticall body of Christ. 3. In regard of the Common-wealth. Levit. 26.6. he saith, It shall be a great blessing he will give, that man shall doe his businesse with∣out feare, and shall have peace, and sleepe without terrour. Now, for every private man, Psal. 36.9. For with thee is the Well of life: That he hath given to every man a life, and nobilem rationis u∣sum, the noble use of reason: whereby he may perceive himselfe , setled in minde: and by this he hath fenced him. Now to consider it particularly. First, in the fault: A man may kill (as the Fathers and Aug. say, and it is the highest division one can come unto) either a man or a beast:1a. Dvis. And he maketh this division against the Manichees, for this is one thing that they hold; they thought that a man might not pull up any herb of the field, nor slip the branch of a tree: for the ttees, they lived too. A fond opinion, for Gen. 1.29. God saith there before the flood came, he gave all greene things, not only the herbs, but also the trees to man and beasts. And we see plainely, Gen. 9.3. whatsoever liveth and moveth, they are given to man to bee food; most plainely,Lawfull to il Beasts. 1 Cor. 10.25. Quicquid in macella, &c. Whatsoever is sold in the Shambles, eate it. And indeed, reason it selfe (in Law) sheweth it plainely. For, where there is no Ius societatis, a Law of society, there is not societas juris, a society in Law. But they have no society with us, because they want reason. And secondly, to use all things for the end they were ordained for, is no sinne: but the lesse perfect things are for the more perfect; there∣fore herbs for beasts: and beasts, as being lesse perfect, for man. Onely
in these two cases,2. Caveats. the holy Ghost forbids to kill beasts: first, when it turneth to the detriment of our neighbour; the sinne is not to kill the beast, but to endammage him by it. And secondly, that we kill them not in the impotencie of our wrath; exacting that power or understan∣ding of him, that is not in him. Aug. he saith, men are so foolishly bent, they must have facilitatem motus, things work to their mind. If the poor Pen, through their negligence and perversenesse, did not write as they would have it, capit & collidit, he taketh it, and dasheth it: So in beasts, if they doe not as we would have them, then we shew our impotencie. Psal. 36.6. Gods mercie: he preserveth both man and beast, and Prov. 12.10. man must be like to him in this point: he shall be mercifull to the soule of the beast he rideth upon. In this regard he shall not kill the beast. The second division of man:2a. Divisi. We will take him first, as he is a mem∣ber, then as a head of a society. There is a slaughter, 1. Sui ipsius, of a mans selfe. 2. Alierius, of another man, of his neighbour. Because we see the Heathen, as we read of Lucretia, Seneca, and Ca∣to; that though they would never have beene brought to kill others,A man may not kill himselfe. yet they durst lay hands on themselves; and were therefore highly thought of amongst the Heathen: But Christian Religion teacheth us, that it must not be so: and that no man hath power of his life, for these causes. 1. We must needs understand Non occides, thou shalt not kill, so: be∣cause, as was said before, the generall rule of the Law is, Siut te ip∣sum, as thy selfe. Then non occides alium, sicut non occides teipsum, thou shalt not murther another, even as thou shouldest not kill thy selfe. So the proportion is against the Law of charity and nature. Against the Law of nature it is, we are so linked to our selves, that nature first maketh alimentum individuum, the nutriment to satisfie the stomack, before she giveth propaginem speeiei, supplement to the other mem∣bers: shewing that to every man belongeth a care how to preserve him∣selfe. 2. Because that every man that liveth in a society, or Common-wealth, is a part thereof: and so is not his owne, but societatis or rei∣pub. the societies or Common-wealths: therefore hee cannot injure or kill himselfe, but he must needs bring detriment to the whole com∣pany whereof he is: And consequently by the Law of the Heathens, they forfeit the goods to the Exchequer, as they doe by the the Law of the Christians; though it be somewhat otherwise. So the Com∣mon-wealth will take some revenge of him, because in that action there doth concurre some dammage to her. 3. Because our life is the gift of God, 1. Sam. 2.6. so consequent∣ly, it is God, that giveth life, and bringeth death; therefore we must not dispose of the gift of God, without the minde of the giver, Rom. 12.4. rather because the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.23. he saith, we are bought with a price; we are his servants that bought us: Then com∣meth that in Rom. 14.4. Quis tu, qui jud cas servum alienum? Who art thou that judgest another mans servant? so Quis tu, qui intersicis servum alienum? Who art thou that killest another mans servant?
Matth. 8.32. Its said, that the very swine would not have runne into the Sea, but that they were carried of the Devill, else they of them∣selves would not: therefore as Aug. reproving the deed of Razis, 2. Maccab. 14.37. and so consequently, the authority of the writer that commendeth him for it in that place: and the Papists dis-allow the thing: So it is a fault to thinke that any man may kill himselfe, whe∣ther he doe it, that he may fugere molestias temporales, hoc enim modo, saith he, incidunt in perpetuas, to avoid temporall evils, for by this meanes they fall into eternall: neither ut evitet peccatum alienum, ne incipiat habere gravissimum proprium, to shun the sinne of another, lest he become guilty of a most grievous one himselfe: nor pro suo pecca∣to, for his owne sinne; for there is time of repentance: neither ne pec∣cer, lest he fall into sinne; as the woman did in the Primitive Church: sic enim incidit in peccatum certum, ut evitaret incertum, for so he com∣mits a certaine sinne, to avoid an uncertaine one. And indeed he pro∣veth out of Rom. 3. that we must not doe it for any cause. 2. Come to the next, in alium, Manslaughter, looking into mans na∣ture; we must not kill any other. The reasons,Man-slaughter. besides the generall reason, Quod tihi fieri non vis,Matth. 7.12. &c. Whatsoever ye would that men should not doe, &c. And besides the other of Gods Image, no man must kill another. Esa 58.7. he saith, when thou seest a naked man, cover him, and despise not thine owne flesh, because we are one flesh: This Esa 9.20. is made a strange judgement, that they should bee brought to such extremity, that every man should eate the flesh of his owne arme. But Gal. 5.15. this is done: and if they bite one another, and prey one upon another, according to discords, contentions, and hatreds, and so consume themselves: unnaturall sinne. Iohn 8.44. By this meanes we come to be primogeniti Diaboli,Murtherers primgeiti Diaboli. Santans first begotten: be∣cause he was the first murtherer. Gen. 3.4. By this nequaquam mo∣riemini, yee shall not die, he brought in a moriemini, death: and so brought them to it. Gen. 4.10. It is said, that the bloud of thy bro∣ther cryeth unto me, because it is peccatum clamoris, a crying sinne. Bloud-shed, that will cry, and come up to Heaven; and will not cease till God take revenge. Other sins, they may be as if he heard them not: but his eares shall be open to this; for this is somewhat more straight. Deut. 21.8.9. A man found lying dead in the fields, and no man knoweth who killed him; God saith, This order shall they take. The Elders, and Judges of Israel shall come forth, and mete to the Ci∣ties that are round about him; and the Elders of the next City shall take an Heifer out of the drove, and chop off her necke at some stony valley: and all the Elders of the City shall come to the flaine man, and wash their hands over the Heifer, and shall testifie and say: Our hands have not shed this mans bloud, neither have our eyes seene it: and shall make their protestation there. And by this meanes shall they stint my wrath, and by no other meanes, except protestation of their innocencie be made, and confession of their negligence. Gen. 4.11. maledictus Cain, cursed is Cain; and Cain his owne confession vers. 14. Behold thou hast cast me out from thy face this day, &c. that is, excommu∣nication, and depriving of the grace of God; excommunicating from
the Church, the first sentence executed: and vers. 15. if that the same God doth set a marke on sinne; it is thought by the best writers, to be an inward horror, and if it be that, it doth of all other accom∣pany this sinne of murther: so that a man cannot be satisfied common∣ly, till he have quit himselfe, or made an end of himselfe: as Gen. 42.21. when the Patriarchs were taken for spies, presently they say one to another (being conscii to themselves of selling their brother,) Surely we have sinned in selling our brother, and so this trouble is come up∣on us: and Gen. 50.15. presently, so soone as their Father was dead, they said: Now he will be even with us, and they could not be quiet till they were quit. So there is a brand-mark, a continuall horror, be∣sides the casting out from the presence of God. Gen. 4.14. For it is said there, Whosoever shall finde Caine, shall kill him. Caines owne sentence. And the Heathen saith, homicida quod fecit, expeclet: Et viri sanguinum, Psal. 55.23. non dimidabunt dies suos, a man-slayr expects that measure from others, that he hath meted to others; and bloudy men shall not live out halfe their dayes. This is Caines sentence. Gen. 21.14. God will set Caines sentence forwar. Hath he slaine his neigh∣bour? flieth he to mine Altar? pull him away from mine Altar, and let him die: the hornes of the Altar, which are in other cases, a San∣ctuary, were no place for murther, as 1 King. 2.32. Benajah, when hee killed Ioab at the hornes of the Altar, being in the fault, killed o doubt, an acceptable Sacrifice to the Lord. Gen. 9.5. Wheresoever it is shed, I will require it: yea even at the hands of a beast will I re∣quire it; how much more, if a man kill a man? And lastly, Gen. 4.10. that is Gods saying to Caine,The earth re∣ceives bloud, how then should man spill it? Thy brothers bloud cryeth from the earth, which openeth her mouth, that hath no reason, and will receive it. And shall man, that hath sense, and power, and reason to governe his affections, let it out and spill it? So he passeth beast, and earth, and all. This killing of another man is augmented by circumstance, for either it is against a publike person, or a private. 1. Against a publike, and that is a more worse and grievous sinne: because it is peccatum in plures, a sinne against many: and as 2 Sam. 21.17. that man doth what in him lith to put out the light of Israel. 2. Among private men, they are either joyned to us, as being neare of bloud: or they are as extranei, as strangers. It is worse, and a more hainous thing, to shed the bloud of them that are neare unto us; the reason is, quia superadditur respectu, because of the tie in nature: that is one way of augmenting. There commeth a double respect: he is a man, homicidium: he is a father or brother, paricidium. Exod. 21.15. Qui percusserit patrem aut matrem morietur, he that smiteth his father or his mother, shall be surely put to death: If he should kill them, no doubt it were too little for him. Yet as the Heathen man saith, he should have lentam mortem & deformem, a lingring, and a loathsome death: and like∣wise as 2 Sam. 14.7. As the woman of Thekoah said to David, if we have but one sonne, or one brother; it is much worse then if wee had more: I have but one sparke left, and they seeke to quench it. Of extranei, those that are removed from us; either they are of
strength to defend themselves, or weake. Exod. 22.21.22. Those that be impotent, it is worse to kill one that is fatherlesse, a widow, or stranger, that is more destitute of power: that is , cruelty, crudi∣ty, eating raw flesh; against the Lions nature. Matth. 18.6. Our Savi∣our saith, Qui offenderit unum è minimis, whosoever shall offend one of these little ones, surely I will set my selfe against him. And againe, of those that are strangers, and not once matchable to resist, it is worse to lay hands upon an innocent and good man, then upon a wicked man; The reason? Because in so doing, we commit a marvellous, strange, and grievous sinne, doing him more hurt and injury, to whom we ought to doe more good: so that we sinne against charity, and against justice; for he is indignus, he is least worthy to die. Then besides, he is, as the Heathen man saith, , a common good:Vir lrus is . and so we hurt the Common-wealth, that had need of such. And last of all, the injury redoundeth likewise to God especially. Zach. 2.8. Qui vos tangit, tangit pupillam eculi mei, he that toucheth you, toucheth the apple of mine eye; and that cannot be without great sorrow: and that will have revenge: and so consequently, there be three degrees in this. Here commeth in, Whether the Magistrate may kill or no? And we fall into the division: in Insontem. Sontem. Guiltlesse, and Guilty. Because we fal into this branch of the division, here falleth in the case of restraint of this Commandement, the rest be rules of extention. For the nature of man is so crooked, that without occides, non ce∣cides (thou mayest kill; thou shalt do no murther) would not be kept:Magistrates may put to death & therfore, as in Physick, a crooked & deep wound, must have a new wound made; fit incisio, ut vitetur excisio, an incision is made, that an excision may be prevented: and as in the cure of the eyes, the Ophthalmists will have the sight to be taken away, and dammed up for certaine dayes, that after the eye may see: So in this, God gave his power, ut fundaiur sanguis, ne funderetur sanguis, that bloud might be shed, lest bloud should be shed. As in the beginning it was the establishing of govern∣ment, Optabilius est timere unum, quam mulios, it is farre better to feare one then many; forasmuch as every man in regard of the whole socie∣ty standeth as a part of it: the same rule is in the civill body, that is in the natural body. For in that, if any one part be so corrupt, that it doth bring danger to the whole, it is no cruelty to cut it off. Because, as was said in the beginning, and it is a most true rule, Melius est us periat unus, quam unitas, it is better that one perish, then unity should be broken. And as we see in a common fire, that a house that hath taken fire so long as there is hope that it may be saved, they deale with water: but when there is no hope, and it bringeth danger to the next houses about, they pull it down; extinguit incendium ruina, that the fall thereof may quench the fire: thus we see it in the naturall body, so likewise in the civill. Deut. 19.10. & 20. & 13.11. In the 10. he will have them tollere homicidam, ut malum tollatur ab Israele, to cut off the man-slay∣er, that evill may be taken away from Israel: and that a double malum, a double evill there is, the wrath of God upon the whole land; be∣cause,
if any part shed innocent bloud, and the land, that is, the whole looke not to it. Impunity mag∣na venefica, to make other do the like.And a second malum, a 2. evill, vers. 10. is the multiplying of it. 1. Im∣punity, because it is magna venefica, a great Witch to make other men doe the like; therefore, Deut. 19.20. & 13.11. that men may see, and heare, and feare, and the like evill may be no more committed. They shall not onely avoide his wrath and multiplying of murther, tollere malum ex Israele, but take away evill also from Israel. So consequent∣ly, if bloud be shed in this respect, as Moses saith, Exod. 32.29. it is not a polluting, but a consecrating of the hands: & Ps. 101. vers. ult. the Prophet David saith, his common morning exercise after prayer, should be this, that he would cut off all the wicked from the Lords City. Prov. 20.26. There is the wise Kings study: or this shall bee his study, how to scatter the wicked, or to make the wheele goe over them: For as it was found in the establishing of the Magistrate, that it was Caines City that made Seth to make himselfe a City; and not on∣ly that, but there were also sundry of Caines spirit, that came in among the seed of Seth: therefore heed was to be had to them, as Ezek. 34.18.21. to the Hee Goates, to the Rammes, and to the fat sheepe; for they would push at the leane sheepe with their hornes: and as the Hea∣then man saith, Tam necesse est, it is as needfull, that there should be, qui arceant homines, such as may restraine men from outward invasion, quā necessariae sunt palpebrae oculis, as the eye-lids are needfull for the eyes: for they keepe out outward injuries, and that that would hurt the eyes, and the sight from hurting it self: for else it would disperse it self too much: therefore, expedient it is, that prius sanguis funderetur, ne plus sangui∣nis funderetur, that bloud be first shed, lest more bloud afterwards should be shed. How this may bee done, it is manifest; that bloud may be shed: Gen. 9.6. and Matth. 26.52. Qui gladium acceperit, gladio peribit, he that taketh the sword, shall perish with the sword: and the sword, Rom. 13.4. is given to one, who is there called Gods Minister, and to the Magistrate, to whom he hath delivered it, not to bear it in vain: and consequently, in deed & in effect, no man sheddeth any bloud, if it be lawfully shed. For (as we say) it is not the sword that killeth and sheddeth mans bloud; so neither doth the Magistrate, the Minister of it, nor the Judge: but the chiefe cause doth it: for quod est organum utenti, id est minister jubenti, what the toole is to him that useth it, such is the Officer to him that commandeth him. Now, Iubens est Deus, the Commander is God: for we blame not the sword, neither must we the minister, but we must have recourse to God. The Magi∣strates Writ.Now then for the Magistrates use of it; as we say, that the Sheriffes and under-Officers rule is, they must doe nothing, but ex praescripto, by a Writ: and when it doth come downe for execution, then they must doe it, and not else: so certainely the Prince, he must have a Writ too from God, else he is not to execute. Now Gods Writ or Pre∣script in this behalfe we have, Exod. 23.7. for there is said there is a Countermand, that no innocent man should have his bloud shed. If any doe it, I will not spare the wicked man saith the Lord. And Abi∣gail,
1 Sam. 25.29. doth well set it out: The soule of my Lord shall be bound in the bundle of life, with the Lord thy God, and the soule of thine enemies shall the Lord cast out: Whoso is a man of bloud, and liveth to the disquieting of the society that hee should maintaine, his soule shall be throwne our, as out of a sling. And 1 King. 1.52. he saith there according to his Writ, If he will bee a worthy man, and a faithfull subject, there shall not a haire fall from his head: but if he will be seditious, he shall surely die. So then wee see, that a Prince may not execute the innocent: and when he doth so, 1 King. 21.8.13. Naboth, an innocent man, is put to death by the King: then the King is a murtherer, he is Rex homicida; for he is so called by the Prophet Elisha, 2 King. 6.32. See I pray you this mur∣therers sonne, and 2 Chron. 24.25. when Ioas fell violently on Zacha∣riah, an innocent Prophet, for telling him the truth; it is said, that God revenged this murther, and stirred up his owne servants against him to kill him. And for this cause, because he had murthered the children of Ichoidah the Priest. As on this behalfe, we must not exe∣cute the innocent; so on the other side, Deut. 19.13. non miseraberis, non parcet oculus tuus, thou shalt not have mercie upon him, neither shall thine eye pitie him: there is an irrevocable Writ, that whoso∣ever is a murtherer, must die. Then the question, Whether any one that is a murtherer, may be any way afterwards executed? And there∣in there are three points necessary to be considered. The first wee call Iudicium perversum, unrighteous judgement. That those that are innocent, are put to death, and those that are nocent are spared. But a just man must not be killed, and an unjust man must not be spared. The second, Iudicium usurpatum, judgement usurped: Every man must be kept in his limits. Rom. 14.4. Quis i es, qui judicas alienum servum? Who art thou that judgest another mans servant? Others subjects, that pertaine not to our Prince. If further then jus gentium, against the law of armes, any be executed, it is usurped. The third we finde, Deut. 19.18. Diligentissimè inquisiveris, thou shalt make diligent inquisition: without triall he must be sons damna. tus, condemned against law: Acts 23.35. Claudius Lysias would have Pauls accusers come before him. And Iohn 18.27. the wicked could say, What accusation bring you against him? Acts 25.16. Festus saith, It is not the law among the Romans, to condemne any man be∣fore his accusers come. They that are able amongst you, come down, and I will heare them in this plea. Deut. 17.6. and 19.15. God would not have bloud shed at the witnesse of one man, but either by his owne confession, or he must be convinced by two or three witnesses. And in regard of this, as Chrysostome saith, was Christs Act: though he knew Iudas to be a thiefe; yet because his theft was not manifest, because he was sons damnatus, condemned as guilty, he did not cast him into prison; the law would take no hold of him, he did it so craftily and wilily. So that judgement may proceed aright, 1. He must be a sub∣ject borne. 2. He must be lawfully convicted: and so proceeding, the law may proceed on him. Where one side is broken, the other will
be broken too. We see it by plaine experience, that it hath alwayes happened, i. if a Prince come once to spare a party that is guilty; sure∣ly it will come to passe, that he will put to death an innocent: & con∣tra. 1 Sam. 15.9. Agag and the chiefe of the Amalekites, men appoin∣ted by Gods prescript to die, were spared by Saul: and 1 Sam. 22.18. he causeth an innocent company of Priests, a whole City to be put to the sword; contrariwise, 1 King. 20.42. Ahab first began by putting to death Naboth the innocent: and afterward ibidem, hee doth not kill Benhadad, sed dimittit eum dignum morte, but let him goe that was ap∣pointed to destruction: therefore, his life shall goe for his life. For whereas clemencie is commendable in a Prince, yet the rule and ground in Divinity is this: As he must diminish that that is his owne arbitriment, so the punishment set downe by the law he may not di∣minish: but if the punishment be left to his arbitriment, then he may alter it. Now, for increasings of punishments, otherwise then God hath set downe, Deut. 17.12. that in theft, or in any other crime that is not ca∣pitall of its owne nature; but with a contempt: for theft, mentis; and an high hand, elevata manus proterve & petulanter, lifted up both wic∣kedly and saucily; contemptus, contempt, which is ubique damnabilis, every where damnable; neglectus, neglect, onely is culpabilis, culpable. To the second case, ut ante, Ezek. 34.18.21. he hath a sword gi∣ven him; As he must have a pointlesse sword, as the Lawyers call it, whereby he seeth good rule kept amongst his subjects, and taketh order that the grasse be not trampled by the fat Sheepe: so he hath another sword which hath a point, which they call gladium exteriorem, against the Wolfe, and that is warre. The authority of bloud-shed in warre, it being plaine, 1 Sam. 25.28. quod praelians praelia Dei, thou fightest the battels of the Lord: therefore it should seeme, that the Lord hath some battels to fight: More plaine, Deut. 20. where the whole order of warre, and conditions are set downe in the second verse, how they must goe to warre, and how it must be enterprised. The Priest shall exhort to fortitude, vers. 5. The Officers shall make a Proclamation of separation of those that goe out, from those that tarry at home, vers. 10. When they shall come to any City to encounter with their enemies, they should first offer them peace: and vers. 12. if they will not take it, they should not spare them: and vers. 11. they have leave to take all the wood of the Countrey round about them, to make them forts. As in the law, Gen. 9. for the Sword, and the Gospel, Mat. 26.52. doth not take it away: and as Aug. saith very well, 4. de civit. Dei, upon Luke 3.14. If it had beene unlawfull, Iohn would have said to the Souldiers, Abjicite arma, deserite militiam, throw away your aimes, and forsake your colours: but he saith, offer injurie to no man, accuse no man falsely, and be content with your wages: and so teacheth them their duty in warre, and and doth not take it away; therefore warre is lawfull.Conditiones 3. liiti belli. That warre may be lawfull, the common distinction is three fold, to make it so. 1. As the party must be a Magistrate in the one, so in the other a Phy∣sitian, both to wound and cure: for the first, here it must be done, ex
justa authoritate, by lawfull authority. Iudg. 1.1. After Ioshuahs death, the people of Israel that could not goe out to warre, till they had received authority from God; they would first receive a lawfull guide. And David, 1 Sam. 17.37. untill Saul was made acquainted with his enter∣prise, would not fight with Goliah. 2. It must be a just cause, and it is a patterne of just warre, 1. to defend our selves, 2. to resist others. As Abraham, Gen. 14.15. for the recovery of Lot: in which respect he had a losse and injury, he un∣der-tooke it. And secondly, according to jus gentium, one Nation hath power over another; for an injury, not for every light iniury, and small; but to revenge some notable course of injuries. So it must be for weighty matters; Iohn 22.12.13. for a matter of Religion, as they thought: and for civill matters, Iudg. 20.23. that the whole multitude of the Tribes of Israel rose up to revenge the fact of the Tribe of Benjamin. 3. It must be done with a right precept, set downe, Deut. 23.9. When thou goest out with thine hoste, against thine enemies, keep thee from all wickednesse: that is, the spoyle and the prey, which was the end of them. 1 Sam. 15.9. Ravening must not be our end and purpose: but with this, to flie evill. And as Abigail said to David, Quia praeliaris praelia Domini, idcirco ne inveniatur apud te malum, be∣cause thou fightest the battels of the Lord, let no evill be found with thee: see that no evill be found in thee. Otherwise, if there be not this, we know what David said to Solomon of Ioab, 1 King. 2.5. that the bloud of warre stucke to his girdle and shooes: therefore, he willed Solomon to punish him. Else, if it be lawfull, and thus qualified, it is a vertue, and it is a part of fortitude; as in the other part of fortitude, there is , a reformation of justice: so in this Christian forti∣tude; whereby, for our Countrey, for our Church, we are willing to hazzard our life, 2 Sam. 10.12. propter pop. nostrum, & urbes Dei nostri, for our people, and the City of our God. A third thing depending upon these, because as we said before, neces∣sitas est exlex, necessity hath no law: nay more then that, necessitas dicit legem legi, necessity imposes a law upon the law: therefore in the case of necessity, which we must take, pro imprudente necessitate, for unlook'd for necessity: not imminent onely, but pro termino indivisibili, but even for that instant; in that case, every man is a Magistrate, and in that case hath his authority from God. Exod. 22.2. he saith there, if a thiefe come by night and breake up my house, I may kill him, I shall never answer for it: therefore, if I may doe this for my house, I may kill then for my life much more. This is the reason that gladius Petri, as August. saith, is lawfull for a man to carry about with him, which the law granteth to carry, to keepe one from evill by the terrour of my weapon, which is not nothing; but especially, because I have the lawes in mine owne hands, and if I doe slay, I am quit. But when this terminus is divisibilis, when the necessity hath a latitude; Acts 23.17. they sweare Pauls death, but because it was not present, Paul might not runne upon them; but caused it to be revealed to Lysias, the chiefe Captaine: so it is inculpata tutela, that is without any purpose of shed∣ding
any bloud: save onely, when otherwise I cannot save my selfe: a man must plus timere vitae suae quam alienae; therefore I may in my defence. And another division is; he that is slain, is slain either of purpose, or without purpose. Now it is not lawful when it is done without pur∣pose, and the reason of it is this: We doe not attribute to nature, but that which is done per se: And as the distinction per se & per accidens in naturall things; so answerable to these in morall things is, ex intentione & praeter intentionem, to doe a thing purposely, or besides our inten∣tion. And as we say not that it is naturall, that is per accidens in natu∣rall things: so it maketh neither a good, neither an evill action, that is done praeter intentionem, besides our intention in morall things: so if bloud be shed praeter intentionem, the shedder thereof is no murthe∣rer.Praeter intenti∣onem. Not onely so, but we see God, Deut. 19.1. & 4.29. Exod. 13.35. Numb. 35.24. he buildeth up his Sanctuaries of refuge for them that doe praeter intentionem: Now God will build no Sanctuary for vices. Deut. 19. If one be hewing a Tree in the Wood, and by chance his Hatchet fall, and kill his neighbour; and Numb. 35.25. when as he had no intent and purpose, the Congregation shall deliver him from the avenger, and restore him to the City of his refuge. And indeed, as August. proveth, and goeth further, if we take this praeter intentionem, for murther; if we take away intentions, then must we cease to have any thing that may be an occasion of evill: for I have ferramenta, in∣struments, as ropes, shovels, spades; and with these may a man goe and kill a man, praeter intentionem nostram; therefore I must not have them: and for other uses, I have Trees in mine Orchard, and oxen; and a man may hang himselfe upon one of my Trees, and one of my Oxen may happily kill a man, therefore I must have no Trees, nor Oxen: and not onely that, but a man may be cast out of a window, and there∣fore I must not have a window in my house: and consequently, wee shall have almost nothing: but absit (as he saith) when a man doth in∣tend to keepe them from that end; yet in these matters, God hath qualified them two wayes: he must dare operam rei licitae, bestow his time in things lawfull: Exod. 21.22. If there be two men striving, and one of them hurt a woman with child, and the child passe away from her; if the child miscarry, he shall surely be punished, though it were not his intention; yet doing a thing unlawfull, as striking was. Besides, they that are evill occupied, that are at unlawfull games, if any such thing fall out, are not to be excused. The second thing, there must not lack debita sollicitudo: he must doe his diligence. Exod. 21.33. If a man digge a Pit or a Well, and cover it not over night, and anothers cattels fall into it and die, hee shall make it good, because he might have covered the Well. And if a man should let fall a peece of timber from the top of an house, and give no warning, and kill a man. In these foure cases, the whole restraint of the Commandement consisteth. Now in the extension of these, that willingly, and of purpose com∣mit murder, there be two sorts, for some murther directly, and some in∣directly. Directly, Numb. 35.16, 17, 18. If any man smite another
with an iron, stone, or wood, or any instrument that will kill him,Wlfull mur¦ther he is a murtherer; and he shall die. And besides this, there is a colourable murther, and indirect: And there are three sorts. First, by poyson. Ier. 11.19. Mittamus lignum in panem ejus, Let us put some of this poysoned wood in his meate: so by Witchcraft, Deut. 18.10. or by sorcery: or if not by poyson, yet by strange things, medicamen: a infanticidii, killing of children in the wombe, a grievous murther: and in the Concil. of Ancyra, Can. 21. (and according to the Greeke, but 20. in the Latin) , and in the 35. can. Concil. Wormatiens. That they are murtherers, if they take strange purgations, and doe abigere parium, cause abortion: she is homicida, a murtheresse, that doth so. And not onely that, but if a man bee co∣operator, or accessorie; as Matth. 26.49. Iudas was accessorie with his kisse. 2 Sam. 3.27. and 20.9.10. Ioab said to Amaza, art thou in health my brother? And tooke Amaza by the beard with his right hand to kisse him, vers. 9. but Amaza tooke no heed to Ioabs sword that was in his hand, for forthwith he smote him in the fifth rib, and shed out his bowels to the ground, and smote him not the second time, so he died. Ioabs kisse, when he murthered Abner and Amaza: so the murther was coloured. 1 Sam. 18.17. By bringing into danger, as Saul to David, I will make David Captaine against the Philistims, my hand shall not be upon him, but the Philistims hand shall be upon him. 2 Sam. 11.15. David doth deale so with Vriah, following Sauls example: he writeth letters to Io∣ab, Let him stand in such a place, &c. though his enemies flew him, yet it was Davids murther. And 1 King. 21.13. to stand a false witnesse, and cap. 11.49. to be a counseller to it: and Iohn 18.28.31. the high Priests and Scribes sought not how to put Christ to death: but yet, because they were as bellowes, incouragers of the people to aske Bar∣rabas, they were murtherers of Christ: likewise, Acts 7.52. and Acts 8.1. if he be a private man, and consent to it: and Matth. 27.24. if a Magistrate that may hinder it, and doth not, and in Magistrates per∣mission. Pilates washing his hands would not serve. 1 King. 2.5.8. the permission of the wicked man Ioab. vers. 8. Shimei troubled David toward, his death: I suffered them; but looke thou to it: so the not putting to death of wicked men, and the not saving of the innocent, this is one indirect meanes. To the second, and that is, committing our selves (as the wise man saith Prov. 3.17.) to danger: Qui amat periculum, peribit in periculo, when a man will put himselfe into danger and need not; and when he useth not the meanes of escaping danger, he is accessory to his owne death. Matth. 4.6. We know what Christ did, we must walke in the way; not tumble downe, when there is a paire of staires. Acts 27.31. Paul was very carefull of the Mariners, that they should not forsake him, though he had Gods promise: and Levit. 13.4. a Leaprous man shall be shut up, that no man shall goe to him; but if any man will goe to him, and take the Leprosie of him, that is againe presump∣tion.
And the third meanes, by our owne negligence, 1 Tim. 5.23. the Apostle saith there, I would have you drinke no more water, because your stomacke is over weake: but drinke a little wine; that is, the meanes that God hath given to strengthen nature, I will have you to use it: else you will weaken your nature. And no doubt, if he had not followed the Apostles counsell, he had fallen into the breach of this Commandement. Now, as Timothy was to drinke a little for the strengthening of nature, lest neglecting the meanes, nature should have perished: so Luke 21.34. when men with too much surfetting and glutiony die, they kill themselves: so that a man must use, or re∣frame, or temper himselfe so, as that he use them to preserve his life, and the image of God: so 1 Tim. 6.8. meate and appatell, though not so much, Rom. 13.14. as to fulfill the lusts of the flesh; but those that are  and for rest, Marke 6.31. Col. 2.23. Psal. 27.2. for due exercise, and due release, due study, and due recreation: not too much exercise, nor too much rest: for both with too much tristitia mnd, care of the world, 2 Cor. 7.10. destroyeth: and Prov. 17.22. dryeth the bones: and too much pigritia, slothfulnesse, robbeth a man: therfore in these things that the Philosophers call non naturalia, not na∣turall: a man must use them carefully, that he hasten not his end. Now this neglect, as it must not be in our selves; so it must not be towards our brethren. Deut. 22.8. There is the prescription of battlements, that the workeman may not fall: Exod. 21.29. If the Oxe be wont to push, &c. the Oxe and he both shall die, and vers. 33. if they stop not the Well at night, and a man fall in and die, hee shall die also for his negligence. By the equity whereof, Prev. 3.27. and 24.12. there is extension made. Contrariwise, a Commandement as Ambrose saith, Pasce ovem morientem. Non pavisti? occidisti: feede that Sheepe which is ready to perish; if thou feedst it not, thou kil∣lest it. Ierem. 8.22. Is there no Balme in Gilead, is there no Physitian, that the people be not healed? and Ezek. 47.12. that God hath or∣dained plants for bruises and sores, and Exod. 21.9. hee saith that the party that shall afferre alii injuriam, wound his neighbour, he shall pay for his healing: this is likewise a meanes to preserve our lives. And on the other side, Marke 5.25. he saith, the woman with the bloudy issue, had received many medicines of divers Physitians, and had spent all her goods, and was never the better, but rather the worse. The practise of Physitians, , to their shame be it spoken, in all examples, it is a sinne to them; and Ecclesiasticus 38.15. it is a punish∣ment to the party. Now come to a disposition hereunto: For it is not onely the life of the body, but incolumitas: for we see, that if the hurt be of any one part, if you have hurt the least part of the whole, consequently, the whole counteth it selfe hurt: and saith Quare me? Why smitest thou me? As not the whole, so not any part must be hurt, Levit. 24.19. there shall not be any blemish upon our neighbour, Exod. 21.25. a wound and a stripe is forbidden: if a rupture, or ustulation with fire, it is an injury; we shall have the like our selfe: Levit. 24.20. And as this vulnus is contra incolumitatem: & plaga contra sensum: so contra
motum, wound impaireth the safety of the body, and causeth smart, so hindreth its motion: 2 Sam. 3.34. binding restraint, and Gen. 42.17. Deut. 32.36. imprisonment: these are accounted as impediments, and as punishments; these things are not to be inflicted without con∣sent of Magistrate: Not any private man must doe it, because therein there is a disposition ad totum: yet one of the priviledges, Eccles. 6.3. if a man live not to his owne contentation, he hath not lived at all: so to bring a man into that estate, to make his life odious, commeth with∣in the compasse of this Commandement. Come to the soule, the murther whereof is so much the more grievous, as Gods Image is in the soule, rather then in the body: and certaine it is, à comparatis, that if the bodily bloud of Abel crie for vengeance, Heb. 12.24. then the bloud of the soule much more: especially, because there is two lives of the soule: one here, another in the life to come; if it be set in worse estate concerning the life to come: if he that hath charge of soules, Revel. 2.14. Mal. 2.8. vos scandalizastis eos in lege, yee have caused them to stumble at the Law: or teaching them as Balaam taught Balak, to cast a stumbling block be∣fore the children of Israel: or whether it be indirectly, by negligence. Ezek. 33.6. If you watch not, and the sword come upon any, he is taken away for his sinne; but his bloud will I require at thine hands: So likewise, though it be not he that hath the charge, but a brother pri∣vately, one private man against another, if he gave counsell, dicto, or facto, by word or example; as Peter, Matth. 16.22. was a scandall to Christ: he had prevented Christ, if he would have beene prevented, and so have hindered the great worke of redemption. Or whether it be the example, Gal. 2.13. the same Peter by his example misled the other Jewes and Barnabas; and Paul 1 Cor. 8.12. that the weake brethren were emboldned by the example of those that had know∣ledge, to eate those things that were offered unto Idols; wounding thereby the weake conscience of others, yet they brought guilt on themselves: for every example in deeds, and Matth. 18.6. shall come upon them: and woe bee to them, it were better that a milstone, &c. then that he should minister this offence, to take away the life of the soule of the least of his brethren: Concerning this wee spake be∣fore. Come to the second life of the soule, Eccles. 6.3. Col. 3.21. that , that a man beginneth to loath the benefit of his life, it is cer∣taine his soule is killed: and as in Gen. the missing of Ioseph, and Simeon, and Benjamin, killed Iacobs heart; and at the newes of Ioseph, that he was alive, his spirit revived. It commeth three wayes, according to the three benefits of the soule. 1. joy, 2. peace, 3. love. Exod. 1.14. against joy; where it is said there, the Egyptians brought them in amaritudinem spiritus, to bitternesse of spirit; and Exod. 6.9. against peace, by breaking their hearts, they brought them in anxietatem spiritus, into an anguish of soule, that they would hearken to Moses; Prov. 22.25. that when a man falleth into hatred of all things, when he hateth himselfe, it killeth his heart. None of al these must be to our brethren: especially,
must not be to the good, 2 Pet. 2.8. Lots soule is not to be grieved, and so bring him by their wicked deeds to the first death, , drow∣sinesse of spirit: he began to loath to attempt any good, and not to goe forward: this is a great and grievous fault, and is done, Psal. 95.8. by provocation and irritation. So we must not provoke him by any manner of these meanes. Thus much of the second point. The third rule, concerning the spirituall law. Our Saviour Christ, Matth. 5.22. nisi sanguis sequeretur, unlesse bloud were shed, they counted it no murther, nor way to murther: as Christ there teacheth them to goe further then the arme or blow that is given: that whatso∣ever are outwardly committed, and accompany murther, are nothing else, and are but fructus irae, the fruits of anger: and that is the roote of Wormwood, Heb. 12.15. and that must be pluckt up. For when these bitter fruits come, by vertue of that which is in the heart, Matth. 15.19. he boldly pronounceth, that out of the heart proceed murthers: and so those that lay plaisters onely to the armour and weapon, shall never helpe the disease. For it is noted further, Deut. 19.16. this is Gods reason, that murther is not capitall of it selfe, if it be not that he hated his brother before: therefore, this is to be punished. As in the begining it was said, so now, that as the beginning of pride was the fountaine of the breaches of this Commandement: so is it that likewise, from which this anger commeth. The wise man, Prov. 13.10. he saith thas; Onely by pride, contention and anger commeth; and therefore, the Apostle, Gal. 5.26. saith: Bee not desirous of vaine glory this is the roote that maketh one envious, and provoketh one against another: so that envies & murthers came here: for, as it was said in the beginning, every one setteth this downe with himselfe, That he is good, and whosoever loveth him, doth his duty; and so consequently, he must be good: as on the other side, hurting him, and envying him, that man must necessarily be evill, so hee must conceive an anger against him: omnis ira sibi videTur justa, each froward man accounts his anger just: as before, omnis iniquitas mentitur sibi: therefore it is that it commeth to the second, for anger is compoun∣ded of two things, 1. The griefe, for whatsoever in dignity is prefer∣red to us. The 2. a desire to require it. The griefe is the boy∣ling aestus irae, actualis, or , Gal. 5.20. It is, as Prov. 14.19. the inward fretting: and from thence pride containing the party evill: and as the Heathen saith, there presently commeth to be mala mens, an ill intent, when his judgement will be corrupted: Eph. 4.3. he doth re∣prehend that man that doth it sub malitia, out of malice: he maketh , malice, to be that that corrupteth his understanding & his affecti∣on: 1 Pet. 4.15. he makes himselfe Bishop of other mens doings: Then necessarily 1 Tim. 6.4. called , evill whisperings: and Iam. 2.4. he is judex malarum cogitationum, a judge of evill thoughts: he draweth his thoughts to evill; why? he hath taken an opinion of him, and then he thinketh he must be even with him. Then followeth the second, , as Luke 9.54. they would command fire from Heaven, because they were not presently entertained. Now then this anger or injurie, if it be conceived to proceed from a superiour, because,
Iam. 4.5. so there is a spirit in us that lusteth to envie; and as Iob saith 5.2. that those same parvuli, &c. envie alwayes layeth hold on the in∣feriour: hence it commeth to passe, as the Apostle, 2 Cor. 12.20. that there will be , a swelling of the minde; and either presently breake forth, or if it lie long and be suppuratio, an impostume, as Cy∣prian calleth it, it will prove rubigo animae, the rust of the soule: which is a fearefull thing, and a great deale worse then anger, Prov. 27.4. Anger is cruell, and wrath rageth, but envie goeth beyond them, it bringeth to murther. And as Matth. 27.18. Pilate saw that it was for very envie, that the Jewes delivered Christ to him. Now the occasion of it ariseth, 1 Iohn 3.12. that there are some better then we: because every one desireth his owne excellencie: so if there be any better then he, he thinketh he standeth in his light; and therefore he seeketh to discredit him, and to bring him low under-wa∣ter, and we will swimme above the water, unlesse all swimme under. Iohn 3.26. Iohns Disciples come to him and say, He that was with the beyond Iordan, now he hath got all the Disciples, was an envious thing to them. Luke 15.18. The elder brother came home from the field; he saw his fathers entertainment of his younger brother, hee would not goe in for envie: the reason is, because he thought himselfe better; and consequently nothing can be done, but envie will make it a matter for her to worke on. But 1 Sam. 18.8. if it come once to ten thousand, then vers. 9. non potuit rectis oculis eum intueri, he could not look right upon him: as vers. 10. on the morrow after there came an evill spirit on him. And there is none that the Devill will sooner fasten upon, then upon such, Gen. 37.4. the making of a better coate for Ioseph, and a little more love of Iacob to him then to the rest, was a marvellous moate in their eye; and vers. 33. it is true that Iacob prophesieth, though perhaps in another sense, bestia pessima devoravit fil um meum, an evill beast hath devoured him: for envie was that cru∣ell beast that devoured Ioseph. The greatnesse of this sinne one saith, Invidiae, propier magnitudinem secleris, futura poena non sufficit, ergo & hic plectitur, so hainous is the sinne of envie, that Hell alone is not a sufficient torment for it, therefore is it punished here also: and con∣sequently, Prov. 14.30. it is putrido ossium, the rottennesse of the bones: he that wished himselfe wholly an eye, that wished himselfe an argus, cannot wish himselfe a worse evill and torment. The Saints, Numb. 11.29. were not envious, in one envie, as Moses, that he would have none equall or like to him, (that was Pompeys envie) and it is there raised by Iosua; and there were some in the hoste that prophesied: but Moses would it were more▪ he would that all the people of God were Prophets, Deut. 1.10.11. Now I pray to God it were seven fold more: and as 1 Sam. 25.41. Abigail said to Davids messengers, she was not fit, let me be an hand-maid rather, to wash the feete of my Lords servants. A conceit of himselfe that he is not meet for that God bestoweth on him, and that he is meeter for a lower estate. The Saints, they can be content to have others goe before them; and others overtake them: Envie can be content with neither. If to our equall, then if our arme have strength, he is sure to feele
presently what we can doe. The wiseman Prov. 21.24. he giveth him 3. servants: 1. proud, 2. furious, 3. scornefull derisor; that in his pride worketh wrath. Now, if he be so our equall, as we cannot presently meet with him; then we play Absaloms part, 2 Sam. 13.22. he saith no∣thing, sed manet alia menie repostum, he keepeth it in his minde, which afterward Amnon felt at the Sheep shearing: and aso should David have done, if he had gone downe. Prov. 10.18. The wicked dissembleth his wrath, and Prov. 26.13. he saith, Burning lips, and an exulcerate heart it is; even as a man should over-lay a Potsheard with the drosse of sil∣ver. Gen. 26.28. Abimelech commeth to Isaac with Ahuzzah and Phi∣col, and they would be at a league with him: Isaac saith, I wonder that you come to me, seeing that you hate me, and have put me away from you, yet let us be at league; till they could revnege. And it is a great part of worldly policie to keep league with other, till such time as he can odium perfundere, be revenged: but 1 Iohn 3.15. qui odit frairem homi∣cida est, he that doth this, is a murtherer, & he that seeketh murther. And you shall ever see, if it be hatred, it seeketh either murther, or some re∣venge that proceedeth to murther. On the other side, if he be our inferi∣our, Prov. 18.3. With a wicked proud man there commeth contempt, although it be said, Prov. 17.5. that the very contempt of the inferi∣our, is the contempt of his Creator: wee see it plaine in the wicked men, especially in those that have had more given them, then to other that come to be more strong and mighty, elder exercised in hunting, &c. 2 King. 19.21. it is Rabshakeys humour: so basely he speakes of He∣zekiah; and Luke 23.11. Herod, and Luke 16.14. the High Priests and Pharisees, and Gen. 21.9. Ismael and Gen. 25.34. they were contem∣ners and scorners all. After it had thus lien inwardly, post suppurationem, after the Impo∣stume, then they did consider icterum peccati, the Jaundise, the breaking of it out, and appearing in the face. It is set downe in another sense, but to the same effect, Cant. 4.9. vulnerastime ictuoculi tui, thou hast woun∣ded me with thine eye. A wound that a man giveth by the eye, Prov. 6.17. it is one of the sixe things that God hateth: an haughty and contemptuous eye, an eye that over-looketh: 1 Sam. 18.9. Presently upon his envie, Sauls eyes began to be obliqui, and Prov. 23.6. the wise man would have one avoid an evill eye: from whence, Matth. 20.17. Christ seemeth to take the same nequam oculus, invidus & obliquus, an evill eye, envious, and winding; such as his meate should doe him no good. Now for the other, for hatred and anger; whereas it hath his right course. Prov. 6.13. hee doth bend his first, and stamp with his feete, supplodere pedibus; and Prov. 10.10. if he fall a winking, he meaneth no good, and Prov. 16.30. of those that bite the lip, and of those that have attonitos oculos; and looke as though they would looke through one. Psal. 37.12. the ungodly looke upon him, and they gnash with their teeth upon him. Acts 7.54. there is the practise of it to Sieven. But the Spuma, the foaming at the mouth, Marke 9.18. it is rather the property of one possessed with a Devill, then of an angry man. Then it is as a wound, Psal. 120.3. he speaketh of a tongue that is like sharp
arrowes, that will stick in a man; and like Juniper coales, that will burne one whole yeere, and Psal. 55.21. they have warre in their hearts, but their words are buttered and oyled: but in effect they are gladi acuti, lik sharpe swords, and Psal. 52.3. they cut like a sharpe razer. Here these are handled, as they are fructus irae, fruits of anger: afterward they are to be handled in the ninth Commandement, as they hurt a mans name. Toward the Superiour, 1 Cor. 10.10. Be not murmurers, as some of them murmured, and were destroyed, &c. Phil. 2.14. doe all things without murmuring, as Iudas (Iohn 12.5.) murmured: sed quid perditio haec? to what purpose is this waste? he thought the money had beene better bestowed upon the bagge which hee carried. And not onely that, but if it be moe, it is muttering: Exod. 14 15. the people mut∣tered against Moses Then there is another thing, i. Susurratio, tale-car∣rying: he is one that he cannot deale with; or if he should deale with him openly, he should have small credit with it, then he carrieth tales: Levit. 19.16. God, he forbiddeth it, 2 Cor. 12.20. , whispe∣rings, Rom. 1.29. , whisperers, they both are condemned: Prov. 26.10. if these would cease, strife would quickly quaile, and vers. 22. verba ejus sunt tanquam contusa, his words are with a sigh: he seemeth to be loath to speake out; but they pierce deepe, and goe downe to the bowels of the belly: Prov. 6.17. he saith, there are sixe things which God hateth, and the seventh thing he cannot abide: and that is a whisperer, or a tale-carrier, that soweth contention among brethren. Beside this, there is another vice against Superiours, that is deiractio, , backbiting, or , 2 Cor. 12.20. the vice , backbiting, Rom. 1.30. 1 Pet. 2.1. the thing it selfe is con∣demned, Iames 4.11. Eccles. 10.11. They are like to Serpents that are not charmed, and yet sting, and Prov. 25.23. he sheweth how they must be dealt withall, that with a sowre countenance we must drive them away; even as the North-wind driveth away raine. And the reasons alleadged come to that Levit. 19.14. we are not to speak ill of one that is deafe;De'asr us nil si bm. and this detraction from one that is absent, is so: hee that curseth a man that is absent, doth indeed curse him that is deafe; and there∣fore all the Congregation curseth him there: And it is one of the vi∣ces that are adjudged to be a great punishment. Now, when this way also is hindred, that he cannot revenge, then there is a fourth way that envious men have: and they use to wreake themselves: Cursing; not as necessarily, but as properly belonging here∣unto. Iames 3.8. speaking there of the tongue, he saith, it is full of deadly poyson; What is that? he sheweth in the next verse, With this we curse men, that are made after the likenesse of God; this is poyson: Col. 3.8. Ephes. 4.31. it is condemned. And there is an ac∣quittance from curses without a cause, Prov. 26.2. that they shall doe them no hurt, against whom they are, that come of envie and rancor. The other, where equality is, there as the first begotten wrath (as the Heathen saith) is no gentlewoman: she hath a daughter like to her selfe, they call , sedition: if it be in the heart, it is called discord: if it come out, it is called contention; that is, indecens
acrimonia, taking of parts, Rom. 1.29. , full of debate: Rom. 13.13. , not in strife: 2 Cor. 12.20.  debates: Gal. 5.20. , variance, seditions: Iames 3.16. they are con∣demned as things against the law, and 1 Cor. 11.16. he saith, if you will needs fall to it, you shew your selves, that you are not of the Church; for we have no such custome, nor the Churches of God: for, as Solomon saith, Prov. 20.3. It is the Churches honour, that is, she taketh it an honourable thing, to goe from contentions: Heb. 12.2. it is said of our Saviour Christ, that he did endure the contentions of a great many. And as nothing is more to be wished then peace in good things: so nothing is more to be wished also, then discord in evill things: Discordia in malis, discord in things that be evill, is as good as concordia in bonis,Disita in malis, i as good as ncdia i bnis. concord in those things that are good: as Acts 23.6. Paul seeing one halfe of the company of the Pharisees part, and the other of the Sadduces, cried out in the middest among them, that he was judged for the hope of the resurrection from the dead: and so set them together, and by that meanes escaped himselfe: And not onely Paul, but Christ, he came to set discord. Now, with this there is another, Ephes. 4.31. , crying, braw∣ling: and it is that the Lord complaineth of, Esa. 5.7. he came and looked downe, and there was nothing but yelling and roaring vices bare downe all: but there was no justice. As for Christ, Matth. 12.19. non contendet, non clamabit, his voice shall not be heard in the earth: but these that doe; Acts 22.23. when Paul said, he would goe to the Gen∣tiles, seeing they had refused him, they made a great shout, and rent their garments, and flung dust upon the aire; this should not be, nor sharpnesse of speech, nor loudnesse of voice should move. And if not these, then much lesse the third, contumelia, ravling: and yet that taketh hold soonest, as the Heathen man saith, promprissima viráicta contumelia, railing is a most ready and easie revenge: that in Matth. 5.22. fall into this same Racha, vaine and light brained: when as a man ad contristandum, commeth to debase a mans gift; to grieve him: the other to lose his friendship, the other may mislike him. Rom. 1.30. 1 Cor. 6.10. , despightfull, and , revilers, are condemned, because the Saints of God are grieved; yea, and thereupon they com∣plaine heavily; see the Prophet David, Psal. 69. a great world of his calamities in that respect: Ier. 20.10. they railed on him on every side, Psal. 79.10.13. 1. Thes. 2.2. at Philippi they were shamefully handled: yet they went on to Thessalonica, and preached there the Gospel notwithstanding. And in these three especially it standeth when we doe murther with our tongue in hatred. There be two more proceeding of contempt, if he be a Superiour. Acts 9 1. Paul breatheth threatnings, and 1 King. 2.14. it is Roboams style, My father chastised you with rods, &c. I will make my little fin∣ger, &c. and Solomon saith, Prov. 29.11. a foole in government, prosundit spiritum suum, sheweth all his power at once: you shall have all at once; and as was said before, as Prov. 8. a man must not commit govern∣ment to one that is furious: for he that doth give him authority, doth as one that putteth a pellet in a fooles Crosse-bow: and when it is put
in, he shooteth at him; and Prov. 27.3. hee saith, Stones are heavie, sand is heavie; but a fooles anger is more heavie; Prov. 17.12. hee saith, he had rather meete a Beare robbed of her whelps, then a furious man: and as 1 Pet. 4.23. testifieth of Christ, that although hee had twelve legions, yet when hee suffered, hee used 1.0 threat∣ning. And a second thing, and it is the right fruit of contempt, Scorn∣fulnesse. Psal. 123.4. the faithfull, their soule was ever filled with the scornfull reproofes of the wealthie. 1 Sam. 31.4. Saul desireth his harnesse-bearer to kill him, not that, &c. but lest the Philistims should kill him, and mocke him, and so consequently, he counted the delusion of his enemies worse then death it selfe: Prov. 22.10. therefore this is the wise mans counfell, Ejice derisorem, cast out the scorner, and contention will cease: Eph. 5.4. and Prov. 12.18. he con∣demneth them there too: they are an especiall meanes to contristate the soule, and to bring downe the countenance of good men, when they shall see themselves a derision even to the abjects, and made (as the Apostles 1 Cor. 4.9.) thereby , a spectacle to the world. Consider the mirrour of patience, Iob 30.1. this is one thing that of all other grieveth him, that the very abjects came against him: and Ier. 20.9. the same, and 2 Chron. 36.16. it was the lot of the Prophets; and Matth. 27.27.31.41. they had their fill of Christ, scorning him: first the servants, then Pilate, then Herod, and after Herods Souldiers, and then the high Priests, and all that went by, had their fill of him. Then afterward (as before) commeth caedes manus, the dealing with the life and limmes of our brethren: and if it be of moe, they are called mockes, 2 Cor. 12.20. , tumults in Common-wealths: and not onely that, but they grow, Prov. 17.11. seditions; that is, a plaine rebellion, the renting of the civill body: and not one∣ly that, but the renting of Christs body in the Church, 1 Cor. 1.11. These in the countenance, eyes and tongue are signes. Meanes; Prov. 3.30. there be such as will strive, though there be no cause given, and they are there condemned: but on the other side, there be some that give cause, and that irritation is an especiall meanes of anger. A woman; 1 Sam. 1.7. every yeare when Elkanah went up to the house of the Lord with his family, she upbraided Anna with her barrennesse, and she continually vexed her soule. Prov. 30.33. he saith there, Even as the churner bringeth forth butter, so this provocation is the ordinary means of wrath. Eccles. 7.8. it is said, that it will exacer∣bare, make bitter the soule of the righteous. It is exemplified by Psal. 106.33. They provoked Moses, so that he spok unadvisedly. Take away this, and then you shall not provoke one another: Prov. 15.18. and 18.16. and 29.22. this is his badge, provocat rixas, stirreth up strife: he that is given to anger; and where a fooles, or an angry mans lippes come, they bring provocations. To the vertues; as every just anger is here condemned,Ephes. 4.25. that  so it is pronounced not to be a sinne; that is, when Prov. 29.19. a superiour towards those that are under him, and deserve it in way of justice, is magnus irarum aestu: That , that Christ speaketh
of, is specially to be regarded. Otherwise, Luke 24.25. after his re∣suriection he calleth his Disciples , fooles, having a just cause. And the Apostle, Gal. 3.1. calleth them insensatos Galatas, foolish Galatians: so if it be a good cause, it is warrantable and authorized, and it is a just cause that we may. The Fathers upon Luke 10.40. say of those plurima, many things that Martha was troubled about, this was one thing, the untowardnesse of the servants of the house. Secondly, for the moderation of it, the vertue opposite, , mansuetudo, meekenesse, it moderateth it; both to those that are under us, and to such as converse with us, all are the better for it; it beginneth in , humblenesse of minde: Rom. 12.16. he would have them not to be high-minded, but to lead with humility: and Ephes. 4.2. Col. 3.12. the same vertue standeth before meekenesse, then the vertue of meeknesse it selfe, Gal. 5.23. , meeknesse: Ephes. 4.2. , with all lowlinesse and meeknesse: Col. 3.12.  meeknesse: Rom. 12.9. 1 Cor. 13.4. Gal. 5.22. Ephes. 4.3. Iames 3.17. 1 Pet. 3.8. The Apostles generally, lightly set downe together all the vertues that be∣long particularly to the Commandement. Now for these vertues, ut ante, we must inferre to foure things be∣fore these, for this is not the first Commandement, but something must be before, Rom. 12.9. Paul going to describe the nature of charity, be∣ginnieth with hatred of evill, and glewed, as it were, to good: and then love men, that unglew you not from God. These two must be. A man must have odium peccati, & agglutinationem bono, a hatred of sinne, and a cleaving to what is good: and his charity must not unglue this good, else it is not charity. A third thing is Phil. 4.8. he willeth us to follow , veneranda, whatsoever is grave and venerable:  honesty or gravity, an especiall vertue: then , and , then , &c. whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, &c. and all contraries to be re∣fused: and any thing that commeth contrary to these, breaketh Gods order. But more of this afterward, because , is the vertue of the last Commandement. And fourthly, Iames 3.17. Rom. 12.9. this love must be unaffected, hearty, , with out hypocrisie, this gratifying must not beare a shew of zeale, of love, and be frozen in effect. Absoloms curtesie was such, but it was not hearty, it was affected: and it was the curtesie of the Pharisees to Christ, they made a faire shew, and called him Rabbi, and said, he was a man sent from God; and that he taught the truth without respect of persons, &c. but it was affected. And so had Io∣ab, so had Iudas, so had the Devill his curtesie (take them altogether) he said to the woman (very honestly) he was sorry God had dealt so hardly with them, &c. as if he had beene greatly moved with their estate, but it was affected: for where affection is, Prov. 17.14. he will meete you very early in the morning, and he will salute and blesse you: but I had as lieve (saith he) he should curse me; for this unjust wrath, there is opposed unto it, one vertue of innocencie, another of charity.
1. The innocencie taketh order that we hurt no body, and consist∣eth in 1. . 2. . The preservative, or the Antidote, then the Sanative, or the medicine. The first is done by three wayes. The first, avoiding of offences, Rom. 12, 18. to have peace with all men, as much as in us lieth; that is, 1 Cor. 13.4.5. to thinke no man any hurt, nor to doe untowardly. The second, not onely this, but also backward. And that is done to us, 1 Cor. 13.7. hee speaketh of a good and right interpretation of things as they are meant: he will beleeve well, and interpret it to the best: he will leave no place for suspition. Iames 3.17. calleth it , without partiality: not standing upon his , discretion: he standeth not doubting what his meaning may be, but he doth candide interpretari, construe it fairely. And the third is a willingnesse sometime to depart from his right. Iames saith, true wisdome is , equity: most plaine, Phil. 4.5. Let your  moderation be knowne to all men. By these three meanes anger is prevented. 2. Now for , the healing after the blow is given: there are three other prescribed in it by the Apostles and Prophets. First, it hath her rest but in a fooles bosome. It commeth sometimes into a wise man, therefore that it may not rest, Ephes. 4.2. Col. 3.12.13. Gal. 5.22. the vertue of supporting, , not to put more bitter into it, not making a bitter thing more bitter: And as the A∣postle saith, 1 Cor. 13.7. , to cover things: yea, and as the Prophet David, Psal. 38.13. sui tanquam surdus, I was as a deafe man: he was not deafe, but tanquam surdus: and it is Iames 20. , the hiding of a multitude of sinnes. The second, Levit. 19.18. we must not keepe in minde, but for∣give and forget. 3. If we have done it our selves, Matth. 5.23. we must seeke for re∣conciliation: partly Prov. 15.1. with gentle words; and partly, Prov. 21.4. with gifts, even with redeeming it; our Saviour Christ calleth it an acknowledgement: this is the way to heale wrath. Of Charity: the fruit of Charity: of the godly, inwardly against anger: Psal. 4.8. Ephes. 4.3. 1 Cor. 13.4. , envieth not, is not puffed up: and Saint Peter calleth it ,1 Pet. 3.8. a spirit lo∣ving to keepe unanimity. And then outwardly to oppose to icterum peccati, the jaundise of sinne: we have that Christ saith, Matth. 6.22. simplex oculus, a single eye: 1 Cor. 13.5.8. , not undecently to disdaine: and for our words, , urbanity, and suavi∣ty: Col. 3.12. Gal. 3.22. Heb. 13.16. Outwardly against murther, beneficence, Gal. 5.12. , good∣nesse: Rom. 15.14. commended. And this according as the men are divided into severall parts; for there is a beneficence, Ruth 2.20. that stretcheth it selfe to the dead, i. both Gen. 23.4. by burying them, and Prov. 27.30. by retaining love to his seed: verifying that, Cant. 8.6. that it is stronger then death, the grave will not quench it. Now then to those that are alive, generally unto all, humanity; 1 Pet. 3.8. Tit. 3.4. , Rom. 12.10. yea, even to evill men;
Levit. 19.17. but thou shalt plainely rebuke thy neighbour, and suf∣fer him not to sinne; correptio fraierna, a brotherly rebuke: and pray∣ing for them. Rom. 10.7. So to good men especially, 1 Iohn 3.14. by loving them, in Epist. ad Philem. & Gal. 6.10. to all, but especially to the houshold of faith; Rom. 12.2. it is called a dignity. Now a∣mong them, to those that are ours; to our friends, Prov. 18.24. A man that hath friends, ought to shew himselfe friendly: for a friend is nearer then a brother. After these, we come to another sort of peo∣ple, that have need; here commeth in the vertue of mercie and almes: , the bowels of mercie. Col. 3.12. And it con∣siseth, Rom. 12.13. in rejoycing with them: and 1 Pet. 3.9. , in suffering with them, giving them, if we have it: or if not that, wishing them well, and giving them comfortable speeches, and pray∣ing to God for them; and among these, , hospitality, 1 Pet. 4.9. Rom. 12.13. last christiana charitas, Christian charity: omnia haec fiunt illustriora; now all these are so much the more commendable, if done to our enemies: by forgiving them, Col. 3.13. , and by assisting and by praying for them, 1 Pet. 3.9. by assisting them in their necessity, Rom. 12.20. and Matth. v. last. Be perfect in over∣comming our affections so much, as that we make our sunne to shine upon them, indifferently, not for their sakes; and that we doe not let our sunne go downe on them, i. that we stop not our benefits, when wee are fallen out. That that remaineth, is this: The avoiding of the roote of this affection: we may referre it to the meanes. The first, Gal. 6.1. It is expedient to have anticipatum animum, a minde voide of prejudice: because that men oft in wrath, are corrupt in judgement; whether it be by want of skill, or by an evill desire. For holding this principle, that evill things are to be esteemed: and so consequently every man is perswaded, that there is some good thing in himselfe, and therefore will make men see his power: therefore let a man know, that he hath to deale with men of like infirmities to himselfe. And as this is good, so it is expedient, Prov. 22.24. not to joyne neare friendship with any angry man: 1 Sam. 25.17. such as Nabal was: if he have (as the Heathen man said) vesparum examen, a shrewd memory for all turnes, he is to be avoided: so Prov. 22.10. his advise there, that the scornefull man that maketh more accompt of his jest, then his friend, and doth not rather love dictum quam a∣micum perdere, to lose his jest, then his friend; cast him out, and con∣tention shall cease and goe. And thirdly, Prov. 26.20. when he would have all heart-burnings and griefes betweene friends to cease; as if ye lay to no wood, the fire will cease: so without a tale-bearer breaches will cease: and as he saith, vers. 24. hee will outwardly in his countenance, shew himselfe dutifull; but where he may be beleeved, he will utter the gall of Aspes. Now then, beyond this, as we have here to be avoided three persons, as Prov. 3.30. not to joyne with them, not to strive without a cause: so Prov. 26.17. not to meddle with contentions that belong not to us: unlesse it be, Exod. 2.13. with the contentions of our brethren,
to set them together againe; else it is the next way to bring on us an∣ger, and the fruits of anger. This is it that the Apostles, Prophets and holy men of God have alwayes exhorted to, before the affection berisen. Now when this affection is prest upon us, and beginneth to rise, Prov. 18.14. that the spirit of man is able to sustaine his infirmi∣ty; or plainely, Prov. 19.11. that he is able to deferre his anger, and not to let it presently gush out; as he said to the Athenians, If Alex∣ander be dead to day, he will be dead to morrow, and the next day: therefore make no bonefires too soone: so to suspend our affections. It is affectio ameambulo, and not affectio pedissequa, an affection which must usher us: Iames 1.16. calleth it to be tardus adiram, slow to wrath: and vers. 20. he giveth a very good reason of it, because the su∣perfluity of the wrath of man doth never operari justitiam dei, worke the righteousnesse of God: therefore, Prov. 17.14. there is good counsell: for he saith, that the beginning of a mans anger is, as if a man should make an hole in a banke, for water to goe through: at the first it is easie to stop it, but after the water getteth in more and more, and casteth downe more earth, then it is impossible. Now when wee speake thus of anger, we speake of it, either as we are angry with other men; or as it is in other men concerning us: In the one (i. if it be ours) then resist, Ephes. 4.27. and in the other, then cede, yeeld, Rom. 12.1. as 1 Sam. 25.37. Abigail, she is there commended for it: she would not tell Nabal his fault in the middest of the feast, (it is momentanea insania, a momentany madnesse) but she deferred it to the next day, gave place to the affection of her husband, and then he heard of it so, as his heart grew to be like a stone within him. This will be done, if we yeeld not to make too much of it; this cogitation auget , & minuit bi∣lem, increases forbearance, and slacketh wrath. And that as the Philo∣sophers teach, with oppressing it with another , passion, as with great joy or feare: one affection will smother another. But the coun∣sell of the holy Ghost is better, to see in our anger God and the Devill after him: as Iob 1.21. his Oxen and Asses were taken by the Chaldeans, Camels by the Sabaeans; but yet he had a further sight, and ascribeth it to God. Better in 2 Sam. 16.11. when Shimei railed on David, he said, peradventure it is the Lords doing to permit the Devill to incite this man to curse me; it is Gods permission, I will heare it: and it may be that God looking on my patience, will have mercie upon me: so David looked beyond Shimei, and saw God: And it is certaine he will permit no evill, but for a greater good, and hee permitteth this for patience: no greater good in this life then pa∣tience. A second thing, Ephes. 4.27. to see the Devill in it: Chrysostome saith, it is a foolish thing for the Dog to runne after the stone that is cast, and bite it in his mouth, and leave the man that cast it: and when one hath beaten us well with a staffe, to pray him to let us have the staffe, and when we have it, to hack it, and not hurt the man that beate us with it. So it is sure; The wicked men of this world, and whoso∣ever are incited by the Devill, are nothing but his staves and stones: so then we must set against the Devill, and we cannot scourge him worse,
then with patience. Bona opera, our good workes, as before, are flagella daemonum, whips for the Devill. If the first motion will not stay, but it come into the griefe, yet if it stay there, it is well. We said that it was mixt with griefe and revenge, but if it be otus in fermento, all in a fume: and if he said, Prov. 24.29. I will doe to him, as he hath done to me; the not saying as Christ said, 1 Pet. 2.22. when he was reviled, reviled not againe, when he suffered, he threatned not, but committed it to God. Deut 30.35. Mihi vindictam; & ego retribuam: his is vengeance, he will looke to it. In the meane season, as Prov. 24.27.28. when this revenge commeth, we must be so farre from desiring it, that we must not be glad when our enemy falleth: lest the Lord seeing it, turne his wrath from him to us. Iob 31.29. If, saith he, I have rejoyced at his destruction that hated me; when his servants would have beene at him, and desired his flesh, he would not doe so. But the practise is 2 King. 21. as the King of Israel did, when the Syrians were brought under his hands, by the Pro∣phet, he asked, My Father, shall I smite them? so when they have one at advantage: but 1 Sam. 24.9. Davids practise was better, for wee know, when he had Saul in the Cave, he might have stricken him; but did it not: but cut off a peece of the skirts of his coate. But if some had had him in this case, they would have cut his skirts so neere, that (it is Chrysostomes saying) effudissent è renibus ejus sanguinem, they would have let out the best bloud in his body. This must not be, the desire of revenge and execution. And the reason is, for we marke in Gods creatures, , there is an Ants anger, and a Flies anger: and the least creatures are the most angry: and women more then men: and quo infirmiores, eo magis iracundi, the weaker they are, the more subject towrath: so on the other side, he that is magnarum virium, of great courage, doth not sentire se percussum, resent a blow: thus to deale a∣gainst the desire of revenge. If it cannot be prevented, it is to be sorrowed: but ratio irae, or suppuratio, the measure, or impostume of the anger, must be met with, he will now and then be angry, but he must not requiescere in ira, sleep in anger. Ephes. 4.26. Ne occidat Sol, let not the Sunne goe downe up∣on your anger. And the reason is, because then we must offer our eve∣ning Sacrifice; and Marke 11.25. before we open our mouth to pray, we must forgive: This in Matth. 6.14.15. is set downe, both in the Affirmative and Negative. This is a case of necessity. It was shewed us before, what we are to thinke, Matth. 18.22. if we number our for∣givenesse, then our forgivenesse shall be delivered by taley: if our for∣givenesse be sine fine & numero, then our sinnes shall be forgiven, sine numero. This for Suppuratio: now for foaming of it out. Ecclus. 28. Hee that doth this, is a trouble, and scandalous to his friends: and therefore men must thinke that they have to deale with men; and such men, Eccles. 19.16. fall with their tongue, though not with their will; who is he that hath not offended whith his tongue? And David, Psal. 116.10. when he was in his anger and haste, he said, all men were lyers, 1 Sam. and all because God deferred his King∣dome: therefore, if a word passe sometime , knowing there
is none but offendeth with the tongue; the counsell of the Prophet David is good, Psal. 38.13. eram tanquam surdus, to be, not deafe, but tanquam surdus, it is the best: and if not, yet Ecclus. 28.12. when a man hath heard an evill word, it is even like a coale of fire laid before him; he may blow on it, and it will kindle: he may spit on it, and it will out. And indeed, this did the Heathen consider by the light of nature; If he without a cause be thus angry, quid faciet irritatus? so as the Philosopher, when one reproached him, he cast up dust into the aire: and when the other asked him why he did so? he answered, Injicio pulverem vomitui tuo, I throw dust to cover thy vomit: and in∣deed it is nothing else but vomitus bilis, a disgorging of choler:Vomitus bilis. Prov. 29.9. Solomon saith, if one man contend with another, if he be not wise, whether you answer him in jest, or in earnest, you goe by the worst: if he be wise, you are wiser, if you forbeare him: , the wiser for not returning word for word: therefore, Prov. 26.4. he would not have a fool answered, because, so we come to be like him: and we shall, as we see, when a man in reproving a fault, will oftertimes be gone so far, as he wil commit as great, nay a greater absur∣dity, sometimes; therefore of fooles words magnum remedium negligen∣tia, the best course is to neglect them: and vers. 5. he would have him answered at sometimes, not at other sometimes,A foole some∣times must be answered, some∣times not. lest hee make him è stulto insanum, of a foole a mad-man. But when he is among such a himselfe, that thinke well of him, then answer him, lest he seeme wise: If he be among wise, then answer him not, and they will regard rather quid tu taceas, quam quid ille dicat, thy wisedome in being silent, then his folly in speaking: but, Prov. 25.9. there must be no secrets disclosed, and Ecclus. 8.5. there must be no exprobration of be∣nefits. Come to the action it selfe, Requiting. They call it bringing a man to justice, Acts 22.25. in some causes it may be. We must not be, as the Pope said of England, that it was a good Asse to beare all. It was the errour of Iulian, persecuting the Primitive Church: For if it be a case of Gods, or the truths, Ecclus. 4.28. strive for the truth to death: but if it be a case of meum & tuum, then it maketh no great matter: as Abraham, Gen. 13.8. he would be contented to be ordered by Lot, and to give the Law into his hands: But because by this de∣parting from our right, we pluck upon us a grievouser burden then we can beare; and make them offer it the oftner: therefore, there is a Ma∣gistrate, and we may lawfully have recourse to him for redresse, yet so we observe certaine rules: 1. Exod. 18.22. Moses saith, he will not have every trifle brought before him. Now any thing that will beare an action in Law, may be brought before him, but non quod opus est, sed quod necesse est; such as if it be not remedied, will breed a further inconvenience; and such as nothing but the Law can remedy. 2. 1 Cor. 6.4, 5. Saint Pauls devise is there, to put up the matter first to the Saints, and to the Brethren among whom we live; and not be brought ad formam civile, into forreine Courts: whereas a great promise is given to two or three gathered together in the name of God in such cases.
3. Christ upon the occasion of having the offer of dividing the inheritance, Luke 12.15. he saith, Man, who made me a Judge, or a Divider over you? Take heed of covetousnesse, that is his first note; so men must looke that they doe it not of covetousnesse. 4. That they will have every mans tuum to be suum: and then Esa. 10.12. a man in regard of his wealth, or strength, or alliance with Judges, must not begin to enter suit, or over-tread the poore. 5. And last, Iames 3.16. that in all, we goe with charity, that our doings may not savour of gall; as the Heathen said of the Judge: the forme of words in the Law: Si jus est adversarii, habeat ille: if it be none of mine, heare me not in these great matters. The conclusion is, Prov. 25.8. See in thy matters thou goe not forth hastily, to strive: and his reason is, lest thou know not what thou shalt doe in the end. And many there be that repent themselves, when they come to end their strife. 1 Sam. 25.31. It is a good saying of Abigail, I doubt not but my Lord will never repent himselfe, that hee hath not shed bloud causelesse: If a man refraine himselfe from evill words, and hath borne injury, he shall never unwish it: but if he doe the other, he shall often repent him. 6. Rule, Accessary. Exod. 2.3. for the negat. where Moses seeing two Hebrewes strive, he endeavoured to set them at peace; And for the affirmative, Matth. 5.9. Blessed are the Peace-makers, for they shall be called the children of God.
The VII. Commandement. Thou shalt not commit adultery. IT is as the other was, in words very briefe. And it pleased God here to delineate unto us, what reckoning he maketh of the vices that di∣spose us to adultery, as concupiscence, &c. by the vice it selfe. 1 Cor. 7.4. It containeth as uncleannesse, so also unjustice, and that great: because the man, he hath not power over his owne body, but the woman: and contra. In this word we see what accompt he maketh of those vices that are subordinate unto it. The commandement is expounded,Ord mad. Levit. 20.10. Matth. 5.27. and 1 Cor. 6.15. and 7. tot. The order is this. The principall cause why there must not be murther, was because man was the Image of God. Now we see the Image of God was specially in chastity, and purity. So one of the Heathen Poets Bacillides, Deus est mens pura, God is a pure minde: and that is especially in this Commandement. The truth whereof is plainely gathered, Gen. 37. by the contrary. It is the first thing our Parents did, so soone as their eyes were open. And they saw themselves naked, and were ashamed to see their un∣cleannesse, &c. Which shewed the Image of God was lost. So for the end, 1 Thes. 4.4. Spus mandt vel finis quad∣plex.1. The Commandement is availeable for the Church. Mal. 2.15. 2. For the Common-wealth; Levit. 18.27.28. the land defiled by the uncleannesse of the inhabitants. 3. And for particular persons, two kinds. 1. That every man (it is occulia lex naturae, a Law even of nature, as of God) that whereof he is chiefe, he will have it wholly and alone. Prov. 6.34. The jea∣lousi of a man, often the rage of a man, and dearer then any ransome. 2. Is his name the legitimation and assurance of his children, Deut. 23. no bastard in sanctuario, &c. As likewise the chastity of his wife. And these foure are the end. Now for the affection it selfe, and ground of the Commandement,The ground of the Comman∣dement. as it was , heat, before for the other: so here it is , desire, that this dealeth with. And every part of concupiscence is not evill, Col. 3.5. but he putteth , malam concupiscentiam, evill con∣cupiscence: as if there were some , lust not evill: Rom. 13.4.
he willeth us to have providence or care of the flesh, but not to fulfill the lust of it. More plaine, There is in man, as in other creatures, a desire to preserve it selfe: and secondly, of his species, kinde: there∣fore, these two desires, because they were most necessary, it pleased God to ordain a bait for both, that men might be allured to them. For as there is a pleasure in eating and drinking; so also in the act of gene∣ration. Then there is a ground, In maxime necessariis maxima voluptas maxime allicit, in things most needfull, the more pleasing the delight, the greater allective. And there is another, Quod maxime allicit, ma∣xime corrumpit, that which allureth most, corrupteth most: and the rea∣son is, quia appetitus tendit ulra modum, because the appetite knoweth not what is enough. For we perswade our selves, that if the doing of it once be good, the doing of it oftner will be better: and so we shall come to doe it too much, because the appetite knoweth not what is enough. So falleth in corrupt custome, for the course of our nature is, when it avoideth any evil, it avoideth it so vehemently, that somtime, if there be any good with it, it putteth out the good too. So if it desire the good, it will de∣sire the evill too: therefore temperance, to the middle: therefore they say, vertue standeth opposed to fortitude and temperance. Temperance magis in defectu, as Fortitude magis in excessu. This concupiscence of the flesh, as it is in us, so in beasts: and hath the lowest place, and as Plato saith, it is alligata ventri, tied to the belly: as a man would tie an asse or a horse to a manger. Now being in the lowest place, and having a necessary use; it is necessary: & in maxime necessariis ordo est maxime necessarius, in things most necessary, order is chiefely to be observed. The order is, that they should not take up a mans life onely; if there bee a great course in the lower faculty, then the upper is quiet. When that that is inferiour, is most quiet; then that that is superiour, is most hinde∣red. When a man hath a vehement appetite, he sets his whole minde to it. Chrysostome, Dedit Deus corpus animae, ut illud in coelum eveheret; & dedit animam corpori, ut illam in terram deprimeret, God gave the body to the soule, that this might carry that to Heaven; and he gave the soule to the body, that this might keepe that on earth: therefore, the intent of God was thus: As we should have this, for the maintain∣ing of life, and for propagation: so we should use it, and no further then this necessity will permit us. This is puritas; that is called purum, that hath nihil alienum immixtum, nothing else mixed with it: wee must needs have some mixture in this life: Esa. 1.22. there is water mingled with wine; but we must see that this mixture be not so; that there be but a drop of wine in a vessell of water. Psal. 49. last. Man was in honour and glory, but certainely he is growne out of understan∣ding, he is like the beast that perisheth. Here is to be considered 1. The inclination of the minde. 2. The meanes. Divisiopartium hujus mandati.1. By Gal. 5.19. we see, and by Christ, Marke 7.21. his interpre∣tation, that all adulteries, and all evill thoughts and workes, prooceed
from the heart. And they are there considered, either as they are in veneno naturae nostrae, in the poyson of our nature: 1 Iohn 2.16. con∣cupiscentiam carnis, the lust of the flesh he calleth it: or suppuratio, an inward festering of this desire, or inward boyling of the pot: as Ezek. compareth it, cap. 24.6. with the scumme in it. Then after these, the first thing in regard of the meanes, is subactum solum, to make our selves meete to receive this vine desire. The Physitians call it , that is, when a man is disposed to an evill humour, to diseases. Those that are given to be plethorike, have their bodies still fed with that humour. And that is done by two meanes. 1. By the sinne, which is gula: and that is of two parts. 1. Crapula, a surcharging of us with meates. 2. Vinolentia, the same in drinke. Secondly, with gula is ex∣cesse of idlenesse, partly of Excesse of sleepe. , flying of exercise. Now then secondly, after this subactum solum, there is another thing in the meanes, that is called irrigatio concupiscentiae, the warring of the seed in subacto solo. And (because we stand upon diseases) it is, as when a man is sicke, and notwithstanding will give himselfe to those things that are , incliners to wickednesse: as he that is sick of an ague, will give himselfe to drinke wine: or he that is troubled with , ptissick, to sharp things; or he that is troubled with col∣licke, to eate hony. Such a thing is in the concupiscence. Solomon, Prov. 7.21. calleth it illicebra concupiscentiae, an inticement to lust: and it bringeth forth the sin, lascivia, wantonnesse; or immodestia, immodesty: It is either in the body it selfe, making our selves birds, bending our selves to those, by whom allurements onely come. 2. For without: if it be of our body, there is first , that is, the plaiting of the haire: and fucus, the colour of the countenance. Or else it is in apparell and gesture. The first is called , garments, vestments. Gesture is either commonly a common gate, or a second kind of gate or gesture, which they terme peculiarly for this purpose, as dansing, Chorea. 2. From without: and it is either corrupt company of men; or we fall into the fault of them, by reading lascivious bookes lascivi∣ously. And besides that, which is an affection, by beholding pictures. i. imagines obscoenas, as Cherea in Terence. And secondly, such playes and spectacles as containe matters of foolish love; and are able to breed this in us. And correspondent to them, is the hearing of them, wicked reports or bookes read, or songs sung, that nourish our disease. This for the meanes. Now for the signes, we will use no other then before: The jaundis of it is in the eyes too, and so it hath his some in sermone obscoen, baudy speeches: And not onely that, but in doing and frequenting such places, actions, and times; as indeed sometimes are not onely cause of suspition, but may justly be suspected. Now to the outward part, and there we have first a disposition to it. They are called in Physicke, grudgings against an ague; as it were, such as were in the other Commandement, bloudshed, and bat∣tery, before the act of murther; such as are there here, like to the
signes, Levit. 13.4. of the leprosie before it came. In this kinde are incesta oscula, whorish kisses: and embracing of the bosome of a stranger: and lastly, the going about to procure it, whether it bee by waiting at the dore for opportunity, or by sorcery, or bloudshed, &c. The act it selfe may be taken both wayes. Aug. whether it be in∣stinctu proprio, or consensu alieno, of their owne motion, or another perswasion; that is all one: that is generally. Then afterward it is pra∣ctised in effect, either with a mans selfe, corpus suum secum: which they call , and , mollicies & impuritas, effeminatenesse, uncleannesse: or with other. And if with other; either it is that , an abomination not to be named: with a beast, and is called Buggery: or with mankinde. And so it is done willingly or un∣willingly, respectu patientis, in respect of the sufferer: if unwillingly, it is Raptus, a Rape: if by consent, either of male or female: (for there is Rape done to both) male, and so it is the sinne of Sodome; female, and so it is with one, or moe. With more: if there be a pre∣text of marriage, it is Polygamie: if without any such pretense, it is called scortatio, whoredome. Where it is done with one, (and because we speak not only of adultery, but whatsoever) either it is in wedlock, and that is fervor: (for we shall after shew, that there is a fault even in matrimony committed) or it is out of matrimony; and then either as the party is allied to us; then it is incest: or as a stranger and remo∣ved; and then we consider her, either as she is nupta, married, or so∣luta, free. If she be married, or desponsata, betrothed, all is one; and so it is adultery, whether she be espoused or married: and that is of three kinds. 1. Where both parties are married, and that is worst. 2. The woman onely espoused, and the man single; The man marri∣ed onely, and the woman single. And the second is lesse evill then the third, because in this is corruptio prolis, an adulterating of the issue begotten. Now in the free, and not married, either we retaine one peculiar to our selves; and it is called concubinatus peccatum, to keepe a concu∣bine: which is not a common strumpet, but a concubine: or else there is not this continuall keeping: and then the party, if she be a Virgin, or a Widow, it is sluprum, devirgination, especially in Virgins; or if she be common, it is fornication properly, though that be given to all. Beyond these, this act is either once committed onely, or often itera∣ted; then it is luxuria, luxury, for distinction: he is a whoremonger, that setteth after evill: or that which is beyond this, as Gen. 18. clamor Sodomitarum, the cry of Sodome, so clamor adulterii, the cry of adul∣tery; of them that impudently dare defend it: as if casse and Ar∣timeas should stand in defence of it. And last of all, permission, whe∣ther it be of private men, for his daughter, or wife, or any of his kins∣folke: and that is Prostitution. Or publike in the Magistrate in suf∣fering, and tolerating Stewes, as Rome doth now adayes. The reason why adultery ought to be odious to every man, and is so to God. 1. Of all sinnes, it is most brutish, and that maketh a man to come
next to the condition of a beast, making us to lose the excellencie and nobility of our nature, Ier. 5.8. like to equi admissarii adhinnientes, like fed horses neighing: Prov. 7.22. he followeth her straightwayes like an Oxe to the slaughter, or as a foole to the stockes for correction. Deut. 23.18. Thou shalt neither bring the hire of a whore, nor the price of a Dogge into the house of the Lord thy God for any vow, &c. The learned in this place compare an Harlot to a Bitch that many Dogs runne after. 2. This hath a kind of dependancie on the first: but yet hath a peculiar consideration. There is no sin, wherein the light of mans reason is so much extinguished, nor that doth put it so much besides the prehemi∣nence that it hath over the affections of the minde. Hose. 4.11. aufert cor, it taketh away the heart. Eph. 4.18.19. By this the judgement of the Heathen men were darkened, and their hearts hardened: and whatsoever blindnesse came upon them, was ascribed to this. It is one of the Epithets they give to Venus, , Venus blindes the soule. We have experience of it in Solomon, we see what a sottishnesse hee grew into after this; that he would fall downe to every blocke, and stocke. David by this fell to murther, and to cover one inquity with another: And it is just it should be so: For the light of our actions being from God, and our anoynting comming ab unctione Dei, from the anoint∣ing of God, as Nazianzen saith, he will not commit his oyntment to such a stinking boxe: for they doe nothing but cast downe, and tram∣ple the Pearles of Gods Grace under their feete, Matth. 7.6. 3. Cyprians: Of all sinnes, this is most without excuse: it hath not a colour: other sinnes may get them a visor: For God hath or∣dained a remedy for this affection: 1 Cor. 7.2. Marriage, the remedy; he that will not use it, is inexcusable. 4. God having made marriage a holy institution, and a holy resem∣blance of Christ and his Church; it is a manifest contempt of his ordinance: And also, whereas God hath set to this act of marriage, a promise of the increasing of mankinde: contrary to this, Hose. 4.10. There shall be no increase to this, and so by this meanes they destroy all mankinde as much as in them lieth. This Sacrilegi nuptiarum, the sacriligious robbers of wedlocke, as Constant, calleth them well: and delinquentes in genus humanum, trespassers against mankinde: that they take away the resemblance of Christs Church; and besides the world should fare the worse for them. 5. Saint Pauls: 1 Cor. 6.18. This is even against a mans owne body, and by the pollution of it, Iude. 13. they doe some out their owne shame. Physitians say, it is an enemy to the life of man; It is one of the speciall causes that preserveth a mans life, the preserving of genitalis humor, the genitall humour: and there is nothing that breedeth a more debility to the vegetative faculty. It is a shortning of life, and bringeth upon a man rotten diseases: Num. 5.27. and so two wayes he is injurious to his owne body. 6. It is injurious to Christ two wayes. 1. In that he having paid a price for him, he alienateth that which is not his owne: as if a man should pull downe another mans house without any right; nay, pa∣latium
regis, the Palace of the King, Chrysostome. 2. He also, being a Christian, doth as much as he can, make his head a member of the body of an Harlot, uniting himselfe to her. 7. This is particular to this alone: In any other sinne a man may perire solus, perish alone; but in this he must have one to perish with him for company. So he is also injurious to the state of his bre∣thren. 8. The punishment allotted to it. 1. That it should be a punish∣ment it selfe; Prov. 22.14. God will not suffer any to fall into it, but onely those that he hateth: and whom it hath pleased him to ordaine to punishment. Prov. 6.33. It is maxime probrosum peccatum, infa∣mous. And in regard of spirituall deformity, Prov. 16.20. It will bring him to beggery: Iob. 31.2. It shall be a fire to pursue him and his house to utter destruction. And beyond all these, Rom. 1.24. whereas every punishment should exceed that whereof it is a punish∣ment, it is said, that these uncleane passions were brought upon the world as a punishment for idolatry, and 1 Cor. 7.12, 13. if any will dwell with an idolater, she may: but not with an adulterer: and in vers. 14. that the children of an idolater are holy; but the children of an adulterer are profane, and not holy. By this we may in part weigh what accompt God maketh of the heynousnesse of this sinne. Suppuratio adulterii.Now for the vapour, the poysoning of our nature, the first motus, & ascendenies cogitationes, motions and thoughts that arise, we will leave them to the tenth Commandement; onely we will meddle here with Suppuratio, the festering of it. The Apostle calleth it, 1 Cor. 7.9. uri, to burne: Hose. 7.4. when a mans soule is like a Bakers Oven, then it is a signe that the sparke hath beene blowne, where there is so great a fire: Prov. 23.33. of this sinne, & cor ejus loquitur perversa, and his heart speaketh perverse things: Outwardly he saith nothing, but inwardly his heart speaketh perversely. Aug. Ego enim Domine saepe taceo, cum cogitationes meae non tacent, O Lord, I hold my peace, when yet my thoughts are not silent: And so the Oven waxeth hotter and hotter; and then is consensus, consent. Or when he saith, utinam, would to God, Qui facturus est malum, jam fecit, he that goeth about a wicked action, hath already acted it in his heart. This is the cordiall passion that is to be striven against. Come to the Subactum solum, to the making of the soile fit: and so to gula, and in it to crapula, feeding too much. It is well said, that gu∣la is vestibulum luxuriae, the gallery that letchery goeth thorow: and that by reason the faculties stand so; for , is officina , nuritiva is officina generativae, the nutritive faculty is the shop of the generative: and so, if it be well looked into, there is good hope that wee shall the better deale with it. Gal. 5.21. Whereas he saith there, that one of the fruits of the flesh, is , uncleannesse, hee addeth , banuetting, as another. Ezek. 16 49. The Prophet there saith, that one of the especiall motives of the Sodomits was fulnesse of bread, that mde them fit for destruction. And Ierom upon that place saith, nunquam ego edacem hominem castum putabam, pro qualitate cibo∣rum
est ordo membrorum: for venter bene pastus, cito despumat ad libidi∣nem, I ever thought a great eater to be unchast, for according to the quality of the meates, is the order of the members; a well fed belly will soone waxe wanton. There commeth to this, Ingluvies, gluttony besides: that as Iohn 6.12. it is injurious to God, in destroying Gods creatures: Luke 15.13. a wasting of Gods creatures in vaine. It is fruges male consumere, Idlely to spend graine: Prov. 23.20, 21. And it will at last begger a man. Siracides cap. 18. vers. ult. sheweth how he must make banquets, although he borrow for them; and so come in debt. The Heathen man, foed ssimum patrimoniorum exitium culina; They cannot be worse spent, then upon the kitchin. And besides, as Numb. 11.34. there are graves of lusts: i. surfettings, that hasten a mans death. It is our gentile vitium, nationall sinne. There is an infinite sort of graves of lusts in our Countrey. When they are sicke, they call for sanitas: and when they have it, they become afterwards to be , betrayers of their health, with surfetting. Be∣sides these effects in the body; Againe in the soule: Luke 8.17. It maketh Sermons, and whatsoever exercise of godlinesse unfruitfull: it is a speciall meanes to choake it. Luke 21.34. It maketh our heart so heavie, and our braines so unapt, by reason of the fuming of the meate and drinke that riseth up to the head, that a man is not fit for any thing, but to sleepe. Amos 6. Greg. saith, ad ineptam laetitiam, scurrile mirth. Besides this, , lust, there is first hebetudo mentis, & durities cordis, a dulnesse of the minde, and hardnesse of the heart: Amos 6.6. They drinke their wine in bowles, and they had no com∣passion on Iosephs affliction, &c. There is no sympathy with these and them that want: and it is a great preparative to the vice. After, when as Deut. 32.15. Moses in his song, my fatling well fedde re∣calcitravit, kicked: and so will the body, Prov. 27.2. Bring up your servant wantonly, and he will prove stubborne: feede him delicately, and he will be check-mate with you. Eccles. 30.8. Equus indomi∣tus, a horse not broken becommeth head-strong; , will be wil∣full: a wanton childe , so the flesh proveth stubborne, if it be like didectus impinguatus, Iesurum waxed fat. 1 Pet. 2.11. These desi∣deria carnis, these concupiscences militant adversus animam. They make the enemies warfare stronger against the soule. And what a fol∣ly is it to strengthen the enemy? Then in this behalfe, for avoyding of these concupiscences, Pauls counsell, 1 Cor. 9.27. Castigatio corporis, to keepe under the body: and one manner of castigation is per damnum, by taking away some commodity: as castigatio jumento∣rum, the keeping under of labouring beasts, is by taking away their provender. This in effect is, that we use Temperance, which is , the Butler of all vertues. Naturally this is ,Temperance,  as the Philoso∣phers call her. the voyce of the flesh; , let me not be hun∣gry, thirsty, cold, &c. Esau, when he was hungry, called Iacobs pot∣tage, lenticulum, a little Lentill: it was it seemes then savory. Sitis non quaerit aurea pocula, thirst cares not for drinking in gold: But it is this, Non resistere ulli desiderio quod habet umbram naturae, when we yeeld to any desire that pleaseth nature: that maketh us
wanton: he will not have it in this dish, and he will not eate it, if it be thus drest; and so then venter, the belly, commeth to be molestus cliens, a trouble some client. We must necessarily have recourse to Temperance, which consisteth in modo, in the meane; and that mo∣dus est in medio, and that meane is in the middle; and that is knowne per regulam, by the rule. Therefore the rule of Temperance is, 1. Ne∣cessitas vitae,Rule of tem∣perance. things necessary for life: 1 Tim. 6.8. , having food and raiment, let us be there∣with content. 2. Necessitas officii, things necessary for our duty and calling: 1 Cor. 9.25. he that is athleia, a wrestler, must not have so much meat; so if he fast, he detracteth: or he that will be contemplative and a stu∣dent, detracteth: a husband-man addeth. 3. Voluptas, quae neutrum horum impedit, seu impediat, things neces∣sary for delight, which neither doe, or may hinder either of the former two. If it be against duty, or against life, it is peccatum, a sinne. According to these rules, we must bridle our desires, . Wee must make temperance our , our Coach-man: and give her the bridle, that she may constringere & relaxare: Temperamia fraenos gutiu∣ris constrimgit & relaxat; both keepe us in, and let us out; for tempe∣rance both gives the reines to, and takes them away from the appetite, Aug. The Heathen, , Venus waites on plenty. And for temperance,Ed. if the first part be well looked unto, the other will be easie; , first regulate the belly. The rule of five branches for governing himselfe in this: 1. Concerning the substance: if ye respect not the substance; Luk. 16.19. the rich glutton must fare , slendide, delicately every day. Numb. 11.6. They were weary of Manna, and they must have Quailes. For certaine it is, Dan. 1.12. if a man have moratum ven∣trem, no dainty palate, his Pulse will serve. It is that that served Da∣niel and his companions: and yet they looked never a whit the worse. Else, as 1 Sam. 2.16. Elies sonnes, they must have roste, they cannot eate sodden meate: when a man breaketh not himselfe, as for the sub∣stance of the meate: it is not to be dainty, nor course, so he be inju∣rious to the Adverbe lauie, costly: And last of all, 1 King. 17.6. by Elias his provision: and 2 King. 4.38. by Elishah his pottage, wee may learne how to satisfie nature. 2. For the quantity. They that have taken the measure of our throate, and the rest of our instruments; say, they are lesse in man, then in any other creature; taking it answerable to the proportion of his body: so consequently, he should eate lesse. Plenty, and variety tempteth a man, as Ezek. 16. Aug. said, when he was at a table of ma∣ny dishes, he was easily overshot. The quantity is taken, either by sur∣charging of our nature, Hosea. 7.3. or secondly, by ability of duty. Christ saith, take heede of crapula, ne gravet corda, surfetting, lest it over∣charge your hearts: or thirdly, in regard of our estate; 1 Sam. 25.36. Naball was a note too high in his feast, he made a feast like a Prince; here was superfluity. 3. Quality. Exquisitenes, it must be so exquisitely done, Luke 10.41.
Martha was partly gone with it: and Christ giveth her a modest re∣prehension. But Rom. 13.14. we must not make , provi∣sion for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it. Sapores non naturales, ex∣quisite sawces: for this is a way to bring Saint Paul to his teares, Phil. 3.19. that he should weepe for us, because wee make our belly our God: and 1 Cor. 6.13. to move God to destroy both it and them. Greg. Haec arca putrescit, & quae in ea reponuntur, the belly will be consumed, and whatsoever is put in it: therefore it is pitie to make that our God. These are in regard of the meate. 4. Now there be two rules in regard of us. The first is, Greedi∣nesse. Esaues fault. Aug. Ardenter profecto comedit, qui ardenter desi∣deravi, he eated greedily, as he hungred heartily: that hee had rather fell his birth-right, two portions of his Fathers goods, then tarry. Iude. vers. 12. calleth it vesci. Ecclus. 37.28. and 31.12. in the first place he calleth it , ardenter, hoc est enim os por∣ci habere, nor too greedy upon meats; greedily, that is, to have a hog∣gish and swinish appetite: while he intendeth it; therefore, the De∣vill, saith Ierome, had rather come into the heard of swine: no doubt there were other heards, but he hath a speciall delight in them, because of their greedinesse: because they were like in their especiall qualities to Cormorants. And Ierome saith, ubi satietas est, ibi daemones agunt choreas, where satiety is, there the Devils dance: take heede of satiety. Of eating and drinking.5. The last is, to eate too often: This is to be taken by the former rules vitae & officii. Eccles. 10.16. eating early, and Esa. 5.11. eating late: Rom. 13.13. any of these , and 1 Pet. 4.3. are forbidden; he telleth thereof , besides, , vinolentia, drinkings: no doubt, having regard to our secundae mensae, second courses; and comessationes banquets, and drinkings. Of these five, as in some of them there is aversio à fine, an aversion from the end: and in some nothing but proportio aberrans à fine, a pro∣portion wide of the end: the one is more grievous then the other. Aug. confessions, upon comessationes, ebrietates & crapulae, surfetting and drunkennesse, Luke 21.34. Domine ebrietas longe est à me, fac quae∣so ne appropinquet mihi: crapula autem nonnunquam subrepit servo tuo, fac quaeso ut longe absit à me: & quis est qui non capiatur aliquantu∣lum exira metas necessitatis? Quisquis est magnus, magnificet nomen tu∣um: ego autem non sum, quia homo peccator sum: sed tamen ego in his positus tentationibus, cerio quotidie cum cupiditatibus: Drunken∣nesse, O Lord, is far from me; grant it may never approach unto me: surfetting sometimes creeps unawares upon thy servant, remove it far from me; and who is he that sometimes exceeds not the bounds of ne∣cessity? Whosoever is perfect shall magnifie thy name: such a one I am not, because a sinfull man: neverthelesse though environed with these tentations, I warre daily against my lusts. And this I doe fur∣ther, for unnecessary refections, I have cleane cut them off: and then secondly, as Prov. 23.20. homines comessatores fugi, I shunne glutto∣nous men: Thirdly, mihi sufficit meus apparatus, I am content with my owne portion. Fourthly, whensoever I goe beyond the bounds
of necessity; non dico, ut Esa. 56.12. erit cras ut bodie, & amplius, I say not, as it is Es. 56.12. to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. This saith he I doe. And then he commeth to ex∣hort, Et fratres mei, quam lenissime, sed tamen quam instantissime vos oro, and therefore my brethren, most lovingly, yet most earnestly I be∣seech you that you will strive to doe the like. Excesse of drinke.In that we called subactum solum, a disposing of our bodies 1. To Temptation. 2. To Concupiscence. As the first is in excesse of meates before handled: so the second is the same in excesse of drinke. Ephes. 5.18. he telleth us, there is a drinke , wherein is this fornication, and the inclination thereto. The very same we see, Prov. 23.33. for among the effects of wine and drunkennesse, there be giveth this, that he should looke upon strange women, and his heart should speake leud things: And he shall be fitter for this sinne. 1. Pet. 4.3. He removeth there from Christians, not onely , drun∣kennesse, which the Fathers call voluntarium daemonem, a voluntary De∣vill, when a man willingly bereaveth himselfe of reason; but he also addeth , compotations: whether they have the effect, Esa. 5.11. though they take not away reason, yet doe enflame us, and kindle our bloud and spirits. Or else, as it is vers. 22. a man by using it, get∣teth an habit, that he is strong to doe it; and that he himselfe can be free from it, and can behold others infirmities with pleasure. In any of these cases, the excesse of drinke is forbidden: not onely because, as Prov. 20.1. he saith, it deceiveth: or as it is, Prov. 23.20. the man that delighteth in wine, the drunkard and glutton shall never be rich: but because it disposeth a man to this, Gen. 19.33. even when he is without knowledge, and unwillingly: but most commonly, Prov. 23.33. voluntarily, and with knowledge to be a meete mould to receive the Devils print. It is suth a vice, that a man entred into it, shall hardly be able to recover himselfe. 1 Tim. 5.23. where Timothy is so farre from excesse, as that being in great infirmity, he will not venture upon wine without Pauls direction. Then we see by that, that the Apostle setteth downe, that in bodily infirmities, the use of it is lawfull. And Prov. 31.6. in heavinesse of minde, whether it come by an extraordinary chance, or by disposition of nature. And Nehem. 8.10. in a publike benefit of the Church, there may be publike gratulation, civilly or ecclesi∣astically: for that was the third part of temperance. And whatso∣ever was not a hinderer of any of these, it was a day of publike joy. There the people were ready to mourne, therefore he saith, they should goe home; and he willed them to testifie by the use of the creatures, the joy of the benefit which God had vouchsafed to his Church. But out of these three cases it must not be used. And contrary to these, Esa. 22.13. Even as in the time when there was occasion that they should rather mourne, they fell to joy and gladnesse: when they should rather have fasted, they fel to feasting: both those are con∣trary to this precept. And a third thing whereas the Apostle reckoneth , wine, they straight take hold of it; but where he joyneth , little: they
take no hold of it. There must not be redundantia, superfluity. Amos 6.6. it is counted an especiall fault of the Princes of Israel, that they dranke wine in bowles, &c. whereas wine and ointments are to be used, no otherwise then will serve for medicines of nature, or du∣ty; or testifying their joy or pleasure for blessings received: if it be not used for some one of these, we have no warrant for it; and it di∣sposeth us to this sinne. And you may apply the five rules, to the right governing your selfe; so both these vices are salved by a vertue called , Temperance: that is here commended. Gal. 5.23. where it is made an especiall fruit of the spirit: and Tit. 2.6. where Titus is called especially to preach it, and exhort young men to it, and 2 Pet. 1.6. it is com∣manded, that vertue shall be , in knowledge: and to that is joyned , Temperance, unto young men, and to those that bend themselves to knowledge; and in scientia abstinentia, in knowledge is Temperance. 2. The second thing is Idlenesse.Idlenesse. The light of nature answering to him, that asked what was luxuria: that it was nothing else but , a passion of idlenesse: Ezek. 16.49. lusting after strange flesh, it came of Idlenesse. Idlenesse highly displeaseth God, as well in regard of the next Commandement, as in regard of losse of time, which is to be care∣fully employed. Gal. 6.10. and Ephes. 5.16. when we have over-seene our selves in losse of time, we must be carefull to redeeme it. It com∣meth also under this Commandement, making us applyable, and like soft wax for concupiscence. Idlenesse is in two things. Being 1. Given to sleepe. 2. Awaked, and not exercised in our callings. The first, in Rom. 13.13. when he hath beene in , banquetings▪ and then in , drunkennesse: thirdly, he commeth to : wee translate it chambering; but is properly lying in bed. And there is joyned with it , wantonnesse: the companion of , cham∣bering, and beginning of concupiscence. Amos 6.4. he speaketh there, and upbraideth them, as with an of∣fence, And they lay and stretched themselves on their beds: and Mich. 2.1. that by thus stretching themselves, they began to cogitare nequam, and to have wicked thoughts. And we our selves see, 2 Sam. 11.2. that David after his sleepe, he was disposed to take the aire in his Tur∣ret, and so was made a fit matter to receive the impression of the sight. For which cause Solomon, Pro. 20.13. meete for this purpose, after that he had sain, vers. 11. Those that are young, a man may know them by their actions, whether their words be aright; And then vers. 12. thus you shall know whether they apply their eares and eyes to know∣ledge, as God created them: otherwise, as vers. 13. if they love sleepe, the effects of it shall come upon them. 2. The quantity of it, Prov. 6.9. Vsque quo dormis, ultra horam? how long wilt thou sleepe O sluggard? Rom. 13.11. when the houre commeth, then to be on his bed, as the dore on the hinge; so hee
that is slothfull will never prove good. 3. The manner, as we see in Ionas, cap. 1.5. It is said there, that he was dead asleepe, when the danger hung over him; and being for his cause. Ierome on that place. Some sleepe doth not seeme to be requies lassi, but sepultura suffocatt, the repose of the wearied but the burying of the dead: Esa. 29.10. The sleepe of slumber, is a certaine plague of God: and, as it standeth there, is to be understood as well of , the drowsinesse of the soule, as of the sleepe of the body: wherein a man, is often iterating of it. It is a signe, that as Ionas in the thickest of the tempest, slept deepely; the visitation of God being upon him. In these regards we come to be faulty in our naturall desires. Aoia, not la∣bouring in our callings.As on the other side, with wanting labour, and giving our selves to ease, we come to have, Heb. 12.12. hanging heads, and loose knees, that are fit for no good thing. And consequently, as there is none of the creatures of God, whether it be naturall, or artificiall; but stan∣ding still, it groweth to be corrupt: as water (for it most properly) standing doth putrifie; and being putrified once, engendreth Toades and other such venemous creatures: so ease in the body bringeth forth podagram, the gout: and in the minde the disease of it, Basill calleth podagram anima, the gout of the soule: Ambrose calleth them creaturas Domin superfluas, superfluous creatures of God: which doe no way profit the body wherein they live. But as the Heathen man saith of the Hogge, that hath animam pro sale, Salt instead of a soule: they should not else be sweete. 2. Thes. 3.11. Idlenesse there not measured by doing nothing, but by not doing the duties of their places. They that are placed here, and doe not study, if they be , working not at all: then if they be , busie bodies: 1 Tim. 5.13. he saith there, they be not , idle: and not onely that, but , idle pratlers. And up∣on these commeth tale-carrying, lying, faining, &c. forging: and they disquiet other; and not onely that, but they are , busie bodies, medling out of their calling. These be here restrained. In each of these, as there groweth a disposition to make the body fit for the evill motions of the soule, so the vertue, 1 Pet. 2.11. Abstinence, and fighting against such concupiscences as doe militare conira ani∣mam, fight against the soule. 1. For the first, against sleepe, 1 Pet. 1.13. he hath that which hee calleth , sobriety, properly watchfulnesse. 1 Thes. 5.6. the Apo∣stle hath the same, , be sober and watch: drunkennesse and sleepe are in the night, these are , workes of darknesse: but we are , of the light: and therefore our desires must be of the workes of light, that we may walke accordingly. 2. For the other , 1 Thes. 4.11. A desire to set our selves to doe our owne workes, and to doe it, &c. Irrigatio concu∣piscentiae.After this, the next is called irrigatio concupiscentiae, the medling with noysome meates, which are provocations to this sinne. As in bodily Physicke, there be many bodies changed by the diet, coveting some one dish, that much breedeth one disease; though they be not naturally given to it, yet at the length they come to it. So it is in the
soule; As we must keepe the state of it from being a meete mould, or a fat ground for the Devill to cast in his seed: so we must take heede of these meates, and outward objects and allurements, that may di∣spose the soule to this sinne. We consider these, as they are in our selves, and as they are in o∣thers: and as they are in the body, and about it. As namely; First, if any man doe adhibere fucum, use painting: it was one of Iezebels vices. 2 King. 9.30. It is said, she paimed her face, tyred her haire, and looked out at a window. And not onely a thing in one person, but in many persons; for setting a wrong colour on their eyebrowes, Ier. 4.30. And then Prov. 9.14. Solomon testifieth of the Harlot, she setteth her down to be an allurement to men. These be things condemned by the word of God; yet this is not so usuall as the second, that is, the strange disguising of our selves in apparell. 1 Tim. 2.9. 1 Pet. 3.3. It is re∣prehended even in women: which are rather to be allowed in it, be∣cause it is mundus muliebris, the ornament of women. Greg. Thinke with your selves what a deformity it is in you, seeing it is found fault withall in women? First, they finde fault with , the wreathing of the haire; and the second is called , the ad∣ding of gold or pearles to apparell. And the third they call , rare apparell, strange and costly. Luke 16.19. It is called fine linnen, and silke. The reason, in Paul, because these become not the professors of the feare of God. Peter hath two reasons, 1. v. 4. not the utter, but the inner man to be garnished. Caro, where is magna corporis cura, there plerunque is magna mentis incuria, where the body is too much decked, there (it is to be feared) the minde for the most part is neglected: for this is care with modesty. 2. vers. 5. ab exemplo san∣ctorum, from the example of the Saints: Did the Saints use apparell thus? did Sarah, did Abraham? A third thing, Gesture. Mich. 2.3. God saith,3. Gesiu. he will be a swift re∣venger against such as goe proudly in gate: Esa. 3.16. telleth what he meaneth by it, 1. they goe on tiptoe: 2. they have exerium gutiur, stretched forth necks: 2. nutantes oculos, the rolling of the eyes: ca∣sting them scornfully on the one side first, and then on the other: and 4. they have minutos passus, a mincing gate: they goe as if they were compedui, shackled. And he thundereth as pathetically as he can, even in the daughters of Sion; much more would he in the sonnes of Sion. Ambr. Gesta naturam dedit, sed gratia emendat. Aug. Prov. 30.13. some have proud gates of nature, sed gratiam emendat, grace must a∣mend all. Then after these, there are other incentives and provocations from without us: Psal. 50.18. consortium cum adulieris;Provocation ab exira. and Prov. 7.22. meeting and conferences with Harlots, carrying a man as an Oxe to the slaughter, and as a foole to the stockes, or a bird to the pitfall, &c. 1 Cor. 5.6. fermentum modicum totam massam,Company.&c. a little leaven lea∣veneth the whole lump. It is common to all vices, but he applieth it there to this sinne. This vice hath an especiall vertue to leaven the com∣pany. Company, not only notorious, but also suspitious is to be avoyded,
Prov. 7.8.9. he saith, one of his observations was, that looking out of his window, he saw a young man would needs goe by a suspitious place; and he did it in the twilight, in the evening, at a suspitious time: and so among the rest, you shall see these two plainely that pre∣pare them to this, 1. Thes. 5.20.22. It is not onely malum, evill: but species also mali, apparence of evill, that must be avoyded. And not onely coram Deo, before God, 2 Cor. 8.21. but all evill suspitions be∣fore men. This for company. Now another thing is, which the Heathen man calleth his comites, his companions: that he was solus, alone, and yet had his comites: nunquam minus solus, quam cum solus, companions never lesse alone, then when alone: he had a booke or two about him; so that under company come evill bookes, that speake broadly, and grossely of this sinne; and bring a man to have both knowledge and affection. 1 Cor. 15.33. Paul speaking of the sayings of Epicurisme, alledgeth out of Menander, , &c. Evill words, or evill deeds, spoken or written, corrupt good manners. Evill words be as Prov. 9.17. stollen waters, &c. or as Prov. 7.18. let us take our pleasure in dalliance, &c. by colouring of a filthy act with good words. So for company. There are annexed hereto, such two things, as by the eye and eare worke the same impression in the soule; 1. Pictures, imagines obscoenae: as of Baal-Peor, Numb. 25.18. Hose. 9.10. they longed to looke on it: and Psal. 106.28. they joyned themselves to Baal Peor, and eate the offerings of the dead. It was Balaams counsell, Numb. 31.16. 1 Cor. 10.8. Ne scortemur, &c. To bring them to see the Image in the Temple. We know what he saith in Eunuchus, The parlers were hanged with the pictures of Danae, and Iupiters comming to her: you see his conclusion. So Prov. 7.16. the Harlots chamber hanged with tapestry, very like to be these. So whatsoever stirreth up the minde by the eye or eare (by analogy) as Marke 6.22. choreae lascivae, or ludi theatrici (i. concil. * Agathense,Chae lasiae. Ludi thaii.  Cncil. Aga∣ens. in Cau∣anz. can. 28. In Ci Edition can n 39. nn Cnl let. 30. an. 23. in Edi∣tin. Cais.can. 5.) that pertaine to this point of foolish places. The reasons, as the Councels alleadge them, are very good, and to be liked. And one is Psal. 119.37. Averte ocu∣los, nevideani vanitatem, turne away thine eyes, lest they behold vanity. And besides these, there is losse of time, Prov. 6.27, 28. he hath Rubens fault, Gen. 49.4. as light as water. Prov. 6.27. Where this affection is, he shall take fire in his bosome; and he shall goe upon coales: and therefore the danger can hardly be fled. Item, whatsoe∣ver may allure us,Wnton songs. as Esa. 53.15. Hariots songs; and a worse abuse: Amos 6.5. a conforming of such songs as they desire to heare for their wantonnesse, to the instruments and tunes of Davids songs. So by what meanes soever the spirit of fornication is watered, all is un∣lawfull, whether it be by songs, or by sights, by the eyes, or by the eares. All these Gal. 5.19. are called generally, the fruits of the flesh: as , wantonnesse, Hose. 14.16. being faclum lasciviemium, and the second redundantium. Amos 6.7. Concerning wantonnesse, both that in redundantia, and in waxing wanton: the casting off of the cords of discipline, 1 Tim. 5.11. & vers. 6. by young widowes: they are the
beginning of what wickednesse soever. The vertue of modesty is to restraine these, 1 Tim. 2.9. with shamefacednesse and modesty; that is properly under the name of honestum. Inward beauty, and an inward eye: and that maketh the Saints to love, even as the outward beauty doth the adulterous eye; Ephes. 5.3 and in divers other places, he sendeth this point, , & , thus it becommeth us, and as it becommeth the Saints: speaking of these, he harpeth alwayes on that. Two sorts of likers.For there are two sorts of likers, for 1 Pet. 4.4, 5. a kinde of men, to whom if we conforme not our selves in the same excesse of riot, they thinke it strange: And they that are used to them, thinke it be∣comes them well. But these shall give account to him that judgeth quick and dead. But Psal. 52. last. there is another sort that shall judge quid deceat nos, & quid offendat sanctos. It is meete, that the Saints ac∣count meete. Sirach 19.27. When a man seeth a man, he may know him; the apparell, laughter gesture, and gate, will declare what is in him. And Hose. 5.5. there is an outward pride that will testifie to the face of Israel and Ephraim. Signes be either in the eye, or in the speech. Adulterour eyes.In the eye, by Christ, Matth. 5.28. a glancing eye; adultery is in the heart, and Marke 7.22. adultery comes from the heart, and , an eye of fornication, thence also: and 2 Pet. 2.14. such as have their eyes full of adultery passively. Now of sending forth our lookes, exempla: the sonnes of God on the daughters of men, Gen. 6.2. and the Egyptians on Abrahams wife: and fell into this sinne, Gen. 12.14. & Gen. 34.1. Dinah, Gen. 39.7. Potiphars wife on Ioseph. So David, 2 Sam. 11.2. Prov. 6.25. in the eyes and eye-lids. 2. The froth or fome of this sinne forbidden under ,Spuma.Ephes. 4.29. rotten speech, and Col. 3.8. Ephes. 5.4. it must not be once named, because, Prov. 12.14. men shall eate the fruit of their lips: and Matth. 12.36. de omni verbo otioso, &c. of every idle word, &c. therefore much more of those broad speeches. The H. G. that way seekes the best names, and hath choice of words for it. Gen. 4.8. cognovit uxorem suam, he knew his wife: And, it was not with Sarah after the manner of women; and 1 Cor. 7.3. he calleth it due benevolence: whereby it is very sure, that as impudicus oculus, is nunci∣us impudici animi; a wanton eye, is the messenger of an unchast heart: so impudicum labium, an unchast lip, is the signe of an unchast heart. These are either the vice of inverecundia, want of shame: Heb. 12.28. , with reverence and godly feare: and 1 Tim. 2.9. , with shamefastnesse and sobriety; or the meanes, , filthinesse, filthie communication: and then inferreth an objection, and answereth it; Some will happily call it stollen water: But let no man seduce himselfe; for, for such things commeth the wrath of God, though the deed be away. Now in the outward act, the , the foregoing sym∣ptomes, it is either in conatu, to compasse it, Iob 31.9. by lying in wait at our neighbours dore, 31.10. by alluring speeches: Exod. 17.18.
by sorcery, by the example of Iezabell, 2 King. 9.22. Iezabels whoredomes and witchcrafts; when they are past the flowers of their yeares, then with sorceries: and much more horrible, if it be with murther: Prov. 7.26. are these praeludia, which are actions, &c. Prov. 5 20. he forbids complexus impudicos; to embrace the bosome of a stranger, forbidden: Prov. 7.13. the Harlot had a strong face, and she caught him, and kist him: incestum osculum, an unchast kisse: Deut. 25.12. he forbids the touch of the hand; the woman that helpeth her husband, &c. shall have her hand cut off. Habak. 2.15. A woe to him that giveth his neighbour drinke, to see his nakednesse. But beyond these the Apostle maketh a period: There are many moe then these, but it is a shame to name them: therefore, it is a shame to doe them. Against these stands the vertue pudicina, chastity: 1 Thes. 4.4. , in sanctification and honour: and Phil. 4.8. and Iames 3.4.17. that is that part of vertue that procureth the taking a∣way of these: Deut. 22.12. he taketh order so, that that sight might not be seene, that Cham saw: and not abhorring the sight, had a curse for it. Now of the act it selfe. In the actuall sinne of incontinencie, in the first place was that which the Apostle calleth,. Col. 3.5. Gal. 4.19. , uncleannesse: for the affirmative of this Commandement before, 1 Thes. 4.4. Every man must possesse his owne vessell in holinesse and honour. Opposite to sanctification, 2 Cor. 7.1. to , holinesse: hee setteth there, , the defiling of the flesh: so likewise, 1 Thes. 4.5. for there he opposeth ; For the actuall sinne is nothing else, but the bringing forth of the passion of concupiscence; of that the concupiscence longeth after. So the carnall passage of the seede. But 2 Pet. 2.10. he goeth plainely to it, and calleth it , i. a desire of polluting. With which pollution, Iude, vers. 8. (spea∣king of wicked men) saith sopiti inquinant carnem, these filthy dreamers defile the flesh: and vers. 23. not onely their flesh, but their garments also are defiled with their flesh, which he would have a man to hate: that his hatred should stretch forth it self, to the coate or garment that was defiled with the flesh: (it was one of the members, and not all) For this, Numb. 5.27. bringeth in diseases and weakning of our bodies, and the pollution of it; which standeth against Baptisme: which hath an outward action, and an inward. Now because Iude, vers. 8. speakes of such as sopiti inquinant car∣nem, therefore there falleth into this member nocturna pollutio, noctur∣nall pollution: which if it be by reason of infirmity, or secondly, ex plenitudne vasorum, from the fulnesse of the vessels: and thirdly, by dissolution of some great exercise, or heate, as in great journeys not tending hereto: in these respects it commeth to be no sinne. So, if not being in thought of man, it passe from him. Of Divines, to speake of it, against it: or Physitians for the cure of it, without any affected minde: if of this thought it doth proceed, it is certaine that in both these it is quit, and no sinne. As on the other side, that a man doth it after excesse it is sinne, as in drunkennesse, though he commit it not ex ratione actus subsequentis, by reason of the act subsequent,
that is purposely to sinne: yet he is punished for it ex ratione actus praecedentis, by reason of the precedent act; that is, his drukennesse: so, if a man give himselfe to surfetting, and of that commeth proflu∣vium seminis, in this he is not quit. Or againe, if by often rolling of that cogitation in the minde, in the day time, it is procured in the night; so it is sinne: as likewise in the former, if there be not ingraia recordato, a sorrow in remembring it. This sinne, the Apostle calleth it , uncleannesse: the Fa∣thers call it mollities soeminea, effeminarenesse: In the Law it is cal∣led the sinne of Onan, Gen. 38.9. It is said, he spilled it on the ground; and the censure of it is, vers. next, It was exceeding wicked in Gods eyes. 2. Cum alio, with another: and first ,Bestialit. an abominati∣on not to be named, Buggery; forbidden, Levit. 18.13. punished with death, Levit. 20.13. the beast also. And with death of soule also, Revel. 21.8. , the abominable, shall have their portion in the lake, &c. ratio est, because it is abominable confusion. 3. With mankinde: 1. where violence is offered,Rapius. as well to males as females: as Aloisius, bastard to Paulus tertius; to females, Deut. 22.25. that if a man offer to force a Virgin, or woman, she seeking to re∣sist him, is innocent: but he shall die; because, beside that sinne, there is violence, breaking the former Commandement: and so there is a double guilt, and death its reward. 4. Of those parties that yeeld consent, they are males, or females:Sedomie. for so strong is our concupiscence, and so strangely affected in it, that every thing is sufficient to stirre up the coales of it. And the Heathen, quod in foe nina sexus facit, id in puero aetas, what the sexe doth in a wo∣man, that doth youth in the male: It is forbidden, Levit. 18.22. and 20.13. present death enacted and decreed for both. The reasons of it. 1. Ephes. 5.11. because it is an unfruitfull worke of darknesse: it is contra bonum prolis, against the benefit of procreation: which is the end of matrimony. 2. Against nature: Rom. 1.26. the naturall use is in the other sexe: vers. 24. it is a pollution: vers. 27. not onely a sinne, but also a recom∣pence of other sinnes: vers. 28. it is a signe of a reprobate minde. For the same sinne God sate in judgement, Gen. 19.5. and punished the five Cities: therefore, that plot of ground is an unfruitfull Sea to this day, called mare morinum, the dead Sea; because it nourisheth no live thing: and lacus asphaltites, of an unprofitable worke: Gen. 18.20. he faith it is an exceeding grievous sinne, and a loathsome: So there is Gods owne censure for it. 5. In the other sexe, 1. a man with a woman; if it be with many, and that without all colour of Law, it is scortatio: whoremongers.Scortatio. Deut. 23.17. God saith there shall be no whore among the daughters of Is∣rael, nor whoremonger among the children of Israel: and as vers. 18. God compareth them with a homely comparison, but good enough; the adulteresse to a bitch, and the scortatorès to a great number of dogges.
The civill punishment of this sinne by the light of nature, Gen. 38.24. death, and Heb. 13.4. if the civill punishment take no hold of it, if in the Common wealth it be forborne: yet he himselfe will judge it, both in the life to come, Revel. 21.8. and in this time, with strange and extraordinary judgements, as lues Gallica, the French poxe: an a∣bominable, and filthy disease, not heard of in former ages. 6. Under colour of Law came that vice of polygamie;Polygamy. where∣with sundry of the Patriarchs and others were intangled, yeelding to the corrupt customes of the Countries about, where they lived, not requiring Gods will; But both nature it selfe, might have taught them, that whereas the care and foresight of both father and mother, the male and damme or female, is required for education, there the ve∣ry beasts admit but one: but whereas the damme or female may bring up alone, there it is otherwise. The creation is plaine, and plainer, by Matth. 19.5. They two shall be one flesh, expressing the number; and Marke 10.11. he saith plain∣ly, that if a man should put away his wife, and marry another wife, he commits adultery against her: so Levit. 18.18. (as it is best under∣stood) when he saith, Ye shall not take a woman and her sister both. The termes and names of brother and sister are joyned to any thing: in things without life, as if one halfe and the other were added toge∣ther, it may be called the brother or sister of it. But whether it be so to be understood or no, yet the reason (Lest you vex her) the ve∣xation of the soule, and the trouble, (as in the house of Abraham, be∣tweene Sarah and Agar, and in Iacobs house, betweene Leah and Rachel, and in 1 Sam. 1.2. betweene Annah and Peninnah) in all these we see the inconvenience that redounds to bonum oeconomicum, the peace of the family, a motive strong enough to evince the inexpediencie, if not the unlawfulnesse of it. Polygamie, and that is to have a woman and her sister: Mal. 2.15. calling men to that ab initio non fuit sic, from the beginning it was not so: (for we speake not what God can permit) he sheweth plainely, that if ever polygamie had been to be allowed, it had been in the begin∣ning of the world: (for that is the colour they have, that for increase of children, and propagation of the world, it was lawfull) but he saith there, that God having plenty of spirit, and power to have made more, yet he made but one for Adam, Eve: therefore, polygamie unlawfull for any age that came after. Againe, whereas Gen. 4.19. Lamech, one of Cains race, is the first that the holy Ghost noteth to have had two wives: and that Iacob lear∣ned it in Padan Aram, among the idolaters: and so consequently was unlawfull then, and afterwards: seeing the Prophets condemne it, and Christ, and the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.2. , her owne husband, for a woman: and , his owne wife, for the man: it is flat, that it is of it selfe unlawfull. In matrimony, fer.7. In matrimony, cum uxore sua, with his owne wife: The saying of Sixtus, a Philosopher, is greatly used of Aug. Ambrose, and other Fathers, that adulter est uxoris suae amator ferventior, too hot and fer∣vent a love towards a mans owne wife, is not free from the suspition of
adultery: that fervour, Levit. 18.19. is forbidden, and is punished, not with death, but with excommunication: Levit. 20.18. no approa∣ching permitted in mensibus, no not to his wife: therefore we are not left to our selves in matrimony, but when in the 1. choice of wife, in the 2. contract, and 3. solemnization of marriage in the Church (by the Minister, Gods deputy) Gods order hath beene kept; then 4. doth fall out into this question, in marriage to behave our selves, 1 Co. 7.29. as if we had them not. i. as he saith vers. 5. being con∣tent to master his lusts, so that for duties of christianity, we may sepa∣rate our selves: then 5. as Christ, Matth. 5.32. not departing, nor wil∣ling to a divorce, but onely in the case of adultery: And lastly, 1. Cor. 7. vers. ult. after we are delivered by the death of one party, 1 Tim. 5.11. not quickly to waxe wanton againe, and to fall to our lusts: but to be contented to stay our lusts for a time, till the body be resolved to earth, whence it came. These things being observed, and kept, the other controversies shall not greatly trouble us. 8. If the woman be allied to us, as either cognata, or agnata,Incest. a kinsman by the fathers side or mothers, it is Incest: Lev. 18.6. forbidden: and Lev. 20.17. punished with death. And he taketh it for such a plaine case, that he dealeth with it as with a principle: as if the onely naming of mother and sister, were cause sufficient in the light of nature, to restrain us from them. No man hotter then Plato in his Common-wealth a∣gainst it: as also 2 Thes. 4.4. Possesse your vessels in holinesse and honour. The honour we are to give to them of our owne flesh, is that we doe not approach or come neare to them. Other reasons. 1. That the nearenesse of education, which by consanguinity (if the same had not beene removed) even by occasion of nearenesse, would have beene a great incentive, and inticement of lust, and of this sinne. 2. Because not onely a family with it selfe, but one with another, should have friendship and familiarity, which is procured by marriage: which if it were made within the family, every house would have beene as it were a Common-wealth within it selfe: whereas now, there is unity to one family with another; and more made of one another: there∣fore the difficulty of the consideration of Adams children, maketh this somewhat hard to decide; yet this is agreed upon by all, in the right line, (Gen. 2.24.) it hath not beene done, but in the collaterall lines it hath beene done; but there are that of this and more, that makes doubt of it, as divorcement and polygamie, winked at for a time: but God, Levit. 20.23. saith, that the Canaanites, &c. for this abomination the land spued them out: therefore of its owne nature it is unlawfull, and Gen. 49.4. Ruben is punished for Incest: his forfeitures there, before the Law, 1. of the right of the Kingdome to Iudah. 2. of the Priesthood to Levi: and he became like water for his fact. So for the collaterall line, Iohn Baptist, Marke. 6.18. stood in it against Herod, that he might not have his brothers wife: and died in the quarrell. Againe, the sharpe course of the Apostle against the incestuous per∣son, 1 Cor. 5.1. and last, Amos 2.7. Gods owne judgement, that if the father and sonne goe in to one woman, he will not spare them, &c. shew the unlawfulnesse of it, though for necessity tolerated in the be∣ginning.
9. Next,Adultery. if the party be removed, and espoused, or married, (which is all one) it is adultery: and forbidden, Levit. 18.20. & 10. Dent. 22.22. punished with death, and vers. 23.24. he saith plainely, If a maid be betrothed, &c. and so sheweth plainely, that the extension of it is not onely to be understood of the married, but of the espoused too. Now the reason why God continually likeneth adultery to this vice; and there is no vice that he oftner setteth himselfe against, then Incest; and why it pleaseth him to name it in this Commandement: wherein the hainousnesse thereof may the more easily be discovered: therefore we are to consider it, for howsoever politicke men have not punished it with death, yet it is the joynt consent of all Divines, that it is ca∣pitall. We see in it the perverting of the whole estate of these two families, of which the parties are members: and so of every family. For if it be not knowne (which God will not suffer) for howsoever he dealeth in all other, yet he stayeth not in this for an accusation: but in Numb. 5.11. he giveth reine to the jealous man, to put his wife to it, though he cannot accuse her. If it be kept close, it is certaine that in the family of the woman there is notorious theft committed: be∣cause the man nourisheth and bringeth up a child that is none of his▪ and layeth up inheritance for him. And in regard of the brethren because he hath inheritance among them: and he counteth him among the brethren, that is none of his. If it be knowne, God giveth them a plaine marke, and taking away , naturall affection: both from them to the parents, and betweene them and the other children: they all perish at last: as Au∣gustus to his bastards: Medea to her children: Absalom and Adoniah to David, and Iephta and his brethren: and betweene Abimelech and his brethren: they had no naturall affection betweene them: so he sinneth against his own children; & against the children in the other family, and against that that is not: he begetteth one that shall not be accounted of the congregation of the Lord, he that is excluded out of the po∣liticke and ecclesiasticall government, Deut. 23.2. Now it is against the Common-wealth, for it is a common hurt: Levit. 18.17. that it polluteth the land: and the pollution will spue out the inhabitants: and the land cannot be rid of pollution, but by bloudshed: & therefore it is certaine, that adultery, if it be not punished, is a very ready way to bring downe Gods judgements upon the land, rather then those things that are committed more against the popular estate; murthers by poysonings punished with death. Lex Iulia, and the ground of this law, that the adulterous woman thinke with the other, she hath fitter occasion to mingle poyson with their meates: and so every Common-wealth upon such grounds may resolve. To make it capitall, now we see not onely by that, but also by plaine murther; by David, he falleth into murther: Marke 6. Herodias, He∣rods wife, because Iohn was a reprehender of it, a cause of murther. But a good wife, Prov. 31.10. she is a possession that a man will esteeme above pearles: So, besides the former thefts, there is another theft of the appropriety of the party here.
In this Commandement, two things goe further: especially there followeth lightly of this, Incest; by keeping it close: for the party not knowing how he is allied, he cannot tell sometimes which is his race or linage: it falleth out that he joyneth with them with whom he is allied, and to whom he may not match himselfe: and so falleth in∣to such a sinne, &c. therefore not onely that, but divorces: And it is plaine by the whole course of profane Histories, that the greatest civill warres of divers nations; yea, and foraine warres have procee∣ded of misliking: for, as 2 Sam. 13.15. that the hatred of Amnon grew to be more then his love was before: so they must needs excee∣dingly hate one another. To these, if we adde the branch of the ninth commandement, per∣fidiam, false measures, and not onely that barely, but perjury also: for there is a solemne oath delivered to and from the parties before the congregation, and so the breach of the third Commandement: and besides these; that God himselfe threatneth, Ephes. 4.18. that it shall change the wisedome of the wise, and make them sot∣tish; as we see in Solomon: and Hose. 4.11. that it shall take away the heart of the strong. Example in Sampson, the strongest that ever was. These are prejudiciall to the Common-wealth, and the curse of God upon the parties, and the Common-wealth: Deut. 23.2. Hose. 4.10. they shall commit adultery, and shall not increase; hence the bar∣rennesse of the fields, Ier. 23.10. punishment of this, and barren∣nesse of the wombe, Hose. 4.10. and more, Iob 31.12. they shall bee put out: for this fault the two Tribes were punished, as the ten Tribes for Incest; so is the Common-wealth endammaged by it. Gen. 40.22. Egypts course for it: Ioseph was committed to that pri∣son, out of which the chiefe Baker was hanged: therefore it was capi∣tall among them. And Ier. 29.21, 22, 13. the adultery of Ahab, the sonne of Kolaiah, and his companion Zedekiah, sonne of Maaseiah, that the King of Babel should burne them with fire. And his comparison, Prov. 6.30.32. wonderfully abjecting theft, in regard of this. Theft tolerable in respect of this, whereas now theft is commonly punish∣ed with death; and that not a very absurd thing. 10. Now if the parties be solutae, single, if she continue with us, it is concubinatus, the keeping of a Harlot that is not common. How God misliketh it, he sheweth by a continuall threatning, Gen. 21.10. crossed first in Agar; Cast her out, and her sonne. They call them Concubines, which being their servants, or baser, they ought not to marry, for disparagement; yet it was punished with vexing them: Gen. 35.22. punished in Iacob, by Rubens Incest with Billah, and Iudg. 19.2. a Levit tooke a Concubine, and she played the whore: and 2 Sam. 3.7. Saul punished in his Concubines by Abner; and David in his, 2 Sam. 16.12. by Absalom: and Solomons Concubines had the worst issue of all, 1 King. 11. 11. Next, if the deede be done once onely, it is stuprum;Stuprum. done to a Virgin, or Widow, forbidden; Deut. 22.21. the punishment, death. Gen. 34.21. Gods hand on the whole City Shechem for the rape of Dinah; and on Tamar, Gen. 38.25. upon the dishonouring of a
Widow: because they be in potestate alterius, in the power of an other: a Virgin in potestate patris, so an injury to the father; and the Widow being in his power, that is in possibility to marry her, &c. 12. When the deed is oft used,Fornication. it is fornication. Though it be oft used for the generall sinne, ye it is properly called, vaga libido, vagus concubitus, wandring lust, promiscuous: that is, when the party is so before forbidden, Rom. 1.29. Gal. 5.29. more plainely, 1 Cor. 10.8. Numb. 25.9. punished with the death of 23000. Iudg. 20.4. A whole Tribe almost destroyed at once, and that by their brethren having warrant from God; thereby God sheweth plainely what ac∣count he maketh of it. Paena: hard lea∣ving this sin.Beyond these three, the iteration of it, that is a punishment joy∣ned to it: Prov. 21.3. if a man be once taken with it, he shall hardly returne; Prev. 5.12. at his later end, he shall wonder at himselfe, and say, How, &c. vers. 22. it is a sinne with cords; a man shall be bound with it: Prov. 23.27. like the falling into a deepe narrow pit, wherein a man cannot helpe himselfe: therefore hard getting up; and Prov. 7.27. like the grave. As they that are buried in Hell, rise not againe; so they that take a taste of it, shall never returne againe, except by great grace of God, as Solomon: but Prov. 9.18. her ghests, not on∣ly in the grave, but also in the bottome of Hell; shewing plainely that this experieutia cognita knowledge by experience, breedeth still more and more cords, and still deeper and deeper. Prostitutio, Stewes.13. Beyond these is prostitutio: both of private men, Levit. 19.29. and publikely, Ezek. 22.11. Every one did it, chap. 6.24. they built them stewes, a brothell-house, detested by the Prophet: and godly Princes, as Asa, 1 King. 15.12. have laboured to remove them. 14. The last pitch of all, is defending of it:Defense. as we know some by publike writing have maintained: so Gen. 18.19. not the deed, but the cry was very great: and Gen. 19.9. there is a patterne of it. For when Lot had told them that it was not lawfull; they say it is good; wee will doe it, he is a stranger, &c. And of the same with women: Agur, Prov. 30.20. she saith, Non commisi iniquitatem, I have done no wickednesse: and Numb. 25.6. frons meretricis, a whores forehead: for there Zimri brought in a strumpet before Moses and the congregation, being at prayers, and that into his Tent: Phil. 3.19. men glory in their shame. Now against these, are 2. ver∣tues, Castitas, chastity, Coelebs, single. Conjugalis, conjugall. 1 Cor. 7.8. Castitas oelebs.The first commended, vers. 38. It is better then the other, either simply, or else vers. 26. in regard of present necessity, which is to be weighed: that he would have men vers. 32. to be without care. If they be married, vers. 24. there is trouble and care of family, &c. so vers. 5. they must watch, fast and pray with consent: which else they may doe freely, without consent; thus in regard of the troubles and cares of the married estate, coelibatus is the better. And consequently, in a second thing: 1 Cor. 9.15. he might do it, but he would not be burthensome, &c. and he would not be charged with
covetousnesse, but to be liberall: 1 Cor. 7.35. he would have our cleaving to the Lord, to be without separation. Now that these , naturall affections, beget in us a care of res familiares, of domesticall affaires, and too often doe separate us from God in our devotions, and wed us to the world; besides that of the Apostle, vers. 33. experience verifies. Vegetius: minus malum me∣tuit, qui minus delicias gustavit: the lesse evill he tasteth, the lesse evill he feareth: so in regard of this, he will be willinger to die, or to follow Christ: he commeth to the first, and if not that, then to the second, conjugall chastity. Meanes of pre∣serving us &.The manner of behaving our selves, to preserve us that wee may be found unblameable against this sinne of concupiscence, 1. knowing that it is not tentari, but uri, to be set into a heate, to be enflamed, that the Apostle speakes against: for his meaning is not, that the gift of continencie bringeth with it naturalem , privationem sensus, naturall insensibility, or privation of sense. The inward boyling a man may examine thus, whether it be in him a punishment for sinne: It is certaine that adultery, and uncleane lusts are a punishment for pride. Enoch. It is plaine, Ose. 5.5. the spirit of fornication is among them: ratio, because the pride of Israel testifieth to his face: he that can accuse himselfe of pride, may feare that the spirit of fornication is upon him: as contra, if he be assailed with the spirit of fornication, he must looke backe and see, if it be not the punishment of pride: Rom. 1.22. he noteth, that they thought themselves wise, &c. therefore God gave them over unto , vile affections: which appeared first, Gen. 3.7. quasi Deus, to be as God, was the first punishment that came upon him for his pride: he had first neede of Fig-leaves to cover the shame of his nakednesse; as if he punished, contumeliam spiritus, with contumelia carnis, the contumely of the spirit, with the shame of the flesh. 2. Another, 2 Sam. 11.2. , that is, sadnesse, or heavinesse, that a man hath in spirituall things; altogether unlusty to good exer∣cises: he must sleepe, and then walke, &c. so he shall be sure to come to Davids tale: therefore, because man must have pleasure, if he have it not in the spirit, he will have it in the body: and so when he feeleth it in him, then beginneth his minde evagari circa illicita, to rove: and further, there comes in importunitas mentis, importunity of the minde: whence , anger: then , injuries: then , finall destruction. If we finde us guilty in these, it is not the way to strive with this sin; but as with the former, and repent. If it be a tentation onely to sin, its proceeding either from a cause Without, Within. From a cause without, in two respects. 1. Company: Matth. 5.29. a man shall have evill eyes that offend him, and hands; he must cut them off, and refraine their company: Prov. 23.20. 1 Cor. 5.6. modicum fermentum, &c. 1. Pet. 4.4. a man must forsake such company, and be content to beare their outrages.
2. And secondly, in regard of some object, Prov. 5.8. and that is, the offending eye. If the occasion grow by a party, keepe farre from thence, goe not nigh the dore of the house; it must be by eschewing: therefore Iob 31.1. he made a covenant with his eyes, &c. The counsell of Paradise, you shall imperare Evae, command Eve: & cavere Serpentem, and avoide the Serpent: and then you shall be safe, if you come not to see the tree. Gal. 3.3. Many mens love and af∣fection beginnes in the spirit, and after, growing to a carnall delight, ends in the flesh: therefore he saith, 1 Tim. 5.2. Comfort the elder women, as mothers; the younger, as sisters; in omni castuate, in all chastity: and 1. Pet. 1.21. cum omni puritate, love with all purenesse, as farre as you will: but a man must vereri omnia opera sua, be jealous of all his actions: for most certaine it is, that naturally we are subactum solum. 2. From within us: either from the body, or soule. 1. From the body: if it be too much cherished, Impinguatus dilectus, our beloved waxed fat: therefore Paul saith, we must castigare corpus, chastise the body, to make it chaste: 1 Cor. 9.27. that we keep it down, and physicke for it; 2 Cor. 11.28. in wearinesse and painfulnesse, in hunger and thirst, in watching and fasting, in cold and nakednesse, i. by avoyding excesse in dyet and apparell: and as ease, so also of sleepe: so must the body be kept downe. 2. If it be in the soule, for anger and mistrusting: but for this, 1 Cor. 6.18. flie from fornication: 1 Tim. 2.22. flie the lusts of youth. Ambrose, vide ne ingrediaris conflictum, stand not resisting it with com∣bate, but flie: and committing himselfe from solitude to good com∣pany, and together with this, because it hath pleased God to warrant his word as a tree of life, and the leaves of his word are as medicines, that the reading hereof shall be profitable unto us in this behalfe: the seeking of such places, as doe ex diametro pugnare, fight against it, can∣not but be very profitable for us: as Gen. 18.20. that he accounts it a very exceeding grievous sinne: and that it is therefore so grievous, because, 1 Cor. 7.2. he hath appointed a remedy for it: and Prov. 22.14. that in his anger he will suffer a man to fall into it: that it is an in∣famous sinne: that when it is knowne, it maketh him as one of the fooles of Israel, 2 Sam. 13.13. It bereaveth a man of his gifts, Ephes. 4. Hose. 4. that it is a brutish sinne, and makes a man brutish: and such, as Ierom saith, delectat in momenium, & cruciat in aeternum, the delight whereof is momen∣tany, but the paine eternall. And the generall remedy here withall, is prayer: because (Prov. 21.6. & 6.14. & 7. the latter end, & 19.18.) it fhall be a marvellous priviledge of wisedome to keepe a mans selfe from a strange woman: Eccl. 1. there is a speciall remedy for this ten∣tation: so Iames 1.5. that wisedome is Gods gift: Wisd. 8.21. when he saw that wisdome would not come, except God gave it, therefore he conformed himselfe to prayer for it: Iames 3.17. the first thing, it maketh a man , chaste: therefore aske it of God. Where these prevaile not, Gen. 20.17. as Abraham prayed for A∣imelec, so if our owne prayers will not helpe, we must seeke for other
mens prayers, and we must make them knowne to them: therefore we are to take Simon Magus his way, Acts 8.24. Pray ye for me &c. Exo. 9.28. Pharaoh to Moses, &c. Pray you for me. Ecclus. 4.9. Vae soli: nunquam autem magis quam in hoc vitio, Woe to him that is alone: and most of all in the conflict of this vice. And if this will not helpe, but there is ustulatio, burning, 1 Cor. 7.9. there is a remedy appointed for it: he is to take on him the estate of marriage, which is holy. This must be the last. So working conti∣nencie in a mans heart; and outwardly, giving our selves to the keep∣ing downe of the body, by avoiding excesse in diet; and as ease, so also sleepe; to avoid which, give we our selves to sobriety, fasting, prayer, and so briefely to watchfulnesse and modesty in all outward meanes, abstaining from excesse of meat, drink, and apparell: Pe castita∣tem coelibem, or else conjugalem, by single, or conjugall chastity, we may performe this Commandement. The last rule, Numb. 25.18. of the enemies, he vexeth the Madi∣anites, because they had laid this stumbling blocke. A setting of our selves against them, that provoke us to it. So likewise a perswasion to vertue, Gen. 39.9. by Iosephs example: and 2 Sam. 13.13. Thamar, Doe not so; for no such thing ought to be done in Israel.
The VIII. Commandement. Thou shalt not steale. QVo praecepto è carne in mundum transitur, with which commandement, passe we from the flesh to the world: because all worldlinesse and worldly dealings, both whatsoever is prescri∣bed and prohibited, is pertaining to this Com∣mand. as the lusts of the flesh to the former. The concupiscence, that is the beginner of this is called, 1 Iohn 2.16. concupiscentia oculorum, the lust of the eyes: as the other of the flesh. The larger exposition of this Commandement, is Levit. 19.11, 13. & à 35, ad sinem, and Deut. 15. toto, by Christ, Matth. 5.42. and more large, Luke 12.14, ad 46. Paul, Ephes. 4.28. setteth downe both the Affirmative and Negative, Let him that stole, steale no more: but rather let him labour, &c. So agreeable to this is 1 Thes. 4.6. after the ex∣position of the seventh Commandement, vers. 4, 5, & 6. hee saith, Let no man desraud his brother, &c. So from these places and the like, the generall equity of all that shall be spoken of this Commande∣ment, is drawne: retaining in the beginning; that it is not the hand, nor the civill theft, nor contractio rei alienae, the fingering of other mens goods; but it is the minde that God dealeth withall. Deus cor interrogat, non manum, God questions the heart, not the hand: and there is not onely manus aduliera, an adulterous hand, but cor adulierum an adulterous heat also: and not only manus fur, but also  as the Heathen man saith, The heart is a thiefe as well as the hand. To proceed in this in the same course, as in the former: For the de∣pendance of this Commandement, with the other it is exact. For the actions of the part of the soule, that are conversant in the nourishment, and generation, having beene ordered in the seventh Commande∣ment. i. the desire that every man hath to meat, drinke, and apparell, and to increase in the world by propagation: they doe necessarily set aworke the concupiscence of this Commandement. For when there is desire by hunger, desiderium elicit motum, that desire sets him awork: so it brings us to that question, Matth. 6.31. What shall I eate? what shall I drinke? and what shall I put on? So then, because that first for consideration of our lives, 1 Tim. 6.8. that we neede foode and
raiment: as secondly, for preserving the lives of our children, 1 Tim. 5.8. that every man had neede to provide for his family; and so con∣sequently, to labour and care in the world: and that is, either as Eccl. 6.7. Every mans labour propter os, for his mouth: or else, 2 Cor. 12.14. To lay up for his children: here commeth the worldly concu∣piscence, that maketh the object of this Commandement. 1. The moderation of it. The naturall desire of riches was lawfull and good: so likewise is this: and like as in the former reduplication, so here there is a naturall desire: and then we come reduplicare amorem, double our love: and that brings forth insaniam, madnesse. For there is a desire of that, that is sufficient: and after that is doubled; then a desire for vanity; and that is doubled: and then for unlawfull desires and lusts: and so men come from foolishnesse to worldlinesse. We see then in what consequence and order the eighth Commandement hangeth on the seventh, and how men come from foolishnesse to worldlinesse. Wisdome 15.12. he divideth mans life into two parts. 1. It is ludus, for pleasure is the zeale of young men. 2. It followeth the world, and life is counted like a market, altoge∣ther for gaine. 1 Tim. 6.5. They account godlinesse to be nothing else but gaine. And that is their zeale: that when yeares come upon them, then their zeale is gone. Now then as first a mans appetite hath relation to these: so second∣ly, because Eccl. 10.19. bread is for laughter, and wine comforteth the living: sed argenium respondet omnibus, money answereth all things: as the Philosopher, , fidejusor pro omnibus, it is surely for every thing: then this second affection commeth in, , the love of money, only in regard of the first. For this being once received in the worldly dealings, there is a promise of , selfe sufficiencie: that if they have money, they cannot want. Menander sheweth that the cornu Amali heae, that the Poets talked much of, is nothing else but money: for if you have that once, you shall have , friends, auxiliaries, witnesses, company to dwell with thee, and all. The promise of , selfe-sufficiencie, a great part of felicity; maketh men so doate on it; And then secondly, there is a , power, or grandor joyned to it: Gen. 26.16. Ismael growne mighty by it. Prov. 18.11. It is like a high wall, and a strong Towre. This also is that that setteth men forward. So that when men are come to the first, and finde not , selfe-sufficiencie, then he must needs have more; then commeth in , covetousnesse. And when they have got, they must still have more: and so it proveth  for that is the suggestion of the Devill: if you had more it were bet∣ter; and for that you are not in estate now, the reason is, you have still too little, and so still goeth forward: Eccl. 5.9. he that loveth silver, shall not be satisfied with silver: and he that loveth riches, shall be with∣out the fruit thereof, he shall never make an end. Now then he either goeth thus, in infinitum, Eccl. 4.8. he hath nore to care for: and he yet leaveth not to take thought: and that is, as he faith, a monster: or else
they returne to the flesh againe: and when he hath gotten that which is the right, and naturall conclusion of riches: as the rich man saith, Luke 12.19. Anima mea, ede, bibe, eate and drinke, O my soule: thou hast enough: and so, redit tanquam in circulo, and so he comes round like one in a circle. So we see the proceeding of it: either that it hath a monstrous end, or that it returneth to the naturall end. Sus rspectu De.For the scope or aime that God the Law-giver had in this Com∣mandement; that after a mans chastity, or purenesse, which pertai∣neth to his Essence: is principally his wealth. And that, as Iames, the principall effect that he accounteth, is his mercie and doing good, And in this point, Luke 6.35. that in respect of God himselfe, the end is, we should be like him in mercie and doing well, and furthering the good of our neighbours. . Raue F∣ctesiae.Then secondly, for the Church. Because the end in regard of the Church, 1 Tim. 6.20. O Timothee, serva depositum, keepe that which is committed to thy trust, unto the end. Chrysost. Not onely Timo∣thy had a depositum; but every man, whether it be learning, strength, or art, it is his depositum, and is therefore put into his hands, that he may employ it to the benefit of the whole body: as 1 Cor. 12. The sight is not received for the eye alone, but for all the body; that there may be a communion of Saints. For when goods are detained, there is an interverting and defrauding. So the communion of Gods Saints is the end of this depositum, for this cause given of God to the Church. For the Common-wealth, 1 Cor. 6.6. It is not the peace thereof that keepeth men from bloudshed,3. Ratione ei∣ablica. but it is the other peace. i. a peace whereby every man is willing to doe good to his neighbour; and ra∣to part from his right, then to doe injurie; whereby that the labou∣rer might have his hire: Matth. 10.10. that Caesar might have his right, his tribute and custome: Rom. 13.7. that they that sow spiri∣tuall things, of duty should reape temporall things. 4. Ratione cu∣jusque privati.Now for every private man, it is the defence of his possessions, and blessings that he hath. Exod. 21.22.23. cap. So soone as he had done with the morall law, he commeth to the politicke law. For much suite is about that. Come to the matter commanded and forbidden: but yet because we are commanded to deale with right and propriety, and with alienation, we must first make this plaine. Because indeed, as we see res aliena & nostra, that other mens goods seised upon, as if our owne: and the unjust detaining and taking of them, is the mat∣ter of this Commandement: therefore we will first speake of the ob∣ject of this Commandement, of the object of this concupiscence, Meum & Tuum,Meum & Tuum. Mine and Thine. The civill Lawyers defineDefinitie Fur∣t Justinian (mutiata a Pau∣o Castensi) ac est, Furtum est contrectatio fraudulosa lucrifacienda gratia, vel ipsius rei, vel etiam usu, possessionisve, quod lege naturali prehibitum est admiere. Ray mundus de penna forti (quam siquuntur Iurisperiti) hoc mdo, Furtum est cotestatio rei alienae mo∣lis & epralis fraudulenta invito Domine, gratia luerandi em psam, el usum ejus, vel possessionem veram. Martinus Apilenca Navat em. 3. (in hoc praec.) in Euchar. confess. & oenit. hoc mdo, Fuum est dolosa connectatio rei alienae  ito Domin suo, ad proprietatem ejus, aut possessionem, aut usum acquirendum. Tho. Aquin secundae secundae Quaest. 66. art. 3. in hun medum, Futum est occulta acceptio rei alienae; At communiter Theologi, furtum est occulia rei alienae ac∣cepti imito Domin. Furtum, or furari, theft, or to steale, to be, Rem alienam contrectare, the laying of hands (closely) upon other mens goods: our Divines, consentire contrectationi rei alienae, to con∣sent
to the (close) laying of hands upon other mens goods: In the which Commandement we shall shew, that concupiscere re alienam, is furari, to covet another mans goods, is to steale. So here, how commeth it to passe, that there is Res mea & aliena,How  coms that the i  mea & ali. a property of goods appertaining to me, and to another: this must first be knowne. It is therefore plaine by Psal. 24.1. he saith, The earth is the Lords, &c. i. it is his, he made it: and so consequently, he hath right to it alone. After that he made it, Psal. 115.16. Coelum coeli Domino, & terram dedit filtis hominum, the Heaven, yea even the Heavens are the Lords, but the Earth hath he given to the children of men. And so there is a giving over of Gods right unto men: And the warrant hereof we have, Gen. 1.28. Fill the earth, and dominamini, have domi∣nion: there is the warrant for the possessing and subduing of the earth by man. This in generall. Particularly, that if man had continued in innocencie, there is none but in the state of innocencie would have beene contented with that that is sufficient: we should not have beene troubled with our unruly appetites; for the earth would have beene sufficient for all. But after the entring in of sinne, it was necessary there should be a division: and so it pleased God. For though the occasion hereof was evill, (for as good Lawes come out of an evill cause) as it was Cains persecution of Abel, that made Seth to gather together. So that first inclosure, or impropriation of a City, Gen. 4.17. Caine chose out a plot, and there he built a City, and called it after his sonnes name. This gave occa∣sion to the Fathers and Patriarchs themselves, seeing the usurping of Cains government, and seeing the expediencie of it, in regard of well ordering of private possessions, it made them to doe the like. This is it, that Noah did presently after the floud: so it beganne presently after the floud. So it beganne jure primae occupationis, by right of the first possessing, or seising on it: by the right of prima occupatio: whether the allotting of Noah of the chiefe parts unto his three sonnes: he gave Africa to Cham, Asia to Sem, and Europe to Iapheth: or whether it were by consent and agreement among themselves; the former, Gen. 11.31. the other, Gen. 13.9, 10, 11. It is said there, that Abraham and Lot agreed to part the Countrey betweene them: and Lot, though he were the younger, had the choyce. So then we see how matters stood at the first. Epictetus sheweth it by a familiar Simile. Where a dish is brought to the table, before it is cut up, it is said to be common to all that sit at the table: but after it is cut of, that every man hath shared his part, then quam quisque occupavit partem, what part soever a man hath shared for himselfe, it is no justice, or civility to take it off his trencher. So first, all the earth was mankinds, and then they divided it: as Deut. 11.24. Omnem locum quem calcaverit pes vester, every place whereon the soles of your feete shall tread, I give it to you, it is yours. So it was pedis calcatio, or occupatio, the treading of the foote, or occu∣pation, that entitled every man to his first right. And a second right. There is a right in common, and right in pro∣prium, propriety: as right in common is prima occupatio, the first posses∣sion: when we seise upon a Countrey, in which no body is; or if it
be terra derelicto, a land given over: whosoever is primus occupatur, the first seisor on it, hath the jus, right of it. And secondly, of things immovable, immobilium est praescriptio, mobilium usurpatio, there is a prescription of goods immovable, an usurpation of the movable: and there are two very good reasons for this: 1. Because the Common-wealth doth marvellously respect terrenam pacem, mutuall outward peace: and doth looke to bloudshed; and because infinite quarrels might arise out of this, and men might forge evidences, therefore to cut off this, there is Praescriptio. But the second hath more shew: The Common-wealth saith this: If any man neglect his owne right, (for that is our Maxime) interest reipublicae, ut quisque re sua recte utatur, the Common-wealth is to have a care, that every man use his goods aright: if he neglect them, that except the Common-wealth should take order for them, they should perish; the Common-wealth taketh order to punish him for his neg∣ligence: and saith, If he leave his ground without tilth so many yeares, till such a prescript time, he shall lose it. And thus every one doth possesse his things, in communi jure, the common Law. The jus proprium, the right of propriety, added to the second mem∣ber, that it is done ex jure belli, by the law of Armes: because the Magistrate hath gladium exteriorem, he hath authority to punish any outward offence, and him that doth it: and so consequently persisting in his obstinacie, may cast him out: as Gen. 48.22. The inheritance that Iacob gave to Ioseph, he had gotten it of the Amorite by his sword and bow; jure justi belli, by a lawfull wārre. Now this proprium jus, right of propriety, ariseth thus. For after a man is thus seised on any thing, whether it be a publike possession, or private, he taketh it in 4. rights. In jure popr, a man hath 4 hs.1. Besides his Dominion and Lordship over it, he hath usum: he may use the thing, as his horse to ride on. 2. Eructum, whatsoever commeth of the horse. 3. Consumptionem, the spending of it; he may kill it. 4. Alienationem, the making of it from himselfe, to another: as sel∣ling or giving of it. This had the Patriarch at the first. Now accor∣ding to these foure things, commeth in jus proprium, the right of pro∣priety: for having power to alienate, he hath power to doe it, either liberally and freely, or illiberaliter; as in debt. I will set it &c. or it shall goe for debt. Now in this giving freely, or otherwise, he hath power to translate either the whole Dominion, and likewise the pro∣perty of it, or nothing but the use of it, or the usus fructus, the profit of it: and this, either for a time, or for ever. See it in particulars. When a man doth alienate the property and use and all of a thing, libe∣rally, and for ever,Dnat. without any consideration, then it is called Dona∣tio, a gift, or legacie: and that is of two sorts, either in a mans life, or when he is a dying. So he translateth the right of his succession at his death to his childe. Now if he doe translate a thing liberally, and but for a time;Mutuum. then it is called mutuum, a loane: he lendeth it, but without consideration. And if he translate not the thing, but the use of it, then it is commodatum, borrowed to be used: though com∣monly it be taken for that that is but for some particular use: and then the end is named; and this is first for the fruit; so is alienation.
Contractus inn∣minatus.Now secondly, that that is called alienatio illiberalis, in considera∣tion it is called donatio illiberalis, they commonly call it by the name of contractus innominatus: and that is of three sorts. 1. Do ut des. 2. Do ut sacias. 3. Facio ut des. These contracts innominate are not unusu∣all in these dayes. For lightly every contract we make falleth into one of these. Of them the first is a kinde of . 1. I let into your hands such a Farme, on the condition that you husband it, and in regard of the properties, give me thus much. 2. And of the second, feoda, fees for homage, when for service something is given. 3. The third, they call contractum civilem, a civill contract. Now then for Do ut des. The old order,Permuta. when men beganne to bee weary of liberality; the first brood of it was permutation, , which now is referred to two kinds: either money for money, and that is called cambium, exchange: or else it is that they call Bartering,Cambium. Bartering. when one thing is given for another, out of money: and this is where there is percommutatio. Now, where it is pecuniae pro re, or rei pro pecunia, money for goods, or goods for money, there commeth in two: for where is commutatio rei pro pecunia, an exchange of goods for money, it is emptio, buying:Emptio. Venditio. & the contrary, nummi pro re, the change of mony for goods, is venditio, selling: Which is divided either into negotiationem, whole sale; or by parcels retailing. And this is in the alienation of the thing it selfe. Then besides this alienatio usus rei, making away the use of the goods, and that illiberalis, illiberally too: not of the thing wholly,Cond. but of the use of any thing separated from the propriety: and that if it be usus rei pro pecunia, hiring; if pecuniae pro usu rei, then locatio,Lcati. let∣ting. And out of this groweth another, that is distrustfulnesse: be∣cause sometimes wee will let one have the use, whereas yet wee dare not trust him with the property of it: and so consequently, there groweth another contract out of this; the contract of words and wri∣tings, of pawnes, of pledges, and suretiship. In regard of words, if he be content with his bare word; in regard of him that requireth it,Stipulatio, Sponsio. it is called Stipulatio, in regard of him that giveth it, Sponsio. If it be in writing (these are proles humanae perfidiae) if he be content with his owne writing alone, it is called Chirographum: Otherwise,Chirographum. Syngrapha. if wee have other mens hands with him, then it is called Syngrapha. If it be Rei, reall, then it is either in regard of some oath;Cautio. and then it is Cau∣tio: or for the recovery of some thing received; and then it is either moveable, and that is Pignus: or immovable, as lands;Pignus. and they are called . If it be personall, then either in warre;. Obsides. Predes. Ʋades. Fidejussores. Ex promisse. and they are hostages, Obsides: or for a publike condemning of a Common-wealth, and they are Predes: or in a criminall cause, Vades: or else in a matter of money, of debt, fidejussores. If he enter a band, if there be but his bare word, they call it ex promisso. They adde to this the contract of Depositum, and that they call Fiduciare; while a man liveth,Fiduciare. or when he dieth. But I cannot see how Depositum can be a contract. Now to the appētite it selfe, how that stands affected, in regard of this object: and then, as it falleth either in his order, or in his manner,
and measure. In his order thus: that whereas there be two things that a mans desire is carried unto; 1. The enjoying of the end it selfe. 2. Of those meanes, quae tendunt ad finem, which conduce to the attaining of that end: There must be (as Aristotle) a division out of the faculty, a double desire, duplex amor, and double love, and double concupiscence; because there be two things, and one is greater then another; 1. wherewith we desire the last fruition, and another whereby we seeme appetere, to long after that that doth further us to the end. Then whereas the end is greater, so the love of it must be prior & major, both timelier and greater then the other love, of which the object of this is one. Then this is that which we hold: first, that as in the ministring of medicine to the body, there is a certaine quantity and measure, which if it faile, it purgeth not all the humour; if it be more, it purgeth all the humour, and somewhat else, that it should not purge: So in the affections and appetites of the soule, there is in some a desire of these things, yet mixed with some defect: neglect then is no regard, &c. And in other some, there is such an excessive desire, that either they are affected to worldly things more then they should be; or so, that they can be content to forget their duty, as Heb. 12.16. hee saith hee would not have one to be as Esau, to forget his birthright, his blessing that God bestowed on him, for a messe of pottage, or meate: there∣fore it is expedient that we take the measure it selfe first: and that we must beginne after this order, 1 Tim. 6.8. . And having foode and rtiment, let us be therewith content. A contented minde, that if it please God to bestow no more on us, then these, yet we stand contented. The reason is, because wee see that God hath created poore men and rich; as having plenty of spirit, so plenty of wealth, he might have made all rich: the reason that hindered this, was, as Ambrose saith, that as the rich might have prae∣mium benignitatis, the recompence of their bounty, so that he might crowne the poore man, cum mercede patientiae. So saith Sol. Prov. 22.2. And therefore every man is to stand contented, if he will, to call him higher: adding no cares which may breed noysome lusts; thus must he stand, because it is Gods good will and pleasure: and then 2 Cor. 8.15. out of Exod. 16.18. he that gathereth much, hath no∣thing over; and he that gathereth a little, hath nothing lesse, when he dieth: therefore making this the first part of measure, not to seeke to rise otherwise then God will. And then secondly, that it is lawfull, Prov. 6.8. to gather in Summer for the time that is to come, by honest meanes, and with a sober minde. And then thirdly, that he seeth his houshold increase (as when Iacob saw the Patriarchs increased in his house; Gen. 30.30. we see what care he tooke for them: When shall I travell for mine owne house, &c. So this desire and care he may have of them that pertaine to him, being alwayes limited with the former conditions: Prov. 5.15. that he may drinke out of his owne Cisterns, i. that he may have of his owne, 2 Cor. 12.13. that he may not be chargeable to others: and as Sol. ut habeat fonies, qui deriventur foras, us tamen juste Dominus eorum sit: the meaning is, that he may be libe∣rall
to others, and yet have to suffice himselfe, that he may have to pay his ditrachma: Exod. 30.12. to helpe the Church, and Matth. 22.29. the Common-wealth, and 2 Cor. 8.12. that he may have where∣by to do good to poore Saints: as Eph. 4.28. to have for himselfe, and to give to them that need. Thus far if the meanes be kept, and a sober minde, the measure is kept. Now if he goe beyond this, 1 Tim. 6.10. then beginneth the roote of this; 1. he murmureth at another, in regard that he hath a better condition. Exod. 16.3. They would have tarried in Egypt still: We will go to Egypt againe. They preferred the life in Egypt, before the life in deserto, in the Wildernesse: First, the life by the flesh-pots, before Gods service: And secondly, a disquietnesse also after that. Mat. 6.31. Quid comedam? quid bibam? quid induam? what shall I eate? what shall I drink? wherewithall shall I be cloathed? And that care∣fulnesse the rich have, Luke 12.17. the rich man reasoneth with him∣selfe: and so the third, out of these: it breedeth a neast of horse-leaches, a worme with lingua bisulca, a forked tongue, crying Affer, affer: unde habeas nihil resert, sed oportet habere: bring, bring; it is no matter how, or whence you have it, for have it you must: upon these three standeth this suppuratio concupiscentiae, the Impostume of lust. Now for the making of subactum solum, of the ground and soile meete: as Tit. 2. the taking of an estate above our proportion, hee that will beare a bigger saile then he is able to carry, cui plus opus est, then he needeth, then he falleth unto unlawfull practises, then is hee a fit soile for the Devill to cast in his seed; and he moveth him to stealth, and the provocation and allurement. Luke 15.13. he setteth downe, that the prodigall sonne fell upon a riotous company of wa∣sters, & sic dissipavit suum patrimonium, and so wasted his substance: If a man follow such company, it will set him supra analogiam, above his allowance. He must spend lawfully and orderly, and then as Prov. 1.12. he will speake as they speake. 1. The breaking forth of this is in icterum, into a Jaundise: we have examples, 2 King. 21.2. of A∣habs eye: because he saw a thing that served for his turne, though hee had enough; he could never be well till he had it: and when he could not by right, he got it by wrong, and by the bloud of an innocent man. And the foamings out at the mouth, there be many set downe by the Heathen man, and Menander is full, to that purpose out of the booke of the Preacher, and of Wisdome. If a man had an inheritance with wisdome, Eccl. 7.11.12.4. The shadow of wisdome is good, but the shadow of money will doe well. Then succeedeth the Act. Now to the act of thoft, reducing all these uses that we said were lawfull, to these that are common among Lawyers. 1. The attaining, and getting of riches. 2. The use of them. In attaining is respect to justice, in the use is respect to justice and charity. For, as was said be∣fore, we have them given us, not onely for our selves, but as the Apostle 2 Cor. 9.11. for liberality; and so we see Deut. 16.11.12. God taketh order, that out of the substance, both the Levit, stranger, widow, and poore should have their portions. Of the getting justly, and of theft in getting committed. Things from the beginning, by the law of nature were first common: and in
extreme necessity by that direction, Prov. 6.30. of the fault, and by the order that God taketh, Deut. 23.24. If he be hungry, he may eat of his neighbours Grapes: so that he put none into his vessell, to car∣ry away with him. And so likewise in the profane law, whereby pro∣perties are distinguished, further then extreme necessity it holdeth not. So a second right in those things that yet remaine common; as fowles, fishes, and those things that we commonly finde on the Sea-shore, as pearles: and further after the distribution, in prima occupatione, in the first seising on a Countrey, there was a propriety to every man, and a part of possession of every Countrey allotted to remaine common, for the benefit of the poore in that measure. After, for the proprieties by publike right, we laid foure. 1. Seising on a Countrey. 2. those things that were left and forsaken. Res derelictae, given over. 3. Pre∣scription. 4. The right by the bow and the sword, by warre. For private use: by liberality, and justice. Illiberalis alienatio, in these alienations before mentioned. Injury in getting is wrought three wayes, so is theft: The first two be in Levit. 19. Non extorquebis, neque fraudabis. Thou shalt not ex∣tort, that is rapina,Rapina. robbery: Thou shalt not deceive, this is furium, theft. And a third to these may be added, as we shall shew afterwards. The genus to these, Habak. 2.6. calleth congregare non sua, to increase that which is not his owne: and Mar. 10.19. the desire to be rich. 1 Tim. 6.9. They fall into temptations, and many hurtfull desires: and as the Heathen man saith, qui vult dives fieri, vult cito fieri, he that would be rich, would be rich suddenly: and Prov. 28.22. Surely a man cannot be innocent, if he make haste to be rich: then his desire cannot so soone be accomplished, but he must needs be intangled with some of these species, kinds following. 1. They beginne with rash∣nesse, that by force and extortion take away, Prov. 11.24. he saith, semper erunt in egestate, they shall still be in want: many times God bringeth this most upon them, that it stayeth not: and 2. Prov. 25.7. he saith, that he bringeth a sudden death: so that of deceitfull men, Prov. 12.27. it is said; That they get in hunting they shall never roste and Haba. 2.8. Vae tibi qui spolias, nam & ipse spoliaberis, woe bee to thee that spoylest others, for thou shalt be spoyled thy selfe: They be, as the Heathen man saith, as sponges; and some tyrannous Prince seiseth upon them: but howsoever it falleth out with them, 1 Cor. 5.11. they are not to be accounted as brethren in the Church: and 6.10. certainely they shall never inherit the Kingdome of God. This is for the fault in generall. It receiveth this division: for there are some that set themselves to spoyle their neighbours in suum commodum, for their owne profit; but sometimes it is in damnum & detrimentum proximi, to doe their neighbour a mischiefe onely: in which respect wee may consider incendiarios,nendia, Sorcerers and Witches. such as will set houses and barnes on fire: so likewise Sorcerers, that wreake themselves on their neigh∣bours goods. Exod. 22.5.6. God taketh order for this. If any man set fire on stacks of corne, or standing corne, he shall make it good. Now of those that doe it for their owne profit, we may consider them thus: either as they doe it under colour of authority, or without. If
under colour of authority, either as in peace, or warre. In warre, after he is a souldier, he spoyleth whomsoever he meeteth withall:Praedo. Praedo. That Iohn speakes against ravening, Luke 3.14. and Ezek. 38.10. and so forward. In peace we come to consider them, that Esay speaketh of, c. 1.23. Principes tui sunt socii furum, thy Princes are companions of theeves: and so Ezek. 22.27. Their Princes were like wolves rave∣ning for their prey, yea to destroy soules for their covetous lucre; and that is done, either by usurpation, if to a private family: and there∣fore the children of Dan were accursed, Iudg. 18.25. to a family, vers. 27. to a whole City, for whether it be for smaller matters, Gen. 25.25. there is a reproofe, and objection of injury of Abraham to A∣bimelech, for a Well. And a third also, Esa. 22.15. that extorting of offices, that which was the vice of Shebnah, or if they be rightly seized on their places, and be no usurpers, and they be called by authority, yet then another way; Esa. 10.1. Psal. 94.10. that they enact grievous Statutes, and doe ponere molestiam praeter statutum, vexe and oppresse beyond law, which no Statute will warrant. And besides that, Nehem. 5.13. such as their rulers were before he came, both themselves, and their under-officers. And we speake not heare of Princes onely, and Magistrates, but of pety-lords. Aug. that Regna magna, great King∣domes; are nothing but magna latrooinia, remota justitia, great spoylers, if justice be not duely administred: and the answer of the Pirate to Alexander, that he with a great armie did rob great Countries; and he did it but with one Ship onely, and with a small company. And the Lawyers make this difference betwixt great theeves and little theeves: that the one weareth a coller of iron, and the other a chaine of gold: so great and noble men, and gentlemen to tenants. Esa. 3.14.15. The spoyle of the poore is in their houses: or, as Micah set∣teth it out more terrible, but yet truely, cap. 3.2.3. that they plucked off their skinnes, brake their bones, and chopt their flesh as for the pot: which Esa. 58.6. plainely expoundeth, he meaneth those that binde the people in hard covenants, taking more of them, then either justice requireth, or their state can beare: and consequently they are under those, having superiority by debt, as the servant, Matth. 18.28. met with one of his fellow servants that ought him money, and tooke him by the throat, and said, Pay me that thou owest me: there condem∣ned. And so Deut. 24.10.11. when any thing is lent, hee will not have him that lent, goe into the house, as Lord of the house: but hee shall stay at the dore, and the other shall bring it out to him. So such as Esa. 5.8. speaketh of, he will be solus: they will dwell alone, they will be Lords alone, and Rulers, and Magistrates, rich alone; they will alone have the sale of any thing, and will be alone in any thing, by what authority they can arme themselves. Come to the other sort, that have no colour of authority: Psal. 62.10. Trust not in oppression and wrong: hee denieth them oppression and robbery. Now for Robbery, it is either on the sea, or on the land. On the sea, Pirates; Ezek. 27.26. against Pirates. On land, ei∣ther such as rob in the way, and they are latrones, such Luke 10.36. that man fell into the hands of theeves: or else those they call fractores,
Burglary. Burglary. Exod. 22.2. And so this may come to the second, Non fraudabis, thou shalt not defraud, Levit. 19.3. In this, as in the other, the first member is, either furium manifestum, manifest theft, or con∣ceptum, close: and in that these men are called receptores, receivers, or succentarit, the Proverbe is, It is all one to hold the sacke, and to fill it. Exod. 22.4. Looke where the theft is found, though he stole it not, he shall be brought before the Judge, and shew how hee came by it. So whether he receive res raptas, or furtivas, goods taken by robbery, or stolne, for the theeves; and themselves: And for manifest theft: this order, that because the Apostle, Ephes. 4.28. where the af∣firmative of this is, he placeth two things; 1. a calling. 2. labour in that calling.Such  h no calling. Sowe will beginne with them first that have no calling, 1 Tim. 5.20. or an unlawfull calling: and there commeth in the third member, rapina, furium, & turpe lucrum, robbery, theft, and filthy lucre. These that have no calling, the civill law divideth thus; Into beggers, and rogues, and superfluous gentlemen: for as the one ought not to live precario, by begging; Deut. 15.4. In that part, by us, so much as in us lieth, there shall not be a begger in all Israel. So likewise the other, because they stand against the good of mankinde, Gen. 2.15.1. in Paradise, 2. out of Paradise; he saith, they were put into the East part of Eden, ut operarentur, that they should dresse and keepe it: They should eate in care, and sweate of browes: and these doe neither, but live voluptuously and idlely: and therefore be theeves; and therefore are to be placed here. For when God giveth his reward, Matth. 20.8. he will say to the steward, Vocato operarios, , call the labourers, and pay them their wages. But Matth. 25.30. when he commeth to punish, he will punish not onely servum flagiti∣osum, but servum inutilem. i. superfluam creaturam, the wicked servant, but even the unprofitable and superfluous creature; and cast him in tenebras, into outer darknesse. Call these idle fellowes, that neither eate their bread in care, nor in the sweate of their browes. So the word, Gen. 3.17. Prov. 10.10. & 15.13. he saith, Care and study that, &c. Or else he must necessarily operari manibu, labour with his hands: his browes must sweate for it. In 1 Cor. 12.21. he setteth downe an opposition betweene the eye and the hand, or the head and the foote: so that if it be not the eye that directeth, nor the head that provideth and directeth, nor the hand and foote, and so labour be not at all: then certainely he is to be accounted as a thiefe. Such as have an evill calling.Betweene nequam & nequaqum, God putteth no difference: there∣fore, no calling and an evill calling is all one; therefore , in both it is filthie lucre: they that have evill callings, these Harlots Deut. 23.17. these lenones, bawdes, and keepers of them, are plainely forbidden: Levit. 19.2. those that the civill officers calleth mathema∣tici, tellers of destinies, Egyptians, and Juglers: we may put them up in the same crue: Deut. 18.10. Because they bring in profit: and so not see how this matter standeth. Then after we come nearer to fur∣tum, theft: but yet so, as we shew first how it commeth to passe that we may receive these things, how these things were brought first. 1. We may alienate by donation, Iob. 6.22. Nunquid dabitis mihi
de substantia vestra? Did I say, bring unto me, or give a reward for me of your substance? that is, it must not be another mans, but our owne. 2. And secondly, out of that, as Abraham reasoneth, Gen. 15.3. in inheritance he saith, Ecce servus meus haeres erit, loe my servant shall be mine heire: and Numb. 27.7. God hath taken full order for it, that it shall goe downe to a mans children, both to the sonnes and the daughters: so that it is a foolish shew of lex Salica in France: a thing prejudicialll both to the law of nature, and Gods law: and Iohn 4.38. he saith, I have set you to reape there where you have not laboured, &c. whereby he sheweth, that we have not onely authority to con∣veigh lands, but also our labours unto others; and that by a good tenure, 1. donatione, 2. haereditate, by gift, and inheritance. Now otherwise there must be industria, paines-taking: which is in three things called the legitimum, viz. 1. labour, 2. cost, 3. perill. 1. For labour, Gen. 29.15. Laban saith to Iacob; It is no reason that thou shouldest serve me, and labour for me, (though you be my brothers sonne) and have nothing: tell me what shall be thy wages? and so telleth plainely, that labour commeth in compensationem, to be recompenced: and Matth. 10.10. he saith, Dignus est operarius mercede, the labourer is worthy of his hire. The rule is Equality, 2 Cor. 8.14. , that there may be equality: So then there is an equality between operarius & merces, the labourer, & the reward: and Deut. 24.15. It shall not be detained: and if it be detained, it shall be peccatum clamans, a crying sinne: therefore he is a thiefe that detai∣neth the reward of him that taketh paines for him. 2. For perill: we see that was in estimation to Calb, Iosh. 15.16. There was a well fenced City, hard to be wonne; Caleb, he maketh a Proclamation, Whosoever can get Kiriath Sepher, and winne it, he shall be rewarded: so Othoniel got it, and had his daughter for a re∣ward. And the same course we see, 1 Sam. 17.25. Saul saith, when the Philistim came to revile Isaael, He that will venture upon the Philistim, shall be my sonne in law, and shall marry my daughter, and I will give him great riches, &c. and David slew him, and had, &c. And so David, for the winning of Iebus, that had rebelled against him, He that getteth Iebus, (1 Cron. 11.6.) shall bee Captaine of the hoste: and Ioab went up first, and was made Captaine. And in this respect it is, because the Merchants perill is greater then the Husbandmans; which ventureth but his seede, and he ventureth his goods and life too: therefore his gaines is allowed to be great. 3. Now then for cost, in laying up: and so for building of houses: and furnishing himselfe more then needeth, onely in publicum usum, for the publike use: as Ioseph, Gen. 41.15. he sels the corne that hee had laid up saleable to his cost; that they call multiplicem usuram, mul∣tiplied usury. And in the like, 2 Chron. 36. vers. last: God allotted to Cyrus, that they call usum pretiosum, a most rich reward: so any of these wayes a man may receive money for it. Now then, beyond these of Industria, industry, there are two more, first damnum, or detrimentum, dammage or losse: Exod. 22.5. Lastly,
money: it is pretium indeed, Eccles. 10.29. and so▪ God hath appoin∣ted that the ground of buying and selling should be by it. Levit. 25.14. and 27.18. Rules given for buying and selling. These thus standing, we come to say that there is furtum occultum, close theft; In Contracts, our of Contracts. 1. Occultum fur∣tum in Con∣tracts.1. In Contracts, when a thing is sold, that cannot be sold; or let, that cannot be let: as when a man would buy the grace of God for money, as Simon Magus. But Peter, Acts 8.20. rebuked him for it: Pecunia tua pereat tecum, let thy money perish with thee: this is called Simony, of him that first offered it in the New Testament. 2. And of the like nature to spirituall things, are those that are an∣nexed to spirituall things, and cannot be translated but to those that have those spirituall things: as Iohn 2.15. about Doves; but they were profane, not spirituall things: but the other, those that sold Ox∣en, and the exchangers, he threw out of the Temple. But to those that sold Doves, vers. 16. he said &c. So Simony, even in resacra, in sacred things,Simon. is when justice is sold. Saint Ambrose and Saint Au∣gust. Quid dabitis mihi ut faciam justitiam? & quid dabitis mihi ut vendam vobis Deum? What will you give me, that I may doe justice? and what will you give me that I may sell you God? it is all one. Also Esa. 5.23. they justifie the wicked for reward. 3. And a third thing under the selling, we may account of the sel∣ling of gratutta beneficentia, of liberality: as Iudx nummarius, an Usurer to sell money, being vitiosa contractio, an unlawfull Contract: Psal. 112.6. & 37.21. and Luke 6.35. , nothing must be hoped for: and it should returne a great reward. Gratuitum & mutuum, a Loane; and no hope of recompence, must goe together: whosoever he be that setteth a price upon that liberality, vendere mutuum, to sell a Loane: it is a corruption of vertue: for donatio is liberalis alienatio sine omni mercede, in aeternum, & mutuum is ad tempus, A gift is a free alienation for ever, without any reward at all, and a Loane is but for a time. And because two things are to be required in Contracts, labor & merces, & res appretiata & pretium, & cura & stipendium, the la∣bour and the hire, the price and the thing apprized, the care and the stipend: Magistrates tribute for his care: therefore to consider both these, and theft in both: Ezek. 34.3. If they eate the fat, and clothe them with the wooll, and kill them that are fed, and feede not the sheepe, he calleth them robbers. i. fures officii, theeves in the office. And a Scholler,Fives officii. Prov. 17.16. if he have pretium sapientiae, the price of wisdome, of his study, and if he have not curam sapientiae, a care of wisdome, he is fur, a thiefe of his study: he maketh not that equa∣lity. Now on the other side, if he doe labour, Deut. 24.15. the la∣bourer must have his hire: but he must have, as Zach. 11.13. by the contrary of that which is there set downe, he must have decorum pre∣tium, a goodly price: i. there must be a correspondencie betweene his labour and his price: as Deut. 15.14. he must give him a reward, and that a liberall reward: i. that we see, that we neither defraud him whol∣ly in the reward, nor that we pinch him in it. Now then to the substance of Contracts, and as before wee consi∣dered,
pretium & rem appretiatam, the price, and the thing apprized: so here we consider, pretium, mensura, & merx, the price, the mea∣sure, and the wares. Now in pretio or mensura, in the measure or price, there is a double fault: for first there is a corruption of the measure only: and then secondly, there is anomalia, inequality or disproportion: if it be a corruption of the measure onely; they are adulieratores mo∣netae, counterfeiters of money: and therefore grievously punished. Gen. 23.16. It is said that Abraham weighed 400. shekels to Ephron, and that ex argento, of silver currant, apud quemlibet mercatorem, with the Merchant. Order must be that we know the weights. 1. Whosoever it be,Coyners. that as it is, Esa. 1.28. mingleth a baser substance with the metall, as drosse with silver, he is an abuser of it: or as Levit. 27.25. hee that maketh a shekel lesse weight, that clippeth it: and therefore whoso∣ever hath that money, maketh a generall unproportion in all Contracts, and bringeth an universall confusion, and is executed as a Traitor. Then the next after is as good, but yet not answerable in wares: for in wares, that they be good; first they consider the substance of them, that they be not quisquiliae frugum, the refuse of the corne: Amos 8.6. Esa. 1.22. mingled with substance: to mingle wine with water, is a corrupting of the wares: so if in substance, they are false, or mingled, they are naught. 2. And for the quantity of it, Levit. 19.34. Prov. 20.10. & 11.1. be sheweth plainely, that false weights and measures are an abomination to the Lord. 3. And in the quality, as God speaketh, Levit. 19.11. where there is a deceit, where a man knoweth that that which he selleth hath a generall fault: and so the buyer is to be told it; or else the price a∣bated. If it be such as may serve for thy use, and cannot be turned for other mens uses; if there be not abating of the price, the coun∣sels have made it turpe lucrum, filthy lucre. Now besides the ware, the manner of uttering it: and then if it be to one that is ignorant, Gen. 43.12. because haply there may be in the party an over-sight, or deceiving. Ier. 9.5. 1 Thes. 4.6. Every man seeketh to goe beyond his neighbour; and so we seeke imponere illis, to deceive them: , not to over-reach: and so this kinde of dealing may be counted grosse dealing: cousening. Zacheus, Luke 19.8. If I have over-reached , that hee calleth couse∣ning: Levit. 19.11. that there be no deceiving, 2 Cor. 7.2. that there be no circumvention. Now for the price, we must not thinke when they come to buying and selling, that they come to a spoile: but avoid that dispraising and abjecting of wares, Prov. 20.14. Malum est, malum est, it is naught, it is naught: but yet afterwards, when he is gone, he boasteth of his peniworths. Amos 8.6. We must not sell the needy for shoes: which when they come to expound, they can interpret no otherwise, then that needy men, which must needs have money, they will wring them so hard, that they shall have little or nothing for their wares: Micah. 7.2. calleth it a net: this ought not to be, Levit. 6.5. Ps. 15.4. Prov. 24.4.
if he adde an oath fraudulenter: he saith, if beside deceiving, he adde an oath, he shall never recall, though it be to his owne harme: 1 Pet. 2.1. , lay aside all guile. Come to theft without the Con∣tract,Theft without the Contract. it is done as before: 1. By a reach beyond our bro∣ther, Stellionatus. 2. Illo nescio, he not knowing of it. After it divideth it selfe into sartum domesticum; it is, Tit. 2.10. ,Ftion d∣si. intervertere: when as they turne something into their owne purse, when the servant beguileth the Master, or the Steward him whose Steward he is: or if not onely a Steward or servant, but a Di∣sciple; we see it was Iudas his fault, Iohn 12.6. he did privily divert out of the bagge to his owne spending: this is surtum domesticum, houshold theft, or theft within dores. 2. To this they adde servos sugitivo, fugitive servants, because the servant is a part of his Masters possessions; there is a detraction of somewhat from the possession: for he detracteth himselfe, and so di∣minisheth it. Philem. vers. 12. Though Paul could have found in heart to keep Onesimus, yet he sendeth him back, he would not be so bold, knowing he was none of his. And not onely this, but when they waste their goods, Luke 12.45. when they eate and drink: and Deut. 21.20. he is a riotour and drunkard; the same is applied to the sonne, if he eate and drinke with sinners. Without the family:1. Without me ands. it is either of a thing 1. Consecrated: and that is sacriledge. 2. Prophane. Of a thing consecrated, Levit. 15.15. there is a law for it. Rom. 2.22. he matcheth it with idolatry: for he saith, Thou that abhorrest Idols, committest thou sacriledge? For we see that the holy Ghost, Iudg. 9.4. marketh there Abimelech for taking our silver out of the Temple of the Idoll: and Dan. 5.2. the alienating of sacred vessels, it did procure the great and mighty hand-writing. This ought not to be; if a man convert to his owne use, or divert from a sacred use to a profane. In profane.In profane things, they are either, 1. publike, 2. private. Publike,1. Publike. and that is peculatus, when a thing is the Common∣wealths, or stolne è loco publico, è balneo, balnearii sures, from out of a publike place, out of the Bath; theeves that stole the clothes of such as were bathing: & to these may be added those that receive pub∣like wages, and convert it to their own private use: such as the Priests, 2 King. 12.5. he saith, the King gave straight charge, that they should bring in their halfe shekel for the repairing of the Temple; and that the Priests should receive it: They brought it in, but there was no reparation done by the Priests: Then another order was taken; he pro∣vided a chest, with an hole in the corner of it; and in that it was put in,2. Private. and kept. And if we consider it of private things; Then it is divided into furtum Personale, of things living 1. Men. 2. Beasts Reale, of things not having life. Personall theft.Theft of men is called Plagium, and the theeves Plagiarii. Exod. 21.16.
was punished with death, if the party were found, or Deut. 24.7. if he were but about it, it was death. And the Apostle, 1 Tim. 1.10. he continueth, and is of the same minde: and with this hee coupleth Iudas his sinne, for betraying a person for money, Matth. 26.15. there is not out-right selling of him. 2. Then if it be of beasts, it is called Abigeatus; and the men A∣bigei, drivers away of cattell: as the Sabees, and Chaldees, Iob. 1.15.17. Exod. 22.1. Reale furtum, of things that have no life, of raiment,Reall  money, &c. and there is an order taken, Exod. 22. in every respect for all these. Aggravation of the.The aggravation of these: This addeth Gods curse, and maketh the theft grievous. Exod. 22.21, 22, 23. First if we vexe or trouble, or take away from fatherlesse, stranger, or poore neighbours, for they will crie: it is a crying sinne; And if they once crie, I will surely heare them: Deut. 24.17. he forbiddeth that there should be any pledge ta∣ken of the widow, And Iob 24.3. he saith, Whosoever he be that dri∣veth away the Asse of the fatherlesse, and taketh away the widowes Oxe; and Prov. 23.16. Whosoever he be that entreth on the field of the fatherlesse, he shall be sure to be punished, and visited with the fierce wrath of God. Enclosing  comm.Now then, partly here, and partly before, commeth in the enclo∣sures of Commons: For as when regions were first seised upon, when as the first partition was made, each man had his peculiar lot distinct, like that of Caleb, Ish. 14.13, 14. and so became their inheritance; so there was a consideration had of Gods protestation, that alwayes there should be poore, and so there was left unto them a division of lands in common, to live upon: And for these, Deut. 19.14. there is an order taken, that they shall not be removed, because all the parties are not there present, they cannot alienate their right: because they that shall be borne, cannot meddle in it: the poore from all beginning to all ending: and yet all that have interest in it cannot, and Deut. 27.17. the whole congregation curseth them that doe it: Prov. 23.10. and 22.28. there is Solomons censure: Hose. 5.10. he saith there, when he would compare them with as odious a comparison, as he can, Thy Princes are like them that remove the land markes: and how odious this was, may appeare from their setting up every where of Meta Ter∣minica, their usuall bounder; the violent transgression, or usurpation of which is by Micah. 2.2. exclaimed against. And not onely these, but Iob that was without the Law of God, yet he seeth it, and detesteth it, chap. 21.2. And this for unjust getting of goods. In the act of theft, we respected the double use of the gifts of God▪ and first before the use, the getting of them, called by the Philosopher generatio pecuniae. And in the unlawfull getting of them, we divided the whole company of unlawfull meanes into, 1. furtum, by deceit: 2. Rapinam, by violence: They are distinguished by Nazianzen thus: , is manus injecta, the laying on of hands, or taking a thing by vi∣olence: and , a crafty way of compassing. Upon the petition that pertaineth to temporall things in the Lords Prayer of daily bread, Chrysost. saith, that habere convenit etiam malis: habere autem de manu dei,
sanctis tantum, the wicked may lawfully possesse goods, but to enjoy them as blessings and favours from God, is the portion of the Saints: which God, saith he, praeparare non vetat, sed cum peccato praeparare: qui enim cum peccato praeparat, ei diabolus dat quod manducat, non Deus: forbids not to purchase at all, but not to compasse them sinfully: which whosoever doth, he hath it of the gift of the Devill, and not of the gift of God, neither can justly make that petition; and hee hath with it , some pledge that some visitation shall come upon him for it. On the other side, the vertue opposite, is the just getting; and that is the object we have in hand. It is called , sludium honeste rem parandi: Prov. 16.8. Every man ought thus to be perswaded, that a little by righteous meanes well gotten, is better then great re∣venues without. i. as very well the Apostle setteth downe both the parts, 1 Tim. 6.5. where he speaketh of covetous men, he saith, they are corrupted in mind, and destitute of the truth: the reason is, this is their position, Game is godlinesse, as the Heathen man saith, , let me put up the money in my bagge, and call me a piller and a poller, and what you will. But in the next verse he sheweth, that if a man can turne the proposiion, and say that godlinesse is gaine; that is to account the true gaine, as indeed it is, that that is gotten by Gods prescript, not by mans oversight Gen. 43.4. But that he may say so as Iacob said to Laban, Gen. 30.33. call my doings to account, cras respondebit pro me justitia mea, my righte∣ous dealing shall be able to answer for me, and to acquit me. Now unto this vertue, as it appertaineth to save and preserve us from evill dealing: yet because the world is full of it, and men have mentem malam, they are in a wicked and vicious race, and so runne on, till stopp'd by conscience, and then afterwards touched: therefore is there a second vertue, that they call Restitution; and that is necessary, if perhaps any man have over-shot himselfe in getting his goods un∣justly. It is one of the greatest and principallest common places through∣out the Fathers, from the time of Constantine the great. And August.Restitution. he sets it downe for a Canon, Non dimittitur pecca∣tum, nisi restituatur ablatum, The sinne of an unlawfull purchase is not pardoned, unlesse restitution be made: the ground of it is, Numb. 5.7. For God saith there, if they have done any such thing, they shall confesse the fault that they have done, and restore the dammage to him that it was done to. And agreeable to that is the affection of Iob in the law of nature; Iob 20.18. He shall restore his labour, and devoure no more: the reason he addeth in the next verse, For hee hath undone many, and spoyled houses he never built. And as by the example of nature, so by the example of the practice of it under the law, Nehem. 5.11. For there Nehemiah saith, Ye shall restore the people their lands and Vine-yards, and the goods they had gotten by usury; and they said, they would: and he called the Priests, and caused them to sweare that they should doe according to this pro∣mise: and he shooke his lap and said, So let God shake them, that
would not restore such things as they had gotten wrongfully, God shall shake them off, and all the Congregation shall say Amen. If we come to the Gospel, we shall see the rule of it, Rom. 13.7. Give to every man that which is his. And in the repentance & protestation of Zacheus, Luk. 19.8. that if he had done any wrong by cousening, for∣gery, or falshood, he would restore foure-fold the value of it. And as this is in goods unlawfully gotten: so in those things that have a lawfull contract, there is a restitution too; as in the gift, donation: God, De it. 21.15. taketh order for the conveyance of inheritance. But for that matter there is but little order to be taken. These things that are of the nature of a gift, as that one being wholly commended to the necessity, liberalis donatio: so the other wholly to the trust, depositum, the committing of any thing upon trust, to be restored: Exod. 22.7.10. vers. 7. if any man deliver money to his neighbour to keepe, &c. vers. 10. if any deliver to keepe Oxe or Asse: there must be a restitution of whatsoever is delivered to our trust to keepe: or else justice will be broken. Among the depositarii, in regard of the thing committed:Depositarii. fiduciarii (as the Law calleth them) in regard of the trust that is put in them; Those that are put in trust with children, while their fa∣thers be alive, as tutors, or guiders after their fathers death, they must make an account, and give an account for their depositum, the things committed to their trust: for we see that the holy Ghost doth give an honourable witnesse of Mordocheus, Hester 2.7. he was put in trust with Hester, his Uncles daughter; he saith, he brought her up as care∣fully, as if she had beene his owne daughter: that is the extremity that can be required. And so they that have charge during the parents lives. Whatso∣ever they take, as Prov. 22.20. Solomon did, he saith he had uttered and written three times, many times in counsels and knowledge, that is, that they must diligently read whatsoever they receive, or whatsoe∣ver commeth in the bill of accounts. Luk. 16.6. If 50. be put in the bill for 80. surely this must not be so of Executors, that are put in trust with the administration of the goods of the dead, and feoffees put in trust with the conveyance of lands; 1 Sam. 20.15. there David is put in trust with Ionathans sonne, and the execution of it, and that in good order, 2 Sam. 9.1. And for those, Luke 20.14. when as they had the Vine-yard, and the heire was sent to receive some fruit of them, they said, Let us kill the heire, and the inheritance shall be ours. We see how grievously he threatneth them, and what a great woe the Lord pronounceth against them for it. 3. After these things that goe sub ratione depositi,Strayes. under the name of trust, they joyne those things that come sub ratione inventi, strayes. Exod. 23.4. God saith, If we meete our enemies Oxe or Asse going astray, we shall bring him home to him: and if we be farre from him, and we know him not, Deut. 22.2. we must keepe it till he come for it: And if the owner never come for it, but by reason of igno∣rance, or negligence, let him alone; then it is plaine by Levit. 6.4.5. and by Numb. 5.8.9. we must not divert it to our owne uses, but
restore it to the kindred: and if the party have no kindred, it shall bee given to the Lord, it shall be employed ad pios usus, to sacred uses. 4. Then for those things that are lent us, that is, that are given free∣ly to us for to use for a time, and then to restore them againe, August. saith, Tameisi benigne dimittitur, tamen non injuste repetitur, although it were freely lent, yet may it lawfully be demanded againe: So he that doth not restore that which was lent him, is injust: therefore God hath taken order for it, Exod. 22.14. where he saith, that it shall not onely be restored, but in this order: if any hurt befall it, it shall bee made good: if it perish, there shall be another given for it. Now because re∣stitution is in conducto, in things that are hired, he hath taken order for it: the thing shall be restored, if it perish not: and Exod. 22.15. if it perish, onely the hire shall goe for it: and so he doth limit us in every action. And because the unfaithfulnesse and untrustinesse of man hath brought in writings, as Bils and Obligations, and pledges, and sureties, &c. therefore, even for them also hath God taken order in his word, Psal. 15.4. If a man have once passed his promise, hee must performe it: and Exod. 22.26. and Zech. 18.7.12. of the pledge, and Ezek. 33.15. if he restore the pledge, he shall live, and not die: and if he doe not, he shall be, as he accounteth him there, an unjust man, and hurtfull, and obnoxious. So the surety, seeing Prov. 22.26. it was such a dangerous thing to become surety: and that the law was so strict, Spare him not: and that the world was now growne to make it a rule, Prov. 20.16. to take the pledge of him that is surety, and let the other goe: therefore he saith Prov. 6. vers. 4. If you be surety, be carefull to discharge it: And if he that is surety must be so carefull, much more must he care for whom he is become surety: because the care is brought upon the o∣ther by him. And last of all,Tenacitas. in regard of the Common-wealth, there is a detai∣ning, and that is, as Solomon speaketh well, Prov. 11.26. to keepe corne in the time of dearth, the people shall curse him for it. So it may be said of any thing that is beneficiall to the whole, every man is bound not to detaine it, but to utter it: that is of that we call with∣drawing. Come to the use: which is, when we have neither by detaining that which is none of ours, nor by taking away from others, which have right of them, but not power to retaine them; if we come not to generare pecuniam, increase money by usury, after none of these wayes, we are just Lords. It is well said, Vbi justitia est condus, ibi Christus est Dominus; where justice is the layer up, there Christ is the Lord over those goods; and we have a good tenure: the Devill is Lord of the other. Aug. upon Luke 8. vers. 14. saith, that the first gaines is thornes:Simile. A thorne, non colligitur sine laesione: if one come to gather it, it may chance to runne him in the hand, if it be not well ga∣thered: hereupon commeth it, that it is a Proverbe, Omnis dives aut iniqus ipse, aut haeres iniqui, every rich man is either an unjust man himselfe, or the heire of an unrighteous father. A man being rightly enstalled in the right of his possessions, and goods, then the use of
them, is either upon himselfe or others: the one Eccles. 6.7. the other 2 Cor. 9.11. he saith he would have them rich to liberality. The first is for sufficiencie to a mans owne neede: the second for liberality, to the neede of others. These are the two uses of riches: they are both comprehended in Prov. 5.15. for he saith there, Drinke the waters of thine owne Cisterns, and let the pipe of the fountaines runne forth to others; for our use, and for the use of others. Gal. 6.8. there is a dou∣ble sowing, into the flesh, and into the spirit: for a man may sow them all into the flesh, then as the flesh endeth in putrifaction, it is a putri∣sving soyle, and so he may reape putrifaction: but if he sow in spirit, to that is for spirituall uses, propter pies usus, for pious uses of the Church and the Ministery: and propter pios civiles usus, for religious civill uses, for the poore. But they are plainest and best of all seene in Christs purse, Iohn 13.29. For there he biddeth Iudas dispatch: Now it is said, that some thought his meaning had beene, because hee carried the bagge, first to buy for their owne use, those things they had need of; or else the second, that he should give something to the poore. In the first use of these, there is a double extreme: Profusion. Niggardnesse.Profusion  nigar. As one may not inserre caedem sibi, kill himselfe: and as , uncleannesse, may be with himselfe: so this is furtum in se, theft a∣gainst, or, from a mans selfe: Eccles. 4.8. he saith, there is a covetous man alone by himselfe, that gathereth with niggardnesse, and never saith, Quare desraudo animan meam bono? why defraud I my selfe of so much pleasure? here is a defraudation and theft of himselfe: And while he doth this, Iam. 5.3. his gold and his silver cankereth, and his garments waxe full of moths, and his canker and moths shall stand up in the last day, and accuse and condemne him. Ambrose up∣on that place saith, Esurientium est cibus, qui apud te mucescit, & siten∣tium est potus, qui apud te acesct, it is the bread of the hungry that growes mouldy by thee, it is the drinke of the thirsty that sowres by thee. Of this man, by the consent of interpreters, Hosea speaketh,T  o  8. cap. vers. 7. he soweth into the winde, and reapeth in the whirlewinde, there is no profit of it: and if there come any profit, the stranger shall reape his labour. That is the common plague, as the Heathen man saith, Quodque profunda hausit avaritia, what profound avarice hath gathered together; there shall another come Qui luxu pejore retundet, whose profuse vanity shall scatter it. And indeed the hand of the Lord is upon them, that whereas their sparing is, that they at the last day may enjoy it, and say as he saith, Luke 12. , soule take thine ease, eate, drinke, and be merry; God disappoin∣teth them, vers. 20. or else that they may be kept, when they are sicke, Psal. 41.3. But when they are in sponda languoris, upon their sick bed, they shall receive no comfort, but waxe worse and worse: they shall spend all their money with Physitians, as the woman with the bloudy issue, and be never the better: as the Rabbins say, they shall not shift from the sicke mans pallet, to the bed of health: or else it is Iob 20.
that their children might have enough; there he saith, vers. 10. that for all that, their children shall be beggers too. And there is nothing more commonly seene then this, that the prodigall sonne is the heire of a niggardly father; this is the use of it to our selves. Now the o∣ther use is the other extreme. Whereas he that doth right is called , a Steward; and his action is a dispensation: he that is prodi∣gall, Luke 15.13. his action is called , wasting: he flingeth his money from his, as though he cared not for it, or were angry with it, as Seneca saith, Ita segerit, ac si iratus esset pecuniae, he behaves himself, as if he were fallen out with mony: Luke 12.19. and that is that that fools some rich men into an easinesse of wasting on their pleasure, what their avarice had layed up (such unnaturall ends have wretched games:) for as his desire beganne from the other , lust, in the oher Commandment: so lightly if it have an end, it is not naturall, that the Preacher cap. 4. calleth a monstrous end: this is the common end, prosundere, prodigally to consume it: but so also, as he is fur sui, a thiefe of his owne: for which being profuse , where he should not the stealeth from him  from whom he ought not: he wasteth and consumeth himselfe in superfluous things. The Philo∣sopher, , that are more eager then needeth upon evill things, dall and heavy an good . they shall be dull and heavie in good things. When there commeth a good thing to be employed in, they are wonderfull spa∣ring and needy, as in the case of redeeming a captive, they are very neere:Ten  he can . but they are very profuse in a riotous supper. As justia, ju∣stice, must be our condus, layer up: so we must have a promus, a layer out too: and of that it is well said of the Heathen man, , good temperance be thou my Steward: that, as Bsi saith, the way to avoid them both, is this, , the whetstone or riot, is nothing else but , vaineglory: and that , is the whetstone of prodigality: which if they could take away, they could take away the compasse of their owne nest: they should never fall. For howbeit that it be true, that they say, That how much soever they spend,Pd they not excused by piene. they have enough to doe it: Luke 16.19. that they can , fare sumptuonsly every day: yet it ought not to be. And the Heathen man could say, they that would spend profusely, and say they had enough; why saith he, it is no answer. For if you a low your Cooke a bushell of Salt, and he by putting too much in the pot, should make the pottage too salt: and he should answer.you, he did it, because he had enough, it were a foolish answer, & you would not like it. gal  at ability more grievous. And much more grievous is this sin in them that are not able, &c. Of this , prodigality and excesse, there are two parts: the first is this, when they doe , upon no occasion, daily, oftner then needeth: so a second, when they doe , above his ability: and that may be done two wayes: the one of his faculties, that he can stretch unto: the other of his condition. Of his saculties, Luke 14.28. for he saith, there was one beganne a , Tower, that could not go through with it. So secondly, though Naball be so rich, 1 Sam. 25.36. yet it is above his condition to make a feast like a King: it is not al∣lowed though he be able, much lesse a man to do it, if his purse wil not
reach. Therefore, David Psal. 69.22. he prayeth that his enemies table may be a snare unto him: for both it becommeth a snare unto the soule, and the body will despumare in libidinem, waxe wanton: and to the body, Prov. 5.11. You shall mourne at your end: it doth bring sicknesse to a mans body: so here it is a snare to a mans substance, it consumeth that; Iob. 20.13, 14, 15. he saith, the sinne of covetous∣nesse in getting, is a very sweete sinne, and he will keepe it close in his mouth, and will swallow it. And so, where he commeth to spending it, it is sweete too; but at the last his meate in his bowels shall be tur∣ned, and he shall vomit it, for God shall draw it out of his belly againe. Come to the second use: there must be something given to the poore, or we must sow to the spirit, or we must let our fountaines run abroad; Sowing onely upon the flesh is the fault in these dayes: whereas we have warning given, that of the ground commeth nothing but rottennesse and putrifaction: and that it shall be destroyed, when the belly is destroyed: yet Christs saying (we know) this is more necessary, Beanus est dare quam accipere, it is more blessed to give then to receive. Acts 20.35. But the other is more blessed, it was his com∣mon saying: In omni re ditati ad liberalitarem, you are enriched in every thing to bountifulnesse, 2 Cor. 9.11. therefore in this behalfe it is expedrent to know, 1. how we have our riches; 2. what wee are to thinke of the poore. 1. Deut. 16. We shall see how God committeth riches to men there: whosoever receiveth of God any temporall blessing, hee must performe him homage; Deut. 26.5. he commeth with his basket, and bringeth him rent, and the Priest setteth downe his basket before the Altar, and then he saith, &c. He doth acknowledge that there is nothing in him or his progenitors, that God should doe so with him, or them: and therefore he is come to doe homage to him. 2. Before the Lord he must say, vers. 13. Sustuli quod sanctum est de saculianbus, that is in the substance of every one, I have taken that that is holy from my substance, and I have not spent upon it my selfe, but have taken it out, and have given it ad usus ecclesiasticos, to the Le∣vite: and secondly, ad usus civiles, to the strangers, fatherlesse, and widowes: and not of his accord, but by necessity of duty; for he saith, according to thy Commandement. So every man must confesse, that as he hath ex libera eleemosyna, of a free and undeserved almes: so secondly, there is a duty, a rent to be paid; that is, a tenth at the least to be paid to holy uses: and a tenth to the poore. For the poore, Psal. 41.1. he saith, Blessed is the man that judgeth wisely of the poore. Our common fancie is, that they concerne us not: that judgement must be as God judgeth; and that shall never be reversed. How is that? even as he saith, Deut. 15.11. God saith there, that he hath ta∣ken this order, that there shall be ever some poore in the land; and therefore I command thee (it is strange) thou shall open thy hand to the needy, and to the poore: so some poore are appropriated unto us, they are made nostri, ours: we cannot shake off this affixum, hanger on us, and so consequently, vers. 3. we shall be bound to doe this, Non
obfirmabis cor, heard heart: neque claudes manum, close hand; and vers. 9. he saith, Take heede there be not a wicked thought in thy heart, that it grieve thee to looke on him: And if he crie out unto the Lord against thee, it will be sinne unto thee. And the reward of sinne is death: therefore he sheweth what he ought not to doe: therefore, vers. 8. he saith, if his hand be but weakned, open thy hand and lend him: and vers. 10. if lending will doe no good, thou shalt give him. For there is a double estate of the poore: some, if it be lent them, cannot employ it so, that they can live and pay it againe: other be so impotent, that lending cannot helpe them: therefore God hath ta∣ken order for a free gift for them: Matth. 5.43. they are both joyned together by Christ. Now this is a second thing, August. counsell is, not to let thornes grow among seed, but to compasse the seed with an hedge of thornes: that is the proper use of them: or else, if that will not be, then we must inserere verbum spinis, as to graft on thorne stickes: here is a science, Thou shalt open thy hand and lend him; and if that will not serve, thou shalt give him: graft that, and it shall bring forth fruits of mercie: there∣fore this we must doe. Christ, Luke 19.13. (as before) he saith there, that he hath given us our talents, with this condition, Negotiamini dum venio, trade till I come, for his advantage: and he saith, Matth. 25.24. that this occu∣pying (if we will deale with him for a reward) must be by improving our talent, and then laying it out to the use of the hungry, naked, and sick; this is the best way of increase, and the surest to binde him to re∣ward us: yet is he not content to goe thus farre only, but he hath made a new promise in the Gospel; that that which is done to the least of them, he will account it as done to him. Those that the wise man, Prov. 20.10. speaketh of, viscera impiorum crudelia, cruell bowels: or else as the Apostle saith, Phil. 2.1. nulla viscera, no bowels: or 1 Iohn 3.17. & clauserit viscera, close bowels, shut up, and no fruit of mer∣cie commeth from them: the law of God abideth not in them. In Exod. 23.11. to meete with this vice, there is a peculiar order taken: sixe yeares the land shall be ploughed and sowen, and whatso∣ever commeth of it those sixe yeares, thou shalt gather in for thy selfe: but in the seventh yeare thou shalt let it lie, and let the poore gather of it: so likewise shalt thou doe in thy Vine-yards and Olive∣trees. Levit. 19.9.10. When a man reapeth his field, whatsoever he leaveth unreaped, he shall not goe over the field twice: and he shall have a corner that is for the poore, and Deut. 25.19. if a man have left sheaves in the field, he shall not returne to take them, but let the poore stranger have them. And by an argument a comparatis, Deut. 22.1. he saith, If any see the Asse of his brother goe astray, or any harme befall him, thou shalt not passe by, but help the Asse; therefore much more thy brother, if any weaknesse befall him, thou shalt help him. Now for the point it selfe:necessitas ui∣plex. there is a three-fold necessity in Di∣vinity. 1. Necessitas naturae, the necessity of nature: every man is to pro∣vide for inward food, meat, drinke, tegumenium, apparell, house-roome.
2. Necessitas personae, personall necessity: 1 Tim. 5.8. he is bound to provide for them of his owne house: Luke 11.21.  that they likewise give almes of what they have. 3. Necessitas status & conditionis, to have wherewith to live accor∣ding to our state and condition. This last commeth not unto this, neither doth respect it, Aug. if a man have three hundred pounds, hee hath no more then will serve him: and if a man have three thousand pounds, he hath no more then will serve him: But Christ saith, after the two first be served, then , but rather give almes of such things as you have: give almes, for during particular ne∣cessities to our selves, of nature, or person, a man is not bound to give; except 2 Cor. 8.3. it be for the common helpe, and good of the Church; but if there be any surplus, he is bound also, even those that were in , they did  otherwise. The reason of this Chysostome giveth: for saith he, if you doe not this, you love not your money: and yet covetousnesse is , the love of money:The covetu loveth not his money. and yet they which are covetous, have most close bowels; he proveth that they love it not very soundly: for saith he, that true love is not amor concupiscentiae, to desire meate to eate: but the other, velle ejus bonum, quod, & quem amamus, to wish the good of that thing, and of that per∣son whom we love. If we love our money, we wish, ut bene fit ei, good to it: now of all things in the world, here bene esse is ia esse, ut Deus ordinavu, the welbeing of a thing,, is so to be as God hath appointed it. Now then, if any man doe ordaine an esse to his money in that order that God hath ordained it, then he wisheth the good of it, and consequently he loveth it; else he wisheth the evill of it, and so loveth it not: (if we speake of the right love) Gods ordinance is as we see in every thing that is good, that it should be , sociable, or wil∣ling to communicate; and to make it an infallible signe of the Church, that there is communicatio Sanctorum, the communion of the Saints: Rom. 12.13. communicantes Sanctorum necessitatibus, communicating to others necessities. Now we become liberales, liberall and free; that is, liberare ani∣mam à vitiis, to free our soules from vices: this is called , fel∣lowship, 2 Cor. 9.13. and there likewise to shew that we are to ac∣count of it, it is called , distribution: 2 Cor. 9.1. it is a service or ministery, a rent to be paid; This is that men must thinke of it; and he calleth it likewise , a free gift; 2 Cor. 8.19. it must be done gratis, freely. Now there is nothing but do ut des, or do ut facias, I give to thee, that thou mayest give to me againe, or I give to thee that thou mayest doe something for me: , is free, and is called , a blessing. 2 Cor. 9.3. So doing this 4. fruit shall come, , the poore shall blesse us, and God too. God hath ordained, that if a man doth appropriate that to his flesh, that he will have common, he taketh away his use. Another use, Gal. 6..8 this sowing, it must be feede: sowe in the spirit, and reape life everlasting: and so Hose. 10.12. sowe righteous∣nesse, and reape afterward. 2 Cor. 9.6. Qui parcè seminat, pareè metet: & qui seminat in multis benedictionibus, metet in multis benediction ibus.
He that soweth sparingly, shall reape sparingly, and he that soweth bountifully, shall reape bountifully. Now a man may love his feede foolishly, so that for very pure love, he may set it lie in his barne: but then we know that wormes will breed in it, and consume it: and so he doth amando perdere, by loving it lose it: therefore a man is so to love his seede, as that he doth projicre semen, cast his seede into the ground: and that is amare semen, to love his seede. And so, if the temporall blessings of God be as seede, (as they are) then there must be a casting and scattering of them; And yet in this casting, when a man hath so sowen an acre of ground, and one aske, Whose is this seed; we say not, it is the grounds, but his that sowed it. So if a man could be brought to this perswasion, to thinke that semen is serentis, and not recipientis, the seede belongs to him that sowed, and not to the ground that re∣ceives it, he would sowe. And that is the state of riches, whensoever they are so bestowed, &c. And therefore as the husbandmen doe credere illud quod nonvident, beleeve that which they see not; so that they cast in one graine, and see it rot, and beleeve that howsoever showrs and snow fall, yet at the last an Autumne will come, and then they shall reape an eare for one come: so, if God enlighten our hearts, and give us faith, credendi ejus quod non videmus, ejuis fructus est videre quod credimus, to beleeve that which we see not, we shall reape the fruit of seeing and enjoying that which we beleeve. And so we shall see and feele that semen, the seede, it is serentis, belongs to the sower: and it will give an hundred fold n∣crease. For the comming to wealth, it was said it stood in two things:To come to wealth. 1. , simplicity, against deceit. 2. Justice, against violence or rapine. And whether to those that are by lawfull contract, or to those that are indirectly possessed restitution belongeth, and in sundry other mat∣ters of depositum, things committed to our trust; and things found, lent, let, debt; and by vertue of restitution supplieth the other part of justice. And then for the use to our selves, against prodigality: and thereby neglect of houshold: and against the part of prodigality, that consisteth in the neglect of a mans houshold; and against too great nearenesse in scraping: frugality, it answereth temperance in the former Commandement. And for the use that we have toward other, against bottomlesse lar∣gition, and against the shutting up or closenesse of bowels, the vertue of liberality. So in effect in these three vertues, and in the vices op∣posed to them, is all that is forbidden and commanded in this Com∣mandement. The spirituall pat, the heart.Now according to the former course, how every man may be an ob∣server of this Commandement, which may best be done in this man∣ner. As in the former Commandement, so in this; Christ saith, Marke 1.22. that thefts, and extortions, and deceit, and evill gettings of a mans goods, which are of affinity, they proceed from the heart: and therefore in them the fountaine of them must needs be damned.
And so 1 Tim. 6.3. first they have the corruption of the minde, be∣fore they come to covetousnesse. 1. If we had continued in the state of innocencie, mans desires both naturall and oeconomicall should by no other have beene willed, but by reason; since which losse the cor∣ruption of the minde is this, appetere , to covet a fulnesse, a satiety. The belly , it hath an appetite beyond that that is sufficient for it: so likewise in the corruption of this unru∣ly appetite we are disquieted with a continuall craving: Prov. 30.15. there is one in the minde that saith, Have, have; bring, bring. Now a∣gainst this there must be one that saith, there is enough; that is, there must be an , a selfe-sufficiencie, or contentednesse; for as , the excesse is become the corruption of our wealth: so , is , the wealth of nature is selfe-sufficiencie; which is contentednesse: But now there is , covetousnesse. Now we see how the case standeth with the heart, 1 Tim. 6.9. because that men will be rich, and because it holdeth in all evill things: & quod volumus, valde volumus, and whatsoever we desire, that we earnestly desire and long after; in so much as Prov. 21.25. if a man be never so slow, yet if he desire any thing, he will have it quickly, he will be rich as soone as he can: then Prov. 28.20. he that maketh haste, shall not be innocent, and Prov. 20.21. of an heritage that is soone gotten, there never commeth a good end. But to come to the heart, by occasion of this your unclinable∣nesse, 1 Tim. 6 9. he setteth , a temptation a good round gaine, and summe: and , the snare, nought but a false asseveration, a few words, a false oath; or Luke 16. a dash with a pen, 50. for 80. If you will come into this snare, you shall have this baite; and then Gods judgements: when a man setteth himselfe to it, he suffereth him to fall into it, as Eccl. 5.9. he shall love it, and not be satisfied, and the reason is, for the minde (as hath beene said) cannot bee satisfied with any thing but with God. And from many desires (a it is vers. to.) he shall have a great many cares; and as his desires shall encrease, his cares shall encrease: as that that Christ saith, Quid edam? quid bibam? quid induam? What shall I eate? what shall I drink? or where∣with shall I be cloahed? if he be not rich; and when he is rich, Quid sacia? I have not barnes enough. Rich and not rich have it. And then beside these, he saith, they shall (being thus distracted) erre, even from the faith, i. they shall be brought even to the estate, that they shall not care for the Commandements of God, nor his threatnings: that was the punishment of Iudas; that when he made no conscience of carrying the bagge, Iohn 12.6. fur erat & loculos gerebat, he was a thiefe and carred the bagge; we see afterwards he came to make little account of Christ, and to sell him. And from this which is ve∣ry heavie, they fell , into destruction and perditi∣on; that is, of substance it selfe, as Zach. 5.3. he saith, there was a booke flew out, that had the curse of God, and it should enter into the house of the thiefe, and swearer, and should consume the house, and burne up timber, and the stones, and there should come no good
end of such: as the Heathen man saith, if you would have your chests full of riches,Evill gotten goods will not, prosper. long to continue, see that you get them well; , whatsoever is unjustly brought into the house, hath no footing. Iob. 20.15. It shall make him cast up his gorge againe: So for a mans life, Psal. 58. vers. last. They shall not live out halfe their dayes: as it is well said, dies Domini veniet tanquam fur, nulli autem ita tanquam fur, ut furi, the day of the Lord will come as a thiefe, but to none so like a thiefe, as to the thiefe. But this is not the point of , the casting away and perdition of the soule, concerning which, Matth. 25.35, 40, 45. they held it for a rule, for those which have beene takers from others, non controvertitur de iis, there is no question of them: but of those that did not give to others, is the plea: but for eripuistis, such as have taken by violence, there is no question of them. Ezek. 13.19. Then they shall see the truth of the saying of the Prophet, that they have gotten an bandfull of bar∣ly, and have sold the Kingdome of Heaven: and they shall see, that it advantageth them not to win the whole world, and to lose their owne soule.T cov  man like hd: nd like will to like. And because the wiseman Prov 30. compareth a wicked man to Hell, as if he would hold as much as Hell: therefore there is an af∣finity, and just adequation betweene them and Hell: so the Apostle setteth downe his conclusion, 1 Cor. 6.10. he saith, no thiefe, no co∣vetous man, no extortioner, &c. none of them shall inherit the Kingdome of Heaven. Come now to the roote or place, a contented minde, or heart: and that is the way to avoid and destroy covetousnesse: Heb. 13.5. , Let your conversation be without covetousnesse: how is that? being contented with those things they have, i. when a man for per∣sonall or naturall necessity hath that that is sufficient, 1 Tim. 6.8. that he stay and be contented with them: and for the better supply of statuall necessity, and of our degree, which is a thing that hath not his medium in indivisibili; and therefore not so to be regarded: for if once he be contented, he must stand upon equall conditions; if he be not contented, Matth. 6.25. Luke 6.22. there commeth in that , the division of the soule, a disquietnesse; he beginneth to di∣strust the providence of God: which the righteous, 1 Pet. 5.7. out of Psal. 55.23. they cast all their care upon God: and Psal. 34.9. they have this perswasion, that they shall not want: a very Lion shall want before they want. Now Paul, 1 Tim. 5.8. allowing men  providence and industry, for the necessity of nature, and person; and if they have not that, he saith, they have denied the faith: But he ma∣keth a difference of , providence, from , an anxious care: for the one is able to exempt and avoid it selfe cleane out of the soule, so that it is a way to give the heart wholly to God in prayer: where∣as the other taketh up the most part of the heart. Ezek. 33.31. Worldly cares compassed their hearts, not the exercise of religion that was preached unto them: in so much, that with their mouthes they made jests, and their heart ranne after their covetousnesse: and doe what they can, they cannot bring it in from thence. Hosea saith, cor corum divisum est, their heart is divided: which with a great
desire and carefulnesse and distrust withall, groweth so strong, and so deep, that when they present themselves before God, he shall not have it hole; nay many times it taketh up their heart: therefore this contented∣nesse grounded upon Gods providence, not excluding , is the first thing. Then the second in Psal. 128.1. Feare God, and outwardly walke in his wayes. i. he must set himselfe in a calling: he must eate his bread either in the care and study of his soule, or in the sweate of his browes; either jure manus, or jure oculi, by the labour of his hands, or of his eyes: 2 Thes. 3.11. he saith there, they be altogether out of order, that live idely; and they are such persons as must be cast off: therefore it is certaine that every man must keepe himselfe in an honest calling. Being come to this Calling, he must stand thus resolved, 1 Thes. 3.8. First, to have a desire not to be chargeable to others; Secondly, Ephes. 4.28. not onely that, but also to be helpfull and beneficiall to others, if it please God. Now for the attaining of that, this we must know, Deut. 15.11. that God will have some poore: So whosoever is rich, and without cares and sorrowes, as Aug. saith, he hath divitias sine verme; he must be perswaded, that it is God that maketh rich and poor: and therefore that riches is the gift of God; that whomsoever God will have to be rich, he will also have him to use lawfull and direct meanes in attaining to them, 1. doing nothing, but according to the strict rule, yet God will extraordinarily blesse him: Gen. 26.12. wee see it in Isaac, God blessed him strangely, so that he made him fearefull to the Philistims; which was a signe, that God would have him rich: and so it is said of Iacob, Gen. 30.43. that he did labour in righteous∣nesse, and increase in wealth exceedingly: and as he confesseth, Gen. 32.10. that he went over Iordan onely with a staffe; but came backe againe with two great bands and flocks. So as God will have some rich: and they are divites dei, Gods rich men indeed, using onely lawfull meanes: so there are other that shall not grow up, but God will have them poore; they shall not have Isaacks increase: hee will blesse their labours no further then they need. And againe, of evill men, benedictio Domini ditat, the blessing of the Lord enricheth, and addeth no sorrowes with it: there are some that are rich, but with great sorrowes. The Heathen man divideth  into  and , riches into such as are got by violence, and such as are the gift of God, and saith, that , such as are the gift of God, are farre the better, Hesiod. So there are some that come by them by evill meanes, and use what meanes they can, Numb. 24 11. yet they cannot be rich, as Balaam did: and when all came to all, he could get nothing, but lingring there he lost his life. And so Iudas, though he stole out of the bagge, and sold Christ; yet it prospered not with him. And so Witches and Sorcerers, though they give their soule to the Devill for riches, yet not one among many proveth rich: the one is the gift of God, the other his permission. So some, if they be poore in spirit, shall weare the crowne of patience, others the crowne of beauty. So that a man standing thus perswaded, that God will have me to be rich, he will so blesse me by lawfull meanes, that I shall
be rich: if not, then, as 2 Sam. 25.26. hee saith, If God will have me restored to my Kingdome, so it is: if not, here I am, let him doe with me, as pleaseth him: as Phil. 4.11.12. that he had learned  be content; he could , suffer need, &c. and stand contented with it; and , abound, and behave himselfe as the will of God would direct him. Then this indifferencie by which he standeth thus affected, and by which he standeth upon Gods gift, as he is perswaded that both these states are of God, and if he will exalt him, he will blesse him: and if he will not, possum deficere, I can suffer want: this is the third thing that a man must be perswaded: If he bee not thus perswa∣ded, then either God punisheth him, by letting him fall into covetous∣nesse, and so dum semper metuit ne indigeat, indiget, whiles he is con∣tinually afraid lest he should want, he wants: he is punished with the evill that he feareth; or else, as, Prov. 5.13. & 6.2. hee sheweth a marvellous strange judgement, it thriveth not with him, and decayeth a man cannot give a reason, nor tell how: yea, sometimes when his bags are filled, Luke 12.20. when his barnes are ready to be filled, he dieth. This standing for a mans calling, then he must take off the whetstone, 1. of too high a saile: so Tit. 2.12. , so∣berly and righteously. First we must keepe it within our measure, and scantling, and then we shall doe justly; for justice is alwayes racked and stretched, if sobriety be broken: 1 Cor. 6.13. if he bee brought under the power, if he must have such meate, and such apparell, then he must have money: and if it cannot be gotten by direct meanes, then justice must be racked for it by indirect meanes. And therefore that is another (rule) he must set downe: he must sobrie vivere, live soberly; that he may live juste, righteously: Take a note too low, rather then too high. Now from hence, when a man is thus affected, he commeth to his businesse; and there he commeth to wish gifts, ex donatione, or hae∣reditate, by legacies, gifts, or inheritances. (as is before) It is the rule of the world, if any man will give me any thing, I will take it: but it is an evill rule, I must not take of every man, but ad mercedem, or debitum, from such to whom I have done good offices, and deserved wel at their hands. We have Gen. 14.23. Abrahams practise, he might have had a reasonable good booty of the King of Sodom: and Gen. 23.16. the field was offered him for nothing of Ephron, but he would pay for it, and the Cave cost him 400. shekels. And in the after times in the dayes of Elisha, 2 King. 5.16. Naaman he maketh a good offer, he would not take it, and 2 King. 4.11. he taketh of the Shunamite. And Paul Phil. 4.15. he had a good opinion of them, for he had not taken of any Church, but of them; that is, as Lydia, Acts 16.15. saith, If ye have judged me to be faithfull unto the Lord, enter into my house. Therfore there must be choyce of those, that we are to be bound to; as the Hea∣then man saith, he will not onely have beneficium, a benefit from one, but judicium, hee will know from whom also: as the sonne of Si∣rach saith, he will open his mouth like a Towne-cryer, to day he lend∣eth, and to morrow will he aske it againe. Come to ther othe second, industria & contractus, industry and, con∣tracts.
And for industria, whensoever a man is to have for his paines, 3 Iohn vers. 5. he giveth Gaius a good commendation, for dealing faith∣fully: Beloved, thou doest faithfull, whatsoever thou doest: and Gen. 31.6. of Iacob, that he had done his service truely with all his minde. In 2 Chron. 31.18. whosoever is partaker of holy things, is partaker of them by his fidelity. And no doubt, if he be not faithfull, he is an usurper of them: and therefore, faithfulnesse and paines in the calling wherein we live, is the second part of this that is required. And a second thing standeth upon Sobrietie, Luke 3. Be content with your wages: when a man looketh on it with an evill eye, and thinketh he hath not enough, he chargeth himselfe with thick clay, and so must needs be unfaithfull; Exod. 16.3. if a man repine and say, he will goe to Egypt againe, and wish for the flesh-pots there. 1. Rule.1. For Contracts. For the charge it selfe, before five cases, when there is any fault in it, for the adequation of it to the price, by reason of its worth; And it is true, that it is not the worthinesse, but the need of it, that maketh. August. Vnus panis, one loafe of bread is worth twenty Flies: and one field, better worth then a great company of Mice: not for creation; for they that are living creatures, are more worth: and some∣times a good Horse is more esteemed then an unprofitable Man: be∣cause there is more need of it. 2. And to the need, they adde the use: which, if it be fit for our purpose, if it be durable, or if it have manifold uses, it increaseth in price. Now because the want of things is varied wonderfully, as in regard of the place, as in the middle of the land, sea-fish: therefore, they are dearer there. In regard of time, because presently before harvest, eve∣ry man is to looke to the getting in of his corne, it is dearest: and the longer from harvest the cheaper it is. And the scarsity of the thing, be∣cause there are but few that have it. And utentium inopia, the scarsity of such as use it: when there are but few that will use it, and great pains to make it, those make that there can be no certain price, and no termini indivisibiles, to make things equall: because the need is not certaine, and then a mans charges that he is at, and the dammage that he sustai∣neth for the getting of it, and his care for the keeping, and the labour that he taketh to polish and trimme, and the danger that he passeth through in the attaining of it; these are valuable: but what paines he taketh, or what cost he is at, it is not easie to be knowne. And because this justitia caniractuum, equity of bargaining cannot easily come un∣der compasse, because men will, &c. We must sumere medium, , take the meane or midst ac∣cording to the breadth: the medium is a broad thing: if a man set him∣self to come to the point, though he misse a little, it is not injust: there∣fore if he stay too, before he attaine the medium, the point he aimes at, warily declining the extreme till that he be better informed, and learne otherwise; he is not therefore to be censured as unjust. This I take to be the need: if I can be enformed better, I will come nearer to the middest, I would be glad to have it certaine, that I might come to the point.
This third they call justum pretium, the just value, in two kinds, the first of them pium pretium, an easie rate; when for publike uses, either civill or ecclesiasticall, we part from it for a lesse price. 2. Moderatum, a moderate price, in some proportion: and the third rigidum, a rigorous price: when a man would have the state and price of things unknowne and uncertaine. But in al these things the circumstances of it, Lev. 27. & 25. In the 27. v. 13. he dealeth for the sale of cattell, and v. 15. for hou∣ses, and 19. for lands, and 27. for uncleane beasts, and 31. for tithes. In all these cases, still he keepeth this, he will have the value of the thing that the thing standeth in: and for the gaine, quintam partem, the fifth part. And in the Law of nature, Gen. 41.24. we see that Ioseph, by the di∣rection of nature, tooke this course, for the fifth part he remitted them all. So in equity, Levit. 25.16. & vers. 14. if the use be long, to the 50. yeare, the price shall be encreased so much: if it be not long, the price shall be diminished: so as the use is to be durable, or not dura∣ble, the price, and not turning of it every yeare, requires even in equi∣ty, that there should be advantage & increase, but a 100. for a 100. that can no wayes be allowed; but this, because we deale with Merchan∣dize; a greater proportion of encrease in the way of trade is to be al∣lowed them then others, for the dangers of times and losses, &c. there∣fore Merchants have greater gaines, answerable to their greater hazards in venturing their goods, and life too many times to the boote; and then 12. or 8. in the hundred, may seeme but the guerdon of their paines. For the restitution, there is no more to be added: but if it be un∣lawfull, it must necessarily goe backe, Numb. 5.7. if it bee debt, we must not sleepe, Prov. 6.4. till we have paid it; or else if we cannot, Matth. 18.26. we must desire patience, and to make another day for paying it. And if it be none of ours, though we have strength, wee must not withhold it. Come to the use, for laying of them out, or for preserving them, Prov. 27.23. he saith, that every man should know his owne estate, and the estate of his cattell; and that he should not put it over to others, to looke to: for the rule, that the Masters eye fatteth the horse, and his step the ground: vers. 24. divitiae non sunt affixae, riches are not for ever: Eccl. 5. they will not flie into a mans mouth: and if hee have them, they will away: therefore he willeth that, &c. And then secondly, being so, that he doth not by superfluous con∣tracts diminish it; but let it be his rule, Iohn 13.29.  for buying that is necessary: and for his sale, he might have taught his belly better manners. Then for the use of them, Iohn 6.12. this is Christs rule, Gather that that is left, that nothing be lost; nothing must be wasted: And so he protesteth, that commeth before the Lord to offer, Deut. 26.14. he saith, though any used it, yet it did not become him, hee hath not suffered ought to perish by evill looking to, i. he had not riotously spent it upon himselfe; The Kites, Crowes, and Vultures have not devoured it; as one saith, the prodigall mans goods are laid upon rockes and high trees, that a man cannot come at: none eateth them
but Vultures and Ravens, that a mans goods be not like these. Exod. 16.23. As there must be a S. Bonifacius, a S. getter,Bonifacius & Servatius, must be joyned to∣gether. so there must be a S. Ser∣vatius, S. Saver; A goood saver, a good getter, a good keeper: If you have bonum Servatium a good Saver, you shall have bonum Bonifacium, a good Getter: (they are the words of Luther on that place) Look what you left of that was baked the sixth day, lay up for the seventh.He must gather in vesperi, that will not esurire in Sabbato. Rab. If a man doe not gather in vesperi Sabbati, on the evening of the Sab∣bath day; he shall esurire in Sabbato, be an hungry on the Sabbath day. And then when we have thus done, we see to the rules then as Christ saith, Luke 14.28. , sit downe and count the cost: that that was said for sobriety, a man must sit downe and reckon what he is able to reach with that estate; and then that he observe the Heathens rule, yet Christs meaning,Condus fortior promo. to take order that his Condus be fortior promo, and promus debilior condo, that his layer up be stronger then his layer out: and if the other be weaker, it will goe out the faster, and so hee shall not sufficere rebus suis, have sufficient for his owne af∣ffaires, & res ejus, and his goods, shall not sufficere ei, suffice himselfe; and then justice must pay for it. For the other use, towards others, we see it out of Psal. 41. that a man must judge wisely of the poore: and Deut. 15.11. that some poore are appropriated to us. Matth. 25.45. And for our goods, that we are but negotiatores, Stewards; and so consequently, God hath charged us with a rent charge out of them. Deut. 16.16, 17. Iuxia benedictionem Domini, according to the blessing of the Lord thy God which he hath given thee: and Deut. 26. by acknowledging, vers. 5. Syrus, &c. vers. 10.13. that there is nothing in him or his progenitors; that God should doe so with him or them, and therefore he is come to doe homage to him: and 1 Cor. 13.5. that charity doth not one∣ly not seeke her owne, but vers. 4. also giveth, and is bountifull: and Ephes. 4.28. the Apostle maketh this the opposition to stealing, to labour to have to give to others that need; shewing this, that the poore must alwayes be in our minds, and every one must say, I doe worke for them, as well as I doe worke for my selfe. 1 Cor. 29.14. David speaking of the Temple, vers. 1. saith, Quod de manu tua ac∣cepimus, damus tibi, What we have received of thine hands, that wee returne to thee; speaking of the applying of his preparations to the building of the Temple; and not that, Ad quid perditio haec? Why was this waste? Marke 14.4. And good affection, Deut. 15.21. if there be any evill favoured thing, either maimed, or blinde, or lame, or that had any other deformity, that is given to God, there is plaine or∣der taken against it: and the affection of Solomon, Prov. 3.9. in the good part; Honour the Lord with thy riches and tithes: and Mal. 3.9. in the evill part, Ye spoyle him, and ye shall have a curse: and as August. Date & Dabitur, give, and it shall be given unto you,Date & dabitur, two brethren, shall be two brethren. Now for the second use, 1. For the poore, because as out of it, Prov. 15.9. it is sinne, if he doe not give; therefore every one must give, except he himselfe be in extrema necessitate, extreme necessity: 2 Cor. 8.12. his reason is, Every one shall be accepted, not accor∣ding
to that he hath not, but according to that he hath. As for this first part, Luke 21.4. if but two mites, there greatly commended of our Saviour Christ: and for the other, Marke 7.41. even to the cup of cold water in Christs name, there shall be a reward given. And giving and lending, they are both enjoyned, Matth. 5.42. And rules for them, Acts 2.45. he saith, they parted their goods, as every one had neede. 1. they had respect to the need of every party; not as the prodigall, of whom the Heathen, male fit ei, qui fecisti choracibus, he fared the worse for his former luxury: whereas they are , Gra∣ces, thou hast made them, , prostitutes, prostituting them with∣out regard. Now then, 2 Cor. 1.13. their almes must not be so, that other men might have, and they want: that other men might finde ease by it, and they disease: whereas others that have  passio, a transient passi∣on, there is no hold in it: so when their liberality doth perire liberali∣tate, perish by their liberality, it commeth so; that is for the measure. 2 Cor. 9.7. God doth not love , but , a giver of ne∣cessity, but a cheerefull giver, it must not be wrung out: , neither searching curiously, nor with weighing and sifting what the party is, or whether he be such a one as is worthy; for that, the Hea∣then could say, that these were given not homini, but humanitati, to the man, but to humanity: , a fel∣low-feeling compassion is due to nature, and we ought to yeeld to the law our approbation; these in free gifts. In matters of justice we are to looke to the man, and Prov. 3.28. he putteth another, he will have it done out of hand: and when as a man hath, he must not bid him goe away, and come to morrow, but give then. Ambrose, Pauperi dabit potum cum acidatur, & panem cum mu∣cidatur, he will give the poore his drinke when it is sower, and his bread when it is mouldy; according to these rules. And thus doing Psal. 128.2. a man shall be sure to eate the labours of his hands, Psal. 41.3. the Lord will have a regard to him in his sicknesse: he will bee his Physitian: Psal. 37.25. his seede shall not begge: not onely cor∣porall blessings, but Dan. 4.27. it shall abrumpere peccata, breake off his sinnes. When a man feeleth his bowels open, it is a good signe and symptoma, of forgivenesse. As Acts 10.2. when Cornelius gave almes, his calling was neare; and Luke 11.41. Give almes, and all things shall be cleane unto you. This outward ceremoniall. But Iames 1.27. It is right and pure religion, and undefiled, to visit the fatherlesse and widowes in adversity; And not onely this, but also warranted by 1 Tim. 6.19. he saith, we shall have a good founda∣tion against the day to come: as out of the sentence of Christ, Mat. 25. the latter part of that Chapter, this is that that commeth in rati∣onem, to be accounted for; I was hungry, and you fed me, or fed me not: and the reason we may alledge out of v. 27. for there it is said, he asketh the unprofitable servant, why he gave not his money to ex∣changers:The Exchan∣gers to whom we must put the Lords mo∣ney be pauperes Ambrose on that place enquireth, who be those Trapezitae, money-changers he speaketh of; and findeth out at last, that they be pauperes, that be campsores; the poore that be those money-changers,
as he calleth them: and therefore he saith, if a man be to goe into an∣other Countrey, and in this respect he carry money with him, hee might be met with by theeves, and so be eased of his money: and se∣condly, if he carry mony that will not be currant and allowable in that Countrey that he is to go to; and therfore he goeth to the Exchanger, and delivereth him the money, and takes a bill of his hand, and carries but that with him, and so feareth neither the one, nor the other: that he is sure they will not take; and so he shall be sure of mony that will passe there: and so he compares the state of a mans life to a Traveller, who doth not load himselfe with that, which may either indanger his life by Theeves, or will not passe currant in the Countrey, whither he goeth, but laies out his money here, that he may receive it there. Now as Iob 1.21. he saith, Naked came I out of my mothers wombe, and 1 Tim. 6.7. We brought nothing into this world, neither shall we carry any thing out: if we carry any thing with us, we shall be spoyled as we go: Psal. 76.5. The proud are robbed, they have slept their first sleepe; they shall rise in the mornining and finde nothing in their hand. And then secondly, if a man, Iob 35.7. could have it in his hand, it is not gold nor silver will serve there; for it is not currant there. Then, as before, in the temporall passage it is best to make us friends of the temporall Mammon: and to deliver here, and to receive the worth of it there; as Ambrose saith, to be di∣ves in libro sigillato, rich in the sealed booke; that Cornelius Act. 10.4. his almes ented into , that is the committing of it here to his Factors, and exchangers, that is, the poore, for whom Christ is surety. Matth. 19.21. & 25.40. What ye doe to them, ye doe to me: and I will make it good; and his bill, which is the very Gospel, the word of God, promiseth, Matth. 10.42. that if it bee but a cup of cold water, it shall be returned there: This is the warrant of delive∣ring it here, and receiving it there. The Heathen man saith, that opera misericrdiae, workes of mercie, doe onely , swimme out with us: Revel. 14.13. & corum opera sequuntor eos, and their works follow them: Esa. 28.9. the other swimme not, but are like to him that dreameth of a great dinner, and when he awaketh, he is hungry. But then he will repay them that give: their worke shall be accoun∣ted of, and theirs is the Come ye blessed of my Father, &c. To con∣clude, Prov. 21.21. he saith, he that followeth after righteousnesse, i. just dealing in getting and restoring, and mercie in parting, he shall finde life in this life, and in the life to come: and his righteousnesse shall have a certaine signe in this life, and in the world to come, glory. The sixth point, of the procuring it in others.6. R. Psal. 50.18. It is set downe there, that currere cum fure, to runne with a Thiefe, and Prov. 29.24. he saith, that he that is partner with a Thiefe, destroy∣eth his owne soule: therefore Gen. 31.37. we see how bold Iacob is with Lban; he saith, Bring forth that which was stollen, let him search: and biddeth him shew then, if he had found them: hee knew he had not brought them. And not onely for himselfe: but Psal. 62.10. for the other part, he directeth himselfe, and speaketh to all; Trust not in oppression and robbery; if riches encrease, set not your hearts
upon them. And the like is, Prov. 20.17. for he saith there, My sonne, the bread of deceit is sweete to a man: but afterward his mouth shall be filled with gravell: Prov. 3.3. he warneth him to take this order: that truth and mercie forsake him not, for so shalt thou fi fa∣four. And so we see, both in themselves and others, inwardly and outwardly concluded of theft, of the Saints in all ages.
The IX. Commandement. Thou shalt not beare false witnesse, &c. THe exposition of this is in Levit. 19.11, 16, 17. and in Zech. 8.16, 17. and by our Saviour Christ, Matth. 12.34. and so forward: and by Saint Paul, Ephes. 4.25.15. for so he setteth it downe: Cast off lying, and let every man speak the truth to his neighbour: and the addition in vers. 15. , speake the truth in love: that is the affirmative part of this Com∣mandement. First, to make plaine the words of this Commendement: it is not of one word, as the other: the Hebrew translated, is after this man∣ner, Non respondebis testimonium salsum super vicinum tuum, thou shalt not answer a false testimony concerning thy neighbour. In which the word respondebis, must be understood after the * Hebrew phrase: a rad  as the Evangelists often use to begin thus; Jesus answered and said, Matth. 11.2. where no man speaketh, nor being demanded of any: so that by answering is meant, not onely when a man is demanded to speake the truth, but also when he speaketh the truth, no man deman∣ding him; for we see, Exod. 32.18. the same word, he saith there, that he heard vocem cantantium, the voyce of them that sing: it is expres∣sed by this word; so that it signifieth to speake, whether as of the mover of a question, or of the answerer. 4 Sorts of wnesses 1. od Now then for witnesses. It is of foure sorts in the Scriptures, for, 1. it is applied to the great and chiefe witnesses to God. Iob 16.19. he saith, Though they did oppresse him with their eloquence, yet ecce testis meus est ia coelis, behold my witnesse is in Heaven: and 1 Iohn 5.7. he saith there are three witnesses in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit; that there is no Person in the Deity, but it is a witnesse of the truth, and of our doings and thoughts, whether good or evill. Rom. 2. vers. last. Though the name of truth be attributed to Christ: Iohn 14.6. yet often a wicked man shall have an applause of wicked men; and a good man shall not: so he hath his praise indeed; but that praise shall not stand: it is not that that hath the praise of men that is praise-wor∣thy; it is a judgement of God against them: he is not a Jew that is outwardly a Jew, but he is a right Jew, that is inwardly one: and therefore Paul, when the judgement lay betweene them and God,
1 Cor. 4.3. inrespect of true judgement he saith, Mihi pro minimo est ut judicer à vobis, he counts it a small thing what man can judge of him. Now after this great witnesse,2. Conscience. in the second place commeth the witnesse that Saint Paul speaketh of, Rom. 2.15. attestante ipsis con∣scientia, their conscience bearing them witnesse: and 2 Cor. 1.23. he saith, Now I call God to record unto my soule, &c. this is that the Heathen man cals conscientia mille testes, conscience a thousand wit∣nesses. i. the knowledge that pertaineth to our selves, and concer∣neth our doings: and as the Heathen man saith, that calleth him mi∣serum, miserable, that contemneth hunctestum, this witnesse; for he will make but small conscience of this Commandement: or else that it is worse: for the Apostle, Rom. 1.18. saith plainely, that it is the begin∣ning of Apostasie, when a man will presse downe and smother the truth in unrighteousnesse. When he hath a wicked affection, an un∣righteous appetite to any action, for the attaining of that, though his his heart speake unto him, and tell him, that it is not right, yet he can be content to suppresse and keepe downe the truth as a prisoner, and not let it over rule: as the Heathen man saith, That the foundation of the justice of God beganne here, speaking in the hearts and con∣sciences of men, and they themselves will doe the contrary: and it is a way for God, as Paul saith, 2 Thes. 2.11. to give them over to strong delusions, that they may beleeve a lie. Though this witnesse be great, yet as 1 Iohn 3.20. and Paul, 1 Cor. 4.4. he saith, that God is a grea∣ter witnesse then our conscience: and Paul saith, though his heart ac∣quit him, yet he is not acquited: for a man often dreameth of him∣selfe, and deceiveth himselfe; and beguileth himselfe in his purpo∣ses: which when it commeth to be ript up, coram magno teste, before the great witnesse, shall be found to have beene wrong, and shall not prevaile: therefore we give it the second place. Now the third.3. Man. Because God will not speake from Heaven, and a mans conscience may be seared, the third is, one man to another. Ios. 24.22. saith unto the people, Vos estis mihi testes, ye are my witnesses, that ye have chosen the Lord to serve him: and they said, Sumus testes, we are witnesses. And concerning this part, is the Com∣mandement, the establishing of the truth by witnesses, Deut. 17.6.7. All matters shall passe by this order: At the mouth of two or three witnesses, shall he that is worthy of death, die, but at the mouth of one witnesse he shall not die: the hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him to kill him. 4. The witnesse of a stone.Now there is a fourth; Ios. 24.27. when he had made a covenant with the people, he tooke a great stone, and pitched it under an Oake, and said, The stone had heard all the words, and should beare wit∣nesse: there is a witnesse of a stone: so Habak. 2.11. saith, that the stone in the wall shall crie out, and the beame out of the timber shall make answer, and testifie against the getting of that money. And so Iames 5.3. the rust and canker of the gold and silver, &c. that is as much to say, as it sheweth that a man is unfaithfull, in so much that there must be a refuge to other creatures, to witnesse against him.
Esay beginneth his Prophecie with it: Moses his song, and Micah his plea; chap. 6.12. because no men are left to be Judges of the mat∣ter, he speaketh to the mountaines; because no man was left from prevarication, or else because that is Testimonium facto, a testimony in fact: as here is rust, &c. 1. There is not onely vox linguae, a voyce or testimony of the tongue; but there is also vox operis, a voyce or testi∣mony of the worke. Iob 16.8. he saith, that the wrinkles he had in his face, should witnesse: so there is falsum testimonium facti, a false testimony in fact, (as well as falsum testimonium dicti) a false testimony in word, which is hypocrisie. What witnesse is it, that is here meant? These two witnesses that are last, pertaineto this Commandement, for the two former pertaine to the first table. Now first for a false witnesse, theinde  A false witnesse signifieth three things. Falsum. word in the originall hath three significations; whereof [false] in Latin will beare but one: for wee say it signifieth, 1. falsum, a falshood, 2. mendacium, a lie, 3. vanitas, a vanity. 1. Falsum, falshood, that is aliter quam res est se habet, which is otherwayes then the thing it selfe is: that is not so, sermo non adaequa∣tus rebus, when the speech is not agreeable, and consonant to the things spoken of. 2. Mentiri, to lie,Mendacium. (as the common derivation is) ire con∣tramentem, is aliter se habens, quam ipse sentit, is to go against the minde, that is to speake otherwayes then we thinke; contrary to that is the property that David requireth, Psal. 15.2. must speak that that is in his heart. And the 3. Vanitas.Vanity. Because the speech of man was ordained to that end that it should serve for two necessary uses, 1. concerning this life, 2. concerning the life to come; that is, the building up of, 1. faith in respect of God, 2. charity, in respect of our brethren; therefore what speech soever hath not this end, is signum mendax, a lying signe; be∣cause it hath not signatum, the thing signified: therefore wee exclude  foolish talking, with the Apostle Ephes. 5.4. and Colos. 3. is vain & frivolous, as he calleth it, unsavory talke. For that (against thy neighbour) is that that many have taken upon them to build up offi∣ciosum memdacium, an officious lie: as if they might buy a lie, helpe a man to save life or goods, which is unlawfull: and indeed the very words of the Commandement here will not beare it, for the word is  therefore, as our English translation, Psal. 15.6. (against) it is not well: and Tremellius he is gone too on the other side, for he inter∣preteth it, pro innocente, for the innocent; but the common transla∣tion, super innocentem, concerning the innocent, is the best, either for him, or against him. Against him, it is naught and absurd; even the Heathen man knew it to be unlawfull: and Christan charity, and the Law of God, to helpe him, goeth against it. Therefore in translations this were onething to be wished, that whosoever is the interpreter,A good rule in translating. he would let the word stand in as broad a signification as it may beare; that if need be, it may be restrained: where, if it bee once set downe, contra, or pro, against, or for, the ignorant or unstable, they will take occasion to exclude the other. Therefore rather take concerning thy neighbour, which, as it signifieth against, so it signifieth with. As also Gen. 30.33. My justice shall answer  for me: so the
proposition hath a generall sense: then it is super proximum, con∣cerning thy neighbour; whether it be for him or against him: and yet neither is it full enough. Now for the mention of a mans neighbour, it is in this respect, because there is a meeting of God and the neighbour, as it were ex aequo, the one by the third Commandement in the first Table, the other by the ninth in the second Table: for as there is excluded, as de∣rogatory to God, false witnesses against God; to the unhallowing of his name: so here the other halfe, i. the abuse of our tongue, be∣ing any wayes against our neighbour, to the dammage of our neigh∣bour. The coherenceThe coherence and dependence that this hath with the former; from the manner of getting our living: some make it lying, for as the Heathen man saith, , where a lie must be made, let it be made. And where may a lie be made? , where a man may gaine by it. This consequence hath some show of reason for its dependence on the former precept, were it not for the inconveniences, which are in the other respect comprehended, &c. This Comman∣dement institu∣ted for the re∣ctifying of the other three.There are other that thinke, when God establisheth authority in the fith Commandement, he tooke order for promiscuall duties in the three next, 6.7. and 8. Commandements: then if it fell out that all were not well in these three, if there were any hurt or breach, then they must come ad judices, to the Judges: Exod. 22.8. if the thiefe bee not found, &c. The affirmative; and so it is in deed, for Deut. 19.12. it is said, that if a man violate the sixth Commandement, the Elders of the Citie shall examine the matter, and sentence shall be given on him by witnesses. Deut. 22.15. for the seventh Commandement; if a man accuse his wife, they shall judge: and the father and the mother shall witnesse of her virginity, &c. and Exod. 22.9. for Commande∣ment 8. if a man deale any way betweene goods and goods with his neighbour, &c. if it perish, &c. therefore, for the rectifying of what∣soever is done amisse in the other three Commandements, was this in∣stituted. It is not enough to have authorities, but there must bee proofes too, and that is by witnesses: therefore, Levit. 5.1. God ta∣keth order that a man shall beare witnesse, and Deut. 17.6.7. the witnesse being so borne, shall be received. 3. There is another sort, that upon the comparisons of the holy Ghost, betweene a good name and credit, and wealth, that honesta fa∣ma, is alierum patrimonium, an honest report, or a good name, is another patrimony, immediately: then having dealt with patrimonium, with o∣ther patrimonies before; now he comes to deale with a good name, which is a second or alierum patrimonium, another patrimony. But the second opinion de re judicata, of the matter to be judged, or, to be referred to the Judges, carrieth it away: that is thought to be the best, and the best are inclined thereunto; for Esa. 59.13. hee saith, that they have trespassed in lying, i. inconceiving lies in their heart, and uttering false matters: and his consequence he bringeth in the 14. Judgement is turned backe, and justice standeth a farre off: that is, tanqam germanum effectum, as the proper naturall effect of
false witnesse: he bringeth in the breach and overthrow of judgement and justice, as most horrible before God; therefore he bringeth it as a barre: and so indeed it is, as Prov. 12.22. he saith, that lying is abomination unto him. Then this is the effect concerning the con∣sequence of this Commandement, that if in respect of the breach of any of the other Commandements, Deut. 19.16. any man bring up an evill name or accusation of his neighbour; if any saith hee hath done that which he hath not, then as he taketh order, chap. 19.21. he shall be punished: and that punishment, whether it be penall or cor∣porall, that he thought to have brought upon his brother, the very same shall be upon him. Scopus quad plex.For the scope and purpose of the Law-giver, it is sure that the Lord being truth, as it is expressely said of Christ, and of the Spirit, the Spirit of truth and holinesse. Secondly, mercie, justice, true dealing:1. Gloria De and thirdly, truth in regard of God; so we may easily see the end in Gods behalfe: he would have the truth preferred, for which truth, as Iohn 18.37. Christ saith he was borne to beare witnesse to it. And for which cause, every man by the proportion of Christs birth, is bone to witnesse. And as the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.15. if wee have taught ale, then we are found false witnesses against God: for we have taught and testified, that Christ is risen: and in teaching this, we teach a lie; if Christ be not risen from the dead: And not onely in these, but also in judiciall matters, Ios. 7.19. where a confession being to be made of Achans theft, Iosuah saith unto him: My sonne, give glory to God, and make confession of thy sinne unto him: that is as much to say, as of the confession of truth, and the glory that commeth of it, is the end for God, because that of the confession of truth, not on∣ly in matter of religion, but in judiciall matters, there turneth an especiall glory to God. 2. Bum S∣lesia.Now for the Church 2 Pet. 2.1. he speaketh there of certaine (as he calleth them) magistri mendaces, lying masters, or false teachers. We speake not as it is referred to the unhallowing of the name of God: but as it is referred to the danger and hazarding of the soules of the hearers that heare them preach. 1 Iohn 2.22. Quis est mendax, nisi qui negat Iesum esse Christum? Who is a lier, but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ? he is a lier that affirmeth an hereticall point; and by that meanes bringeth into hazard the soules of the hearers: And the preserving then of the truth in the Church, not in respect of Gods glory, but in respect of the safety of the Church, it is the se∣cond end. 3. The esta∣blishing of ju∣stice and truth in the Com∣mon-wealth.Now for the third end, for the Common-wealth, as we said, Gen. 21.30. Abraham calleth the Well Beersheba, the Well of the oath: and gave Abimelech seven Lambes for a testimony that the Well was his. And Gen. 31.47, 48. that cumulus testimomi, the heape of wit∣nesse, was onely this; because there passed a covenant betwixt Laban and Iacob, that they would be friends and allies. So Levit. 5.5. the cause of proceeding of justice, and the establishment of all truth was done by this onely (Numb. 5.) except it were in the case of jealousie. Now for every particular man, it is the fence of his good name and
credit:4. The fence of every particu∣lar mans good name. for seeing, Prov. 15.30. that a good name fatteneth a mans bones; it doth him much good within and without. And Eccles. 7.1. it casteth a good and sweete savour, and Prov. 22.1. when it commeth to be prised, it passeth gold and silver: and indeed it is selfe the cause of them, especially of the last, Prov. 22.1. because from it proceed∣eth favour; and of that favour the smell, that men will commit them∣selves unto him. Act. 5.34.40. as to Gamaliel, being a man of name, they gave all eare unto him: as men will goe to Physitians that are well spoken of: and a cunning Lawyer shall be sure of many Clients, and a good Tutor of many Schollers: and most customers will resort thither, where is most credit, and best report: so we see the foure-fold end of this Commandement. The entrance into that that followeth, may be thus. In respect of Gods judgements, it maketh no matter what men thinke of us: But then there is an injunction to every man,Matth. 5.16. that his workes shall so shine before men, &c. There is laid upon every man a duty of doing good here: and there is no good to be done by that man that hath an evill report.A double ne∣cessity of truth. So that duplex necessitas, a double necessity is laid upon us, to have bonam conscientiam proper te, a good conscience for your selfe, and bonam samma, a good report for your brethren, as August. you may be able to doe good then before men: And therefore how∣soever, in respect of God, and duty, setting scandalum vitae, & scan∣dalum justitiae, the scandall of life, and the scandall of righteousnesse or justice aside; a man must stand thus resolved, as he speaketh, 2 Cor. 6.8. that through evill report, and good report, he must doe good: yet if Phil. 4.8. with , & , & , whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, a man can joyne , those things that make a good report, it is the best course, and that way is to be taken. For little good use will there be of mens gifts without them. As a man must regard the witnes of God, rather then the witnes of his conscience: so the witnesse of this conscience, rather then mans: as the Philosopher, Malo viri bòni nomen, or famam perdere,The testimony of a good con∣science. quam conscientiam, I had rather lose the name and report of a good man, then hazard the losse of my conscience. But yet in these things where both can meere, there that his gifts may increase to the enlarging of the Lords Dominion, and the Church, both ought to be followed: therefore, 2 Cor. 6.8.3. he saith, they were true, but were counted as deceivers: yet he saith there, that they gave no occasion for offence: And that for this reason, to the end that their ministery might escape, and not runne into blame, and be by that meanes made lesse able to doe good. So then, both in regard of a mans own selfe, that he is more circumspect, while he hath it to keep; when it is lost, Ier. 3.3. he putteth on frontem meretriciam, a whores fore∣head; he is impudent: Psal. 58.4. he stoppeth his eare. So long as he hath a good name, he is carefull to keepe it: so the consideration of both these and this, and also the former respect, it is a sinne, not to looke to, but to neglect his good name: as the Heathen man, excepto probro, reliqua omnia maledicta existimo, take away slander and reproach, and I will endure all other railings: because the wound of a slanderer
might be healed, but there will a skarre remaine: and because he is shut up to doe good, and good men will be suspitious, and evill men will never have done with it; so he ought thus to stand affected. For the offence it selfe, Matth. 15.19. it commeth from the heart: Marke 7.22. , &c. blasphemie,Oigo pea hujus pra. , &c. foolish spea∣king. Now then, as in the former, there is an inclination of nature, grassa∣ri ad famam, for a man to thinke, when he can thrust downe other, that he shall be better thought of. But when as it commeth to that that Esay speaketh of, chap. 29.15. he saith, They digge deepe and hide them∣selves▪ Ier. 18.18. Let us imagine some far reaching counsell against Ie∣remie, let us slander him, that none may credit him; this is beyond the roote of this vice, and is the Suppuratio, and rankling of it: 1 Tim. 6.4.  evill surmisings; The Apostle there condemneth evill suspitions, light suspitions, when they be upon little or no ground. There it beginneth. Now we handle these, as they are enemies and prejudiciall to mans credit, not as before: Iames 4.11.12. he procee∣deth further, for he saith there, that from this light suspition, men be∣ginne to take upon them the office of the Law;Rash judge¦ment of light suspition. whereas the Law should condemne and accuse, they take upon themselves to judge. Thus we come to judgement: and not onely to judgement, but as Paul saith, 1 Cor. 4.5. we come to judgement before the time, too hastily. And he will not judge of outward things, so as there may necessarily grow a conclusion of them: but of doutfull things, Rom. 14.4. such as may be well interpreted; as to deale with Christ and Iohn Baptist: The one for not eating, but abstaining, was said to be troubled with a melancholike fancie, the other for eating and drinking, a dissolute fellow. That whereas these outward things may be done to badde or good ends, they judge hastily de rebus sociis, of the things themselves, and of their neighbours. Testis repenti∣nus nun an∣re judat.Now this repentinus testis, this sudden hasty witnesse, Prov. 12.19. he never giveth his verdict truely: Acts 28.4. they no sooner see the Viper cleave to Pauls hand, but presently they say, he is a murtherer: even at the very sight of the Viper. Now it is not onely this, but 2 Tim. 2.26. he must suspend his judgement, for he knoweth not what will be hereafter: that is, God may give him grace to see fully. And whereas he should keepe his conclusion of sinnes, praecedentia & consequentia, and observe the things that goe before, and the things that follow after, 1 Tim. 5.21. this will not be held: but there is no sooner a Viper on the hand, but a verdict will be given. And not one∣ly that, but where God taketh order, that ubi malum contingit, ibi moriatur, if it be private, let it have private death; Prov. 11.13. Hee is a discoverer of secrets, as we see, that was the first augmentation of Chams sinne, to tell his brethren of his fathers folly. Matth. 1.19. Ioseph, because it was secret, and might have beene done by some that had a pure contract, in simplici actu fornicationis: he would not , make her a publike example. And not onely this, but as we see beyond this, 2 Sam. 13.30. when he openeth it more then is true: when the King hath lost but one sonne, they will
say all the children of the King are dead:2 Sam. 13.30. as we see, it was the common rumour then: if there be but one killed, then all are killed. And be∣yond all these, Prov. 17.9. when he hath once told it, hee will after∣ward at it againe: and when the wound seemeth to be whole, and re∣pentance is made, yet he will refricare cicatricem, renew it a∣gaine. These degrees and affections are the appetites of a nature lusting to envie, but especially that of things doubtfull, it is very certaine that we must strive against. But if he will reason, as Shimei, 2 Sam. 16.7. that because Ioah and Abner were great men of bloud, that so David was a man of bloud; and when we proceed ex dubiis, upon doubtfull and uncertaine grounds, we will open a window to all other. Solum subactum.Now after this we doe consider, as in the former, that which maketh us Solum subactum, soile fitted for the seed, which is called pruritus aurum,Pruritus u∣. the itching of eares: so the Wiseman, Prov. 17.4. saith there, he is a willing hearer: and so if there were no receiver, there would be no theeves: so if there were no itching eares, that itched after the na∣kednesse of their brethren, it is certaine that there would be no Chams to come to tell them of it. Psal. 15.3. He saith, that as he will not take up a slanderer, so he will not receive a slander: for if a man doe vulium contrahere, draw his forehead together, and shake him off, it is very certaine he will not returne againe. Discet non libenter dcere, cum di∣dicit non libenter audire, he will learne not to be forward to speake, when he perceives others unwilling to heare him. Aug. As on the other side, if he be willing to heare, then the other will be willing to speake it. So there must be a delight in hearing mens imperfections, and secondly, a credulity: As we see, the word was no sooner out of her mouth, Gen. 39.20. but presently there is commandment given, that Ioseph should to prison. Putiphars wife was beleeved without ex∣amining: Whereas Ier. 40.16. Aug. saith, The righteous are liker to Gedaliah, when Iohanan told him that Ismael would slay him; yet because he did not suspect any such thing by him, he would not beleeve him: that is, they are not credulous, either to admit them, or non indul∣gere, not to have regard unto them; that is, when a man maketh a con∣clusion of it, or a action upon it, or maketh a shew by gesture, as if he thought it were true without examination: and sheweth himselfe so against him as if he were guilty. Irrigatio soli, the watering of the soyle, is that which Peter called 1 Pet. 4.15. ,Irrigatio li. to take care of another mans Dioces; that is, a curious searching, that is a note of an Hypocrite: Cur aspicis? why spyest thou? not cur vides? not why lookest thou? that same , and not , to espie into other mens affaires, to looke for it, and to know what they thinke, and what they say, that Paul maketh the opposite to the former Commandement, for indeed it is idlenesse: he saith, They doe not onely come to be idle; but , praters, , busie bodies; an affection much mis-becomming a discreet man, and certainely to be condemned: 2 Sam. 18.19. there is the image of this vice in Ahimaah; many would not have stood for the best office in all Iury, to be the tydings carrier. And so we see that it
is the vice and quality, Act. 17.21. wherewith Athens. was infected. They intended nothing in the world, but to heare what tydings. And surely by this meanes, when we looke onely outward, it sheweth ei∣ther a neglect of a mans selfe, or else they fall in jucundum spectacu∣lum, into pleasing dotage in themselves. Ierome; Qui sua non ornani, aliena eupiunt, they that are carelesse of their owne behaviour, are al∣wayes observing other mens carriages; They are still noting of other mens lives, as to prate, asking, what shall Iohn doe? Iohn 21.22. Christ saith, what have you to doe? Care not for him, but follow me: and sheweth his appetite to know what Iohn must doe; it is not for Peter to doe it: he must keepe himselfe in his owne Diocese. And so if we can , doe our owne businesse, 1 Thes. 4.11. and search them as we ought, we shall have but little leisure to looke to other mens. And for the remedy, the Heathen, Qui confidit virtuti suae, non invidet alienae, he that can rest confidently in the assurance of his owne vertue, needs not envie anothers. And so we see, both what is in the minde first, and after the disposition; and what is that that watreth it. So we are come to the outward actions. Actus, evill words.The actuall sin is in words specially: which, as Christ, Matth. 12.35. are according to the treasure in the heart, so that there is not onely an evill treasure that bringeth forth evill things: but also an idle treasure, that bringeth forth vers. 36. idle things, idle words. Divisie actuum hujus mandati.Now these two comprehend the division of false and vaine. For false things; and then either as disagreeing from the truth and essence of things, or else from our minde. And againe, both these, either as they concerne either our selves, or our brethren: for whatsoever it is, that is prejudiciall to us, or to our neighbour; it is therefore con∣demned, because it is against charity. But though it doe no hurt to us or to our brethren, yet if it be a falshood, it is against the truth of God. 1 Cor. 15 15. We are found false witnesses to God, though not as in the third Commandement: because the falshood that is in the truth of do∣ctrine, there as it toucheth Gods glory, here as it hurteth our brethren, Prov. 30.6. by adding to the word, by taking from, or by changing, Gal. 1.9. or by making, alium Iesum, by preaching another way of salvation: this was touched before. So not now onely this we are to know, that as there, so here, it is a good rule of Basils, not onely , but , all lies and falshoods; all turnings of the Scripture: and one thing, and the speciall thing, hee beateth against it, that making of the literall sense, typicall; it giveth an occasion to an heresie:  placet, they so please themselves, though thus they displease others. Now to make man the reasonable part, and Eve the sensuall, and naturall part, and thereupon to inferre this maxime, as a positive do∣ctrine deducible thence: and Adam imperare Evae, cave Serpentem, that if reason command sense, we shall escape temptation. A man may allude to it: but to say that by Agar and Sarah is meant this or that, is nothing else in the world, but to make the Scripture cothurnum, a bus∣kin with will serve either legge, or a Welshmans hose: and bringeth in an uncertainty in religion. Ezekiel maketh it an opprobrie to God,
to say, that in obscuris scripsi vobis, I have written to you in dark spee∣ches: that as for the third Commandement, so here in regard of men, because they shall be brought in doubt to have nothing to hold to. Testim. in judi∣cio, extra judici∣um.We consider first the testimony, as it is given in judgement, and then as it is out of judgement, Prov. 19.5. and the very selfesame three verses after, is repeated, vers. 9. Solomons division there, is this. They that speake lies, and false witnesse: this is applied to the judgement-seate; and these propositions that stand thus, Non feres contra proxi∣mum, Thou shalt not beare against thy neighbour, &c. shew plaine∣ly, that there may be falsum testimonium, a false testimony; that is not de proximo, concerning our neighbour. So it may be resolved into two: so that this is one, to speake lies: though they doe not concerne our neighbour: and the other that may, &c. Of lies in generall,Mendacium. that seeing, Iohn 8.44. the Devill was alwayes a lyer from the beginning, for the first word he spake was a lie, and they that utter lies belong to him. And seeing Psal. 58.3. it is a property of wicked men, even from the very wombe to speake lies; and that is not onely a light fault, but as Psal. 5.6. Perdes omnes qui loquuntur mendacia, Thou shalt destroy all those that speake lies; so whether it concerne our selves, or our neighbours, or none, yet it is false witnesse to God: and as Revel. 22.15. out of Heaven, in the place of torments shall be , all that make, or love to heare lies. So we see that these things are condemned, whether they be Actively, or Passively. Come to that that is in judgement. And for this false witnesse we have,In judgement a false witnesse is a hammer, a sword, an arrow Prov. 25.18. a good comparison of Solomon; for he saith, A man that beareth false witnesse, is a Hammer, a Sword, a sharp Arrow. Now the manner how he is these three, (and that is that that aggra∣vateth the offence,) is because himselfe, who, Ier. 3.3. writeth, hee groweth harder, and putteth on a Harlots face. Besides that, there are three parties, as Bernard sheweth, that are smitten with one and the selfesame tongue: after these three wayes. A false witnesse to the Judge an hammer.1. Iudici est malleus, he is a Hammer or Mallet to the Judge: he doth astonish the Judge, as a man that giveth a blow on the head to one, that he knoweth not how to determine. 2. A Sword to him that hired him.And the second, to him that hired him, he is gladius, a sword; hee destroyeth his soule: he giveth him hope, that he hath now by his purse overthrowne the truth: and so at any other time he will bring the same to passe. 3. An arrow to the adverse patty.And the third, he is an Arrow to him, against whom he witnesseth: though his harme be least, if by patience hee beare it. Yet it is a wound that sticketh in him, either in his goods, or life, or howsoever: at the least in his good name, he receiveth a blemish by it. Latitudo falsi testis in judicio.Now this false witnesse bearing is not onely to be referred to the witnesse alone; but it taketh hold also of whatsoever commeth into judgement, & is a party active in it. Deut. 19.16. The Accuser is called a Witnesse, and all the rest of the parties: so both the Actor, the Ac∣cuser, and reus, the Defendant, both these, the one by untrue accusa∣tion, the other by untrue defence, may beare false witnesse; and the
Judge likewise by his wrong determination: and the Notary,6. False witne¦ses n judg¦ment. by inser∣ting the sentence otherwise then it was: and the Advocate: for of these sixe consisteth the judgement. First, there is the Judge, 2. the Register, 3. the Plaintiffe, 4. the Defendant, 5. the Witnesse, 6. the Advocate. 1. ud, he h need to  wise man.1. For the Judge, it is most perilous on his side; so he had neede to be a man of wisdome, Deut. 1.17. it is said, Iudicium est Domini, the judgement is Gods: and so whosoever he be, that being a Judge, giveth a wrong sentence, facit deum mendacem, he maketh God to speake a lie: or whosoever he be that induceth a Judge by false wit∣nesse, he perverteth the course of nature, and changeth as much as in him lieth, God into the Devill. 2. False No∣taries.2. And for those that make false Records and Writs, Ezr. 4.19. there is a memory of them: whereas Darius, cap. 6.2. found that the Jewes had not beene a rebellious people, against those, to whom they were in subjection, nor had attempted any such thing, nor the buil∣dings of the Temple, without Cyrus his Decree: yet Artaxarxes his Notaries could finde Records that made mention that they were re∣bellious to the King of Assyria: and so, that these were false Records. For when Darius, a good King, came to beare rule, they could finde in a coffer that Cyrus had made such a Decree. 3. Plaintiff.3. For the Plaintiffe, Levit. 5.1. there is order taken, that whatso∣ever he hath seene or heard; he should testifie, and as in vers. 5. if hee doe not testifie, it is sinne. 4. Defendant.4. Ioshua 7.19.20. for the Defendant, that he must confesse what he hath done, as it is there in the case of Achan. 5. Advocat.5. For the Advocates, they are onely to follow what is altogether just, Deut. 16.20. causarum cognitores, knowers and followers of causes: these officers were Atturnies, and Counsellors, that are to en∣forme them that come to pleade, how to pursue their matters: the not wresting of the Law, not respecting persons, nor the not taking rewards. 6 Accusers.6. And for Witnesses, Deut. 19. If any be an accuser, or testifie a false matter, looke what penalty the other should have had, if hee had beene proved guilty, the same shall be inflicted on him, if he prove it not, therefore Gods judgement-seate is established on every side. Going to  .Now for the Judge, seeing the Apostle hath said it, 1 Cor. 6.7. that it is , a fault so long as men goe to Law one with another; mea∣ning those that beginne, not those that are , constrained to an∣swer: therefore it must necessarily follow, &c. that it is his reason, for there must be alwayes some untruth. Both cannot be true, because they are contradictions; and therefore much untruth must needs be uttered in the place of judgement; and this is derogatory to God, Ioshua 7. which should not be: therefore Pauls advise is, that there be as great diminishing of it as can be: he would have it as little as could be, and that it should not be, but when there is , or , a most unjust action, and defraudation, a harme, that cannot be borne. Therefore this first, the cherishing of suits and Law cases, by a Prince
or Judge, it is certaine to open a wide window to the breaking of this Commandement: therefore there must be some order taken for it, ei∣ther that there be , Examiners and Inquisitors, as there were in Greece,. such as had the approbation of quarrels and suits; and they should judge whether they were worthy to be taken in hand: or else as they had in Rome, contending ex Sacramento, they should put downe each his pawne, in manum pontificis ad sacros usus, in the hands of the High-Priest, to be bestowed upon holy uses: and if his quarell were not good, he should lose it, and it should goe ad sarta tecta templi, to the repairing of the Temple; otherwise there will be no good done:The seae of judgement e∣rected for hard matters & ex∣tremities. but it is , a fault; for the seate of judgement, Exod. 18. Deut. 1. it was erected therefore, that hard cases, and extremities might be taken order for. But to say that ours are matters of difficul∣ty, it were absurd: therefore it is abused, and there is a great bait laid to the multitude of false witnesses. 2. Qu di∣spath.A second thing is set downe, Exod. 18.23. for Moses, though hee were excellent in knowledge, and therefore could better determine: yet this benefit was to be exchanged with this, that causes might soon be dispatched; he appointeth more as his father in law counselleth it. An absurdity for causes to hang from morning to night: but now it is no absurdity for causes to hang from one yeare to three, vers. 17. he saith, That that thou doest, is not well done: and vers. 23. if this be done, then the people shall goe home quickly: That will be the be∣nefit that he reckoneth of it; for as the multitude of suits is a way to much falshood, for some causes are very plaine, and cannot be with∣stood without cavils: so that long depending of suits, the manifold non-suits, and delatory Pleas, even for shifts, and to delude justice: therefore this is secondly condemned, as a way furthering much to false witnesse. Now in the 3.4.5. Commandements, were these three before. Iudicium, Vsurpatum. Temerarium. Peversum.Iudicium, 1. Vsurpatum. 2. Temerarium. 3. Perversum. Judgement is either, 1. usurped. 2. rash or hastie. 3. perverse. 1. Is Rom. 14.4. ov party that we have not to doe with, 2. Deut. 1.17. in a case too hard: and the 3. Deut. 19.17. Act. 25.16. untill both parties be heard, he must not give sentence: And a blemish of David, 2 Sam. 19.29. he gave rash judgement of Mephibosheths lands; and after he had much adoe to let him have halfe of them, and Ziba the other halfe. Solomon, Prov. 18.17. saith, Looke who is first, he is just: then commeth his neighbour, and maketh inquiry or search after him. This is one step of rash judgement, to give such credit to the first, that Ziba played, that though Mephibosheth prove all the lands to be his, yet he must be content with halfe. And perversum, perverse judgement, Prov. 8.8. defrauding of justice. Exod. 23.2. Perverting, for there may either be defrauding: 1. by the exposition of Solomon, Prov. 17.15. where either the wicked is accounted just, i. absolved: or the just is accounted and pronounced wicked, and condemned: when as the right translation word for word is, The un∣just is justified, or the just unjustified; it is all one in case of justice
to affirme a thing to be so, or to make it so. The last also was before touched, i. falshood in justice, Numb. 35.32.33. there is no reward to be taken for a murtherer, but he shall die: bloud will not be cleansed but by bloud; whereas in these cases God doth appoint to the Magistrate hands to doe as he thinketh good, yet he will make a release. But in some cases he is appointed to his ar∣bitriment, but yet with two conditions. First, if it be expedient for the Common-wealth: or the second, if the other party that is hurt, be contented therewith. Now for the other part of condemning, Esa. 10.1. some decree wicked Decrees, Judges: others wrrite grievous things: sometimes the record is more grievous then the Decree: if he goe not exactly to the sentence, it is a false record: Quando justitia revertitur ad ju∣dicium, when righteousnesse shall returne unto judgement: Psal. 94.15. when Christ that is the true righteousnesse shall come to judge∣ment, they shall answer for it. Accusers offiFor the accuser, the breach of this office in this behalfe is three wayes. 1. Calumnia, slander, when he doth calumniari, slander; as Ha∣man doth, Ester 3.8. for he saith there, that the people of the Jewes had lawes diverse from other Lawes; & they had not been observers of the Kings Lawes, and the King, he falleth into his temerarium judicium, his rash judgement too, i. when he heareth a false accusation against it. And the next, when a man proceedeth upon uncertainty; as Acts 24.13. those that did accuse Paul, alleadged many things,1. Proceeding upon uncer∣tainty. but they could not prove any thing. So he is to wait till he have his full proofe. Now the third is Praevaricatio, prevarication, or collusion in plea∣ding: a metaphore taken from (vari) those that have their knees out of joynt, and the convulsion is inward, so that both touch above,3. Paevaricatio. and their feete are farre asunder. For in the ancient common-wealths, when as they wore long garments, a man might easily have beene de∣ceived, thinking them to be as broad at the knees, as at the feete: so they that strive together, whereas they are friends privily, those are called praevaricatores, prevaricators, or accusers; when a man doth accuse, and yet his friend with him whom he doth accuse: and it is nothing else but a mockery of the place of judge∣ment. And Advocatus actoris, the Advocate for the Plaintiffe: he that representeth the party, he is so charged with the same prevarication, the betraying of the truth with weake proofes and grounds: those that betray the cause with weake defences. Ezra. 4.5. it is said, that they were hired, i. there were men about Artaxerxes, that bare the face of such as would advise him of that that was best for him: whereas in∣deed they had taken a bribe against the Jewes before. That party that is to sustaine one person, and is corrupted to doe the contrary, he is to be blamed for his prevarication. Now for the Defendant, or him that is accused,Defendant. there are three other. The first is, if being according to the forme of Law by Ioshuah de∣manded, Psal. 141.4. that he doe not versare se ad agitandum acti∣ones, practise himselfe to turne off the suite commenced against him,
or which is as old, ad accusandas excusationes, to accuse other, that he may excuse himselfe; it was Adams fault, Gen. 3. tergiversatio, tergi∣versation: the question was, whether he had eaten or not? he answe∣red not to it; but said, the woman which thou gavest me, &c. Iob 31.33. This he saith of himselfe, If I have hid my sinne as Adam did, concealing mine iniquity in my bosome: though I could have made afraid a great multitude; yet if I made a fault, I confessed it. So be∣ing lawfully commanded, we must confesse: so we must not adde evill to evill. To be evill is evill: & videri malum, and to seeme evill is evill too. And so a man is not bound to open himselfe without the seate of judgement; and so, where there is not a lawfull course ta∣ken, as Iohn 18.20.21. he saith to them directly, They had heard of him. And if any man would accuse him, let him come forth. And as he there used indirect words; so he himselfe practised, Iohn 19.9. to Pilates questions he said nothing, because they did not proceed ex publica infamia, or ex semiplena probatione, of publike infamy (or ra∣ther it should be, common fame) or probable grounds, or likely proofes: but onely he questioned with him, to see if he would accuse himselfe. So in these cases, a man may answer nothing; for if it be a truth, as Paul, Act. 23.6. if there be two things, and both true, a man may answer one truth, and occultare pariem veritatis, and hide a part of the other truth: as he did; that forasmuch as the councell was divided, and the Pharisees held the Resurrection; he said he was judged for that, though it was not for that alone, that he was judged for. So if a man have divers wayes to defend himselfe, he may chuse one which he will: or if they proceed not aright, &c. But if according to the forme of Law there be proceeding, made of that he is accused of, he is bound, Iosh. 7.19. to answer; this is one. And the second is, that whereas there is given for a remedy of those that are oppressed, the benefit of Appeale: yet for a man to protract in an evill cause, to sue Appeales, that need not, is a second fault: and against that Exod. 18.22.23. to make delaies of justice, and when he hath received sentence, to refuse it: resist it ordinationi, and not obey their orders: Rom. 13.2. Qui ordinationi resistit, Deo resistit, whoso∣ever resisteth the ordinance, resisteth God. For Witnesses,Witnesses. there are three other. The 1. is Levit. 5.5. If a man being lawfully required by his superiour according to the proofe, demanding his witnesse, if it be not in matters out of question, hee is bound to tell whatsoever he hath heard. And if it be not a superiour, yet if it be for the delivery of a man; and if it be a matter, Prov. 24. that doth concerne the delivery of the soule, he is bound to answer: so saith he, Prov. 24.11.12. he speaketh of those that will not deliver them that are drawne to death: If hee say, I cannot say so much as I would, and I know not of it, &c. he counteth it a great fault for a man, for the preservation of an innocent, not to give testimony, though it be not required by authority. But otherwise, if it be out of these, if the superiour require not for condemnation; on the other side, if he require matters out of que∣stion,
or if it be not in the case of deliverance, he is not bound to an∣swer. And as these 2. causes, Prov. 11.21. he setteth downe another way for wicked persons: The Greekes proverbe is, Da mihi mutuum jusjurandum, lend me an oath: Our Saviour Christ calleth it,Lend an Oath. Prov. 11.21. & 16.5. a joyning in hand in hand: The wise man he saith plainly, though that they may happily escape the hands of men, yet they shall not escape unpunish∣ed: that is, God will be sure to punish them. For the Advocate, there are two wayes appointed to him. First,Advocate if he take an evill cause in hand; which so as man to doe, he knowing it not, is a great sinne. For Exod. 23.1.2. he saith there, you shall not report for your witnesse: and then for him that helpeth him, Thou shalt not helpe him in his Plea. 2 Chron. 19.2. Iehu said to Iehosophat, Wilt thou helpe the wicked, and love them that hate God? And we see, he withdrew himselfe: for as it is, Rom. 1.32. he saith, not onely the doer of wicked things, but , he that hath pleasure in them, as our Placets are; so the voyces in the Greekes suffrages: when with , it pleaseth, , good-liking pleaseth them. Whosoever trieth , good-liking, and helpeth the wicked, it is very certaine it shall be a sinne unto him. 2. And the other is set downe, Prov. 17.23. that is, when a man for the defence of a cause indifferent, doth wrest the Law, or take a gift out of the bosome to helpe a cause in judgement, that might be carried otherwise: yet it is condemned, Prov. 24.24. to say to the wicked, thou art just, to joyne with the wicked to helpe a wicked cause; or if it be not, yet by wrong meanes to seeke a bolster for it, so is the course of judgement. But because there is not onely judgement , but in , on the Bench, but in the consulting place too, when we take coun∣sell with our selves, , after long deliberation, or with a pur∣pose of perseverance in it; so no false witnesse must be given in choyce, because there is justice and truth in both: for justitia, justice, as the Philosophers well define it, is rectitudo in affectu impressa à rectâ ratione, so as electio dicit excellentiam, as excellentia dicit magis aut plus; a rectitude stamped upon the affections by right reason, so as election or choyce regardeth excellencie, as excellencie regards the more eminent and best: so there must be a magis and a plus in excellentia & in electione; & melius est eligendum, an eminencie and meliority in excellencie, and in choyce; and the better is alwayes to be chosen, is the second rule in morall Philosophy. And if not that, he goeth a∣gainst the truth, and so justice is broken. False testimony out of judge∣ment. Nemo Dominus sui, nisi ad licitaNow to that without judgement. For when a man is out of judge∣ment seate, Psal. 12.4. that he should not say, Ego sum Dominus linguae, my tongue is mine owne: Nemo est Dominus sut, nisi ad licita, no man is further master of his owne, then to employ it to a lawfull use: therefore, Prov. 24.28. he saith a strange thing: When a man is not called, and there is no cause to testifie, even without a cause in common talke, he will beare false witnesse: therefore the greater is his finne. Then we must put protervitatem oris & labirum,Prtervitas or is & labiorum. a fro∣ward
mouth and perverse lips, Prov. 4.24. farre from us, that wee must not breath out, &c. seeing our neighbours thinke us no evill. Now this report is according as the tongue may doe no harme:Words. for first a man hath favour, a credit, which is in the minde. Secondly, a good report, in speech. Thirdly, friends. Fourthly, an estate of dignity, a superiour. Now as any of these foure may be hurt by the tongue: so are the faults of the tongue: for there, Prov. 22.1. 1. a good name, and loving favour: for the third, Prov. 20.6. a faith∣full friend is an unknowne treasure: for the fourth, Esa. 37.23. dig∣nity. Rabshakes blasphemy, because, &c. Against the first, good credit, they commonly oppose contumelie, i. disgrace,Sinnes against credit. 1 Centumelia Disgrace in presence. Sui Cnn. when he is present, Rom. 1.30. , despightfull; when a man is disgraced to his own face, by opprobrie: then if it be per sales ob∣liquè, glancingly by scoffs; that is against the fourth, against his dignity, and is called Subsannatio, a taunt: for those that are laughed at, are mori∣ones, scoffers, the off-skowrings of men, and wee may laugh at them: But to make a man as one of them, to set a man in that estate, that he shall be scoffed at, it is an impairing of his estate, and it breedeth a great wound: therefore, 1 Sam. 31.4. this is Sauls reason why he will have his harreis-bearer kill him: he had rather be killed, then mocked of the uncircumcised Philistims. And an ingenuous nature coun∣teth onely probrum to be delecti, caetera indelicta, reproach to be a crime, all other railings to be neglected. These two may be done present. Now there is an obtrectator,Obtrectator. a back-biter, one behinde the back, that hath to doe with a good name. Plautus calleth him Mus nominis, a Mouse (that is, the gnawer or eater up) of ones good name: but Paul calleth him by his true name, 2 Tim. 3.3. Diabolus, the Devill,  in, lingua, a Devill in the tongue, that is, a false accuser, a detractor: first he speaketh against one, then more; & then a third one that would have him to lose some of his friends, they call him Susurro, a tale-beater. And indeed he so prevaileth,Su that Prov. 16.28. he saith, he is able to sow discord and dissertion betweene Princes, and betweene whole realmes. Then if it come contra bonum aestimationis, against his cre∣dit and estimation,Shemets sinne, 2 Sam. 1 6 5.6.7. &c. Hamans sinne. and to his face, it is called Shimets sinne: if it come behinde the backe, it is called Hamans sinne, Hest. 3.8. if it touch onely the alienation of friendship, 2 Sam. 16.3. it is Zibaes sinne: he said to David, he was at Ierusalem, to alienate David from the love of Mephibosheth. And if it be onely concerning the abjecting of a man, as Iudg. 8.6. as of Gedeon, by the Princes of Succoth: but it is shewed afterward how he used them. An heroicall minde cannot abide this, Psal. 69.12. and in sundry other Psalmes, the scoffing at him of his friends and neighbours, and his enemies, and the jestings of the abjects. So saith Ieremy of himselfe, cap. 20.10. This may be done by letters also,Letters. as by words: as Nebe. 6.6. there was a letter sent by Sanballat, as full of untruths as it could hold. And as it is done in words, directly and indirectly: so the same things may be done in writings, as Libels; and we have a resemblance of it,
2 King. 14.9. that of the Thistle and Cedar tree was nothing but a scoffe that Iehoash King of Israel sent to Amazia; and is in action: so, Iohn 19.2. for it is said there, that the Souldiers platted a crowne of Thornes, and put on his head, &c. Any of these things, whether it be done directly or indirectly, they all come under , foolish talking, jesting; they are called , jesters: that is the common name for curtesies sake; and indeed they are , foolish talkers, in this point concerning false witnesse it selfe: because 1 Cor. 13.6. love delighteth in truth, and Ephes. 4.15. truth must be in love, which is the affirmative of this Commandement: therefore, though it have truth, yet if it have not love, it is not right: therefore Doeg was Doeg, though he told the truth, 1 Sam. 22.9.10. It is true, David came to Nob to Abimelech, and he gave him bread, and the sword of Goliah; all was true he said, but yet he was a Doeg still. First, as David truly saith, Psal. 52.2. that his tongue did cut like a sharp Rasor: for it did cut the throat of all the Priests. Yet a further degree, such as the Apostle, Gal. 2.4. , false brethren unawares brought in. Ierome giveth a reason why they are so called, because they came under the table, as those in the story of Daniel, when he destroyed the Idoll of Babylon. And thus are such as you shall see, All their lips swimme with Butter and Oyle: Mat. 22.16. Magister bone, good ma∣ster: Chrysostome; this is the Butter: We know that thou teachest tru∣ly; there is the Oyle: but here is the sword, Shall we pay tribute to Caesar? If he answer one way, out goe the people: if the other, off goeth his head. So whether a man doth it to bring into danger, or out of credit; the wise man saith, Prov. 26.22. of him that is a talebearer, his words are as flatterings, and they goe downe into the bowels of the belly. Bernard in his 24. upon the Cantic. saith, Video magna prae∣mitti suspiria, you shall have him send before great and deepe sighes, and he will speake tanquam contusus, sicque cum quadam tarditate di∣missis superciliis, voce plangenti, &c. sic egreditur maledictio, as if con∣founded and ashamed, and then with an affected flownesse, casting downe his countenance, with a mournfull voyce: and there commeth out the cursed venom of the heart. You would thinke it were rather done dolenti animo, quam malitioso: vehementer doleo, quia vehemener diligo, with a mourning, then a malitious minde, I am heartily sorry for him, because I heartily love him: and afterwards he saith, comper∣tum jam est, otherwise I would never have told it; but now seeing it is knowne, I must needs say so it is. And in this manner he doth breath out cursed speeches. This is one extreme. As in respect of excesse, your slanderous tongue either plainely, or under cover is often seene; so on the other side, because men are joyned by the law of charity, Iames 3.2. It falleth out that wee all stumble in many things, and many times: therefore God hath taken order in his law, Levit. 19.17. that as we should not doe, as before: so we should performe fraternam correptionem, the duty of brotherly correction. Rebuke him, and not suffer him to sinne: that is as much to say, as we should as the Heathen man saith, cum opus est, contristari amicum, if occasion be even to make sadde our friend by reproofe.
1 Thes. 5.14. If any be out of order, by admonition, if it be a small matter, without circumstances, in the spirit of meekenesse, Gal. 6.1. but if otherwise, Tit. 1.13. sharply and roundly: if it be an open fault, 1 Tim. 5.20. openly before all: if secret, Matth. 18.15. privately in the eare: with this caveat, except it redound to the damage and detri∣ment of another: and then Act. 23.16. it must be declared to him. So we see, as Aug. saith well, there is a double truth. Veritas duis & amaa.Veritas 1. Dulcis, quae fovet dum bene agimus. 2. Amara, quae curat, when as we are in wrong. A Truth that is sweet, and this cherishes us while as we doe well; & another Truth which is bitter, and this heales. And therefore the Apostle 2 Cor. 7.8.9. he saith there, Though I made you sory, yet I repent not: but I perceive the example made you sory but for a season: But now I rejoyce, not for the act, but for your amendment by the act. So we see it is a way to repentance: therefore for this, to make them repent, were to performe this duty: and when we have performed it, not to repent us of it: And so is the reason of the speech to be understood, Non amo quenquam, nisi offende∣ro, I love not any, till I have made him sadde: and making him sadde, he hath had the effect of amendment. Now there are others against this, that say, that as the former Com∣mandement is mixt of frugality against prodigality; and of liberality against covetousnesse; so here in this Commandement, the one is re∣proving against flattery, and the other giving a true charitable report against detraction. There are such as the Philosopher saith, as when they come to doe evill, a man dealing with them, must either prodere ve∣ritatem, or amicitiam, betray the truth, or friendship; there are such as cannot abide this contristation. And though there be such, yet we must retaine open rebuke: Prov. 27.5.6. he saith there, An open rebuke is better then close love: & vulnera diligentis, the wounds of a friend, are better then oscula blandientis, the kisses of a flatterer: that is in Physicke, amarum dulce, a bitter sweete, is better then perniciosum dul∣ce, a pernicious sweete. Now there is no doubt but we shall meete with such, as Amos 5.10. If a man reprove, they will hate him. And there is nothing in this point but is seene to the Heathen, Veritas o∣dium parit, truth bringeth forth hatred. There are tres optimae matres trium filiarum pessimarum, three very good mothers,Matis optimae pessima filia. which have three most wicked daughters: and among the three, the first is Truth, which parit odium, bringeth forth hatred: there is mater optima, & filia pessima, an exceeding good mother, but a most naughty daughter: therefore beginne with Demaratus his Ora∣tion, in Herodotus. And if it shall please your Majesty, if I had spo∣ken the truth, I should not have spoken that that liked your Majesty: yet because non potest uti me & amico & adulatore, I cannot be both your friend, and your flatterer: therefore I may speake to make you sadde to amendment. Now on the other side,Fattey. for the vice opposed, i. flattery, that that Ierome calleth, natale malum, our native evill; natali ducimur malo phi∣lautiae, we are transported with native evill of selfe-love. And it is as
Plutarch maketh it, that every one is , his owne chiefe and greatest flatterer: and because we love our selves, we thinke we are good, and he that loveth us, doth his duty, and is there∣fore good ipso facto, in so doing. So he that speaketh in commenda∣tion of that we doe, we thinke him to be a good man, and that he doth but his duty, and we love him. And on the contrary, because hee grieveth us, we thinke he is evill, and we consequently hate him. This naturale malum, our native evill, and good opinion that we have of our selves, maketh that we doe cito nobis placere, easily please our selves: and if any be found, that will say we be learned, presently we beleeve him: and ubi propitia mens est, where the minde is favourable, Psal. 5.9. propitiae aures erunt, the eares will stand wide open. Nay, that which is farther, as Seneca saith, when they will deny that, and say it is not so, ut enim blanditiae, cum excluduntur, placent, faire and smoothing speeches please us, even then when we seeme averse to them, that very urging we like. This maketh Esa. 3.10. that when a man is thus perswaded of himselfe, that he saith inwardly to those that are about him: Pro∣phesie to us no true things, but speake flattering things: prophesie unto us such things as we doe love and like; and as the Prophet said,Mich. 2.1. that he should be the Prophet unto the people, that would prophesie of the things that they were delighted in; as of wine and strong drinke. And so Ierome saith, Qui nescit adulari, he that cannot flatter with himselfe to the humours of others, is said either to be superbus, or invidus, proud or envious. Thus it commeth that they doe like them that sooth them up. Now this vice consisteth of two kinds, for either it is of things uncertaine, as many men, This is the hastie commendation upon the very first beginning; and at the very first sight: when any thing is well done, presently they so greatly commend him, that they make the par∣ty thinke that he hath done enough, and answered all expectation: 1 King. 20.11. at the putting on of harnesse they goe with great ap∣plause, but it is the putting off of the armour that is commended. It is not stadium, a part of the race well runne, but the dolichus,The word Dli∣chus, properly signifies 16. fur longs. the whole race: praeclarum stadium, sed metuo dolichum, the entrance of the race is excellent, and I like it well, but I am afraid of the length and conti∣nuance of it: many men at the beginning, at the very first pitch, &c. therefore while things are uncertaine, there ought no praises to goe out so prodigally, nor we so liberall in commending. If in certaine things, either in evill things plainely condemned: laudatur male, qui laudatur ob malum, or de malo, it is a sory commen∣dation, to be cried up for ill: first, as Solomon saith, Prov. 24.24. they say to an unrighteous man, What you do is right and good, and justly done, you doe not evill: and Psal. 10.3. laudare peccatorem in deside∣riis animae suae, to praise the wicked, while he boasteth his hearts de∣sire. And when it is done, Esa. 5.20. they will call darknesse light; first, that which is naught, they will say it is well done, Vae vobis qui dicitis malum bonum, & bonum malum, Woe be to you that call evill good, or good evill. Herodotus writeth of Cambyses,Cambyses his flatterers. that his minde standing to an incestuous marriage, he moved a question. The que∣stion
was, whether hee might so doe or no? They told him that they could not tell in generall, for the action, and that it seemed not good: but this they found in particular, that whatsoever the King would, that he might doe. This flattery is abominable, and to be ha∣ted of all good men: that they will further, and set a man forward in that wicked enterprise: Ezech. 13.10.11. he saith there are naughty men in Israel, they will needs build a wall, which God will destroy af∣terwards: therefore it is of no good substance, and he saith, There are some that build with untempered mortar, which for a time will hold out a falshood, he calleth these daubers; diaboli cementarios, the Devils daubers, that use plaistered words; but say unto them, that the wall shall fall. i. that his wicked enterprises shall come to a wicked end. When the unrighteous matter was in hand, they upheld it: but when it commeth to an evill end, they shrinke away. But they must be put in minde of their dawbing of the wicked, and of their un∣gratious speeches uttered in the beginning, vers. 18. the Prophet seem∣eth to import thus much; when a man is asleepe in a sinne, till he be sober againe, he would have a man sleepe with as much disease as may be, without pillowes and curtaines, for he threatneth out a woe to those that sow pillowes under mens elbowes: and hang curtaines to those that slept in sinne: also in good, make a small good to be prai∣sed without measure: 2 Cor. 12.6. this bringeth an error, to make men thinke otherwise of it, then it is: and therefore it is not good. Also that preach peace and salvation, when there is none such, or when contrary affection, Prov. 27.14. & 28.27. both these are a curse: for as love rejoyceth with truth, 1 Cor. 13.6. so truth rejoyceth with love, Ephes. 4.15. Therefore, Psal. 12.3. he wisheth them liplesse, that speake thus: so that they should not utter this venome; that is, in oratione, in his speech, Paul would please all, 1 Cor. 9.22. sinne set aside: but without this condition, none that pleaseth men, pleaseth God, Gal. 1.10. Those then that Esa. 28.15. make falshood their refuge, love to speake thus. So Menander saith, he that flattereth best, fareth best: so they Ier. 9.3. will bend their lips, and teach their tongue to insinuate, Psal. 141.5. David would not be dulled and mad himselfe with this: so that we must not doe thus, but reprove with that warrant, Prov. 9.8. that the wise will heare us: and Prov. 28.23. to a foole at the last, he that rebuketh shall be the more the friend. Now for the actum reflexum in se, act which reflecteth upon it selfe:Proptio laus sordet in . as not onely, Rom. 1.18. to suppresse the truth in his conscience, but also 2 Cor. 12.1. to glory and boast of himselfe. Paul spake therfore of himselfe as of another man: and that he should not fall into this, he had one to buffet him: and therefore this is no light sinne. And be∣cause Iohn 18.37. onely the truth can beare witnesse of it selfe there, Prov. 27.2. os alienum te laudet, let another man praise thee, and not thine owne mouth. And as this must be shunned of all; so espe∣cially of the Prophet, Esa. 9.15. for Iob 13.7. God needeth not our lies: and this is onely yea, and not nay, 2 Cor. 1.19. therefore Rom. 15.18. the Apostle durst speake nothing but that which he knew cer∣tainely.
For it is in vaine to shew that they have read or doe know more then indeed they have. Also to take upon him a fault: as where 1 Sam. 31.4. Saul killeth himselfe: 2 Sam. 1.10. one comes and saies, he killed him, in hope of a reward. Also not to deny any things of themselves, as Hierom: Mendax humilitas, in cauta est humilitas: ne ita caveatur arrogantia, ut caveatur veritas: a lying humility, is an un∣circumspect humility: we must not so labour to shunne arrogancie, as to make shipwrack of the truth. Also, though Esa. 3.9. we may not voluntarily tell our faults, yet being asked, we must not deny, as did Sarah, Gen. 18.15. No untruth must be affirmed, or truth denied of our selves. Mendacium i∣necuum.Now after this actus reflexus, reflected act; that all these which went before, which were perniciosa mendacia, mendacia serpentis, per∣nicious lies, the lies of the Serpent; his first word, nequaquam: be∣sides these, there is mendacium, a lie, which they call innocuum, harme∣lesse: that, of which commeth no losse. But Aug. saith, Those that say so, are not innocui, innocent for it: for though they account losse, as of name, of goods, of life, and such like: yet Ier. 23.22. it is an er∣rour, and therefore the losse of the truth, which is worth all these. These are in three, 1. Mendacium temerartum.1. Contra quam se res habet, otherwayes then the thing is, though he be perswaded of it in his minde: which as Aug. saith, non menda∣cii, sed temeritatis accusandus est, he is not so much guilty of a lie, as of rashnesse and temerity. They which have not their tongue learned to say nescio, but speake things they know not: Iud. vers. 10. 2 Officiosum.2. Contra quam se animus habet, otherwayes then he thinkes: that of the Midwives, as they call it, officiosum mendacium, an officious lie, Exod. 1.19. 3. Iocosum, a merry lie; as of scorners, Hose. 7.3. Aug. de mendacio. If a man should be sicke,3. Iocosum. and know that his son is dead; which if I should tell him, it would kill him also: What shall I then answer, if he aske me? In such a case he knew, 2 Cor. 13.8. Nihil contra veritatem possumus, We can doe nothing against the truth: and Psal. 5.6. Perdes omnes, qui loquuntur mendacia, Thou shalt destroy all those that speake lies. And as Christ the son of God is called the the truth; so the lier the is first borne of the Devill. And if he should account peccatum justum, sinne to be just; then, and not else, he might account mendacium justum, a lie to be just. So might he answer to them that said, it was lawfull to lie to bring one to the truth: so it is as lawfull to commit adultery. For onely the truth did command that it should not be done. So that neither for saving of body, or life, we may depart from the truth. And this was his con∣clusion; which all the Fathers, and Schoolemen, and late writers hold true. And yet this may be better called Rahabs lie,Rahabs lie. Ios. 2.5. occulta∣tio veritatis, a hiding of the truth; then the lie of the Midwives: for they said true, that some of the Hebrewes were stronger then the E∣gyptians: and no doubt had done as they said. So they tell no lie, but part of the truth. And this might be allowed in Rahab, having only a good disposition, which none of the Saints would have done. And as
for Iocosum, the merry joy; Hose. 7.3. Gal. 1.10. he will not please any man out of the truth. And though this be lesse evill then the rest, yet it is not good. Now seeing we are not to goe against the truth, there be foure places, where the truth may seeme to be gone against, and yet is not so. 1. As Iudg. 9.8. and Christ continually by a figurative speech, that is vox picta, a Parable. 2. As Abraham to Abmelech, Gen. 20.12. by keeping back part of the truth; so 1 Sam. 16.2.5. Samuel told them he went to doe sa∣crifice, when he went also to annoint them a King: which if he had told, Saul having an evill spirit, might have taken it for treason. 3. If the question have two meanings, if he answer to one, so that be true: Iohn 18.36. Christ answereth truly of another Kingdome then Pilate asked him. So Iacob, Gen. 27.19. was in one sense Isaacks eldest sonne; in that he had bought his brothers right. So Matth. 11.14. Elias, that is, one in the power of Elias. 4. When the thing is changed in circumstance, so Gen. 19.2. the Angels would not come in, had not Lot changed their minds by his importunity, Iohn 13.8. Pete would not let Christ wash his feete, till he was otherwise perswaded, 2 Cor. 1.16, 17. Paul promised to come to Corinth, had not Satan hindred him. So that all these are lawfull, and not against the truth. itas est ua∣ is p in∣rem, & cogi∣tationem no∣stram, secundo inter cogitatio∣nem & signa, quae sunt vel verba, vl facta.Now seeing that the truth is aequalitas, an equality; this aequalitas, equality, is first betwixt the thing and our thought: and secondly be∣twixt the thought and the signe of it, and that is either verba or facta, words or deeds. And that this factum, deed or fact, is a signe, it is plaine out of Matth. 7.20. that we shall know by the fruit, as by the signe: So Matth. 12.38. they would have a signe, i. some miraculous worke; As also for that by example offence commeth as well as by words. If this factum, worke or fact, be not equall to the thought, it is si∣mulation:We need not shew all our deeds. yet as in words we neede not utter all our minde, Esa. 3.9. so we neede not shew here all our deeds, for Ios. 8.3.4. God himselfe is the author of an ambush: so that we may either openly or privily oppresse the enemies of God. So Christ himselfe, Luke 24.28. made as though he would have given back, and had it in his purpose, if they had not compelled him. So Paul, Gal. 4.20. wisheth to be with them in another voice, that he might trie them. A principall part of this simulation is hypocrisie, resembling ho∣linesse, when there is no such in the heart: but of this before. Vanity breeds s, idlenesse and superfluity breed theft.Here is also besides this, that of Psal. 26.4. vaine persons that leade us into this vice; and therefore is forbidden. For as idlenesse and superfluity bring stealth: so vanity bringeth lies. Christ maketh this vanity or foolishnesse, Mar. 7.22. to be one of the three vices of this Command. pride & slander being the other two. And therefore having spoken of this Commandement, Matth. 12.36. he concludeth that they must give account for every idle word: so that this is , foo∣lish talking; which they call falsely, urbanitas, urbanity: but Christ calleth it idle words. Esa. 5.18. Woe to them that draw iniquity
with a string. Such a string is this, that bringeth all idle words after it. Then seeing that this vanity, Psal. 144.4. is an essentiall marke of the wicked, and that it commeth so farre, as to corrupt judgement, Esa. 59.4. and Psal. 26.4. David professeth to slay those men: and that Prov. 21.6. they tosse vanity to and fro, with vaine questions, and vaine answers: and Iob. 31.5. he taketh it for a comfort, that he hath not used any such: therefore it is good to forbeare it. For as Chry∣sostome saith, there is no man that keepeth any instrument, but he know∣eth some use of it at some time: and how much more in this arte uni∣marum, Art of soules, arte artium, the Art of Arts:A good rule. therefore he con∣cludeth with that which we make a generall rule: Quicquid est ocio∣sum, est criminosum: whatsoever is idle, is sinfull: else should Pauls ar∣gument be naught which he maketh, Tit. 3.9. to withdraw him from questions, &c. for the major proposition, that is, that all vanity must be shunned, must needs be true. Also, because that as Iob 11. we are as Onagri, wild Asses; and 1 Pet. 1.18. having a vaine conversati∣on; this would be no use, seeing that,A forge of va∣nity in us. Iob 13.4. in us there is a forge of vanities, i. idle thoughts, whence proceedeth idle words: there∣fore we must take heede that we walke not as the Heathen doe, Ephes. 4.17. that is, Psal. 24.4. when any vanity is shewed us, to lift up our hearts after it. But Ephes. 4.29. our conversation must be either ad aedificationem, ad necessitatem, or ad gratiam: to edification, to necessity and use, or to grace. 1. For that of edification for their soules: all his examples stand most of, &c. 2. For use, as that which is not for edification, 1 Tim. 5.23. to drinke some wine, 2 Tim. 4.13. for his cloke, &c. 3. For Grace: if it cannot be neither for edification, nor ad justam necessitatem, for our just necessity and use; yet to engender some love &c. which are his salutations: for these neither edifie, neither are they necessary: for he leaveth them out often,Urbanity and mentioneth no such thing. And that powdred speech, Col. 4.6. this is urbanity: not with sale nitro, salt nitre, or gall; but mercurio: that is, not to vexe them, as the Heathen, but wittily to stirre them: as 2 Cor. 12.13. by craving pardon that he had not troubled them: he meaneth that he had nothing to thanke them for. And yet this , gratia, Grace, may stand ve∣ry well with edification, as most wisely he joyneth them together,Phil. 3.. Rom. 12.3. , &c. not to thinke of themselves more highly then they ought to thinke. And so sharply, when they would be of the Circumcision, he calleth it Concision. And the error of all these three are opposite to , thanksgiving, Ephes. 5.19.20. where the Hereticks would at every word, whether good or bad, cry, Laudate Christum, praise Christ: but the ancient Church will have it in no other things, then which are worthy of praise. And of all these three, that ad aedificationem, to edification, is the best: yet in respect of the weaker, the other are both lawfull, and sometimes necessary. Now for the meanes, to obey this precept. First,Mean. we must marke that Psal. 62.9. where he saith, that we are deceitfull upon the weights, that is, are light: and this lightnesse is the first thing that taketh ad∣vantage
of us here: therefore 1 Cor. 15.58. we must be so stedfast, that we must not be easily moved: for else every vanity will breede suspition. This suspition is a fruit of our corrupt concupiscences. The use of it, as for a mans selfe, to be at safety for his soule and life; And here that is true,A good caveat. that melius est nimium timidus esse, quam parum prudens, it is a great deale better, to be a little too much fearefull, then a great deale too little provident. This did Paul practise, Act. 27. fearing that the master of the ship should have fled. But when we make this prejudiciall to others, we abuse it. And though at some time it will arise in every man, as indeed in the Disciples of that of Iohn 13.27. Quod facis, fac cito, what thou doest, doe speedily: yet in good men these are primitivae suspiciones, primitive suspitions: as Gal. 4.11. a divination, not the setting downe of a conclusion: and they come not into that positivam suspicionem, to set downe a flat affirmative or Negative; but though they doe sometimes admitiere, admit it; yet they cherish it not: but the wicked straight make a flat judicium, judgement of it: and some goe to the action of this suspition. Then to keepe our selves from this judgement and action: from the judgement, first, we must know, Iob 15.21. that such as we thinke others to bee, such wee are most commonly: as the foole thinketh all fooles; making himselfe the rule of all men. And se∣scondly, according to the rule of the affection, as being good, Mar. 8.16. as they had to the bread, and so they suspected it: so evilly af∣fected to Ioseph, Gen. 37.8. every little dreame did encrease their hate: so that this must be removed. In suspition they note sixe things; which they reduce to two. 1. In respect of the manner, it ariseth of a small ground, as Iohn 21.22. If that I will that he tarry till I come: they suspected that hee should never die: so Marke 14.70. Thou art one of them, for thou are of Galilee: this is a small ground. 2. In the respect of thē object, in that it appertaineth to God: the Heart. Providence. Futurum, that which is to come. Men: the Act. Person. 1. The Heart, which appertaineth onely to him, which God hath to deale with all. 2 Chron. 6.30. Yet mans meanings must be sought out. To such Chrysostome, Rom. 14.4. that my heart is not your Se∣nate, then judge it not. 2. The providence of God, by that which Nazianzen cals , casuall: whereas Eccles. 9.2. all those things come alike to the good and to the bad: so that Iohn 7. affliction, &c. come from his provi∣dence, therefore they ought not to say, Ezek. 18.2. that because the fathers have eaten sower grapes, the childrens teeth are set on edge: and Mal. 3.14. vani sunt, qui serviunt Deo, it is in vaine to serve God. For those that are afflicted, are according to his povi∣dence, &c. 3. That which is futurum, to come: as 2 Tim. 2.25. They think
that if we sleepe once in sinne, we shall never wake. Which they are not to thinke, as August. Multi sunt fures intus, & Oves foris, so multi inserti refringendi, & multi refracti inserendi, there are are ma∣ny theeves within, and sheepe without, so are there many ingraffed, that will be broken off, and many broken off, that shall be ingraffed: so that they may turne to God. 2. In that which appertaineth unto man. 1. Of the act or thing. And in this, if he that judgeth, erre, he hurt∣eth onely himselfe. 2. Of the person: and here we may doe injury, to make others report the worse by him after: But if he hurt not in his judgement, that judgement is not evill: and if he erre, so it is not injury: for if we erre in thinking well of any, it is error in singularibus, but an error concerning particular persons or things, and imputed to the good af∣fection of charity, 2 Cor. 13.5. which suspecteth not evill. Now this, if it be not a determination, but a supposition, then the rule is, to suppose the worst: as if we should cure a sinne, lest wee should apply over-weake a plaister, it is better suppose it the greater: and so not to leave any thing that may tempt one, as money; for so we may say, contrary to that which is said, that we may not commit our selves to men, because we know them. Iohn 2.24. So that here we may suppose the worst. And if it be a determination, in manifestis, in things that are mani∣fest; it is plaine that we may conclude: But in dubtis, in things that are doubtfull, when it may be both well and evill, the rule is, That ju∣dicium moralium pendet à fine: ergo dubia sunt in meliorem partem sumenda, the judgement of morall things depends upon the issue, and end of them; and therefore things doubtfull are alwayes to be con∣strued to the best sense. And in good things, that there bee not haste: but as God would aske the cause, though he knew it, Gen. 3.9. to teach us to doe so before we judge: neither must we report the truth, lingua prodigâ, with a lavish tongue: but as he Matth. 9.9. cal∣leth himselfe the Publican; whereas others called him not so; but the sonne of Alpheus: and he setteth not downe his owne liberality, which is set downe, Luke 5.29. Marke 14.71. (which Peter is thought to have penned) setteth downe Peters abnegation most plainely; I know not this man: whereas the other have, I know not the man. So that the rule is here, that we say the worst of our selves, and the best of others: so we must behave our selves in our good or evill, against hearing: the countenance, and Psal. 58.45. we shall be as deafe Ad∣ders to the hearing of evill, as evill are to the good, reports augment it: as Doeg, 1 Sam. 22.20. he gave but bread, and he told it was victuals: so did the false spies augment the strength of the Countrey, Numb. 13.32. as we may say by them which report truely. Numb. 14.9. Flattery, mellea strangulatio, is but as the choaking of one with honey: Against that of himselfe, Prov. 28.4. To keepe himselfe low, and not to hate others that speake against, as did Achabs suspition. Rom. 6. consider that they condemne themselves: therefore 1 Cor. 11.31. Look to themselves; which will make them say, Esa. 51.7. feare it not, but
esteeme the witnesse of our owne conscience, and the witnesse of God, more then mans witnesse. But if it be in a knowne thing, wherefore we are committed, then take heede of a brazen face, to set our selves a∣gainst it without shame, and not to feare the punishment; for that will last but nine daies: but to have a confusion in our mindes, and wish againe to be in the favour of God, and his Saints. 2. In unknown things, seeing no body can prove ought: and not re∣tegendum peccatum, nisi sine peccato id fieri possit: a secret sinne is not to be discovered, unlesse it can be done without giving offence or scan∣dall: yet with David, Psal. 51.4. we must say to God, Tibi soli pecca∣vi, against thee onely have I sinned. And this suspition, if we have gi∣ven any by suspitiously behaving our selves in any sinne, wee must thinke it Gods goodnesse to put us in minde, that we wander not in error, and delight in it. If we never give occasion of it, but alwayes detested it, yet because we may fall into it by negligence, this may be a warning: as many fall into these sinnes, by not taking heed, which before they have most hated: so Prov. 28.14. bonum est timere omnia, happy is the man that feareth alwayes. When therefore this sinne commeth, we must consider whether we have ever said to God, as they doe, Iudg. 10.15. heare us but this once, and we will serve thee: or Hose. 7.13.14. in our sicknesse promise more obedience after health restored, and yet with this in the Israelites, Psal. 78.36. lie unto God: And therefore justly they that doe this, lie also unto men; and therefore the Vineyard shall lie unto them. And when they depart from the truth, for mighty men looking for helpe of them: those axiomes shall deceive them, and it shall be con∣trary. The last rule, to procure this to others: Psal. 101.6. veraces terrae, the faithfull of the Land shall be his, and vers. 7. The lier shall not tarry in his sight. And thus much of the ninth Commandement.
The X. Commandement. Thou shalt not covet, &c. IN this Commandement the Papists are against us, and make it two, which it cannot be. Our rea∣sons (as we said in the generall division) are these. 1. Because there is but one period. 2. Because there should be a Law of particu∣lars, which in least of all is Gods Lawes. 3. Because onely these two concupiscences should be forbidden. And whereas they say, all other ought to be referred unto these, they teach not how. 4. Because Rom. 7.7. the Apostle sets it downe in one word, non concupisces, thou shalt not lust. 5. The consent of the Hebrewes before Christ, and the Fathers since. 6. The inconveniencie that they are driven to, to transplace this Scripture, and say, sensus est perturbatus, that the sense thereof is per∣plexed. 7. They themselves cannot speake of it distinctly, as they divide it, but confound it. Now for the Commandement, Deut. 5. Esa. 55.7. Ier. 18.11. Mar. 7.14. Rom. 7.7. Ephes. 2.3.4. whence we must take all that we speake herein. The depen∣dance.The dependance, as Aug. saith, si quis caetera facere studeat, hoc maximè faciat, if any man endeavour to observe the other Comman∣dements, let him much more labour to fulfill this. Prov. 4.23. As life issueth from the heart, so good and evill life. And Esa. 59.5. commeth the Cockatrice egge, which if it be not broken, Iames 1.15. will be sinne, whence commeth death. The end,The ends, 1. That God may shew himselfe to looke further, and his Law to reach further then mans Law. For though mans Law say, Binde the hands, and stop the mouth: yet it saith, cogitationis poenam nemo patiatur, let no man be punished for his thoughts. But Gods Law saith not so, Act. 8.22. but the very thought must bee prayed for. 2. Propter Pharisaeos, for your Pharisaicall justiciaries: that though in the other Commandements we may flatter our selves; yet this, Rom. 7.14. will make us see that we are wretched. The consent is in the other Commandements. But the thought,
which in respect of the consent, is called partus imperfectus, an imper∣fect birth, is forbidden in this. For as in the other, intentio, the in∣tention is forbidden; etsi non consequaris, although yee accomplish it not: so here, cogitatio, etsi non consentias, the thought, although ye consent not: as Aug. magnum fecit, qui non sequitur, sed non perfecit, he hath done much, and gone a great way, who bath never assented to lust. This Paul, Rom. 6.12. calleth sinne raigning in us, and Rom. 1.2. dwelling in us. For as Aug. saith, transivit in affectum cordis, & impetravit consen∣sum rationis, ut faciat si adsit occasio & facultas, this (raigning) sinne hath built his nest amongst the affections of the heart, and hath ob∣tained the consent of reason to fulfill its lust, whensoever occasion and ability presents the opportunity. So that it is here whilest it is in question: but when it commeth to that Faciam, I will (or would) doe it, it is done before God. This concupiscence is of two sorts. 1. 2 Pet. 3.3. proper. 2. Gal. 5.17. of the spirit a∣gainst the flesh. This of the spirit, is good, and Ephes. 1.18. causeth good motions in us; and 1 Pet. 4.1. armeth us to performe them: and checketh us, Psal. 44.5. and is opposite to us, Matth. 5.22. from this commeth our prayer, and maketh us to love those things so much the more, Prov. 3.9. And that of our owne,Concupiscentia naturae. which is , naturae, naturall, is not evill: for so Christ desired to eate when he was hungry, Matth. 24.18. and rest when he was weary,Concupiscentia corruptionis.Iohn 4.6. But that which is , corruptionis, from corruption, 2 Pet. 1.4. which is not an hand to the understanding as it ought to be, but choketh it up, and maketh us to be men of concupiscences. And of this corrupt concupiscence 1 Tim. 5.19. some is foolish, and some is hurtfull. 1. Foolish con∣cupiscence.Foolish concupiscence is, Colos. 3.1. earthly desires, when the na∣turall desire, transit lineas, passeth the bounds, wholly to seeke those things, and set their heart on them. 2. Hurtfull con∣cupiscence.Hurtfull concupiscence is that which is against the spirit: Gal. 5.7. 7. opposite to the spirit. This is that praeputium, uncircumcision, Act. 7.51. which hindreth the eares and heart from that which is good. And this in good things corrupteth our understanding, ma∣king it, Eccles. 10.1. like a flie in a barrell of honey; and provoketh us to evill by these things, which though they are good, yet will worke in us an evill humour, 1 Cor. 6. (i.) to make us subject to evill: to need to have it: then the Devill will bring such a condition, as Mat. 4. he did to Christ. And in evill it will bring us per malum, aut ad malum: an evill way, or to an evill end: as to make us use evill meanes to a good end, or an evill end to good meanes. It is called the old man, Ephes. 4.22. Col. 3.9. peccatum inhabitans, sinne dwelling in us, Rom. 7.5. the sting, 1 Cor. 15.16. the pricke, 2 Cor. 12.7. virus Serpentis, the poyson of the Serpent. The Scholemen call it, fomitem peccati, the fuell of sinne: the late writers  virium, a want of power and strength to rule the passions and affections: for when man would make his concupiscence above his understanding, Hose. 8.11. God permit∣ted
it to be. And this is that giving up, Rom. 1.24. delivering to them∣selves; And whereas the giving to Satan hath a returne, 1 Cor. 5.1. 2 Cor. 2. this, (to be given up to himselfe) hath no returne: so that it is better to be delivered up to the Devill. We see then what this concupiscence is, and how we are affected to it. Now for the danger, and the meanes to it, though we come not so farre, as suppuration, i. the consent, which is the lowest degree in the other Commandements: we must not yet once cover for this desire, being in us, Ephes. 2.23. as also of the world and of the Devill. Suggestions from conen piscence.Per hanc còncupiscentiam carnis, by this lust of the flesh, there is two suggestions: the one in regard of this alone, and the other as it is ap∣plied to us of the Devill. 1. Alone, as Matth. 9.5. in the dialogue, Mar. 7.2. those ascen∣ding thoughts: for nothing in us is good, but that which descendeth.Ascending thoughts. 2. The Devill seeing this, as he did with Christ when he was hun∣gry, Matth. taketh occasions to cast thoughts into us, as hee did into them, Luke 9.49. and together, Ephes. 2.2. the world carrieth them away. For as Nazianzen saith, The sparke is in us, and the Devill doth onely blow it up. Now those that arise, are sinne indeed: but those that are cast into us are no sinne, if they infect us not. 1. Now we are infected of those, sixe wayes, 1. for the fruit, (when sinne beganne) Gen. 3.6. was holden out to be (1.) profitable, and (2.) pleasant, and (3.) to be desired, in regard of the knowledge or prefer∣ment it should bring. And so the first thing was, and is, to turne our selves to Satan, 1 Tim. 5.15. Gal. 4.9. to entertaine him: this is pro∣stitution of the soule to his temptation, when they would have it. 2. Which affection, if it be sudden, Ierome on Mathew, calleth it , the first passion or motion (that is) desires upon sight; but if it be more impressed, he calleth it , passion, that is a setled lust. This is, Iob 20.13. poyson to the mouth: which if it be spit out, hurteth not, but if it be retained under the tongue, it breedeth woe. 3. And this retentio seminis, consensus in delectationem, retentation of the fuell, is a consent to the pleasure of sinne, (for consensus in opus est suppuratio, for the consent to the lust is the very impostume of sin) to delight in it: And this is conceptio peccati, the conceiving of sin. 4. Morosa delectatio, a lingring delight, to stay in it, and to consider every circumstance: and this is articulatio foetus, the forming of this deformed issue. 5. Aberratio cordis in peccato, the wandring of the minde in sinne: reasoning of it: and after it once left, to call it backe againe, and to make a contrary covenant to Iob, that is, to looke still upon it; or else to make, figmentum cogitationis, a wicked imagination in the heart, Gen. 4. of that which was never seene. And this vita peccati, is the life of sinne, for here it moveth. 6. Nixus, the endeavour: and as the fathers call it, , laying hold on the occasion: si tanta voluptas in animo, quid si potiar? if there be so much pleasure in the imagination, what in the fruition? And these sixe are in every sinne, though many have not the spirit of
God to watch them all: for that saepe iniquitas mentitur sibi, wickednesse often cousens it selfe. The Devil fetches.Now Iames 1.14. we are brought into this two wayes, 1. by the esca, the baite, the allurements: 2. by uncus, the hooke, force. 1. For this concupiscence will make pleasure, libido, a sensuall de∣light, & libido, and this delight, will make consuetudo, custome, & consuetudo, and custome, will make necessity: for the concupiscence is like an hot Oven, Hose. 7. which will ever have matter. So the De∣vill hath those two also, by these two speciall termes, unto the which the rest may be brought, as to allure, Revel. 20.6. which doth not as they cogge a Die, but hath, Ephes. 4.14. methodum decipiendi, a cun∣ning craftinesse, or the art and method of deceiving by subtilty. And this distinguisheth his allurements from ours. And this his craft ex∣traordinarily the Apostle could know, 2 Cor. 2.11. , his fetches. 2. To draw by force, 1 Pet. 5.8. a roaring Lion: and Matth. 8.31. cast them headlong, as he did the Swine: 2 Cor. 7.5. his thrusting sore, that if he might, he would cast us downe: and this also could Paul perceive, 1 Thes. 2.18. that Satan hindred him. Mund illae.So the world also hath these three to allure us, 1. profit, 2. plea∣sure, 3. preferment. And contra, if they will not prevaile, it will be violent, with, 1. losse, 2. griefe, 3. reproach. As Aug. saith, aut amor erit mali inflammans, aut timor mali humi∣lians, either love shall be the inflamer and kindler of evill, or feare the humbler, and bringer downe to evill: so that these two meanes are in our selves, the Devill, the world, to bring us to the danger of this fin. itas quid.After simulationem dicti, simulation in words; we come to consi∣der simulationem facti, simulation in words and deeds: for first, the truth is nothing but an agreement or equality betwixt the heart and minde, and that which we conceive in our minde: 2. a consent of the minde with the tongue: 3. a consent of our minde, with our deedes and actions. If there be agreement betwixt these, then are we witnes∣ses of the truth: for as veritas oris, truth is in the mouth, if the speech and heart goe together: so is veritas vitae, truth in our life, if it be agree∣able to the word, which is signum ejus rei, quae menie signata est, the signe and fruit of that thing which is sealed up in the minde: which is plaine by Christs assertion, By their fruits yee shall know them: Mat. 7. and Matth. 12.36. the Scribes require a signe from Heaven to testifie to them the greatnesse of Christs power. And workes, and not onely words, but deeds may be called, signa ejus rei quae in mente est, signes of such things as are in the minde. This also is manifest by common experience: For we see not onely by precept and speech, but also by example and action, good and hurt done: therefore we must expresse the truth as well in action as in word: & avoid simulation in both: which opposite in this place, for this cause God taketh order, that neither in deede nor in word men should coun∣terfeit to be, that which they are not. Notwithstanding, as before, a man may lawfully occultare partem veritatis in dictis, conceale a part of the truth in his discourse: so al∣so,
so, he may doe it in factis, in his actions, except it be manifest to the eyes of all men, as that of the Sodomites, Gen. 19. or of the Benjamites, Iudg. 19. and that of Zimri, and Cozbi, Numb. 25. who were not a∣shamed to make their sinne manifest, even to the sight and view of all men: and not to this end, to make them loath and detest their sinne, but rather to glory in it. Also there may be significatio ejus quod deest, an intimation and sig∣nification of what is wanting. As he is not bound to tell that forth in word, which he knoweth, so neither is he bound by conscience to utter that by countenance which he knoweth. Otherwise, in time of warre, to oppose our selves to such as resist the truth, a man may with Iosua 8.15. simulare fugam, make as if they fled. As also for triall, as our Saviour Christ did, Luke 24.28. he made as though he would have gone further, if intreaty had not stayed him: and it is plaine by Gal. 4.20. A principall part of this vice, is hypocrisie, which is an outward resemblance, or cloke of religion, without any ground of it in the heart: of this we have spoken heretofore, we will therefore passe it over: and come to that which the Prophet hath, Psal. 26.4. hee saith he hath not kept company with vaine persons. For as in Commandement 8. not onely injury was forbidden, but also superfluity, as a speciall means thereto: & in Commandement 7. not onely adultery, but also all wantonnesse: so here is forbidden not onely falshood, but also vaine and foolish speech. Our Saviour sets downe three heads of the sinnes against this Law. 1. Slander. 2. Pride, the occasion of flattery and boasting. 3. Foolishnesse, which is the roote of vaine speech. Our Saviour, Matth. 12.36. and verses before going treateth of this Commandement, and concludes it thus: of every idle word wee must account. Besides, false witnesse in judgement, and out of it, of flattery, boast∣ing, and simulation; notwithstanding this , foolish talking and jesting: and , which he distinguisheth, not as he did in , & , filthy communication, and filthie: but he saith , & , foolish talking and jesting: though it be accoun∣ted of nothing in the world but urbanity. Whereas indeed they doe but abuse that word: for in truth it is nothing but a foolish and idle babling, as our Saviour cals it: and after shall appeare, and as Iob 34.35. words of no value. The Prophet Esa. 5.18. Woe to them that draw iniquity with cords &c. woe to them: and Prov. 30.8. he prayeth to be removed farre from vanity and lies. By which two places it is manifest, that vanity brings lies, and with them the catalogue of those sinnes that belong unto this Commandement. As wantonnesse is forbidden in the se∣venth, and superfluity in the eighth Commandement: so here vanity of speech. Concerning which Psal. 144.8. he maketh it an especiall part of a wicked man: And Esa. 59.4. they trust in vanity, which is
the first step to lies: and they proceed further to iniquity. David, Psal. 26.4. glorieth that he had not kept company with dissemblers, and vaine men, or as Solomon saith, Prov. 21.6. among such as tosse vanity like a Tennis-ball. Such as make questions, and receive as vaine answers, and reply againe as vainely. And this Iob. 31.5. by the light of nature saw among the rest; that this was one thing where∣in his conscience bare him witnesse, that he was free, that hee had not walked in vanity, which is good for no use. And then as Chrysostome saith well upon Ephes. 4. what workeman is there, that will have any toole, that will serve him to no use? and therefore he concludeth, that this ars animarum, this art of saving of soules, being ars artium, & scientia scientiarum, the Art of Arts, and Science of Sciences: there must not be any thing in it belonging to vanity. And hereupon the Fathers say, that Quicquid est ociosum, est criminosum, whatsoever is idle is sinfull. For this cause the Apostle bids us stay foolish questi∣ons, Tit. 1.8.9. and his reason is, because they be vaine. Now ex∣cept the major proposition be this, which must be generall, whatso∣ever is vaine, is to be avoided: it were no syllogisme. And we see this is to be avoided: so there is in us, saith the holy Ghost, an untowardnesse, as is pullus onagri, the wild Asses colt: so is man from his youth.A forge of va∣nities. 1 Pet. 1.18. Rom. 13.4. For as Iob saith, there is a forge of idle thoughts, which bring forth, Ephes. 4.17. vaine con∣versation; therefore we must in the beginning take heede of this, that we will not as the Gentiles doe, that we lift not up our heads to va∣nity. Both which we shall doe, Psal. 24.4. if we have our conver∣sation idle and vaine: Ephes. 4.29. he sheweth us what this is, , Let no corrupt communication proceed, &c. He will have our conversation to be to edification, that God may have praise, our neighbour may be built up in his knowledge and af∣fection by our example. If not this, then a second, that there be a ne∣cessary use of it: or if not that, yet it must be such, as may give grace to the hearer. And if we will take Paul for example, we may best learn ex verbis ejus in Epistolis, from his owne words in his Epistles, what his speech was. For we doubt not but he shewed himselfe like in his common speech. For the first, we know his examples are plentifully to edification, That we may doe it ad necessitatem, for our necessary use: it is manifest by 1 Tim. 5.23. he bids him for the health of the body, drinke wine, which no man will say, was done ad aedificationem, but ad justam ne∣cessitatem, to edification, but yet it was done upon just and necessary grounds. Thirdly, if not this, yet that, whereas he bade him bring the cloak which he left at Troas, 2 Tim. 4.13. &c. and so vers. 20. he saith, Erastus abode at Corinthus, Trophimus I left at Miletum sicke: which doe not directly serve to edification, though indirectly it doe all other things. And therefore those narrations which concerne a man to know, be∣ing not things of necessary use, take a second place: for , salutati∣ons, this is a third: whither Rom. 16. wholly, may be reduced. Now in these Salutations there is no edification, nor yet just necessity; for
in divers examples they are omitted: but they serve to encrease love and savour among men. Col. 4.6. he exhorts every man, that his speech be powdered with Salt: not with scurrisity and profane urbanity, non nigro sale Momi, sed cannte sale Mercurit, not with that blacke Salt of Momus, but with the white Salt of Mercurie. Whereby our wits being dulled, and our spirits condensated, they may be sharpened againe; which often have a good and necessary use. To this end serveth that 2 Cor. 12.13. where he saith, I have not beene chargeable to any of you. I pray you forgive me this wrong. Surely there was no cause why he should crave pardon for this fault: but no doubt this pierced deeper then if he had uttered it in direct words and termes. Now, but that grace must concurre with edifica∣tion: Rom. 12.3. a fruitfull speech, and profitable to edification; and none in the world could have expressed it more wittily: and Phil. 3.3. he calleth the circumcision, concision. Eph. 5.4. The Apostle disswa∣deth us from foolish talking, and exhorteth us to thanksgiving: where∣upon the Hereticks called fratricelli, the poore humble brethren, would have no word in answering, but laudate Deum, praise God. Who, when they were demanded any question, said alwayes, laudate Christum, praise Christ. But the old Church understood well enough, per me∣tonym. effecti, by a metonymy of the effect, thanksgiving for that which was thankworthy. Then whatsoever speech it is, that may be brought to one of these three kindes, is not evill, but good. Albeit that that which is lawfull be not kept, for we are to strive after the best things: that is, that it may be done ad aedificationem, to edification: so that though these terrene consolations, these pety comforts be lawfull; yet exultati∣ons in Psalmes and spirituall songs are better. Yet these are not un∣lawfull, but expedient, and likewise necessary. And thus much of the actuall offences of this Commandement. For the obedience hereun∣to, how we are to behave our selves toward our selves, we are to learne these few precepts. 1. That we may learne out of Psal. 62.9. the Prophet saith there, The children of men are deceitfull upon the weights; that is, they are too light. This is that beginning indeed. For it is vanity by which he hath the first vantage upon a man: and therefore he must learne and labour to be stedfast, 1 Cor. 15.5.8. he must be so grounded that eve∣ry little suspition will not put him out of tune: for if he want this, every vanity in respect of himselfe, and every affection toward his neighbour, will set him out of the way. For suspition is one of the fruits of concupiscence, and the rising of it is a thing that cannot be resisted: but the principium, beginning of it must be suppressed, 1 Tim. 6.4. The first use of this suspition, was to procure our safety: and to preserve our soules: therefore, for the safegard of our owne lives and soules, it is better to be nimium timidus, quam parum prudens, it is better to be solicitously fearfull, then securely improvident. We have the example and practise of it in Paul, he suspected the
worst, and yet the truth, Acts 27.30. Now, when these things, given us for helpe of our selves and others, are turned to the hurt and detriment of our selves and others; this must be a great sinne, wherewithall even the Godly may bee at∣tainted, but there is a difference. For though the they arise, as Iohn 13.19. when Christ said to Iudas, quod facis, fac cito, what thou doest, doe speedily, there was suspition in the hearts of the Apostles: some thought he bade him buy such things as he stood in need of, against the feast; other, that he should give something to lepoe: but these were privative suspitions, they doe not prevaile, &c. Gal. 4.11. These suspitions prevailed so fame in the Galatians, even beyond positive suspition, that he said, metuo ne srustra laborave∣rim, I am afraid, least I have laboured in vaine. They prevailed to diminish his opinion of them, and yet possessivam suspicionem, a positive or possessive suspition had the Apostle of them that his paines were not so fruitfull as they might have been. An argu∣ment of the Pharisee, to prove Christ a sinner, Luke 7.39. If hee had not beene a sinner, he would have knowne who, and what manner wo∣man, &c. but he answered quickly, and he was reproved. So we see what difference is betwixt the highest and the lowest: the suspition of the best goeth not into judgement: they doe suppresse it, and doe not lay sticks upon it, to encrease it. The lowest have a diminution of their good opinion that they had conceived: and cherish the evill conceived opinion, not suspending their judgements. But in those that are evill, they grow to say, he is a sinner, they make judicium ex saspcione, & trabem ex festuca, a judgement upon their suspition, and out of a sprig a beame: and some also proceede to action. To keepe himselfe from judgement, he must abstaine from two things: 1. that is in Iob, he enterpreteth every thing after his way, stulti omnes sibi similes esse putant, fooles thinke all men like them∣selves, so are other men: if they be evill, they cannot keepe themselves from suspition. 2. The other is, as every man is affected, so he judg∣eth: and every small thing will encrease this affection in him. As if he have concealed a jealousie of any thing, every small action will aug∣ment. An example we have, Mar. 8.16. their minde ranne upon leaven, &c. If the other, Gen. 37.8. after they had conceived an ill affection of Ioseph, even his dreame made them to hare him. If we doe not remove evill, and avoid suspitions, every thing will cause us to make this conclusion, that the Barbarians did of Paul, Sure∣ly he is a murderer. Six things to be noted in the conclusions, they reduce them to foure heads. 1. That it is most naturall to suspition to arise upon a slender ground. In good part, as that, If I will that he tarry till I come, &c. For the evill, Mar. 14.6▪ 7. the maid reasoned, Thou art of Galilee, thou srly art one of them. When an affection hath possessed the heart; the be∣ing
of Galile will make him a Disciple of Christ. But let every man when he is tried with a suspition, trie the ground. From this they come to the object: sundry things pertaine to God, which men will scanne, and make conclusions of it; whereas Solomon saith, God onely knoweth the secret of thoughts. 2 Chron. 6.30. Yet we must be concluding that men thought thus and thus: even of their meaning. Chrysostome saith, that that, Rom. 14.4. is most fitly applied to this, Quis in es qui servum judicas alenum? Who art thou that judgest another mans servant? our suspitions must not go into mens thoughts, which are no mens servants, but onely ought to be judged of God. The second thing, the condition in which men live: in whom wee will be judging of the secret judgements and predestination of God: so that if we see any man fall into sicknesse, or any other calamity, wee straight conclude that he is a wicked man, a murderer, with the Barba∣rians: although the Preacher 9.2. saith, All things come alike to all, &c. In those kindes of suspitions ye have one thing not to doe, not to suspect. Iohn 9.2. For neither was it the father of him that was borne blinde, that had sinned, neither yet he that was borne blinde. This was a conclusion of Christs Disciples, That either hee or his fa∣ther must needs be a sinner: whereas indeed the judgements of God are abyssus, a great deep, and cannot be searched. Or else we enter into the secret counsell of God: saying, as Mal. 3.14. vanus est qui servit Domino, it is in vaine to serve the Lord: be∣cause Iohn Baptist, and others have lost their lives for serving of God. The third is concerning things to come. They will affirme if a man be cast downe once, and forsaken of God, he can never recover againe. Whereas we ought 2 Tim. 2.25. to enstruct them with the spirit of meekenesse. And then so we come to give oftentimes foolish, rash, and preposterous judgements of good men: not knowing that multi sunt intus Lupi, multi etiam sunt Oves soris, &c. many Wolves are within, and many Sheepe also without. And these are Gods matters, and are to be judged by him, and not of us; for his hand is long e∣nough. The fourth thing is in matters pertaining to men. Sometime we judge of an 1. Act. 2. Thing it selfe. 3. Person. When de re, we judge of the thing it selfe, then if we judge amisse, we hurt not the thing which cannot be allowed by our judgement, or opinion, but our selves. So that in what thing soever it be, wee must strive to come to the truth of it. When it comes to the judgement of the person, it is not so, for the person may be hurt by my judgement. For if either I make him con∣temptible, or of lesse credit, when he doth not discerne it, I offend grievously. If I hurt him by judging him, I doe him injury. If I doe not impaire his credit, or good name, I doe not if I judge well, &c. But if thus againe, when it groweth not to determination, but to supposition, we must suppose the worst that may be: for if I minister
a medicine unto a sinne, not strong enough to take away the sinne, I rather increase it. If it be too forcible, I shall be sure to take it away, which is the lesse. Iohn 2.22. Our Saviour will not commit himselfe to any, because he knew them all: A good reason it is therefore, that wee should not trust all men, because we doe not know them. In determinations we are to respect two things. 1. Suspicio violenta, a violent suspition. 2. Res dubia, a thing that is doubtfull. From suspicio violenta, this violent suspition, there may be a conclu∣sion drawne. As duty may be done, 1. well, or 2. evill: therefore we must take heede, and advisement in giving of our opinion of them: and have respect to the end, for moralia sortiunur speciem a fine, the judgement of morall things depends upon the issue and end of them; and are alwayes, in meliorem partem determinanda, to be construed in the better sense. The last is that, 1 King. 20.11. Let not him that girdeth his har∣neis, &c. Precipitation of judgement is noverca justitiae, the step mo∣ther of justice: it is not good, &c. More plainely, Gen. 18.1.2. When the crie of the Citizens of Sodom and Gomorra came up into the eares of the Lord: yet God saith, I will deliberate, &c. Although he know all things, yet he will not precipitate his sentence. Thus are we to keepe our selves from judgement. From judgement let us come to the action, which is more unlaw∣full. 1 Sam. 22.22. David saith, I thought thus much, when I saw Doeg there, that he would tell: yet would he not proceed unto action. The common action is the telling forth of that conclusion that wee make unto our selves: he must tell every one, that he goeth withall by the way, that he himselfe is a foole: he will tell every one of is owne faults; Prov. 10.3. The repression of the speech is the next thing. When we have a truth to report of our selves, we must take heede: knowing that our tongue is prodiga, and running over. This may teach us here to use our tongues in repeating to our owne good or evill: and all the good or evill of our brother. As we should not speake, so we should not heare the hurt of our brother, nor the praise of our selves: if we shall first shut our eares, Psal. 58.5. or shew a cloudy counte∣nance. It were to be wished that good men were as forward to good things, as evill men are to evill things; 1 Sam. 22.10. a reporting augmentation of Doeg, and Numb. 13.32. of the Spies. For flattery, we shall not use it our selves, if we doe not forsake the word of God, Prov. 28.4. for hearing if we be not strangled with it, if we can say the contrary of that that Ahab said of Micaiah, 1 King. 22.18. I hate him because he never prophecied unto me any good. Another helpe, and a good one, Rom. 2.1. In quo alium judicas te∣ipsum condemnas, wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thy selfe. 1 Cor. 11.31. Si nos ipsos judicaremus, if we would judge our selves, we should have no leisure, either to judge other men, or to hear∣ken
to flatterers. They would say as the poore man saith, They say I am poore, but I can scarcely beleeve them. How to behave our selves in reproaches; Esa. 51.7. he bids them hearken unto him, and not to esteeme the reproach of men, for his own conscience will be a witnesse unto him that he is free. Sometime in a matter knowne, when we are convicted for it, we must take heede of the forehead of an Harlot: if the discipline of the Church will doe no good, it is a dangerous case: for we see how few come to repentance by the civill policie. For it is not the punishment and shame that will availe with us, for they may be both wiped off in 9. dayes. But we must be humbled in the confusion of our soules, that is, if we can say, this shame is befallen me, the which I beare patiently with griefe that I have deserved it. And sometime is man reproached for a sinne unknowne, which he is not bound to disclose, reiegere peccatum nisi cum possit sine peccato, a sinne is not to be disclosed, unlesse it can be done without giving of∣fence or scandall. Psal. 51.5. David confesseth, Tibi soli peccavi, against thee onely have I sinned: though I could set my selfe against all the world, yet thou knowest it. In this case there must be a travelling with a mans mind, as if he were in the shame of the world, though it cannot be pro∣ved; either if he hath given some occasion, as a man may be suspected to have committed some sin, which is far from him. And knowing that the love of God is great towards him, that he hath not committed it; that he may be thereby withdrawn far from it, it is an effectuall way to preserve us, that we wander not into such an error, neither delight in it. It is often seene, that when a man hath detested a sinne, he falleth a∣gaine into it; as sicke men make faire promises to God, Hose. 7.13. And this lying unto God, maketh us ly unto men, Psal. 78.36. Also it maketh that vineae mentiuntur nobis, the Vineyard and Vines lye unto us. In the Spring time it shall be faire to looke to, but the Harvest shall deceive our expectation, Hose. 9.2. And as Micah. 1.14. saith, The houses of Achzib shall be as a lye unto the Kings of Israel: that is, in those men whom they trusted, they shall finde no succour. For the procuring of it in others, ut supra, &c. FINIS.
A PREPARATION TO PRAYER. The I. SERMON. 2 COR. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to thinke any thing as of our selves: but our sufficiencie is of God. TOuching our hope which we have concer∣ning the performance of Gods promises, the Apostle saith, Heb. 6. that unto the full assu∣rance of hope, there must be diligence shew∣ed, and that we are to prepare our selves to receive Christ, and also having received him, with all his benefits, to strive to hold him fast, and never suffer our hope to be taken from us. Upon which points, the Doctrine that is to be delivered out of this Scripture doth follow by good consequence, for of these points of holding fast our faith in Christ, two questions may arise, which may be answered by the Apostles words in this place, where it may be demanded, First, Whether we be able of our owne strength to shew forth that diligence that is required to assure us of our hope. The Apostle resolveth us of that doubt in saying, We are not able of our selves to thinke any good as of our selves. Secondly, because it may be objected, If we be not able of our selves, from whence then may we receive abilitie? he addeth, that our suffi∣ciencie is of God, from whose goodnesse it commeth, that we are able to do any good thing whatsoever: to the end that when God stands without, knocking at the doore of our hearts, Rom. 3. for the performance of such duties as please him, we, in regard that of our selves we cannot do the least thing that he requireth, should knocke
at the gate of his mercy, that he will minister to us ability to do the same, according to his promise, Mat. 7. Knocke and it shall be opened to you. That as by the preaching of the Law there was open∣ed unto us the doore of faith, Act. 14. And as the Creed is unto us a doore of hope, Hos. 2.15. So the consideration of our owne insuffici∣encie might open unto us a doore unto prayer, by which we may sue unto God for that ability which we have not of our selves. So this Scripture hath two uses, first, to preserve us from errour, that we seeke not for that in our selves, which cannot be found in us: secondly, for our direction, that seing all ability commeth from God, we should seek for it, where it is to be found. Both these things are matter very necessary to be knowne; the first serveth to exclude our boasting, Rom. 3.27. We ought not to boast of our ability, because we have none. The second is a meanes to provoke us to call upon God by prayer, that from him we may receive that which is wanting in our selves. To speake first of the negative part, both Heathen, and holy Wri∣tings do commend to us that saying, , but in a divers sense: the Heathen use it as a meanes to puffe up our nature, that in regard of the excellencie which God hath vouchsafed us above other crea∣tures, we should be proud thereof; but Christian Religion labou∣reth by the knowledge of our selves, and of our misery, to cast downe every high thing that exalteth it selfe against the knowledge of God, and to bring into captivity all imaginations to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. Which as Heathen Philosophers will us to consider the excel∣lent vertues wherewith mans nature is endued, the Scriptures all along put us in mind of our insufficiencie, and tell us, That if any man seeme to himselfe to be something, when he is nothing, hee decei∣veth himselfe in his owne fancie, Galat. 6.3. And if any man think∣eth that hee knoweth any thing, he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8.2. Amongst the places of Scripture, which the Holy Ghost useth to shew our insufficiencie, none doth so much disable our nature as this place of the Apostle, which denieth unto us all power ever to conceive a good thought, so farre are we off from fulfilling that good which we ought. In this negative, we are first to consider these words, wherby the holy Ghost doth disable us, We are not able to thinke any thing: Se∣condly, the qualification, in these words, as of our selves. In denying our ability he setteth downe three things, 1. Not able to thinke: 2. any thing: 3. this want of ability is imputed, not to the common sort of men onely, but even to the Apostles them∣selves, who of all other seemed to be most able. The Apostle to shew our insufficiencie, telleth us, We are not able so much as to thinke any thing; therefore much lesse are we able fully to performe that good which is enjoyned us. For whereas there are seven degrees to be considered in the effecting of any thing, to thinke that which is good is the least, and lowest degree; which being denyed un∣to
us, doth plainly shew, what is our imperfection. The first thing to be observed in undertaking any good, is the accomplishing of it: secondly, the working, or doing of the thing re∣quired: thirdly, the beginning to do it: fourthly, to speake that which is good: fifthly, to will, and desire it: sixthly, to understand: seventhly, to thinke. But the Scripture doth deny all these unto us. The perfecting, or bringing to passe of that which is good, is not in our selves. To will is present with us, Sed bonum perficere non inve∣nio, Rom. 7.8. Deus est, &c. It is God which enableth us to performe, Phil. 2.7. This we find by experience to be true, in things that are evill. The brethren of Joseph, when they sold him to the Egyptians, had a purpose to worke their brothers hurt, but they had no power to performe their wicked attempts; For God turned their wicked purpose to good, Gen. 50.20. When Paul was going to Damascus, with pur∣pose to persecute the Church, it pleased God in the way to stay his purpose, so that he could not performe that evill which he in∣tended, Act. 9.9. Thus much the Wiseman sheweth, when by an example he proveth, That the strongest doth not alwaies carrie away the battell, Eccl. 9.13. The Heathen themselves say, that heroicall vertues are in the mind of man, but if any singular thing be done, it is the gods that give that power: and the Pelagian saith, though we be able to begin a good worke; yet the accomplishment is of God. Secondly, we are not able, facere, no more then we were able to effect, for so saith Christ, Sine me nihil potestis facere. The Pro∣phet saith, Scio quod viri, non est via ejus, Jer. 10.23. If it be not in mans power, to order his way, and to rule his owne steps, much lesse is he able to hold out to his journeyes end, but it is God that ordereth and directeth mans steps, Prov. 16.9. Therefore Paul saith, The good I would do I do not, Rom. 7.17. And if we do any good, that it be not effected; yet it is the worke of God in us, as the Pro∣phet confesseth. Domine, omnia opera nostra operatus es in nobis, Esay 26.12. Thirdly, the inchoation, or beginning of that which is good is de∣nyed us, though we purpose in our hearts to performe those duties of godlinesse that are required, yet we have not the power to put them in practise. Filii venerunt ad partum, & non sunt vires pariendi, Esay 37. The children are come unto the birth, and there is no strength to bring forth. If we begin to do any good thing, it is, Deus qui coepit in nobis bonum opus, Phil. 1.6. In consideration of which place, Augu∣stine saith of the Pelagians, Audiant qui dicunt, à nobis esse coeptum, à Deo esse eventum. Here let them learne of the Apostle, that it is the Lord that doth begin, and performe the good worke. Fourthly, the power to speake that which is good is not in us, for as the Wiseman saith, A man may well purpose a thing in his heart, but the answer of the tongue commeth from the Lord, Prov. 16.1. Where∣of we have often experience. They that have the office of teaching in the Church, albeit they do before-hand prepare what to say,
yet when it comes to the point, are not able to deliver their mind in such sort, as they had purposed: as on the other side, when God doth assist them with his spirit, they are inabled on a sudden to deliver that which they had not intended to speake. Fifthly, as the ability of effecting was attributed to God, so is the will, Phil. 2.14. Sixthly, for understanding the Apostle saith, The naturall man perceiveth not the things that are of the spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. For the wisedome of the flesh is enmity with God, Rom. 8.7. Seventhly, the power of thinking the thing that is pleasing to God, is not in us, so farre are we from understanding or desiring it, as the Apostle in this place testifieth. And therefore where the Pro∣phet speaketh generally of all men, Psal. 94. The Lord knoweth the thoughts of men, that they are but vaine; the Apostle affirmeth that to be true, of the wise men of the world, that are endued onely with the wisedome of the world, and the flesh, that their thoughts are vaine also, 1 Cor. 3.19, 20. Secondly, that we should not thinke, that the want of abilitie standeth onely in matters of difficulty and weight, the Apostle saith not, we are unable to thinke any weighty thing, but even, that without the speciall grace of Gods spirit, we cannot thinke any thing. So Augustine understandeth Christs words, Joh. 15. where he saith not, Nihil magnum & difficile; but, sine me nihil potestis facere. This is true in naturall things, for we are not able to prolong our owne life, one moment; the actions of our life are not of our selves, but from God, in whom we live, move, and have our beeing, Act. 17. Therefore upon those words of Christs: Ego à meipso non possum facere quicquam, nisi quod video Patrem, I of my selfe can do no∣thing, but what I see my Father doe, &c. Joh. 5.9. Augustine saith, Ei tribuit quicquid fecit, à quo est ipse qui facit. But the insufficiencie of which the Apostle speaketh, is not in things naturall, but in the ministration of the Spirit: So he saith, that God of his speciall grace hath made them able Ministers of the new Te∣stament, not of the letter, but of the spirit; his meaning is, that no endea∣vour of men can endue us with the grace of repentance, with faith, hope, and Christian charity, except the inward working of Gods spirit. As the Apostle speakes of the gift of tongues, of the understan∣ding of secrets, and of all knowledge without charity; Nihil miht pro∣dest, 1 Cor. 14. So all our endeavours are unprofitable to us, unlesse God by his spirit do co-operate with us, for, He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit, Joh. 15.5. that is, the fruit of righteousnesse, the end whereof is eternall life, Rom. 6.22. Thirdly, the persons whom he chargeth with this want of ability, are not the common sort of naturall men, that are not yet regene∣rate by Gods spirit, 1 Cor. 2. but he speakes of himselfe, and his fel∣low-Apostles. So these words are an answer to that question, 2 Cor. 2.16. ; unto these things who is sufficient? he answereth himselfe, Not we, for we are not able of our selves to think a good thought, much lesse are we fit of our selves, to be meanes, by
whom God should manifest the favour of his knowledge in every place; So that which Christ spake, Joh. 15. he spake it to his Di∣sciples, who albeit they were more excellent persons then the rest of the people, yet he telleth them, Sine me nihil potestis facere. The negative being generall, we may make a very good use of it, If the Apostles of Christ were unable, how much more are we: If Jacob say, I am unworthy of the least of thy blessings, Gen. 32. If John Baptist say, I am not worthy, Mat. 3. If S. Paul confesse, I am not wor∣thy to be called an Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. much more may we say with the Prodigall sonne, that had spent all, I am not worthy to be called thy sonne, Luk. 15. and with the Centurion, I am not worthy thou shouldest come under my roofe, Mat. 8. The reason of this want of ability is, for that the nature of men cannot performe that which the Apostle speakes of, neither as it is in an estate decayed through the fall of Adam, and that generall corruption, that he hath brought into the whole race of mankind; nor as it is restored to the highest degree of perfection, that the first man had, at the beginning. Adam himselfe, when he was yet perfect, could not attaine to this, for he was but a living soule; the se∣cond Adam was a quickning spirit, 1 Cor. 15. And it is not in the po∣wer of nature to elevate, and lift it selfe up, to conceive hope of be∣ing partakers of the blessednesse of the life to come, to hope to be made partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. and of the heavenly substance: if men hope for any such thing, it is the spirit of God that raiseth them up to it. As the water can rise no higher then nature will give it leave, and as the fire giveth heat onely within a certaine compasse, so the Per∣fection, which Adam had, was in certaine compasse, the light of na∣ture that he had, did not reach so high as to stirre him up to the hope of the blessednesse to come; that was without the compasse of nature, and comes by the supernaturall working of grace. As we are corrupt, it never commeth into our minds, to hope for the felicity of the life to come; for all the thoughts of mans heart are onely evill, and that all the day long, Gen. 6. That is true, which the Apostle witnesseth of the Gentiles, Rom. 2.13. That they by nature do the things of the Law; if we understand it of morall duties (for the very light of nature doth guide us to the doing of them.) But as the Prophet saith, Ps. 16.2. My goodnesse doth not extend to thee. So whatsoever good thing we doe, by the directi∣on of naturall reason, it is without all respect of God, except he en∣lighten us before. Therefore in our regeneration, not onely the cor∣ruption of our will is healed, but a certaine divine sparke of fire, and zeale of Gods Spirit is infused into us, by which we are holpen to do those duties of piety, which otherwise naturally we have no po∣wer to do. Now followes the qualification of this generall negative sen∣tence. For where the Apostle hath said, We are not able to thinke any thing of our selves; the Scripture recordeth divers good purposes, that came into the hearts of Gods servants. The Lord himselfe
said of David: Whereas it was in thine heart to build an house to my name, thou diddest well in thinking so to doe, 1 Reg. 8.18. The Apostle saith of unmarried folkes, that they care for the things that belong to the Lord, how they may please the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.32. But the Apostle sheweth, that if we have any such thoughts at any time, they do not proceed from us. By which words the Apostle, no doubt, maketh this distinction, that there are some things that come of us, and are of our selves: a∣gaine, there are other things that come from us, and yet are not of us, that is from, and of our selves, that groweth in us naturally. That is said to be from our selves, but not of our selves, which is in∣grafted in us: It is the true Olive, that from it selfe, and of it selfe yeeldeth fatnesse; and the wild Olive being ingrafted in it, doth from it self yeeld fatnesse, but not of it self, but as it is by insition made partaker of that fatnes, which naturally is in the true Olive, Rom. 11. Figmenta cogitationis, are from, and of our selves; but if any di∣vine, and spirituall thoughts come into our hearts, the Lord God is the Potter that frames them in us, Jer. 18.6. The Apostle saith, Scio quod in me, hoc est, in carne mea, non habitat bonum, Rom. 7.18. But sinne dwels in mee, v. 17. therefore sinne, that dwels in us, is from us, and of us; but the grace of Gods spirit, which dwells not in us, but doth tarry guest-wise, is that, which is from us, but not of us. Our Saviour saith, Luk. 24.38. Why do thoughts arise in your hearts? such thoughts are from us, and of us; but those thoughts, that come from the Father of light, James 1. are from our selves, but not of us. All that we have by the strength of nature, is said to be of our selves, and from our selves, but the power, wherewith we are endued from above, to the doing of heavenly, and spirituall things, of our selves, but not from our selves: Perditio tua ex te Israel, Hos. 13. that is from us, and of us; Tantummodo salus ex me; that is neither of us, nor from us. The Apostle saith, 1 Cor. 15. I persecuted the Church: that was from himselfe, and of himselfe; but when he saith, yet I laboured more then they all, he corrected that, and saith, yet not I, but the grace of God with mee: Because that was of himselfe, but not from him∣selfe, but from the grace of God, which did co-operate with him. Sinnes are of our selves, and from our selves, but not good actions. Hoc piarum mentium est, ut nihil sibi tribuant, this is the part of godly soules, that they attribute nothing to themselves. Aug. It is dan∣gerous to ascribe too little to the grace of God, for then we robbe him of his Glory; but if we ascribe too little to our selves, there is no danger: for whatsoever we take from our selves, it cannot hinder us from being true Christians: but if we ascribe that to the strength of our owne nature, which is the proper worke of Grace, then do we blemish Gods Glory. The affirmative part is, our sufficiencie is of God. So that albeit, in regard of themselves he said, Who is sufficient to these things? yet, having ability from God, he is bold to say, Omnia possum in eo qui me confortat, Phil. 4.13.
The Apostle willeth Titus to choose sufficient men, such as were able to exhort with wholsome doctrine, Tit. 1.9. That is, such as God hath made able, so he speakes of all in generall, that God the Father hath made us meete to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1.12. As none are meete, but such as are made meete, so there are none , worthy, but , such as are made worthy, Luk. 20.21. The Apostle saith, I was indeed to come to you, that ye might receive a second grace, 2 Cor. 1.15. Whereby he sheweth that to be true, which Saint Peter affirmeth, That the grace of God is manifested, 1 Pet. 4. And so much we are to understand, by the words of the Evangelist, when he saith, That from the fulnesse of Christ we received grace for grace, Joh. 1. As Noah is reported to have found grace in the sight of God, Gen. 6. So many do find grace with God: first, he worketh grace in men, by the meanes of his Word, when before they were void of grace, The grace of God hath appeared to all, teaching them, Tit. 2.12. Also by the meanes of the Crosse, Job. 33. Psal. 119. and by that he wor∣keth a second grace that is inherent, whereby they are enabled to do the duties of holinesse. In which respect, as he is said to give grace, Prov. 3. Humilibus dat gratiam: so we receive grace, 2 Cor. 6.1. After God by his spirit hath thus enabled us, we are said to be able, and meete, to do those things which we are commanded; so that, though our righteousnesse be but menstrualis justitia, Isay 64. he will not reject it: though our zeale in godlinesse be but as smoking flaxe, or the broken reed, he will not quench, nor breake it, Isay 42. and though the measure of our charity exceed not the cup of cold water, yet we shall not lose our reward, Matth. 10. And though the affictions of this life, which we suffer for Christs sake, be not worthy of the glory that is to be revealed; yet, as the Evangelist speakes, , Luk. 21. For if wee suffer together with Christ, we shall be glorified with him, Rom. 8.17. So then, the summe of all commeth to this, where the Apostle ex∣horteth, Let us have grace, Heb. 12. The question is, from whence we may have it? It is certaine we have it not of our selves, (for it is a divine thing) therefore we must have it from him, that is the Well of grace, Joh. 1.14. If we come to him, out of his fulnesse we shall receive grace for grace. He is not a Well locked up, but such an one as standeth open, that all may draw out of it. Therefore the Apostle saith, that the grace of God is, , 1 Pet. 1.13. And as Salomon saith, bonus vir haurit gratiam, Prov. 12.2. The meanes to obtaine this grace at the hands of God, is by prayer; who hath promised to give his holy spirit to them that aske it, Luk. 11. And having received grace from God, we shall like∣wise have bonam spem per gratiam, 2 Thess. 2. He hath promised that those that seeke shall find, Mat. 7.
If in humility we seeke for grace from God, knowing that we have it not, of our selves, we shall receive it from God, for he giveth grace to the humble, 1 Pet. 5. Seeing then that in us there is no ability, so much as to thinke any thing, and all ability commeth from God, we are to learne from hence, that if God say, Turne to mee, and I will turne to you, we must pray, Convert thou us O Lord, and we shall be converted, Lam. 4. If he say to us, Make you cleane hearts, Ezek. 18: Because that is not in us, we must pray, Create in me a cleane heart, and renew a right spirit in mee, Psal. 51.10. When Christ saith, Beleevest thou this? Joh. 11. for as much as Faith is the gift of God, Eph. 2. we are to pray with the Disciples, Do∣mine, adde nobis fidem, Luk. 17.5. When the Apostle exhorteth, Per∣fecte sperate, 1 Pet. 1.13. we should say with the Prophet, Lord my hope is even in thee, Psal. 39. And where our duty is to love with all our hearts; because we cannot performe this, without the assistance of Gods Spirit, we are to pray that the love of God may be shed in our hearts, by the holy Ghost, Rom. 5.5.
THE SECOND SERMON. JAMES 1.16, 17. Erre not my deare brethren. Every good giving, and every perfect gift, is from above, and com∣meth downe from the Father of lights; with whom is no variable∣nesse, neither shadow of turning. AS Saint Paul 2 Cor. 3.5. tels us, that we are not sufficient to thinke a good thought, but our sufficiencie is of God: So the Apostle saith, t is God onely, from whom every good giving, and every perfect gift commeth: And that we shall erre, if we either thinke, that any good thing, which we enjoy, commeth from any other but from God, or that any thing else but good proceedeth from him; so that as well the ability which man had by nature, as our enabling in the state of grace, is from God. He is the Fountaine, out of whom (as the Wiseman saith) we must draw grace by prayer, which is, Situla gratiae, the conduit or bucket of grace. There∣fore he promiseth, in the old Testament, To poure upon his Church, both the Spirit of grace and of prayer, that as they sue for grace, by the one, so they may receive it in, by the other, Zach. 12.10. Unto this doctrine of the Apostle, in this place, even those, that otherwise have no care of grace, doe subscribe, when they confesse themselves to be destitute of the good things of this life, and therefore cry, Quis oftendit nobis bona? Psal. 4. As before the Apostle shewed that God is not the cause of any e∣vill; so in this verse he teacheth, there is no good thing, but God is the author of it; If he be the Fountaine of every good thing, then he cannot be the cause of evill; for no one Fountaine doth out of the same hole, yeeld sweet and bitter water. Iam. 3.11. Secondly, if every good thing be of God onely, then have we neede to sue to him by prayer, that from him we may receive that, which we have not of our selves. Wherefore as this Scripture serves to kin∣dle in us the love of God, for as much as he containes all good things that we can desire; so it is a speciall meanes to provoke us to the du∣ty of prayer.
This proposition hath two parts: first, an Vniversall affirmative in these words, Every good giving: secondly, a prevention; for where it may be objected, that howsoever some good things come of God, yet evill things also may successively come from him; even as the Heathens say, that Iupiter hath divers boxes, out of which hee doth powre both good and evill: the Apostle preventeth that objection, and saith, that with God there is no variablenesse, nor shadow of chan∣ging: So that as the meaning of these words in the Prophet Hosea 13.9. Salus tua taniummodo ex me, is both, that salvation is onely of God, and that nothing else but salvation commeth from him; so the Apostles meaning in these words is, both, that God is onely the cause of good, and that he is the cause of nothing else but good, lest when we are tempted unto evill, we should make God the Author of all such temptations. The former part of the proposition called subjectum, is, Every good giving, &c. The latter part, called praedicatum, is, descendeth from above. Where the heathen call all vertues and good qualities which they have, , of having, the Apostle calleth them, , of giving, to teach us that whatsoever good quality is in any man, he hath it not as a quality within himselfe, but he receiveth it from without, as it is a gift. Esau, speaking of the blessings bestowed upon him, saith, I have enough, Gen. 3.3. And the rich man Luke 12. (Anima) soule thou hast much good, as though they had not received them from God; but the Saints of God spake otherwise, Iacob saith, These are the children which God hath given me, Gen. 33.5. Againe, when Pilate without all respect of God, of whom the Apostle saith, There is no power but of God, Rom. 13. said, Knowest thou not, that I have power to crucifie, and to loose thee? our Saviour said againe, Thou shouldest not have any power over me, except it were given thee from above. Iohn 19.10. The consideration hereof serveth to exclude our boasting, Rom. 3. That the Wise man boast not of his wisdome, Ier. 9. seeing wisdome, strength, and whatsoever good things we have, it is the good gift of God, as the Apostle tels us, Quid habes, quod non accepisti? 1 Cor. 4. Secondly, this division is to be marked, that of the good things which come from God, some are called Donationes, others Dona: and to these two substantives, are added two adjectives, whereof one doth answer to the givings of Gods goodnesse, the other to the gifts of God ascribeth perfection. The first errour the Apostle willeth them to beware, is, that they thinke not that God is the cause of any evill, because every good thing commeth from him: the second errour is, that they should not con∣ceive this opinion, that the maine benefits are from God, and the lesser benefits are from our selves; not so, for the Apostle tels us, that as well, every good giving, as every perfect gift is from above. That which the Apostle cals Donatio, is a transitory thing: but by gift, he meaneth that which is permanent and lasting. Ioseph is recorded to have given to his brethren, not onely corne, but
victuals to spend y the way, Gen. 45.21. So by giving, the Apostle here understandeth such things as we neede in this life, while wee tra∣vell towards our heavenly Countrey, but that which he calleth gifts, are the treasures which are laid up for us in the life to come; and thus the words are used in these severall senses. Of things transitory the Apostle saith, No Church dealt with me in the matter of giving, Phil. 4.15. there the word is , but speaking of the good things that come to us by Christ, he saith: The gift is not as the fault, Rom. 5.16. where the word is By Givings he understandeth, beauty, strength, riches, and every transitory thing whereof we stand in neede, while we are yet in our journey towards our heavenly countrey; such as Iob speakes of, Domi∣nus dedit, Dominus abstulit, Iob 1.21. By gift he meaneth the fe∣licity that is reserved for us after this life, the Kingdome of Heaven, that whereof our Saviour saith to Martha, Luke 10. Mary hath chosen the better part, which shall not be taken from her. That which is a stay to us in this life, is , but the things which neither eye hath seene, nor eare heard, all which are reserved for them that love God, 1 Cor. 2. these are , and as well the one, as the other, come from God. So much we are taught by the adjectives that are joyned to these words. Givings are called good, and the Gifts of God are called perfect: In which words the Apostles purpose is to teach us, that not onely the great benefits of the life to come, such as are perfect, are of him; but that even that good which we have in this life, though it be yet imperfect, and may be made better, is received from him, and not else where, Who doth despise little things? saith the Prophet, Zach. 4.10. God is the Author both of perfect and good things: as the Image of the Prince is to be seene as well in a small peece of coine, as in a peece of greater value; so we are to consider the goodnes of God as well in the things of this life, as in the graces that concerne the life to come, yea even in this, To thinke that which is good, 2 Cor. 3. Of him are the small things, as well as the great. Therefore out Saviour teacheth us to pray, not onely for that perfect gift, ut adveni∣a: Regnum, but even for these lesser good things, which are but his gi∣vings, namely, that he would give us our daily bread. Under Good, is contained all gifis, both naturall, or temporall. Those givings which are naturall, as to live, to move, and have under∣standing, are good, for of them it is said, God saw all that he made, and lo, all was good. Gen. 1. Of gifts temporall, the Heathen have doubted, whether they were good, to wit, riches, honour, &c. but the Christians are resolved that they are good, 1 Iohn 3. So our Saviour teacheth us to esteeme them, when speaking of fish, and bread, he saith, If you which are evill, can give your children good things, Luke 11. And the Apostle saith, Hee that hath this worlds good, 1 Iohn 3. For as Augustine saith, That is not onely good, quod facit bonum, sed de quo fit bonum, that is not onely good that makes good, but whereof is made good. so albeit riches do not make a man good alwaies; yet because he may do good with them, they are good.
The gift which the Apostle cals perfect, is grace and glory, whereof there is in this life the beginning of perfection; the other in the life to come, is the end and constancie of our perfection, whereof the Prophet speaks, Psal. 84.12. The Lord will give grace and glory. The Apostle saith, Nihil perfectum adduxit Lex, The Law brought nothing to perfection. Heb. 7. that is by reason of the imperfection of our nature, and the weaknesse of our flesh. Rom. 8.3. To supply the defect that is in nature, grace is added, that grace might make that perfect which is imperfect. The person that giveth us this grace is Jesus Christ, by whom grace and truth came. Iohn. 1. And therefore he saith, Estote perfecti sicut Pa∣ter vester coelestis perfectus est. Matth. 5. And by this grace not only our sinnes are taken away, but our soules are endued with inherent vertues, and receive grace and ability from God, to proceed from one degree of perfection to another, all our life time, even till the time of our death, which is the beginning and accomplishment of our perfection, as our Sa∣viour speakes of his death. Luke 13.32. In the latter part of the proposition we are to consider the place, from whence, and the person, from whom we receive these gifts; the one is su∣pernè, the other, à Patre luminum: Now he instructeth us to beware of a third errour, that we looke not either on the right hand, or on the left hand, that we regard not the persons of great men, which are but in∣struments of God, if we have any good from them, all the good we have it is de sursum, the thoughts of our hearts that arise in them, if they tend to good, are not of our selves, but infused into us by the di∣vine power of Gods spirit, and so is whatsoever good thought, word, or worke, proceeding from us. This is one of the first parts of divinity, Iobn Baptist taught; A man can receive nothing, except it be given him from above, Iohn 3.27. This was the cause of Christ ascending into Heaven, Psal. 68. He went up on high, and dedit dona hominibus: and the Evangelist faith, the holy Ghost (which is the most perfect gift that can come to men) was not yet given, because Christ was not yet ascended. Iohn 7.39. Therefore if we possesse any blessing, or receive any benefit, we must not looke to earthly meanes, but to Heaven. The thing which is here mentioned excludeth the fourth errour: we thinke that things come to us by fortune, or customably: he saies not, that good things fall downe from above, but they descend, & qui de∣scendit, proposito descendit. Our instruction from hence is, that they de∣scend from a cause intelligent, even from God himselfe, who in his counsell and provision bestoweth his blessings as seemeth best to him∣selfe: for as the Heathen man speakes, God hath, sinum facilem, but not perforatum, that is, a lappe, easie to receive and yeeld, but not bored through, to let things fall through without discretion. When the Prophet saith, Tu aper is manum, Psal. 145.15. he doth not say that God lets his blessings droppe out of his fingers. Christ when he promised to his Disciples to send the Comforter, saith, Ego mittameum advos. Iohn 16.7. Whereby he giveth them to under∣stand that it is not by casualty, or chance, that the holy Ghost shall come upon them, but by the deliberate counsell of God; so the A∣postle
postle speaks, Of his owne will begat he us, by the word of truth. The person from whom, is the Father of lights. The Heathens found this to be true, that all good things come from above, but they thought that the lights in Heaven are the causes of all good things, therefore is it that they worship the Sunne, Moone, and Starres. Iames saith, Be not deceived, all good things come not from the lights, but from the Father of lights. The naturall lights were made in ministerium cunctis gentibus, Deut. 4. and the Angels, that are the in∣tellectuall lights, are appointed to do service unto the Elect. Heb. 1.13. It is the Father of lights, that giveth us all good things; therefore he onely is to be worshipped, and not the lights, which he hath made to our use. God is called the Father of lights, First, in opposition to the lights themselves, to teach us, that the lights are not the causes of good things, but he that said, fiat lux, Gen. 1. Secondly, in regard of the emanation, whether we respect the Sunne-beames called radii, shining in at a little hole, or the great beame of the Sun, called Iubar, he is au∣thor of both, and so is the cause of all the light of understanding, whe∣ther it be in small, or great measure: Thirdly, to shew the nature of God: nothing hath so great alliance with God, as light: The light ma∣keth all things manifest, Ephes. 5. and the wicked hate the light, because their workes are evill, Iohn 3. But God is the Father of lights, because as out of light commeth nothing but light, so God is the cause of that which is good. Prov. 13. Againe, light is the cause of goodnesse, to those things that are good of themselves; It is a pleasant thing to behold the light. Eccles. 11. On the other side; howsoever good things are in themselves, yet they af∣ford small pleasure, or delight, to him that is shut up in a dark dungeon, where he is deprived of the benefit of light. So God is the Father of lights, for that not onely all things have their goodnesse from him, but because he makes them good also. Light is the first good thing that God created for man, fiat lux, Gen. 1. But God is the Father of lights, to shew that he is the first cause of any good thing, that can come to us. Againe, because he is that onely cause of the visible light, which at the first he created, and also of that spirituall light, whereby he shineth into our hearts, by the light of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 4. the Apostle saith of the whole Trinity, Deus lux est, 1 Iohn 1.5. More particularly Christ saith of himselfe, Ego sum lux mundi, Iohn 8. The holy Ghost is called light, where he is represented by the fiery tongues, Act. 2.3. The Angels are , Heb. 1.7. David also, as a civill Magistrate, was called the light of Israel. 2 Sam. 21.17. Ecclesi∣asticall Ministers are called light, Vos estis lux mundi. Matth. 5. And not onely they, but the people that are of good conversation, are said to shine, tanquam luminaria in mundo. Phil. 2. All these lights have their being from God, and for this cause he is worthily called lux mundi, and the Father of lights. A againe, this name is opposed unto dark∣nesse, God is light, and in him there is no darknesse. 1 Iohn 5.5. Therefore the ignorance of our minds is not to be imputed unto him. He is the
light that lightneth every one, Iohn 1.9. and cannot be comprehended of darknesse: Therefore it is not long of him, that we, through ignorance, are said to sit in darknesse, and in the shadow of death, this comes of the Devill, the Prince of darknesse, who blindeth mens eyes. 2 Cor. 4. God is the Father of lights. Secondly, he is so called to distinguish him from heat. The lights which we make for these private uses, doe not onely give light, but heat also; but God giveth light without heat: wherefore such as are of a fiery spirit, as the Disciples that said, Shall we command that fire come downe from Heaven, and consume them? are not like God. Christ is called the day-starre, not the dog-starre, 2 Pet. 1. God is said to have walked in the coole of the day, not in the heat of the day, Gen. 3.8. When God would speake to Eliah, he shewed himselfe neither in the strong wind, nor in earth-quake, nor in fire, but in a small still voyce. 1 Reg. 19.12. To teach men, that, if they will be like God, they must be of a meeke and quiet spirit. He is said to dwell in the light, 1 Tim. 6. not that he is of a hot fiery nature, as our lights are, but because he giveth us the light of knowledge. In respect of the number, he is not called the Father of one light, but Pater luminum. It was an imperfection in Iacob, that he had but one blessing, Gen. 27. God is not the cause of some one good thing, but as there are divers starres, and one starre differeth from another in glory, 1 Cor. 15. so as we receive many good things, and of them some are greater then others, so they all come from God, who is the Author and fountaine of them all. Our manifold imperfections are noted by the word tenebrae, which is a word of the plurall number, and in regard thereof it is needfull, that God, in whom we have perfection, shall not be Pater luminis, but Pater luminum. Our miseries are many, therefore that he may deliver us quite out of miseries, there is with the Lord Copiosa redemptio, Psal. 130. The sinnes which we commit against God are many; therefore he is the Father, not of one mercie, but Pater misericordiarum, 2 Cor. 1. The Apostle Peter tels us, that the mercie of God is multiformis gratia, 1 Pet. 4. So that whether we commit small sinnes or great, we may be bold to call upon God for mercie, According to the multitude of thy mercies, have mercie upon me, Psal. 51. For as our sinnes doe abound, so the mercie of God, whereby he pardoneth and is inclined to pardon us, is exuberans gratia, Rom. 5. The darknes that we are subject to, is manifold: there is darknesse in∣ward, not only in the understanding, Eph. 4. where the Gentiles are said to have their cogitations darkned, but in the heart, whereof the Apostle speaketh, He that hateth his brother is in darknesse. 1 Iohn 2. There is the darknesse of tribulation and affliction, whereof the Prophet speaketh, Thou shall make my darknesse to be light, Psal. 18. and the misery which the wicked suffer in the world to come which our Sa∣viour calleth utter darknesse, Matth. 22. God doth helpe us, and give us light in all these darknesses, and therefore is called the Father of lights. As the Sunne giveth light to the body, so God hath provided light
for the soule, and that is first the light of nature, which teacheth us, that this is a just thing, ne alii facias quod tibi fieri non vis, from this light we have this knowledge, that we are not of our selves, but of an∣other, and of this light the Wiseman saith, The soule of man is the candle of the Lord. Prov. 20.27. They that resist this light of nature are called, rebelles Lumini. Iob 24. With this light every one that commeth in∣to this world is inlightned. Iohn 1.9. Howbeit this light hath caught a fall, as Mephibosheth did, and thereupon it halteth, notwithstanding, because it is of the bloud royall, it is worthy to be made of. Next, God kindleth a light of grace by his word, which is, lux pe∣dibus; Psal. 119. and lux oculis, Psal. 19. and that we may be capable of this outward light, he lightneth us with his spirit, because the light of the law shined but darkly; therefore he hath called us into the light of his Gospell, which is his marvellous light, 1 Pet. 2. He lighteth the outward darknesse of affliction, by ministring com∣fort, There springeth up light for the righteous, and joyfull gladnesse for such as are true of heart. Psal. 97.11. In the multitude of my sorrowes, thy comforts have refreshed my soule. Psal. 94. He giveth us everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace. 2 Thes. 2. And that we should not be cast into utter darknesse, he hath made us, meete to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, yea he hath delivered us from the power of darknesse, and hath translated us into the Kingdome of his be∣loved Sonne. Col. 1.12. Of these things it followeth: first, if all good things be gifts, wee may not boast of them; if they come from God, we may not forget him, from whom we receive them. Secondly, because Gifts are rather Commendata, quam data, because there is , Phil. 4. Seeing God will come, and take ac∣count of the Talents, Matth. 25. we must neither wast-fully mis-spend them, Luke 16. nor have them without profit. Matth. 25. Vt crescit do∣num, sic crescat ratio donati. Thirdly, seeing they come from above, we must not be like blind Moses, nor as Swine grovelling upon the earth, which eae the acorns that fall from the tree, and never looke up, but it may teach us to look up; Sursum cor, qui habes sursum caput. Fourthly, seeing God is Pater Luminum, we must walke as Children of light. 1 Thes. 4. For we are not darknesse, but light. Ephes. 5. Fifthly, seeing God hath divers good things in his hand to give, we must desire to receive them from him by prayer.
THE THIRD SERMON. MATTH. 7.7. Aske, and it shall be given you; seeke, and yee shall finde; knocke, and it shall be opened unto you. AFter the consideration of our owne unability, mentioned by Saint Paul 2 Cor. 3. And the exami∣nation of the manifold goodnesse of God, from whom, as Saint Iames saith, every good giving, and every perfect gift commeth: Because wee see that of our selves we cannot so much as think any good, and yet that from the Father of lights wee may receive that grace which shall inable us to doe all things; Now it followeth by good order, that we repaire to God for that power, which we have not of our selves. Christ will not have holy things given to dogges, nor pearles cast to swine, that is, to such as make no account of them; and therefore if we esteeme of the grace of Christ, or make a∣ny reckoning of it, we must come to him for it; now we cannot come to God, but by prayer, as Augustine saith, Non passibus, sed precibus, itur ad Deum: & nuncius noster oratio est, quae ibi mandatum nostrum peragit, quo caro nostra pervenire nequit: It is not with pases, but with prayers we goe to God; and our messenger is prayer, which there doth our errand, where our flesh cannot come. Therefore Christ saith: Doe not waite as swine, till the grace of God be cast unto you, but if you will have it, aske, and it shall be given to you. The tenor of this Scripture hath this coherence: first, knowing our owne insufficiencie, and the goodnesse of God, from whom every good thing commeth, presently we wish with our selves that he would admit us to be suiters unto him. Therefore Christ in the word Aske, tels us, that God hath his Courts of requests, that we may be bold to put up our supplications. Secondly, whereas earthly Princes may perhaps afford a good countenance, but will not grant the thing that is sought for at their hands; Christ saith, that the Father of lights, is not onely affable, but liberall; so that albeit we be not onely dust and ashes, and there∣fore unworthy to pray to God, Gen. 18. but also wretched sinners, un∣worthy to be heard, because as the Blind man saith, peccatores non ex∣audit
Deus, Iohn 9. Yet he will not cast out our prayers, nor turne his mercie from us, esal. 66.18. But if we aske, it shall be given. Thirdly, that we should not think, that as in the world there are many suiters, but few obtainers; so howsoever all doe pray unto God, yet we are not in the number of those that speede; therefore Christ ad∣deth, Whosoever asketh, receiveth: whosoever seeketh, findeth: and to him that knocketh, it shall be opened: No unworthinesse of our owne can ex∣clude us from the mercie of God, for he receiveth the prayer, not on∣ly of the Publican, Luke 18. but of the prodigall sonne, Luke 15. and pro∣miseth mercie to the Thiefe hanging on the Crosse, Luke 23. if at the last houre he seeke it by prayer. Of these two verses there are three parts, first a precept, petite, quae∣rite, pulsate: aske, seeke, knock: secondly, a promise, it shall be given, ye shall finde, and it shall be opened: thirdly, an enlargement of the pro∣mise, which is made not onely to such as are of just and holy conver∣sation, but to sinners; For whosoever asketh, receiveth. As on Gods behalfe we see first his affability: secondly, his libera∣lity: thirdly, the largenesse of his liberality: so on our owne parts we are taught, first, that we may boldly powre out our desires before God: secondly, we may conceive hope to be heard in the thing we crave: thirdly, not an uncertaine hope, confounded through our owne unworthinesse; For whosoever asketh, receiveth: and as Christ speaketh, Him that commeth to me, I will in no wise, cast out. Iohn 6.37. In the precept foure things are to be considered: first, the necessity: secondly, the vehemencie, signified by a three-fold petition, which im∣plieth an instancie, as Solomon speakes: Have I not written three times to thee? Prov. 22.20. thirdly, the coherence of these three termes, asking, seeking, and knocking: fourthly, the distinguishing of them. Touching the first, the example of our Saviour might be a suffici∣ent motive to stirre us up to prayer, who in the morning very early before day went into a solitary place, and there prayed, Marke 1.35. and in the evening, prayed himselfe alone in the Mountaine, Matth. 14.23. Secondly, whereas he setteth downe a forme of prayer, Matth. 6. He sheweth that prayer is necessary, but when unto both he addeth a precept, we may not thinke any longer it is a matter indfferent, but of necessity, a commandement is a thing obligatory. So when Christ commands us to pray, he doth not leave it as a thing in our owne choyce; but bindes us to the performance of it, for prayer is not on∣ly required as a thing supplying our neede, (for when wee feele want, we neede not be provoked to prayer;) the bruit beasts themselves be∣ing pinched with hunger, doe seeke their meate at God, Psal. 107. and the Ravens call upon him for foode, Psal. 147. but it is required as a part of Gods service. Anna being in the Temple, served God by prayer, Luke 2.37. By prayer the Apostles performed that service to the Lord, which the Apostle cals , Acts 13.1. Therefore so oft as we resort to the house of God, to put up our petitions to God, then we doe him service properly, and nt onely when wee are present at a Sermon, for then God rather serveth us, and attends us, and entreates us by his Ministers to be reconciled to him, 2 Cor. 5.
As prayer is a part of Gods worship: so the neglect of prayer is a sinne, as one saith, peccatum non orandi. Therefore the Prophet a∣mong other sinnes wherewith he chargeth the wicked, reckoneth this to be one, that they call not on the Lord, Psal. 14.9. The neglect of this duty was the beginning of Sauls fall, as all the Fathers interpret that place, 1 Sam. 14.19. where it is said, that Saul commanded the Priest to with-draw his hand from the Arke. For this hath beene comman∣ded ever from the beginning, that we should pray unto God; not onely in the law of nature, Iob. 8.5. But also in the law of Moses, Deut. 10.12. In the time of the law a speciall part of the service, which the peo∣ple performed to God, was the offering up of incense, and therefore the Prophet compareth prayer to incense, Psal. 141.2. And it is most fitly resembled to incense, for the use of incense was to sweeten those places which are unsavory: Even so the wicked imaginations, and un∣chast thoughts of our hearts, which yeeld a stinking smell in the no∣strils of God, are sweetned by no other meanes then by prayer: and therefore to shew how the one is resembled by the other, it is said, that while the incense was a burning, the people were without upon their knees in prayer, Luke 1.10. neither was it a thing usuall in the law onely, but also in the Prophets. Call upon me, Psal. 50. & aperi os tuum & im∣plebo, Psal. 81. Touching the effect and fruit whereof it is said, Whosoever calleth on the name of the Lord, shall be saved, Ioel 2. Secondly, albeit God have little Commandements, as Christ speakes, Matth. 5. Hee that breakes one of these little Commandements: Yet this, touching the duty of prayer is not a slight Commandement, but of great instance, and so much we are to gather from hence, that Christ is not content once to say, Aske, but repeates it in three severall termes: aske, seeke, knock; which as Augustine saith, sheweth instantissimam necessitatem. From the vehemencie of this Commandement we are to consider these three things: first, it lets us see our want and neede, in that wee are willed to aske: secondly, by seeking, Christ doth intimate thus much to us; that we have lost our selves: thirdly, in that he would have us to knocke, he would have us to learne that we are as men shut out of the presence of God, and his Kingdome, where is the fulnesse of joy, and pleasure for ever. The first sheweth man what is the misery of his estate, in regard whereof he is called Enoch: secondly, his blindnesse, which is so great, that when he doth pray, he asketh he knowes not what, Matth. 20. If hee would pray, he knowes not how to pray, for which cause the Disci∣ples desire Christ to teach them, Luke 11. Their blindnesse is such as they know not the way to come to the Father, as Thomas confesseth, Iohn 14.5. Thirdly, it sheweth our slothfulnesse in seeking our owne good, which appeareth herein, that we have neede to have a Com∣mandement given us to stirre us up to pray to God. The third thing in the precept is the dependance of these three word, petite, quaerite, pulsate. For there is no idle word in Gods book. Therefore as they that have to doe with Gold, will make no waste at
all, but gather together the least paring: so we must esteeme preciously of Gods word, which is more precious then Gold. We must be gone hence, and there is a place whither we desire all to come, which wee cannot doe, except we knocke: and because we know not at what dore to knocke, therefore we must seeke the dore; But we have no will nor desire to seeke, therefore Christ willeth in the first place that we aske it, and the thing that we must aske, is the spirit of grace, and of pray∣er: and if we aske it, then shall we have ability and power, not only to seeke the dore, but when we have found it, to knock at it. Fourthly, as these words depend one upon another, so they are to be distinguished one from another: they that are suitors for any earth∣ly benefit, doe occupie, not onely their tongue in speaking, but their legges in resorting to great persons: they that seeke, doe occupie not onely their legges, in going up and downe, but their eyes to looke in every place; and they that knock, as they use other members, so espe∣cially they use their hands: But when our Saviour enjoyneth us the use of prayer, he expresseth it not in one word, but in three severall termes; to teach us, that when we come to pray to God, the whole man must be occupied, and all the members of the body imployed in the service of God; for Christ will not have pearls cast unto swine; and we may not looke to have the gifts of God cast into our mouthes: but if we will obtaine, we must first, open our mouthes to aske it, Psal. 81. Second∣ly, they are not so easily found, as that we shall stumble upon them: but we must seeke diligently, with the lifting up of our eyes. Psal. 1.20. And to God that dwels in the Heavens. Psal. 123. Thirdly, because the dore is shut and locked up, therefore we must knock, for which end we are willed, To lift up our hands with our hearts to God which is in Heaven, Lam. 3. The lifting up of our hand is that which the people call the Eve∣ning sacrifice, Psal. 141. As the body, so also the soule may not bee idle, but occupied with these three vertues: first, it must petere, which noteth confidence and trust: secondly, quaerere, which signifies dili∣gence: thirdly, pulsare, which implyeth perseverance: If we joyne these three vertues to our prayer, doubtlesse we shall be heard. As the second cause of our life here is, sudor vultus: (for we live arando, ac serendo) by plowing, and sowing; so the second cause of our living is another sudor vultus; which consisteth in asking, seeking, knocking: As in the sweate of our browes we eate the bread that feeds our bodies, so by these spirituall paines, and endeavours we come to the bread of life, which feedeth our soules eternally. Now if we aske that question that is made Iob 21.15. What profit shall we have if we pray unto him? It is certaine that God having cre∣ated us, may justly command us: but he doth not onely constraine us to pray by his commandement, but allure us thereunto by his promise: he saith, if we aske the life of grace, we shall obtaine it; if we seeke it, we shall finde it; thirdly, having found the way, we shall intrare ingau∣dium Domini, enter into our Masters joy, Matth. 25. If we aske, we shall have grace, whereby it shall appeare, we have not received our soule in vaine, Psal. 24. secondly, seeking we shall finde
the helpe and assistance of Gods spirit, so that we shall not receive grace in vaine, 2 Cor. 6. thirdly, by knocking, the way of entrance shall be opened unto us, so that our labour shall not be in vaine in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. as Aug. saith, Non dicitur quid dabitur, Christ nameth not what shall be given to you: to let us know, that that gift is a thing su∣pra omne nomen, above all that can be named. It is as great a gift as an earthly Prince can give, to promise halfe his King dome, Marke 6.23. but God hath promised not halfe his Kingdome, but all his Kingdome; we shall receive of God, not onely whatsoever we desire, (For desiderare nostrum, as one saith, is not terminus bonitatis Dei, our desire is not the limit or bounds of Gods good∣nesse) but above all that we can aske or thinke. Ephes. 3. In the confidence of this promise the Saints of God in the time of their misery fly unto God by prayer, as their onely ready helpe. In the dayes of Enoch, which were full of miseries and troubles, men began to call upon the name of the Lord, Gen. 4.26. and Abraham in every place where he came, being departed out of his owne Countrey, and living in exile, built an Altar, and called on the name of the Lord. Gen. 12.8. Da∣vid saith, that his onely remedy which he used against the slander and injuries of his enemies, stood herein, that he gave himselfe to prayer. Psal. 109. Iosaphat being besieged with enemies on every side, used this as a bulwarke against them: Lord we have no power to with-stand this great company that are come against us, and we know not what to doe, but our eyes are towards thee. 2 Chron. 20. The like comfort did Ezechiah find in prayer, both when Senacherib threatned his destruction, and in his sicknesse: and it is indeed the City of refuge, whither the godly in all times have used to flie for safegard from their miseries. It is rete gra∣tiarum, & situla gratiae, the net of graces, and bucket of grace, Prov. 12.2. by which a good man draweth the grace of God. The speciall gift that we can desire of God is Christ himselfe, who is Donum illud Dei. Iohn 4. Now forasmuch as indeed nothing can be a greater benefit, then to enjoy the presence of God, as the Prophet saith, Whom doe I desire in Heaven but thee? Psal. 73. and Philip saith, Ostende nobis patrem, & sufficit, Shew us the Father, and it is sufficient, Iohn 14. wee are to consider how we may come to it. Christ saith, I am the way, Iohn 14. & ego sum ostium, Iohn 10. If he be both the way and the dore, then no doubt but if God bestow Christ on us, we shall both finde the way to God, and enter into his King∣dome, by Christ, who is the dore: for the obtaining of this gift wee must be instant with God in prayer, which if we doe, he will give us that we aske: therefore Augustine saith, Domine cupiote, da mihi solumie, out non dimittamte, Lord I desire thee, give me thee alone, or else I will not let thee goe. In the third place our Saviour enlargeth the promise, lest we should doubt that God will not heare all manner of persons, that pray to him, or that he will not grant all our suites, therefore in regard of the per∣sons, Christ saith, Quisquis, whosoever asketh, receiveth, whosoe∣ver joyne these three vertues in their prayer, Confidence, Diligence, Perse∣verance, and occupie all the parts of their body in this service of God,
they shall be sure to receive the thing they aske, for the promise is made onely to them that performe Gods Commandement, petenti da∣bitur, we must aske, and we shall have it: for God useth not to cast ho∣ly things upon them that make no reckoning of them, Matth. 7. Touching the things themselves, Hee that is the truth hath said, Whatsoever you aske my Father in my name, he will give it you. Iohn 16. Therefore it is impossible he should lie, especially when he confirmeth it with an oath, as in that place, Verily, Verily, I say unto you, whatsoever you aske the Father in my name, he will give it you. But wee must take need what we aske: we may not , aske without a cause. If we aske any thing according to his will, he heareth us. 1 Iohn 5. There∣fore our prayers must be grounded upon some just cause: we may not aske any childish petition of God, for he will revert them. If we like children aske we know not what, we cannot assure our selves to bee heard, for unto such prayers he answereth, Yee aske you know not what, Matth. 20. Much lesse will he grant hurtfull petitions. As he is our Physitian, he will not give us cold drinke when we are sick of an ague, though we cry for it never so much. They that ask ven∣geance of God, and would have him to be the executioner of their wrath, shall not be heard, Prov. 26.13. but their prayer is turned to sinne, Psal. 109. So farre is it from the service of God. If the child aske fish, the Father will not give him a Scorpion, no more will God heare us in those things which we aske of him, if hee know they will be hurtfull. He onely is wise, and knoweth what is good for us, and if we receive not the thing which we aske, yet he (as Ierome saith) non accipiendo ac∣cepit, in not receiving, he hath received. Christ saith not, aske, and ye shall receive the thing ye aske, but aske and it shall be given unto you, that is the thing that you desire. We all desire those things that be good, though outwardly we are not able to discerne what is good, but God our heavenly Father, as he knoweth best what is good for us, so he will give us good things, though we be not able alwayes to aske that which is good for our selves. Secondly, we must pray in such manner and forme, as he requireth; God doth heare us many times even quando petimus malum: in as much as he doth not give us the hurtfull things, which we ignorantly aske. But he will not heare us, cum petimus malè, Yee aske, and receive not, be∣cause yee aske amisse. Iam. 4. Therefore we must beware how we stand affected at the time of prayer: if we pray coldly, without any great desire to attaine the thing we aske; we aske like swine, that esteeme not of pearles, but trample them under their feet: If we draw neare with our lips, but our hearts be farre from God, Esa. 29. then it is not like we shall be heard: If we pray as Peter, and the other Disciples, who being heavie. with sleepe, asked they knew not what, Luke 9.32. we can∣not receive the truth. But if, as Moses speakes, we seeke the Lord with all our heart, Deut. 4.29. If we doe with Paul, orare spiritu, & orare mente, 1 Cor. 14. then we may conceive hope to be heard, for the com∣mandement to aske is given Cordi, non pulmoni, to the heart, not to the lungs; Id quod cor non facit, non fit, that which the heart doth not, is not done.
Secondly, touching the manner, as with fervencie, so we must pray with reverence, not having our heads covered, as we see many doe: which behaviour, how rude, and unbeseeming it is, we may easily dis∣cerne, as the Prophet speakes, Offer this kinde of behaviour to thy Lord or Master, and see whether he will accept it? Mal. 1. If thou, having a suite to an earthly Prince, darest not speake but upon thy knees with all submission; how much more ought we to reverence the Lord God, in comparison of whom all the Princes in the earth are but Crickets and Grashoppers, Esa. 40. Therefore the man∣ner of our prayer to God must be in all reverence. Solomon prayed upon his knees, 2 Chron. 6. Daniel fell downe up∣on his knees, Dan. 6. So did Saint Peter, Acts 9. So Paul, Ephes. 3.14. And not onely men upon earth, but the glorious spirits in Hea∣ven cast themselves and their crownes downe before him that sits upon the Throne, Apoc. 4. Yea Jesus Christ the Sonne of God fell downe upon his knees, and prayed to his Father, Luke 22. & exauditus prop∣ter reverentiam. Heb. 5. So did Paul serve God , Acts 20.19. Secondly, If we would obtaine any thing at Gods hand, we must not onely aske it, but seeke for it. He that having prayed, sits still without adding his endeavour, shall not receive the thing he prayes for, for he must not onely orare, but lahorare, pro quibus enim o∣randum, pro eis laborandum est: to this end the Apostle would have us to pull up our faint hands and weake knees, Heb. 12. And when we have asked grace, we must be carefull that we our selves be not wanting unto grace, as well as we were carefull that grace should not be wanting unto us. This diligence is noted in the word petite, which as it is used in the first place, so also it signifieth to goe to, or to hit, and knocke: so that it containeth all the three vertues that are required unto prayer, but for our instruction our Saviour hath expressed them in three severall termes. Thirdly, having found the way, we may not rest there, there is a dore whereby we must enter, and that shall not stand open for us against we come, we must knocke at it. It pleaseth God to entreate us, 2 Cor. 5. to seeke and finde us, when we are lost, Luke 15. He stands and knockes at our dore, Apoc. 3. Therefore as Moses speakes in Deut. We are to con∣sider what he doth require at our hands. The service that we owe him, is likewise to entreate him, to seeke for grace at him, to knocke continually, till he open the gate of his mercie. If God heare us not so soone as we aske, we may not cease to knocke, as Saul did, who because that God answered him not, neither by dreames, nor by Urim, nor Prophet, asked counsell of a Witch, 1 Sam. 28. Importunity, as our Saviour speakes Luke 11. is a meanes whereby often times men obtaine their suites. The unjust Judge will be content to heare the Widowes cause at length, even because he would bee rid of cumber: if she be earnest with him, she shall at last obtaine her suite by importunity: So howsoever God be not inclined to doe us good, and have his eares open to our prayers, yet he is much delighted with our importunate suites. If the unjust Judge that neither feared God, nor reverenced man,
may be overcome with importunate suite, much more will God re∣venge them which give not over their suites, but cry to him night and day, Luke 18. Let us not be weary of well doing; for in due season we shall reape, if we faint not. These conditions being performed, that we seek in the desire of our heart and in humility: secondly, that we be not wanting to grace, but worke with it: thirdly, if we doe it with continuance, not giving over, then we shall finde it true, which Christ saith, Omnis qui petit accipit. The summe is, as when God said, Seek ye my face, David answered, Thy face O Lord I will seeke, Psal. 27. So when Christ saith to us, aske; our answer must be; we will, at least dispose our selves thereunto, especially seeing he doth not onely praeire exemplo; but dicere ut petas, seeing he doth not onely by his commandement, permitiere, but prae∣cipere ut petas. Lastly, seeing by his promise he doth not onely allure them, ut pe∣tani, but doth minari si non petas, threaten if thou aske not: for if we aske of any but from him, he is angry, as he was with the King of Israel, that required of Baal-zebub when he should recover, 2 Reg. 1. Is there not a God in Israel? And Christ was offended with his Disciples for the neglect of this duty. Hitherio ye have asked nothing, Iohn. 16. And when we come to aske of God, we must not cease our suite, if he grant us not our suite at the first; but say with Iacob, Non dimittam te, Gen. 32. We must be instant, as the Canaanite was, Mat. 15. We must be earnest, as he that came at midnight to borrow bread, Luke 11. and im∣portunate, as the Widow with the Iudge, Luke 18. and then we may assure our selves of a comfortable effect of prayers.
THE FOVRTH SERMON. ROM. 8.26. Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not what to pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it selfe maketh request for us with sighs, which cannot be uttered. OUt of Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 3. we may see first, that of our selves we are not sufficient at all to do good: and that all good comes from the Father of lights, Jam. 1.17. and that, in that regard, we must aske, and receive at his hands from whom it comes, Matth. 7.7. Now the Apostle meeteth with an∣other difficulty, which is, how we may pray: for as we cannot performe any good thing of our selves, unlesse God minister power, so we know not how to aske this grace at his hands. Therefore to answer that question of the Disciples, which desired that Christ should teach them how to pray, Luk. 11. the Apostle saith, that because we know not what to pray for, as we ought, therefore the Spirit doth helpe our infirmities. The Apostle begins at our infirmities, which he laies downe in such sort, as wee may plainly see that our defects and wants are many: for as there are infirmities of the body, which the Scripture calls the infirmities of Egypt, Deut. 7.15. Whereunto the Saints of God are subject as well as other, as the Apostle speakes of Timo∣thy, that he had Crebras infirmitates, 1 Tim. 5. So the soule also hath certaine infirmities; and that is the infirinity whereof the A∣postle speaketh; for albeit our soule be the stronger part, as our Saviour speaketh, when he saith, The spirit indeed is strong, Matth. 26. yet it is subject to many infirmities, and weaknesses, when it doubteth of Gods mercies, saying: Will the Lord absent himselfe for ever? hath God forgotten to be gracious? which the Prophet acknow∣ledgeth to be signes of his infirmities, Psal. 77.10. And as the spi∣rit is weake, so there is a weaknesse of conscience, 1 Cor. 8.7. and no marvel if there be such infirmities in the bodies also; for life it selfe is but weake, in regard whereof it is said of God, that hereby hee is content to spare us, for that hee remembreth that wee are but dust,
Psal. 103. and considereth, that we are but even as the wind that passeth away, Psal. 78. The difference is that, as Christ saith, Haec infirmitas non est ad mortem, Joh. 11. and the dropsie, palsie, and such like diseases, and infirmities of body are not mortall. The second thing which the Apostle teacheth is, that howsoe∣ver we be, as the Apostle speaketh, compassed with infirmities, Heb. 5.5. yet they are not past cure, for the Spirit helpeth our infirmitie so that albeit we are subject to fall through weaknesse, yet there is hope concerning this thing, Esay 10.2. and our errour may be healed, Dan. 4. For there is balme in Gilead, Jer. 8. which serveth to cure all our spirituall diseases. Now the cure of the infirmities of our soule is not performed by any strength of our owne, nor by our owne spirit, but by the Spirit of God: for so long as our infirmities are but bodily, the spirit of man will sustaine them, and there is helpe to be found; but when the spirit it selfe is wounded, then who can help it? Prov. 18. The spirit of man must have helpe from a higher thing then it selfe, as from the Spirit of God, which onely is able to mini∣ster helpe. The Apostle ascribeth to the Spirit of God two benefits, first, in regard of the life to come: secondly, in respect of this present life: For the one, as he is the Spirit of Adoption, assures us of our estate in the life to come; namely, that as God hath adopted us to be his children, so we shall be fellow-heires with his owne Sonne, of his heavenly kingdome. Touching the other, because we are subject in this life, to fall through infirmitie, we have this benefit from him, that he stayes and upholds us, and therefore is called spiritus . As our infirmities are manifold, whether we respect the body, o the soule, so the weaknesse and defects of our souls appeareth, not onely in good things, which wee cannot do, because the flesh ever lusteth against the spirit, so that we cannot do the things that we would, Gal. 5. but in evill things, which we should beare and are not able. The evill things that we should beare, are not onely afflictions, and the crosses which we are subject to, which the Apostle proveth to be more tolerable, because they are not worthy of the glory to come: but dilatio boni, wherein we need the vertue of magnani∣mity, because it is a great crosse, as the Wiseman saith, Spes quae differtur affligit animam Prov. 13. Touching which affliction and crosses, because in this life we cannot obtaine that which the Pro∣phet wisheth, namely, to fly away (as it were) with the wings of a dove, that sowe might be at rest, Psal. 55. therefore we must betake our selves to the mourning of the Dove, Esay 38. waiting patiently when God will give us time to escape. The meanes and wayes whereby the Spirit doth helpe us, are many; but he onely meaneth prayer; to teach us, that howsoever it be not esteemed as it ought, yet it is the chiefe prop, and princi∣pall pillar which the holy Ghost useth to strengthen our weaknesse.
Therefore when the Apostle willeth, that first of all, prayers and sup∣plications should be made for Kings and all in authority, 1 Tim. 2. the reason is, as Augustine noteth, because both mans salvation, the honesty of life, knowledge of the truth, quietnesse of kingdomes, duties of Kings, and whatsoever tendeth to the publique benefit, commeth by and from Prayer: So that not onely the Church, and spirituall matters, but the common-wealth, and temporall things are stayed upon the pillar of Prayer. Wherefore as prayer is aspeciall helpe: so we are not onely ex∣horted by religion to use it, but nature it selfe binds us unto it: for so long as we can either devise any help of our selves, or receive it from any other, so long we leane upon our owne staffe; but when all help failes, then we flie to prayer as our last refuge: and there∣fore when God is said to feed the ravens that call upon him, Psal. 147. that cry of theirs is the voyce of nature; so that albeit men for a time, leane to their staies and help, yet there is a day, when all flesh shall be made to come unto him, who onely it is that heareth prayer, Psal. 65. that is, when they lye howling upon their beds, Hos. 7. then they shall be faine to call upon God for help: so, howsoever Pharaoh in the pride of his heart say, Who is the Lord that I should heare his voyce? Exod. 5. Yet he made him come to him, when he plagued him with thun∣dring, and raine, and haile, which made him send to Moses and Aaron, that they might pray unto God for him, Exod. 9.28. But here the Apostle meaneth the prayer of the spirit, which al∣waies reckons prayer to be the first and chiefest help in all trouble, and not the last, as the prayer of the flesh doth. Therefore as we must discerne simulacra virtutum, from vertues themselves, and that which is naturall, from that which is of grace; so we must distinguish the prayer of the spirit, from the carnall prayer; and be sure that the vertues which we have, if they be any, are not naturall, as those in many of the Heathen, but that they pro∣ceed from grace, and the working of Gods Spirit. To the right framing of our prayer it is required, that we do not onely orare mente & spiritu, 1 Cor. 14. but as the Psalmist saith of the praising of God; so we pray to God with understanding, Ps. 47. Both our heart, our understanding, our affection must concurre in making intercession to God. For a second point, if prayer be a stay to us in our infirmities, then we must be carefull that our prayers be not faint and weake, but that they proceed from the fervencie and vehemencie of the spirit, for as Christ saith, If the light that is in thee be darknesse, how great is that darknesse? Matth. 6. If our prayer be nothing else but in∣firmity, as it is for the most part, how great is our infirinity? But the Apostle sheweth our weaknesse in prayer, in that he de∣nyeth men two things: first, that we know not what to pray for: se∣condly, that we know not how to pray: for both these defects we have a double supply; for Christ, as he is the light of the world, Joh. 8. hath directed us what to pray for, by that forme of prayer which he hath prescribed unto us; and the holy Ghost, who is compared
to the wind that bloweth where it will, instructeth us how to pray, for that it stirreth up our affections, so that we pray with fervencie of spirit, and utter our desires unto God with sighes that cannot be ex∣pressed: for as a man that travelleth must have a knowledge of his way: so he cannot take a journey in hand, except he have a good wind to set him forward: to this end we are taught, not onely by the wisedome of God the Father, what to pray for, but from the power of his Spirit we have those motions kindled in us, whereby our prayer is made fervent. Touching the persons, whom the Apostle chargeth with this two∣fold ignorance, they are not the common sort of men, but even the Apostles themselves, for he includes himselfe in the words, We know not: So Christ said, not to the Heathen men, Nescitis quid pe∣titis, Matth. 20. but to his Disciples, James and John: so that this is generally true of all men, that they know not what to aske, , as they ought, except Gods Spirit help them. It is true that we have a diffused knowledge of good and evill, and a desire to be partakers of the one, and to be delivered from the o∣ther, for Ignoti nulla cupido; but we must have a distinct knowledge, that is, whether the thing we desire be good or no: There is an e∣state of life, which is contemplative, and another Active, and our infirmity is such, as we know not which of them to take our selves unto, but oftentimes we thinke that course of life to be good for us, which albeit it be good in it selfe, yet turns to our overthrow: so that when we desire of God to place us in any such course of life, we speake after the manner of men, Rom. 6. taking it for a contented course for our selves, whereas it falls not out so. This will appeare more plainly, both in things temporall, and spirituall. The sonnes of Zebedee in their suit to Christ, Matth. 10. had a desire to obtaine some good thing at our Saviours hands, and they could not bethinke themselves of any thing better than to be exalted to some place of honour, and therefore desired that one of them may fit at his right hand, and the other at his left hand: but Christ told them, they asked they knew not what, for honour it not fit for all men: they were the Disciples of Christ, and were to drinke of the cup of affliction, and therefore willed them to be mindfull of it, and not to affect that which was not for their good. Likewise in spirituall things we may erre, and hereof we have example in Saint Paul, whom a man would thinke to have know∣ledg enough, so that he would not aske the thing that was not good for him; he had the messenger of Sathan sent to buffet him, and hee prayed that it might be removed from him, which seemeth to have have beene a reasonable petition, but God answered him, that hee asked he knew not what; it was more necessary for him to be exercised withthe temptations, then not: and vvhereas he desires to be so pure, as not once to be driven to evill; God told him, that his grace was suf∣ficient for him, for it was his will to perfect his strength in his weaknesse, 2 Cor. 12. Therefore if vve have any revelation from flesh and blood, Matth. 6. that persvvadeth us, that this or that is good for us, vve
must know that all such are false, and that we must suffer our selves to be directed by Gods Spirit, who knoweth better what is good for us, then we our selves. But to the end that we should not erre, the Spirit of God maketh intercession for us, and therefore we may be sure, that although we know not how to pray, in such sort as may please God; yet the Spirit of God, who knoweth the secrets of the counsell of God, will make that prayer for us, which shall be both for our good, and also ac∣cording to Gods will, 1 Cor. 2. It cannot be verified of the holy Ghost, which is God, that hee either prayeth or groaneth, but the Apostles meaning is, that he makes us to make intercession, and hath that operation in our hearts, that he makes us to groane. So when the Apostle, Galat. 4.6. sayes, that the Spirit cries Abba, Father, his meaning is, that by it wee cry Abba, Father, Rom. 8.15. Againe, the Spirit is said to make intercession for us, because it sheds abroad the love of God in our hearts, Rom. 5. for from the love of God proceeds this love and affection in us, that we desire him and all his blessings, and therefore make our prayers to him to that end, which is nothing else, but explicatio desiderii: so that we do not so soone desire any good thing, but we are ready to pray for it: So sayes the Prophet, Lord thou knowest my desire, and my groaning is not hid from thee, Psal. 36. Likewise when our desire is delayed, so that we obtaine not the thing wee would have, then wee are cast into sorrow, which is wrought in us by the Spirit which is in us, and by prayer; for it is the Spirit of God which kindleth this fervencie of desire in prayer, as Augustine saith, Tepida est omnis oratio, quam non praevenit inspi∣ratio, every prayer is luke-warme, which is not prevented with in∣spiration. The first thing that the Spirit of God workes in us, is, that he in∣clineth our hearts to pray to God for the good which wee lacke, which is a thing not in our owne power; and therefore David thankes God that he found in his heart to pray, 2 Sam. 7. for when we would settle our selves to pray, Nihil tam longè abest à nobis, quàm orare ut decet. Now being thus untoward in our selves, the Spirit of God comes and helps our infirmitie, and as the Psalmist saith, He opens our hearts to pray: By this meanes it comes to passe, that a man having his affections cold, shall on a sudden feele in himselfe a desire to pray, and shall say, Domine, paratum est cor meum, Psal. 108. Secondly, whereas the Lord saith, Open thy mouth and I will fill it, Psal. 87. We find this infirmity in our selves, that when wee have found an heart to pray, yet we cannot open our mouthes: and there∣fore David sayes, Open thou my lips, Psal. 51. and so must we sue to Christ, that he will give us words to speake; for God hath a key both to our tongue and will. Thirdly, having begun to pray, that falls out many times which David complaines of, Cor meum dereliquit me, Psal. 40. So our heart
will be gone, and our mind will be wandring abroad, not regarding what our tongue speakes. It falls out often, that as Abraham had his sacrifice ready, he was no sooner gone from it, but the fowles of the aire did light upon it, Gen. 15. So while we offer up to God the calves of our lips, Hos. 14. and our course is past, Psal. 141. it comes to passe through our wan∣tonnesse many foule thoughts be got upon our sacrifice, and di∣spoyle it; and the remedie that the spirit of God affords us against this infirmity, is, that it calls us home, and tels us, we are kneeling before the Majesty of God, and therefore ought to take heed what we speake in his presence. Therefore Bernard to keepe his mind in the meditation of God, when he would pray began thus, Let God arise, and let all his enemies be scattered, Psal. 68. and Augustine to the same purpose began thus, Save mee, O God, for the waters over-flow, Psal. 64. Fourthly, though we have our meditation still on God, yet wee shall find in our selves, that our spirits are dull and heavie, and have no manner of vigour to help our infirmity; herein the Spirit helps and puts these meditations in our hearts, whereby it kindleth, as the Prophet saith, a fire burning within us: so that God shall be faine to say to us, as he did to Moses, Dimitte me, let mee alone, Exod. 32. Fifthly, albeit we pray but faintly, and have not that supply of fervencie that is required in prayer, yet we have comfort, that ever when we most faint in prayer, there are of Gods Saints that pray for us with all instancie, by which it comes to passe, that being all but one body, their prayers tend to our good as well as their owne, for the faithfull, howsoever they be many, and dispersed into di∣vers corners of the world, yet they are but one dowe; and as they are the members of one body, so they pray not privately for them∣selves, but for the whole body of the Church: so that the weak∣nesse of one member is supplyed by the fervent and earnest prayer of the other. Therefore when the Apostle saith, The Spirit maketh intercession for us, gemitibus inenarrabilibus, Augustine asketh, what groanings are these? are they thine, or mine? no; they are the groa∣nings of the Church, sometime in Mee, sometime in Thee, and therefore Samuel (to shew that the Ministers of God do the people no lesse good when they pray for them, then when they teach them) said, God forbid I should cease to pray for you, and so sinne against God, 1 Sam. 12.23. for he was an help to them, not onely in preaching to them, but in offering burnt offerings for them. Therefore the people pray to Esay, Lift thou up thy prayer for us, For as the offering of the Minister is to put the people in mind, 2 Pet. 1. so they are Gods re∣membrancers: they are Angels as well ascending upwards by their prayer in the behalfe of the people, as descending to teach them the will of God. But if the Spirit that quailes in us, do quaile also in the whole Church; yet we have a supply from the teares, which our head Christ shed on his Church, Luk. 19.41. and from the strong cries which he uttered to God his Father, in the daies of his flesh, Heb. 5.7.
by which he ceaseth not to make request to God still for us, so that albeit the hardnesse of our heart be such as we cannot pray for our selves, nor the Church for us, yet we may say, Conqueror tibi Do∣mine, lachrymis Jesu Christi. Lastly, because we cannot pray, , we have two helpes al∣so in that behalfe from the Spirit: first, that the Spirit teacheth us to submit our will unto Gods will, because as we are men, so we speake after the manner of men, Rom. 6. This submission we learne from the example of Christ his prayer to God his Father, Transeat calix isle à me, Let this cup passe from mee; yet not my will, but thy will be done, Matth. 26. So David qualified his desire, If I have found favour with the Lord, he will bring mee a∣gaine, but if not, let him do what seemeth good to himseife, 2 Sam. 15. Secondly, when wee looke backe upon our prayer, and see, that by reason of want of fervencie and zeale, it is but smoaking flaxe, then the Spirit stirreth us up to desire God, that according to his promise, Esay 42. He will not quench it, but that his grace may be suffi∣cient for us, and that he will make perfect his strength in our weaknesse, 2. Cor. 12. The other thing wherein the Spirit helpeth our infirmities, is, that he worketh in our hearts certaine groanes that cannot be expressed, which is a plaine opposition to drousie and sloathfull prayer: for a devout prayer, plus constat gemitibus, quàm sermonibus; it is not fine phrases and goodly sentences, that commend our prayer, but the fervencie of the spirit from whom it proceeds. It is well if wee doe orare mente & spiritu, 1 Cor. 14. but if our prayers do draw out sighs and groanings from our hearts, it is the better, fr then it appeares that our prayer is not a breath, comming from the lungs, but from the very depth of the heart, as the Psal∣mist saies of his prayer, De profundis, out of the deepes have I cryed to thee, O Lord, Psal. 130. What the Apostle meaneth by groanings which cannot be expressed, is plaine, for when the griefe of the heart is greatest, then are wee least able to utter it, as appeares by the Shunamite, 2 Reg. 4. Not∣withstanding as it was God that wakened in us the desire of good things; so though we be not able to utter them in words, yet hee doth heare, etiam vocem in silentio. There are mutae preces, & tamen clamantes: such as are the silent prayers of Moses, which he made in his heart to God, though hee expressed it not in words; to this God said, Cur clamas ad me? Exod. 14. Now as Martha was loath to serve alone, and therefore would have Mary to helpe her, Luk. 10. So the spirit doth not pray alone, but doth , beares together, or helpes us, whereby the Apo∣stle gives us to understand, that man must have a co-operation with Gods Spirit. So we see the Saints of God, albeit they acknowledge prayer to be the work of Gods Spirit in them; for as much as we are not able to call Jesus Lord, but by the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 12. Yet they are not themselves idle, but do adde endeavour, as David, Lord open
thou my lips: So he affirmes of himselfe; I have opened my lips, and drew in my breath, Psal. 119. But that we may have the help of Gods Spirit (without which our endeavour is but vaine) wee must still thinke upon our owne weaknesse, and humble our selves in the sight of God, as the Publi∣can did, Luk. 18. So the Spirit of God will rest upon us, as the Lord promiseth, Esay 66. For this end fasting is commended to the Church, for it hath beene an use alwaies among the faithfull, to humble their soules with fasting, Psal. 35. Secondly, as we must pray in faith, so we must also be charitably affected to our brethren, first, by forgiving them, if we will have for∣givenesse at the hands of our heavenly Father, Mar. 11.25. Secondly, by giving them that need; this commended Cornelius his prayer, that he gave almes, Act. 10. If our prayer be thus qualified, we shall have Gods Spirit to assist us in prayer; whose help if we obtaine, and unto our prayer adde a patient expectation, so that we be not in hast to obtaine the thing we crave, but we wait upon Gods leasure, as the Prophet saith, Qui crediderit, non festinabit, Esay 28. He that beleeveth makes not hast, thus we shall find that the Lord will not cast out our prayer.
THE FIFTH SERMON. LUKE 11.1. And so it was, that as he was praying in a certaine place, when he cea∣sed, one of his Disciples said unto him, Master, teach us to pray, as John also taught his Disciples. WHich words do bring us to that forme of invoca∣tion, to which by degrees wee have beene ap∣proaching; for first out of Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 3. we learned, that of our selves, wee are not able so much as to thinke a good thought, much more un∣able to do that which is good: Secondly, from Saint James, that albeit we have no power in our selves, yet our want may be supplied by the Father of lights: Thirdly, that therefore to the end we may obtaine this abi∣lity, we are to seeke for it by prayer, as Christ counselleth: Petite, & dabitur vobis. But then wee meete with another difficulty, and that is as Paul confesseth, Rom. 8. that albeit grace may be obtained at the hands of God by prayer; yet we know not how or what to aske, except the Spirit of God supply our infirmities: and therefore as then it was said, that as the Spirit of God maketh intercession for us, so here the same Spi∣rit doth move the Disciples to seeke for a forme of prayer of Christ, whereby we are taught, that if we know not how or what to pray for, our duty is to repaire to Christ, with the Disciples, that he would direct us. This Text hath two parts: first, the Petition of the Apostles; second∣ly, Christs answer thereunto, vers. 2. In the first part we are to consider, first, the occasion of the Petition: secondly, the petition it selfe, Domine doce nos. Touching the first point, the Disciples tooke occasion of this pe∣tition from Christ praying, for seeing him not onely pray now, but at sundry other times, presently they conceived thus within themselves, that doubtlesse prayer was a matter of great inportance, and a meanes of no small benefit, otherwise Christ would never have prayed so often.
Before we considered two speciall motives to prayer: The first was Christs commandement: the second Christs promise, Matth. 7.7. Aske and it shall be given you; and here againe we have other two motives: first, the provocation of Christs example, whom the Disciples found praying in a certaine place: secondly, the mould and set form of prayer, which he hath given us for our better direction, in this du∣ty, Say, Our Father, &c. Concerning the first of these, no doubt the examples of holy men ought to move us to pray, much more when Jesus Christ him∣selfe, who is the Holy of Holies, Dan. 9.24. doth by his owne exam∣ple stirre us up hereunto. King David, when he had his Crowne pulled off his head, by his owne sonne, and was driven out of his Kingdome, said to the Priest, If it please God he can bring mee againe, and shew mee both the Arke, and the Tabernacle, 2 Sam. 15.25. Declaring hereby, that he was more carefull to have the liberty to come into the house of prayer, to powre out his supplication before the Lord, as hee was wont, then to be restored to his Crown, so great account did he make of prayer. The like account did the holy Prophet Daniel make, for when by the commandement of the King it was proclamed, that whosoe∣ver made any petition to God or men, save onely to the King, should be throwne into the Lyons Denne; he chose rather to adventure his life, then not to pray, Dan. 6. Whereby we may gather, both how acceptable to God, and also how necessary for us, this duty of prayer, and invocation is: So that these examples of these holy men, ought to be of no small efficacie to perswade us hereunto; and especially if we consider the example of our Saviour Jesus Christ, who is greater then either David or Daniel. Of whom it is reported, that he went into a solitary place alone, not onely in the morning, Mark. 1. but also in the evening, Joh. 6. not for an houre, but to spend the whole night in prayer, Luk. 6.12. he prayed not onely in deserto, which was a place of distresse, but in horto, Joh. 18.2. which was a place of pleasure: as hee prayed when hee was in his agony, Luk. 22.46. so also, when he was to be made King, Joh. 6. to teach us, that as well in prosperity as in adversity, we have need to pray, for hereunto our Saviour doth exhort us in plaine words, not onely by precept, Matth. 7. Luk. 21.40. Pray that yee enter not into tempta∣tion, because prayer is a meane to keepe us from evill, both à malo culpae, & à malo poenae; as well from sinne, as from all manner of plagues, which are the effects of sinne; as one saith, there would none adversity come upon us, unlesse there were perversity in us: but se∣condly, by promise of reward, Pray unto your Father in secret, and he will reward you openly, Matth. 6.6. We think it sufficient if earthly Princes will vouchsafe to hearken to our prayer; but God promiseth us more, he will reward us for the same. Therefore seing God both commands us to pray, and pro∣miseth to grant us that we pray for: seeing he doth not only by his example teach us, that Prayer is requisite, but prescribes us also a Form of Prayer; we ought not to be negligent in this duty.
Besides, out of this occasion, we are to consider this, That Christ prayed though he needed nothing, as hee was the onely begotten Sonne of God, he was full of grace and truth, Joh. 1.16. Hee had received the Spirit without measure, Joh. 3. Yet for all that he prayed. There are three uses of prayer: First, there is an Use of Necessity: for God hath left prayer to be our City of resuge, to the end, that when all meanes faile, wee should slie unto God by prayer. In which regard the Wise man saith, Prov. 18. Turris altissima est nomen Domini. But Christians should have a further use of this duty: for unreasonable creatures, as Lyons, and Ravens, are provoked (in re∣gard of their necessity) to call upon God. Secondly, the Use of Duty: for prayer is an offering: The Pro∣phet compareth it to Incense, Psal. 41. a Reasonable service, Rom. 12. Our Spirituall sacrifice, 1 Pet. 2. It is compared to Incense, which gi∣veth a sweete smell to all our workes, words, and thougths, which other∣wise would stinke, and be offensive to the Majesty of God. This use of prayer we have not onely for the supply of our wants in the time of adversity, but at all times, as Job saith, Chap. 27. Thirdly, there is the Use of Dignity, when a man doth abstract himselfe from the earth, and by often prayer doth grow into ac∣quaintance, and familiarity with God: for this is a great Dignity, that flesh and blood shall be exalted so much, as to have continuall conference with God. Now as Christ was the Sonne of God, he had no cause to pray in any of these three respects, but as he was Principium omnis crea∣turae, Col. 1. as he was the head of the Church, Eph. 1. he had use of prayer in these three respects: as he was a creature, he stood in need of those things, which other creatures of God were wont to desire. Againe, as he was a creature, though the chiefe of all creatures, hee ought this duty of Invocation unto God his Creator: and as hee called on God in these two respects, so he was heard, as Christ speakes; I know thou hearest mee alwaies, Joh. 11.41. But as he was in the state of a Creature, the last use doth most of all concerne him; for which cause having told Martha, that one thing was needfull, Luk. 10. because the obtaining of the same is not in our power, hee presently withdraweth himselfe unto prayer in the beginning of this Chapter, teaching us to do the like. Before we come to the Petition, these words ut cessavit, are to be considered: for there are some with Saul, will call for the Arke, and will presently cry, Away with it, 1 Sam. 14. that is, will begin their prayers, and will breake them off in the midst upon any occasion: but the Spirit of God doth teach us to be of another mind, when he willeth us to avoid whatsoever may be a meanes to interrupt our prayer, 1 Pet. 3. The Disciples forbare to make their petitions to Christ, till hee had done praying, and therefore from their example we are to learne, so to settle our selves to prayer, as that nothing should cause us to breake off, and so to regard others that are occupied in this duty, as by no meanes to interrupt them.
In the Petition we are to consider, first, the thing that they desire: secondly, the reason why they make this Petition. First, whereas they make request that Christ would teach them how to pray, they do by implication acknowledge as much as Saint Paul speaks of, Rom. 8. that they know not what to aske: not that they were without that ge∣nerall institution which we have from nature, that is, to desire that which is good, but because they know not how to limit their de∣sire: as in temporall things, they know not whether it were good for them to be the Chiefe men in a Kingdome; that was the ignorance of the sonnes of Zebedee, Matth. 20. In spirituall matters they will be like Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 12. who thought it good for him to be saved from the temptation, whereas God told him, that his grace was sufficient for him; and yet that the temptation should continue still. As James and John made a request ignorantly for themselves, Matth. 20. So they make another in the behalfe of Christ, Luk. 9. Lord, wilt thou that wee command that sire come downe from Heaven? and therefore were reproved by Christ for it: and as we see both by examples of Christs owne Disciples, that we may pray amisse, Jam. 4. So in the old Testament, David saith, We may pray so, as prayer (which is a part of Gods service) shall be turned into sinne, Psalm. 109. For prayer is nothing else but an interpreter of our desire, as one saith: Ea petimus quae appetimus: and as our desires are many times not onely vaine and unprositable, but dangerous and hurtfull: so it fals out likewise, that our prayers are vaine, and so are turned into sinne. The Disciples therefore being privie to their owne infirmities in this case, are stirred up by Gods Spirit, to seeke for a perfect forme of prayer of Christ, in whom all the treasures of wisedome and know∣ledge are hid, Col. 2. And this they do to the end they might not faile, either in the matter, or manner of their prayers, and that, having received a platforme of prayer from Christ, they might use it as a patterne and complement of all their petitions. The Pharisees were great prayers, Mat. 6. but they under a pretence of long prayers did devour Widows houses, Matth. 23. and therefore their prayers turned into sinne. The Heathen used also to make long prayers, Matth. 6.7. but they erred, for they thonght that they should be heard for their long babling. Therefore the Disciples, that they might not pray amisse, do make their request to our Saviour: Lord teach us to pray: which Petition was therefore acceptable to Christ, because profitable for themselves: for thus he professeth of himselfe: Ego Dominus Deus tuus, docens te utilia, Esay 48.17. Not subtilia, (saith August.) So Saint Paul confirmeth, that he with-held nothing from the Church, that was profitable for them to know, Act. 20. The world is full of curious questions: The Pharisees move que∣stions totching matrimony. The Sadduces asked, what should come to passe after the end of the world, whether we shall know one another, Matth. 22. These were unprofitable and curious, the inventions of flesh and blood, not those that proceeded from the holy Ghost: The Disciples question
is here, how they may serve God, and how they may performe that duty, for which they came into the world; Curious things are those abscondita, which belong to God, with which we may not meddle, Deut. 29. we must enquire of things which concerne us. Of the sons of Cain and Abell, who were inventors of tents, some devised to worke in brasse and copper: others found out Musicke, as they thought it most profitable for the publique-weale. The trade that the sons of Seth used and professed at the same time, that they thought to be most profitable, was the calling upon the name of the Lord, Gen. 4. and they were occupied therein, as an Art no lesse profitable then the building of houses, or making of armour; and ever since howsoever the worldido addict themselves to other things, that serve to make most for their private profit: yet the Church and City of God are busie in studying how they may by prayer receive mercy, and ob∣taine grace, to help them in time of need, Heb. 4. The reason whereby they urge their suit is, as John taught his Disciples; which reason in the judgement of flesh and blood, might seeme of small efficacie; for whereas John confessed himselfe unwor∣thy to unloose Christs shooe, Mat. 3. he might have tooke it in scorne that the Disciples of John should teach him his duty after the example of John: but Christ to commend his humility, is content both in his preaching and praying to follow John: John said, Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, Matth. 3. And Christ, though he were the wisedome of God, and furnished with all manner of doctrine, yet was content to borrow that sentence from John Baptist, as appeareth in his Sermon, Matth. 7. So he was content to follow him in prayer; So that the example of Johns diligence in teaching his Disciples that duty was a motive to him to do the like unto him. Whereas the Disciples of Christ tell him, that John was wont to teach his Disciples to pray, they speake by experience, for divers of them were before-time Disciples unto John, as appears Joh. 1.37. The ordinary prayer that was used in the Synagogue among the Jewes, was that prayer which is intituled the prayer of Moses, Psal. 90. and as Christ saith, The Law and the Prophets were untill John, Luk. 16. So that prayer of Moses continued in the Church of the Jewes, untill Johns time; when he was come, he used another forme of prayer which endured to the comming of Christ, who having taught his Disciples a third forme of prayer, Johns prayer ceased; the reason was, because as the Apostle speaketh of Moses, Heb. 3. Albeit both Moses, the Prophets, and John, were faithfull in the house of God, yet they were but servants, but Christ was that Sunne of righteousnesse, and the day-starre, that was long before promised, and therefore seeing he being come, hath taught a more perfect forme of prayer, hee beeing onely wise, all other formes ought to give place to his. Secondly, according to the rule of John Baptist, a man can receive nothing except it be given him from above, Joh. 3.2. Then if wee will obtaine any thing, we must put up our supplications to God for it; but in making our prayers we may offend: for he that is of the earth is earthly, and speakes earthly things: Therefore John, according to
his owne confession, may mingle some corruption with his prayer: But Christ that is from heaven is above all, Joh. 3. and therefore if he teach us to pray, it shall be in such sort as God shall accept it: and for this cause Christs prayer doth excell the prayers both of Moses and John, and all the Prophets. Touching which forme of prayer, as before he had given them an abridgement of that obedience, which the law requireth, Luk. 16. So here he doth briefly set downe a forme of prayer. As it is said of him, that grace and truth is by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1. so when in the other Chapter, he had shewed them the truth of the Law: so now he tels them that grace must be sought for of God by prayer, whereby wee may be able to obey that Law. The suit of the Disciples being both profitable to themselves, and no subtile question, Christ is content presently to grant their re∣quest, and therefore his answer is, When yee pray, say, &c. Wherein we are to observe two things: first, whereas there are certaine practicke spirits, that crosse that saying of our Saviour, and tell us, we may not use this prayer which Christ gave, saying, Our Father: but that we are to frame our prayers of our owne, as our state shall require, these words are a contradiction to their ne dicite. Christ himselfe hath commanded us to use this forme of prayer; and therefore we may be bold to say: Our Father; whatsoever pray∣ers we make of our selves, they have some earth, because wee our selves are of the earth; but the prayer instituted by Christ is free from all imperfection, because it was penned from him that was from above, Joh. 3. In this prayer there is not one word wanting, that should be put in, nor any word more then ought to be. Therefore both in regard of the Author of it, and the Matter, we may safely use this forme of Prayer. Secondly, these words are an opposition betwixt Cogitate, and Dicite. It is not enough to thinke in our minds this prayer, but our prayers must be Vocal; so that, as in this Christ casteth out the dumbe devill; so here he casteth out the dumbe prayer. It is true, that the life of prayer and thanksgiving standeth herein, That we sing praises with under standing, Psal. 47. that we do or are mente & spiritu, 1 Cor. 14. Herein stands the soule of prayer; but as we our selves have not onely a soule, but a body also: so our prayer must have a body: Our tongue must be the penne of a ready writer, Psalm. 45. We must at the time of prayer, bow our knees, as our Saviour Christ did, Luk. 22.41. We must lift up our hearts with our hands, Lam. 3. Our eyes must be lift up to God, that dwelleth in the heaven, Ps. 123. And as David sayes, Psal. 135. All our bones must be exercised in prayer. The reason why we must use this forme of prayer, is taken from the skill of him that hath penned it, and from his favour with God. We are not acquainted with the phrases of the Court, and we know not what sure to make unto God. But Christ, who is our Ad∣vocate, in whom all treasures of wisedome and knowledge are hid, Col. 2.
He can forme us a bill, and make such a petition for us, as shall be acceptable at the hands of God: None knowes the things of God, but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. So none knowes what pleaseth God, but Christ, who hath received the Spirit from God: and in this regard, as he knowes Gods will best, so he is best able to frame a forme of prayer, so as it may be agreeable to Gods will. Secondly, touching the Authority which Christ hath with God his Father; it was such as God proclamed from Heaven: This is my beloved Sonne: and Christ saith, Thou hearest mee alwayes, Joh. 11. So greatly was he respected with God. In both these respects we may be bold to say, Our Father, &c. We have the promise, that if we aske any thing in the name of Christ, he gives it us, Joh. 16.17. Much more may we have confidene to be heard, Si non modo in nomine ejus, sed verbis ejus. The Apostle saith, If I had the tongue of Men and Angels, 1 Cor. 13. His meaning is, that the tongues of Angels were more glorious then the tongues of men; and therefore that song of the Angels, Holy, Holy, Holy, Esay 6. is magnified in the Church: But this prayer was formed by the tongue of Christ, who is the Lord of Angels. The Cherubims hid their faces before th Lord of Hosts, Esay 6. And he that made this prayer was the Lord of Hosts, of whom it is said: Os Domini exercituum locutum est. This prayer, as one said, is , the Ingaging of our cha∣rity and love: for we desire to have remission of sinne no otherwise then as we forgive our brethren, whereby the love of our brother is continually increased. And this prayer is breviarium fidei, it teacheth us to beleeve those things which we pray for. Lastly, our perfection in obeying the Law, and in beleeving those things which we ought to intreat, with such a hope by prayer: Le∣gem implendi, & legem credendi, lex statuit supplicandi.
THE SIXTH SERMON. LUKE 11.2. And he said unto them: When yee pray, say: Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name: thy Kingdome come: Let thy will bee done, even in earth as it is in Heaven, &c. IT is the answer of our Saviour Christ, to that Dis∣ciple of his, which in the name of the rest desired to be taught a forme of prayer. Concerning prayer, among other things al∣ready noted, we te to know, that it is the doctrine of the Fathers; that God not prayed unto on our parts, and his holy Spirit not yet possessing our soules, hath notwithstanding promised, that he wll poure his Spirit up∣on all flesh, Ioel 2. as it was poured upon the Apostles after Christs Ascen∣sion, Acts 2. Namely, that Spirit which he cals the Spirit of Grace and Prayer, Zach. 12.10. When he thus vouchsafeth to send the Spirit of Grace into our soules, then from thence there doe runne two streames into the two se∣verall faculties of our soule, that is, the Spirit of Grace hath a work∣ing on our Vnderstanding by the light of Faith: and secondly, in our Will, by inspiring us with holy desires: of which holy desires, the in∣terpreter betwixt us and God, is Prayer: For that as the Apostle speaks: Our requests are made knowne to God by prayer and supplication, Phil. 4.6. Now as prayer is properly the effect of Grace; so whatsoever wee obtaine of God by prayer, it is the gift of Grace; which prayer is therefore our reasonable service of God, because we doe therein ac∣knowledge, not onely our owne wants and unworthinesse, but also that as God hath in his hands all manner of blessings to bestow upon us; so if we sue to him for them, he will with hold no good thing from us. Psal. 84.12. Before we can pray for good things, it is required, that we doe con∣ceive a love of them; which if it be in us, then we shall not onely bee inflamed with a desire of them, which is an effect of love, but shall be stirred up to pray for them: But it is the peculiar worke of the holy Ghost, to shed in our hearts the love, not onely of God, Rom. 5. but of all
other good things, which work he performeth, not in all in differently; for he is compared to the Wind, that bloweth where it will, Ioh. 3. But those whom it pleaseth the holy Ghost to inspire with a love and affection towards good things, they doe not onely desire them, but withall doe pray earnestly for them unto God; for as it is the worke of Jesus Christ, the eternall Word, to enlighten every one that commeth into the world, so it is the office of the eternall Spirit, to inspire our hearts with holy desires. In this answer of our Saviour, we are to consider three points: first, a time limited for prayer: secondly, the contents of the word, Oratio: thirdly, what is to be noted out of the word, Discue. Touching the time limited for prayer, we have heard already, that there are three uses of prayer, one was the use of dignity and persection, when men doe converse and enter into familiarity with God, by ab∣stracting their mindes from humane affaires, and sublevating them in∣to Heaven by a continuall meditation of God, and things pertaining to the life to come, which because it is peculiar to them that have al∣ready attained to some perfection, we must say of it, as Christ did of another matter: Qui poest capere capiat, Matth. 19. Our weaknesse is such, as cannot by any meanes come to this use; yea the infirmity of the Disciples themselves was so great, that albeit Christ had so many other things to tell them of, yet they were not able as yet to beare them, Iohn 14. Therefore we are to consider the two other uses, which doe more neerely concerne us; whereof the one is, the Vse of necessity, which standeth either upon feare, or upon want; and when necessity lyeth up∣on us, in either of these respects, they are so forcible, that they make all flesh to come unto him that heareth prayer, Psal. 65. Of feare the Pro∣phet saith: Lord in trouble they visited thee, they powred out a prayer when thychastening was upon them, Isa. 26.16. And the want of outward things is so vehement a motive, as when nothing else can move men to prayer, yet they will assemble themselves before the Lord for corne and oyle, Hos. 7.14. These two, the one being as Solomon termeth it, Plaga cordis, 1 Reg. 5. the other, Defiderium cordis, Psal. 5. doe point to us two times of prayer; namely, when either we are oppressed with misery, as the effect of sinne, or disquieted with our selves with the conscience, and guilt of sinne it selfe, which is the cause of all our miseries. Touching sinne, the Prophet saith, While I held my tongue, my bones consumed away; but after he had confessed his sinnes unto the Lord, and craved pardon, he forgave his wickednesse: And because it is not his case onely, for as much as we have all sinned, his counsell is in this behalfe; pro hoc orabit omnis pius, Psal. 32. Which being done, as the Prophet speaketh, the weakest of them, that is, every sinner, shall be as David: Neither are we of necessity to pray, that God will for∣give the guilt of our sinnes past, but that he will prevent us with his grace against temptations of sinnes to come; for in this regard, our Saviour Christ would have his Disciples occupie themselves in this holy duty, Orate, Pray ye that ye enter not into temptation, Luke 22. For
the effect of sinne, which is adversity. Then is prayer necessary in the time of affliction, when outward∣ly through the malice of our enemies we are in misery: In which case the Prophet saith: when the ungodly, for the love he bare to them, requited him with hatred, Then he gave himselfe to prayer. Psal. 109.3. Or else inwardly, by reason of crosses, which it pleaseth God to bring upon us, against which, the onely remedy is to use prayer, as the Apo∣stle exhorts, Iames 5. Is any afflicted? let him pray. A timore iuo con∣cepimus spiritum salutis, Esa. 26.8. That is, for feare. And when we consider our owne wants, the troubles that are upon us, though for a time we hold our tongues and speake nothing, yet a fire will kindle in us, we cannot long be silent, but the desire of our heart must have a vent by prayer, as the Prophet had experience in himselfe, Psal. 39. So that as well the feare of danger to come, as present want and affliction, will leade us to prayer. But when we are rid of all adversity, yet there is another use of prayer, which is the Vse of Duty. We are to pray, not in regard of our selves, but in obedience to God, who commandeth prayer to be made by us, as a part of his ser∣vice and duty, which we oweto him. Prayer made of duty, is of two sorts, both in regard of time and place. Iob in the Law of nature tels us, that it is our duty: Invocare Deum omni tempore, Iob 27.10. and our Saviours charge unto his Disciples is, that they should semper orare, Luke 18. which the Apostle interpre∣teth by , 1 Thes. 5. But this cannot be performed of us, by reason of our infirmity, therefore we must expound this otherwise, and as Saint Paul speakes, we must speake after the manner of men, propter infirmitatem, Rom. 6. and so we are commanded to pray alwaies; the meaning is, that it is our duty to appoint certaine houres for pray∣er; for as Augustine saith, Semper orat, qui per certa intervalla temporum orat, the reason of this exposition is, for that our service to God, must be a reasonable service, Rom. 12. and the preaching of the word must not be done negligently; for it must be , 1 Pet. 2. which cannot continually be performed of man without some respect. Touching the set times appointed to the service of God in the Law, it is appointed and required, that there should be both mor∣ning and evening sacrifice day by day, and that upon the Sabbath there should be twice so long service as upon other dayes, Numb. 2.8. This publike service was performed by the Jewes, among whom the booke of the Law was read foure times a day, Nehem. 9.3. For private devotion the Prophet saith, In the evening, in the morning, and at noone day, will I call upon thee, Psal. 55. and Daniel was for pray∣ing three times a day, cast into the Lions Denne, Dan. 6. In the new Testament this duty of prayer was by the practise of Saint Peter limited to the third houre, Act. 2.15. to the sixth houre, Acts 10.9. to the ninth houre, at which time Peter and Iohn went up to the Temple together to pray, Acts 3. whose diligence and care ought to stir us up to the like.
Further the Disciples desire to be taught a right forme of prayer: not onely as here, as a Christian, but as an Apostle and Minister sent forth to preach the Gospel: whereby we learne that prayer belongeth not onely in generall to every Christian, but more particularly and specially to those that have any Ecclesiasticall authority over others. So that is an opinion very erronious, that we have no other use of the Apostles of Christ, and their Successours, but onely for prea∣ching: whereas, as it is a thing no lesse hard to pray well, then to preach well: so the people reape as great benefit by the intercession of their Pastors, which they continually make to God, both privately and publikely, as they doe by their preaching. It is the part of the Ministers of God, and those that have the charge of the soules of others, not onely to instruct the flock, but to pray for them. The office of Levi and his posterity, as Moses sheweth, was not onely to teach the people the Lawes and Judgements of the Lord, and to instruct Israel in the Law, but also to offer Incense unto the Lord, Deut. 33. Which Incense was nothing else but a type of prayer, made by the faithfull. Psal. 145. Therefore Samuel confesseth, that he should sinne no lesse in ceasing to pray for the people, then if he were slacke to shew them the good and right way, 1 Sam. 12.23. This duty the Ministers of God may learne from the example of Christs owne practise, who went out early in the morning to pray, Marke 1.35. So he prayed for Peter, that his faith should not faile, Luke 22. also from the example of the Apostles, who albeit they did put from them the ministration of the Sacraments, yet gave them∣selves continually to prayer, and the Ministery of the word, Acts 6.4. In which regard Paul saith, he was sent not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.17. which they did refuse to doe, not as a thing im∣pertinent to their office, but that they might with more attention of minde and fervencie of Spirit apply themselves to make intercession for Gods people. Thus much they are to learne from hence, that the Priests are An∣geli Domini exercituum, Mal. 2.7. If Angels, then they must not on∣ly descend to the people to teach them the will of God, but ascend to the presence of God to make intercession for the people; and this they doe more cheerefully, for that God is more respective to the prayers which they make for the people, then the people are heedfull to the Law of God taught by them. For this cause the Priests are called the Lords remembrancers, Esa. 62.6. because they put God in minde of his people, desiring him continually to helpe and blesse them with things needfull; for God hath a greater respect to the prayers of those that have a spirituall charge, then to those that are of the common sort. Thus the Lord would have Abimelech deale well with Abraham, and deliver him his wife, because he is a Prophet, and should pray for him that he may live, Gen. 20. So to the friends of Iob the Lord said: My servant Job shall
pray for you, and I will accept him, Iob. 42. This office was appointed to the Priests in the Law, Levit. 5.6. orabit pro iis sacerdos: Thus Ezechia sent for Esay: so saies he, Lift thou up thy prayer, Esa. 37.4. Men, as they are Christians, ought to pray three times a day, as David, Psal. 55. but as they are Prophets, and have a speciall charge, they must pray to God seven times a day, as the same David, Psal. 119. This day of prayer, made by the Priests in the behalfe of the peo∣ple, was so highly esteemed, that they tooke order that prayer should be made continually: and because the same Priests are not to doe all one thing, but to pray; therefore some were appointed for the first watches, others for the second, and others for the third watches, that so while one rested, the other might pray, whereof David speaketh, when he saith, Mine eyes prevent the night watches, Psal. 119. So Christ speaketh of the first and second watches, Luke 22. Touching Davids diligence in performing of this duty for the good of the people, he saith, At midnight I will rise up, to give hankes to thee, Psal. 119. So did Paul and Silas, rise at midnight to sing praise to God, Acts 16. And it were to be wished that the like order were taken in the Church, that the sacrifice of prayer were continually offered among Christians, as it was in the Synagogues of the Iewes. Secondly, in regard of the place, we are every where to lift up pure hands, 1 Tim. 2. and so the Psalmist extendeth this part of Gods ser∣vice to all places generally of his Dominion, Psal. 103. Howbeit though it be not to be neglected in no place; yet especially wee must offer this sacrifice of prayer and prayse, in the assembly, among the faith∣full in the congregation, Psal. 111. and so we must learne to distinguish the Liturgy, and the publike service of God in the Church, from that private devotion, which our Saviour would have us to performe daily; when he saith, when thou prayest, enter into thy chamber, Matth. 6. For God hath promised to accept that worship which we tender unto him in the place consecrate for that purpose: In every place where I put my name, thther will I come and blesse thee; Exod. 20.24. Non solum quod cratis, sed quod ibi oratis, that is, the publike place whither the Saints of God from time to time assemble themselves to call upon God to∣gether. In his Temple doth every man speake of his praise, Psal. 29. Our Saviour Christ did therefore tell them that it was domus orationis, Isa. 56. to teach us, that the chiefe end of our meeting there should be, not to make it a pub like schoole of Divinity, and instruction, but to powre out our prayers to God; for private prayers were not enough, unlesse at times appointed we meete together to pray publikely. So the Apostle Saint Peter doth teach us by his example, who not onely when he was at home went up to the top of his house to pray, Acts 10. but to the Temple also, Acts 3. Saint Paul did not content himselfe to bow his knees to God when he was at Rome, and Ephesus, and other places; but he went to Ierusa∣lem, and prayed in the Temple, Acts 22.11. which thing as he did for himselfe; so no doubt, he did it in the behalfe of the Church of God,
to which he was sent to preach; and it were to be wished that in the Church there were minus oratorum, & plus orantium. The second generall point is, touching the contents of the word, Oratis. Our necessities are manifold, and the grace of God, which we sue for to God, is, multiformis gratia, 1 Pet. 4. Besides, the Apostle saith, Pray with all manner of prayer, Ephes. 6. therefore it is meete that wee should take notice how many kinds of prayer there are, wherein the Apostle guides us, when he saith, Let supplications, prayers, thanks-gi∣ving, and intercessions be made, 1 Tim. 2. These foure containe all those sorts of prayer, which are contained in the body of this word, Orate. Prayer, or Invocation, consists of Confession and Petition, Con∣fession is divided into confessionem fraudis, which the Greekes call , that is, the confession of sinnes, whereunto they adde sup∣plication to God for pardon, like that of the Publican, Luke 18. God be mercifull to me a sinner. The other kinde of Confession is, Confessio laudis, that is, Thanks∣giving to God for his goodnesse in pardoning our sinnes, and bestow∣ing his benefits upon us, which kinde of Confession is called . This also is a part of prayer, and ought to goe with it, as appeares, Phil. 1.3. Col. 1.3. where the Apostle doth thanke God al∣wayes for the Churches in his prayer. Both these the Iewes gather from the words Iudah and Israel; for Iudah is Confession, and Israel is the name of prevailing in wra∣stling with the Angel, as the faithfull doe strive with God in prayer, Rom. 13. The one they call Tehillah, the other Tephillah. They had both these, Hosanna, and Hallelujah. Petition stands upon Comprecation and Deprecation. Deprecation is, when we desire that evill may be removed, which kinde of prayer is  and Techinah. Comprecation is, when we would have our want supplyed with good things, which is  and Tephillah. Intercession, is in another kinde of prayer proceeding from charity, as the other came from faith, when we doe not onely confesse our owne sinnes, but the sinnes of others, when we pray not onely for our selves, but for others; when we praise God not onely for his goodnesse on our selves, but for others. So it was the charge which God gave by his Prophet to them in captivity, not onely to pray for themselves, but to pray for the prosperity of the City where they were prisoners, Ier. 29.7. As they were to have a care of the Common wealth, so the like is to be had of the Church. Therefore when Peter was in prison, there was prayer made continually of the Church to God for him, A. 12.5. Pray for all Saints, saith the Apostle, Ephes. 6. and for me especilly, that utterance may be given to me, &c. and as for them that have any speciall place in the Church or Common-wealth, so we are bidden to pray for all such as are in misery, as David teacheth us by his exam∣ple; who when his enemies were sicke, ceased not to pray for them,
no lesse then for himselfe, but put on sack-cloth, and humbled his soule with fasting, Psal. 35. Unto these kindes of prayer, some adde two more; the first is, when upon condition that God will grant us our desire, wee vow that we will faithfully serve him afterwards, as Iacob prayed, Gen. 28. The other is a simple prayer or petition uttered in short words, as, Lord have mercie on me, and such like, which are nothing else, but sparkes of that fire, which kindleth within us, whereof David spake, Psal. 39. Heare me Lord, and that right soone, for my spirit faileth, 143. In regard of this our weaknesse, our Saviour hath in a short prayer comprehended whatsoever is needfull for us, which brevity hee used, lest if he had set a large forme of prayer, our spirit should bee dead, and our devotion key-cold before we could come to the end; and for the same purpose the Church hath prescribed collects, prayers answe∣rable to that short petition of our Saviour Christ. All these kindes of prayers were used by our Saviour Christ in the dayes of his flesh, as he tooke our nature, and was the head of a body, Factus pro nobis peccatum, 2 Cor. 5. and so did not onely confesse him∣selfe a sinner, but suffered the wrath of God for it; which made him cry, Deus mi, Deus mi, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Mat. 26. The rebuke of them that rebuked thee, fell on me, Rom. 15. Psal. 69. Also he was an example to us of thanksgiving, I thanke thee O Fa∣ther, &c. Luke. 10.21. I thanke thee that thou hast heard me, Iohn 11. For Deprecation, as he was a man. Let this Cup passe from me, Matth. 26. The good he prayed for at the hands of his Father, was, Pater glo∣rificame ea gloria, quam habui apud te, &c. Iohn 17. Touching Intercession, he prayeth, Pater ignosce eis, Luke 23. I pray not for them onely, but for all them that shall beleeve by their preaching, Iohn 17. As he used all these kindes of prayer, so he set them all downe in this forme of prayer. The Confession of sinne, and the supplication for remission, is in the five petitions; The thanksgiving is that , for thine is the Kingdome, power, and glory; and the good which he desireth is, the sanctification of Gods name, the accomplishment of his Kingdome, and fulfilling of his will, as also a continuall supply of all things need∣full for this present life. The evill from which he prayes to be delivered, is first, from sinne it selfe: secondly, from the temptations of sinne: thirdly, from evils, which are the effects of sinne. The third and last point in this Text is, that we observe something in this word Dicite; whereof the first is, that here Christ doth not say, Say thus, as Matth. 6. whereof some gather, that we may frame prayers after the forme of the Lords prayer, but not use the words themselves: But he saith to his Disciples, Dicite, Pater noster, &c. that is, wee may boldly use the very words of this prayer; and albeit; to set forth the de∣sire of our hearts, we use other formes of prayer, and that in more words, yet we must conclude our prayers with this prayer of Christ.
Secondly, when he sayes Dicite, he doth not say cogitate, or recita∣te, or murmurate, but intus dicite & cum ore, for there is a mouth in pray∣er, & non est oratio sine ore, therefore he alloweth vocall prayer; and as he will have us expresse the desire of our hearts in words, so the chiefe thing is, that our prayers be from the heart; for invocation is a spirituall sacrifice, 1 Pet. 2. A reasonable service, Rom. 12. So both the understanding and reason must be occupied, and also the spirit or in∣ward affection of the heart: Our Saviour requireth both in expresse words, Worship him in spirit and in truth, Iohn 4. Sing with understan∣ding, Psal. 47. I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the under∣standing also, 1 Cor. 14. We must not onely have a spirituall servencie and zeale, but also must know what we pray for, which is belonging to the understan∣ding: So that if both doe not concurre, our service is not reasonable, nor our sacrifice of praise, spirituall. As for that prayer that comes onely from the lippes, it may be said of it, as God spake of hypocrites, Is that the Fast that I required? Isa. 58. So, assembling to heare the word, as a people useth to doe, Ezech. 33. Is that this which God requireth? Is this to eate the Lords Supper? 1 Cor. 11. It is not enough to make long prayers, and use many words, there is a spirituall prayer which God will have with our vocall petitions, and therefore, that we may pray with understanding, we have neede to be instructed in the sense of the Lords prayer. The excellencie of this prayer is in regard of him that made it, who is come from above, who hath mixed nothing with this petition that savoureth of the earth; for they are all heavenly, as hee himselfe is heavenly. Secondly, in respect of the forme, which is a most perfect forme, it was compiled by him who was the wisedome of God, and there∣fore cannot be but perfect, quia perfecta sunt opera Iehovae, Deut. 33. Thirdly, in regard of the excellent benefits that are procured to us by it, which are so many as can be desired at the hands of God. Fourthly, for the order which Christ keepeth. If man did make a prayer, he would beginne at daily bread: but Christ in this prayer teacheth us first to seeke the Kingdome of God, Matth. 6. Our first petition must be for the glory of God, and then for our owne welfare, chiefly in the world to come; and also in this life: for as we may not pray at all for things that are evill, so in things that are good and lawfull, we must take heed that we aske not amisse. The petitions being seven, are divided thus: The first, concerne God himselfe, the other sixe concerne us. They concerne us in a three-fold estate, first, of Glory: secondly of Grace: thirdly, of Nature. In these petitions that concerne us, the evill that we would have re∣moved from us, is: first, sin: secondly, temptation: thirdly, evill. The good we desire to be granted us, is, first, that Gods Kingdome may be in our hearts: secondly, that his will may be performed of us: thirdly, that he will give us things necessary for this present life.
THE SEVENTH SERMON. LUKE 11.2. Our Father. THis Prayer, penned by our Saviour Christ in the behalfe of his Disciples and his Church unto the end of the world, standeth first upon an Invo∣cation, then upon certaine Petitions. The invocation is the stile or word of saluta∣tion, wherein we call upon the Majesty of God. The Petitions containe the sum of those things we seeke for at the hands of God. That which we have generally to note out of this Preface is, that this is one benefit which God vouchsafeth us, that we may pray unto him and be heard; whereby we are to conceive of him that hee is not like the great Monarches, to whom no man might presume to speak, except he hold out his golden Scepter to him, as it is in Est. 4. The heavenly Majesty vouchsafeth every man this honour to speak to him, and the Golden Scepter of his word doth allure us there∣unto. Secondly, it is a greater benefit to pray to God on this manner, that is by the name of Father; and therefore by that which he pro∣miseth the faithfull, Isa. 65. Before they call I will heare them, wee are taught that we are so assured of Gods good will and favour towards us, even before we open our mouthes to aske any thing of him, that we doubt not to call him Father; from whence we may reason as the A∣postle doth, Rom. 8. Seeing he hath given us his Sonne, how shall he not with him give us all things? So seeing God taketh us for his children, how shall he deny us any thing, whereby he may shew himselfe a Fa∣ther? In the first we consider the perfection of Gods goodnesse, in these words, Our Father: In the second, the excellencie of his power, expres∣sed thus: Which art in Heaven. Both these are attributed unto God, not onely of the Christians, but even by the Heathen, that are strangers to the Church; for they attribute this unto God, that he is optimus, maximus, and therefore
where these two doubts arise in our hearts, Domine si vis, Lord, if thou wilt, Matth. 8. and Domine si quid potes, Marke 9. they are both ta∣ken away by these two attributes. By that terme which setteth out the perfection of Gods goodnesse, he assureth us that he is willing, and by that which expresseth the ex∣cellencie of his power, we are taught that he is able to performe our requests. His goodnesse giveth us fiduciam, that in regard of it we may boldly come to the throne of grace, Heb. 4. The consideration of Gods power breedeth in us devotion and reverence, (for both must be joyned together) neither feare with∣out the consideration of his goodnesse, nor bold confidence that is not tempered with a dutifull regard of his power, is acceptable to him. So that which we learned in lege credendi, that God is the Father Almighty, is here taught againe in lege supplicandi; where wee are in∣structed in our prayers to ascribe both these unto God: first, that hee is our Father; secondly, our heavenly Father. The consideration of these two, are the pillars of our faith, and there is no petition wherein we doe not desire, that God will either shew us his goodnesse, or assist us with his power, and no Psalme or Hymne, that is not occupied in setting forth one of these. The titles which expresse Gods goodnesse have two words, the one a word of faith, the other a word of hope and cha∣rity. Of both these words of Pater, and noster, Basil saith, that here Lex supplicandi, non modo credendi, sed operandi Legem statuit, The Law of prayer, doth not onely establish and confirme the Law of be∣liefe, but of working also, For where in the word Father, is expressed the love of God to us, it comprehendeth withall the love wee beare to him. Where we call God our Father, and not my Father, therein is contained our love to our neighbour, whom we are to love no lesse then our selves, Vpon these two hang the Law and the Prophets. Matth. 22. Againe, the word Father, is a word of faith, and our, a word of charity; and the thing required of us in the new Testament is, Fides per charitatem operans, Faith, which worketh by charity, Gal. 5. So that in these words Our Father, we have a summe both of the Law and the Gospel. Christ might have devised many more magnificent and excellent termes for God; but none were apt and fit for us to assure us of Gods favour. Our Saviour saith, Luke 11.13. That earthly fathers which many times are evill men, have notwithstanding this care for their children, that if they aske them bread, they will not give them a stone: much more shall our heavenly Father give us the holy Spirit, if we aske it. Wherefore Christ teaching us to call God by the name of Father, hath made choyce of that word, which might serve most to stirre us
up unto hope, for it is Magnum nomen sub quo nemini desperandum, a great name under which no man can despaire. There may seeme an opposition to be betwixt these words, Fa∣ther and Our, if we consider, first, the Majesty of God, before whom the hils doe tremble, and the Angels in Heaven cover their faces; Secondly, our owne uncleannesse and basenesse, both in re∣spect of the mould whereof we be made, which made Abraham confesse himselfe unworthy to speake unto God, being but dust and ashes, Gen. 18. And also in regard of our pollution of sinne, in which regard we are called, The slaves of sinne, and children of the Devill, Iohn 8. Herein we finde a great distance between God and us, and so are we farre from challenging this honour to bee the sonnes of God in regard of our selves. Who durst (saith Cyprian) pray to God by the name of Father, if Christ our Advocate did not put these words in our mouthes? He knoweth how God standeth affected towards us, for all our unworthinesse; and therefore seeing he hath framed this patition for us, we may boldly as he commandeth, say thus, Our Faher. Therefore albeit of our selves we cannot conceive hope, that God is our Father, yet we may call him Father by the authority of Christ, and say with Augustine, Agnosce Domine stilum advocati Filiui, Lord take notice of the stile of our Advocate, thy Sonne. Wee know not Gods affection towards us, but by Christ wee take notice of him, for hee hath declared him unto us, Iohn 1.18. and being taught that God in Christ vouchsafeth to admit us for his children, Wee doe with boldnesse come to the throne of grace, Heb. 4. Therefore we have thankfully to consider unto what dignity wee that live under the Gospel are exalted, not onely above the Patriarches in the time of the Law, but above the heavenly Spirits. Before the Law was given, Abraham saith, Shall I speake to the Lord? Gen. 18. In the Law Christ saith, Ego sum Dominus Deus tuus, Exod. 20. then he was not called Father. But if we aske that question which the Apostle makes, To which of the Angels said he, Thou art my Sonne? Heb. 1.5. It will appeare that God hath honou∣red us in a degree above Angels, for that he giveth us leave to call him Father. Thus we see what preheminence we have from God, above, as well the Saints on earth in time of the Law, as the heavenly Angels; that we may not only pray, but pray thus, Our Father. In the word Father, we are further to note, not onely that God is the cause of all things, for that he bringeth forth all things, but also his , or naturall affection, to those things that are produced. Gods Paternity is first generally to be considered in all creatures, which for that they have their being from God, he is said to be their Father, So Iob called God Pater pluviae, The Father of the raine, Iob 38. Also he is called Pater Luminum, Iam. 1.17. and this is a motive
sufficient to move God to be favourable to our prayer, if there were no more, that we are his creatures: so David spake, Despise nt the work of thine owne hands, Psal. 138. But men have another use of Gods pa∣ternity, for whereas of other things God said, Producat terra, Ger. 1. When man was to be created, he said, Let us make man, giving us to un∣derstand, that how soever other creatures had their being from God im∣mediately, God himselfe would be his Father, and frame him immedi∣ately with his owne hand. Secondly, when God created man according to his owne Image, he breathed into him life immortall, he gave him the sparkes of know∣ledge, and indued his soule with reason and understanding, in which regard it is called the candle of the Lord, Prov. 21. Thirdly, when man was fallen from his first estate, God ope∣ned to him a doore of repentance, which favour hee hath not vouch∣safed to the Angels that fell, and so wee may crave Gods favour, not onely as we are the workes of Gods hands, but as we are his owne Image. Fourthly, God is our Father, as we are Christians: that which Mo∣ses saith; Is he not thy Father? Deut. 33. and, Doubtlesse thou art our Fa∣ther, Isa. 63. is to be understood of our generation; but we have a se∣cond birth, called , or Regeneration, which setteth us in a de∣gree above mankinde, and makes us not onely men, but Christians, which if we be, then we are the sons of God, not as the raine, or lights, or they that are created to the Image of God, but for that we are borne of God, Iohn 1.18. that is, borne againe of the Water and of the Spirit, without which Regeneration, no entrance is into the Kingdome of God. And our dignity in being the sonnes of God, in these three sorts is to be considered: First, in that we are the price of Christs blod, 1 Cor. 6. Secondly, we have Characterem, that is, the stampe of the sonnes of God, when we are called Christians, Acts 11. Thirdly, we are the Temples of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 3. By meanes whereof he giveth us holy desires, and maketh us sorry that we have offended his Majesty; the assurance of this, is that which the Apostle cas the Spirit of Adoption, which hee sends into the hearts of Christians, to certifie them both that they are the sonnes of God, and may call him Father, Rom. 8. in a double sense, both in respect of nature and grace, not onely by generation, but by Regeneration. In the naturall affection that God beareth us, we have two things, 1. the immutability of it, 2. the excellencie. God doth teach us, that his love to us is unchangeable, in this that he expresseth it by the name of Father; nam pater, etansi offerss, est pater; & filius, etiamsi nequam, tamen filius, A father, though offended, is a father; and a sonne, though naught, yet is a sonne. The Master may cease to be a Master, so may a servant: The hus∣band may cease to be a husband, so may the wife by meanes of di∣vorce; but God can never cease to be our Father, though he be never so much offended, and we cannot cease to bee his sonnes, how wicked soever wee bee; and therefore God doth by an immutable
terme, signifie unto us the immutability of his affection, Heb. 6. And indeed whether hee doe bestow good things on us, or chasten us, his love is still unchangeable, for both are to bee per∣formed of a father toward his children, and therefore whether hee afflict us, or bestow his blessings on us, we are in both to acknowledge his fatherly care, howsoever To flesh and bloud no affliction seemeth good for the present, Heb. 12. This immutability of his love, as it ministreth comfort in time of affliction, so doth it comfort and raise us up in sinne and trans∣gression, so that notwithstanding the greatnesse of our sinnes, wee may bee bold to seeke to God for favour, and say, Etsi amisi inge∣nuitatem filii, tamen tu non amisisti pietatem patris: Although Lord, I have lost the duty of a sonne, yet thou hast not lost the affection of a father. The excellencie of Gods love appeareth herein, that he is not de∣scribed to be God under the name of a King, or great Lord, as Mat. 18. There we have an example of great goodnesse in pardoning tenne thousand Talents; but yet a doubt will arise in our mindes ex∣cept we know him to be good otherwise then as he is a King: for so looke what mercie he sheweth to us, the like he will have us shew to others, but we come short of this. But this is it that contents us, that he describes his goodnesse under the terme of Father: in which re∣gard how wickedly soever we deale, yet still wee may say with the evill child, I will goe to my Father, Luke 15. He had cast off his fa∣ther, he had spent all his patrimony; yet for all that he resolveth to goe backe, and his father is glad to receive him, he went, and met, and entertained him joyfully; such affection doth God beare to his children. The benefits that we have by the fatherly love of God is of two sorts: First, Fructus indulgentiae paternae: Secondly, Fructus liberali∣tatis paternae: that is, the fruit of fatherly compassion, and the fruit of fatherly bounty. Fathers stand thus affected towards their children, that they are hardly brought to chasten them, and if there be no remedy, yet they are ready to forgive, or soone cease punishing: Pro peccato magno panlulum supplicii satis est Patri, for a great offence, a small punishment is enough to a father. And for their bountifulnesse, the Apostle saith, that there is natural∣ly planted in fathers a care to lay up for their children, 2 Cor. 12. they are both in God; for facility ad veniam, to pardon, and readinesse to forgive, makes him Patrem misericordiarum, 2 Cor. 3. not of one, for he hath a multitude of mercies, great mercie and little mercie, Psal. 51. The affection of David toward Absolon, a wicked sonne, was such, that he forgave him, though he sought to deprive his father of his King∣dome, 2 Sam. 12. and though wee offend the Majesty of God, yet hee assureth us, that hee will be no lesse gracious to our offen∣ces, then David was, For David was a man after Gods owne heart, 1 Sam. 13.
Touching the care which God hath to provide for us, the Prophet saith, and also the Apostle, Cast your care upon the Lord, for hee careth for you, 1 Pet. 5. He careth for us, not as he hath care of Oxen, 1 Cor. 9. but such a tender care as he hath for the Apple of his eye, Zach. 2. He provideth for us, not lands and goods, as earthly fathers; but, an inheritance immortall, incorruptible, and that fadeth not, reserved in Hea∣ven for us, 1 Pet. 1. and hath prepared for us, an heavenly Kingdome, whereof we are made co-heires with his Sonne Christ, Rom. 8.17. and this is the fruit of his fatherly bountifulnesse towards us. Out of these two, the immutability, and excellencie of Gods love, shewed both in forgiving sinnes, and providing good things, ariseth a duty to be performed on our parts, for , in all comfort: & nomen patris, ut explicat, sic excitat charitatem: the name of a father as it sheweth, so it stirreth up love: as it sheweth quid speran∣dum, sic quid▪ sit prastandum, what is to be performed of us: the name of a father doth promise unto us forgivenesse of sinnes, and the bles∣sings not of this life onely, but especially of that that is to come, and this duty lieth upon us, that we so live as becommeth children: wee may not continue in sinne, but at the least must have virtutem redeun∣di, the vertue of returning, Isa. 63. Why hast thou caused us to goe out of the way? A child though he have wandred never so farre, yet at length will come to that resolution: I will returne to my father, Luke 15. But if we consider the dignity whereunto we are exalted, wee shall see on earth, Si filii Dei, quodammodo Dii simus: if we be sonnes, we are after a sort Gods: & Divinae participes naturae, 2 Pet. 1. partakers of the divine nature, as the sonnes of men are men. But the Apostle sets down this plainely; Behold, what great love he hath shewed us, That we should be called the sonnes of God, 1 Iohn 3. This dignity requireth this duty at our hands, that we reverence our Father, Mal. 1.6. If I be your Father, where is my love? If yee call him Father, without respect of persons, &c. Then passe the time of your dwelling here in feare, 1 Pet. 1.13. Our, is a word of hope, as Father is a word of faith, for he that saies noster, our, includes himselfe, and by hope applyeth Gods favour in particular to himselfe, which by faith he apprehends to be common to all, neither doth appropriate it to himselfe, saying, My Father, but includes them with himselfe; and so the word our is also Vox chari∣tatis, the voyce of Charity. As the first word did teach us the Father-hood of God, so the word our, implyeth the fraternity we have one with another: for God, to shew what great regard he hath of the love of our neighbour, hath so framed and indited this prayer, that there is neither Ego, nor mi, nor meum, nor mea, neither I, nor mine, nor my, but still the tenor of it is, Our Father, our bread, our trespasses, us from evill. Therefore one saith, that prayer is not onely, breviarium fidei, an abridgment of our faith, but , a mutuall pledge of our love towards our brethren, which is then especially testified, when we pray to God for them: For this prayer which our Saviour sets downe
for us, and all Christians prayers; are not the prayers of nature, pro se orat necessitas, necessity stirreth up men to pray for themselves: but the prayers of charity, when we are to commend the state of our brethren to God as well as our owne, quia pro ali is charitas, for charity prayeth for others; for in this prayer there is matter not onely of supplication for the avoyding of evill, and comprecation for the obtaining of good in our owne behalfe; but of Intercession also, to teach us, that whe∣ther we desire that evill be rëmoved, or good be bestowed upon us; we should desire it for others, as well as for our selves. The use of this doctrine is of two sorts: first, against Pride, for if God be not the Father of one man more then another, but all in common doe call him Our Father, why then doth one man exalt himselfe above another? Have we not all one Father? Mal. 2. and the Apostle saith, Yee are all the sonnes of God, by faith in Christ Iesus, Gal. 3. and our Saviour saith, Vos omnes fratres estis, Yee are all brethren, Mal. 2.3.8. Therefore we are not onely to love one another as bre∣thren, but to honour one another, because we are the sonnes of God; for this end the Apostle exhorteth, In giving honour to one before an∣other. Rom. 12. So farre ought we to be from despising one another, Cur enim non pudeat aspernari fratrem, quem Deus non aspernatur fili∣um? Why are we not ashamed to scorne him to be our brother, whom God scorneth not to be his sonne? Secondly, it serveth against malice, wēe were all in the loynes of Adam when he fell, and all one in the body of Christ; so that what∣soever he, as our Head, hath done or suffered, the same all men doe, and suffer in him. And lastly, we are all included in this word, to teachus, that wee ought to wish the same good to others, which we doe to our selves, for this is that which Christ commendeth in our Christian practise in the duty of prayer, Vt singuli orent pro omnibus, & omnes pro sin∣gulis, that each should pray for all, and all for each other. He hath taken order, that no man can pray this prayer, but he must pray for others, as well as for himselfe, and so doe good to all, and the mends that is made him is, that they also for whom he prayed, doe likewise at another time pray for him; and though we cannot al∣wayes pray in such fervencie of Spirit as is required in prayer, yet the holy Ghost doth supply our infirmity, by stirring up others to pray, and make intercession in our behalfe, cum gemitibus inenarrabilibus, with unspeakable groanes, Rom. 8. even then when we cannot doe for our selves; and this is a speciall benefit, which the faithfull have in the Communion of Saints. The Apostle saith, that God, to assure us that hee takes us for his sonnes, hath sent his Spirit into our hearts, whereby we cry Abba Fa∣ther, Gal. 4. the one of these words hath respect to the Iewes, the o∣ther to the Gentiles, teaching that it is our duty to pray both for Iewes and Gentiles, and so for all though they be strangers to us. Secondly, we are to pray for sinners, be their sinnes never so great, in hope that God will give them the Grace to repent, and to come out of the snare of the Devill, 2 Tim. 2. and that he will translate them out of
the state of sinne into the state of grace, for this life as long as it lasteth is, tempus praestitutum poenitentiae, a time ordained for re∣pentance. Thirdly, as for our brethren, so for our enemies, as our Saviour willeth, Matth. 5.44. for they also are comprehended under the word noster; For God hath shut up all in unbeliefe, that hee may have mercie upon all. Neither are we to pray in generall for all, but for some in particu∣lar as neede requireth. Not in generall for all good things, but for some speciall blessings. As we are to pray generally, that Gods will may be done, so, for that this is Gods will, our sanctification, 1 Thes. 4. we may pray in par∣ticular for those things that we have neede, as to be delivered from all temptations generally, so specially from those sinnes, whereunto the corruption of our nature is most inclined.
THE EIGHTH SERMON. Which art in Heaven. WHich words containe the second part of this invoca∣tion; for as in the word Father we call upon the bowels of Gods mercy, so by these words, Which art in Heaven, we do invocate the arme of his po∣wer, (for so it is termed by the Prophet in the Old Testament) Stirre up thy strength and help us, Psal. 80.2. Rise up thou arme of the Lord, Esay 51.9. So that as the Lepers doubt, Matth. 8. is taken away by the consideration of Gods father∣ly goodnesse: so that when we know that this our Father hath his beeing in heaven, it takes away that doubt which we use to make of his power, Domine, si quid potes: Lord if thou canst do us any good, Mark. 9. For the stile of God in respect of our necessities, consists of his goodnesse and greatnesse, which as they are both ex∣pressed by the Heathen in the title Optimus, Maximus: so the power of God in these words which they use, , Dwelling in heavenly habitations. Christ willing to expresse the greatnesse of Gods power, doth it by that place, where his glory and power are most manifest, and that is heaven, whereof the Prophet saith, The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament sheweth his handy worke, Psal. 19.1. For when we see a poore cottage, we presently ghesse, that the dwel∣ler is no great person; but if wee meete with some great house, we conjecture that some person of account dwells there, and there∣fore Job saith, that the basenesse of man, in respect of the Angels, is great, for that he dwels in the houses of clay, whose foundation is of the dust, Job 4.19. But here our Saviour tells us, that God our Father, hath his dwelling in the stately Tabernacle of Heaven; whereby we may gather what is the greatnesse of his power. But before we come to these things, which are particularly to be considered in these words: First, we are to take heed that wee run not into their errour, which so confine and compasse God in Hea∣ven, as if he had nothing to do in earth, such as they, who say: How should God know? can be judge through the darke cloud? the clouds cover
him that hee cannot see? Job. 22.14. For when he is said to have his beeing in heaven, the Holy Ghost thereby doth not expresse his presence, but his power, therefore we are to know, that God is not so in heaven, that he is not in earth also; for so doth the old Testa∣ment witnesse of him, Coelum & terram ego impleo, Jer. 23. Behold the heaven, and heavens, and the heaven of all heavens, are not able to com∣prehend thee. 1 Reg. 8.27. and the Prophet David saith, If I goe up to heaven, thou art there: if I go downe to hell, thou art there also, Psal. 139. Whereby it appeareth that we may not limit Gods power and pre∣sence to any one place, who is every where present, for when God is said to be in heaven, we learne thereby what his excellencie is, which doth especially shew it selfe there; for as the glory & Majesty of earthly Princes, doth chiefly appeare in their thrones; so the glo∣ry and Majesty of God, doth especially shew it self in heaven, which is his Throne, Esay 66. Matth. 5.34. He hath not his denomination from earth, a place of wormes and corruption, but from heaven, a place of eternall glory and happinesse. Secondly, the use of this is, to temper our confidence in God; for albeit we love him as he is our Father; yet withall we must feare him, for as much as he dwelleth in heaven; as we may in regard of his goodnes, pray unto him with confidence, so withall, considering his power, we must pray with due devotion and reverence unto his Majewy, for he is not as an earthly father, that dwelleth in houses clay; but his dwelling is in heaven, and therefore as he is a Father, and consequently will be honoured, so because he is our Lord, he requires feare at our hands, Mal. 1.6. With thee is mercy that thou may∣est be feared, Psal. 130.4. Whereby the Prophet would have us so to esteeme of Gods mercy; that withall we be bound to feare him; and that we be not like those that contemne the riches of Gods mercy, the more that he laboureth with his bountifulnesse and good∣nesse to bring us to repentance, Rom. 2. for as sweet things have an obstructive power to stop the passages which are in our bodies, and on the other side sowre and bitter things do fret and consume, and so open the veines: So it fareth with the soule, for it is stopped when we consider nothing but the mercy of God, and contrariwise, when we cast our eyes too much upon the Majesty and power of God, the force thereof casts us into an astonishment, and brings to desperation, and therefore, that we neither have Nimiam trepidatio∣nem, nor Nimiam ostentationem, too much terrour, nor too much secu∣rity; we must know that God is so in heaven, as that yet he is a Fa∣ther, and as he is a Father, so not an earthly, but an heavenly Fa∣ther: and we cannot but feare and reverence God, if we in humility consider our basenesse in respect of him, for though he be our Fa∣ther, yet so long as we be on earth, we are strangers and exiles from him, and howsoever it please him to account us sonnes; yet as it fa∣red with Absalon, we cannot see our Fathers face, 2 Sam. 14. untill he take us hence, that we may be at home with him in his king∣dome of Glory. Thirdly, these words lead us also to a confidence in God, and
serve to raise up our faith: There is Paternitas both in heaven and earth, Ephes. 3.16. There are Fathers of the flesh, and Fathers of the spirit, Heb. 12. But when the Holy Ghost saith, that God our Fa∣ther hath his being in heaven, we are thereby to distinguish him from other fathers. If he be an heavenly Father, he is of a more ex∣cellent nature, then other fathers that are earthly and carnall, for they are mortall; as they live on earth, so by death they shall be brought sub terris, and do forsake us, but our heavenly Father is im∣mortall, his yeares change not, Psal. 102. and though our Fathers, and mothers forsake us, yet the Lord will take us up and succour us, Psal. 27. Secondly, though earthly fathers were immortall, yet they are not able, and their affections are turned away, either by meanes of some lewd parts in the children, or for that they beare not that na∣turall affection towards their children which they ought. But God is immutable in his love: so that although Jacob will not acknowledge us, and Abraham will not know us; yet God will be our Father, Esay 63.16. The Apostle saith, There are wicked parents that are , without all naturall affection, Rom. 1. And it falleth out that sometime a wo∣man will deale cruelly with her owne child; but though she forget it, yet God our heavenly Father, will not forget his children, nor turne his fatherly affection from them, Esay 49. and therefore Tertullian saith: Nullus pater tam pater: no father so fatherly. Thirdly, though they wish us never so well, yet many times they cannot do us that good they would, for want of ability, yea though they be never so able, yet they cannot deliver from sicknesse and death, for the sonnes of Princes die daily, they can give us bread and fish, Luk. 11. they have a care to provide and lay up for their children, 2 Cor. 12.14. but it is such trea∣sure, as the moth and rust will corrupt, Matth. 6.19. But God our heaven∣ly Father can deliver us from all evill, he can give us, not onely bread and fish, and other things necessary for this life, but his holy Spirit if wee aske it, Luk. 11. The treasure that God layeth up for us, is not earthly, but an in∣heritance incorruptible, and undefiled, 1 Pet. 1. such things as neither eie hath seene, nor eare hath heard, Esay 64. 1 Cor. 1. For God is not onely carefull in this life for our well doing; the knowledge of that is spes mortua: but his care extendeth to the life to come, and there∣fore the Holy Ghost saith not Pater in coelo, sed in coelis, in the hea∣vens, whereby he hath begotten us unto a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1.4. Quae∣cunque optant vel timent homines, Whatsoever things men either with for, or are affrayd of, all things come from heaven, whether it be raine, drought, or contagion, or plague, and from the first heaven, Ubi vultures coeli, Matth. 6. From this heaven Saint Paul tels the heathen that God sends us raine, and fruitfull seasons, Act. 14. And when Job saith that God sends raine, and frosts, and snow; and thundreth, and worketh marvellous things, &c. Job 37. that is done in Primo coelo. But in the second heaven are the Eclipses of the Sunne and Moone, there he workes in the signes of heaven, He binds the seven starres together, Job 38.31. whatsoever wonders are wrought there, it is God that worketh
them, and therefore he saith to his sonnes, Nolite timere à signis coeli. Jer. 10. he is in the second heaven, and will not suffer any thing to hurt them. The third heaven is that whereunto the Saints of God shall be received in the life to come, where Saint Paul heard things that were not lawfull to be uttered, 2 Cor. 12. So that as God will not suffer the first or second heaven to do us hurt, so hee will bring us to the happinesse of the third heaven: for he is Pater noster in coelis: where∣by we have hope and comfort not in this life onely, which is but a dead hope, but a lively hope touching the life to come. For Christ doth not expresse Gods power by an action, saying, Our Father which madest heaven and earth, Psal. 121. nor, which ridest upon the hea∣vens, Psal. 68. But by a locall word, to shew, that as God is in hea∣ven, so we have an interest in the same place, and that he will at the length bring us to the same place where he is. Fourthly, this word Heaven serveth to prepare us to prayer, to the end that we should lift up our hearts and affections, from earth to heaven, seeing we speake not to an earthly father, but to one that is in heaven, and this is that , or sursum corda. Tou∣ching which thing one saith, Aquilarum est hoc negotium, this busi∣nesse belongs to Eagles, which as they flie highest, so they look most stedfastly upon the Sunne; non Talparum, not belonging to moules, nor of such as are blind and will not open their eyes; nec Milvo∣rvm, neither of Kites, which albeit they flye aloft, yet cast their eyes still downeward to the dunghill: wee must wish with the Prophet, O that I had the wings of a Dove, Psal. 55. and labour more and more to flye up with the Eagle into heaven, into the presence of God the Father, and his Sonne, who sitteth at the right hand bodily, for, ubi cadaver, ibi congregantur aquilae, Luk. 17. As the consideration of Gods Majesty, who is in heaven, doth bring us downe and make us bow our knees before God our Father. Eph. 3. So it must cause us levare manus & corda, Lam. 3. and to lift up our eyes to the hills, Psal. 121. and to have such a continuall medita∣tion of his power, that we may say with David, Providebam Domi∣num in conspeclu meo semper, I have set the Lord alwayes before mee. Fifthly, this word doth admonish us, what things we should sue unto God for, he is a heavenly Father, therefore we must aske of him heavenly things; his answer to the sons of Zebedeus was, Matth. 20. Ye aske yee know not what, honour and wealth are not things pro∣portionable to him that is in heaven, and an earthly Prince will count it a disgrace, if a man aske at his hands meane things, such as may be had of every man. The gifts we are to aske of our heavenly Father, are the eternall salvation of our soules, this gift of the holy Ghost, which he hath promised to them that aske it, Luk. 11. and all spirituall blessings in heavenly places, Eph. 1.3. God is a Father, as Abraham was, and as he had moveable goods, which he gave to the sonnes of Keturah; so he bestowed the inheri∣nance, which was immoveable, upon his sonne Isaas, Gen. 25. So we
that are the children of the promise, as Isaac was, Gal. 4. must seeke for the inheritance of Isaac, and not content our selves with that portion which was given to the sonnes of Keturah. Salomon saith not amisse, Two things have I desired of the Lord, Prov. 30. But David saith better, Unam perii à Domino, I have sought one thing of the Lord, Psal. 27. That I may dwell in the house of the Lord, that I may be partaker of Grace in this life, and may be received in∣to glory in the life to come. Unto Martha that was troubled about many things, our Saviour said, Unum est necessarium, Luk. 10. and this is the reason why it is not said, qui es in terris; For God sheweth himselfe a Father, rather in heaven then in earth, Deus pater est in coelis, he is in heaven by assu∣ring us of Gods heavenly blessings: for they are the signes of Gods fatherly bounty to such as are his heires by promise; as for earthly things he sheweth himselfe in them rather to the sonnes of Keturah then to Isaac, and in respect of this world, Martha is said to have chosen the better part, Luk. 10. Sixthly, as it teacheth us, what we must pray for, so also we learn hereby what wee are to judge of our selves, and how we are to di∣spose of our minds, when we come to pray; if God our Father be in heaven, then because we are yet on earth, we must esteeme of our selves as strangers and pilgrims. This did all the Fathers acknow∣ledge, I am a stranger, and sojourner upon earth, as all my Fathers were, Psal. 39. and therefore having a longing to be in our City, Wo is mee that I am constrained to dwell in Meshech, Psal. 120. The Apostles Pe∣ter and Paul confessed the same, the one writing to the Church of God calleth them Pilgrims and strangers, 1 Pet. 2. the others repor∣teth of the Fathers that they confessed themselves strangers and Pil∣grims upon earth; and in saying these things they shew that they sought a country, not the land of Canaan from whence they came, for they had time to returne thither if they had beene mindfull of it; but they sought a better, that is, an Heavenly City, Heb. 11.13. and we have no abiding City here, but do looke for one to come, Heb. 12.13. These shew us that albeit we have our dwelling in earth, and be subject to many calamities, yet for this our exile, we do, genus de coelo ducere, we take our pedegree from heaven: When therefore as the Poet saith, os homini sublime dedit; it is a shame for us to have our hearts downeward; we must remember that we are of a more excellent nature then other creatures,  for we are his kindred, Act. 17. we have received from God a soule and spirit indu∣ed with many heavenly qualities, which beeing dissolved from the body, returneth to God that gave it, Eccles. 12. During this our exile and pilgrimage, we are not onely to con∣sider, that we looke upwards with our faces, (which moved the Hea∣then to meditate on heaven) but chiefly, that in our soules wee have the Image of God imprinted, ought to move the people to thinke of God, and to set our minds onthings above, Col. 3. Albeit we be here in a farre country farre from our fathers dwel∣ling; yet we must not forget our fathers dwelling house, Luk. 15.
The poition is in heaven which our Father will give us, and that we seeke to be acquainted with the lawes of that country, where our inheritance lyeth, that we may guide our lives according to the same, lest being rebellious, we deprive ourselves of our right and be disinherited. Secondly, seeing we know that we are not in our owne country, we must say as Absolon did: Why am I come hither, if I may not see the Kings face? 2 Sam. 14. He being an ungratious sonne, was desirous to see his father: then it shall be a shame for us, that are all the Sons of God, by faith in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3. if we have not a longing de∣sire to come before the presence of God our Father, Psal. 42. and except we have a desire to enter into the Courts of the Lord, Psal. 84. except that with the Apostle, we desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, Phil. 1. the first begotten of many brethren; and if with our Father God, we lay up our treasure in heaven, and count it our chiefe felici∣tie to be there, then would we thinke upon heaven more then we doe: For, where our treasure is, there must our hearts be also, Matth. 6. But because we altogether set our hearts on earthly things, therefore it falls out that our heart is as a heavy clodde of earth, and unable to lift it selfe up to heavenly meditation. Thirdly, as wee desire to be in heaven in our Fathers house: so our conversation must be , Phil. 3. we must not live by the lawes of earthly Princes, and Acts of Parliaments, but by an heavenly law: though we be strangers on earth, yet we are Citizens of heaven, and must carry our selves according to the lawes of our country, being alwayes desirous to do that which pleaseth our hea∣venly Father, though there were no humane law to compell us there∣unto; and whereas naturall men have for the end of their civill actions, bonum commune, a common utility, we that are spirituall, must make bonum coeleste, the heavenly good, our end: we must do well, because God will behold our well-doing favourably, and the An∣gels of heaven will be glad of it, Luk. 15. Christ, who is the Lord from heaven, did subject himselfe to the will of God his Father; Not my will, but thy will be done: and as hee that is heavenly, so must they that will be heavenly: as we now beare the Image of the earthly, so shall we port are imaginem coolestis, 1 Col. 15. He while he lived on earth, did guide himselfe by an heavenly law, and we that remaine on earth must expresse his image by the imitation of his obedience. It is true which both our Saviour Christ, and John Baptist said, That that is borne of the flesh is flesh, and so, that that is of the earth is earthly, and speaketh of the earth, Job. 3. But there must be an imitation, and we must set our selves forward towards our heavenly country. But because it is not in our power to doe this of our selves: for that, as Christ sayes, No man can come to mee, except the Father draw him, Joh. 6. therefore wee must pray with the Church in the Canticles, Cant. 1.4. Trabe me, and to this end doth the holy exercise of fasting and mortification serve great∣ly, that wee may, as it were, with Doves wings, flye up into Heaven.
As the word Father doth shew us not onely our dignity, but our duty also; so the word Heavenly, doth not onely give us a hope of heaven, but also teacheth us, that seeing our Father is heavenly, wee must live by the lawes of Heaven. As we are carefull to be made partakers of the inheritance which God hath prepared for us; so we must be as carefull to please him, and to do those things which are agreeable to his will. We must not onely know, Quid speran∣dum, what is to be hoped for, but Quid praestandum, what is to be per∣formed of us. If we pray not onely with confidence, because God doth take us for his sonnes, but also with invocation, with devotion, and reverence, knowing that our Father hath his dwelling in hea∣ven, and we are pilgrims in earth; Thus shall we be veri adoratores, Joh. 4. true worshippers. As we know we shall have our part in hea∣ven, so we must begin our heaven here on earth: and this shall be done, if we adde our endeavour to those things which we pray for at the hands of God, as August. prayeth: Da Domine, ut pro quibus oramus, pro iis laboremus: Grant Lord, that the things we pray for, and crave of thee, for them we may also labour.
THE NINTH SERMON. Hallowed be thy Name. HAving ended the first part of this prayer, which we called Invocation, consisting upon the power and goodnesse of God, we come to the petiti∣ons themselves, which are seven, of which the first concerneth God, the other concerne our selves: or they may be divided as the dayes of the weeke, whereof, as one falleth out to Gods portion, the other to be imployed in our owne affaires. So, of these petitions, the first doth immediately concerne the glory of God, the other sixe the supply of our owne necessities: in the beginning we heard that it is expedient to know not onely what we are to aske, but in what order; what first, and what second; touching which point we are taught by this forme of prayer, that that petition which concerneth the sanctification of Gods name, is Caput votorum; and that all other things that we either desire, or pray for in our owne behalfe, ought to stand after it: and that wee must both desire and pray for the sanctification of Gods name, be∣fore any thing that we desire, either for our selves, or for our bre∣thren; whether it be for the removing of evill, or for the obtaining of good: for as before we learned what his love is to us, in that he vouchsafed to be our Father; so hereby we shall expresse our love againe to him, if when we come to pray to him for our necessities, we be carried away with such a desire of the glory of our heaven∣ly Father, that we forget our owne selves, and desire onely that his name may be sanctified, which duty Christ doth by his owne exam∣ple commend unto us. In this forme of prayer, we are put in mind of that which before was required in the law of works; for as there vve learned, that God is not honoured aright, except he be loved above all things, because he created all things: and for his wills sake they all were created, Rev. 4.11. So we cannot pray to him aright, except above all things, and in the first place we seeke for the sanctification of his Name. In respect of God himselfe there is no cause why we should make
this petition on his behalfe; for as the Prophet saith, Thou hast no need of any goods, Psal. 16.1. So he stands not in need of any thing that can come to him by our meanes: if we would wish him any profit, the earth is his, and all that is therein, Psal. 24. If pleasure, there is with him torrens voluptatis, a River of pleasure, Psalm. 16.11. Wherefore albeit that in his owne essence and nature he be perfect, yet extrinsecus assumpsit sibi nomen, he tooke himselfe a name from without, he calls himselfe the Lord Almighty: not that any terme can sufficiently expresse him and his essence, but to the end, that while wee have a reverend regard of his Name, hee might receive some service at our hands. The account that men do make of their name, is such as Salomon saith: A good name is more to be desired then great treasure; it is more worth then pretious oyntment, Eccles. 7.1.5. God accounts, that we do not onely greatly profit him, but do procure great delight and plea∣sure to him, when we reverence his holy name; which how preti∣ous it is, it doth appeare hereby, that he setteth the hallowing of his name before his kingdome. Many of the Kings subjects that are in the farthest parts of the land, never see his face all their life time, and yet in reverence to his name are ready to make long journeyes, to appeare when they are commanded in his name; and so it fareth with us that live on earth: for, Deum nemo vidit unquam, Joh. 18. Nay, very few are admit∣ted to see his back-parts, Exod. 33. But though wee cannot see his face, yet as those are counted dutifull subjects that do not onely re∣verence the Princes person, but obey such commandements as come in his name: so looke what duty wee do to Gods name here on earth, he reckons it to be as good service, as that which is perfor∣med by the Angels in heaven, that alwaies behold his face, Mat. 18. And reason it is that we should esteeme of Gods name, for as in time of trouble, Turris altissima nomen Domini, the Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, Prov. 18.10. So being delivered once of danger, yet we are sure of the salvation of our soules, and sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 6. Besides there is no other name given under heaven, by which men can be saved, Act. 4. And therefore ought by good right to receive sanctification of us. Howbeit we may not hereupon ground that errour, which some gather upon these words, Ephes. 1. where it is said, That God hath tho∣sen us in Christ to the praise of the glory of his grace: not that God is desirous of vaine-glory, he is not to receive any thing from us; but contrary-wise as he is good, so he is desirous to communicate his goodnesse to us: but the care that he hath for the sanctifying of his name, ariseth from the duty which man oweth unto him: In which regard such as have beene most religious in all times, have reared up Altars, and set up Temples in honour of Gods Name. The account of this Petition is that which maketh the difference betwixt the Papists and religious people, betweene Heretickes and the true worshippers of God, that the one esteemeth highly of
the Name of God, the other doth not. We usually account of mens names, according to the worth of their persons: but God himselfe is holy, therefore he tels us, that his name also is holy: as the Prophet saith, Holy and reverent is his Name, Psal. 111.9. and Psal. 9.9. and it is not onely holy in it selfe, but it gives holinesse unto all things that are holy. The word of God is holy, because it is published in nomine Dei, wherefore the name of God being holy in it selfe, needs not be hal∣lowed by us, that can neither adde holinesse to it, nor take any from it; but when God willeth us to hallow his Name, it is to prove us, that by glorifying his Name, we may shew how we glorifie God himselfe, and what reckoning we make of him, that God may have proofe how we do with the Virgin magnifie God our Saviour, Luk. 2. and how we do glorifie God in our bodies, and in our spirits, 1 Cor. 6. The Name of God must be considered in two sorts, either as it is expressed by the terme of Lord, Father, Lord Almighty, or else as it is expressed in such things as beare his name, as he speaketh of Moses, Exod. 23. Behold I will send my Angel before thee, beware of him, and heare his voyce, &c. quia nomen meum est in eo. Touching the expressed name of God, whether it be Father, which importeth his goodnesse, or Lord, which implyeth his power, as we may not account basely of them, so we must not use them light∣ly and negligently, but upon just occasion. The things that have the name of God impressed and imprinted in them, are either those persons which have their denomination of God, either joyntly, as the Church, which is called sancta Ecclesia Dei, or severally, as the Priest, of whom Moses saith, Let thy Urim and thy Thummim bee with thy holy one, Deut. 33. The Priests are called holy, because they are consecrated to the Lord: In which respect, as in the old Testament they are called vi∣ri Dei; so in the New, they are vasa nominis Dei, vessels of the name of God, as the Lord speakes in a vision touching Saul to A∣nanias, That he was a chosen vessell to beare the Name of God among the Gentiles, Act. 9.15. Secondly, those places are said to be Gods, which are consecrated to holy uses, as the Sanctuary, which is Domus Dei, and all those pla∣ces, where he puts the remembrance of his Name, and whither he pro∣miseth that he will come to blesse his people that are assembled there for his worship, Exod. 20. Thirdly, those times which are kept holy to the Lord, as the Sabbath, which is dies Domini, Rev. 1. Fourthly, the Word of God preached in Gods name. Fifthly, the Element consecrated in the Sacrament, for a holy use, cal∣led therefore, panis Dei, Joh. 6. In all these there is an impression of Gods name, and therefore we must not lightly account of them, but shew great reverence to them, that thereby we may testifie the high and reverent regard and estimation we have of God himselfe, for sanctification is when God is said to magnifie or glorifie.
It signifies to make great and glorious: so when sanctification is given to him, it betokeneth to make holy, but when we are said to sanctifie, that is, to account holy; when we magnifie God, that is magnifacere Deum, to esteeme greatly of God; and our glorifying of God is to account him glorious: so that when we pray, Hallowed be thy Name, our desire is, that Gods name which is holy of it selfe, may be so accounted of us; and be holily used by us. And whereas he saith not glorificetur, or magnificetur nomen tuum, glorified, or magnified by thy Name, but sanctificetur, hallowed, or sanctified be thy Name, it is to the end, that we receiving the sancti∣fication of Gods spirit, might have a holy regard of his Name; for things may be accounted great and glorious by those which are accounted neither great nor glorious: but sanctificetur cannot come from any persons that are prophane, but onely such persons as are holy: therefore the Angels in heaven cry not, Glorious, Glorious, but Holy, Holy, Holy, Esay 6. The title that Aaron ware upon his breast, was not Glory, but Holinesse unto the Lord, Exod. 28. And the foure beasts ceased not to cry day and night, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, Rev. 4.8. The duties which pertaine to the sanctifying of Gods name, are two. First, that against which we do Deprecari, or pray to be remo∣ved: secondly, that for which wee do pray, or desire to be granted. First, wee are to pray, that we may not use the name of God, which is Wonderfull and Holy, either contemptuously to Magicke, or cursing, or negligently abuse it upon any slight occasion; because that holy things are to be separated from a common use, and are not to be used but when necessity requireth. We see by experience that the holy name of God hath not that reverence which it ought to have, and therefore the persons which do take it in vaine, do oftentimes pull upon themselves the plagues and vengeance of God by that sinne: for God doth in justice pu∣nish such offenders, not because the name of God can receive any pollution by mens default; but because we doe, quantum in nobis est, as farre as in us lyeth, pollute the holy name of God, even as hee that looketh after a woman to lust after her, hath already committed the sinne of uncleannesse, although she be not a whit the lesse chaste for his lust, Mat. 5. The Heathen faile in this duty, because they do appropriate the name of God to foure-footed beasts, Rom. 1.23. And change the glory of God, who is incorruptible into the similitude of mortall man. The Jew sinneth, because he contemnes the name of JESUS, which is a name above all names, Phil. 2. and despiseth the name of CHRIST, the preciousnesse whereof appeareth herein, by that that it is Oleum effusum, an ointment powred out, Cant. 1. But as we are to pray against the contemptuous abuse of Gods name, so we are to pray that we do not negligently, or carelesly use it, with∣out that reverent estimation, and regard, that is due to it; that we tread not under feete the Sonne of God, nor account of the blood of the Testament, whereby we are fanctified, as a common thing, Heb. 10.29.
Secondly, Moses and Aaron were debarred from entring into the land of Canaan, not because they polluted Gods name; but for that they did not sanctifie the Lord among the children of Israel at the waters of strife, Deut. 32.51. Therefore as we pray against the contempt and negligent use of Gods name; so we must pray, that we may have a due regard of it: First, that we sanctifie Gods name in our hearts, 1 Pet. 3. Secondly, we must not use the name of God with our tongues but seriously, and therefore we are forbidden to take it in vain in the third Com∣mandement. Thirdly, in all our actions we must not begin any thing that is extraordinary, but in the Name of the Lord that made heaven and earth, Psal. 124. and men must referre the end of them to the Glo∣ry of his name, 1 Cor. 10. God, whose name is called upon by us, is holy, and Christ, of whom we are called Christians, Act. 11. is holy; therefore we must sanctifie God in our actions. Neither do we pray, that we our selves onely may sanctifie Gods name, but that others also may do the same, for Christ saith not, Sanctisicemus, let us sanctifie: but Sanctificetur, let thy name be san∣ctified. This is it whereunto the Prophet exhorteth, Laudate Dominum omnes Gentes, Laudate Dominum omnes populi, Psal. 100. and Psal. 117. Praise the Lord all yee Nations, praise him all yee people; that is for persons. For places, The Lords name be praysed from the rising of the Sunne to the going downe of the same, Psal. 113. Thirdly, for the time, Blessed be the name of the Lord from this time forth for evermore, Psal. 113. But because it cannot generally be sanctified, except it be known, we must desire that all may know God, and pray with the Prophet, Let thy way be knowne upon earth, and thy saving health among all Na∣tions, Psal. 67. Secondly, not to know it only, but cheerfully to go forward in the profession of Gods truth, and in the worship of his name: Thou hast multiplyed the people, but not increased their joy, Esay 9.2. But wee are to pray that as all Nations know his name, so that they may so carry it and professe it, as that the Heathen may not have occasion to say scoffingly, Populus Dei est iste, Ezek. 36.20. We must desire of God that all that professe his name may so carry themselves, that for their sakes the name of God may not be evill spoken of among the Gen∣tiles, Rom. 2. But contrariwise, that they may shine as lights in the world, among a froward and crooked generation, Phil. 2. That they may by their good workes stirre up all men to glorifie our heavenly Father, Matth. 5. and by their good conversation, without the word, winne those that obey not the Word, 1 Pet. 3.2. We are to desire that such as have not yet cared to performe this duty, may now begin, that such as have begun to sanctifie Gods name, may goe forwards, and that such as are fallen away from God, and pollute that holy Name, which sometimes they did
highly esteeme, may resipiscere, that being renewed by repentance, they may recover themselves out of Relapses, that they may be of the society of Angels, that cry continually, Holy, Holy, Holy, Esay 6. Rev. 4. We must be carefull not for our selves onely, but for those over whom we have power, that they may sanctifie Gods name and account it holy; that the Heathen may not take occasion to pol∣lute the holy name of the Lord, saying, Are these the people of the Lord? but that while they behold our good conversation, they may have occasion to say, Verily God is in you, 1 Cor. 14.1 Cor 14.25. Thirdly, Tuum nomen, thy name; men are given generally to give a kind of honour to God, but in the meane time they will have themselves honoured, but here they are taught otherwise. It is our duty to ascribe all glory to God; Non nobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam, Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but to thy name give the glory, Psal. 115. So that all men are no lesse desirous of their owne ho∣nour and glory, then the builders that built Babell, that said, Let us get us a name, Gen. 11. But such as are thus affected, and carried with the love of them∣selves, are not fit to sanctifie the name of God, as our Saviour speakes, How can yee beleeve, seeing yee receive glory one of another, and seeke not the glory which is of God? Joh. 5.44. As we may not usurpe Gods honour for our selves, so we may not defie Princes: for we see how ill that voyce was taken, Vx Dei & non hominis, the voyce of God and not of man, Act. 12. neither may we give divine honour to the Apostles and Prophets of God. The Hea∣then people said of Paul and Barnabas, Gods are come downe to us in the shape of men, and they would have sacrificed unto them, but the Apo∣stles, not willing to admit this sacriledge, rent their cloathes and cry∣ed, We are men subject to the same passions that you your selves be, Act. 14. for we are desirous to give honour, if not to our selves, yet to others; but here Christ tels us, that no other name is to be sanctified but the name of God; whereof we should be so carefull, that we ought to pray, that Gods name may be sanctified by others, if not by our selves, though we in our owne persons cannot hallow it, yet san∣ctificetur nomen tuum, Let thy name O Lord be sanctified. Hereby, as we pray for the gift of the feare of God, which is one of the seven vertues which are set downe, Esay 11. because wee do truly sanctifie God, when we make him our Feare and Dread, Esay 8.13. So wee pray against the vice of pride which is the contrary to the vertue of Feare, so shall we obtaine the blessings, Matth. 5.23. Blessed are the poore in spirit, &c. And upon this petition is grounded, not only whatsoever Hymne or Psalme is sung of the Congregation, but even the end of all Assemblies is to ascribe Holinesse to God, and to sanctifie his Name for his benefits bestowed upon us. And in this they acknowledge, first, their owne unworthinesse: secondly, they blesse him for his goodnesse extended toward them: thirdly they do not acknowledge it in themselves, but do tell it forth as the Psalmist speaketh: O come hither and hearken, all yee that do feare
God, and I will tell you what he hath done for my soule, Psal. 66. Fourthly, to this end they lift up their voyces in singing, to the end they may make the voyce of his praise to be heard, Psal. 66. And among other benefits, we are to praise and blesse his name for the benefit of Sanctification, which we have in the name of the Lord Jesus: secondly, for the Meanes whereby this Sanctification is offered and wrought in us, which is the Word, as Christ saith: O Fa∣ther sanctifie them in thy truth, Joh. 17.13. For the perfection of san∣ctification that we shall have after this life, when we shall be Parta∣kers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1.12. when we shall continually sing with the heavenly Angels, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, Esay 6. And howsoever, when we desire of God that his name may be sanctified, we seeme like naturall children to forget our owne ne∣cessities in respect of the care we have to Gods glory; yet even then, we pray no lesse for our selves then for God, for the Lord hath pro∣mised: Them that honour mee I will honour, 1 Sam. 2.30. and Christ saith: That if the Name of the Lord Jesus be glorified in us, we also shall be glorified in him, 2 Thess. 1.12. Et sanctificando nomen, adveniet Regnum: In sanctifying his name, his kingdome shall come, as the next Pe∣tition is. If while we remaine on earth, our whole desire be to sanctifie Gods name, we shall at length come to the place where we shall day and night sing as the Cherubims do, Esay 6. And with the heavenly Host of Angels, sing Glory to God on high, Luk. 2. we shall fall down before his Throne, saying alwaies, Thou art worthy O Lord, to receive glory, and honour, and praise for ever, Rev. 4.11.
THE TENTH SERMON. Thy Kingdome come. HAving intreated of the first petition, touching the holy estimation of Gods name, we are consequently to speake of those sixe that concerne our selves, whereof the first three are spent in praying for that which is good, in the other three we pray for the removing of evill; The first two petitions, or the summe of them, is excellently expressed by the Propher, Psal. 84.11. And by our Saviour, Matth. 6.33. for agreeable to the words of David, and of Christ our Saviour, in the first petition wee aske for glory, and seeke for the Kingdome of God; in the second, for grace and righteousnesse: in the third, for the good things of this life, which shall not be withheld from them that leade a godly life, but shall be ministred unto them that upon earth doe seeke Gods Kingdome, and the righteousnesse thereof. Wherefore as of things which concerne our good, the first, both in order and nature, is the Kingdome of God; for the first thing in our desire ought to be the Kingdome of God, according to the com∣mandement of our Saviour, and we are to account all things but dung in respect of it, Phil. 3.9. Hereunto is required the spirit of Wisedome, and Vnderstanding, Isa. 11.2. that may teach us to contemne all earthly pleasures, in respect of the heavenly Kingdome. Here our Saviour condemneth that capitall vice that reignes in those men which in the world live of their owne, and take no further care but to establish for themselves a Kingdome upon earth. But if (according to his direction) we fixe our desire upon the Kingdome of Heaven, and by despising the world, doe labour for the vertue, which consists in the purity of the heart, then shall we have the blessing that is promised to the pure in heart, Matth. 5.8. that is, they shall be ex∣alted to see God. Now when he saith, None shall see my face and live, Exod. 33. they that truly make this prayer shall behold his face in the Kingdome of glory.
These two first petitions have relation to the Invocation; for as God by the word Father doth expresse his love to us, and for that he is in Heaven, doth give us hope for an heavenly estate; so we in these petitions doe first desire that whereby our love towards him may ap∣peare, while we prefer the sanctifying of his name before the regard of our owne good: secondly, we declare our heavenly Hope that may come of being partakers of his heavenly Kingdome. Howsoever God will not have any mans name Hallowed, or Glori∣rified but his owne, as he speakes of himselfe, Esa. 42. My glory will I not give to another: yet he will communicate his Kingdome to us: and therefore in our owne behalfe weare taught to pray: Thy King∣dome come. In the petition we are to consider two things: First, the Kingdome it selfe: secondly, the Comming of his Kingdome. Touching the first point it may be objected, how it is that Christ teacheth us to make this petition: for Gods Kingdome is an everlasting Kingdome, and his Dominion endureth throughout all ages, Psal. 145.13. How then is it said to come? For the answer of this doubt, the Kingdome of God must be distinguished. First, God hath an Vniversall Kingdome, such a Kingdome as ever was, and for ever shall be; of which it is said: The Lord is King, be the people never so impotent: he ruleth as King, be the people never so unquiet, Psal. 99. Secondly, there is a Kingdome of Glory, that whereof our Saviour speaketh, Matth. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdome prepared for you, &c. And the thiefe upon the Crosse said, Lord remember me when thou commest into thy Kingdome, Luke 13. and this is the Kingdome which in the first place Christ teacheth us to pray for: we pray for this King∣dome, that it may come: we pray for our owne good, for it is a King∣dome of power, and therefore able to defend us: and therefore our Saviour in the conclusion of his prayer, addeth this, For thine is the Kingdome, Matth. 6. According to which the Prophet David saith: Thy Saints give thankes to thee, they shew the glory of thy Kingdome, and talke of thy power, Psal. 145.11. The government of his Kingdome is committed to Christ, of whom it was said by God: I have set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion, Psal. 2. In which regard he doubteth not to affirme of himselfe, Matth. 28: Data est mihi omnis potestas, &c. All power is given e in Heaven and in Earth. And notwithstanding God reigneth as King; yet that is verified, which the Prophet complaineth of, Isa. 26.13. O Lord God, other gods besides thee have ruled over us: for Sathan taketh upon him to be King, and hath played the Tyrant, and hath prevailed so farre, as that the greatest part of the world are subdued unto him, in which re∣gard our Saviour calleth him the Prince of the world, Iohn 14.30. And by the Apostle he is termed the God of this world, for that he blindeth mens eyes, and maketh them subject to the Kingdome of darknesse, 2 Cor. 4. Secondly, there is a Kingdome of sinne, against which the Apostle exhorteth: Let not sinne reigne in your mortall bodies, Rom 6 2. which he meaneth, when he saith: That sinne hath reigned unto ath, Rom▪ 5.21.
Thirdly, the Apostle sheweth, that Death hath a Kingdome, when he saith, that by meanes of sinne death reigned from Adam to Moses, Rom. 5.14. These are enemies to the Kingdome of God; for while the Devill reighneth by meanes of sinne, as he doth so long as he worketh in the children of disobedience, Ephes. 4. he taketh away the glory of Gods Kingdome, and Death takes away the power of it. And in regard of Sathans Kingdome, he is said to be a King over all the children of pride, Iob 41.34. For he makes the whole world rebell against God, so that they are not ashamed to deny him to his face; and that is true not onely of the common sort of the world, but even of a great many of the Church, of which number are those that sticke not to say, We will not have Christ to rule over us, Luke 19.14. Againe, there are many stumbling blocks for the hinderance of Gods Kingdome, Matth. 13.41. that the Kingdome of God cannot come; and therefore we doe worthily pray as well that the King∣dome of Sathan and sinne may be overthrowne, as for the removing of those offences. God having exalted his Sonne into the highest Heaven, saith unto him, Sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy foot-stoole, Psal. 110. The last enemy that is to be destroyed, is death, 1 Cor. 15.16. Where∣fore our desire is, that there may be such a Kingdome, as wherein the Law of God may be exactly kept, and that it would please God in this Kingdome to tread downe Sathan under our feete, Rom. 16. that not on∣ly death it selfe, but he that hath the power of death being destroyed, Heb. 2.14. God may be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.28. When we behold the state of the world, and see that good men are trodden under feete, and the vessels of wrath and sinne are exalted and prosper, then we may know that that is not the true Kingdome, and therefore we pray that God will set up his Kingdome in our hearts, and governe us by his Spirit. And therefore this point doth not onely concerne our selves, but also God, for unlesse his Kingdome come, his name cannot be sancti∣fied of us. As there are temporall Kingdomes, so there is a spirituall Kingdome, called the Kingdome of Grace, whereof our Saviour speaketh, The King∣dome of God is within you, Luke 17.21. As before we prayed for the Kingdome of Glory, so now for this Kingdome of Grace; for, without this we shall never bee partakers of that other Kingdome. The glory of other Kingdomes is the reformation of things that were before amisse; but the glory of the Kingdome of Grace is, that, as during the tyranny of Sathan, Sinne raigned unto death, so now under this Kingdome, Grace may raigne through righteousnesse by Iesus Christ, Rom. 5.21. That we may have interest in both these Kingdomes, wee must hearken to that which Christ proclaimeth, Matth. 4.27. Repent, for the Kingdome of God draweth neare: as it draweth neare to us, so wee
must draw neare to it, else we shall never enter into it, for, except a man be borne againe, he cannot enter into the Kingdome of God, Iohn 3.2. And that we may beginne to draw neare to it, there is an outward regiment to be used, which is a token of the grace of God bearing rule in our hearts; we must by the Kingdome of God within us, cast out Devils, Matth. 8. We must intreate God by the power of his Spirit to plant in our hearts that which is good, and to roote out, and remove out of them that which is bad, Matth. 13.48. We must displace Sa∣than and sinne, that they set not up their thrones in our hearts, and in stead of it, we must set up Gods Kingdome, ruling in us by his Spirit, for the Kingdome of God stands in righteousnesse, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Rom. 14.17. If we finde these vertues in us, they are sure pledges of the King∣dome of Grace, and we may assure our selves, that after this life is ended, we shall be received into the Kingdome of Glory. And how soever he hath appointed Kings and Rulers over us for our outward safety and defence, yet they have their Scepter from him, and the end of their rule is, to further Gods Kingdome, as the Apo∣stle speaketh, That we may live under them, in all godlinesse and honesty, 1 Tim. 2. Touching the comming of his Kingdome, it may be demanded why we pray that it may come to us, seeing that it were meeter that we should come toward it? But hereby Christ giveth us to understand what our corruption is: It is with us, as with the Israelites, that were so addicted to the flesh-pois of Egypt, that they cared not to goe into the promised land, likewise we are so in love with this present world, as that we have no minde of Heaven. Besides, there are so many stumbling-blocks in our way, as that the Kingdome of God must come unto us, or else we shall never possibly come unto it. Therefore, as we pray that God would lighten our blind eyes, and inflame our hard hearts with a love of his heavenly King∣dome, so also, that he would send his Angels to gather out of his King∣dome, all things that offend, Matth. 13.41. The things that we pray against, are the Kingdome of Sathan, darke∣nesse, and sinne, that they may depart from us, and that the inward King∣dome of Grace may take place in our hearts, but the principall King∣dome that we desire is the Kingdome of Glory, whereof our Saviour said, Behold, I come quickly, Revel. 22.7. This is the Kingdome which the Saints desire, saying, Come quickly, Lord Iesus, Revel. 22.20. and all creatures doe waite for this King∣dome, looking when they shall be made free from the bondage of their corruption, Rom. 8.20. For whereas now all things are subject unto vanity, then there shall be a Kingdome that shall not perish. It is not for the wicked to desire the comming of his Kingdome; Woe be to you that desire the comming of the Lord, it is darknesse, and not light, Amos 5.18. The wicked shall say to the Mountaines, Fall upon us, for the wrath of the Lord no man is able to abide it, Revel. 6.16. But to the godly, it is a day of comfort, Lift up your heads, for the day of redemption drawes neare, Luke 21.33. Howsoever, hee will render ven∣geance
to the ungodly that have not knowne nor obeyed the Gospel of God, 2 Thes. 1.8. Yet he comes to make a garland to crowne the godly, and to set them in his throne, they shall be received into his Kingdome of glory, where they shall injoy the things, which neither eye hath seene, nor eare hath heard, nor hath ever entred into the heart of man, which he hath prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 1. Therefore Saint Paul saith, I desire to be dissolved, and to bee with Christ, Phil. 3. Simeons desire is, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, Luke 2.29. Thus the remembrance of the day of our redemption is a joyfull remembrance to them, and the chiefe thing that they desire, so that they are willing to depart, in regard of their future hope, rather then to tarry here: and howbeit that Christ deferres his Kingdome and com∣ming, yet we are to be watchfull, for it will come as a snare, Luke 21. and 1 Thes. 5. and when he commeth he will rather be for us, then a∣gainst us.
THE ELEVENTH SERMON. Thy will be done. THe summe of all our desires, is set downe by those words of the Prophet, Psal. 84. where he saith, The Lord shall give glory and peace, and no good thing shall he with-hold from them that live upright∣ly; And our Saviour doth excellently expresse the same, Matth. 6. Seeke the Kingdome of God, and his righteousnesse, and all other things shall be ministred. The Petitions of glory, and Gods Kingdome, have already beene han∣dled: Now in this third (which is the second of those which concerne our selves) we are suiters for the grace of God in this life, whereby we may be enabled to doe his will here, that so we may obtaine the King∣dome of glory in the world to come: for the Kingdome of God, and of glory is the Heaven that we desire all to arrive at, and grace and righte∣ousnesse is the gale of wind that drives us forward thereunto, and our suite to God in this petition is, that by doing of his will here on earth, Grace may raigne in our hearts by righteousnesse, Rom. 5.21. that so here∣after we may raigne with him in glory. He doth not onely will us to seeke Gods Kingdome, Matth. 6. And tels us that there is one prepared for us before the foundation of the world, Matth. 25.34. but also how we may finde it, and attaine to it, Matth. 7. Not every one that saith, Lord, Lord, shalt enter into the King∣dome of God, but he that shall doe the will of my Father which is in Heaven. Therefore touching the order of this prayer, as of those things which concerne our good, the first is, that Gods Kingdome may come to us: so the doore whereby we must enter into the same, is the doing of Gods will, and therefore in the second place we are taught, that the Kingdome of God shall come, not by wishing or desiring, but by do∣ing of Gods will, as Christ saith, The Kingdome of God is come neare you. So Christ tels us, If we draw neare to God, he will draw neare to us, Iames 4. Touching the Will of God, it may be demanded, Why we should demand, and aske this petition; For as the Psalmist saith, Our God
is in Heaven, he doth whatsoever he will, Psal. 115. Whatsoever the Lord willed, that did he, in Heaven, in the earth, and in all deepe places, Psal. 135.6. and who hath resisted his will? Rom. 9.19. No counsell or wisedome can prevaile against the Lord, Prov. 21.30. And if any doe oppose them∣selves against his will, yet they doe but kicke against the prickes, Acts 9. The answer to this objection is, that we pray not so much that Gods will may be done, but rather, that, what God willeth, may bee our will; for there is one will of God which we may resist, another which we may not resist. For the distinction of Gods will, it is either hidden and secret, or re∣vealed and open, the one is that which the Prophet cals the counsell or thought of his heart, Psal. 33.11. The other is that will of his word, wherein the declareth and openeth to men what his will is. His secret will is, voluntas beneplaciti, the good pleasure of his will; his revealed will is, voluntas signi, which is disclosed to us. Gods secret will is, voluntas quam Deus vult, that will which God willeth; his revealed will is, voluntas quam ipse nos velle vult, that will which he willeth us to will; the secret will of his heart is, volun∣tas adoranda, non scrutanda: He that curiously searcheth the glory of Hea∣venly things, shall not enter into glory, Prov. 25.27. How unsearchable are his judgements? Rom. 11. and who hath knowen the will of the Lord? or who was his counsellour? But the open and revealed will of God is, vo∣luntas scrutanda, & sacienda, both to be searched out, and to be done of us. Be not unwise, but understand what is the will of God, Ephes. 5.17. The knowledge of his will is not enough, but as Christ saith, If yee know these things, blessed are ye if ye doe them, Iohn 13.17. Of the secret will of God, that is true which the Apostle saith, Who hath resisled his wil? Rom. 9. and therefore we pray not that that will may be done. Of his revealed will, that is verified which Christ complaineth, Matth. 23. Quoties volui congregare vos, & noluistis? How often would I gather you together, but yee would not? God often times willeth when we will not, and therefore we have neede to pray that his re∣vealed will may be accomplished in us. Moses thus distinguisheth Gods will, Secreta Deo nostro, quae autem revelavit, nobis, & filiis nostris, Deut. 29. The things that are secret be∣long to God, but the revealed are for us, and our children. The secret will of the Father is, that of all that he hath given me, I should lose no∣thing, Iohn 6.39. The revealed will of him that sent me is, That every oe that seeth the Sonne, and believeth in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. Gods judgements, which are the fountaine of Reprobation, are abyssus magna, Psal. 36.6. and his mercie extended to all, that by faith apprehend the same, is abyssus & profunditas, a great depth, Rom. 11.37. Therefore we are not curiously to enquire and search out of Gods secret touching Reprobation or Election, but to adore it. His revealed will doth especially concerne us, which is expressed in his Commandements; whereby hee declareth whatsoever hee desireth at our hands, and therefore our study must bee to
frame our lives and actions according to that will. Unto both these wils, we must give a fiat; but severally. The first will is passive, and for as much as the secret will of God shall be done whether we will or no, we crave that with patience we may submit our selves to whatsoever he in his secret will hath appoin∣ted to bring upon us. The other will is active, and therein we desire, that we may willing∣ly practise that which he willeth in his word. There is voluntas de nobis, and voluntas in nobis; for the first, we desire that we may approve of it, though it be done without us: in the second, we desire not onely an approbation, but a co-operation. Touching his secret will, when we say fiat voluntas tua, we pray that Nihil Dei displiceat nobis, that nothing which God commands dis∣please us, and in respect of his will declared, our desire is, that nihil nostrum displiceat Deo, that nothing we doe, doe displease God. Touching his secret will, so long as it is not plaine (within his owne counsell he will compasse) we may dissent from it, for a man may bona voluntate velle, quod Deus non vult; hee may with a good will, will that which God wils not, so Samuels will was good, when he wept for Sal whom God would not have him to bewaile, 1 Sam. 26. Secondly, we may bona voluntate nolle quod deus vult, with a good will not will that which God willeth: as a child may be unwilling of the death of his Father, whom notwithstanding Gods will is, shall not recover. Thirdly, men may mala voluntate velle, quod Deus non vult, with an ill will he may will that which God willeth not: The Patriarches in a corrupt will would goe into Egypt, whom God would not to goe thither. And fourthly, they may in a corrupt will be unwilling to that which God willeth: So it was Gods will that Saul should be King, when as the people were unwilling to it; and this is the state of the will of the creature, so long as it is not acquainted with the will of his Creator. But when once it pleaseth God to reveale his will, then wee must say with the people, fiat consilium Domini, Let the counsell of the Lord come to passe, Isa. 46.10. We must not wrestle nor struggle against it; but patiently submit our wils to his, not onely when Gods will is vo∣luntas dulcis, when his will is to doe us good, as Bethuel spake con∣cerning the marriage of his daughter, Gen. 24.50. but when it is Amara & aversa voluntas, we must submit our wils to his, when it pleaseth him to crosse us, either outwardly, by taking away those that are bere∣ficiall to us: in which case it was said by some, that bewailed the de∣parture of Saint Paul, The will of the Lord be done, Act. 21.14. or in our selves, in which case we may say with Christ, Luke 23. I would have this cup passe from me; yet O Father, if thy will be other wayes, not my will, but thy will be done. This lesson had David learned; for albeit he had complained of the great affliction that he had suffered; yet he saith, Tacui tamen Domine, Psal. 39. And as he was content to beare this, so he gave God thanks
for them, acknowledging, That is was good for him that he had beene in trouble, Psal. 119. We must learne Iobs fruits, Iob 1. as well as Bethuels, and these be∣ing joyned, we shall perfectly conforme our wils to Gods secret will. Concerning the will of God declared, or the will of his word, the Lord by his Prophet saith of his Church, My will is in it, but David speakes more plainely of this revealed will, Thou hast charged that we should keepe thy Commandements diligently, Psal. 119. The Apostle speakes more particularly, haec est voluntas Dei, sancti∣ficatio vestra, 1 Thes. 4. and this is the will of God, that by well-doing, yee should stop the mouthes of ignorant and foolish men, 1 Pet. 1.15. This is the revealed will of God, and we must not onely take notice of it, but labour to practise that which in our understanding we know is meete to be done. As the Apostle saith, Oslende mihi fidem ex operibus tuis, Iames 2. Shew methy faith by thy workes: So we must shew our desire that wee have unto Gods Kingdome, by obedience of his will; for not they that sing, or say, or wish, that Gods will be accomplished, but qui secerit, He which doth the will of God, shall enter into the Kingdome of God, Matth. 7. To the doing of Gods will, two things are required: first, that wee lay aside our owne will: For as they that will sanctifie Gods name, must say with David, not to us, but to thy name give the praise. Psal. 115. So that Gods will may be done, we must say with Christ, not my will, but thy will be done, we must abridge our selves of our owne will, that Gods will may take place. The better sort that are regenerate, doe assent to the Law of God, that it is good, and have a delight to it, Rom. 7.22. but yet they see another law in their members, which leadeth them unto the law of sinne and death. Every man findes that to be true in himselfe, that the flesh lusteth a∣gainst the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, Gal. 5. The will of the flesh wils one thing, and the will of God another, therefore that Gods will may take place, we must renounce our owne will, and as Christ saith, willingly deny our selves, Matth. 16.24. We must oppose Gods will to the will of the flesh, and the will of man, Iohn 1.13. We must pray unto God, Converte meum nolle in tuum velle, con∣vert my froward and unwilling will into thy will; and because thy will is the true will, Insereolem voluntatis tuae oleastro voluntatis meae, in∣graft the true Olive of thy will into the wilde Olive of my will. If our will be contrary unto Gods will, and will not be subject unto it, then we must scatter it, and pull it up by the rootes, Psal. 32.9. In chamo, & fraeno constringe maxillas meas, (sayes an ancient Father) and upon the words of Christ, Compell them to enter, that my house may bee full, Luke 24. saith he, Compelle me Domine intrare, si vocare non est sais. Secondly, that Gods will may be done in us, we must be possessed with a base conceit of our will, and have an high, and reverent opini∣on of Gods will: we must be perswaded that our owne will is blinde, and childish, and perverse, and therefore Solomon saith, Ne innitaris,
&c. Doe not leane to thine owne wisedome, Prov. 3.1. Every man is a beast by his owne knowledge; and to expresse the fault of mans will, Iob saith, that man is tanquam pullus asini, like an wilde Asses colt, Iob 11.12. which of all other beasts is most foolish. But be hee never so wise naturally, yet he is but a foole in heavenly things, as Saint Paul witnesseth, 1 Cor. 2.14. Men speake evill of things which they know not, yea, even in those things which they know naturally they are but beasts, Iudg. 10. All our reason and understanding hath not in it selfe sufficient direction for our will: and therefore Christ saith of Saint Peter, that flesh and bloud did not reveale to him that knowledge, that is attained by Gods Spirit, Matth. 16. and in spirituall things, Saint Paul he counselled not with flesh and bloud, Gal. 1.16. Lastly, our will is wholly enclined to that which is evill, Ier. 4. where∣fore one saith truly, Tolle voluntatem tuam, & ego extinguam inferaum: take away thine owne will, and I will quench hell fire. They that are given over to Satan, as the Incestuous Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5. may be restored, but those whom God giveth over to their owne will, Rom. 1.24. their case is desperate, and therefore wee have the more cause to thinke the more humbly of our owne will, and wil∣lingly submit our selves to the holy will of God. Touching both, Saint Paul saith, The Law is holy, and the Comman∣dement is holy, and just, and good, and the Law is spirituall, but I am car∣nall, sold under sinne, Rom. 7.14. But we must thinke honourably of Gods will: and this we cannot but doe, if we consider, that his will is so perfect, as it needeth no rule to be guided by: but our will being crooked, and perverse, must of necessity be directed by the rule of his holy will, or else we shall swerve out of the way. Our will is blinde and foolish, but his will is full of counsell and wisedome; our will is crooked, and perverse, and froward, but his will is full of all goodnesse; which we are to understand hereby, that he sheweth himselfe a Father to us: if a child be left to his owne will, it is as much as his life is worth, therefore with-hold not correction, but strike him with the rod, and he shall not die, Prov. 22.13. and our will being childish, we must be abridged of it, or else, wee shall fall into danger: therefore we doe pray, that we may not onely submit our will to Gods, but that we may utterly deny our owne will, being foolish: that Gods most holy will may take place in us: but we doe not onely pray, that we may have a will, and desire to doe Gods will, but also abi∣lity, and power; for of our selves we have no strength to doe it; that ap∣peareth by the petition it selfe, Nam quid stultius, quam petere id qod pe∣nes nos est? What is more foolish then to aske those things that are in our owne power? and the Apostle saith, We are not sufficient of our selves to thinke a good thought, 2 Cor. 3. Such is our corruption, That though God will, yet we will not, Matth. 23. We cannot speake unto God; for no man can say that Iesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12. We doe not finde either will, or ability, but it is God that giveth
both, Phil. 2. and though the Spirit be willing, yet the flesh is but weake, Matth. 26.41. Therefore we are petitioners for the grace of God, and for power from him, without which we cannot doe Gods will, so that our desire is, to obtaine something from God, whereby his will may be accom∣plished in us, for it is not said, faciamus, or fac tis tuam voluntatem, let us doe, or doe thou thy will; but, fiat voluntas tua, thy will be done. Wherein we are to consider, a quo, & per quem fiat, from whom, and by whom it is to be done, we pray not that we of our selves may doe the will of God; for no man can rise up to Heaven, unlesse hee first receive a grace from Heaven; He that is of the earth, speaketh of the earth, Iohn 3. Therefore our suite is not onely for good thoughts, and heavenly desires, but also for ability of grace; but this grace is either passive or active. The passive grace is that, which proceeds from God towards us; which standeth in offering grace, as God is said to doe, 1 Pet. 1.13. or when he causeth his grace to appeare to all men, Tit. 1.2.11. and that is not enough, unlesse we be made capable of it; as it is invaine, that light doth shine, unlesse we have eyes to see it; and therefore as hee offers grace, so he must give us grace, and enable us, to draw grace from him, Prov. 12.2. That he would powre grace into us, Zach. 12. That he would sow in our hearts good thoughts, change our affections, and make them conformable to his will; and so though the thoughts of his heart seeme hard to flesh and bloud, may for all that please us. And last, our desire is, ut induamur viriute ex alio, Luke 24. and he doth offer his grace, and doth powre it into us. Then we must have that active grace, by which the will of God may be done in us, of which the Prophet saith, Omnia opera nostra ope∣ratus es in nobis, Thou Lord hast wrought all our workes in us, Isa. 26. God must not onely, sanare cogitationem, & mutare affectum, heale the thought, and change our affection, but perducere ad actum, that is, he must bring to passe, that as he gives us ability to doe his will, so his will may be done by us; we must say with the Prophet, Psal. 27. Thou art my helpe, for sake me not, O God of my salvation. As he prevents us with his grace, by giving us both a will, and a power, so he must still follow us with his grace, that we may goe for∣ward in doing of his will, for our case is compared to the state of the Israelites, which in their fight with Amalek, did prevaile, as long as Moses held up his hand; but when he let is downe, they were put to the worse, Exod. 17. we may see it in the case of Saint Peter, who was able to walk upon the water, while Christ held him up, but when hee was left to himselfe, he sunke, Matth. 1.4. therefore we must have not onely a pre∣venting, but also an accomplishing grace, that may still follow us in our workes: ne cessent in effectum, that they faile not in the upshot, where∣of the Evangelist makes mention, that from him who is full of grace, We must receive grace for grace, Iohn 1.14. It was not the grace of God onely, that wrought in Saint Paul, stirring him up to ho linesse: but also gratia Dei, , The grace of God with me, 1 Cor. 15. And when the Angels say , Toward
men good vvill, Luke 2. they doe not onely wish, that God vvill shew good vvill tovvards men, but that he vvould accomplish it in them, by infusing grace into their hearts. Our desire therefore is, that the vvill of God may be done and sul∣filled in us, but yet by his grace, and the assistance both of his preven∣ting and follovving grace: And as for sanctifying of Gods name, our desire vvas, that it may be sanctified of us; but if not, yet that it may ut fiat quovis modo, that it be done hovvscever, that it may be done in others: but especially in our ovvne behalfe, that vvhen vve are either unvvilling or unable, to doe his revealed vvill; it may please him to give us the knovvledge of it, and to put into us the obedience of it, that being assured in our consciences, that vve have done the vvill of God, vvee may have that peace, and joy of the holy Ghost, vvherein the Kingdome of grace standeth, vvhich may be to us a pledge of the Kingdome of glo∣ry, vvhereunto vve shall be exalted after this life, if vve be carefull both to submit our vvils to Gods secret vvill, and to frame our vvili and the actions of our life to that declared and open vvill of God, vvhich for our direction he hath revealed in his vvord.
THE TWELFTH SERMON. In Earth as it is in Heaven. WHich words are an appendix to the three first Pe∣titions; for though it be added to the third, which concerneth the doing of his will, yet the ancient Fathers referre it also to the two for∣mer; So that we are to pray no lesse, that Gods name may be sanctified in earth as it is in heaven: & that his Kingdome may be consummate in earth, as i is in heaven, then that his will be accompli∣shed on earth, as it is in heaven. Wherefore we may observe by this complement of the three first Petitions, that God respects not onely the doing of that which he requireth, but chiesly the manner of it; for it sufficeth not simply to do Gods will, as others do on earth, but we must do it as it is done in heaven; for adverbes please God better then verbes, and he respecteth more in the doing of his will, the manner of the doing of it, then our doing it selfe. The Greekes distinguish the will of God by both the words of  and  when we do Gods will without any regard how, so it be done. that is his , but when Gods will is done with a sicut, and in such fort as he requireth, that is his good pleasure, and . Gods will was done of the people, when they sacrificed any beast whatsoever, but if they chose out the fittest, then the sacrifice was the more acceptable, so in this prayer, we do not onely desire to do Gods will utcunque, without regard how, whether with willing∣nesse and cheerfulnesse, or against our wills: but wee desire to do it in the best manner, as it is done in Heaven; wherein we offer that sacrifice, or service to God, which is as the fat of Rams, for the sanctifying of his Name. The Apostle saith, that at the Name of Jesus every knee shall bow, both of things in heaven, in earth, and things under the earth, Phil. 2.10. But our desire is so to reverence the Name of Jesus, as the things in heaven reverence it.
Of Gods Kingdome it is said, that Christ is Ruler both in the midst of his enemies, and also that in the day of his power the people shall as friends offer free-will offerings with an holy worship, Psal. 110.2. But we pray that Gods Kingdome may come among us, not as among his enemies, but that we may willingly submit our selves to his will and government. Lastly, for the doing of his will the Prophet said: Whatsoever the Lord pleased that did hee, in heaven, in earth, and in the Sea, Psal. 135.6. We desire that his will may be performed in us, not as in the deepe places, but as in heaven, for this prayer containes two Sicuts the one pertaines to God, teaching us how to love him; the other concernes our neighbour, where we pray so to be forgiven, as wee forgive our debters: so that as heretofore we have noted, lege ope∣randi lex statuitur supplicandi, though there were no law to require the love of God, and our neighbour, yet this forme of prayer doth teach us how to love God, and what perfect love wee owe to our neighbour. In the thing it selfe, we are to observe three points: first, a quali∣fication: secondly, an Elevation of the soule: thirdly, an application. In the qualification we are to enquire what is meant by heaven, and earth, either tanquam continentia, or else we may understand them as things contained therein; then how Gods will is done therein. Howsover our tongue or dialect speakes of heaven singularly; yet both Greeke and Latine imply a plurality of heavens, for there are three heavens: first, the aire where the birds flye, whence they are called volucres coeli, Matth. 6. Secondly, the heaven of heavens, where the Sun, Moone, and Starres are set to give light: thirdly, that which the Apostle cals the third heaven, whereunto he was ta∣ken up, which is the place of blessednesse, where Gods Majesty is especially resident, 2 Cor. 12. In all these heavens which containe other bodies, in them wee shall find that Gods will is done. Of the lower heaven the Prophet saith, that it is obedient to Gods will, and fulfills his word by sending downe snow, and fire, and wind, Psal. 148. In the second heaven which Salomon calls the heaven of heavens, 1 Reg. 8.27. Gods will is done, for there at Gods Commande∣ment the Sunne and Moone stood still, contrary to their usuall course, till the people of God avenged themselves of their enemies, Josh. 10.13. Thirdly, the earth it selfe, and things contained in it, do yeeld obe∣dience to heaven; for if the heaven be favourable in sending downe raine and fruitfull seasons, Act. 4.17. Psal. 65. the earth an∣swerably will bring forth her encrease for the good of man; but if the heaven be brasse, the earth also will be Iron, Deut. 28. Lastly, as the powers of the heavens are such, as that they can draw up clouds from the earth, Psal. 13.5. which do distill raine up∣on the earth, to water the Furrowes thereof; so we desire, that the spirituall heaven may transforme us into an heauenly nature, not setting our minds on earthly things, but on things above.
For the things contained in heaven, as they are heavenly; so we desire, that we living on earth, may have our conversation in hea∣ven: that earthly man, to whom God said, Terra es, Gen. 3. may by this meanes be made heavenly. In the third heaven is contained, in respect of his humanity, first Christ himselfe, who is both in heaven and earth: for as he is called the head, Ephes. 3.23. of his Church, he is in Heaven: but in respect of his body, which is called Christ, 1 Cor. 12. he is on earth. Therefore we pray, that Christ on earth, that is, the Church, may do Gods will, even as Christ the head, who is in heaven, hath done it: that as Christ our head came not to doe his owne will, but the will of him that sent him, Joh. 6.38. so the whole body of Christ may labour to fulfill the same. Secondly, in heaven thus are Angels, which fulfill his Commande∣ment, and hearken to the voyce of his word, Psal. 10. So our prayer is, that men, to whom God hath made the promise, that they shall be , Luk. 20. may labour to be like the Angels, in doing Gods will, as they hope to be like them in nature. Thirdly, in heaven there is the Congregation of the first borne, Heb. 12.23. that is, the Saints departed: wherefore our prayer is, that as they have, and still do carefully fulfill Gods will, so the Saints on earth, and Church militant, may do the same. Againe, whereas Saint Cyprian out of the 16. Psalm. 2. and 19.1. saith, that heaven is here upon earth; for when the Psalmist saith: The Heavens declare the glory of God, the Apostle applyeth that to himselfe and to the rest of the Apostles, Rom. 10. of whose preaching he saith: No doubt their sound went out into all Lands, and their words unto the ends of the World: So that the Apostles were heavens living on earth: So our prayer is, that as they living on earth, lived an heaven∣ly life, and began heaven here, so our carnall heart may be applyed to the meditation of heaven, that we may be Saints on earth, Ps. 16. The Wiseman saith of the body, That it being dust, at the houre of death, turnes it self to dust, from whence it came, and that the spirit returnes to God that gave it, Eccl. 12.17. Thus must the spirit returne to God in our life-time, and we must, while we be on earth, and beare the Image of the earthly man, seeke still to be in heaven: and here labour more and more to beare the Image of the heavenly, 1 Cor. 15.49. As the heavenly part of man, that is, his spirit, is willing, and doth not only consent that Gods Law is good, but delight in it, Rom. 7. so must we be carefull to bring our flesh in subjection, that our old man, and outward man may conforme himselfe to the inward and new man, 2 Cor. 4. Eph. 4. Secondly, touching the question; How Gods will is done in hea∣ven? the answer is, that where his will is both dulcis, and amara vo∣luntas, a sweete and a bitter will, it is there obeyed and performed in both kinds: for the heavens do not onely at Gods commande∣ment keepe a continuall motion, which is agreeable to nature, but against nature, Sunne and Moone stand still at his will, Jos. 10. whose obedience tels us, that our duty is to doe his will, not only in things agreeable with our nature, but when his will is contrary to our liking.
This obedience was performed in Christ: Not my will, but thine be done, Luk. 22. and in the Angels, which at Gods commandement are ready not onely to ascend, but also to descend, Gen. 28. to shew, that they are content, not onely to appeare in heavenly glory, which is their nature, but also to be abased, according to the Apostles rule, I can abound, and I can want, Phil. 4. The heavenly bodies do service to all Nations, and the Angels are ministring spirits, Heb. 1. As naturally they have a desire to ascend to beare rule, so at Gods commandement they are content to descend, to do service here be∣low, they do altogether fulfill Gods will, Psal. 104. whereas the nature of man doth hardly grant to obey Gods will, in that which seem∣eth strange to flesh and blood, as Agrippa affirmeth of himselfe, Thou somewhat perswadest mee, Act. 26.25. The Saints in heaven confesse to God: Thou hast created all things, and for thy wils sake, they are, and were created, Rev. 4.11. And there∣fore refuse not to subject their will to the will of God, be it plea∣sant to them or not: but as our Saviour speaketh, Yee seeke mee, not because ye saw the miracles, but for that ye did eate of the loaves and were filled, Joh. 6.26. So if we do that which God requireth, it is rather for our owne sake, with regard to our owne private profit, then to do Gods will. The heavenly Angels do Gods will with willingnesse, and readi∣nesse of mind, which is the fat of their sacrifice: and therefore they are said to have every one sixe wings, Esay 6. From whose example wee must learne to do all things commanded of God, with∣out murmuring or disputing, Phil. 2.14. and that because it is Gods will we should do it. In earth when God willeth any thing, that is not pleasant to our wils, we make excuse, Luk. 14. or we post it off to others, as Peter said to John, Joh. 21. Quid autem hic? We are ready to communi∣cate with flesh and blood, Gal. 3.16. and to say with the Disciples: Du∣rus est hic sermo, this is a hard speech, Joh. 6. If we cannot shift it off from our selves, yet as the Devill reasoned; Cur venisti ante tempus? Matth. 18.29. and as the people say, It is not time yet to build the house of the Lord, Hagg. 1.5. So we are ready to deferre and prolong the doing of Gods will, as much as may be, when we do it, as the uncleane spirit would not come out of the child, but with much crying, and renting of him, Mark. 9.26. so we cannot do Gods will, but with great murmuring, and grudging; and when men do Gods will in this sort, they do it not as it is done in heaven by the Angels and Saints, that willingly obey it: but as the Devills in hell, which against their wills are faine to do it. Therefore our rule in this behalfe is, that we do Gods will, not , 2 Cor. 9. but , Col. 3. not grudgingly, but cheerfully from the heart, accounting it our meat to do the will of our heavenly Father, Joh. 4. Secondly, for the Elevation, it is true, that the qualification is signi∣fied by , not , and our prayer is, that we may do Gods will as it is done in heaven, but not as much, with like readinesse of mind, but
not in like measure: (for that is impossible for earthly men) wee desire to fulfill Gods will in the manner, but not in the same de∣gree of obedience, which may be expressed by the words Image and likenesse, Gen. 1. Our obedience may be the likenesse of the Angels; but not the Image. The Character or Stampe of the Angels obedience, is that which is equall in proportion; but such obedience is not to be found; there may be a beame of it, answerable in likenesse and quality, not in quantity; so in likenesse we are, Conformes imagine Christi, Rom. 8. and beare the image of the heavenly Man, 1 Cor. 15. as endeavouring thereunto, but yet we cannot attaine to it. But albeit, it is hard for flesh and blood, which our Saviour requi∣red: Be ye perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect, Matth. 5. yet there is an use of such precepts: first, ut feramur ad perfectionem, that we may be led on to perfection, Heb. 6.1. Secondly, we must have an Heroicall and free spirit, Psal. 51. which may stirre us up to wish that wee could do more then we can, which consists of Aspiration, and Su∣spiration. We must aspire to the greatest perfection, with David: Concupivit anima mea, My soule hath lusted to keepe thy righteous judge∣ments for ever, Psal. 119.20. And, O that my waies were so directed▪ Psal. 119.5. This is an Angelicall perfection, which we cannot attaine unto in this life: therefore we must suspirare, when we consider that the Law saith, Thou shalt not lust, and yet find that wee do lust, we are to sigh and say with the Apostle, Who shall deliver us from this body of death? Rom. 7. If we find that we cannot love our God with all our heart, and soule, as we ought, then to say with the Prophet, Vae mihi, quia pro∣longatus est incolatus meus in terra! Wo is me that my dwelling is prolon∣ged in the Tents of Kedar, Psal. 120.5. We must desire to do more then we can, and grieve that we can∣not do so much as we ought; that as we do what we can, so what we cannot do, we should supply it, Voto, desiderio, animo, with our hearty wish, desire, and mind. Thirdly, the supplication is of two sorts, Reall, and personall: Touching the first, as the grace of God is multiformis gratia, 1 Pet. 4. So the will of God being one, is of many sorts and containeth divers particulars: therefore, as we generally pray that the will of God may be done, so when by the word of God wee understand, what is the will of God in particular, we are to desire, no lesse, that it may be performed: This is the will of God, even your sanctifica∣tion, 1 Thess. 4. Therefore our desire must be, that this will of his may be done and fulfilled in us. This is a speciall remedy against the tēptations of the flesh, which oppose themselves against Gods will. There is another will of God for patience, for he would have us suffer for Christs sake, without murmuring, that so wee may stop the mouthes of ignorant men, 1 Pet. 2.6. Therefore we are to pray, that this will of God also may be done in us. As Joseph was carefull to do Gods will, touching sanctification,
and Job to obey Gods will in suffering patiently; both which are now Saints in Heaven; so must wee after their examples be both holy, and carefull and patient. It may be we are willing to obey Gods will in particular, but we will say, Nondum venit hora, it is not yet time; Therefore we must learne to practise the Prophets resolution, I made hast, and prolonged not the time to keepe thy Law, Psal. 119. When God revealeth his will to us, we must presently put it in practise, and as Saul did, Act. 9. and not counsell with flesh and blood, and this is the reall application. The persons to whom the doing of Gods will is to be applyed, are not onely the whole earth (which is also to be wished, as the Prophet sheweth) Set up thy selfe, O God, above the heaven, and thy glory above all the earth, Psal. 57. But the earth or land wherein we dwell (as the Prophet speakes) that glory may dwell, interra nostra, in our land, Ps. 85. So we pray that Gods will may be done in all lands, but especially in our land, and country, that so he may bestow his blessings upon it, but yet we are every one of us particularly to ap∣ply to our selves, for to man it was said by God, Terra es, Gen. 3. To man it was said, Earth, earth, earth, heare the word of the Lord, Jer. 22. So we desire that Gods will may especially be done, and fulfilled, in that part of the earth, whereof God hath made us, that is, that in these our earthly vessels, which we carry about with us, we may be carefull to do that, which God requireth at our hands.
THE THIRTEENTH. SERMON. Give us this day our daily bread. OUt of the words of our Saviour, in the sixth of Matth. vers. 33. wee have elsewhere set downe the order of these three Petitions, which con∣cerne our selves, for the first is the Petition of Glory, and of Gods Kingdome, which our Saviour willeth us to seeke in the first place. The second is the Petition of Grace, and of Gods righteousnesse, wherein we pray that Gods will may be done. The third Petition tendeth to this end, that as the Prophet speakes, God would not with-hold any temporall blessing, needfull for this life; but that he would give us all things that are necessary for us. The things pertaining to Glory, for which wee pray in the first place, are Eternall; those that concerne grace, are Spirituall; and the blessings of this life, which we desire may not be with-held from us, are naturall and temporall. This is Natures prayer, for not onely we, but all creatures above and beneath, make the same suit to God, by the voyce of Nature; the ravens of the aire call upon God, that he would feed them, Ps. 147. The Lyons beneath roaring for their prey, do seeke their meat at God, Psal. 104.21. and therefore no marvell that wee, in as much as we are creatures, do seeke to God, who is the God of Nature, to supply the defects of nature that we find in our selves, as other crea∣tures; and yet there is a difference betwixt us and them, for they call upon God onely for corporall food, that their bellies may be filled; but the prayer that we make for outward things, is not without respect to things spirituall, and this Petition followeth upon the o∣ther, by good consequent, and order; for (as the Heathen man saith) Haud facile emergunt, quorum virtutibus obstat Res angusta do∣mi; So wee shall be unfit to seeke Gods Kingdome, and to do his will, unlesse we have the helps of this life. Therefore we desire that God will give us the things of this life,
those things without which wee cannot serve him; that as wee desire the glory of his Kingdome, and the grace of his Spirit, where∣by we may be enabled to do his will, so hee will minister to us all things for the supply of our outward wants, in this life; the want whereof hath beene so great a disturbance to the Saints of God in all times, that they could not goe forward in godlinesse as they would. Abraham, by reason of the great famine that was in Canaan, was faine to go downe into Egypt, Gen. 12.7. The same occasion moved Isaac, to goe downe to Abimelech at Gerar, Gen. 26. and Jacob to relieve his family in the great dearth at this time, was faine to send his sonnes, the Patriarchs, into Egypt to buy corne, Gen. 42. The chil∣dren of Israell, when they wanted bread or water, murmured against God and his servants, Exod. 16. Numb. 20. the Disciples of our Saviour were so troubled in mind, because they had forgotten to take bread with them; that they understood not their Master, when he gave them warning to beware of the leven of the Scribes and Phari∣sees, Matth. 8. So the want of outward things, doth distract our Saviour were so troubled in mind, because they had forgotten to take bread with them; that they understood not their Master, when he gave them warning to beware of the leven of the Scribes and Phari∣sees, Matth. 8. So the want of outward things, doth distract our minds, and makes us unfit for Gods service. Therefore that we may in quietnesse of mind, intend those things that goe before in his prayer: our Saviour hath indited us a forme of prayer, to sue to God, as well for things temporall, as spirituall, and eternall: for it is lawfull for us to pray for them, so that we do it in order. The first Petition that the naturall man makes, is for his daily bread, but our care must be first for the Kingdome of God, next for the fulfilling of Gods will and doing that righteousnesse which God requires at our hands: and after, wee may in the third place pray for such things as we stand in need of during our life. This blessing the Fathers observe out of the blessings which Isaac pronounced upon his sonnes; Jacobs blessing was first the dew of heaven, and then the fat of the earth, shewing that the godly do preferre heavenly comforts before earthly. Esaus blessing was, first the fatnesse of the earth, and next the dew of heaven, to teach us, that prophane persons do make more reckoning of earthly commo∣dities, then of heavenly comforts, Gen. 27.28. and 39. Therefore in regard of the Spirituall account we are to make of Gods Kingdome, and the doing of his will; we are to wish them in the first place, and then Davids Unam petii à Domino, One thing I have required of the Lord, Psal. 27. And that which Christ saith to Martha, Unam est necessarium, one thing is needfull, Luk. 10. would bring us to Salomons two things, Prov. 30. Give mee not poverty, nor riches; but feed mee with food convenient for mee; lest being full, I deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? or beeing poore, I steale, and take the name of my God in vaine. And that is it which wee are bold to do, by Christs owne warrant; for he hath taught us first to pray for his Kingdome, then for the working of righteousnesse, or for the doing of Gods will, and lastly, for daily bread. If we do first pray for the two former, then we may be bold in
the third place to sue to God for the latter, for he hath promised to with-hold no good thing from them that lead a godly life; if the doing of Gods will be our meat, then, Requiem dedit timentibus se, He hath given rest to them that feare him, Psal. 111. In the Petition we are to observe from sixe words, sixe severall points: first, the thing that we desire, that is, bread: secondly, the attribute, our bread: thirdly, daily bread: fourthly, wee desire that this bread may be given us: fifthly, not to mee, but nobis, to us: sixthly hodie, and as long as we say hodie, to day, Heb. 3. To beginne with giving: hitherto the tenor of this prayer ran in the third person, now we are to pray in the second, saying: Da tu, whereupon the Church hath grounded a double dialect of prayer, which comes all to one effect; for that which the Church prayeth for, Psal. 67. God be mercifull unto us, and blesse us, is no lesse a pray∣er, then if we should say, in the second person, Miserere nostri, O Lord be mercifull to us: and blesse us, and that which is added, and lift up his countenance, is all one, as if the Church, speaking to God, should say, Lift up the light of thy countenance. This change, or alteration of person, proceedeth from the con∣fidence, which the Saints are to gather to themselves, in prayer: for having prayed for the sanctifying of Gods name, for the accom∣plishment of his Kingdome, and for grace and ability to do his will, Christ assureth us, that we may be bold to speake to God for our owne wants. Out of the word of Giving, we are to note three things: first, our owne want; for if we had it of our selves, we would not crave it of God: this confession of our want, and indigence, is a great glory to God, that all the inhabitants of the earth usque ad Regem Davidem, to professe to say, Give us, Psal. 40. I am poore and needy but the Lord careth for mee; they do professe themselves to be his beggers, not onely by the voyce of nature, which they utter for outward things, as other unreasonable creatures do, but by those prayers, which they make for the supply of grace, whereby they may be enabled to do Gods will, so that not onely regnum tuum is Gods gift, but also panem nostrum, we acknowledge to be his gift. It is from God from whom we receive all things, as well the good givings as the per∣fect gifts, Jam. 1.17. he is the author, not onely of blessings spirituall, but of benefits temporall; he gives us not onely grace to obey his will, but as the Prophet speakes, dat escam, Psal. 104. The idolatrous people say of their Idols, I will goe after my lo∣vers, that give mee my bread, and my water, my oyle, and my wine, but God saith after, It is I that gave her corne, and it is my wine, and my flaxe, and my oyle, Hos. 2.8. Ipse dat semen sementi, & panem manducanti, 2 Cor. 9.10. We are destitute of the meanest bles∣sings that are; it is God onely from whom wee receive all things, therefore to him we pray, acknowledging our owne want, Da no∣bis panem. Secondly, we must consider the word Da, as it is set in opposi∣tion to Veniat, or habeam panem, it must not content us that we have,
bread, but labour that we may have it of Gods gift; Esau said of things temporall which he enjoyed, I have enough, Gen. 33. not ac∣knowledging from whom: Balaam cared not how he came by pro∣motion, so he had it, and therefore he is said to have loved the wa∣ges of unrighteousnesse, 2 Pet. 2.15. but we must labour, not so much to have good things, as to have them from God: and Pilate is to ac∣knowledge that the power which he hath, was given him from above, Joh. 19. and not to vaunt of any usurped power. It is said of God, Tu aperis manum tuam, Psal. 104. Thou openest the doores of heaven, Psal. 78. So we are not so much to labour for temporall things by our owne endeavour, as that we may have them from God. Thirdly, Da, opposed to rendring, teacheth us, that it is not of our owne endeavour, but it is of Gods free bounty and liberality, that we have bread, and other things: which while wee seeke for of Gods gift; we confesse that to be true which Salomon saith, Non est panis sapientis, Be a man never so wise, yet he hath not alwayes to sup∣ply his need, Eccles. 9.11. As he that is highest gets not alwaies the goale, nor the strongest man the victory: so saith our Saviour, Which of you by taking thought can adde one cubit to his stature? Matth. 6. All our endeavours for the things of this life, are unprofitable, without Gods blessing; It is in vaine to rise up early, and to go to bed late, Psal. 127. And when he blesseth our labour, then he is said to give us bread; and therefore we are to confesse with David, that whatsoever we have received, we have received it at his hands, 1 Chron. 29.14. Now the meanes of Gods giving, is of foure sorts: First, God giveth bread when hee blesseth the earth with plenty; when hee gives force to the heaven: When the heaven heareth the earth, the earth heareth the Corne, the Wine, the Oyle, and they heare man, Hos. 2.21. Secondly, he gives, when hee sets us in some honest trade of life, and vouchsafeth his blessing to our endeavours therein, that we may get our living, and eate the labour of our hands, Psal. 128. without which the first giving will do us no good. Thirdly, he gives us bread, not onely in his blessing the earth with increase, and by blessing our honest paines in our vocation, but when he gives us Baculum panis, the staffe of bread; for at his plea∣sure he useth to breake the staffe of bread, Levit. 26. and to make it of no power to nourish us: then are they but beggerly elements, When we eat and have not enough, Hag. 1. Therefore our prayer is, that he would cause the earth to yeeld us bread, so that to the bread he would infuse a force, to strengthen mans heart, for which end it is or∣dained, Psal. 104. Fourthly, because Moses saies, Man lives not by bread onely, but by the Word of God: therefore we pray, that as our bread by his bles∣sing, is made to us, panis salubris, so it may be panis sanctus, Deut. 8. that he will give us grace to use his creatures to the end that wee
may the better serve him; otherwise, howsoever they nourish our bodies, yet they will prove poyson to our soules. God performeth these three former givings to the Heathen, so that their bellies are full with bread, but withall hee sendeth leannesse into their soules, Psal. 106. But Christian men have, not onely the earth to yeeld her fruit, Gods blessing being upon their labours, and a blessing upon the creature it selfe, that it is not in vaine, but nourisheth; but also it is sanctified to them, and that bread is pro∣perly theirs, because they are Gods children, Et panis est filiorum, it is the childrens bread. Secondly, the thing we desire to be given, is Bread, concerning which, because the decayes and defects of our nature are many, so as it were infinite to expresse then severally, therefore our Saviour Christ doth here comprehend them all under the terme of Bread, using the same figure which God himselfe useth in the law, where under one word, many things are contained. Howsoever our wants be many, yet the heathen bring them all to these two Pabulum, & latibulum, food and covering: and as they do, so doth not onely Moses in the Law, where all that per∣taine to this life, is referred to victum, and amictum, Deut. 10.18. but also Saint Paul, in the Epistle, 1 Tim. 6.8. Hebentes victum & amictum, his contenti sumus. So then, under this petition is contained, not onely that God would give us bread, by causing the earth to bring forth corne, and all good seasons for that purpose, but that withall he will give us health of body, and not plague us with sicknesse, as hee did the Israelites, Psal. 31. Then, that we may have peace, without which these outward blessings will afford us no comfort: and that as he fills our bellies with food, so he will give us Laetitiam cordis, Act. 14.17. that is, all manner of contentment in this life. Howbeit this petition stayeth not here, for the prayer of Christi∣an men must differ from the Lyons roaring, and the Ravens cry∣ing: the end of their praying is, that their bellies may be filled: but we must have as great a care for the food of our soules: there∣fore where we call it panem nostrum, we do not meane panem commu∣nem, such bread as is common to us with other creatures, but that Spirituall bread, which is proper to men, which consists not only of body, but of soule and body, which must be both fed: and where we pray that God would give , we aske such bread as is apt and meete for our sustenance: that is, not onely Earth∣ly, but Heavenly Bread, because we consist not onely of a terrestriall, but also of a celestiall substance: so then our desire is, that God would give us, not onely, panem jumentorum, but panem Angelorum, Psal. 78. The bread of Angels; and our suit is as well for panis coeli, Joh. 6. as for earthly bread. The bread of the soule is Gods word, which hath a great refe∣rence to earthly bread: and therefore speaking of the sweetnesse of that bread, Job saith, I esteemed of the words of his mouth, more than my appointed food, Job, 23. and David saith, Thy word is
sweeter then hony, and the hony combe, Psalm. 19.10. In the New Testament the Apostle, to shew the nourishing force of Gods word, saith, that Timothy was enutritus verbis fidei, 1 Tim. 4.6. To shew the taste or relish that it hath as well as naturall food, saith, Gustaverit bonum Deiverbum, hath tasted the good word of God, Heb. 6. So the food of the soule is to be desired at Gods hands as well as the bodily food. There is a Famin as well of Gods word, as of bread, Amos 8. There is an hungring & thirsting after righteousnesse, Matth. 5. therefore wee are to pray, that God would supply the wants, not onely of the body, but of the soule likewise. But there is a Spirituall food, both for Body and Soule, that which our Saviour promiseth, Joh. 6. He that commeth to mee shall not hunger, and he that beleeveth in mee, shall never thirst: that is the hidden Manna that God hath promised for us in heaven; where∣of it was said: Blessed is he that eateth bread in the Kingdome of God, Luk. 14. Thus, by how much the leannesse of the soule is worse then bo∣dily famine, so much the more earnestly are we to pray for the spi∣rituall food, then for the food of the body. Thirdly, for the first attribute, we pray not simply for Bread, but for our Bread. The word Our, hath respect not onely to Use, but to Property and right. This right or property is double: First, that which was appoin∣ted in the beginning: In sudore vultus tui comedes panem tuum, Our request to God is for that food, which is gotten by honest paines taken in our calling, whereunto God hath made a promise, Thou shalt eate the labour of thy hands, Psalm. 128. And without which we have no right to this bodily food: For 2 Thess. 3. Qui non laborat, non manducet: He that laboureth not, let him not eate. Now we would have God supply our wants with bread by right, and this right is ge∣nerall to all adventurers. Secondly, as we would have it made Ours, by the labour of our vocation, so by the duty of invocation, that this corporall food, which is common to other creatures, may be proper to us by calling upon God for his blessing upon it, which if we do, we have a pro∣mise, it shall be truly ours. Open thy mouth, I will fill it, Psal. 81.11. For, the creatures of God are sanctified to us by the Word of God and prayer, 1 Tim. 4. This puts a difference betwixt the Christian mans bread, and that which the prophane man eates: for first, those slouthfull per∣sons, whom the Apostle calls slow-bellies, Tit. 1.12. cannot say this prayer as they ought: for they are nothing but idle upon the earth, and Fruges consumere nati, borne to eate and drinke: they labour not for their living, but eate panem alienum, not suum; which the Apostle requires, 2 Thess. 3.12. Secondly, those that eate the bread of violence, Prov. 4.17. and feed upon bread, that is gotten by deceit, Prov. 20.17. do not
eate panem suum, but subdititium: they eate not panem datum à Deo, but a Daemone. Thirdly, Esau having filled his belly, rose without giving God thankes after he had eate, as without calling upon God for his blessing before, Gen. 25. For the which also he is said to be prophane, Heb. 12. So are all those that eate of Gods creatures, without praying to him for his blessing, and for a sanctified use of them; which thing if they re∣fuse to do, as Atheists, and prophane persons, their bread may be panis salubris, but not sanctus, it may be able to nourish their bodies, but it shall bring leannesse to their soules. Fourthly, the other attribute of bread, is Daily, concerning which we must consider foure things. First, from the Latine word quotidianum, which hath relation to the time; by which word, as we acknowledge our daily want, and Gods continuall care and providence for the supply thereof, of whom it is said, Thou givest meat in due season, Psal. 104. So Christ teacheth us daily to praise and magnifie Gods care, daily extended towards us, and to use that Psalme of thanksgiving, wherein the Church confesseth Gods goodnesse in that behalfe, Psal. 145. Secondly, for the Greeke word , which signifieth, bread apt and meete for our substance. Now, for as much as man consists of Body and Soule, his prayer to God must not be onely for such meat as is meete to nourish the Body, but also for the food which agreeth with the Soule: for it is in vaine to have food, except it be nutritive, and convenient for us. Thirdly, the Syriack word used by our Saviour signifieth panem necessitatis meae, which hath relation to the quaility of the bread, tea∣ching us not to pray for Dainty meat, but such as is fit to relieve our hunger: Tribue victui meo necessaria: not meat which is above my estate: Da panem necessitatis, non lasciviae, bread of necessity, not wantonnesse. The Israelites lusted after the Flesh-pots of Egypt: and there∣fore God gave them quailes from heaven, but (which was the heavie judgement of God upon them) they perished while the meat was in their mouthes, Psal. 78. The Apostle willeth us therefore, not to set our minds upon su∣penfluity: but contrarily, , Food and Rayment, let us therewith be content. Fourthly, the Hebrew word used, Prov. 30. hath relation to the quantity: for it signifieth panem dimensi mei, non gulae; and it tea∣cheth us not to seeke abundance, but to desire of God to measure us out so much as he knoweth to be meet for us, and as Christ spea∣keth, to give us our portion of meat in due season, Luk. 12.22. For the Scripture telleth us what inconvenience commeth of abundance of meat: Dilectus meus impinguatus recalcitravit, Deut. 32.15. My be∣loved when he waxed fat, spurned with his heele; and the sinne of So∣dome was fulnesse of bread, Ezek. 16. and the people by excessive eating and drinking of wine, made themselves sicke, Hos. 7.5. Therefore
Christ diligently warneth his disciples to take heed of surfetting and drunkennesse for this cause: Ne graventur corda, That your hearts waxe not heavie. Fifthly, in the word Nobis we must consider two things: First, a Reason: secondly, a Limitation: For the first, we desire that this bread should be given us. First, because we are Gods creatures, he refuseth not to heare the Lyons and Ravens in this behalfe, when they cry to him. And our Saviour saith, that our heavenly Father feedeth the fowles of the aire, Matth. 6.26. And therefore wee, in regard we are his creatures, as well as they, we may by right make this prayer to him. Secondly, in as much as we are men, we may be bold to crave that favour at his hands which he sheweth indifferently to all men: for he suffereth the Sunne to shine on the evill, and on the good, Matth. 5. And as David saith: Oculi omnium suspiciunt in te, The eyes of all wait and looke up to thee, Psal. 145. Therefore we are to pray, that God will give bread, not onely nobis animalibus, but nobis hominibus, not onely as to living creatures, but as to Men. Thirdly, the Gentiles and Heathen people, which onely seeke after these things, Matth. 6. do obtaine them at Gods hands; much more will God grant them to us, which professe our selves Christians, and his Children. Secondly, for the Limitation, it is not mihi, non meum, but give us, and give our: the reason is, that as Salomon sayes, Prov. 5.6. Our wels may flow out abroad, and that there may be rivers of waters in the streetes, and that not only we may not be burdensome to others, but that we may have to give to them that have need, Eph. 4. Sixthly, for the word Hodie, our Saviour teacheth us to pray, Give us bread this day, and as the Apostle speakes, Heb. 3. Dum dicitur ho∣die; the reason is, because life is but onely dies, not seculum. And the Wise man saith: Talke not of to morrow, for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth. We may not say to our soule: Soule, thou hast store of goods laid up for many yeares. We see by his example what may fall out, Luk. 12. For as much as the continuance of our life is un∣certaine, our desire must be, that God would give us sufficient for our present want. Howbeit this makes not for them that are carelesse for the time to come: for such are sent to learne wisedome of the Ant, Prov. 30. which provides for Winter: and not onely the Saints at all times, have beene carefull and provident for outward things, as Joseph who counselled Paraoh before hand to lay up corne to feed him for seven yeares space during the famine, Gen. 41. But our Saviour himselfe gives charge, that that which remaineth should be saved, and nothing lost, Joh. 6. And it was his pleasure that Judas should beare the bagge, for his and their provision, to teach us, that he alloweth provi∣dent care for things earthly. But by this word daily our Saviour condemneth , or im∣moderate care for worldly things, whereby the soule is rent and divided, and not that , 1 Tim. 5. which is required of every
man for his owne houshold, and is both lawfull and honest. Here ariseth an objection, how a man having filled his belly, or being ready to leave this world, may say this prayer. The answer is, first, Multi dormierunt divites qui surrexerunt pauperes: therefore our desire is, that as we have enough now, so we may be preserved in this estate, and that God would not change plenty into poverty. Againe, though wee have bread, and it continue with us, yet it is nothing without that beata pax; therefore though we have the thing it selfe, yet we are to desire that which is the life of bread, which is a power to nourish; then, that God will give us the sanctified bread, which is the heavenly Manna, and grace, that as we worke for bread in our vocations, so we remember to sanctifie it by invocation; for else it is usurped bread.
THE FOVRTEENTH SERMON. And forgive us our Debts. AUgustine interpreting our Saviours words, of the shutting of Heaven in Elias time, Luke 4.23. compared prayer to a key, that hath pow∣er to open Heaven, from whence all blessings descend unto us, and to shut the bottomlesse pit of Hell, from whence all evils proceede. Prayer, is a meanes not onely to draw all grace from God, Prov. 12.2. but it is obex mali, & fla∣gellum daemonis: as the name of Christ is Oleum effusum, Cant. 1. be∣cause by it we receive all good; so the name of the Lord is Turris fortissima, Prov. 18. for that it saves and defends us from all evill. As these are both truely affirmed of Gods name; so by the Invo∣cation of the name of God, we have this double benefit, that wee doe not onely receive all good by it, but also are delivered from all evill. In the three former Petitions, our Saviour hath taught us to draw grace from God; in these three latter we are taught to use that kinde of prayer that concernes the removing of all evill, called Tekinah, , and deprecation. The evill is of three sorts, of sinnes past, and to come, and of the evill of punishment. In the first of these three Petitions, we pray against the guilt of sinnes past, that God would not charge us with them: in the second, against the running issue of sinne to come, that God would not suffer us to sinne hereafter: in the third, that God would turne away from us all those plagues that our sinnes deserve, both in this life, and in the life to come, and these three Petitions are fitly opposed to the three former. To the Kingdome of glory we oppose our sinnes: to the doing of Gods will, temptation: to naturall good things, the evill of the world to come: and the miseries of this life; from both which we desire to be delivered, when we say, deliver us from evill. The Petition consists of debts, and forgivenesse, but before we han∣dle them, we are to speake, first, of the necessity of this Petition: se∣condly, of the goodnesse of God that penneth the Petition for us.
What need we have to pray to God for remission of our sinnes, ap∣peares hereby, because our sinnes do make a partition betweene God and us, Esa. 59. the effect whereof is, that our mis-deeds doe turne Gods blessings from us, and doe keepe good things from us, Ier. 5.25. Now having already desired at Gods hands the glory of Gods King∣dome, the good of grace, for the doing of his will, and all outward good things necessary for this life: we are of necessity to pray that God will forgive us our sinnes, which otherwise will hinder us of these good things: and as our sinnes doe hinder Gods graces that they can∣not come to us; so they hinder our prayers, that they cannot come to God, for our sinnes are as it were a cloud to hide God, so that our prayers cannot goe through, Lam. 3.44. So that except we desire the forgive∣nesse of our sinnes, we shall in vaine pray for the three former good things. Besides, our sinnes are a plaine hinderance to Gods Kingdome, for none shall come thither, but such as are uncorrupt, and voide of sinnes in the whole course of their life, Psal. 15. Et nihil impurum ingreditur illc: no uncleane thing shall enter thither, Revel. 21. Therefore the Prophet saith, hic est omnis fructus, & auferantur pec∣cata, Isa. 27.9. Secondly, the goodnesse of God appeareth herein that he hath en∣dited us a prayer to aske remission, telling us that it is possible to obtaine remission of sinne. It is true, that by our sinnes, wee have made our selves uncapable of all good things, but yet we see the goodnesse of God, that as we have still dona, so he teacheth us to say, condona. Where he teacheth all men to pray for good things, we learne that we are all mendici Dei: but in that we are taught to aske forgivenesse of sinne, we see that we are malefici Dei, the malefactors of God, such as have need of pardon: and the goodnesse of God towards us appeares to be the greater in this behalfe, because there is no Angell nor spirit to whom he vouchsafeth this favour, to have their sinnes remitted, save onely to man. Of them it is said, he found no truth in his Angels, in his servants, and in his Angels there were folly, Iob 4.18. that is, they had trespasses, but yet God will not forgive them, nor receive any supplication for pride; but contrarywise, he keepeth the Angels that sinned in everla∣sting chaines to the judgement of the great day, 2 Pet. 2. he that is the God of the spirits of all flesh, Numb. 27.16. & 16.22. will not heare the spirits that sinned against him: but thou that hearest prayers, to thee shall all flesh come, Psal. 65. There is a way for man to escape the danger of sinne, if he aske par∣don: but the sinnes of the wicked Angels shall not be forgiven. The elect Angels doe make the three first Petitions as well as we; and the Petition for the supply of natural defects is common to all living crea∣tures, but this which prayeth for pardon of sinnes is proper onely to man; so we see how God exerciseth his goodnesse, and sheweth it; not onely in exercising of liberality to them that have need; but his long suffering in pardoning them that have sinned against him.
To come to the Petition it selfe; by Debis, our Saviour meaneth sinnes, expressely so called Luke 11.4. and sinners are called debters, Luke 13.4. for the Scripture speakes of them, Matth. 18.24. one was brought that owed ten thousand Talents, that is, which had committed a great number of sinnes, and Luke 7.31. a lender had two debters, by which are meant sinners; the reason hereof is, because there is a resem∣blance betwixt sinnes and debts. In the affaires of men, the case is thus, that if the condition be not performed, they are bound to indure the penalty, and so become double indebted: so it is betweene God and us, the sinnes that we commit by the breach of Gods Law, is Chirographum contra nos, an hand-writing a∣gainst us, Col. 2. So they are called in the old Testament, Thou writest heavie or hard things against us, Iob 13.26. and Ezech. 2. Our sins are compa∣red to a book written in both sides; for we are bound to keep Gods Com∣mandements, because he made us, and not onely so, but he still doth nourish and preserve us, therefore we ought to doe his will; hee gives us Talents▪ Matth. 25. which wee ought to imploy to his glory; hee gives us dwelling places in the world, as to the Israelites, he gave the land of the Heathen, that they might keepe his Statutes, and observe his Lawes, Psal. 105. If we fulfill them, we discharge our duty to God, and are free from all penalty, but if we doe it not, there is an obligation, Deut. 27. Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things that are written to doe them. If he place us in the Vineyard, he will looke to receive fruit of it, Matth. 21. If he give us Talents, he will have us so to imploy them, as that he may reape gaine thereby, Luke 19. The gifts, and graces that God bestowes upon us, must bee imployed in hallowing his name, in enlarging his Kingdome, in accomplishment of his will; if we fulfill this, the penalty of the Law takes no hold on us, but if we doe not onely not use them to his glory, but abuse them, and turne them to the breach of the Law, by serving sinne, then are we in a double sort indebted to God, and make our selves guilty of his wrath, Et quis intelligit, &c. Who understandeth the power of his wrath? Psal. 90. If we consider how grievous plagues God threatned for the breach of the Law, we would be more carefull, and heedfull that we doe not offend him, which because we consider not, we become indebted to God. We are debters to the flesh, to provide for it onely, so much as is meete for the releeving of it, Rem. 8.12. And the rest of our care must be for the spirit: but because all our care is for the flesh, to satisfie it, in fulfilling the lusts thereof, and are carelesse of our spirits, therefore we become indebted to God in a third sort, by breaking his Com∣mandements, in that which concernes our selfe, but this the Apostle saith, I am debter to the wise, and the unwise, Rom. 1.14. That is, we must be carefull of others, as God said to Caine, Where is thy brother? Gen. 4. But because omnes, quae sua sunt quaerunt, all seeke their owne, Phil. 2. and seeke not the good of others, therefore they grow further indebt∣ed to God. These debts, or sinnes, are properly said to be ours, because they
proceed from us, (for there is no member of our body that is not guilty of some sinne) and not in that sense, that bread is said to be ours, which commeth to us, and is made ours, by Gods gift; and when wee pray forgive us our debts, we learne that it is our duty to crave forgive∣nesse for others, as for our selves, for as the Apostle by these words, The rebukes of them that rebuked thee, fell upon me, Rom. 15.5. shew∣eth, that Christ was carried with the same zeale against sinne commit∣ted against God, as if it had beene against himselfe; so he teacheth, that we must be moved with the like compassion towards others, when we consider their sinnes, that we find in our selves for our owne; and that we ought no lesse to pray for them, then for our selves, and to suf∣fer others to passe over the bridge of Gods mercie, as well as we. In the words debts, three things are to be noted: first, where Christ teacheth his Apostles, that were baptized, and the most perfect Chri∣stians that ever were, to pray for remission of sinnes; it should work in our nature an humiliation, for they in making this prayer, acknow∣ledge themselves sinners, much more ought we. The Apostle Peter confesseth of himselfe, Luke 5.3. I am a sinfull man, Saint Paul saith of himselfe, peccatorum primus sum ego, I am the chiefe of sinners, 1 Tim. 1.15. Saint Iames including himselfe, and the rest of the Apostles, saith, in multis offendimus omnes, In many things we sinne all, Iames 3.2. Saint Iohn saith, If we say we have no sinne, we deceive our selves, 1 Iohn 1.9. He saith not exaltamus nos, as the A∣postle spake of modesty, or non humiliamus nos, wee doe not humble our selves: but decipimus nos, and if we deny it, the truth is not in us: Seeing it is so, we must not say with the Pharisee, I am not as this man, but with the Publican, God be mercifull to me a sinner, Luke 18.13. Secondly, we are not onely sinners, but daily sinners, as appeareth by this, that vve are taught, no lesse to pray daily for forgivenesse of our sinnes, then for bread; To confirme this, Solomon saith, Septies in die cadit justus, the just man fals seven times a day, Prov. 24. and as man eateth and drinketh every day, so he drinkes iniquity like water, Iob 15. Thirdly, vve runne into such debts, as vve are not able to discharge: for if vve vvere, vve needed not to say, Dimitte nobis, Forgive us our debts; but, Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all, Matth. 18. To signifie to us the greatnesse and number of our sinnes, one vvas brought that ovved 500. pence, and another that ovved 50. Luke 7. and another that ovved to his Master ten thousand Talents. By vvhich vve perceive, that vve cannot make satisfaction to God, therefore hee must remit them. The consideration vvhereof ought to vvorke in us humiliation: First, that as Iob sayes, our hearts doe not excuse us, and that vve seek not to justifie our selves, that as God requireth, we confesse our mis-deeds, Levit. 26.40. that we acknowledge our sinnes to God, and hide them not, Psal. 32. For, if we confesse our sinnes, God is faithfull to forgive our sins, 1 Iohn 1. Secondly, that vve doe not onely confesse, but be sorry for them, Psal. 38. that vvhile vve are in danger to God for our sinnes, vve goe and humble our selves, and intreat him, and suffer not our eves to
sleepe, till we be sure how we may obtaine forgivenesse, Prov. 6, 3. The consideration of sinne made David forget to eate his bread, Psal. 102. so greatly was he disquieted, till he was assured of pardon. For the second point, if our sinnes be debts, they must be payed. Owe nothing to any: but we are not able to answer one of a thousand, Iob 9. and for the penalty of malediction we are not able to endure it, Psal. 90. Who knoweth the power of his wrath? therefore our prayer must bee to God, that our misery may prevaile more with God, to move him to compassion, then our unworthinesse, to stirre up his indignation: and that he will Cancell the hand-writing, Col. 2. which thing, for that he is full of the bowels of compassion, Ier. 31.20. hee is moved to doe, when he seeth us sorry for our sinnes; howbeit his justice must be sa∣tisfied, else his mercie cannot take place: but Christ by his death ha∣ving done that, God saith of the sinner: Deliver him, for I have received a reconciliation, Iob 33. Qui circumcisus est, debitor est totius legis, Gal. 5.3. But Christ was circumcised, and therefore fulfilled the law for us, ad ultimum quadrantem, to the utmost farthing: and not onely so, but he saith of himselfe: Exolvi quae non rapui, I restored that which I tooke not, Psal. 69.4. He not onely perfectly fulfilled the Law, but suffe∣red the curse of the Law, which he had not deserved, with this con∣dition: Sinite istos abire, Let these goe, Iohn 18. that is, hee was content to be the reconciliation for us, that he might draw us out of the hands of Gods justice. The estate of our debts may be compared with the Widewes state that was left in debt by her husband, 2 King. 4. for as the Lord blessed her Oyle in such sort, as she did not onely pay her debts, but had enough to live on after; so Christ is our Oleum effusum, our Oyle pow∣red out, that is of power not onely to satisfie Gods wrath for ous sins, but also to give us an estate in the Kingdome of Heaven, and for his sake it is that we may be bold to pray for remission of sinnes, and are taught to beleeve, that for his merits, our sinnes are forgiven: so that is true, Legem operandi, & legem credendi, lex statuit supplicandi, the Law of prayer stablished both the Law of obeying and beleeving. Our of Dimitie, arise three things for our comfort: First, that even these sinnes which we commit after Baptisme, after our calling, and when we are come to the knowledge of the truth, are remissible. In teaching the Apostles to pray, he assureth them of this favour, that the same party that saith peccata nostra, our sinnes, is taught to say, Pater noster: Our Father. Our comfort therefore is, that still we are the children of God, though great sinners: for though we lose the dutifull affection of children, yet God cannot lose, Viscera patris, the tender bowels of a Father. David, to a rebellious sonne, could not but shew a fatherly affecti∣on: Doe good to the young man Absolon, 2 Sam. 18.5. So though the prodigall sonne had offended hainously, yet the Father is ready to re∣ceive him, Luke 15. Secondly, another comfort, that albeit we commit sinne daily, yet he will daily forgive us: for God should mocke us, saith Augustine, if bidding us pray for forgivenesse, he should for all that shut up the
bowels of his mercie: he bids us pray for pardon of our sinnes, put∣ting no difference, whether they be peny-debts, or Talents; whether fifty, or a thousand; if we aske forgivenesse, he tels us, be is ready daily to remit them. Thirdly, that be our sinnes never so great, so great as cannot be sa∣tisfied by us, yet he will forgive them, proper seipsum, for his owne sake, Isa. 45. Christ hath made himselfe a satisfaction for the sinnes of the whole world, 1 Iohn 2. We must labour how we may soundly apply his satisfaction to our selves; and among other meanes whereby we apply the satisfaction of Christ to our selves, prayer is one: They shall confesse their iniquities, then I will remember my covenant, Levit. 26.40.41. He shall pray unto God, and he will be mercifull unto him, Iob 33.26. I confessed my sins unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the wickednesse of my sinne. Propter hoc, ora∣bit omnis sanctus, Psal. 32. For this cause shall every one that is holy pray, &c. By vertue of this prayer, Solomon saith, that the people having com∣mitted any sinne, if they come into the house of the Lord, and pray for pardon: God, who is in Heaven, will heare them, 1 King. 8.47. But this is more plaine in the new Testament, Matth. 18. Did I not for∣give thee? quia rogasti me; and to Simon Magus: Pray to God, if he will forgive thee the thoughts of thy heart, Acts 8.22. that is, if we confesse, and be sorry for our sinnes, and aske pardon, he will forgive us; How long wilt thou be angry with thy people that prayeth to thee? Psal. 66. But we must be of the number that is meant by Nobis, that is of the Apo∣stles, that is, such as are baptized into Christs death, Rom. 6. We must die unto sinne, as he died for sinne, Vt, sicut is demisit peccata, so we must dmitiere peccata, he hath suffered in the flesh, and hath ceased from sin, so must we, 1 Pet. 4. We must have a care that hereafter we fall not in∣to sinne, more then our infirmity compels us: For sinnes of infirmity, Gods grace is sufficient, 2 Cor. 11. But if we willingly sinne after remis∣sion, there is no more sacrifice for sinne, Heb. 10. We are therefore to crucifie the flesh, with the lusts and affections thereof; if wee will be Christs, and receive benefit by his satisfaction, Gal. 5.
THE FIFTEENTH SERMON. As we forgive them that trespasse against us. IN this Treatise it hath beene noted, that there is a double Sicut, annexed to two severall Petiti∣ons: the one concerning God, and our duty wee owe to him, in the third Petition: The other concerning our Neghbour, and the charity that we ought to shew towards him, in this fifth Petition: wherein we are to consider this, that as this law of Prayer, which our Saviour prescribeth to us, doth esta∣blish the law of workes and faith, so these two Sicuts doe comprehend the summe of the Law, and the Prophets. The Law saith, Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart, Levit. 19. and the same is confirmed by this Petition, wherein we are taught, that if we desire to have our sins forgiven of God, we must not onely not hate our brother without cause, but if he offend, we must likewise forgive him. Neither doth this Petition concerne our Neighbour and Brethren onely, but our selves likewise: for hereby we have a pledge of Remission of sinnes, if we acknowledge, that we have forgiven others: and as the taking a∣way of our sinnes, is the great fruit and benefit we desire of God: so the subordinate meanes that God hath appointed for the end, is the forgiving others that offend us. Now God hath laid upon us this bles∣sed necessity of forgiving one another, not onely that he might esta∣blish peace in earth among men; but that by this meanes glory might redound to God on high. In respect of our selves, this is our estate before wee become true Christians: To be hatefull, and to hate one another, Tit. 3.3. and that hath a sorrowfull effect: For if we bite and devoure one another, we shall be consumed of one another, Gal. 5.15. To prevent this, Gods will is, that we should not hate, but forgive one another, which unlesse we doe, we cannot live peaceably; so that this Petition hath a respect to our be∣nefit also, as well as our Neighbours, and God himselfe also hath his part in it: for when we have forgiven our brethren, and purged our hearts of all hatred, we are more fit for his service; and contrariwise, as without forgiving others we cannot live peaceably one with ano∣ther:
so neither can we live devoutly towards God: and therefore our Saviour chargeth, If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and remembrest that thy brother hath ought against thee, leave there thy gift at the Altar, and goe thy way first, and be reconciled, Matth. 5. and the Apostle gives ex∣presse charge, that man and wife should live quietly, ne interrumpantur preces, 1 Pet. 3.7. lest their prayers be interrupted. Thus it pleased the wisdome of God, in this Petition, to adde this Sicut, not for our neighbours sake onely, nor for our selves onely, but also in regard of God. The first Sicut, pertaineth to the imitation of the Saints in Heaven, this doth not imply an imitation: For God forbid, that God should no otherwise forgive us then we forgive our brethren; but it is a meere condition, teaching us, that if we forgive those that are indebted to us, we shall obtaine forgivenesse of God: for we doe not alwayes sub∣scribe to Gods commandement, Forgive one another, as God for Christs sake forgave you, Ephes. 4. Col. 3. But by saying this Petition wee binde our selves to this condition: so as we would no otherwayes be forgiven, then as we forgive them. At the first we became bound to keepe his Law, which he did deli∣ver in ten Commandements, Exod. 20. Deut. 5. and for not fulfilling of it, we fall into the penalty of Maledictus, Deut. 27. Now, because we have not obeyed the Law, we are to undergoe the penalty: and therefore it is said to be Chirographam contra nos, Col. 2. God having the Obligation in his owne hands, might require the forfeiture of us: but it pleaseth him to enter Bond to us by another Obligation, wherein he binds himselfe to forgive our sinnes upon this condition, that we forgive others: for if we forgive not, then his bond is void, as appeareth by the parable wherein our Saviour sheweth, that if we will have forgivenesse of God, we must forgive our brethren, and have compassion on our fellow servants, as God hath pity on us, Matth. 18. It is Christ that freeth us, both from the Obligation of the ten Com∣mandements, and of the twelve Curses and therefore as he that receiveth a benefit doth, as it were, become bound to the thankfull: so we enter into a new bond of thankfulnesse unto God, the condition whereof is, that we should forgive our brethren, even as wee desire to be forgiven of God. By the words of this Petition, we see what our estate is, to wit, qui∣lbet homo est debitor, habens debitorem, every man is a debtor, having a debtor: for so it appeareth by the parable, Matth. 18. wherein as one was brought that ought a great many Talents to God; so he had an∣other that ought an hundred pence; but there is a great difference. The debts that man oweth to God, are great sinnes; but the debts that man oweth to man, are of small value; we are debtors to God, not onely to keepe the whole Law, but also to undergoe the curse of God, which is due, even to the least breach of the same, Deut. 27. Secondly, we are indebted, not onely for not using his Talents to his glory; but for abusing them in the service of sinne; even so we are debtors one to another, Rom. 1.14. not onely when we neglect the du∣ties
of charity, and justice; but, when we of purpose doe wrong one to another. Now we can be content that others should forgive us, and therefore if we will have forgivenesse of God, for the debts that we owe him, we must forgive our brethren, For what you would that men should doe to you, and in what measure, even so doe to them, Matth. 7. Therefore our Saviour in penning this Petition, tels us, that if wee make to our brethren a release of our debts, hee will release us of his; and this condition is very reasonable; for Caine hath no reason to hope for favour of God, though he serve him never so devoutly one day, when notwithstanding he hath a purpose to kill his brother the next, Gen. 4. neither is it reasonable, that he should say to God, Dimitte mi∣hi, that will not say to his brother, Dimitt tibi. The difference betwixt Gods forgiving and ours is, first in the per∣sons that forgive; when we forgive, then one fellow-servant forgives another, as duty binds them, Matth. 18. But when God forgives us, there Dominus dimittit servum. Againe, as I have a debtor of my fellow-servant, so I may be in∣debted to him, and therefore I ought rather to forgive him: but God cannot be indebted to us, but we are all deepely in his debt, and there∣fore it is a reasonable condition that he requires at our hands. Secondly, in the things to be remitted, the number of Gods debts are thousands, ours are but hundreths: his Talents, ours are but pence, Matth. 18. The condition therefore is reasonable on Gods behalfe, if we consider the excellencie of his person, and the vilenesse of ours: If we regard how greatly we are indebted to God, more then our bre∣thren can be to us; ut pudeat alia lege petere remissionem, that wee may be ashamed under any other condition to aske forgivenesse. Then we may not thinke much, that he requireth this forgivenesse at our hands, but magnifie his mercie, that having forfeited our first bond, it hath pleased him to remit it, and onely to tie us to this: wee are to thanke him that he vouchsafeth, accipere stipulam, pro margaritis, to accept our stubble, for his pearles; for the forgivenesse of our sinnes (which was bought at so deere a rate) to accept the forgivenesse we shew to our brethren. Some would give thousands of Rams, and ten thousand rivers of Oyle for this great benefit, Mich. 6.7. Much more ought wee condescend to God, when he offereth us so great a benefit, upon so easie a condi∣tion: and thus we see that to be true in some part, which some of the Heathen have observed, De utilitate capienda etiam ab inimicis: It is not altogether for our hurt that they wrong and injury us, for unlesse there were some to offend us, we should not have occasion to exercise this part of our mercie, in forgiving: and therefore, where David com∣pares his enemies to Bees, and not to Waspes, Psal. 118. the reason is, for that albeit Bees have stings; yet they yeeld hony also, and so no doubt David received great comfort inwardly, by meanes of his enemies; though outwardly they persecuted him, with all the malice they could; for he that can master his owne affections so farre, as quietly to put up a wrong, offered by an enemy, and to forgive the same,
may be assured that his sinnes are forgiven of God. Wherein we are to consider the goodnesse of God, that vouch∣safeth to set men in his owne place, and to give men a power to for∣give, even as he himselfe doth forgive; whereby it commeth to passe, that one man is to another even in Gods place, so that if wee would know whether God doe remit our sinnes, or no, we need not to climb up to Heaven, to be certified of it, nor to goe downe into the deepe, for the word is neere, even in our heart, and in our mouth, Rom. 10. If thy heart tels thee, that thou forgivest thy brother, doubt not, but God doth likewise forgive thee, and it is his mercie, that he vouch∣safeth to frame his pardons after our pardon, to assure us that as wee forgive one another in earth, so God forgives us the sinnes that wee have committed against him; and he layeth this necessity upon us, not onely to shew that he is carefull to have peace among men, but also that he would have us to be perfect as himselfe; for God is said to be Proclivis ad misericordiam, tardus ad iram, & vindictam, Prone to mercie, slow to wrath and revenge, Psal. 145. So Christ requiring of us, that we should forgive our brethren that offend us, willeth us to be slow to anger, and long suffering, as God is, for it is not (as man judgeth) an honourable thing to be revenged. Wicked Lamech thought it an honour, to take revenge, seventy times seven times, of any that offended him, Gen. 4.24. but contrariwise Christ tels Saint Peter, that it should be a greater honour for him, to forgive untill seventy times seven times, Matth. 18. Therefore it becomes a Christian, rather to follow Christ, then wicked Lamech: for as Christ sayes, It were better to lose the right eye, and the right hand, then to have the whole body cast into hell fire, Matth. 5.29. So it were better for us, to suffer wrong for righteousnesse, then for worldly honour seeke to de∣prive our selves of the remission of our sinnes, which cannot bee ob∣tained of God, except we be content to put up injuries offered to us. If we will have true honour, let us imitate our heavenly Father, he is so farre from taking revenge of them that offend him, that hee lets his Sunne shine upon them, Matth. 5. So let us account it the greatest honour for us, to aspire more and more, to resemble our Father here∣in, for the nobler sort of creatures are not desirous of revenge, but one∣ly those that are vilest and of lowest power, and of all creatures unrea∣sonable, none so angry, as Flies, and Waspes, and Bees, and of them that have reason, Women are more testy and fretting then Men; and of Men, none more subject to anger then such as are sicke; in their greatest weaknesse, then are they most angry; which is no signe of an honourable quality. Let us therefore count it a shame to be like the weakest things, in this behalfe, and rather let us imitate the nobler creatures, which are more flow to anger. If we will be honourable, let us learne to get it by the example of such as have true honour, Ioseph in the Court of Pharaoh, no doubt was an honourable man, and yet hee placed not honour in taking revenge of his brethren, that had rewarded him evill, but in forgiving them, and doing them good for evill, Gen. 50.21. David was an honourable
man, and yet he placed honour in pardoning Shimei, 2 Sam. 19. and to doe good to Mephibosheth the sonne of Saul, that was his deadly enemy: Solomon knew, no doubt, what was true honour, and yet he gives us counsell, not to seeke honour by revenge: Say not, I will doe to him, as he hath done to me, Prov. 24. and the honourable King, that was angry with the unmercifull servant, thought it more honour, to draw neare the honour of God, in pardoning, then in revenging, Matth. 18. The benefit that insueth upon this condition, is of two sorts, first, outward, for by vertue of it, we have a covenant on Gods part; where in he binds himselfe tous, that he will forgive us, if we forgive our brethren; so that we may be bold to challenge him for his promise, so that we keepe the condition. Secondly, inward, for when we love the brethren, not in word, and tongue onely, but in deed and truth, that is a meanes for us, to per∣swade our hearts before him, 1 Iohn 3.19. If we forgive our brethren from our hearts, we may be assured that God will forgive us. So our Saviour affirmeth of the woman, because she loved much, she had many sinnes for∣given her, Luke 7.27. Some when they came to this Petition, left out this Sicut, and so pas∣sed on to the next Petition: but we must use this prayer orderly; Christ is not mocked, he penned the prayer for us himselfe, and therefore he can quickly espy, if we leave out any of his words, and to teach us, that we should pray in true charity, he hath not onely enjoyned us to for∣give our brethren, as we would be forgiven; but willeth us before we beginne to pray, to bethinke our selves whether we forgive: Cum stabi∣tis ad orandum, Marke 11. when ye stand to pray, forgive: Secondly, as we must use this Sicut, so not with our lippes onely, but with our heart, for otsterwife, we doe imprecari nobis, we pray for vengeance a∣gainst our selves, and Christ may say to us, Ex ore tuo te judicabo serve nequam, Luke 19. We cannot curse our selves more bitterly, then if we say to God, forgive us, as we forgive our debters, unlesse wee de indeed forgive them. As we runne in debt with God daily, and so need daily forgivenesse, the same measure of charity we are to shew to others that offend us: by forgiving them their trespasses. We must not thinke it enough to forgive them, till seven times, but untill seventy times seven times, and as we would not have a counter∣feit forgivenesse of God, so we must be carefull to forgive our brethren from our heart, otherwise he will call backe his word and promise made to us touching the remission of our sinnes, Matth. 18.35. Whereas some count it a sufficient forgivenesse to forgive onely, though they doe not forget, they must know that it is onely, Semiple∣na remissio, a forgivenesse by halfes: for we desire God by the Pro∣phet, that he will not onely forgive, but forget our sinnes; and remember not our old sinnes, Psal. 79.8. Therefore wee must performe the same measure of charity in this behalfe to our brethren: and whereas the messenger of Satan doth so buffet us, 2 Cor. 12. and our owne corrupti∣on so prevailes with us, that we cannot utterly forget an injury, yet so long as we shew not a revenge in deed, nor in word, nor in looke, but
strive to master our corrupt affection, we shall be accounted accor∣ding to that we have, and not according to that we have not, 2 Cor. S. 12. As for that which some object, that so the law of justice is over∣throwne by this kinde of mercie, Rom. 3.31. It is not so, for mercie triumpheth over justice, Iam. 2. Now, as prayer is a meanes to apply Christs benefits and mercie to our soules, as Christ sheweth, I forgave thee, because thou prayedst me, Matth. 18. So that is not enough unlesse we use charity and mer∣cie; to dimitte tu, we must adde, nos dimittimus, the want whereof cau∣sed the King to deale so severely with the unmercifull servant, Matth. 18. Now, mercie which is the second meanes of application, slands in giving, and forgiving, Quicquid praestatur indigenti Eleemosynae est. Therefore because these have need of forgivenesse which offend, wee should doe a worke of mercie in forgiving them when they doe us wrong, and both those kinde of almes and mercie are alike accepted of God, and therefore in the Law he ordained as well peace-offerings, as meat-offerings. That mercie is a meanes to us to apply this benefit unto our selves, which Christ offereth, appeareth by these places, Prov. 16.6. with mercie and faithfulnesse sinnes are forgiven, Isa. 58.7. Dan. 4.27. and Luke 11. Date Eleemosynam, & omnia sunt munda. This is that which maketh both prayer and fasting acceptable be∣fore God, and without which all prayer is rejected as hypocriticall, Mat. 6.16. Thus must we have oyle from him, and the vessell to receive it in us, dimitte & dimittitis, that is both prayer and mercie. As we pray to God for pardon of our sinnes, so we must forgive others, now Christ maketh choyce of that kind of mercie, which stan∣deth in forgiving, because it is common to poore and rich, for all can∣not give, but the poore may forgive as well as the rich, and therefore it is the duty of us all to forgive one another, if we will be forgiven of God. Secondly, he maketh choyce of this mercie, as the greatest and ex∣cellentest, for nature will move us to give him that is in need, and wee cannot in such case hide our selves from our owne flesh: But when we doe not onely forgive him that hath done us wrong, but also offer kindnesse to him that did provoke us to anger, that is a supernaturall worke. Thirdly, it is the fittest mercie, for we desire to bee remitted, and therefore the fittest meanes to obtaine remission is, that mercy which standeth in remission, and forgiving of others. The mercy that we shew in this behalfe, is active mercie; that which God promiseth us, if we forgive our brethren, is a passive mercie. Of the active mercie, our Saviour saith: Blessed are the mercifull, for they shall obtaine mercie, Matth. 5. But contrariwise, here shall be judge∣ment mercilesse to him that sheweth no mercie, Iames 2.13. Wherefore wee must so deale with those which offend us, that wee may say to God: Ecce misericordiam activam, praesta mihi passivam: Behold my
active mercie, performe to me thy passive mercie. And to shew you the necessity of this duty on our parts, Christ ha∣ving penned this Petition upon this condition, is not contented there∣with, but having ended the prayer, he returnes to the same matter, and sheweth why we should forgive our debters: For if yee (saith hee) for∣give men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will forgive you yours, but if you will not, neither will God forgive you, and hereof he hath given an example in the parable of the King, Matth. 18. who to shew to us, what we are to looke for at Gods hands, is said to have beene loving and mercifull, at the first, to him that was indebted so farre unto him: But when the same party having the debt which hee ought, pardoned, would notwithstanding have present payment of his fellow-servant; then the Kings affection was turned, and he became severe and rough, and committed him, till he had paid all that was due.
THE SIXTEENTH SERMON. And leade us not into tentation. THis is the Petition that concernes sin to come: for Remission, which was the thing we prayed for last, is referred to sinnes past, Rom. 3.25. and wee are no lesse to desire of God, that he will give us abi∣lity to resist sinne to come; then to be gracious to us in pardoning our sinnes already committed: thus much we are given to understand, by this, that this Petition is chained to the former, with the copulative, And, as if that were not perfected, without this, no more in deed is it, for as God lets goe his hold, so must we let goe ours; and if wee will have God to remit our former sinnes; we must beware, that we doe not willing∣ly sinne against his Majesty afresh; but that we strive against temp∣tations to come: For as the Psalmist speakes: If I incline to wickednes in my heart, the Lord will not heare me, Psal. 66.16. If I purpose still to continue in sinne, I shall in vaine pray, Forgive me my sinnes. But contrariwayes, he that doth not onely confesse, but also forsake his sinnes, he shall have mercie, Prov. 28.13. If accounting it sufficient, that we have spent the time of our life past in sinne, we shall resolve henceforth to live, so much time as remaineth for us in the flesh, after the will of God, 1 Pet. 4.3. Then may wee assure our selves, that God will be mercifull unto us; and will remember our sinnes and iniquities no more. And that which we are to performe in this behalfe, is, the second part of Remission, which is opposed, both to retention and intention: that is, as we would have God not to re∣taine our sinnes, but freely to pardon them, so our care must be, that sinne be more remisse in us: for whereas in the last Petition wee con∣sidered a Double debt, one of Duty, another of Forfeiture, our desire was, not to have both forgiven, but we desired to be forgiven, quia non pre∣stitimus; non ne praestemus: because we performe it not; not that wee might not at all performe it. Howsoever our prayer to God is, that he would not lay upon us the penalty, which we have runne into, by not keeping his Law, yet we are still bound to doe our duty.
Now, whereas the Prophet saith, Hic est omnis fructus, ut auseratur peccatum, Isay 27. We may not thinke, that sinne is taken away, when God, for his part, doth remit the guilt of our sinnes past, for sin consists not onely of an offence, or guilt, but of an issue, or inclination to sinne: so that our care must be, as well that wee pray, that this running issue may be stopped, as that punishment due to us for sinnes past be remit∣ted: and to this end, both parts of repentance are required of us: that is, Sorrow for sinnes past, and a provident care to avoid sinne to come: we must by prayer seeke for grace of God, non modo qua deleatur debi∣tum, sed ne contrahatur debitum: not onely, that our debts may be done away, but that it may not be contracted; as the widow, by the bles∣sing of God, had sufficient oyle, not onely to pay her Creditors with∣all, but also to live upon afterward, 2 King. 4. So we must seeke of Christ, the oyle of his grace, both for the discharging of our sinnes, and for an holy life. As we would be glad to heare this voyce from Christ, Remissa sunt tibi peccata, Luke 7. So we must be content with this: Vade, & noli amplius peccare: Goe thy way, and sinne no more, Iohn 8. As God on his part doth covenant with us, that he will remember our sinnes and iniquities no more, Ier. 31. So, that which he requireth of us, Haec est via, ambulate inea, Isa. 30.21. For it is not enough for us to confesse our sinnes and be sorry, Psal. 38. nor yet to performe our active mercy by giving and forgiving, except we have a resolute purpose to forsake the sinnes we have heretofore committed: for if being washed from our old sinnes, we shall wallow in the mire like swine, and return to our vomit, then shall our latter end be worse then our beginning, 2 Pet. 2. This is one reason, why this copulative conjunction is set before this Petition. Another is, in regard of the ficklenesse of our estate: wee may not thinke our selves secure when we have forgivenesse of our sinnes. The Apostles of our Saviour Christ having received the Sacrament, which as Christ told them, was a seale of the remission of sinnes, purchased by the shedding of his bloud, fell into a sleepinesse, so as they were not able in time of greatest perill, to watch with their Master one houre: therefore he was faine to warne them: Pray, that yee enter not into ten∣tation, Matth. 26. the reason is, because the Devill is most malicious against them that are recovered out of his thraldome: For when the un∣clean spirit is gone out of a man, he is never quiet, till he returne againe, and that he may, he will use all the meanes he can, Mat. 12. So that they (of all others) are in most danger, and most subject to the malice and rage of the Devill, that are restored out of the state of sinne, into the state of grace: and therefore we pray, that as God in his mercy doth vouch∣safe to pardon our sinnes past; so it will please him to strengthen us with his grace, that we may withstand the temptations of Satan. The Petition hath two things to be considered, the Temptation, and the Leading. Temptation (that we may know what we aske, Matth. 20.) is a Triall or Proofe, and is of two sorts: , and , the one good, the other evill, the one is made by God, the other by Satan. God is said to tempt us, when he maketh triall of our faith, which
triall is more precious then gold, 1 Pet. 1.7. as in Abraham, or when hee trieth our patience, Iames 1. as in Iob: for while wee live in this world we are spectaculum Angelis, & hominibus, 1 Cor. 4. God therefore in his wisedome thinkes it good to trie our faith, and patience, by laying affliction upon us, that albeit hee know us suf∣ficiently, yet that both Men and Angels may have a proofe of our faith, he trieth us: for as the drosse is consumed with fire, and the pure gold remaineth behinde: so the purenesse of our faith is tried with the fire of affliction: this is that Fan which Christ is said to have in his hand, whereby he purgeth his floure, and separateth the good Corne from the Chaffe, Matth. 3. The other proofe or tryall is, that which Satan makes: for as God tempteth Abraham, Gen. 22. for his good: so Satan tempted Adam, Gen. 3. but not for his good, but onely to draw him away from his God: as Christ hath his Fan, so Satan hath his, Luke 22. Satan hath desired to sift and winnow you. The difference is, that whereas God by affliction thinketh good to prove how stedfastly we beleeve in him, and how willingly we will undergoe the crosse for his sake: The Devils pur∣pose is, that by all meanes he may quench our faith, and dash our patience. The Devils triall therefore is, tentatio ad detrimentum, non ad expe∣rimentum. Gods tentation maketh us happy: Blessed is he that endureth temptation, Iames 1. but the Devils temptation brings us to misery, and this latter is that against which we pray, and it is of two sorts: first, that which the Apostle cals, tentatio humana, such as is incident to the nature of man: secondly, tentatio Satanica. Humane temptations are such as are hecessary, and cannot be avoy∣ded, by reason of the corruption of nature; of which the Prophet speaketh, when he prayeth, Libera me de necessitatibus meis, Psal. 25.16: The Apostle doth more plainely expresse it, when he cals it the infir∣mity of the flesh, Rom. 6. and the sinne that dwels in us, Rom. 7. which causeth this necessity, that while we remaine in the body, the flesh will ever lust against the spirit, Gal. 5. But there is another kinde of tempta∣tion, which is Devillish; when we doe not sinne of infirmity, or through the necessary weakenesse of the flesh: but of malitious purpose, that whereof the Prophet speaketh, Be not mercifull to them that trespasse of malitious wickednesse, Psal. 59. and, Keepe thy servant from presumptuous sinnes, Psal. 19. These sinnes proceed not from that necessity of sin∣ning, which doth accompany our nature: but from that corruption of nature, which the Apostle doth call the superfluity of wickednesse, Iames 1.2. These proceed not from sinne that dwels in us, but from that sin, which reigneth in us, Rom. 6. And as we desire, that God will pardon our necessary tentations: so especially we are to pray, that we may not fall into these superfluous sinnes, as the Prophet doth pray, Psal. 19. Keepe thy servant from presumptuous sinnes, that they get not the Domi∣nion over me. And, Order my steps in thy word: Ne dominetur mihi omnis iniquitas, Psal. 119. For the better understanding of this point, we are to consider what are the tentations, and tentamenta: that is, the things whereby wee are tempted.
The Tentations are either without us, or within us. Without, first the Devill, that is, the Tempter, 1 Thes. 3. Secondly, the corruption that is in the world through lust, 2 Pet. 1. The Tempter within us is, our owne concupiscence, Iames 1.14. without which the outward Tempters should not onely not hurt us, but also greatly profit us: for the Devill shall in vaine tempt us, and the evill examples of the world shall not allure us, unlesse we, in the lusts of our hearts, doe suffer our selves to be overcome: and therefore one saith well: Teipsum vince, & victus est mundus & Satanas. If there be neither covetousnesse in us, nor the lust of the flesh, the Devill shall not be able to prevaile against us, but we shall stand unconquered, both of worldly lusts and of the lusts of the flesh. The things whereby the Devill tempteth us, are Massah, and Me∣ribah, Psal. 95.8. whereby is understood, Prosperity and Adversity. One while, as a Serpent, he allureth us by pleasures, and if he prevaile not that way, then, like a roaring Lion, he terrifieth with violent danger: and that he may have his will of us, by one of these meanes, hee be∣witcheth our understanding, Gal. 3. so that we either make great account of those things, which indeed are of least value, or else judge the dan∣ger which he threatneth, to be more terrible then it is. From this Petition, we are to acknowledge, that where we pray, that God will deliver us from tentation: first, in regard of our selves, we are unable to encounter with these temptations, and to withstand the least temptation, and yet the grace of God is sufficient for us: so that al∣beit, in the light of our owne understanding, we cannot discerne what is true pleasure, or what is in deed to be feared; yet as the Prophet speakes, In lumine tuo videbimus lumen; In thy light we shall see light, Psal. 36. and though the messenger of Satan buffet us never so much, yet Gods grace shall make us to have the victory, without which we are not able to resist the first temptations. Which considerations serve to keepe us from pride, and to worke in us humility, 2 Cor. 12. Secondly, in regard of our tempters, we are to acknowledge, that the Devill, much lesse any thing else, cannot be able to tempt us, without Gods permission: so he was not able to touch Iob, untill hee had leave of God, nor the heard of swine, till Christ had permitted him to en∣ter, Matth. 18. Thus we see that Satan is chained by God, so that he cannot goe further then God will give him leave, which maketh for our comfort. Temptation is necessary, and therefore we pray not, ne tentet nos Sa∣tanas, but ne Deus nos inducat: For it is Gods will to use Satans service in this worke, and that if we feele that our corruption doth yeeld to sinne, we are to say with the Prophet, Let God arise, Psal. 68. and, Save me O God, Psal. 69. Also with Ezechiah, Domine vim patior, responde pro me, Isa. 36. O Lord I suffer oppression, comfort thou me. Touching the leading into tentation, we desire not to be led, which hath two expositions: first, that God, who knowes our weaknesse, will not give leave to the Devill to tempt us at all, by any of those meanes, be∣cause the issue of tentation is doubtfull, for many excellent men, even
the Saints of God have beene overcome thereby. Secondly, at the least ne inducat, that he leade us not into them, which have three differences: first, in respect of God, that albeit the Devils desire be to sift us, Luke 22. yet, ne inducas tu, though the lying spirit be ready to intice us, that we might fall, yet, that God would not com∣mand him to goe forth, 1 King. 22. yet that he would not deliver us over in Satans hands, and leave us to our selves. Secondly, in regard of us, that we commit not sinne that leads there∣unto, for qui ducitur volens ducitur: but that if we needs must yeeld to temptations, it may rather lay hold on us by violence against our wils, then leade us: so the Apostle speakes, 1 Cor. 10. Tentatio vos non appre∣hendit, Tentation hath not taken hold of you: and when our Saviour saith to his Disciples, Orate ne intretis intentationem, pray that ye enter not into tentation: his meaning is, that willingly and wittingly, and of de∣light of your selves, otherwayes then as the infirmity of your flesh doth compell you: for if any willingly enter into tentation, these God suf∣fers to be led into it, so as they cannot get out any more; that is, the Gentiles till they be effectually called, are said to commit all uncleannesse with greedinesse, Eph. 4.19. So we doe not devoure the temptations that are incident to our nature, and that as the Syriake word, used by our Saviour, is, we take not paine to satisfie the tentations of Satan, as it were to climbe up into an high tree. Thirdly, in respect of the nature of the Greeke word, which is rather ne inferas, the ne inducas. Of Christs leading into tentation, Matth. 4. it is said, , that is, so led, as that he was brought backe againe, but our leading by the Devill, is, so to be carried into temptations, as that withall we are left there to our selves. Christs tentation had an issue, 1 Cor. 10. nostra non habet exitum, ours hath no issue: but our prayer is not onely, that it be against our will, if at any time we be tempted, but that in the tentation he would so hold us by the hand that we may get out of it, that albeit we be led into it, that we may be brought backe againe. From whence this question ariseth, Whether God lead any into tentati∣on, so as they never get out of it againe: The answer is, that there are some such, but they are those that first suffer themselves to be led, even as he hardeneth no mans heart, but his that first hardeneth his own heart. Of Pharaoh it is said, that albeit Aarons rod eate up the inchanters rods, that yet he hardened his heart, Exod. 7.13. After Exod. 8. when the Sorcerers told him, Digitus Dei hic est, this is the singer of God: yet he hardened his owne heart; and then God seeing his obstinacie, Indura∣vit corejus, hardened his heart, Exod. 12. So when Ahab had first sold himselfe to worke wickednesse, 1 King. 19.20. then it pleased God to deliver him to the lying spirit, to deceive him, that he might fall, 1 King. 22. Because Ephraim would have many Altars to serve, God gave them many Altars, Hos. 8.11. That we be not led into tentation, the meanes that we are to use is, that we put from before our face the stumbling blocks of iniquity, Ezek. 14. that we restraine our eyes and mouthes from beholding, or spea∣king
that which is evill, that we restraine our feete, as the Wiseman saith: Keepe thy way farre from her, and come not into the doore of her house, Prov. 5.8. For can a man take fire in his bosome, and his clothes not be burnt? Prov. 6. Therefore if we will not be led into tentation, we must not lead our selves, nor tempt our selves, nor grope for sinne, for the Devils tenta∣tion cannot hurt us: it shall be a meanes to grace us, if we withstand it: but if we will be drawne away of our owne lusts, then wee cannot but be led. As we must forbeare the occasion of sinne, so must wee use the meanes that may keepe us from it, that is prayer. We must make a covenant with our eyes, Iob 31. so we shall not bee tempted. As we prayed, that Gods will, touching sanctification, 1 Thes. 4. and suffering, may be done of us, so we are to pray, not generally to be de∣livered from the temptations of sinne; but particularly, from the temp∣tation of any severall sin, whereunto we are inclined: if to worldly lusts, Tit. 2.12. that he would keepe us from them; If to the lusts of the flesh, 1 Pet. 2. that he will not suffer us to be tempted of them neither, that as our tentation increaseth, so his strength may increase, and if not increase, then that he will cause his tentation to decrease.
THE SEVENTEENTH SERMON. MATTH. 6.13. But deliver us from evill. THis last Petition concerneth the last of those three evills, which we desire to have removed from us; under which we comprehend all miseries and ca∣lamities of this life, for that is it which our Savi∣our understandeth by the evill of the day, in the last verse of this Chapter. So there is a plaine opposition betwixt this Pe∣tition and the fourth. As there by daily bread, wee understood all things necessary for this present life: so when we say, Deliver us from evill, we seeke to be delivered from all such things as are laborious and troublesome to us in the same. There are that make but sixe Petitions of this Prayer, saying, that the two last are but one, but they have no warrant for it. The ancient Church hath alwaies divided it into seven, and this division they grounded upon the motive, which caused our Saviour Christ to pen this prayer, which was the avoyding of that , used by the Heathen, Matth. 6. v. 7. into which they cannot chuse but fall, which affirme, that these two last Petitions containe but one thing, wherein they are deceived; for temptation, and evill are not of one scantling. Every evill is not tentation, neither is every temptation evill. Some things are evill in their owne kind, as wolves, and Kites: other things are not onely evill in themselves, but bring forth evill effects, for our sinnes are not onely evill, but the calamities and mi∣series which our sinnes bring upon us, are also evill: and therefore we are to pray no lesse against the one, then against the other. Touching the misery of this life, we are to pray as the Prophet wils us, for the deliverance from them, Psal. 50. Call upon mee in the day of thy trouble. That this and the former cannot be one Petition, appeareth, for
where we pray that we be not led into temptation, we desire that we may do no evill, when we pray that we may be delivered from evill, our desire is that we may suffer no evill. In the first we pray against malum culpae, in the second against malum poenae. The first is an evill of our owne doing, the other of Gods doing, as the Prophet speakes Amos 3. Non est malum in Civitate, quod non facit Dominus. As before sinne committed, wee desired non induci: so here, when we have committed sinne, our desire is, that God would not deli∣ver us to our Ghostly enemy, that he may afflict us in this life with temporall plagues, nor in the life to come keepe us in eternall torments. When we desire that God will deliver us from the miseries of this life, and of the life to come, we have these things to consider: first, that the case of Christian men is not like the state of the Hea∣thens, for they had Joves white gods, from whom they received good things, and blacke gods, whom they called depulsores malorum: but Christians have but one God to flie to, whom they acknow∣ledge to be both , and , a God that doth not onely give us good things, but takes from us those that are evill: so God testi∣fieth of himselfe to Abraham, that he is not onely his exceeding great reward, but also his shield, Gen. 15. both which we are to consider in this, that in Scripture he is compared to a rocke. Secondly, that the devill hath a desire to carry us away into sinne and transgression, to the end he may endanger our soules, and if he cannot hurt us that way; then he will labour to do us some outward mischiefe: if he cannot prevaile as a tempter, yet that he may hurt us as a tormenter. So he dealt with Job, who for that he was a just and perfect man, so as Satan could not tempt him to sinne against God, therefore his desire was, that he might touch his body, and torment him with outward losses, for his delight is evermore in doing of mischiefe; if he can no longer vexe the soule of man, yet he will crave this leave, that he may torment the poore hogges, Luk. 8.32. Thirdly, that we have two kind of helpes against this evill: first, that precaution which our Saviour tells us of in the former Petition, that before we commit sin, we pray, non induci; that neither tempta∣tion come at us, nor we at it. Secondly, that albeit wee by sin are fallen into evill, yet there is a , or salving to be looked for of God, who will deliver us after that we are delivered into the hands of our adversarie, as in the first Petition, we pray that we may not fall into evill by yeelding to temptation: so here, if wee be fallen, yet God would deliver us out of it. Both these helpes are ascribed to God. Of the first it is said to him, he that maketh his prayer for his help, the enemy shall not be able to do him hurt, and the sonne of wickednesse shall not come nigh him, Psal. 89. Of the other, Let not the waterflood drowne mee, nor the deepe swallow mee up, and let not the pit shut her mouth upon mee, Ps. 69.16.
Touching the evill from which we desire to be delivered, Chry∣sostome, and the rest of the Greek Church, expound it of the devill, who is Lerna malorum, or the greatest evill that can befall us, which exposition is grounded upon the Article,  but this exposition is too narrow: and for the holy word is best expounded, when it is most enlarged: so that wee shall have a full understanding of this matter, if under the word Evill, we include whatsoever is evill, and so desire generally to be delivered from it: but if we desire to be delivered from whatsoever is evill, then from our selves, (saith Au∣gustine:) for we are evill, and so wee have need to pray: for as, when we aske forgivenesse of sinnes, it is from those sinnes, unto which our lust hath already drawne us away into sinne: so when we say, Libera nos à malo, that is, ab abstrahente, from that infirmity of the flesh, and necessity of sinning, which doth accompany our nature, in regard whereof the Apostle saith, Quis me liberabit de hoc corpore mortis? Rom. 7.24. So Augustine under the word, Evill, doth include, not onely , but . But Cyprians exposition is, when we pray, libera nos à malo, wee desire not to be delivered from this, or that evill, but generally from all evill, by which he meaneth not , nor , but : that is, all manner of trouble, and calamity, and whatsoever turnes away good from us, especially that evill which keeps us from God, which is the chiefest good thing: so then our desire is not onely to be de∣livered from the devill, who is the beginning of all evill, as that which is opposed to our chiefe good; but from that which may turne away from us the meanest blessing which we stand in need of outwardly, which also are bona data, Luk. 11. If we understand by evill, Satan, then we pray to be delivered from him, not onely when he playeth the subtill serpent, and chan∣geth himselfe into an Angell of light, 2 Cor. 11. but when hee playeth the Lyon, 1 Pet. 5. First, to be delivered from his jawes, that he swal∣low us not downe: for then there is no help for us: that is, that God would save us from the nethermost hell, Psal. 86. that which is called The second death, Apocal. 20. and . Secondly, from his clawes, under which are comprehended all temporall calamities: first, the losse of life, against which the Apostles, being in a great tempest, pray unto Christ, that he would save them: Master, carest thou not that we perish? Mark. 4. Secondly, of good name, whereof the Prophet saith, Libera me à contrariis hominibus, Psal. 114. Thirdly, the losse of goods, concerning which, when the Lord had formed Grasse-hoppers to destroy their fruit, the Prophet prayed, O Lord God, spare I beseech thee, Amos 7.2. And this is the remedy in all outward afflictions, as Solomon saith: If there be dearth in the land, through blasting, caterpillar, or grasse-hopper: then if the people come into the Temple, and say, Libera nos à malo, God will heare their prayers and deliver them, 1 Reg. 8.37. Therefore in that dearth which is spoken of, Rev. 6. where corne was given by measure, and
weight, the remedy they had, was prayer: How long Lord dost thou deferre to avenge our bloods? The reason why we pray to be delivered from these miseries, is, that we may the better intend Gods service; so said David: Deliver mee from the slanders of men, that I may keepe thy commandements, Psal. 119. Christ doth not expressely name tribulation, affliction and cala∣mity, though they be comprehended under the word Evill. wherein we are to observe, that in this Petition, as in the rest, he tempers his stile with great wisedome. Therefore outward trouble may co∣operate to our good, and therefore he teacheth us not to pray, that God will deliver us from them absolutely, but from that evill which is in them; and in this sense we may pray to be delivered, à malo panis, as well as à malo famis: for bread, which of it selfe is good, may turne to our hurt: and therefore Solomon prayeth, Give mee not riches, lest I be full, and say, Who is the Lord? neither give mee pover∣ty, lest through want I be driven to steale, and take the name of my God in vaine, Prov. 30. There is both evill and good in both, and therefore we pray to be delivered from the evill: for if God see that it is good for us to be humbled with want, then we are not to pray against it. Where we desire to be delivered, first, we acknowledge how little we are able our selves; an haire, or a crumme of bread oftentimes is enough to cast away a man: for the meanest creatures are able to hurt us, except God deliver us: and as we cannot help our selves, so if we looke about us, there is none to succour us. So will the King himselfe tell us, who of all others seemeth most able to help: If the Lord do not succour thee, wherewith can I help thee? 2 Reg. 6.27. Wherefore we may not trust to our selves, nor to any other for∣raine help, or power, but to God the great deliverer, to whom Christ hath taught us to pray: Libera nos à malo. Secondly, herein wee acknowledge our desire, which is to be delivered: the word is , which implyeth such a deliverance which doth rid us from bondage, or captivity: wherefore wee use this word as a motive, that God will the rather deliver us; because, if the evill, which lyeth upon us, continue long, it will make us the devils bond-men, and we are his servants, and desire that he may not take us captives at his will, but that wee may come out of his snare, 2 Tim. 1. to do God service, and not onely so, but that our service may be done freely, and with cheerfulnesse, for that wee are his children, and he our Father: that is, as the Prophet speakes: When God hath set our hearts at liberty, we may runne the way of his Commande∣ments, Psal. 119. But if we will be delivered from the devill indeed, we must have this freedome of Christ the Son of God, of whom it is said, Si filius vos liberaverit, verè liberi eritis, Joh. 8. for he onely is able perfect∣ly to save us out of the thraldome of Satan. The devill indeed is subtile, and playeth the serpent, but Christ is the wisedome of God, and knoweth well enough to keepe us from temptation.
The Devill is cruell, and roareth like a Lyon, but Christ, who is the power of God, is able to free us from evils, to save us from him, 1 Cor. 1.29. 2 Pet. 2.9. The meanes and wayes whereby the Sonne of God, who is his wisedome and power, doth free us from evill, is first, non inducendo, that is, not to suffer us to be tempted at all, for so we should be freed both from the evill of sinne, and from the evill of punishment, which is the effect of sinne, but for as much as there is none upon whom the devill hath not at least laid his nailes, and as it were scratched with his clawes by outward afflictions, we are not to looke for that meanes of deliverance: the Apostles themselves had not this privi∣ledge: for Saint Paul, that was a chosen vessell, had the messenger of Sathan to buffet him: even the corruption of his flesh, which did still tempt him to sinne, 2 Cor. 12. And for outward affliction, it is the case of all Christians generally, All that will live godly in Christ Je∣sus, shall suffer persecution, 2 Tim. 3. So that the godly may not looke for their paradise on earth, Christ hath fore-told, In the world you shall have trouble, Joh. 16. as for their joyes and comfort, it is elsewhere to be had: Merces vestra magna est in coelis, Mat. 5. But if they be without tribulation in this life, if they be in the state of those that come into no misfortune like others, Ps. 73. it is an evill signe, and they little differ from the world, which have their portion in this life; whereas the troubles and miseries of this world, are to the godly, a pledge of the joyes that are to come: and yet sometimes he giveth them a taste of his future mercie, by blessing them on earth: I have set before thee an open doore, because thou hast a little strength, Rev. 3.8. But we pray here for a deliverance after wee are fallen into evill, and this deliverance is performed foure waies: First, when God doth quickly take the evill from us, and not suffer it to continue to our ut∣ter over-throw. Such a deliverance is that when hee suffereth his wrath to indure but a little season, when, though he send heavinesse over night, yet he causeth joy to come in the morning, Psal. 30. It was a great cause of griefe to the Apostles, that Christ spea∣king of his departure from them, said, A little while, and yee shall not see mee; but he delivered them out of this griefe, by comforting them with the hope of his speedy returne, when he said, And yet a while and yee shall see mee againe, Joh. 16. and as Saint Paul saith: This is a great means to deliver us out of our afflictions when we know, that it is but , a tribulation, that as it is but light in it selfe, so it is but momentany, 2 Cor. 4.17. Secondly, God doth deliver us from evill, when he doth mixe some cōfort with our affliction, that may make us to beare it the bet∣ter. Such comfort it pleased God to mixe with Josephs trouble, who was first sold to be a slave by his owne brethren, after cast into pri∣son, by means of his wicked Mistresse; but in the midst of his afflicti∣on, God did not only bring him out of prison, but brought him into favour with Pharaoh, which made him forget all his labour & travell. Wherefore he called his first son Manasseh, of forgetting, Gen. 41.51.
Thus God tempered the afflictions of David, as himselfe confes∣seth: In the multitude of the sorrowes of my heart, thy comforts have refre∣shed my soule, Psalm. 94. And the Apostle saith: Blessed be God, for hee giveth us comfort in all our tribulation: so as we are able to comfort others with the same comfort that he ministred to us, 2 Cor. 1.4. Thirdly, when he gives us patience to endure our affliction, which is a greater benefit then the former: for if we suffer wrong, and take it patiently, then there is thankes with God, and we follow the exam∣ple of Christ, who suffered for us, though he had done no sinne, 1 Pet. 2.20. and as it is a thing thank-worthy with God, so the Prophet saith, Blessed is the man whom thou chastisest, O Lord, that thou mayest give him patience in the time of adversitie, Psal 94.13. Wherefore the Apostle exhorteth, Let patience have its perfect worke, that we may be perfect and intire, lacking nothing, Jam. 1.4. Christ was for a time forsaken of his Father, that he might com∣fort himselfe with patience; and so it is required of us, that in our afflictions we possesse our soules with patience, Luk. 21.19. for so we shall apply our selves to be found in Faith, and the love of God, and to be lacking in no duty which God requireth at our hands. Fourthly, when out of evill he brings good, and turnes the evils that are come upon us, to our greater good: for to this end God affli∣cteth his children; and therefore Christ saith not, deliver us from calamity, or tribulation, but from evill: for God in his wisdome doth so dispose of the afflictions of the godly, that they shall have cause to rejoyce, and glory in tribulations, Rom. 5.3. 2 Cor. 11. Now they have cause to rejoyce in their tribulations in two re∣spects. First, quando crux liberat à cruciatu, when the crosse delivereth from anguish, or vexation: for so the Apostle saith; that God doth chasten his children in this life, that they should not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11. Secondly, quando crux convertitur in coronam, when their crosse is turned into their crowne: for so Saint Paul saith, That the afflictions of the godly, which they suffer here, are but light and momentany, and yet pro∣cure unto us a surpassing, and everlasting weight of glory, such as cannot be expressed, 2 Cor. 4.17. And the same Apostle, Rom. 8.18 saith, I have made my reckoning, and now find, that the afflictions of this life are not worthy, or comparable to the glory that shall be revealed in the world to come. Now we may not limit God to any one of these wayes of delive∣rance; but our desire must be, that he will deliver us from Evill, that way which seemeth best unto him. Lastly, seeing it is Gods will that we shall undergoe the crosse in this life, our prayer to God must be, that of the crosses that were on mount Calvary, Luk. 23.33. ours may be like to Christs crosse, that we may suffer innocently for the name of Christ: For this is thank∣worthy, if a man for conscience towards God endure griefe, and suffer wrong undeserved, 1 Pet. 2.19. Secondly, if not innocently, yet that our suffering may be like the
good theefe, that confessed he suffered worthily: for hee repen∣ted of his sinne, and by faith conceived comfort, that albeit his bo∣dy were crucified, yet his soule should be received with Christ into glory: but in any waies our desire must be that we suffer not like the wicked and reprobate theefe, that blasphemed Christ, and dyed without repentance. The persons to be delivered are expressed in the word nos, which implyeth a twofold reason, the one in regard of the word libera, We are thy servants, therefore make us free, and suffer us not to be slaves to Satan. So the Prophet reasoneth, Psal. 116. & 143. Secondly, againe, deliver us, for we are thy children; those whom thou hast taught to call thee Father, therefore though we be Me∣phibosheths, for our deformity, and Absolons for our ungraciousnesse, yet shew thy selfe a Father to us; and of servants, though we be not only unprofitable, Luk. 17. but evill and wastfull, Luk. 16. yet because we are thy servants, deliver us. Thirdly, we are thy workmanship, therefore despise not the workes of thine owne hands, Psal. 138. Fourthly, We are thy Image, Gen. 1. Fifthly, the price of thy Sonnes blood. Sixthly, Vessels to carry thy Name: we are they upon whom thy name is called, therefore deliver us, else wee shall be a reproach to them that are about us, Dan. 9.18. Seventhly, we are the members of thy Church, which is the body of Christ Jesus our Saviour, our head, Rom. 12.5. Eph. 1.22. The other reason is from the word mala, the devill as hee is our enemy, so he is Gods, and he hateth us, because we are thine, and therefore laboureth to draw us from thee; but save thou us that wee fall not from thee, as he hath done. Lastly, (us) for we may not pray for our selves alone, but for our brethren also, that God will be good to them likewise; and though we be out of trouble, yet because we be of the body, we may truly say, deliver us, when we pray in the behalfe of our brethren that are under the crosse. Untill the last enemy, death, be destroyed, 1 Cor. 15.26. we shall ne∣ver be fully freed, but have one evill or other: Therefore we are to pray for that time, when we shall hunger and thirst no more, when God shall wipe all teares from our eyes, Rev. 7.16. at the least, if he take us not presently out of the world, yet to keepe us from the evill of the world, Joh. 17.15. till that day, when there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor paine, Rev. 21.4. but God shall be in all to us for ever.
THE EIGHTEENTH SERMON. For thine is the Kingdome, Power, and Glory, for ever and ever. SAint Paul willeth that all things in the Church be done orderly, 1 Cor. 14. which no doubt he tooke from Christ, whose answer to John Bap∣tist, Matth. 3.14. was; Sic enim decet, for so it becommeth, whereby wee see, that both Christ, and his Apostles, have alwaies obser∣ved a decorum or decency in all things. So touching prayer, our Saviour Christ, to shew that it is an undecent thing for any, ha∣ving done his Petitions to breake off suddenly, or to beginne his prayer without any introduction, hath not onely made an en∣trance to his prayer, wherein he acknowledged Gods goodnesse, but also addeth a conclusion wherein hee confesseth his King∣dome, Power, and Glory, which the Fathers call , and hee tooke the patterne of this conclusion out of the old Testament, where King David acknowledgeth, Thine O Lord is greatnesse, power, and glory, and victory, and thine is the Kingdome, 1 Chron. 29.11. In the beginning we heard, that all Prayer and Invocation is no∣thing else but a testimony, and confession. The Petitions that are severally made in this Prayer, are; confession of our weaknesse, want, need, and unablenesse to do any thing that may please God. The begin∣ning and end of it are, an acknowledgement of Gods riches, power, and goodnesse, whereby he is inclined to supply our wants, for that hee is not onely willing, as a Father, but able as a King; so that what∣soever prayer we make, whether Tekinnah or Tehillah; whether we pray that we may receive some good thing of God, or praise him for good received, is a confession and both these confessions make for Gods glory; not only to him that was to make confession of his sin, it was said, Da gloriam Deo, Josh. 7.19. but the blind man that had received a benefit by the recovery of his sight, was said, to give glory to God, Joh. 19.24.
The beginning of this prayer was a confession of Gods goodnesse, the end of his power, for unto doing of good is required not onely willingnesse, but power and ability. To shew that God is willing, we are taught to call upon him by the name of Father; for any father is willing to do his child good, but with this willingnesse, there must concurre an ability to do good, which howsoever it be wanting in earthly Fathers, yet it is not wanting in our heavenly Father: for whereas nothing doth more expresse power, then the name of a King, Christ acknowledgeth God to be such a Father as hath Kingdome, power, and glory, and therefore is able to do us whatsoever good he will. So God him∣selfe affirmeth of himselfe, I am a great King, Mal. 1.14. Rev. 19.16. he is called King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, so that if wee will pray to God the Father, wee have cause to conceive hope that hee will heare our Petitions, and help us, because he is not onely willing, as a Father, but able, as a mighty, glorious, and powerfull Prince. Secondly, if to God the Sonne, his dying for us doth assure us, of his good will and readinesse to do us good, and his rising againe from the dead, when he hath broken the yron barres, doth assure us of his power. Thirdly, if to the Holy Ghast, we shall not need to doubt of his willingnesse, for he is the essentiall love of God, which is shed in our hearts, Rom. 5. Besides he is the spirit operative, by whom God worketh all good things in the hearts of his people, and therefore able to do whatsoever good for us: and those two, to wit, the as∣surance of Gods goodnesse, and power, are the two parts of the an∣chor of our hope, Heb. 6.18, 19. and he gives us not onely auda∣ciam petendi, but also fiduciam impetrandi, not only boldnesse to aske, but also assurance to obtaine. The make requests in our owne behalfe, and acknowlegement to God of his love and power, are both confessions, but the principall is the acknowledgment of his gooodnesse, and Kingdome, & power; for to make request to God for good things that we want, concernes men, but to confesse Gods power and goodnesse, is that wherein the heavenly Angels are occupied in, they feele no want of any good thing, and therefore they have no ned to make petition to God as we on earth, and therefore all the confession that they make, is of Gods goodnesse and power, whereof they cry continually, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, the earth is full of his glory, Esay, 6.3. The same is done by the Saints in heaven: Blessing, and glory, and wise∣dome, and thanks, and honour, and power, and might, be unto our God for evermore, Rev. 7.12. Whereby we learne, that wee concerning whom Christ saith, That wee shall bee  equall, or like to the Angels, Luk. 20. ought while we live on earth, not speake only with the tongue of men, but of Angels, not onely to confesse our owne wants, and to crave a sup∣ply from God, but to acknowledge Gods riches, goodnesse, and power. Againe, the Petitions that wee make for our selves, is a taking; and sanctification of his name, by ascribing Kingdome, power, and
glory, unto God, is a giving, and therefore as the Apostle saith, It is a more blessed thing to give, then to receive, Act. 29.35. So the confessi∣on of Gods goodnesse and power, is a better confession, then that which we make of our owne weaknesse, and poverty; and this is the onely thing which God receives from us, for the manifold benefits that we receive from him. Neither is this confession and acknowledgement left to our owne choice as a thing indifferent, but we must account of it as of a neces∣sary duty, which may in no wise be omitted, seeing God enters into covenant, that he will heare us and deliver us out of trouble, when we call upon him, Psal. 50. therefore God challengeth this a duty to himselfe by his servants, Ascribe unto the Lord worship and strength, give unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name, Psal. 29. All Nations whom thou hast made shall come and worship thee, and glorifie thy name, Psal. 86.9. Therefore our Saviour commends the Samaritan, because he re∣turned to give glory to God for the benefit received; wherein he blames the other nine, that being cleansed of their leprosie were not thankfull to God, in that behalfe, Luk. 17. For God, for this cause doth heare our prayers, and grant our Petitions, that we should glo∣rifie and honour his name. But this is not all that we are to consider in these words, for they are not onely , but , not onely an astipulation, but an allegation, wherein as we acknowledge Gods goodnesse and pow∣er, that hath heard and granted our requests, so wee alledge reasons, why he should not onely heare us, but also relieve and helpe us with those things that wee crave for at his hands: wee do not onely say, heare our Petitions, for so shalt thou shew thy selfe to be a King, but a mighty and glorious King, and we for our parts shall acknowledge the same; but we use this confession as a reason, why our former requests are to be granted; for it is in effect as much as if we should say; Forgive thou our sinnes: deliver thou us from evill: hallowed be thy Name: thy Kingdome come, for Kingdome, power, and glory is thine, and not ours. The reason why we would have our requests granted, is drawne from God himselfe in two respects: first, that we may by this humble confession make our selves capable of the graces of God, which do not descend to any but those that are of an humble spirit, For he gi∣veth grace to the humble, 1 Pet. 5. If we would have our desires granted, because it is the nature of God to be good and gracious; to be of power, to do what hee will for the good of his people, we must desire him to be graci∣ous, propter semetipsum, Esay 43.25. Our motive unto God must be, For thy loving mercy, and thy truths sake, Psalm. 115.1. Helpe us for the glory of thy Name, deliver us, be mercifull unto our sinnes, for thy Names sake, Psal. 79.9. By these motives we must provoke, and stirre vp God to heare us. This is the difference that is be∣twixt the prayers of profane men, and those that are sanctifi∣ed, Heathen and profane men referre all to their owne glory, so
saies Nabuchadnezzar, Is not this great Babell which I have built by my great power, and for the honour of my Majesty? Dan. 4.30. Such a man thinkes himselfe to be absolute Lord, and will say, Who is the Lord over us? Psal. 12. Therefore are they called the sonnes of Be∣liall: But the Patriarches that were sanctified, frame their prayers o∣therwise: Jacob acknowledged, I am not worthy of the least of thy mercies, Gen. 32. by which humility he made himselfe capable of mercy. To us belongeth shame (saith Daniel, chap. 9.) but to thee be∣longs compassion and forgivenesse, though we have offended: So Christ himselfe in this place doth teach his Disciples to pray, that God will give them the things they desire, not for any thing in them∣selves, but for his names sake: for thine is Kingdome, Power, and Glory, whereby wee perceive that humility is the meanes to obtaine at Gods hands our suites. The other respect is in regard of God, for he makes his covenant with us, that he will be our God, and we his people. And when the Prophet stirreth up the faithfull, to worship the Lord, and to fall downe before the Lord our maker: hee addeth this as a reason, For he is the Lord our God, and we are his people, and the sheepe of his pa∣sture, Psal. 95. Wherefore one saith, Commemoratio, est quaedam ne∣cessitas exaudiendi nos, quia nos ipsius sumus, ipse noster est: It is a necessary motive to God to heare us, because we are his, and he ours. Therefore in all the Prayers and Psalmes which the Saints of God make, they ground their Petitions upon this: in regard of God the Father, who is the Creator, they say, Wee are thy work∣manship created by thee, therefore despise not the workes of thy owne hands, Psal. 138. Besides, wee are the likenesse of Gods Image, Gen. 1. therefore suffer not thine owne Image to be defaced in us, but re∣paire it. Secondly, in regard of Christ, Wee are the price of Christs bloud. Empti estis pretio, 1 Cor. 6. Yee are bought with a price, therefore suf∣fer not so great a price to be lost, but deliver us and save us. Againe, We carry his Name, for as he is Christ, so wee are of him called Christians: seeing therefore that his name is called upon us, Dan. 9.19. be gracious to us, and grant our requests. Thirdly, in respect of the Holy Spirit, the breath of his Spirit is in our nostrills, which is the breath of life which God breathed in us at our creation, Gen. 2.7. Againe, the same Spirit is to us an Holy Spirit, and sanctifieth us, wee are not onely Vaginae Spi∣ritus viventis, the sheaths of the living Spirit; but Templa Spiri∣tus sancti: The Temples of the holy Spirit, 1 Corinth. 6.19. And therefore for his sake wee are to intreat him to be gracious to us. Wee are Gods Kingdome, and therefore it belongeth to him to seeke our good: all the world is his kingdome by right of inheritance; but we that are his Church, are his Kingdome by right of purchase: wee are , 1 Pet. 2.9. a people peculiar, or gotten by purchase, hee hath redeemed us to be ,
Tit. 2.14. A peculiar people: and the price whereby we are purchas∣ed, is his owne blood, 1 Pet. 1. Act. 20. He saith, He will be our God, and wee his people, Levit. 26. Hee will be our Father, and wee his Children, 2 Cor. 6. he our Lord, and we his servants: Therefore we may challenge at his hands that favour which Kings vouch∣safe to their subjects, which Fathers shew to their children: that is, to love them, to defend them, and to wish them all the good things they need. If he have purchased us to himselfe by his blood, then wee per∣taine to him, and we may say to him as his Disciples said to Christ, Mark. 4.38. Carest thou not for us that pertaine to thee, but sufferest us to perish? These words, Kingdome, Power, and Glory, being joyntly considered, are a representation of the Trinity. As Moses, speaking of the Author of our creation, reckons up the name of God three times, Gen. 1.27. as in the blessings of the Law, the name of God is there repeated, Numb. 6.6. and as the Angels cry there, Holy, Holy, Holy, Esay 6. to teach that there are three Persons in the God-head, which the Heathen themselves have com∣passed; So Christ in the New Testament doth by these words, Kingdome, Power, and Glory signifie those three Persons, which af∣terward he expresseth by the name of Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, Matth. 28. If we consider them severally, although they may all be ascribed to any Person of the Deity, yet the Kingdome is to be ascribed unto Christ, 1 Cor. 15.35. Power, to the Holy Ghost, Rom. 15.13.19. and Glory, to the Father, Rom. 6.4. that wee setting our selves in Christs Kingdome, that is, his Church, by the power of the Holy Ghost, may be partakers of that glory which God the Father hath prepa∣red for us. Againe, these words are set to distinguish Gods Kingdome from earthly kingdomes. Each King hath not power, as the King of Israel saith: If the Lord do not succour thee, how can I helpe thee? 2 Reg. 6.21. But Gods Kingdome is a Kingdome of power. Secondly, there are Kingdomes of Might, but not of Glory: such was the Kingdome of David, hee had a Kingdome of Might, but not of Glory: for hee spent all his time in troubles; but the Kingdome of Solomon his sonne, was both a powerfull, and a Glorious kingdome, and there was a figure of the perfect Kingdome of Christ. Wherefore we are taught by these words, that as the Kingdome is the Lords, so he hath not onely a Kingdome of power, whereby he is able to defend, but of glory, whereby he can also reward his servants and subjects: Moses desired of God, that hee would shew him his glory, Exod. 33. But hee that is of Christs Kingdome, shall see the glory which Christ had from the beginning with the Father, Joh. 17.21. To consider these words severally: upon these words of the
Prophet, Knit my heart unto thee, Psalm. 86. one saith, Religio dici∣tur à religando: as there is a mutuall bond betweene the King and his people; so is there betweene God and us. The Kings du∣ty is to defend his subjects from injury and wrong, and to bestow on them all manner of benefits. The duty of subjects is to be duti∣full, and yeeld all ready service to their Prince: so God for his part is ready, not onely to defend us from all danger, but to be∣stow all good things upon us: and therefore wee are bound to be religious and dutifull to him, as to our King and Soveraigne: wee must not onely love him, as a Father, but feare him, as our Lord and King, Matth. 1.6. And this mixture shall keepe us in the way of sal∣vation, wee shall neither too much despaire, nor presume of his goodnesse; this feare we must testifie both by a reverend regard of his Law, and of his Officers. Hee is no good subject that rebelleth against the lawes of his Prince; no more are we, when no more can be gotten at our hands, but by the precepts of men, Esay, 29. when the statutes of Omri are kept for feare of temporall punishment, Mich. 6. and the lawes of God are had in no price, then it is a signe that we are not so dutifull and loyall to our heavenly Prince, as wee ought to be. Secondly, we must testifie our feare of God, by a reverend re∣gard of his Prophets and Priests, which are the Ministers and Offi∣cers in his kingdome. When the Jewes mocked the messengers of God, and mis-used his Prophets, they shewed their contempt of God him∣selfe; and therefore the wrath of the Lord arose against that peo∣ple, 2 Chron. 36.16. Contrariwise, if wee have an honourable conceit of them, and receive them as the Angels of God, Gal. 4. then we shew our selves to be dutifull vassalls to our heavenly Lord and King. Next, for power, as S. Peter saith, God is able both to respect the righte∣ous, and to shew vengeance upon the wicked, 2 Pet. 2.9. So whether we respect the power of his grace inward, whereby hee worketh all good things in the hearts of his people, or the outward power, where∣by hee defends them from evill: whether it be the power of his holy Spirit, or of his right hand, wee must confesse with the Saints that all power, and strength, and might belongs to God, Rev. 7. And therefore whatsoever power we have, whether inward or outward, we must imploy it all in his service. Fortitudinem meam ad te servo, I will keepe my strength, or reserve it unto thee, Psal. 59.9. So we must not spend our strength in thoughts of vanity, but imploy it to his use, and to the setting forth of his glory, to whom onely all power belongeth. Thirdly, Christ teacheth us to ascribe all glory to God, that whatsoever praise or commendation doth come unto us by any thing we do, wee should make a surrender of it to God, to whom all glory is due, and say with the Church, Non nobis Domine, &c. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name give all glory, Psal. 115. For as the Prophet saith, The Church is a place wherein
the voyce of gladnesse is heard, and the voyce of them that sing, Praise the Lord of Hosts, for he is loving, and his mercy endures for ever, Jer. 33.11. The faithfull are taught to returne all glory to God, which is given to them. God himselfe saith, Gloriam meam alteri non daho, Esay 42. If he gives his glory to any other, it is to such as deserve it, and have all power of themselves; but there is no creature which hath any power, but what is given of God, and therefore God doth by right reserve his glory to himselfe, and wee ought willingly yeeld all glory to him alone, because he promiseth, them that honour mee, I will honour, 1 Sam. 2. that we glorifying him here with a verball glo∣ry, we may be glorified of him with a reall glory, when he commeth to judge the world, 2 Thess. 1.12. and with an exceeding weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4. But yet wee do not fully see wherein the glorious Kingdome of God differs from the kingdomes of this world: for both power, and glory may be ascribed to an earthly Prince; and it is certaine, that Solomon had them all: and therefore as hee is distinguished from earthly fathers, for that he is said to be in heaven: so he dif∣fers from earthly Kings, in that his Kingdome is said, to endure for ever and ever. There is another difference implyed in the Article; earthly Prin∣ces have a Kingdome, a Kingdome of power, and a certaine glory in this world, but it is not the Kingdome. This prepositive Article imports two things, a Generality and a Superiority: for the first point, he that hath but a peece of the earth to beare rule in, is not an universall King; but God is King over all the earth, Psal. 47. Therefore if wee be so carefull to behave our selves aright in the presence of an earthly King, whose Kingdome is limited within certaine bounds, which if hee exceed, he is no more King; much more ought we to praise and glorifie him, whose King∣dome is universall. Secondly, for the superiority of Gods Kingdome, there are a great number of Kings on earth: but of this Kingdome it is said: All Kings shall fall downe before him, all Nations shall worship him, Psalm 72. For hee is said to be King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19. Touching the other difference signified by the word (for ever.) Though a man had all the earth for his Kingdome, yet it could not be a Kingdome for ever and ever: no Prince ever raigned the whole age of a man, and so long time as a man naturally may live, which the Philosophers say, is the space of an hundred yeares; but his Kingdome indures not onely the age of a man, but In seculum, For ever: Thy Kingdome, Power and Glory endureth for ever and ever, whereas mans Kingdome, Power, and glory, lasteth but a few yeares, and sometimes but a few dayes. Jezabel had a glorious Kingdome, but within a few yeares it was said of her, Ubi est illa Jezabel? 2 Reg. 10. when it was fulfilled
which the Prophet Jeremiah foretold, 13.28. Tell the King and Queene: Humble your selves, for your dignity shall be taken away, and the crowne of your glory shall fall downe. And the like is the greatnesse of all earthly Kingdomes: and therefore Christ teacheth us to di∣rect our Petitions to him, whose Kingdome is everlasting, Psalm. 145. whose power endureth for ever and ever: not to a mortall King, but to God, Qui solus habet &c. which onely hath immortality, 1 Tim. 6. who being himselfe an everlasting King, and incorruptible, is able to bestow upon us both a Crowne, 1 Pet. 5. and an inheritance incorrupti∣ble, and that fadeth not, 1 Pet. 1.4. This is our hope and the perfecti∣on of our desires, and therefore as the Creed hath his period in Life everlasting, so last of all we are taught to pray for Glory everlasting.
THE NINETEENTH SERMON. Amen. WE are now come to the last word of the Lords Prayer, the power and efficacie whereof at this time is to be considered, for there is in it every way, matter worthy of our consideration; and wee cannot perfectly accomplish our duty in prayer, except we understand this word aright: For after we have laid out our severall petitions to God, and made our allegation to God, why we desire to be respected by him; namely, because we are of his King∣dome, and Jurisdiction, for that we have no power of our selves to do any thing; Lastly, because that we confesse, that all glory is to be ascri∣bed to him; then it remaineth that we desire of God, that those Petiti∣ons, and allegations made by us, may by him be ratified, which is done in the word Amen. Wherein the ancient Writers consider two things: First, Jerome saith, it is Signaculum consensus nostri, that by it we acknowledge that whatsoever we can desire is contained in this forme of prayer. Secondly, as S. Cyprian saith, it is votum desiderii nostri, that as wee allow of this forme of Prayer, and the Petitions made therein: so we desire that it will please God to performe, and accomplish them: so in this word is implyed the consent of our minde to allow of the things which we are taught to pray for in this Prayer: and se∣condly, the desire of our heart for the obtaining of the same. The one is the seale of our faith, in as much as wee acknowledge those things to be true. The other is the seale of our love, whereby we testifie our desire for the accomplishment of these Petitions. The one is referred to Truth, the other to the fervencie of the spirit: in which two things, as our Saviour affirmeth, Joh. 4.24. the right worship of God consisteth: concerning which word, to be added in the end of our supplications, there is an absolute commandement, not only in the old Testament, Let al the people say Amen, 1 Chron. 16.33. Ps. 106. but in the New, as appeareth by S. Pauls question, 1 Cor. 14.16. who to shew the necessity of this word, he saith, How shall the
unlearned say A men to thy thanksgiving? for indeed it concerneth e∣very one, as he will answer the transgression of dicet omnis populus, all the people shall say, which is a flat commandement, not to be omitted, to adde this word to their prayer. The word it selfe is ori∣ginally Hebrew, but used by the Evangelists, and retained still in eve∣ry language and tongue, without translation, or alteration, either in Greeke, Latine, or any other; the reason of the retaining of it is, that is might appeare, that the Synagogue of the children of Israell, and the true congregation of the Church of Christ, gathered out of all Na∣tions, is but one mysticall body, whereof Christ is the head: the same we are given to understand, by this, that the Spirit of Adoption is said to cry non onely Abba, in the hearts of the Jewes, but also  and Father, in the hearts of the Gentiles, Rom. 8.20. Therefore our Sa∣viour would not have his name to be either intirely Hebrew, as Je∣sus, Messias, or intirely Greeke, as , but the one in Hebrew, the other in Greeke, Jesus Christ, to shew that he is our peace, who of two hath made one, that hath reconciled us both in one body, and that he is the corner stone, whereby the Church con∣sisting both of Jewes and Gentiles, is coupled together, and groweth to be one holy Temple to the Lord, Eph. 2.14. Though they be as the Apo∣stle speakes, Congregatio primogenitorum, Heb. 12.23. yet we are the Church of God as well as they; we, I say, that are borne after them: we, that are of the Gentiles, have none other law for our direction, then that which the Jewes had, as the Apostle saith, I write no new commandemem, but an old commandement, which you have heard from the beginning, 1 Joh. 2.7. Wee have no other faith, but as the Apostle saith, eundem spiritum fidei habentes; 2 Cor. 4. The same grace is offe∣red to us, that was offered to the Fathers, for we beleeve to be saved by the faith of Jesus Christ, as well as they, Act. 15.11. and wee have no other Sacraments, then those which the Jewes had, of whom Saint Paul saith, They all did eate the same spirituall meat, and dranke the same spirituall drinke, 1 Cor. 10. and therefore it is meete like∣wise that we should make the same prayer that they made: and in∣deed there is no Petition in the Lords Prayer, which is not found in the Old Testament, used by the Church of the Jewes. For, that which the Prophet prayeth, Psalm. 57.6. Lift up thy selfe, O God, a∣bove the heavens, and thy glory above all the earth, Psal. 67. That thy way may be knowne upon earth, &c. is nothing else, but the hallowing of Gods Name. Secondly, Remember mee O God, that I may see the felicity of thy cho∣sen, Psal. 106. It is nothing else but an exposition of the second Pe∣tition, where we pray, Thy Kingdome come. Thirdly, these words of the Prophet, Psal. 143. Teach mee to do the thing that pleaseth thee, is a full comprehension of the third Peti∣tion, where we desire that his will be done. Fourthly, the eyes of all things do looke upon thee, and thou givest them meat in due season, Psal. 145. and the prayer of Solomon, Prov. 30. Give mee not poverty, nor riches, but feed mee with food meete, is a full expressing of the fourth Petition.
Fifthly, My misdeeds prevaile against mee; O be mercifull to our sinnes, Psal. 65.3. is a summe of the fifth petition, and the condition of this Petition is found, Psal. 7. wherein the Prophet saith, If I have done any such thing, or if there be any wickednesse in my hands; If I have rewarded evill to him that dealt friendly with mee (yea I have delivered him that without a cause was my enemy) then let my enemy persecute my soule; whereby he desireth no otherwise to be forgiven of God, then as he doth forgive his brother. Sixthly, that which the Prophet prayeth, Psal. 119.37. Turne away my eyes, that they behold not vanity, and Psal. 143. Set a watch be∣fore my mouth, and keepe the doore of my lips, is that which Christ teach∣eth us to pray, Lead us not into temptation. Seventhly, Redeeme Israel from all trouble, Psal. 25.20. in affect is as much as, Deliver them from all evill, which is the seventh Petition. Lastly, looke what reason Christ teacheth us to use here, the same doth David use, 1 Chron. 29. Therefore having the same prayer that the Jewes had, it is meet that wee should have the same conclusion that they had, and the same is, they said Amen, and so do wee. Touching the use of this word, it is found in Scriptures to have two seats or places, and accordingly two severall expositions, to wit in the beginning, and in the end, before, and behind. In the beginning, as in the doctrine of the Sacrament of Baptisme, concerning which our Saviour saith, Amen, Amen, except a man be borne of the water, and of the Spirit, hee cannot enter into the Kingdome of God, Joh. 3. And touching the Sacrament of the holy Eucharist, Verily, verily, except yee eate the flesh of the Sonne of man, and drinke his blood, yee have no life in you, Joh. 6.33. And touching the effect of prayer, Christ saith also, Verily, verily I say unto you, whatsoever yee shall aske the Father in my name, hee will give it you, Joh. 16. In those places, the word (Amen) is used, and thereby our Sa∣viour laboureth to expresse the truth of that which he doth teach. In the end likewise it is said, as Psal. 41.13. Psal. 72. Psal. 87.50. Praised be the Lord for evermore, Amen, Amen. And in the New Te∣stament, when the Apostle sheweth, That of the Jewes according to the flesh came Christ, who is over all, God blessed for ever, Amen, Rom. 9.5. Here the word is used, and set behind, to signifie that wee desire that that may be performed, which God before by his Amen hath affirmed to be true. Therefore David, having received promise from the Lord, by the hand of Nathan, saith, Let the thing that thou hast promised be Amen. Let there be an accomplishment of the same, 1 Chron. 17.25. So when the Prophet Hananiah had prophesied in the name of the Lord; I have broken the yoke of the King of Babell, and after two yeares will I bring againe, into this place, all the ornaments of the house of the Lord: Jeremy the Prophet said, Amen, the Lord do as thou hast said, Jer. 28.6. As in the beginning it ratifieth the truth of Gods promise, so be∣ing set in the end, it signifieth the desire of our hearts for the accom∣plishment of the same, and this desire alwaies followeth, and is
grounded upon the promise of God, and the truth thereof: In which regard the Prophet saith, Remember me O Lord concerning thy word, wherein thou causest me to put my trust, Psal. 119. and therefore, to Christs A non, in the beginning, where he promiseth, Verily, verily, whatsoever ye aske in my name, Iohn 16. we may boldly adde our Amen in the end, that his Amen may be performed; and by right doe we ground our A∣men upon Gods Amen, for he is called Amen, that is truth, Esa. 65.16. So the Apostle expresseth it, when speaking of Jesus Christ, he saith▪ Thus saith Amen, the fault fall and true witnesse, Revel. 3.14. Therefore S. Paul saith of Christ, that in him all the promises are made to us, yea, in the beginning, and Amen, to us in regard of the certaine ac∣complishment, 2 Cor. 1. The reason of our Amen is, because not onely faith, but trust and confidence doth proceed from the truth of God: fides, hath relation to Gods truth, but fiducia, or confidence, is setled upon Gods faithful∣nesse, and both are affirmed of God. Moses saith of God that he is, verus and fidelis, Deut. 32. and Esay, The Lord is faithfull, Esa. 49.7, 8. Paul in the new Testament, Hee is faithfull that promised, Heb. 10. He deemed him faithfull that promised, Heb. 11. For there are two things required in faithfulnesse, without the which a man cannot be said to be faithfull: the one is ability, of which Abraham doubted not of Gods faithfulnesse, being fully per∣swaded, That what he promised, he was able to performe, Rom. 4.21. the other is will and readinesse to doe, touching which the Apostle saith, Faithfull is he that called you, & ipse faciet, 1 Thes. 5.24. These are the parts of faithfulnesse, and they are both found in God, and therefore not onely God the Father is true, but Christ is said to be the truth, Iohn 14. and the holy Ghost is called the Spirit of truth, 1 Iohn 5.6. So that albeit men deale so untruly that it is verified of them; ad men are lyers, Rom. 3. Yet God abides faithfull, and cannot denyh myselfe, 2 Tim. 2.13. So much the Prophet teacheth, when he saith; the mountaines shall be removed, but the thing which be hath spoken shall not faile, Esa. 58. And our Saviour faith, Heaven and Earth shall passe, but one joy of my word shall not passe, Matth. 5.18. that is, in regard of his power and ability. For the other part of his faithfulnesse, which is his will and readi∣nesse, he is said to be a faithfull Creator, that will have care of the soules committed to him, 1 Pet. 5. and to this purpose serveth that which S. Iohn affirmeth; Behold what love the Father hath showed us, that we should bee Sonnes of God, 1 Iohn 3. There is in God that faithfulnesse that is in a mother towards her children, for as a woman cannot but pity her owne child, and the son of her womb, so the Lord will not forget his owne people, Isa. 45.15. As his arme is not shortned, but is still able to helpe; so his affection to∣wards us is such, that he is most willing to helpe. In this regard, as hath beene observed, he is both a King and a Fa∣ther, the one shewing his power, the other his willingnesse and good∣will towards us; upon both these we doe ground our Amen, and doe learne, not onely, Credere vero, beleeve God which is true, but fidere
fideli, trust him which is faithfull, upon this faithfulnesse we may ground all our Petitions, if we seeke forgivenesse of our trespasses, as Christ teacheth us to pray, then God is faithfull to forgive us our sinnes, 1 Iohn 1. If we will pray against tentation, the Apostle saith, God is faithfull, and will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able to beare, 1 Cor. 10. If to be delivered from evill, which is the last Petition, the Apostle tels us, The Lord is faithfull, and will stablish us, and keep us from all evill, 2 Thes. 3. Thus we see, both what is our Amen, and whereupon it is grounded. The last thing is, the right saying of this word, which is a thing to be inquired, for the Apostle as though he tooke care for the right say∣ing of it, saith, How shall the unlearned say Amen? 1 Cor. 14.16. Teaching us, that it is not enough to say Amen, unlesse it be said in right forme and manner. The right saying is reduced to foure things: First, that as the Apo∣stle sayes, We pray with the Spirit, 1 Cor. 14. For of the foure evill A∣mens, which the Hebrewes note, one is, when our Amen doth not come from an earnest desire, We must powre out our hearts before him, Psal. 62.8. So our Amen must come from the heart: we must be so disposed, that we may say: As the Hart brayeth for the rivers of waters, so thirsteth my soule after thee O God, Psal. 42.1. My soule thirsteth for thee, and my flesh longeth for thee in a barren and dry land where no water is, Psal. 63. with∣out this Amen, our Amen is evanime, a dead Amen. Secondly, a man may desire a false thing, so did the Prophet give his Amen to the false prophecie of Hananiah, Ier. 28. but wee must bee carefull that it be true that we pray for, therefore the Apostle saith, He will not pray with the Spirit onely, but with his understanding also, 1 Cor. 14.25. So our Saviour tels us, We must worship God, not in Spirit onely, but in Spirit and Truth: That is, we must have understanding that our Petiti∣ons be true and agreeable to Gods will, Ioh. 4. for as in thanksgiving it is requisite, that we sing praise with understanding, Psal. 47. So the like must be done in prayer; they are both good; both to pray with the Spirit and with the mind, therefore it is better to pray with both, then with but one alone. Therefore it is a marvell that any should thinke it enough to pray with the Spirit, though they doe not know in their mind what they pray for, but pray in an unknown tongue, as the Church of Rome doth; seeing the Apostle saith, He will pray both with the Spi∣rit and with the understanding, 1 Cor. 14.15. and this understanding is not of the words onely, but of the matter that we pray for. We may understand the words wherein the prayer is made, and yet not understand the thing that is prayed for. The sonnes of Zebedee prayed in their owne Language, and yet our Saviour tels them, Yee know not what yee aske. The Eunuch that was reading the Prophet Esay, no doubt, under∣stood the Language of the Prophet, and yet when Philip asked him: Vnderstandest thou what thou readest? he answered, How can I, except I had a guide? Acts 8.31. Therefore we must pray, not onely Intelligenter, but Scienter: we must know what we aske, wee must be carefull, that whatsoever we aske, be according to his will: for then may we be assured that he will heare us, 1 Iohn 5. we must aske in Christs name, Iohn 16.
Lastly, to a good end: for otherwayes our prayers shall not be heard: Yee aske and receive not, because yee aske amisse, Iames 4. But this is not all that is required, that we may pray with the Minde and Vnderstan∣ding: for we must intend the thing that wee pray for with out heart, that the Lord may not have cause to complaine of us, as of the Jewes, that honoured him with their lips, while their heart was farre from him, Isa. 29.14. That we may with more attention of heart addresse our selves to pray, our Saviour bids us to gather our selves from all things that may carry away, or distract our minds, and to enter into our chamber, there to pray to our ather, which is in Heaven, Matth. 6.6. This did not Saint Peter observe, when he prayed: Master, let us make here three Taberna∣cles: and therefore the Evangelist saith, He knew not what he said, Lake 9.33. Thirdly, that we may say Amen aright, we must not onely under∣stand in our mind, and desire in our spirit the thing that wee pray for, but must confidently looke for the performance of that we desire: for unto this confidence there is a promise made on Gods part, of whom the Prophet saith, That the Lord is nigh to all that call upon him in truth, Psal. 145. that is, in faith and confidence, that they shall obtaine the thing that they pray for: therefore our Saviour saith, whatsoever yee pray for beleve, and it shall be done, Marke 11.24. and the Apostle saith, If we will obtaine our requests, we must aske in faith, without wave∣ring: or else we shall be like the waves of the sea, that are tossed with the wind, and carried about with violence, Iames 1.6. And we shall not need to doubt, but we shall be heard, if we pray in a right manner, if we pray for a right end, that we may say, Tua est gloria. This confidence and trust hath certaine Limitations: first, wee may assure our selves, that God will grant our requests, if it be expedient for us: and therefore we must not limit God, nor appoint him his time, but as the Psalmist saith, We must direct our prayers early to him, and wait for his pleasure, Psal. 5.3. We must tarry our Lords leasure, Psal. 27. Secondly, though he grant not the same thing we desire, yet he will grant us a better. The Apostle prayed Christ, that the pricke in the flesh, the messenger of Satan, might be taken from him: but he had another an∣swer: My grace is sufficient for thee, that was better, then if God had said, Apage Satanas, 2 Cor. 12. For if we pray to God in such manner and sort as he requireth, we may assure our selves, our prayers shall not returne into our own bosomes, Psal. 35.3. But he will either grant the thing we desire, or else that which shall be better for us. Fourthly, that our Amen be indivisible, that is, we must say Amen to every Petition of the Lords prayer: for naturally our corruption is such, that we can be content to desire the accomplishment of some of them, but not of others: we doe willingly say Amen to Thy Kingdome come; but as for Hallowed be thy name, we give no Amen to that, as ap∣peares by the whole course of our life, which is nothing else but a pro∣faning and polluting of Gods most glorious and fearfull Name. We would gladly pray for daily bread, but as for doing of Gods will, and obeying his Commandements, we agree not to that. We like well of the last Petition, Deliver us from evill, but as for that
goes before it, Lead us not into temptation, we will not subscribe to that: for we doe seeke by all meanes to tempt our selves, and to draw our selves unto sinne. We can be content to pray, that he will forgive us our trespasses, but as for the condition, which is, the forgiving of those that trespasse against us, we give no Amen to that, as is cleere by the wrathfull and revenging spirit that carrieth most men into all manner of outrages, while they will not learne to put up wrong, as they are taught by Gods word. Therefore in regard of this Petition, and the condition annexed, our Saviour saith: Take heed ye say Amen to this intirely: except ye forgive one another, your heavenly Father will not forgive you, Matth. 6.15. Therefore we must have a care as well to hallow Gods none in this life, as to be partakers of his Kingdome in the life to come: we must labour as well for the fulfilling of his will, as for the obtaining of daily bread. If we will be freed from evill, which is the effect of sinne, we must take heed that we doe not tempt our selves; and as we would be forgiven of God, so we must forgive our brethren. Lastly, we must say Amen to the reason which our Saviour useth in the conclusion of the prayer. As the Apostle saith: How shall the un∣learned say Amen to thy thanksgiving? 1 Cor. 14. For there are many that will say with the Leapers, Iesus Master, have mercie upon us: but being cleansed, few, or none will returne to give God thankes▪ and to say as our Saviour teacheth: Thine is Kingdome, Power and Glory, Luk. 17. We must not onely pray to him when wee lie sicke upon our beds, that it would please him to comfort us, and to make our bed in our sicknesse, Psal. 41.3. but to sing praises to him when he saveth us from adversi∣ty, and delivers us out of our enemies hands, Psal. 106.129. Our Hallelu∣jah must be sounded as loud as Hosanna. The Saints in Heaven have no other prayer but Thanksgiving; they cry Amen, Blessing, and Glory, and Wisedome, and Honour, and Power, be to God, Revel. 7.12. All their song is Amen, Hallelujah, Revel. 19.4. Therefore if we will come where they are, wee must sound out the praises of God, as they doe; If we will be like the heavenly Angels, we must speake with the tongue of Angels; If we say Amen to his praise and honour, he will ratifie his word towards us; so that his promise to us, shall be Yea, and Amen. FINIS.
SEVEN SERMONS ON THE VVONDERFVLL COMBATE (for Gods Glory, and Mans Salvation) BETWEENE CHRIST AND SATHAN. DELIVERED By the Reverend Father in God, Doct. ANDREWES, Bishop of Winchester, deceased. JAMES 1.12. Blessed is the man that endureth Temptation: for when he is tryed, he shall receive the crowne of life, which the Lord hath promised them that love him. LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes. 1642.
SEVEN SERMONS VPON The Temptation of Christ in the WILDERNESSE. The first SERMON. MATTH. 4.1. Then was Jesus led aside of the Spirit into the Wildernesse to be tempted of the devill. OUR Saviour Christ by his Nativity, tooke upon him the shape of man;Gal. 4.4. by his Circum∣cision, hee tooke upon him,Phil. 2.7. and submitted himselfe to the degree of a servant. By the first, he made himselfe in case, and able to per∣forme the worke of our Redemption: By the second, he entred bound for the performing of it. All was to this end, that he might restore the worke of God to his originall perfection. In the bringing of which to passe, it was decreed by God in the be∣ginning (as a thing necessary) that the head of the Serpent (by whose meanes it was violated and defaced) should be bruised. And For this cause (saith John) appeared the Sonne of God,1 Ioh. 3.8. that hee might loose the workes of the Devill: whereof this was the first. For in Gen. 3. we read, that his first worke after his fall, was enviously to tempt our first Parents, and thereby to overthrow all man-kinde. And here, straight after our Saviour was baptized, hee with like envy setteth on him. Christ therefore first beginneth with the overcom∣ming of that: and for that purpose he is here led forth to be tempted, that so being tempted he might overcome.
Our Saviour makes this question, Matth. 11.7. upon their going out to see John Baptist; What went yee out to see? As if hee should have said, They would never have gone out into the Wildernesse, except it had beene to see some great and worthy matter: and be∣hold a greater and a worthier matter here. If there be any thing in the Wildernesse worthy the going out to behold, this is a matter much worthy of it. Or if there be any matter worthy the hearing, it is worthy our attention to heare; not Michael the Archangell, dis∣puting about the body of Moses with the devill, Jude 9. but our owne matter, argued by two such cunning adversaries; to see the com∣bat betwixt our grand enemy, who goeth about like a roaring Ly∣on seeking to devoure us,1 Pet. 5.8. and our Arch-duke: for so hee is called, Heb. 12.2. to see our King of old, Psalm. 74.12. the pawne of our in∣heritance, and our Prince of new, or Prince by usurpation, the Prince of this world, John 4.30. enter the lists together; to see the wisedome of the new Serpent,Iohn 3.14. match the craftinesse and subtilty of the old serpent, Rev. 12.9. to see the Lyon of the Tribe of Judah, combating with the roaring Lyon, 1 Pet. 5.8. If any thing be worthy the sight,Apoc. 5.5. it is this. Though there should come no profit to us by the victory, yet were it worth the sight, in this respect, onely to behold how these Champions behave themselves; that so we may be warned before∣hand, by seeing the strength of our Adversary: and that also see∣ing the manner of his fight, and of our Saviours defence, we may be instructed how to arme our selves, and how to ward accordingly. For let us be sure, that since the Devill spared not to tempt our Sa∣viour, he will be much more bold with us: If he have done this to the greene tree, what will become of the dry? Luk. 23.31. If hee have sought our overthrow in Christ, how much more will he doe it in our selves? If our dayes here be but as the dayes of an hireling, Job 7.1. and our whole life be but as a continuall warfare, 2 Tim. 2.4. then is it behoovefull for us, to have some intelligence of our e∣nemies forces and drifts. It is said, his darts are fiery, Eph. 6.16. Here we may see the manner of his casting them, that so Sathan should not circumvent us, 2 Cor. 2.11. Let us marke how our Savi∣our wardeth and defendeth himselfe, that so we may be armed with the same minde, 1 Pet. 4.1. Let us therefore goe out into the Wilder∣nesse to see it. [Then Jesus.] This is the description of the entry into the tem∣ptation, and it containeth (as a weighty History) many circum∣stances, importing great matters, which may be reduced to seven branches or heads. First, the two Champions, first, Christ, and Secondly, Sathan: Thirdly, the leader of Jesus into the lists, who is said to be the Holy Ghost: Fourthly, the end, which was the conflict it selfe, that is, to be tempted: Fifthly, the day of the bat∣tell, expressed under the word Then: Sixthly, the lists themselves, that is, the Wildernesse: Seventhly, Christ his preparation to it, that is, his fasting. I. First, for the party defendant, Christ; who (as God) giveth
food to every living creature, Psal. 136.25. and (as God and man) with five loaves and two fishes fed 5000. men, besides women and children, Matth. 14.21. He that is said to be the very meat it selfe, whereby we live eternally, John 6. is here said to be hungry. He, before whom thousand thousands are said to minister, and ten thou∣sand thousands are said to stand before him, Dan. 7.10. hath here for his companions the wilde beasts: for so saith Marke Chap. 1.13. He to whom the Angels minister, verse 11. is here assayled with de∣vils, which offer unto him matter of great indignity; and the indig∣nity which he suffered, leads us to the consideration of the grievous∣nesse of our sinnes, and of the greatnesse of his love, both which are measured by the greatnesse of those things he suffered for us; as that he was cast out from among the company of Angels (for so Marke, chap. 1. ver. 12. hath it) into the Desert, to be a companion of beasts, and so led forth to be tempted; where he suffered in his body hun∣ger, in his soule temptation: what is it else, but a proclaiming of his great love towards us? As if he should (exulting) say, What is it that shall separate me from the love of men? Shall temptation? shall solitarinesse? shall hunger? shall wearisome labour and tra∣vell? shall watching? shall anguish of minde, and bloody sweat? shall mockes? shall whippes? shall nayles? shall speares? shall principalities? That wee also might use the same challenge which Paul doth in the 8. Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans the 35. verse, What shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation? shall an∣guish or persecution? These two profitable points grow out of the con∣sideration of the person of the defendant. II. Secondly, the party assaylant is the Devill, who is so called, by reason of his foule mouth in defaming: for so doth the word Diabolus import, where by we have occasion to detest the sinne of infamy: and it sheweth what name they deserve, and how to be esteemed of, in whom that quality is found. Saint Paul, 2 Tim. 3.3. foretold, that in the latter dayes there should be men devills, foule-mouthed men, evill speakers: and 1 Tim. 3.11. he speaketh of women de∣vils, because of their calumnious speeches. In the tongue wherein Christ spake these words, namely, the Syriacke, the fittest word that he could finde to signifie the devils name, is a word that signi∣fies Divulgator: so that a publisher of infamous reports, is good Sy∣riacke for the devill; as when a man lightly conceives a reptoach, either forging it himselfe by misconstruction, or credulously recei∣ving it upon the report of others, and then is not sorry for his bro∣thers ill, Mat. 5.22. but rather insulteth; not considering, that he himselfe may fall into the like temptations, Gal. 6.1. and so becomes puffed up, 1 Cor. 5.2. and at last, fals a blazing his brothers imper∣fections, 3 Joh. 10. These come right to the devils quality, they take upon them the abetting of the devils quarrell. It is the devils occupation to defame us first with God, as he did Job, as if he had beene an hypocrite, and had served God onely for gaine, Job 1.9. and so stands he continually accusing us, Apoc. 12.10. and he also defameth God with us, as if he were a God that
did envy our good, Gen. 3.1. and so he here defameth God to Christ, as if he were carelesse in providing for him, in suffering him to be hungry. And from these two defamations proceeds all evill what∣soever, aswell that which the Divines call Malum poenae, as Job. 1.12. accusing Job, that he would curse God if he handled him rough∣ly, and so got power over his goods: as that which they call Malum culpae. For his defaming God with us, was the cause of all sinne: and every where still we see he laboureth to perswade us, that God is an unkinde God; that so we may burst forth into those termes, This good did I get at Gods hand, 2 King. 6.33. to wit, hunger. To this doth he tempt Christ, verse 3. And as to desperation, so sometimes to the contrary, presumption; as verse 6. Cast thy selfe downe, &c. by bringing us to have a base conceit of God, defaming him as if he were a God of cloutes, not to be reckoned of, as if he were a man to waite upon us, and to take us up as oft as we list to throw our selves downe, that we may say in our hearts, as they that were frozen in their dregs did, Sophon. 1.2. He neither doth good nor hurt, it is all one to serve him, and not to serve him. He tels us (as ver. 9.) that he will give us all this, if we will fall downe and worship him, as though he were very liberall in rewards, and as though God were unkinde or ungratefull, not once regarding us for all our service, but suffers us even to starve. which brought men to that passe, as to say, Mal. 3.14. that It is but in vaine to serve God, what gaine is in his service? If he cannot prevaile this way against us, then he will try another way: for, when (seeing that this temptation succeeded not) the devill left Christ, he departed not for altogether, but went to come againe (as appeateth in Luke 4.13. He departed for a time.) Christ was too cunning for him in disputing: he meant therefore to take another course; for as James noteth, chap. 1. ver. 14. there be two sorts of temptations, one by inticement, as a Serpent: another by violence, as a Lyon: if he cannot prevaile as a Serpent, he will play the Lyon. He had also another houre at Christ in the garden, the houre of darkenesse, Luke 22.53. there he bruised his heele. III. Thirdly, we are to consider the leader, He was led by the Spi∣rit. In which we are to note five things: not making any question, but that it was the good Spirit, for so it appeareth in Luke 4.1. First, that the state of a man regenerate by Baptisme, is not a stan∣ding still, Matth. 20.6. He found others standing idle in the market place, and he said to them, Why stand ye idle all day? We must not only have a mortifying and reviving, but a quickning and stirring spirit, 1 Cor. 15.45. which will move us, and cause us to proceed: we must not lye still like lumpes of flesh, laying all upon Christs shoulders, Phil. 3.16. We must walke forwards, for the Kingdome of God consists not in words, but in power, 1 Cor. 4.19. Secondly, as there must be a stirring, so this stirring must not be such, as when a man is left to his owne voluntary or naturall moti∣on: wee must goe according as we are led. For having given our selves to God, we are no longer to be at our owne disposition or direction: whereas before our calling, we were Gentiles, and were
carryed into errors, 1 Cor. 12.2. we wandred up and downe as ma∣sterlesse or carelesse, or else gave heed to the doctrine of devils, 1 Tim. 1.4. or else led with divers lusts, 2 Tim. 3.6. But now being become the children of God, we must be led by the Spirit of God: For so many as be the Sons of God, are led thereby, Rom. 8.14. We must not be ld by the Spirit whence the Revelation came, Matth. 16.22. from whence revelations of flesh and blood doe arise: but by the Spirit from whence the voyce came, This is my beloved Sonne, in whom I am well pleased. It came not by the spirit that ministred wife counsell, but by that which came downe upon them. Thirdly, the manner of leading, is described to be such a kinde of leading, as when a Ship is loosed from the shore, as Luke 8.22. it is called launching forth: so in the 18. of the Acts, the 31. verse, Paul is said to have sailed forth. The Holy Ghost driving us, is com∣pared to a gale of winde, Joh. 3.8. which teacheth us, that as when the winde bloweth, we must be ready to hoyst up saile: so must we make us ready to be led by the Spirit. Our hope is compared to an Anchor, Heb. 6.19. which must be haled up to us; and our Faith to the Saile, we are to beare as great a saile as we can. We must also looke to the closenesse of the vessell, which is our Conscience: for, if we have not a good conscience, we may make shipwracke of Faith, Religion, and all, 1 Tim. 1.19. And thus are we to proceed in our journey towards our Country (the spirituall Jerusalem) as it were sea-fating men. Act. 20.22. Now behold, I goe bound in spirit to Je∣rusalem; to which journey the love of Christ must constraine us, 2 Cor. 5.14. Fourthly, that he was led to be tempted. His temptation there∣fore came not by chance; nor as Job speaketh, chap. 5. v. 6. out of the dust, or out of the earth, nor from the devill, not onely over Jobs person, but not so much as over his goods, Job 1.12.14. He had no power of himselfe, no not so much as over the Hogges of the Gor∣gashites, who were prophane men, Mat. 8.31. Hence gather wee this comfort, that the Holy Ghost is not a stander by (as a stranger) when we are tempted, Tanquam otiosus spectator; but he leads us by the hand, and stands by as a faithfull assistant, Esay 4.13. He makes an issue out of all our temptations, and will not suffer us to be tempted beyond our strength, 2 Cor. 10.13. And, he turneth the worke of sin, and of the devill too, unto our good, Rom. 8.28. so that all these shall make us more wary after to resist them: and hell (by fearing it) shall be an occasion unto us, to avoid that might bring us to it; and so they shall all be fellow-helpers to our salvation. So that temptations, whether they be (as the Fathers call them) rods to chasten us for sinne committed, or to try and fist us, Mat. 3.12. and so to take away the chaffe, the fanne being in the Holy Ghosts hand: or whether they be sent to buffet us against the pricke of the flesh, 2 Cor. 12.17. Or whether they be as matters serving for our experi∣ence, not onely for our selves, that we may know our owne strength, Rom. 5.3. and to worke patience in us: but to the devill also, that so his mouth may be stopped, as in Job 2.3. Hast thou marked my servant
Job, how upright he is, and that in all the world there is not such an one? Howsoever they bee, the devill hath not the rod or chaine in his hands, but the Holy Ghost, to order them, as they may best serve for his glory and our good: and as for the devill, he bindeth him fast, Rev. 20.2. Fifthly, by the Greeke word here used, is set forth the difference betweene the temptations of the Saints, and Reprobates. In the Lords Prayer one Petition is, Lead us not into temptation: but there, the word importeth another manner of leading, than is here meant. We doe not there pray against this manner of leading here, which is so to lead us, as to be with us, and to bring us backe againe, Heb. 13.20. but we pray there, that he would not cast or drive us into tem∣ptations; and when we are there, leave us, by withdrawing his grace and holy Spirit, as he doth from the reprobate and forsaken. IV. The fourth point is the end, that is, the Conflict, as it con∣cerneth Christ; insomuch, that he was led to be tempted. In which temptation, Augustine saith, Habemus & quod credenies veneremur, & quod videntes imitemur: There be two things for faith to adore, and two things for imitation to practise. First, for faith, that the temptations of Christ have sanctified temptations unto us: that whereas before they were curses, like un∣to hanging on a tree; now, since Christ hath beene both tempted and hanged on a tree, they be no longer signes and pledges of Gods wrath, but favours. A man may be the childe of God notwithstan∣ding, and therefore he is not to receive any discouragement by any of them. Secondly, besides the sanctifying, it is an abatement, so that now when we are tempted, they have not the force they had before: for now the Serpents head is bruised, so that he is now nothing so strong (as he was) to cast his darts. Also the head of his darts are blunted, 1 Cor. 15.55. Death, where is thy sting? Hell, where is thy victory? For as his death and resurrection had a mortifying force against the old man, and a quickning force toward the new man: ▪ so hath his temptation a dulling force to the devill, and a strengthning force to us. For our life and imitation, there are also two. First, Compassion: for Christ knowing in what sort we were tem∣pted, as having felt by experience, both how strong the assaylant was, Psal. 118.13. who thrust sore at him that he might fall; and how feeble our nature is to make resistance, being nothing but dust, Psal. 103.14. He is moved thereby to lay away severity, and to put on the bowels of compassion. So that, Now we have not a high Priest which cannot bee tempted with our infirmities, but was tempted in like sort, Heb. 4.15. So we, (which were before stony Judges, and too rough for Physitians) ought in like sort, (having beene tempted our selves) to looke upon others defects with a more passionate re∣gard. The second thing we are to imitate, Christ is our fellow-helper, in all our necessities and temptations; who, as he sheweth us his sleights
and darts, Ephes. 4.14. so he teacheth us how to avoyd them. This is no small comfort to us, when we consider that he is with us, and will be, till the end of the world, Matth. 28.20. who hath overcome the world, Joh. 16.33. and the devill: if any temptation happen, that he will beare us out, we may be of good cheere. This was it that did so animate Job, Doe thou but take my part, and who shall touch me? Job 17.3. When as both Christ and we draw together in one yoke, Matth. 11.29. what can hurt us? Yet if we be afraid for that we see the enemy comming; let us call for the helpe of our assistant, and as it is said in Psal. 68.1. we shall see God will arise, and his enemies shall bee scattered: they shall vanish like smoke, and melt like waxe. When they are ready to attache us, let us say, Save me O God, for the waters are entred even into my soule, Psal. 69.1. When we are feeble, then let us say with Ezekiel, O Lord it hath oppressed me, comfort me, Ezek. 38.14. Or though they have wounded us, let us say with Da∣vid, Bring out thy speare, and stop the way against them that persecute me, Psal. 35.3. Say yet to my Soule, I am thy Salvation. So that we have not onely an example, but a comfort too. V. The fifth point, is the day and time when this was done, in which we are to note two things. The word [Then] relateth as well to the end of the Chapter next going before, as to the present in∣stant. First then, when as Christ was but newly come out of the water of Baptisme, and immediately after the heavens had opened unto him, and the Holy Ghost descended upon him in the likenesse of a Dove, and while he was yet full of the Holy Ghost; did the devill set upon him. When as the voyce from Heaven had pronounced, This is my beloved Sonne, in whom I am well pleased; the devill straight addeth; in whom I am ill pleased: and so addresseth himselfe a∣gainst him. And it is Gods property to looke for much at his hands, to whom he hath given much. When he gives a man a large mea∣sure of grace, he gives the devill withall a large patent. Our Saviour had great gifts, and the devill is like a theefe, that will venter most for the greatest booty. Secondly, in regard of the present, we are to note, that in thirty yeares, the devill did nothing to our Saviour: but now when hee goes about to gird himselfe with our salvation, according to Psal. 45.3. then doth the devill gird on his sword also; that is as much to say, as the better the worke is, the more resistance it shall have. Ten repulses did the Israelites suffer, before they could get possessi∣on of the promised Land of Canaan: and as many did David endure before he was invested in the promised Kingdome. Many lets came before the Temple was re-edifyed, as is to be seene in Esdras and Nehemiah. Yea, (saith the devill) Hath God annoynted him with the oyle of gladnesse above his fellowes? I will see if I can annoynt him with the oyle of sadnesse above his fellowes. Hath he beene bapti∣zed of water and the Holy Ghost? I will provide another Baptisme for him, namely, of fire. Hath God sent downe the Holy Ghost upon him in likenesse of a Dove? I will cause tribulation, and a crowne of
thornes to light upon his head. Hath a voyce come downe from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Sonne? I will provide a voyce for him, that shall ascend from the foote, that shall say, If thou be the Son of God, come downe from the Crosse. VI. The sixts the place, the Lysts; to wit, the Wildernesse, that so hee might be alone, and that there might be no fellow-worker with him in the matter of our salvation, that he alone might have the treading of the Wine-presse, Esay 63.3. So, in the Transfigura∣tion in the Mount, he was found alone, Luke 9.36. So in the garden in his great agony, he was in effect alone; for his Disciples slept all the while, Matth. 26.40. that unto him might be ascribed all the praise. Secondly, wee will note heare, that there is no place priviledged from temptations. As there be some that thinke there be certaine places to be exempt from Gods presence, (as was noted in the dreame of Jacob:) so the Monkes and Hermites thought, that by avoyding company, they should be free from temptations; which is not so. For, although Christ were alone in the Wildernesse, and fasting too, yet was he tempted we see. And yet it is true, that hee that will live well, must shunne the company of the wicked, Gen. 19.7. When the Angels had brought Lot and his family out of the doores, they charged them not to tarry, nor to stand still, nor once to looke backe. So after the Cocke had crowed, and put Peter in minde of his fall; he went out of the doores and wept bitterly, Matth. 26.75. his solitarinesse was a cause to make his repentance the more ear∣nest, and helped to increase his teares: and company is commonly an hinderance to the receiving of any good grace, and to the exerci∣sing and confirming us in any good purpose. But as true it is, that temptations are, and may as well be in the deserts, as in publique places: not onely in the valleyes, but in the mountaines, ver. 8. and not onely in the countrey, but even in the holy City, ver. 5. yea, and sometimes full, and sometimes fasting, yea, in Paradise and in Heaven it selfe; for thither doth the devill come and accuse us be∣fore God: we are therefore alwayes to stand upon our guard. For in Luk. 11.24. he is said, to walke through dry places, lest happily some might be escaped from him thither: and though we could goe whither he could not come, we should not be free: for we carry ever a Tempter about with us. And when we pray to be delivered from temptation, it is not onely from the devill, but from our selves: we carry fire within us. Nazianzen and Basil were of that minde once, that by change of the place a man might goe from temptati∣on: but afterward they recanted it, affirming, That it was impos∣sible to avoyd temptation, yea, though he went out of the world, except he left his heart behinde him also.
THE SECOND SERMON. MATTH. 4.2. And when he had fasted forty dayes, and forty nights, hee was afterward hungry. NOw come we to the seventh and last circum∣stance. It may seeme strange, that being a∣bout to present himselfe to the world, as Prince, Priest, and Prophet, that hee would make his progresse into the Wildernesse, and begin with a Fast: for this was cleane con∣trary to the course and fashion of the world, which useth, when any great matter is in hand, to make a Preface or Praeludium, with some great solemnity. As when Solomon came first to his Crowne, he went to the chiefe City, and gathered a solemne Convent. So Christ should rather first have gone to Jerusalem the holy City, and there should have beene some solemne banquet. But Christ from his Baptisme began his calling, and fasted forty dayes and forty nights. This his Fast (by late Writers) is called the entrance into his calling: by the ancient Writers it is called the entrance in∣to his conflict. The manner of the Church hath alwayes beene, that at the first institution, or undertaking of any great and weighty matter, there hath beene extraordinary Fasting. So Moses, Deut. 9.9. when he en∣tred into his calling at the receiving of the Law, fasted forty dayes. So Elias, 1 King. 19.18. at the restoring of the same Law, did the like. And so when they went about the re-edifying of the Temple, as appeareth Esdras 8.49. So in the New Testament, at the sepa∣ration of Paul and Barnabas, Act. 13.3. And (as Jerome reporteth) Saint John would not undertake to write the divine worke of his Gospell, untill the whole Church (by Fasting) had recommended the same unto God. So likewise, at the entrance into a Conflict, for the obtaining of some Victory, as Jehoshaphat did when he overcame the Amorites, 2 Chron. 20.3. So did Hester when she went about the deliverance of the Jewes, as in Ester 4. ver. 16. And Eusebius reporteth, that
when Peter was to enter disputation with Simon Magus, there was Fasting throughout the whole Church generally. Whether at the entrance into a Calling, or to resist the devill, Saint Peters rule, mentioned in his first chapter and fifth verse, ought to take place, we must use Prayer and Fasting. And as at all times wee are to use watchfullnesse and carefulnesse: so then especially, when we looke that the devill will be most busie; and the rather, for that in some cases there is no dealing without Fasting, as Marke 9.29. there is a kinde of devill that will not be cast out, without Prayer and Fa∣sting. As for the number of dayes wherein he fasted, just forty; Curio∣sity may finde it selfe worke enough; but it is dangerous to make Conclusions, when no certainety appeareth. Some say, there is a correspondency betweene these forty dayes, and the forty dayes wherein the world was destroyed by the Deluge. But it is better to say, As Moses fasted forty dayes at the institution of the Law, and Elias forty at the restauration; so Christ here. And because hee came but in the shape of a servant, hee would not take upon him a∣bove his fellow-servants. Contrary to our times, wherein a man is accounted no body, except he can have a quirke above his fellows. But it is more materiall, to see how it concerneth us. It is a thing rather to be adored by admiration, then to be followed by apish imitation. This Fast here, was not the fast of a day, as that of Peter and of Cornelius, Acts 10.9.30. but such as Luke 4.2. describeth, Hee did eate nothing all that time. Saint John the Baptist, though his life were very strict, did eate Locusts and wilde Honey, Matth. 3.4. Ours is not properly a Fast, but a provocation of meates; and therefore there can be no proportion betweene them. But as it is, what is to be thought of it? Socrates and Irenaeus record, that at the first, the Church did use to celebrate but one day in remembrance of Christs Fast, till after, the Montanists (a certaine sect of heretiques, who thereupon are called Eucratitae) raised it to foureteene dayes; the zeale of the Clergy after increased it to forty, after to fifty: The Monkes brought it to sixty, the Fryers to seventy; and if the Pope had not there stayed it, they would have brought it to eighty, and so have doubled Christs fasting. When the Primitive Church saw the Heretiques (by this outward shew) goe about to disgrace the Christians, by this counterfeit shew of holinesse; they used it also: but (saith Augustine and Chrysostome) they held it onely a positive law, which was in the Church to use or take away, and not as any exercise of godlinesse. Onely a doubt resteth now, because of the hardnesse of mens hearts, whether it were better left or kept. Some would have ab∣stinence used, and one day kept for the Sabbath, but left to every mans liberty, what time and day, and tyed to no certainety: but that were (upon the matter) to have none kept at all. Notwith∣standing, the Reformed Church (as that of France) have used their liberty in removing of it, for that they saw an inclination in their
people to superstition, who would thinke themselves holyer for such fasting; like the Pharisees, Luke 18.12. The Church wherein we live, useth her liberty in retayning it, and that upon good reasons: for sith God hath created the fishes of the sea for man, and giveth him an interest in them also, Gen. 9.2. as well as in the beasts: Sith the death of fish was a plague wherewith God plagued Pharaoh, and so contrariwise the encrease of fish is a blessing: God will have fish to be used, so that he may have praises as well for the sea, as for the land, Psal. 104.25. If we looke into the civill reason, we shall see great cause to ob∣serve it. See Numb. 15.22. the abundance of flesh that was consu∣med in one moneth. The mainetenance of store then is of great im∣portance, and therefore order must be taken accordingly. Jerusa∣lem had fish dayes, that Tyrus, and such like, living upon Navigati∣on, might have utterance for their commodities, Nehem. 13.16. (for Tyrus was the maritine City, till after Alexander annexed to it ano∣ther City, and made it dry.) The Tribe of Zabulon lived by Navigation, Gen. 49.13. which is a thing necessary both for wealth, 2 Chron. 9.20. and made Solomon richer than any other King, and also for munition, as Esay 23.4. that Tribe therefore had need of maintenance. And therefore our Church and Common-wealth have taken order accordingly; and the rather, for that our times require it: (for the times that forbad marriage and the abstinence of meates, 1 Tim. 4.3.) There is more feare of a pottingerfull of gluttony, than a spoonefull of superstition. This is no Fast, but a change of meate. Verse 3. Then came to him the Tempter, &c. BEfore we come to the particular temptations, we have foure ge∣nerall points to be considered. First, the changing of the devils name, from devill to Tempter: Secondly, that it is said, Hee came unto him: Thirdly, that he came when he was fasting: Fourthly, the diversity and order of the temptations. I. First, in Jam. 1.13. it is said, that God tempteth no man; and yet in Deut. 13.3. it appeareth, that God doth tempt some; we must then make a difference betweene Gods temptations, and the devils. The devill indeed tempteth us, but God (as our English translation hath it) tryeth us. The latter is to commend us, Rom. 3.5. or rather that our tribulation may bring forth patience, and patience hope, Rom. 4.3. It makes us know that to be in our selves, which before wee knew not, as we see in Job. So the Lord proved the Israelites, to see if they loved him or no, Deut. 13.3. The devils temptation is to know our corruption: for knowing the innocency of Adam, hee went about to corrupt him. It is like the Israelites proving of Manna, to try conclusions. Gods is like the tryall of gold, 1 Pet. 1.7. which the oftner it is tryed, the purer it waxeth: the devils, like that of Manna, which stinketh and corrupteth by tryall. Gods is like the tryall of the fanne, Matth. 3.12. the devils like that of the scive,
Luke 22.31. which lets goe the flower, and keepes the branne. II. Secondly, the devill hath two shapes; in the one, he tempt∣eth and allureth, (and in that he came now to our Saviour:) in the other, he assayleth us, that is, by assault and violence, Ephes. 6.11. The first is the temptation of hypocrites, Matth. 22.18. Shall we pay tribute to Caesar? The second, of Judas, who in the garden assaul∣ted our Saviour, John 6.70. So Satan sets on Christ by violence. He came unto Christ by casting sparkes of fire into him; for hee was devoyd of any wicked and vaine thoughts comming forth of him. Two wayes may a man be tempted: either by doubts arising in our hearts out of us, Luke 24.38. or by a sop entring into us, John 13.27. Christ could not be tempted the first way: for he was de∣voyd of any wicked and vaine thought, comming forth of him. To us the devill needs bring but a paire of bellowes, for he shall finde fire within us: but to Christ he was faine to bring fire too. III. Thirdly, he then came to him when he was fasting, which discovereth the devils desperate boldnesse, as also his craftinesse, in that he waited his time, to stay till he was hungry. Notwithstand∣ing, Christ was newly come from his Baptisme, and was full of the Holy Ghost, and even now in his exercise of mortification; yet had the devill courage to set upon him. There is no place so holy, nor exercise so good, as can represse his courage, or give a stay to the boldnesse of his attempts: as we see, Marke 4.14. The word is no sooner sowne, but Satan comes immediately, and takes it out of their hearts: which must needes be done in the Church. For the word is out, before they be out of the Church: so that hee is not affraid of hearing the word, but can abide it well enough, yea, bet∣ter than many. And though they carry the word out of the Church, he will waite on them home, and choake the word with cares, and riches, and voluptuous living, like the seed that fell among thornes, Luke 8.14. And no more doth he care for the exercise of prayer: for even then immediately after the repetition of forgivenesse, when we have made even with all the world, when God hath forgiven us, and we others; then doth the devill give us occasion to say, Lead us not into temptation, as standing by there ready to tempt us. And as little cares he for the Sacraments: for presently after they had received the Sacrament, and sang the hymne, Christ tels them, they shall all be offended in him that night, Matth. 26.1. Thus we see his courage serves him at all times, nothing is able to quaile it. As this ought not to discourage the children of God, having so faithfull an assistant to take their part: so it giveth them this caveat, that they be at no time secure, but alwayes to keepe a sure guard. Saint Bernard in the middest of a Sermon was solicited to vaine∣glory, because he thought he pleased his auditors, and thereupon brake off his speech, and turned it to the devill, saying; Non propter te hoc opus coeptum est; nec propter te, nec in te finitur. And as he is couragious, so he is subtle: for notwithstanding his
eager desire, he staid the fittest time, wherein consisteth a chiefe point of wisedome. So when he tempted Eve, he staid till her hus∣band was away, and till he could shew her the fruite which was so pleasing to the eye. So when David lay with Bathsheba, Vriahs wife, he tempted him in the evening, and after his sleepe, 2 Sam. 11.12. a very fit time for the purpose. So when they were asleepe, the enemy sowed tares, Matth. 13. And as he is wary in choosing his time, so is he as cunning in chusing the meanes, observing the dispositions of men. For wan∣ton and voluptuous men, he hath the daughters of Moab, a bayte fit for their humors, whereby to tempt them to idolatry, Numb. 15.1. For men secure and carelesse, he hath a net that sufficeth to throw over them, (2 Tim. 2.26.) and snare them in. For others, that have more care to seeke and inquire into things, hee hath quils to blow them up, as knowledge which puffes up, 1 Cor. 8.1. Yea, even the best things can he make serve for his purpose, and to be occasions of temptations; so that he may finde better entertainement, for the good exercises sake that come with him. He will come sometimes shrowded in the necessity of nature, as here; for when a man is hun∣gry, nature requireth somewhat to asswage it. Prayer, no man doubteth to be a godly exercise; yet thereby he tempted them that loved to pray in the Synagogues, and make much babling, and repetition, Matth. 6.5.7. In like sort doth he abuse the name of good counsell, as in Peter to Christ, Matth. 16.22. who (as a friend) wished him to spare himselfe, and live out his time. Thus can he put on a faire shew, the sooner to beguile: and for good reason, for if he should come unmasked in his owne likenesse, he would be rejected; as if Jehoram the King of Israel had come himselfe without Jehoshaphat, Elisha would not have looked on him: so by a good pretence, the temptation shroudes and insinuates it selfe; otherwise, it would not be looked on. IV. Now we are to consider the diversity and order of the tem∣ptations, and then will we handle them particularly. And first we are to note, that though there are but these three recorded, yet he endured divers others. His whole life was full of temptations, as may appeare by Luke 22.28. It is said, Luke 4.2. that he was tempt∣ed forty dayes of the devill, whereas these three temptations here set downe, were not till after the end of forty dayes. These onely are mentioned, but there were other not written, as divers of his miracles are unwritten, John 20.25. Onely, so much was written as was expedient. These three are a briefe Abridgement of all his temptations. As it is true that Paul saith, that Christ resembled Adam, and was made a quickning spirit, as Adam was a living soule, 1 Cor. 15.45. And the bringing of the children of Israel out of Egypt, by being called our of Egypt, Matth. 2.15. So may Christ and Adam bee compared in these three temptations. For they both were tempted with concu∣piscence of the flesh, concupiscence of the eye, and pride of life, 1
John 2.16. In Adam the devill first brought him into a conceite, that God envyed his good. As we see Faulconers put hoods over Hawks eyes, to make them more quiet and ruly. Secondly, he lulles him on to a proud conceit of himselfe, by perswading him that by eating he should be like God. Thirdly, he sheweth the fruit, which was plea∣sant. So in Christs temptation: First, he would have brought him to murmure against God: Secondly, to presume: and thirdly, to commit Idolatry; all which are set downe in the 1 Cor. 10.5, 6, 7. verses. And under these three heads come all temptations, Num. 14. & 21. & Exodus 32. To some of these extreames will the devill seeke to drive one. First, by distrust he will seeke to drive us to use unlawfull meanes, for the obtaining of necessary things, as bread is when a man is hungry. Or if we be in no such want, that that temptation cannot take place, then (through superfluity) hee will tempt us to wanton and unne∣cessary desires, as to throw our selves downe, that the Angels may take us up: and having prevailed so farre, then hee carryeth us to the devill and all. All this will I give thee; there is his [All:] Fall downe and worship me, there is the devill with it: so that (in this re∣spect) it may well be said, that The way of a Serpent is over a stone, Prov. 30.19. He goeth so slily, that a man seeth him in, before hee can tell what way, or how he got in. First, he wraps himselfe in necessity, and thereby windes himselfe in unperceived, then he brings us to make riches our God. Now let us see his darts. The first is, of making stones bread: This may well be called, The hungry Temptation. The streame of the Doctors, make Adams offence the sinne of Gluttony: but Bucer thinkes, that this temptation is rather to be referred to distrust and despaire. There is small likelihood, that one should sinne in glutto∣ny by eating bread onely. The devils desire was onely, that the stones might be turned into bread, and that after so long a Fast: and then, if the temptation had beene to Gluttony, Christs answer had been nothing to the purpose, the Devill might well have re∣plyed against the insufficiency of it. For gluttony is to be answered by a Text willing sobriety: whereas this Text which Christ answe∣reth by, containeth rather an assertion of Gods providence: and therefore our Saviour should have seemed very unskilfull in defen∣ding himselfe. The temptation therefore is to distrust. This standeth well with the devils cunning in fight: for by this be shooteth first even at the throate, and at that which is the life of a Christian, to wit, his faith; as a man would say, Iugulum petit, e∣ven at that which overcommeth the world, 1 John 5.5. He tempted him to such a distrust, as was in the Israelites, Exod. 17.7. when they asked if God were with them, or no? So he made Adam thinke, God cared not for him: so here the devill premiseth a doubt to shake his faith, wherein Christ made no doubt, Si filius Dei es. Indeed you heard a voyce say, you were the beloved Sonne of God, but are you so indeed? or was it not rather a delusion? You see yon are almost starved for want of bread: well, would God have suffered
you so to be, if you had been his Filius dilectus? No, you are some hunger-starved child, So Luke 22.31. Christ prayed, that Peters faith might not faile. It was that the devill shot at. He is a roaring Lyon, seeking to devoure us, whom we must resist by faith, 1 Pet. 5.8. It is our Faith that he aymes at, 1 Thes. 3.5. For having overthrowne that, disobedience soone will follow. Having abolished the stablish∣er of the Law, Rom. 3.31. the breach of the Law must needs follow. He hath then fit time to set us aworke, about making stones into bread, that is, to get our living by unlawfull meanes. First, shipwracke of faith, then of obedience. The devill here seeing him in great want and hunger, would thereby bring in doubt, that he was not the Sonne of God; which is not a good argument. For whether we respect the naturall to∣kens of Gods favour, we see they happen not to the wisest and men of best and greatest knowledge, as appeareth in Eccles. 9.11. or the supernaturall favour of God. We shall see Abraham forced to flye his Country into Egypt for famine, Gen. 10.12. So did Isaac, Gen. 26.1. And Jacob likewise was in the same distresse, Gen. 43.1. Notwithstanding that God was called, The God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; yet were they all three like to be hunger-starved. Yea, not onely so, but for their faith many were burned and stoned, of whom the world was not worthy, Heb. 11.37. So fared it with the A∣postles, they were hungry, naked, and a thirst, 1 Cor. 4.11. But what doe we speake of the adopted Sonnes of God, when as his owne naturall Sonne suffered as much, nay, farre more? Here we see he was hungry, also he was wearied with travaile, and faine to rest, John 4.6. he had no house to hide his head in, whereas Foxes have holes. If thou be the Sonne of God, &c. THe Heathens have observed, that in Rhetoricke it is a point of chiefest cunning, when you would out-face a man, or importune him to doe a thing, to presse and urge him with that, which he will not or cannot for shame deny to be in himselfe, As by saying, if you have any wit, then you will doe thus and thus: if you be an honest man or a good fellow, doe this. So here the devill (not being to learne any point of subtilty) comes to our Saviour, saying, If thou be the Sonne of God, (as it may be doubted, you being in this case) then, make these stones bread. No, no, it followes not: a man may be the Sonne of God, and not shew it by any such Art. So when Pi∣late asked, who accused Christ? they answered, If he had not beene a malefactor, we would not have brought him before thee, John 18.30. They were jolly grave men, it was a flat flattery: and in John 21.23. there is the like. This ought to put us in minde, when wee are tempted in like manner, that we take heed we be not out-faced. In the matter it selfe, we are to consider these points: First, the devill sets it downe for a ground, that (follow what will) bread must needs be had. Therefore Christ first closeth with him. Admit he had bread, were he then safe? No, We live not by bread onely: so that bread is not of absolute necessity. Well, what followes of that?
Bread you must needs have, you see your want, God hath left off to provide for you. Then comes the conclusion, Therefore shift for your selfe as well as you can. First, he soliciteth us to a mutinous re∣pining within our selves, as Heb. 3.8. Harden not your hearts, as in the day of temptation, &c. whereby he forceth us to breake out into such like conceites, as Psal. 116.11. I said in my distresse that all men be ly∣ars: and Psal. 31.22. I said in my haste, I am cast off. Thus closely he distrusted God, in saying, his Prophets prophesie lyes, till at last, we even open our mouthes against God himselfe, and say, This evill commeth from the Lord: shall I attend on the Lord any longer? 2 Kings 6.33. Hunger and shame is all we shall get at Gods hands. And so casting off God, betake themselves to some other Patron, and then the devill is fittest for their turne. For when we are fallen out with one, it is best serving his enemy, and to retaine to the con∣trary faction. Then we seeke a Familiar (with Saul) to answer us, 1 Sam. 28.7. But what did the devill then tell him? did he bring comfort with him? No: he tels him, that to morrow he and his sennes should dye. So here doth the devill bring a stone with him. What Father (saith Christ) if his Sonne aske him bread, would give him a stone? Matth. 7.9. yet the devill doth so; Christ was hungry, and the devill shewes him stones. Here is the devils comfort, here be stones for thee, if thou canst devise any way to make these stones bread, thou art well; whereas we doe not use to make bread of stones, but of wheate, to worke it with the sweat of our browes; to get it so, we learne Gen. 3.19. By extortion and usury we may make stones into bread, that is the devils Alchymistry: or haply we may make bread of nothing, when a man gets a thing by anothers oversight, Gen. 43.12. Or else, what and if we can over-reach our brother in subtilty, and goe be∣yond him with a tricke of wit or cunning? Let no man defraud or oppresse his brother in any matter: for the Lord is avenged of all such, 1 Thes. 4.6. The one is called the bread of violence and oppression, Prov. 4.17. The other, The bread of deceit. They are indeed both made of stones, for they still retaine their former property, as the event will declare. For though in the be∣ginning such bread be pleasant, Prov. 20.17. yet after, his mouth is but filled with gravell. After which will consequently follow, gnash∣ing of teeth.
THE THIRD SERMON MATTH. 4.4. But he answering, said; It is written, Man shall not live by bread onely; but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. IT was a good service that Elisha (2 Reg. 6.9.) did, to tell the King of the traines laid for him, when they lay in ambush against him. And even this is the first use that wee have of our Saviours Temptations. It warnes us aforehand of the devils com∣ming, so that we may have time to prepare our selves accordingly. For as at that time the devill came upon Christ when hunger pinched him: so where we are in any distresse, we are to looke for temptations. This temptation hath two parts, First comes (Si,) a distrust: Se∣condly followes unlawfull meanes. Having laid this foundation, that bread is necessary to be had when one is hungry; he inferreth, that God helpeth not, nor supplyeth the want: therefore God is not the Father, Matth. 7.6. and therefore depend no longer on him, but shift for your selfe. This is the effect of the devils argu∣ment. The Fathers upon the words, Ephes. 6.16. (Take the shield of faith, to quench all the fiery darts of the devill) doe note, that about every one of the darts or temptations of the devill, there are (as it were) bals of wilde fire. For being to assault our obedience, and knowing that faith is our shield: to that end he useth the arrow head, which is, distrust in God, about which is fire; to wit, the using of unlaw∣full meanes, to consume our obedience, which will consume our shield of faith, and so make way for the dart to kill or wound us. So that his drift is, to bring our adoption or Son-ship, to a Si. There is no doubt but Christ was able to have turned stones into bread: but why would he not then follow the devils advice? The devill by saying, Say unto these stones, seemeth to acknowledge, that
he had the force to have done it, even by his bare word: for even stones are said to heare the voyce of God, and obey his commande∣ment, and not onely Gods, but even Gods servants, as 1 Reg. 13.5. when the man of God had pronounced, that the Altar should rent in sunder, it did so. And Matth. 27.5. when Jesus cryed out with a loud voyce, the vaile of the Temple rent in twaine, the earth did quake, and the stones were cloven. The dead men are worse than stones, yet they in their graves heard his voyce. And not onely was he able to turne stones into bread, but into men also: as Children to Abraham of stones, Matth. 3.9. If there∣fore it had pleased him, he was as well able at this time to have tur∣ned stones into bread, as after he turned water into Wine, John 2.10. It was no lesse possible to him (no doubt) to have saved himselfe, when the Jewes scoffingly bad him, Matth. 27.42. as to have saved others; and to have come downe from the Crosse being alive, as it was after for him, not onely being dead and buryed, but a great stone being over him, to remove it, and come out of the grave, Mat. 28.2. He had power to both, but not will alike to both. But why would he not here use his power, for the satisfying of his hunger, and follow the devils advice? In setting downe the Histo∣ry of turning water into Wine, it is thus further said, that he did it, That his Disciples might beleeve in him, John 2.11. That was the rea∣son that moved him to the working of that miracle: and because there was no such cause here, he did it not. For the devill would not beleeve in him (he knew) though he had done it. The devill desired him, but to have him shew what he could doe for a need onely, for a vaunt of his power: wherein we see the humour of pride, that made him at the first to fall. It is the same temptation that his kinsfolkes used, No man doth any thing secretly, that seeketh to be famous; if thou dost these things, shew thy selfe to the world. But see how unfitly the Temptation hang∣eth together. He should rather have said, If you be hungry; then, If you be the Sonne of God: and then rather have bid him fast forty dayes more, then turne the stones into bread. If it had beene to have made a Sonne of God, Christ would have done it: but not to have shewed himselfe to be the Sonne of God. But it may be asked, why did Christ vouchsafe to give him any answer at all; whereas he might have commanded him to silence, and tormented him before his time, and have punished him for his saw∣cinesse? When Peter tempted him, he cut him up very sharpely, saying, Come behinde me Satan, Marke 8.33. Why did he not an∣swer the devill so? He might have enjoyned him, and throwne him into the bottomlesse pit, Luke 8.31. or at the least bidden him, A∣voyd Satan, verse 10. Augustine answereth this doubt, that Christ answered in the like time, to teach us to answer: willing us thereby (as Abimelech did his souldiers) to doe as he had done before: Judg. 9.48. So Christ is our example, John 13.15. and bids us doe as hee hath done. Christ is our Captaine, he hath gone before us, and
shewed us how to behave our selves in fight: when the devill assaul∣teth us with distrust, then are we to ward it off with a Text of Gods providence: and so to the rest, as he hath done before us. Our Saviours shield, whereby (we see) he beareth off all the devils darts, is covered all over with Scriptum est. We have here a briefe view of the Churches Armory, Cant. 4.4. of the Tower of David, built for defence. Here be the shields wherewith Solomons Temple was hang∣ed, and which Paul calleth, The weapons of our warfare, 2 Cor. 10.4. not carnall, but mighty (through God) to cast downe holds. They are in number five: First, a preparation of our selves by the use of Gods Sacraments, that we may be the more strong to sustaine and beare off temptations, and to hold out to the end without fain∣ting. Secondly, a withdrawing our selves into the desert, or some other solitary place, there (by Meditation) to kindle good thoughts, Psal. 39.3. Thirdly, fasting. Fourthly, watchfull prayer, Matth. 26.41. Fifthly, the perfecting our selves in the Scriptures. These be the five shields wherewith Solomons Temple was hanged. Now as for the Scripture, we are to note, that where God speak∣eth of any good that we are to receive out of it, it is commended to us as a storehouse, whither we are to make our resort for the bread of life, and the water of life, whereof he that tasteth, shall never thirst, John 6.35. And from thence are we to draw the waters of comfort, out of the fountaines of salvation, Esay 12.3. When there is any ill spoken of, which we are to resist, then it is commended to us as an Armory, whence we may fetch any kinde of weapon which we shall need, either offensive, as a sword, Heb. 4.12. or defensive, as a shield, Prov. 30.5. The Scripture is the broad plate that is to beare off the darts: our faith is the braces or handle whereby we take hold, Ephes. 6.16. and lift it up to defend our selves withall. For the Scripture is a shield, Non quod dicitur, sed quod dicitur. Dicitur; there is the strong and broad matter, fit to beare off: and Creditur, that is the handle or braces to it, God spake once or twice, I have heard it, Power belongeth unto God, Psal. 62.11. So that it sufficeth not that it be spoken one∣ly by God, but we must heare it too: neither must we heare it as the voyce of a man (as Samuel at the first did; who when God cal∣led him thought it the voyce of Eli:) but as the voyce of God, that we which were dead in our sins, he hath quickned and forgiven us all our trespasses, 1 Thes. 2.13. This is the perfection of our faith. Generally of the Scriptures, this is Christs opinion, confirmed by his owne practise; that if the devill come as a Serpent, here is a charme for him, Psalme 58.5. Or if he come as a Lyon, here is that is able to prevaile against him, 1 Peter 5.8. And that the devill knowes well enough, as appeareth by his malice that hee hath alwayes borne it, before it was Scripture, when it was but one∣ly Dictum. For so soone as God had said, Let us make man in our likenesse, that word was straight a whetstone to the devils envy. And after the fall, when the seed was promised, that was, and is the cause of all the devils enmity, Gen. 31.15. So when the promise
was reiterated, Gen. 22.18. that was the cause he so turmoyled all the Patriarchs. But when the word was to be written, and to become Scripture, then his malice began to grow very hot, insomuch that he caused it for anger to be broken, Exod. 32.19. For the Fathers are of o∣pinion, that all the devils busie endevour, in making the Israelites to commit idolatry with the golden Calfe, was to the end, that he might so heate Moses in his zeale, as that in his anger hee should breake the Tables of the Law, by casting them hastily out of his hands. We are to note therefore; that there is a forcible sound in the word, which the Devill cannot abide; and not onely the sound, but the sight also. It is written of Augustine, that lying sicke on his bed, he caused the seven penitentiall Psalmes to be painted on the wall over against him, in great Letters; that if after he should become speechlesse, yet he might point to every verse when the devill came to tempt him; and so confute him. Blessed is he that hath his quiver full of such arrowes, they shall not be ashamed. Blessed is he that hath the skill to choose out fit arrowes for the purpose, as the Fathers speake out of Esay 49.2. Christ saith affirmatively of the Scriptures, that in them is eternall life, John 5.39. Negatively, that the cause of error is the not knowing of them, Marke 12.24. David saith, it was that that made him wiser than his enemies, than his teachers, and than the Ancients, Psal. 119.98.99. & 110. Knowledge of the truth, is the way to amendment after a fall, 2 Tim. 2.26. There is much cal∣ling now adayes for the Word, and others finde fault as fast, that it is no better harkned unto. For as the want of obedience, and all other abuses (which are so much cryed out against) proceed not onely from the not hearing of the Word, but aswell from the not mingling of faith with it, (without which mixture, it is nothing worth) it profiteth not, Heb. 4.2. So the error of the former times was, in yeelding too farre to the devils policy, by sealing up the Scriptures, and locking the storehouse and Armory of the people. It is the policy Christ tels us of in the 11. of Lukes Gospell, ver. 22. A strong man puts the strong armed man out of his house, and takes away his armour from him: then he needs not feare him. The like policy we read of, 1 Sam. 13.19. when the Philistims had taken away all Smiths and Armour, then they thought they were safe. So in the time of darkenesse, the devill might let them doe their good workes, and what they list, and yet have them still under his lure: that he might offend them at his pleasure, that had no armour to resist him. All the Children of God, had a right and property in the Law of God, as appeareth by Christs words, John 10.34. he answered them, that is, the common people, Is it not written in your Law? As though hee should say, the Scripture is yours. To the young man (in the tenth Chapter of Saint Lukes Gospell, and 26. verse) that asked Christ, what he should doe to be sa∣ved? Christ answereth: What is written in the Law? how readest thou? Whereunto to answer, that we cannot read, or that the booke
is sealed up, Esay 29.11. is as the devill would have it. Then hath he a fit time to offer us stones to make bread of. But this answer with our Saviour Christ will not be allowed of. Now come we to the speciall point of Christs answer, It is writ∣ten, Man lives not by bread onely, &c. Deut. 8.3. There is no better kinde of reasoning, than that, when one grants all that hath beene said by his adversary, and proveth it to make on his part; and upon a new conceit, avoyds all that his adversary said. Here our Savi∣our might confesse all that the devill objected; as that he is the Son of God; and admit the stones were made bread, and that bread were of absolute necessity, and that it were so to be come by (which is untrue) were we then in good case? This indeed is the devils position, wherewith he would perswade all those that have animam triticeam, (as the Fathers call it) that those externall things are necessary to be had: and that if they have enough thereof, they are well enough; as we see it to be the minde of the rich man, Luke 12.19. This man having a wheaten soule, ha∣ving corne enough, bade his soule take rest, and live merrily for many yeares. But Christ goeth further, and saith; Though the stones be made bread, it will not availe, except it please God (by the blessing of his word) to give vertue, and (as it were) life unto the bread, there is no difference between it, and a stone. It is not the plenty or quality of victuals, howsoever some dote upon such externall meanes, as they did, which sacrificed to their net, and burnt incense to their yerne, Habak. 1.16. because by them their portion was fat, and their meates plenteous. For what saith Job 31.27. If I had rejoyced because my substance was great, this had beene an iniquity. So that our life is not mainetained by bread onely, descended out of the mould of the earth. The nature of bread and stones are not much unlike, they come both out of one belly, that is to say, the earth, Job 28.5, 6. and of themselves, the one of them hath no more power than the other unto life: for we know that the Israelites dyed, even while the flesh of Quailes was in their mouthes, Numb. 11.33. and Manna (heavenly fare) being farre better than our bread. It is the devils crafty policy, to bury a mans life under a loafe of bread: and (as it were) to fetter the grace of God to the outward meanes; wheras they of themselves are of no more efficacy, without the operation and grace of the word, than a hammer and a saw, without a hand, able to employ them. David saith (Psal. 104.28.) The eyes of all things waite on God for their meate in due season, and thou fillest them: With what? with bread? No, but with thy blessing and goodnesse. Our hearts must be stablished with grace, not with meats, Heb. 13.9. It is Gods prerogative, that as all things had their beginning from him, Colos. 1.17. so he sup∣porteth and sustaineth them, Heb. 1.3. This is a further point than all Philosophy teacheth us. For they having laid downe the foure elements, bare and simple essences, tanquam materiam, by compounding and tempering of them, they bring forth a certaine quintessence or balme full of vertue. But Di∣vinity
leadeth so to a quintessence, without which, all the quintessen∣ces and balmes in the world can doe us no good. To the question that Jeremie propoundeth, Jer. 8.22, Is there no balme at Gilead? Is there no Physitian there? The answer may bee. Mans health is not recovered by balme or physicke onely, but by eve∣ry word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God, if we weigh Christs ar∣gument aright. For we may see, 2 Chron. 16.12. Asa dyed for all his Physitians that were about him. So if it be asked, Are there no horses nor chariots in Gilead? We may answer, warlike victory con∣sisteth not in warlike furniture onely, but in remembring the name of the Lord God, Psal. 20.7. A horse is a vaine thing to save, with∣out the power of this word. And so when a man thrives not, or prospers not in his actions; it is not often for want of labour or care: Psal. 127.1. tels him, Except the Lord build the house, &c. Au∣gustine adviseth his Auditory to beleeve it in time, lest (by wofull experience) they finde it to be true; when as they shall have such a consumption, that no meate shall doe them any good; or such a dropsie, that no drinke shall availe them. The power and vertue of this word is called, The staffe of bread, Levit. 26.26. and it is meant of a chiefe staffe, such a one as is set in the middest, to beare up all the Tent. The plainest similitude I can use, to make you un∣derstand the force thereof is this: When we goe to Physicke for a∣ny disease, we are bidden feeth such herbes in running water, and then to drinke the water, we know it is not the water which help∣eth, but the decoction of infusion. So it is not the bread (conside∣red barely in it selfe) that nourisheth us, but the vertue and grace of the word infused into it. We are not therefore to sticke to the meanes, like the Glutton, Luk. 12.19. but to pray for this blessing. And to this end, God (in the establishing of nature) hath thereout reserved foure speciall prerogatives to his Word. As first, with a very little of the meanes to goe farre in operation, 1 Reg. 17.14. with a little oyle and a little wheate, he fed Elias, the poore widdow, and her sonne a great while. And Matth. 17.14. Christ made five loaves and two fishes serve five thousand persons. The heathen man thought no certaine proportion was to be set downe for a family, because when a heavenly hunger commeth on men, they eate more at one time, than at another. But whatso∣ever the heathen have spoken wisely, we have farre more wisely ut∣tered by the Holy Ghost, in one place or other. In Psal. 17.14. this is set downe, where there is mention made of a certaine hidden trea∣sure, wherewith mens bellies be filled, and Hagg. 1.6. saith, Men eate much, yet have not enough; drinke much, but are not filled: This is the first prerogative. His second is, he takes order as well for the quality, as for the quantity; course meates and fine are all one with him; for the Israe∣lites (notwithstanding their Quayles and Manna) dyed; and Da∣niel and his fellowes, that fed upon course meates, looked better than all the children that were fed with the Kings owne dyet, Dan. 1.15.
Thirdly, without meanes he worketh sometimes. Therefore Asa had said little or nothing to the purpose, 2 Chron. 14.11. If he had said, God helpeth by many or few (if he had not put in too) and some∣times by none. For there was light before any Sunne or Moone, Gen. 1.3. though after (verse 14.) it pleased God to ordaine them as instruments. And so Gen. 2.5. the earth was fertile, when as then no raine had falne on the earth, not any such ordinary meanes. Let Moses be on the Mount, and but heare God, and hee needeth no bread. The fourth is, that he can bring his purpose to passe, even by those meanes, whose natures tend to contrary effects; as to pre∣serve by stones. Colloquintida, being ranke poyson, (in eating where∣of is present death) was (by the Prophet) made matter of nourish∣ment, 2 King. 4.40. So Christ, by those things which were fit to put out a seeing mans eyes, as dust; made a blinde man recover his sight, John 9.6. And so doth hee make light to shine out of darkenesse, 2 Cor. 4.6. One contrary out of another. Thus we see the devill answered. Now let us apply these things to our selves. Christs answer doth import two words, and so two mouthes, and two breaths, or spirits: and these two be as two twinnes. He that will be maintained by the one, must seeke after the other. The first word is the same decree, whereby the course of nature is establish∣ed, according to Psal. 147.15. He sendeth forth his commandement upon the earth, and his word runneth very swiftly: he giveth snow like wooll, &c. Secondly, the other is that whereof James 1.18. speaketh: to wit, the word of truth, wherewith (of his owne will) he begat us. The one proceedeth from the mouth of Gods providence, crea∣ting and governing all things, Psal. 33.6. He but spake the word, and it was done. The other proceedeth out of the mouth of Gods Pro∣phets, who are (as it were) his mouth, Jer. 15.19. Thou standest before me, as if thou wert my mouth. From the first word, all things have their beginning and being; as when he sent forth his spirit or breath, they were created and had their beginning: So Psal. 104.29. He teacheth us, that so soone as God hides his face, they are troubled. And if he takes away their breath, they dye, and returne to dust. The other spirit, that is, the sanctifying Spirit, ministreth unto us supernaturall life, Esay 56.21. Now therefore to set them together, every man is thus to thinke with himselfe. If I get my li∣ving contrary to Gods word, that is, by any unlawfull meanes; surely Gods other word will not accompany such gotten goods. That is, these two words be twinnes: if we get not our goods by the one word, we shall want the blessing of the other word, and than wee were as good eate stones: it will be but gravell in our mouthes, or Quailes. We are then to use the meanes, according to the second word. Abraham (we see) went forth to sacrifice, ac∣cording to Gods appointment, Gen. 22. the Word was his directi∣on: therefore when Isaac asked, Where was the Sacrifice? he might
boldly answer, God would provide one; as we see even at the very pinch he did: whereupon it came to be a proverbe, that even In monte, Jehova providebit. The Israelites went out of Egypt, by the warrant and appointment of Gods Word. How then? First, they had a way made them (where never was any before) through the Red∣sea, Exod. 14.21. they had bread downeward out of the clouds, whereas it useth to rise upwards out of the earth: their garments in forty yeares never waxed old, Deut. 8.3, 4. they had water, whence water useth not to come; by striking the Rockes, water gushed forth: So that it is true, which the Prophet David saith, Psal. 34.9. There is no want to them that feare God. Though (peradventure) he will not use the same meanes he did for the Israelites; yet the Children of God (walking after his will) shall have some way of reliefe alwayes. And therefore Christ would not distrust the pro∣vidence of God: for hee knew he was in the worke and way of God; For we read, That he was led into the Wildernesse by the Spirit, and therefore could not lacke; as indeed he did not, for the An∣gels came and ministred unto him: as it followeth in the 11. verse of this Chapter. So either the Crowes shall minister to our wants, as they did to Elias: or our enemies, as the Egyptians did to the Is∣raelites: or else the Angels themselves, as they did here. But to grow to a conclusion, Let us seeke the Kingdome of God, and all other things shall be ministred unto us. And in all like temptations, we may learne a good answer out of Dan. 3.17. That God that we serve is able to relieve and deliver us, even from the burning fire: But, if it should not be his will so to doe, yet wee will not use unlawfull meanes, or fall to Idolatry, or turne stones into bread. In this an∣swer (againe) Christ would teach us heare to be resolute, how∣soever Gods blessing doth not concurre with our gettings, as it doth not when we get them by indirect meanes, contrary to Gods word. To goods so gotten, God will adde sorrow: for The blessing of the Lord maketh rich, and he doth adde no sorrowes with it, Prov. 10.22. When God gives riches, he gives quietnesse withall: but if God give them not, we were as good be without them, whether they be gotten by oppression or violence, Prov. 4.17. or by fraud and deceit, Prov. 20.17. For these two be the quick-silver and brim∣stone of the devils Alchymistry. God will adde sorrow to them, for though they be pleasant at the first, Prov. 20.17. and money got∣ten by stinking meanes, smels like other money (as an Emperour said:) and bread so gotten, tastes like other bread: yet in the end a plaine conclusion and experiment will make it manifest, that it was made of stones, and had sorrow mingled or added to it. And therefore it shall be either an occasion or matter of the disease cal∣led the Stone: or it shall turne his meate in his bowels, and fill him with the gall of Aspes, Job 20.14. or as Asaes oppression by delica∣cy, became an occasion of the dropsie or gout: or else shall the executioner catch all that hee hath, and the stranger spoyle him, Psalm. 109.11. or spend them upon Physitians, Marke 5.26. or on Lawyers: or else, though God suffer them to enjoy them quietly
all their life time, and even to dye by their flesh pots; yet on their death-bed, they shall finde such a grudging and torment in their conscience, that they will wish that they had starved for hunger, before they had begunne to use any such meanes. Or if God in his judgement (for their greater torment) suffer them to dye in their beds, without any remorse of conscience, like blockes, or like an Oxe dying in a ditch; at the last day they shall feele a gnashing in their teeth, and then they will know it was made of stones.
THE FOVRTH SERMON. MATTH. 4.5, 6. Then the devill tooke him up into the holy City, and set him on a pinacle of the Temple, And said unto him, If thou be the Sonne of God, cast thy selfe downe: for it is written, that he will give his Angels charge over thee, and with their hands they shall lift thee up, lest at any time thou shouldst dash thy foote against a stone. THE manner is, after one hath taken a foyle, his courage will faile. The Angell would have beene gone, when he saw he could not prevaile over Jacob, Gen. 32.26. But it is not so here with the devill. For when he saw that his first temptation would not prevaile, he tryeth another. And even so he played with Job: for when he could doe no good upon his first Patent, by taking away all he had, he comes and sues for a new Commission, that he might touch his flesh and bones, Job 2.5. and thereby he giveth us to learne, That it is not one foyle that can make him give over. He is one of those, whom a Father saith, to have courage above their strength; and of that nature be many in our dayes, whose daring is above their skill; and have courage to undertake much more than their ability is to performe. Not like David, who did as much as he undertooke in killing Goliah: nor like him of whom Esay speaketh in the se∣venth verse of his third Chapter, that when they would have made him Prince, he had no bread nor cloathing, and therefore refused: but they will take it upon them, though they have not wherewith∣all, and thereby become Authors of trouble, wanting ability to goe through withall. But as Augustine saith; Is it not all one not to be able to answer, nor to be able to hold their peace? We see here the devill is a great undertaker. Secondly, he is not onely content to take a foyle, but even out of the same thing wherewith he was foyled, maketh he matter of a new Temptation, a new ball of fire: Out of Christs conquest, he makes a new assault; that is, since he will needs trust, he will set him on
trusting; he shall trust as much as he will. As the former tempted him to diffidence; so this shall tempt him to presidence. As before the devill brought him to the waters of Meribah (Exod. 17.7.) where the Children of Israel did murmure and tempt God: so now he brings him to the temptation of Massah, (Deut. 6.16.) that is, to presumption, wantonnesse, and delicacy: for then with bread they were not content, but they must have flesh and other dainties, Psal. 78.20. As the first might be called the hungry Temptation, so this may be called, The wanton Temptation. That which was in the old Testament the Temptation of Meribah, is here in the new Testament the Temptation of the Wildernesse; and that which was there the Temptation of Massah, is here the temptation of the Pinacle. In the first, by want of things necessary, he thought to drive them to vexation and bitternesse of spirit, and to distrust Gods power and goodnesse. In the second, by unnecessary matters, he draweth us on to wantonnesse, and to put God to try what he can doe, and to set him about base services: by the one, he driveth us unto unlaw∣full meanes, by the other, he draweth us from the use of things law∣full: by the one he brings us to this conceit, that we are so abject∣ed of God, that if we trust in him, he will in the end faile us; by the other to thinke we are so deare in Gods eyes, and such darlings, as throw our selves into any danger, and he will not forsake us. By the one, he puts us in feare, (as Augustine saith) Deum defuturum, etiam si promisit; by the other, in hope, Deum adfuturum, ubi non promisit: by the one, he slandereth God unto us, as if he were a God of straw, of base condition, and subject to our becke; by the other, as if he were a God of iron, that would not encline, though we requested him. Now to the Temptation: wherein we are to consider three things. First, the ground the devill chose for the working of this temptati∣on. Secondly, the temptation it selfe; to wit, the devils speech. Thirdly, Christs answer to it. In the place, three things are to be noted: First, the place it selfe: Secondly, the devill chose it: Third∣ly, that our Saviour followed him thither. For a new temptation he makes choyce of a new place. Indeed for a temptation to pre∣sumption, the Wildernesse was not a fit place: First, it was not high enough, and then it was not populous enough. It was a me∣lancholy place: when a man is under the crosse in affliction, or in some anguish and sorrow for want, death of friends, or otherwise, and generally for all solitary men, the hungry Temptation is fitter than this of Presumption. As long as Noah was in the Arke in the midst of the waters, he had in him no presumptuous thought: but sitting under the Vine in his Vineyard, he was overcome therewith. And just Lot (2 Pet. 2.8.) in Sodom, had no fit time or place to be presumptuous; but when he dwelt in the mountaine in security, then he committed incest with his daughters, being made drunke by them. David, so long as he was persecuted by Saul, and tossed up and downe from post to pillar, had no leisure to be presumptuous: but in the top of his Turret, when he was at rest in his Palace, 2 Sam.
11.2. presumption gave him a blow. So here the Wildernesse was no fit place, but the Pinacle is a very fit place for one to be presum∣ptuous on. It is as good as a stage to shew himselfe upon, to see and to be seene. In the Wildernesse there was small warrant for one that would be presumptuous: but from the Pinacle hee might discerne farre and neere, both the inner Court and outward Court, and see a whole Cloud of Witnesses, and have some warrant of example of all e∣states, high or low, wise or noble. For what abuse soever be in him, be he never so presumptuous, he shall see some as proud, stout, and high-minded as himselfe: be his haire never so long, or his ruffes never so great, he shall finde some as farre gone therein as him∣selfe. If we marke the foure gradations that it hath, we shall finde it to be a very fit place. As first, before he could come to the Pinacle, he must goe out of the Wildernesse into the City: Secondly, not any City, but the holy City: Thirdly, into the Temple of the Ci∣ty: And fourthly, out of the Temple up to the Pinacle. First, (ha∣ving got him to leave the Wildernesse) he brought him into the Ci∣ty, that there he might say unto him: You see such and such grave men, how they behave themselves: why should you seeke to be holier than they? This was a good civill temptation: he brought him not to Cesarea or Samaria, but even to Jerusalem the holy City: for that addition is given it, Luke 4.9. and Dan. 9.24. Thirdly, he brought him into the Temple, where even the very ground was holy. Fourthly, not to any other place of it, but the very top and Pinacle, which was over the Sanctum Sanctorum. Who would not tread hard there, and take upon him, being in such a place? where if a man will be carryed away with example, he may see Ananias the High-Priest, renting his cloathes, at the hearing of things that sounded like blasphemy, Mark. 14.63. and yet buying his Bishoprick for money; who will not then be bold to doe the like? And Herod a Prince, such a one as heard John Baptist Preach; yea, and with much delight, to commit adultery, Marke 6.20. who would feare to doe the like? There he may see the Pharisee, under shew of great holinesse, tything Mint and Cummin, and under colour of long pray∣ers, devoure Widowes houses, bringing in by extortion, and sen∣ding out by excesse, Matth. 23.14.21. And so in this City, one may see some men, both great frequenters of Sermons, and yet great U∣surers; Gentlewomen, mis-shapen in their attire. Seeing this, who will not be as bold as they, the place being so holy? And being thus warranted by example, surely we must needes commend the devils wit, for his choyce. Out of this, arise two notes. First, against some phantasticall spi∣rits, who say; Can that be an holy City, where there be dumbe dogges? There were so in Jerusalem, Esay 56.10. Where the lea∣ders be blinde; Matth. 15.14. They were so where Judas ministred the Sacrament; where there is divsion and debate amongst them∣selves, Phil. 4.2. Can this, (say they) be the holy City? And there∣upon
upon they forsake the fellowship, Heb. 10.25. Whereas they (not∣withstanding the former abuses, and notwithstanding the eleven Tribes were Apostates) did yet name it the holy City. Secondly, on the other side we are to be instructed, though a man be on the battlements of the Church, yet hath he no sure footing, or cause to be secure; but rather to feare the more: for even there doth the devill stand at his elbow, watching his overthrow. There is no place we see priviledged from temptations, no Desert so solita∣ry, but the devill will seeke it out: no Pinacle so high, but the de∣vill is a Bishop over it, to visit and over-looke it. To conclude, though in Jerusalem sits the abomination of desolation (whereof Daniel spake;) yet it is the holy City still. And though the place be never so holy, yet is that no cause of priviledge; but even there may sit the abomination of desolation. Both are proved out of Matth. 24.15. The second thing that we observed in the circumstance of place, is; that the Devill assumpted Christ: which, to those that are weake (as Gregory also collecteth) may be offensive, in giving them to thinke, that the devill had such power over Christ, as to carry him whither he listed. But when they shall consider, that even the limbes of the devill haled and harrowed him to and fro, from Annas to Caiphas, from Caiphas to Pilat, from Pilat to Herod, and from him backe a∣gaine to Pilat: and how spitefully and contemptuously he was used in all these places, and at last carryed to execution: what marvell will it be to see him (as Augustine speaketh) In monte duci à capite, qui àmembris traditur, &c. These things doe indeed (as all other his sufferings) set forth the greatnesse of the love of God toward us. Of God the Father, that he would give his onely Sonne; yea, ap∣point him this worke of our salvation, and give the devill such a po∣wer over him, Luk. 22.53. Of God the Sonne, that he would be content to suffer such indignity, Phil. 2.7. as to be obedient to the death of the Crosse. The reason of all these his sufferings, as also that he would be bap∣tized of John, a weake and sinfull man; was (as himselfe declareth it) to fulfill all righteousnesse, Matth. 3.15. So here he was to suffer it, else Gods righteousnesse would not have beene fulfilled, nor the worke of our salvation. And as he suffered this Assumption, so after∣wards, Luke. 9.51. his second Assumption was, to goe to Jerusa∣lem to suffer: and so at the last he came to his third and last Assum∣ption, to be received up into glory, 1 Tim. 3.16. And by the very same steps and degrees, must we be assumpted. And this is the as∣sumption of suffering, which brought him to glorifying. The third thing is, that our Saviour followed; whereby we are to marke, not so much his courage, that he durst encounter with the devill, in any place wheresoever he list to carry him: and that he was not onely the God of the vallies, but a God of the mountaines also, contrary to their surmise, 1 King. 20.23. That (I say) is not so much to be marked, as that our Saviour would at all stand upon a Pinacle. There be some that would make us beleeve, it is a sin to
stand upon a Pinacle: but then if that had beene so, Christ would ne∣ver have stood there. And since Christ stood there, it is no more sin for any man else to stand there, than it is to stand in the Wildernesse: for it is lawfull for us to follow his foot-steps, and to tread wheres∣oever he hath trod before us; yet such places be not priviledged. For, as it is true, that many mens table and wealth is their snare, Psal. 69.22. even so the good gifts and graces of God, be turned to a mans hurt: as knowledge may serve for a quill to puffe him up and make him swell, 1 Cor. 8.1. Nay, even that godly sorrow, which is so much to be wished for, hath in it matter of temptation, lest men be swallowed up with two much heavinesse, 2 Cor. 2.7. The Scriptures themselves (we see) are subject to the abuse of the devill: whereby it should follow, that they are to be refused, if eve∣ry thing be refused which brings matter of temptation. But as Au∣gustine saith, Non est laus stetisse in pinaculo, sed stetisse & non cecidisse. In every place to answer the devill, is praise-worthy. Indeed it is dangerous for one that hath a light and giddy braine, for such as are drunke, Esay 51.22. (though not with wine) to stand so high. Job could stand there without falling, for he had a more setled braine, Job 31.27. Such places are for the wisest and sagest men. Saint Paul stood not there, but yet he could have stood there, for he had the tricke, or skill of it, as himselfe confesseth, Phil. 4.12. I can be abased, and I can abound, &c. Now come we to the Temptation it selfe, which hath three gene∣rall heads. First, the ball of wilde-fire; which is to consume his faith. Secondly, the dart, Cast thy selfe downe; which is to pierce the soule. Thirdly, he tempereth the head of his dart with some stronger me∣tall; which is, Scriptum est. I. First, Si filius Dei es. This is a great moate in the devils eye, he useth the same terme in the former temptation, and here he is up with it againe. And all is to this end, that by often bringing it into que∣stion, whether he be the Sonne of God; he may at last make it out of question or doubt, that we are not the Sonnes of God: that by, and from Si sis, he may bring it to Ne sis; and so we may be like himselfe. For to this end is all his compassing of Sea and Land, to make one Proselyte like himselfe, according to the endeavour of the Pharisees, Matth. 23.15. who did in like sort; and when he is made, yee make him twofold more the childe of hell, than your selves. As on the other side, Christ would have us the Sonnes of God like him. But see what a dexterity the devill hath, in making things serve for his purpose: he maketh one selfe-same thing serve for two seve∣rall, yea, contrary purposes. What a goodly grace he hath in the first Temptation? He useth it there to procure us to desparation: He maketh it here to serve for presumption. But indeed there be two man∣ner of Si es, or Ifs: the one is a questioning or doubting [Si;] as, If thou be the Sonne of God, shew us a signe, Marke 8.12. Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me whole, Mat. 8.2. The other is a plaine affirma∣tion, as, Phil. 3.11. If by any meanes I might attaine to the resurrection of the dead, where we are sure he made no doubt thereof. So here
the devill saith, If thou be the Sonne of God, as I now grant indeed. I was in some doubt, but now. I confesse thou art: I am of that voy∣ces minde, that deonounced thee so at thy Baptisme. The devill (in the former temptation) came out like a malecontent, or a murmurer: here he comes like a flattering parasite, he will pin∣guare caput ejus oleo, make his head even swim in the oyle of ostenta∣tion. But though it be not the same temptation, yet it is the same de∣vill in both places. For both by the one and the other, he seeketh the downfall and destruction of man: and though his two Ifs be con∣trary in themselves, yet are they both also contrary to the will and Word of God: for he would not in any case we should distrust him, neither would he that at any time we should cast our selves downe. And therefore hath he caused battlements to be made on every house top, that none might be slaine with falling downe; Deut. 22.8. Now he would have him shew himselfe (thereby) to be the Sonne of God, for he is now in the sight of all Jerusalem. It is said, that Christ comes now to put to a sparke of fire, that is of faith, and that his will was, it might burne and be maintained. The devill on the other side, labours by all meanes possible to quench and put it out: and seeing water would not doe it in the former tem∣ptation; he goeth now about to see, if he can make the very oyle it selfe to put it out, even that very thing whereby it was to be main∣tained: as indeed it will, if we powre out too great a quantity. Or if he cannot quench it, either with water or oyle, he will see if he can blow it up with gun-powder. As, seeing the water of distrust will not extinguish his faith, but that he would trust in God: he endea∣voureth now by Scriptures (that magnifie the providence of God, and the confidence we are to put in him) to set him as farre gone in the other extreame, by presuming or trusting too much, that so the fire, which before he would have quenched, may now so flame out, as not to keepe it selfe within the chimney, but to set the whole house on fire. This is the ball of wilde-fire of this second Temptation: and so both we see tend to the consuming and nullifying of our faith. II. The dart it selfe is, [Cast thy selfe downe:] which consisteth of two points. First, the casting downe. Secondly, that he himselfe was to cast downe himselfe. For the first, it is generall, the neglect of ordinary meanes, as here. Whereas the ordinary way was downe the staires, he would have him leape, or throw himselfe over the Battlements. And here a man may see to what end the devils halting commeth: he brings a man up by little and little to some high place, that so he may send him at once with his head downward. All the preferments that he bestoweth on a man, is not to any other intent, but that he may doe as the devill himselfe did, (who being on high did cast himselfe downe) and so be like him, John 8.23. that is, from beneath, not from above: who fell from heaven like light∣ning, Luk. 10.18. So that howsoever in outward shew he may seem to befriend us, yet this is inward intention and scope. As the Edo∣mites in time of the prosperity of the Israelites, pretended great good will to them: but in the day of their great calamity, they were they
that cryed, Downe with them, downe with them, Psal. 137.7. Gods manner is, when he meaneth to exalt a man, he will first humble him, and make him low, Matth. 23.12. The devils manner is (we see) cleane contrary, Esay 14.14. to lift them up to the clouds, that he may bring them downe to the grave, yea to the lowest grave, Psal. 86.13. He carryeth them the higher, to throw them downe with the greater violence. He lifteth up Adam with a conceit, to be like God, to the very top of perfection, to the intent he might be like the beast that perisheth, Psal. 49.20. The second hath some matter of comfort: the devill is here a su∣tor to him, to doe it himselfe. Why doth not the devill cast him downe? First, it was not in his power; or, if he had, yet would not that have served his turne: then there had beene no sinne of presumption in it. There must be two persons that must concurre in our downefall: well may the devill induce and move us to it; but unlesse we our selves be consenting, and cast our selves downe, there can be no down-fall to hurt us. For as Chrysostome saith, Nemo laedi∣tur nisi à seipso: so, Nullum praecipitium nisi voluntarium. The de∣vill did not cram Eve with the forbidden fruite: but when she saw it, she tooke it, and eate it, Gen. 3.6. So the devill, when he entreth into the soule of a man (which he counteth his palace) he doth not breake open the doore; no, nor so much as draw the latch; but when he commeth, he findeth it swept and garnished, Luke 11.25. and so goeth in. There must therefore be a reaching out of the hand, and an opening of the doore by our selves, and so a casting downe of thy selfe, or else, though the devill thrust sore at thee that thou maist fall, the Lord will helpe thee, Psal. 118.13. In Deut. 22.8. God hath caused battlements to be made on every house top, by which we may stay our selves. The devill tels God, that he had made a hedge about Job, Chap. 1.10. so that unlesse Job step over it, or breake it downe, he is safe. III. The devils dart is, Cast thy selfe downe: but he bestoweth some great cost on this. With the selfe-same armour that Christ bare off the other dart, doth the devill sharpen and harden this: he doth not so in any other of the temptations, therefore we are to looke for some great matter: he bringeth Scripture, that he may be the better credited. He speakes not now after the manner of men, 1 Cor. 9.8. so that it is not he now that speaketh, but Scripture, as Paul reasoneth there, You see (saith he) I counsell you to nothing, but that the Psalmes will beare you out in. The devill knew well by his owne fall, how dangerous the sinne of presumption is, it cost him dearely: and so did it David likewise, and therefore of all other, he prayeth God to keepe him from presumptuous sinnes, Psal. 19.13. He knew also what it was to abuse the goodnesse, patience, and long suf∣fering of God, Rom. 2.4. Therefore he avoucheth it by Scripture, he tels him, it will be too long to goe downe the staires, and with∣all teacheth him a neerer way, but to jump, or to cast himself down, and to feare no hurt, for the Angels have charge of him. And even so he perswadeth men now adayes; that they need not goe downe
faire and softly, in feare and trembling, but to deferre all till their dy∣ing houre, and then commend themselves to God, and throw them∣selves upon Gods mercy, and that fiery Chariot that tooke up Eli∣as, shall come and fetch up them; or else, an Angell shall carry them up, let them be sure they shall have no harme, for they be Gods darlings, and God doth so dote on them, that he will not suffer them in any case to receive the least hurt that may be. If ever the devill came in his likenesse, it was here, In the first of Sam. 28.18. he came but in the guise of a Prophet: so that in stead of saying, Is Saul among the Prophets? it might have beene said; What, is the devill among the Prophets? But here he hath used himselfe so cunningly, that if ever he was transformed into an Angell, here it is verifyed, 1 Cor. 11.14. For he commeth here like a white devill, or like a Divine; he comes with a Psalter in his hand, and turnes to the place, and shewes our Saviour the 91. Psalme, the 11, and 12. ver∣ses. Wherein first we are to note, that the devill readeth Psalmes, as well as we, and hath the words of Scripture in his mouth. And 1 Sam. 28. he counterfeited Samuel so right, and used the very words that he had used, that they could not know him from Samuel: so here he counterfeited the voyce of David, Act. 19.15. This will make us shake off security, considering that God doth (for our tri∣all) sometime deliver the adversary the key of our Armory, where∣by he is able to hold argument with an Arch-angell, Jude 9. yea, with Christ himselfe, as we see here. How carefull therefore had we need to be, to finde out a fit answer for him? For onely to as∣sault us doth he reade the Scriptures: yea, but not to any good end, but even thereby to deceive the simplicity of men; as here to make them put their soules in adventure to the last houre. He hath indeed a grace with some vaine youths of the Count, and ungodly Atheists, to set them a scoffing at the Scripture, as Esay 28.22. But with o∣thers, that have the Scriptures in more high reverence, he goeth an∣other way to worke, making it to them the favour of death, Rom. 7.10. The words which he useth in the name of Samuel, hee useth to make Saul despaire: and here he useth Davids words to cause pre∣sumption, and to make them our bane. And not every Scripture: but if there be any Scripture more full of heavenly comfort than an∣other, that of all other will the devill abuse; as indeed the Psalmes are; and of all the Psalmes, this 91. especially: and in that part, if any one sentence be sweeter than another, that of all other will the devill abuse. Marke the second verse here cited: Hee shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keepe thee in all thy wayes. These last words the devill leaves out, because they make not for his purpose. They shall beare thee in their hands, that thou dash not thy foote against a stone. And we shall see nothing can be spoken more comfortable: as first, in that it is said, that the Angels have charge over us in all our wayes, Exod. 23.20. Behold, I send my Angel before thee, to guide thee in the way; and to comfort, and confirme us. As when Jacob was in feare of his brother Esau, the Angel met him, Gen. 32.1. and to
defend us in all dangers, and succour us in all necessities, spreading their wings over us, and pitching their tents about us; Psal. 34.7. Secondly, this charge not onely concerneth our head and principall members, but also our feet: yea, Gods providence reacheth even to the haires of our head, for they are numbred, Mat. 10.30. Third∣ly, this charge of theirs is not onely to admonish us when danger commeth, but they are actually to helpe us, as it were putting their hands betweene the ground and us, Matth. 13.14. They shall take the rubs and offences out of our way. Fourthly, this doe they not of curtesie, as being creatures given by nature to love mankind, but by speciall mandate and charge, they are bound to it, and have a praecipe for it, yea, the very beasts and stones shall be in league with us. This Psalme, and these verses containing such comfort, hath the devill culled to perswade men, that being such sweete children of God, they may venture whether, and upon what they will; for the Angels attend them, at an inch. He bids them put the matter in adventure, and then but whistle for an Angell, and they will come at first: he carryeth them up to the top of the Pinacle, and shewes them their owne case in Annas and Herod; and tels them God will require no more of them, than he did at their hands: and all the way as they goe up, he singeth them a Psalme of the mercies of God: he carryeth them up with a song, that Gods mercy is above al his workes, Psal. 145.9. And with Psal. 103.8. How gracious and long-suffering God is, who rewardeth us not according to our deserts, And Psal. 136. That his mercy endureth for ever: God therefore being so full of mer∣cy, will take all things in good part. But this mercy the devill tels them of, differeth from the mercy David meant. For the mercy Da∣vid speaketh of, is coupled with judgement, Psal. 101.1. I will sing mercy and judgement to thee, O Lord. and Psal. 85.10. Mercy and Truth are met together, Justice and Peace have kissed each other. Thus, I say, they shall have musicke all the way, and if any at the height thinke it a great way downe: no (saith the devill) you need but a jumpe from your baptisme into heaven, you shall need no staires at all.
THE FIFTH SERMON. MATTH. 4.7. Jesus said unto him; It is written againe, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God. Considering that Saint James saith, Chap. 4.5. The Scripture speaketh nothing in vaine: and that as our Saviour Christ saith, John 10.35. No Scripture can be disappointed; it may seeme strange that the devill comming armed with The Sword of the Spirit, (for so is the Word of God termed, Ephes. 6.17.) Christ gives not place, but opposeth himselfe to answer. We see that a message comming in the name of the Lord, this very name abashed Nehemias, (Neh. 6.10.) at the first hearing, till he perceived it was contrary to the Law of God, and so came not from him: which here we see to be the cause, why Christ doth not yeeld by and by, upon the hearing of the Word, but sets himselfe to make answer: forsomuch as the word is not of, Quia dicitur onely, but Quia creditur, as Augustine noteth. If there be not the mixture of faith with it, (whereof Paul speaketh, Heb. 4.2.) it is nothing worth. And therefore the bad spirit was nothing abashed or daunted at the hearing of the bare names of Jesus and Paul, Act. 19.15. but answered, I know them, but who are ye? They did not be∣leeve, and therefore could doe them no good, but were wounded themselves: glorious names would not serve the turne. So was it here used without faith. When the Scripture is here urged against one, a man would thinke it were not to be answered by citing ano∣ther place of Scripture, but by some tradition of the Elders, Mark. 7.1. or some glosse, or other shift; but we see our Saviour answer∣eth here no other way but by Scripture. Because, the Woolfe comes sometimes disguised in a sheepes skinne, it is no reason that therefore the very sheepe should lay away their fleeces: so here, because the devill useth the Word, as the slaying Letter, 2 Cor. 3.6. or as the sword to kill men with; it is no reason why Christ may not there∣fore
use it in his owne defence. Why then (will some say) one of these two inconveniencies will follow; that hereby we shall thinke the Scripture is of the devils side, aswell as of Christs side; and so divided; as in like sort they make a division of Christ, when one holds with Paul, another with Apollos, 1 Cor. 1.13. No, it is not so, Christ alledgeth not this Scripture in that sort, as one nayle to drive out another: but by way of harmony and exposition, that the one may make plaine the meaning of the other. For, albeit the devill sheweth himselfe to be the devill, in citing that Text so, as might best serve for his purpose: in that, whereas the Psalme whereout he taketh it, hath it thus; That he might keepe him in all his wayes; which words he leaveth out. For if he had cited that, he could not there∣by have enforced any casting downe. For the Angels have no charge over a man, but in his wayes; and from the top of the Pi∣nacle there was no way, but downe the staires on his feete. He was not (relying on the Angels) to cast himselfe downe with his head forward. But the devill hath a wrest to make the string sound high or low, as he list; or if that will not serve, he hath a racke to stretch them out, as some did Saint Pauls Epistles, 2 Pet. 3.16. He can set them on the tenters, to prove, that downe the staires, or o∣ver the battlements, all is one, the Angels shall safe-guard him. Though this (I say) be the devils corruption, which the late wri∣ters have well spyed: yet Christ (we see) is not willing to take ad∣vantage of that, but useth a wiser course; for so are we to thinke, that he went the best way to worke; that is, the conference of Scrip∣ture with Scripture, which Christ here practiseth, and commendeth unto us. In every Art, all propositions are not of a like certainty, but some be grounds and principles, so certaine, as that no exception is to be taken against them. From them are others derived, by a consequence called Deduction, not so certaine as the other: from these againe o∣thers, to the twentieth hand. So is it in Divinity. Christ here re∣duceth the devils argument and place, to a place most plaine to be confessed. For the Jewes valuing of the meaning, had to consider, that God fed them with Manna, which they knew not, to teach them that Man liveth not by bread onely, Deut. 8.3. contemning the same: and in Deut. 6.16. bade them, They should not tempt their Lord their God, as in Massah, when they cryed for bread. The Lord curseth him, that maketh flesh his arme, and with-draweth his heart from God, Jer. 17.5. They sacrificed unto their yarne, because their portion was plentifull, Habak. 1.16. Job condemneth the making gold our hope, or the wedge of gold our confidence, Chap. 31.24. As then we must not defie the meanes, attributing all-sufficiency to them: so we may not nullifie them, and think too basely of them, but use them that we tempt not God, according to his word. Out of these two grounds, may every question be resolved: for every proposition must be proved out of the ground. So that, as we may not thinke the arme of God to be so shortned, that he cannot helpe without meanes: so are we not to thinke basely of God, for
ordaining meanes. Secondly, we heard, that the devils allegation was taken out of the Psalme, and one of the most comfortable places of the Psalme. Christ, by not standing in Disputation about the words and meaning of the Text, commendeth to us the safest and wisest way to make answer in such like cases. Our Saviour would warne us, that the 91. Psalme is not fit matter for us to study on, when we are on the toppe of the Pinacle: he therefore chuseth a place of a contrary kind, to counterpoise himselfe standing in that fickle place. The Law (we know) is a great cooler to presumption. If one tam∣per much with the Psalmes, being in case of confidence, he may make the fire too bigge. Faith, is the fire which Christ came to put on the earth, and it is seated betweene two extreames, Distrust, and Presumption. Distrust is as water to it, which, if it be powred on in abundance, it will make it to be smoaking flaxe, or utterly quench it. Presumption (on the other side) is as Gunpowder to it, which being throwne into it, it will blow it up, and make it flye all about the house. Christ was to take heed of over-heating his Faith. Lu∣ther upon the Galatians saith, the 91. Psalme is no meete study for many mens humours in our dayes: they had more need of a corro∣sive, to eate out the sore from the roote and bottome. Now to the answer, which consisteth of sixe points. First, what it is to tempt God. Secondly, wherein. Thirdly, the manner how. Fourthly, this proposition, Thou shalt not tempt. Fifthly, the reason why we may not. Sixthly, though he be our God, and we on the Pinacle, these be no arguments for us to presume. I. First, whosoever will not use such ordinary meanes as God hath appointed, tempteth God: If he use extraordinary, (as here the devill would have Christ doe) when no body went about to thrust him downe, wilfully to have cast himselfe downe, were great madnesse: or when a man hath a faire paire of staires to goe downe by, to call for a Cherub to carry him, or for the wind, to fly downe, Psal. 18.10. were as great wantonnesse. There is an humour in man, that we are all given unto by nature; to be marvellously desirous to try conclusions in matters that are rare and unknowne unto them; contemning things common, and to be fond after strange novelties. It was told them as plaine as could be, that they should not reserve of the Manna till morning, and they nee∣ded not to have reserved it; they had fresh every day: and yet for∣sooth, they would needs keepe it, if it were but for an experiment sake, to try whether it would stinke or no, Exod. 10.20. And though they were forbidden to gather on the Sabbath day, and on the Ee∣ven had enough for two dayes, and it was told them, they should find none; yet they must needs try. When a thing cannot be had with∣out great difficulty, it is our manner to have a vehement longing af∣ter it: as when David was in a Hold, and the Garrisons of the Phi∣listims were in Bethlem, then being thirsty, no water would serve his turne, but that in Bethlem, 2 Sam. 23.15. But when three mighty men had broken into the host of the Philistims, and had brought him of it, he cared not for it,
II. For the second, we are to know, that where neede is (as the Heathen speaketh) there a man may commit himselfe to the provi∣dence of God, and rely upon him. For we have heard, that where the meanes faile us, God hath yet in store his foure Prerogatives: therefore when it comes to a dead lift (as we say) then to have a strong confidence in God, is thanke-worthy: and it is the practise and property of Faith, to say boldly with Abraham, when he saw nothing present, that even on the hill God will provide, Gen. 22.14. When our enemies are behinde us, and the red Sea before us, then to looke for a way through the Sea, and to expect Manna out of heaven, and water out of the Rocke, is much worth. So our Sa∣viour, when he and his company were in the Desert, where no meate was to be had, fed them miraculously: but being neare to the Towne where they might have it, he dismissed them. When Elias was in distresse, and all meates failed him, then the Angell brought him meate, 1 Kings 19.6. When Hagar and Ismael were in the Wildernesse, and the water in the bottle spent, and she in great heavinesse, then God comforted her from heaven, Gen. 22.17. When the Israelites were in the Desert, then they had an Angell to lead them, Exod. 22.20. When Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, were cast bound into the fiery Furnace, then God sent them an Angell to be their deliverer, Dan. 3.25. And so when Daniel was throwne in∣to the Lyons den, (not when he put himselfe in) God sent his An∣gell to stop the Lyons mouth, Dan. 6.22. When we are deserti indeserto, and all meanes faile, it is time to trust in God, as Job did. Our conversation therefore must be without covetousnesse, and wee must bee content with those things that we have; for he hath said, He will not faile us, nor for∣sake us, Heb. 13.5. This is out of the compasse of tempting God, and this is as much as the Psalme could warrant him to looke for. Looke upon it, and you shall see, that it expresseth such dangers, as could not be prevented by mans care and industry. As, from the snare of the hunter, ver. 3. who useth to lay it so as we cannot see it to avoyd it, Vers. 5. Thou shalt not feare the arrow that flyeth by day. An Arrow (we know) will reach a man farre off, before he be a∣ware. And so throughout the Psalme, they are things out of our defence, therfore they had need of Angels helpe: but when we have meanes to helpe our selves, Gods omnipotency is for the time dis∣charged. Eutichus that fell out of a window by heavinesse of sleepe, was restored to life by Paul, Act. 20.9. This then is Christs answer. If there were no staires, and he must needs goe downe, it were a good Scripture to meditate on. III. Thirdly, as it is a point of Gods power to helpe without meanes: so hath he in his wisedome appointed meanes: there be de∣grees, whereby we ascend to the effect: they are as a paire of staires. Where these are, we must use them; but when he offereth as a strange signe, it is scrupulous and foolish nicenesse to refuse it. As when God
bade Ahaz aske a signe, Esay 7.21. and he would not for tempting God, he was too precise, he was but an Hypocrite. Moses asked a signe and had it, and God was well pleased with it. And so did Gedeon also, to assure himselfe of delivering Israel by him, Judg. 6.36. In great, weighty, and extraordinary callings, it was allowa∣ble to request a signe: but, when there is no need, or when there be otherwise sufficient, as Matth. 16.1. where many miracles were daily done before their eyes, and where (though they had never so many more) yet they would not have beleeved on him. Such were the Scribes and Pharisees, that for every trifling occasion, they much have a signe from Heaven. Thus to grate upon Gods omni∣potent providence, is sawcy malepertnesse. For ordinary matters, there be ordinary meanes to serve our turnes: and for extraordinary, there be extraordinary wayes and meanes reserved, that we neede not let fall our trust in matters corporall. We all confesse there be meanes, as they which will not worke, may not eate, 2 Thess. 3.10. In warfare there is no victory to be hoped for, without fight, building of rampiers, and making of darts and shields, 2 Chron. 23.5. onely in spirituall matters we thinke to doe well enough, though we never poo our endeavour; we lay all upon God, and trouble not our selves. There is but one degree or step in all Christianity; it is no more but out of the font to leape straight into Heaven; from Predestinati∣on, we leape straight to Glorification: it is no matter for Mortification, there be no such meane degrees. But Saint Paul tels us, it is so high, that we had need of a ladder, in which be many steps: insomuch, as he puts a [How shall] to every steppe, Rom. 10.14. How shall they call on God, on whom they have not beleeved? &c. There must be calling on God, beleeving on him, hearing his word. There must be ordinary meanes; and there is a ladder of practise, aswell as of speculation, or contemplation, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6. Joyne vertue with your Faith, and with vertue knowledge, and with knowledge temperance, and so patience, godlinesse, brotherly kindnesse, and love. If these things be in you, you shall not be idle and fruitelesse in the knowledge of Christ: for he that hath not these things, is blinde: he goeth blind∣fold to the wood, and may chance hap beside heaven, or steppe besides the ladder. A great many say as Balaam did, O let my Soule dye the death of the Righteous: but they care not for living the life of the Righteous. He went but blindfold, he knew not the Angell that stood with a sword drawne in the way, but would have gone upon it, if his Asse had beene so foolish. A great many thinke, that presumption in being secure of their salvation, is good Divinity. Ba∣laam thought he went well, when he went on the point of a naked sword. So, one entised by the flattery of a harlot, thinkes he goes to a place of great pleasure: but he goeth, as one that goeth to the slaughter, and as a foole to the stockes, Prov. 7.22. Those whom it pleaseth God to have partakers of his Kingdome, he puts them in minde To remember their Creator in the dayes of their youth, before the evill dayes come: He giveth the grace of timely Repentance, and suf∣fereth
them not to deferre it till the last cast, and then to thinke, that with the turning of a pin (as it were) they shall with a trice be in heaven, with Elias in a whirle winde. Augustine saith, We may in some cases advise men to have great hope that they shall be saved, but in no case give them warrant of security. So, in Ephes. 5.6. This wee know, that no whoremonger, nor uncleane person, hath any inheritance in the Kingdome of Heaven. Let no man deceive you through vaine words, he that doth righteousnesse is righteous, and he that doth unrighteousnesse, is of the devill, Joh. 3.7. Now therefore, to neglect the hearing of the Word, or when he commeth to heare it, to clap downe in his place, without desire or minde to beare it away, thereby to be bettered in his life; and with∣out purpose after by meditating on it, to chew it, and so to kindle a fire within himselfe, whereby it may be digested, and turned in∣to the substance of the minde: this is to tempt God. So also, to beare a greater countenance, and make more shew of holinesse, than indeed is in one, is to lay a greater yoke on himselfe than he need; as Act. 15.10. is a tempting of God. Againe, he that sinneth must looke for evill to follow, Psal. 91.10. He therefore that sinneth, and yet thinketh to escape punishment, tempteth God. They that by often experience have found, that such and such things, have beene to them occasions of sinning, and yet will presume to use the same againe, tempts God. And those which set up their Idols in their heart, and put the stumbling blocke of iniquity before their face, EZech. 14.3. and thinke not they sinne, such tempt God. He that comes to aske forgivenesse of God, and will not performe the condition of the Lords Prayer, that is, Forgive others, tempts God. Generally, he that seeketh for good of God, and will not performe that which he is to doe; or doth evill, thinking to escape scot-free, without endevouring to avoyd or resist it, both these tempt God: and to these two, may all other be referred. IV. The fourth is, we must not at all tempt God at no hand: we must not thinke but God is able to bring water even out of a Rocke, Numb. 20.11, when there is nothing but rockes, and stones; but when we may hope to finde it, we must digge for it. So, when the soyle will beare Corne, we must Till it. When Elisha was in a little village, not able to defend him from the Assyrians, he had cha∣riots and horses of fire to defend him, 2 King. 6.17. but when he was in Samaria, (a strong walled City) then when the King of Israel sent to fetch his head, he said to those which were with him, Shut the doore, ver. 32. Christ in the Wildernesse miraculously fed many: in the City he sent his Disciples to buy meate, as John 4.8. In the beginning, when the Gospell was published, there wan∣ted sufficient men for the purpose: the Apostles had the power, as appeareth Acts 8.29. that on whomsoever they laid hands, he re∣ceived the holy Ghost, and was straight able and meete to Preach the Gospell: but after, every man to his study, 1 Tim. 4.5. These things exercise, &c. We see, that notwithstanding Paul was told by
an Angell, that there should be no losse of any mans life in the ship, yet he caused the Mariners to cut the ropes, and to cast Anchor, Act. 27.23, 24.29, 30, 31, 32. Nay, when some would have gone out by boate, he would not let them: so here Christ answereth, that howsoever Angels attend on him, he may not tempt God. V. Now follow the reasons why we may not tempt God. There be two sorts of tempting; the one, by ignorance; the other by un∣beliefe. It is the manner of Chirurgions, when they are to dresse a wound, and know not how farre, nor which way it goeth, to tent it: In the same manner is God (after the manner of men) said to tempt us; sometimes to prove what is in our hearts, and whether we will keepe his Commandements, Deut. 6.2. as he did the Israe∣lites forty yeares. To this end, he both made them hungry, and fed them with Manna. We sometimes tempt God, as if the arme of his power had received a wound, or his eye a hurt; as if he could not helpe or discerne our wants as well as before, because he brings us not water out of the Rocke, Numb. 20.10. but such miracles now are not agreeing with his will, which content us. He will have mer∣cy on whom he will have mercy, Rom. 9.19. And we must not despise the riches of his bounteousnesse, and patience, and long-suffering, which leadeth to Repentance, Rom. 2.4. The Lords hand is not shortned, that he cannot save; nor his eare heavy, that it cannot heare: because he doth not reprove us, we thinke him like us, Psal. 50.19. When God holds his peace, we thinke his tongue is cut: But I will not alwayes hold my peace, saith God, Mal. ult. But how shall I know this, say men now adayes? as Zacharias knew his wife was with childe, Luk. 1.18. who (when he would not beleeve the Angell that told him so, but would needes have a signe,) was stricken dumbe. Behold thou shalt be dumbe till the day. Here is a signe for incredulity: he had beene as good have beleeved without a signe. The second kinde of tempting, proceedeth of over-much famili∣arity, when as we thinke we may be bold with God, and that he will take it in good part, and therefore we will put him to it, (as we say:) we will try both him and his Angels, what mettle is in them and what they can doe. We are to thinke upon the name of God, as of a heavy and weighty thing, that is, not upon every small oc∣casion to be taken up and removed. We are not to accompt it as a feather, that we may lightly tosse up and downe at our pleasure; and even so are we to esteeme of the mercy of God. It is not to be advocated upon every vaine trifle, for that were to use God as we are wont to use our Juglers. Come on, let us see what you can doe, shew us a miracle, say they, Exod. 7.11. So Herod desired to see Christ, that he might see some miracle of him, as in Luk. 13.8. It is a heavy case when men stand thus affected toward God: when afterwards, in Luk. 22.64. they blind-folded him, and bade him read who strucke him. We our selves would not be so used, we could not endure to see our friends used so: how much lesse ought we to use God in that manner? especially, that attribute, quality, or pro∣perty
of God, which of all others, he would have to be most mag∣nifyed, that is, his mercy? He must needs take it very hainously to see that abused, since (of all the rest) be makes most accompt of it. Howsoever he could be content to serve, yet would he not be a servant to our sinnes in any case, Esay 43.24. especially not to be made a packe-horse (if I may so say) for our sinnes, to lay load on, even till his backe ake. He saith, Amos 2.13, that hee is prest under us, as a cart is prest that is under sheaves. Let us not make a dung-cart of Gods mercy, let us forbeare him that service of all o∣ther. VI. The sixt is, that none of these Dominum Deum tuum, neither Lord, nor God, nor that he is thine, are fit arguments to prove, that we may presume upon him. The devill belike had perceived, that there was some acquaintance betweene Christ and God, and per∣adventure had said unto him; You may be bold with him, and with his Angels. What? he is your Father, and (as Caesars daughter answered) that though he forget himselfe to be Caesar, yet doe not you forget to be his Sonne. No saith Christ, these be no good ar∣guments to make one presume. As for Dominus we will all grant (I am sure) there is small matter of presumption in that. In Deus there may be some more colour: but yet very little. It is no good dea∣ling with one that is mightier than our selves, lest he happen not to take it in good part, but fall to earnest, and so we feele the smart. We were not best to make sport with Sampson, least he pull the house about our eares, and so make us pay dearely for our pastime. Paul saith, Doe we provoke the Lord to anger? Are we stronger than he? 1 Cor. 10.22. If we will needs tempt, we were best tempt with our matches. There is no dealing with fire, for it will burne all that toucheth it, Heb. 1.7. his Angels and Ministers are a flame of fire: but Heb. 12.29. it is said, Our God is even a consuming fire. Indeed, if he were like Dagon the Philistims god, he might be set up and taken downe, and we might breake his necke and hands at our pleasure: but being the strong and mighty God of Hoasts, we were best take heed how we deale with him. Tuum, what say we to that? An ungracious child might make that an argument of presumption, but whosoever is of a good nature, will make it an argument of the contrary. Isaac was Jacobs father, but was Jacob more bold to abuse him for that? No, but rather more timerous, Gen. 27. My father (saith he) may chance feele me; and so I shall seeme to him a mocker, and so bring a curse on me, and not a blessing. Is God mercifull? yea truly, Mercy is with thee, but that thou mayest be feared, Psal. 130.4. We may not abuse his mercy, as to sinne that grace may abound, Rom. 6.1. Is he bountifull and long suffering? We must therefore the more feare to displease him. When the Pharisees tempted him, and would adventure their soules in seeking a signe, it is said, Matth. 8.11. Christ sighed: and why did he sigh? Because God sware in his wrath, that they should never enter into his rest, whose Fathers tempted him in the Wildernesse, Psal. 95. What rest? He doth not
meane the rest in the Land of Canaan onely, but that which shall be in the Kingdome of God, Heb. 3.10. These two temptations of the devil, may fitly be compared to those two rockes, betweene which Jonathan was to passe, which are said, 1 Sam. 14.4. to be sharpe. One is called Bozez, which signifyeth dirt; the other Seneh, which sig∣nifyeth a Bramble, or some sharpe pricke; betweene which, he and his Armor-bearer were faine to clamber up, ver. 13. Betweene two such Rockes lyeth our way, that is, Presumption, and Desperation: therefore blessed is he that so loveth God, that he can be content to creepe on hands and feete to him.
THE SIXTH SERMON. MATTH. 4.8, 9. Againe, the devill taketh him up into an exceeding high Mountaine, and sheweth him all the Kingdomes of the world, and the glory of them. And saith unto him: All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall downe and worship me. AT the first overthrow, we had the first Againe: and when Christ overthrew him then also, yet would not the devill leave then neither, but he commeth with his second Againe: he comes A∣gaine, and Againe. The first Againe, was an ar∣gument of his courage and stomacke: this se∣cond, is an argument of his importunity. The first repulse could not drive him away, nor the second neither; no, nor this third for altogether: for Luke saith, He departed for a season, Luk. 4.13. So that as Christ saith, John 16.16. After a while ye shall see me, and after a while you shall not see me: so saith the devill also, After a while you shall not see me, and againe, after a while you shall see me. Which teacheth us this lesson; that it is not enough to have prevailed against his temptations twice or thrice, and so become se∣cure; but we are alway to stand upon our guard, knowing how the devill will successively, every turning of a hand, be with us; and that while we live, we shall never be at rest with him: or if he tempt us not, we shall be in as bad or worse case. For so long as the Lord left other Nations among the Israelites to prove them by, and to be prickes to their sides, it went well enough with them, Judg. 3.1. but when they began to live in some security (having for the most part subdued them) then grew they to mutuall dissention. It is the greatest temptation to be without temptation. Therefore Paul had the messenger of Satan to buffet him, 2 Cor. 12.7. for then followes the pressing of God by prayers. But whether we joyne hands with Satan, or resist him, we shall be sure he will set upon us, and try by faire meanes what he can doe; or if we say nay, yet in the end he will weary us, as Dalila did Sampson, Judg. 16.16. who because she was importunate, his soule was pained to the death, and then he
told her: or if we will be obstinate in rejecting his temptations, gi∣ving him at the first a peremptory refusall; then he will goe another way to worke, as to imagine some devise against us, and smite us with the tongue, Jer. 18.18. he will be rough with us. If none of these will prevaile, he will perswade us, we must be like other men, and that is as profitable or pleasant to us, and then say Samuel what he can, we will have a King, 1 Sam. 8.19. And when we have yeel∣ded once, then goes he to fetch company, and takes unto him se∣ven worse spirits than himselfe, Luk. 11.26. So the last state of that man is worse than the first. Give but an inch, and he will take an Ell: if he can get in but an arme, he will make shift to shove in his whole body. As we see, if the point of a nayle have once made en∣try, the rest will soone in. We see an example of his encroaching even in David, 2 Sam. 11.4. after he had once made him commit a∣dultery by some meane degrees with Bathsheba, see how he drawes him on from one wickednesse to another. She was with child, her husband being in the service of God and the King, was by the King murthered to hide her shame, and satisfie his lust. So did he draw on Peter; first, he made him follow a loofe off; secondly, flatly to deny Christ; thirdly, to forsweare him; and fourthly, to curse himselfe if he knew him. The Hebrew writers note, that the Devils name Belzebub, signify∣eth a great flesh Fly, or a master Fly; flap him away never so of∣ten, he will still flye thither againe. So the devill will never cease molesting us, till the smoking flax be quite quenched, and the brui∣sed reed cleane broken, Esay 42.3. First, he twists certaine small threds together, and so makes a little cord of vanity, to draw us un∣to him: afterward with a cart-rope or cable of iniquity, he seekes to binde us fast unto him for starting; either by the vice of lust, or of envy, or at least covetousnesse. But if all should faile, pride is sure to hold; O Lord, I thanke thee, I am not like such and such, nor like this Publi∣can, (a degree farther,) nor like this Pharisee, Luke 18.11. This may be a good caveat unto us, that we stand alway upon our guard, and that we be sure that we make strong resistance in the beginning, and breake it (if we can) while it is but a whip-cord. And to use the like policy in a good matter, that the King of Egypt did in a bad; who tooke order that every male childe should be killed, to keepe the Israelites downe betimes: and against the succession of tempta∣tion, to entertaine the succession of Prayer. Now to the matter. The Devill deales a with a City. In the first, he tels him he must be famished, except he can turne stones into bread. Secondly, he comes to make a traine of Scripture to in∣trap him. Now he comes to the ordinary meanes of dealing, that is; when men strive about any thing, and both parties are loath to yeeld, there will be some parley of composition and sharing be∣tweene them. So here, the devill seeing that he cannot overthrow his faith, offereth him to compound: and (on his part) he is con∣tent to give Christ all the Kingdomes of the world, if our Saviour (for his part) will but fall downe, and worship him. The devill be∣fore
came disguised in the shape of a male-content, as that Christ should be in such hunger. Next, he came in the habit of a Divine, and that very demurely, with his Psalter in his hand. Now he comes in all his Royalty, like the Prince of this world, as he is so called, John 4.30. He doth not stand pedling with Christ, but goes round∣ly and frankely to worke: he offers all that he hath, (and that is no small matter) to bring Christ but to one sinne, that so he might o∣verthrow all mankinde. He comes no more now with Si filius Dei es: for that we see is here left, he would not have him thinke on it: he would have him now, filius seculi. This is called by Saint Paul, the bewitching temptation, whereby men become so foolish, as that after they have begun in the Spirit, they will end in the flesh, Gal. 3.3. Where the devill cannot prevaile, either by our owne con∣cupiscence, or by his enticings, he will see what he can doe with his Dragons taile, and by that meanes (say the Fathers) he did more hurt, than by the other. Secondly, his tayle is said to draw downe the third part of the starres of heaven, and to cast them to the earth, A∣poc. 12.4. We are here to consider: First, the preparation that the devill makes, by taking him up to an high hill, to make the offer, ver. 8. Se∣condly, the temptation it selfe, ver. 9. Thirdly, our Saviours answer, and the shield he opposeth to it, ver. 10. Fourthly, the issue of the con∣flict. the victory, ver. 11. First, the preparation that the devill makes, by taking him up to an high hill, to make the offer, ver. 8. Se∣condly, the temptation it selfe, ver. 9. Thirdly, our Saviours answer, and the shield he opposeth to it, ver. 10. Fourthly, the issue of the con∣flict. the victory, ver. 11. In the first, we are to consider: first, the devils method; secondly, the place and ground: thirdly, his policy, in not onely telling what he would give; but in shewing thereof: fourthly, the things themselves which he offers, which are two: the kingdome of the earth, and the glory thereof. I. First, of his method, Ephes. 4.14. we are warned not to be wa∣vering, and carryed about with every winde of doctrine, by the deceit and craftinesse of men, whereby they lye in waite to deceive. Craftinesse and deceit then, be the instruments which the devill useth; hee brings Christ from the Wildernesse to the Temple, and from the Temple to the Mountaine, to destroy the Temple, which Mountaine is pro∣sperity. So in adversity we vow to God, that we will serve him; but after helpe, we breake it. II. Secondly, the lists where this temptation was used, was the Mountaine. The reason why he chose this place rather than any o∣ther, is the fitnesse of it, in regard of the prospect. The wildernesse (we know) was a melancholy place, and in no wise fit for this tem∣ptation, so, neither was the Pinacle: for besides that it might have hindred the working of this temptation, being the Pinacle of the Temple; the prospect was not good enough. For though it were high, yet there were divers hils about Jerusalem, which would have hindred the sight of many things. And though Sion were a Moun∣taine, yet in respect of Mount Hermon, and Libanus, it is said to be a little one, Psal. 42.6. And Psal. 68.16. Basan is said to be the great Hill. Therefore as God chose a convenient Hill, both for heighth and neemesse, where Moses might behold the whole Land of Canaan, Deut. 32.49. So here the devill chose an exceeding high Mountaine,
where a high minde might best take view and comtemplate: such, where his horizon might be as spacious as was possible, and where his sight might not be hindred by any meane object. III. Thirdly, he sets before his eyes, all the kingdomes of the earth. There is nothing so soone enticed and led away, as the eye: it is the Broker betweene the heart, and all wicked lusts that be in the world. And therefore it was great folly in Hezechias, to shew his robes and treasure, Esay 39.2. as he was told by the Prophet: it stirred up such coales of desire in them that saw them, as could not be quench∣ed, till they had fetcht away all that he had, and all that his Ance∣stors had laid up, even till that day. It is the wisdome that is used now adayes, when men would have one thing for another, to shew the thing they would so exchange: as the buyer sheweth his mo∣ney, and the seller his wares in the best manner that he can, each to entice the other (by the eye) to the desire of the heart. It is the devils ancient sleight, he would not goe about to perswade the mat∣ter in words, till he might withall present the thing to the eye. So he dealt with Eve, Gen. 3.6. First he shewed her how pleasant the fruite was, and the woman saw it. So the cause of the deluge was, Gen. 6.2. that the Sonnes of God saw the beauty of the Daughters of men. Achabs seeing of Naboths vineyard, 1 King. 21.2. for that it lay neere his house, was the cause of all the mischiefe that followed. This same foolish vanity of apparell, (whereof I have given so often war∣ning out of this place,) comes from hence: I saw a fine Babilonish gar∣ment, and desiring it, I tooke it, saith Achan, Joshu. 7.11. So the see∣ing of the bribe, blindeth the eyes of the Judge, Deut. 16.19. So still the sight of the eye, allureth the heart to desire. The Heathen man therefore wished, that vertue and honesty might as well be seene with bodily eyes: for then he thinketh, that Admirabiles amores ex∣citarent suo. So if we could as well see that which God hath for us as that the devill here offereth us: we would not regard the devils largesse. Moses and the other Patriarchs saw him which is invisible, which had provided a better thing for them: Therefore he refused to be called the sonne of Pharaohs daughter, Heb. 11.27. And to enjoy the pleasure of sinne. But you are not so to take it, as though it were a thing simply ill to behold such things, or to looke on a cup-boord of plate, or to stand on a Pinacle, it is dangerous, but no sinne; e∣specially; it is unfit for an unstayed, and an ungoverned eye. There∣fore Lot and his wife were forbidden to looke backe at the destructi∣on of Sodome, Gen. 19.17. To Abraham it was left at large, without any restraint; for that he was a man of better ruled affections. For, as there must be one without, to take view and to entice: so must there be one within, to hearken to it, and to condiscend. Be sure of that within, that it be upright; and then thou mayest the better looke with that which is without. But ever be wary, for the tinder of thy nature will soone take fire. Job said, Chap. 31.1. He made a covenant with his eyes: why then should he thinke on a maid? and that he had not beene deceyved by a woman, vers. 9. and that his heart had not walked after his eyes, vers. 7. Paul knew how to use want, and how to use
abundance or plenty, how poverty: both to be full, and to be hungry: he had stayed affections, Phil. 4.12. IV. Omnia Regna. This was no small offer, but even all the wealth and honour that may be: two such things as are most vehemently desired of all men. So that as Jerome saith, Prae auri sacra fame ni∣hil sacrum. The desire thereof also is so unsatiable, that it is like the dropsie; which, the more liquor is ministred to it, the more it thirst∣eth; it is perpetuall and unnaturall. The lesse time a man hath to live, and so needes the lesse; the more he covets to abound. These two doe never waxe old; of all vices, gray haires doe never grow on these. This is the baite the devill laid for Christ, and layes for youth, and mindes lasciviously given, he layes a baite on live flesh; to cholericke natures, he ministreth matters that may encrease their wrath; for melancholy, he laies baites of envy: and so for e∣very one, according to their naturall inclinations and humours, such baites as may entice them soonest. Which if he can get them once to swallow his hooke that is within, it will hold them sure enough, and by his line he will draw them to him when he list; so that he cares not to let them play with the line: then, though hee goe to twenty Sermons; it is no matter: with an Apple he caught Adam and Eve, and all their posterity. Well, we must be as children, wea∣ned from this world, though it bring weeping with it, Psal. 131.2. Gen. 27.38. When Eve was Lady and Mistresse of all the world; yet because there was a Godship, a higher degree than hers, she was not content. Princes, because they can goe no higher by any earthly dignity, aspire to be gods, and so would be accounted; as was said to Herod, that it was the voyce of God, and not of Man. But, as they that are above, can abide to have no equals, but will be alone by themselves; so they that be below, can abide no superiours. As when Saul was chosen by lot from amongst the Israelites, to be King over them, some wicked men said, There is a goodly wise King: nay, I would I were King, I would they might come to me for Justice, 1 Sam. 10.27. 2 Sam. 15.4. Every one hath this conceit of himselfe, that he is worthier to beare rule, than they which are in authority: not so much as the silly Fur-bush, but it thought it selfe a fit person to make a King, Judg. 9.15. and the Thistle would have the Cedars daugh∣ter marryed to his sonne, 1 King. 14.9. The Spider, a silly poyson∣full thing, will yet be in the top of the Kings Palaces, Prov. 30.28. The Gourd starts up in one night, and was gone in the next, Jon. 4.6. Goodly Zebedeus wife, could finde no lesse thing to aske of Christ, for her two sonnes, that came the last day from the cart, but that the one might sit at Christs right hand, and the other at the left in his Kingdome, Matth. 20.20. Balaam could never thinke his Asse went halfe fast enough, when he rode towards preferment, Num. 22.17. The Disciples also longed for the Kingdome of Isra∣el to be restored. The devill did not shew all his Kingdome to Saul, when he was comming from keeping his Fathers sheepe, 1 Sam. 9.24. and Samu∣el feasted him: nor after Saul was chosen King, 1 Sam. 11.5. and he
followed his cattell: neither did he shew them to the King, bidden to Absalons sheep-shearing, 2 Sam. 13.24. nor at such time as Princes withdraw themselves to be private, Dan. 6.18. But he shewes them at such times as they are in their greatest glory and ruffe, when king∣domes were growne to the top of jollity and Majesty, as the King∣dome of Israel was in Solomons time: and chooseth such a time, as when they were in most triumph and pompe, as they were wont to be at the day of the Kings birth, or inauguration, Hosea 7.5. Cant. 3.11. or at a Coronation, or at the receiving of Ambassadors; or at the entertaining of forraigne States, as when the Queene of Saba was in Solomons Court, 1 King. 10. To conclude, he shewed them not when they are in a base estate, but when they are in greatest pompe. Act. 25.23. Now come we to the second point: to wit, the Temptation it selfe: En haec omnia tibi dabo, ver. 9. Having prepared Christs minde (as he thought) by shewing him that he would give him: now he comes in with a short and pithy Oration; [All this will I give thee.] Here thou seest all thou canst wish for; without thee shall no man lift up his hand or his foote in all Egipt, as Pharaoh said to Joseph, Gen. 41.44. so as he might make all Captaines, and give to every one fields and vineyards, 1 Sam. 22.7. that he might say to every one what he list; Speakest thou to me? Seest thou not that I have power to crucifie thee, or to let thee goe? John 19.10. that his favour might raise a man so high, as Haman was exalted above all the Princes, Hest. 3.1. and his disfavour, or the least word of his mouth quite overthrow him, as Haman was, verse 7.8. by picking some small quarrell against him. But this is not all neither: for the same gayish apparell, wherein ma∣ny doe delight, is contained under this Haec omnia: Not onely em∣broydered with gold, but even gold it selfe, and smels of the finest scent, Psal. 45.8, 9. And as for the delights of the flesh, if he can see any that delight him better than other: it is no more than with Da∣vid, 2 Sam. 11.4. to send for her and have her, she was straight at his command. Neither must any say, it was unlawfull: no, not John Baptist, if he love his head, Mark 6.17. He may command what he list; if any gainesay it, he may dispatch him out of the way: for he may kill and wound whom he list, Dan. 5.19. He may command all mens tongues, 2 Samuel 14.10. that they dare not once open their mouth to speake against him. Nay, hee shall have all mens tongues and pens, ready to extoll all that he doth, and say; The King is like an Angel of God, 2 Sam. 19. or that it is the voyce of God, and not of man, Act. 12.22. Why, then to have all mens hands, feet, bodies, faces, tongues, and pens: this may be well said All, to have not onely one Kingdome, but all: to have all the power and glory of those Kingdomes: here is even all the kingdome, the pow∣er, and the glory. He comes not after a pelting manner, he shewes himselfe a franke chapman: he saith not, that Godlinesse is great gaine, and a minde content with his lot, 1 Tim. 6.6. and wils him to be con∣tent with food and rayment, ver. 8. He comes not with Illa, which we
shall not once behold till another world come; and whether there be any such or no, many doubt. He shewes him a mount that may be touched, Heb. 12.18. he comes with haec, that is, with ready mo∣ney in his hand: he not onely offers, but stakes downe: and where∣as God saith, that in the sweat of our fore-head we shall eate our bread, Gen. 3.19. the devill requires no such thing. This is a donative, Haec amnia dabo. What say ye now? Shall Christ take it, or no? The Heathen man saith, if a man be to violate his faith for any thing, it is for a Kingdome: Christ hath here offered him all King∣domes, a very enticing baite: but is there never a hooke hidden un∣der it? The woman was fine and brave, and had a cup of gold in her hand, but it was full of abomination, Apoc. 17.14. So here, for all these faire shewes, if you will gaine any thing by the devill, you must worship him; that is the condition annexed to the grant, it is no absolute gift, the devill is not so kind, as to part from all that for nothing. It is such a gift as the Lawyers call Excambium, that is, Exchange: I will give you this, if you will give me that. But yet one would thinke it a very large offer, to give so great a lieu for so small a service; it is but a little externall reverence, the bowing of the knee; you may (notwithstanding) in heart thinke what ye list. Well, we may thinke there was somewhat in it, that the devill offe∣red so much for so little, and yet Christ refused it. Indeed Christ had great reason to refuse it: for he should have beene a loser by the bargaine. I will stand to it, he had beene better to have yeelded to ei∣ther of the two former temptations, than to this: he should full deere∣ly have bought all his kingdomes, he had beene better to have cast himselfe downe from the Pinacle. For that which the devill here demandeth in lieu, is as much worth, as both the glory of God, and the redemption of man. Of his glory, God saith, That hee will not give it to another, Esay 42.8. If to no other, then not to the devill of all other. And therefore the Angell would not have a burnt of∣fering offered to him, but to God, Judg. 13.16. The Angell would not let John fall downe and worship him, but bad him worship God, Rev. 19.10. For he knew that God was very jealous of his honour, and stood precisely upon that point. If he would not impart this honour with the Angels, much lesse would he with the devill: for there are degrees in idolatry, Rom. 1.23. It is not so ill to turne the glory of God into the image of a man, as into birds and beasts. Secondly, if we looke into the desire that he had to satisfie his an∣cient envy, by the destruction of mankind: we must needs commend the devils wit, in making such a bargaine. It had beene the best pen∣ny worth that ever was bought. For if we marke how Christ rateth one onely soule, we may see, how he, that to gaine all the kingdomes of the world, shall lose his owne soule, Matth. 16.26. makes but a foo∣lish bargaine; Then what rate shall be made of all mens soules, if one be worth kingdomes; all which had beene lost, if Christ had consented to that which the devill here requireth: for then he could not have said, I restored that which I tooke not, Psal. 69.4. By his death he payed the price for the sinnes of the whole world; he should then
have had a score of his owne to have paid, and his death could have beene sufficient but for himselfe onely. If he had falne downe, and worshipped him, he could not have said, That the Prince of this world had nothing to say against him, John 14.3. Now let us apply this to our selves. But we will peradventure say, the devill never made us any such offer; and therefore what needs any admonishment in this behalfe? But I answer, though the devill come not in person to us, as he did to Christ, yet he comes by his instruments. When Balak sent to Balaam, to come and curse the Israelites, and promised him great re∣wards, Numb. 22.17. it was not Balaks messengers that spake, but the devill used them as instruments to speake. So when Simon Ma∣gus would have bought the Holy Ghost with money; the devill therein tempted the Apostles with Simonie, Simon was but the trunke, through which the devill spake, Act. 8. Againe, there be some that will say; they were never tempted with Kingdomes: It may well be, for it needs not, when lesse will serve. It was Christ onely, that was thus tempted: in him lay a Heroicall mind, that could not be allured with small matters. But with us it is nothing so; we esteeme farre more basely of our selves: wee set our wares at a very easie price, he may buy us even dagger-cheape, as we say: he need never carry us so high as the Mount, the Pina∣cle is high enough; yea, the lowest steeple in all the Towne would serve the turne. Or let him but carry us to the Leads or gutters of our owne houses, nay, let us but stand in our window, or in our doores; if he will give us but so much as we can there see, he will tempt us throughly, we will accept it, and thanke him too. He shall not need to come to us with Kingdomes, one Kingdome is too much, what say ye to halfe a one? Mark. 6.23. No, will the devill say, I will give ye halfe a one? If he would come to us but with thirty pence, Matth. 26.15. I am afraid many of us would play Judas. Nay, lesse than so would buy a great sort, even handfuls of Barley, and peeces of Bread, Ezek. 13.19. and Prov. 28.21. Yea, some will not sticke to buy and sell the poore for a paire of shooes, as Amos speaketh, Chap. 8.6. When he commeth then to tempt us, he may abate a great deale of this that he offers Christ; he may strike out Omnia and Hac too, and instread thereof of put in Hoc, and say; Hold, ye shall have this to worship me, I will give ye no more; I feare me we will make short worke, and take it, Hoc aliquid, a matter of halfe a crowne or ten groates, a paire of shooes, or some such trifle, will bring us on our knees to the devill. Is there a pretty commodity to be had? It makes no matter for breaking faith and promise. This is that that makes the devill so good a husband and thrifty, and to goe neere hand: what need he give more, when so little will serve? Whereas, if we will stand hucking with him, we might get a great deale more. In this temptation (as in the former) there is both fire to consume
our faith, and a dart to wound our consciences. The fire is the mo∣tion of discontent, that God is either a poore God, not able suffici∣ently to reward those that serve him: or else an unkind God, that will not reward the duties that are performed by those that serve him. By this we come to say: Who is the Almighty, that we should serve him? Job 21.15. The wicked are they that prosper and en∣crease in riches. I have cleansed my heart in vaine, for daily have I beene punished, Psal. 73.12. Then this dart makes us weary of well doing; and then followes, that we will serve the devill. Being dis∣content with Gods service, we undertake the service of his enemy: he requireth nothing but a little falling downe, and then if Simon shall come, and require any unlawfull thing at our hands, we are ready (with Judas) to meete with him, and say; What will ye give me, and I will doe it? Matth. 26.15. though it be to the betraying of Christ. The devill here opens his meaning in this Temptation plainely, (that he would have him fall downe and worship him) with a bare and bold face: before, he came disguised, and spake in Parables. His mea∣ning is not when he saith Dabo, to give them; but to barter or ex∣change one thing for another. It is no gift, but a flat bargaine: men use not to account it a gift, except it be without rendring backe ei∣ther money or service. If he render here service backe, he may well thinke I have sold my soule for Hoc aliquid, Matth. 16.76. He may thinke, as Esau sold his birth-right for a messe of pottage, Heb. 12.16. so hath he sold his soule, his birth-right, and freedome: for we were all bought with a price, 1 Cor. 7.23. the same great high Priest re∣deemed us all with his blood. No sinnes are so carefully to be ta∣ken heed of, as these, that have annexed to adoration, donation: he hath Malum with a joynter. If he should have cast himselfe downe from the Pinacle, here is all he should have had: they would have talkt of it, and have wondred a while at it. Well, we must be thus perswaded, that God is as well able and willing to reward us for any service, as the devill, and better too. It is he indeed that reigneth over the kingdomes of men, Dan. 5.21. and placeth in them whom pleaseth him: but when he giveth or dis∣poseth, he giveth indeed freely, exacting nothing backe againe, un∣lesse it be such things, as he were to have without any such gift: such things as are due of meere right, without any stipulation or hire, Jam. 1.5. The devils Dabo, is, as Offices and Parsonages are given amongst us; that is, as usually sold as horses in Smithfield. But if we could be content to give indeed, let that heroicall minde that was in Abraham be in us, Gen. 14.23. that as he would not take any thing of Melchisedech, so we will not be a shoo-lachet the richer by the de∣vill. If he offer to make us wealthy, let us answer him; Pecunia tua tecum pereat.
THE SEVENTH SERMON. MATTH. 4.10, 11. Then Jesus saith unto him; Get thee hence behinde me Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, & him only shalt thou serve. Then the devill leaveth him, and behold the Angels came, and ministred unto him. THe answering of this Temptation, if some had had the answering of it, would have beene facto, by the doing of the thing that the devill required: and not in words, standing upon termes in dispu∣tation. Insomuch, as they would never have cared for a cushion to kneele on; but have fallen down straight on their very faces, and have thanked him too. If Balaak should say unto one of them, I will promote thee to great honor, Numb. 22.17. an Angel standing in the way, should not hinder him from going. The manner of flesh and blood is, in cases of pre∣ferment, to respect nothing that may bring them out of their concei∣ved hope or desire thereof: and therefore, whatsoever it is that stands in their way, be it never so holy, downe it shall for haste, to make the way nearest. In regard of this, one brother respects not another. When Joseph had had a dreame of his brethren, and told it them, all brotherly affection was laid aside, Gen. 37.5. The sonne and subject Absolon, forgetteth his duty as to his father, and allegeance as to his Prince, seeking his life, 2 Sam. 16.11. The mother of Ahaziah, Atha∣lia, when she saw her sonne dead, makes no more adoe, but destroyes all the Kings seed, 2 King. 11.1. Jehu makes no bones, nor is abash∣ed at the sight of heapes of dead mens heads, of Kings sonnes that he had caused to be slaine, but addes more murthers to them, 2 Kin. 10.8. What's a basketfull of heads to a Kingdome? And Herod stacke not to kill all the male-borne children in Bethlem, Matth. 2.16. So that Gregory might well say, Ambitio est vita, cui etiam innocentes nocent, such is the vehement desire of a Kingdome. So that a great many would have made no scruple at the matter, neither would they have counted it a temptation, but good counsell: Neither would so have cut up Peter as Christ did, to bid him goe behinde him, and turne their backes on him; but they would rather have turn'd their
backes to God, and their faces after Satan, Jer. 2.27. 1 Tim. 5.15. And indeed it must needs be, that either our Saviour was unwise in refusing so good an offer, or else the World (in these dayes) is in a wrong byas. Our Saviour (we see) doth not onely refuse the thing, but also gives him hard words, for making the offer and motion. For he doth not onely confute him here, by saying, Scriptum est: but he addes words of bitter reprehension, saying, Avoid Satan. He might have given faire words, as he did before: but here he seemeth to have left his patience. The reason why he was more hot in this, than in the former, is, for that this toucheth the glory of God, and the re∣demption of mankinde: the former Temptations touched but him∣selfe in particular, as the turning of stones into bread, but for mira∣cle: and the casting himselfe downe, was but to try God, what care he had of him. But this so much toucheth the glory of God, as he can hold no longer. Also, his longing to redeeme man, caused the same. Neither did he onely answer the devill so; but when his bles∣sed Apostle, who meant friendly to him, moved him to the like mat∣ter, he rebuked him sharpely. Two causes there are, wherein Christ is very earnest; one in coun∣sell ministred to him, tending to the impairing of Gods glory; the other in practises, tending to the impairing of Gods Church, Joh. 2.15. there he was not onely vehement in words; but made a whip to scourge them out. And so in the Old Testament, it is said of Mo∣ses, Numb. 12.3. That he was a meeke man, above all the men of the earth; yet when he came to a case of Idolatry, Exod. 32.19. it is said, Hee threw the Tables out of his hands, and brake them. And so farre did he lose his naturall affection to his people and Countrymen, that he caused a great number of them to be slaine. And so in a case of the Church, when Corah rebelled, Numb. 16.15. then Moses waxed ve∣ry angry; for Glory be to God on high, and peace on earth, is the Angels song and joy, and the devils griefe: as on the other side, the disho∣nour of God, and dissention of the Church, is the devils joy, and griefe of the Angels. Now, besides that he doth in words rebuke him sharpely, he doth no lesse in gesture also; as by turning his backe upon him, (as it is most like he did, in saying, Avoid Satan) which is such a despitefull disgrace, as if that one should offer us the like, we would take it in very great disdaine. Which is to us an instruction, that as there is a time, when we are to keepe the devill before us, and to have our eye still upon him, and his weapon or temptation, for feare lest un∣awares he might doe us some hurt: so is there a place, a time, and a sinne, that we are to turne our backes on, and not once to looke at his temptation. In affliction, patience is to be tryed; there resist the devill, stand to him and he will flye from ye, Jam. 4.7. Here we are to set the devill before us. But in a case of lust, or filthy desire, then doe ye flye from him, 1 Cor. 6.18. So in 2 Tim. 2.22. we are exhor∣ted to flye from the lusts of youth, and to follow justice: there is no standing to gaze backe on the devill, and his temptations.
Now to the answer: Scriptum est. The disputing or deciding of the Devils Title: that is, whether the Kingdomes of the earth were his to give or no, Christ stands not up∣on; nor upon this, whether the devill were a man of his word or no. Indeed, it might well have beene doubted, whether the devill be as good as his word: his promises are not Yea and Amen, as the promises of God are. We may take example by Eve, to whom he promised, that if they did eate of the forbidden fruite, that they should be like Gods; but were they so indeed, after they had eaten? No, but like the beasts that perish. And as true it is, that the King∣domes are his. If the Kingdome of Israel had beene at his dispositi∣on, we may be sure David should never have beene King; as well appeareth by the troubles he raised against him. No, nor Hezechias neither, of all other he would never choose such. We may see his good will in Job, Chap. 2.7. he could not onely be content to spoile him of all that he had, but also he must afflict his body, and so up∣on the Gergasens hogges, Matth. 8.30. The Kingdomes are none of his, but they are committed to him in some sort to dispose, as himselfe saith, Luk. 4.6. He hath (as it were) an Advowson of them, to present unto them: but yet, not as he there saith, to give to whom he list, but to whom he is permitted. God must first put all that Job hath in his hands, or else he can doe no∣thing. Abimelech, Judg. 9. and Herod, Matth. 2. came to their King∣domes by the devils Patent, they be the devils Officers. So we see daily in our dayes, that he bestowes Offices, and presents to Chur∣ches. So that as Brentius saith, Many have Panem quotidianum, that cannot come by Da nobis: they come not to it by Gods gift: yet all the interest that the devill hath, is but to present Pro hac vita tan∣tum. As therefore it may be true, that in some sort they may be gi∣ven him: so yet, not to dispose as he will. It is God onely that can say so, for his onely they are absolutely. The earth is the Lords, and all the fulnesse thereof, the round world and all that dwell therein, Psal. 24.1. It is he (the most high God) that divided to the Nations their in∣heritance, Deut. 32.8. By him Kings raigne, and Princes have dominion, Prov. 8.15. He brought Nebuchadnezzar to know, That the most high God bare rule over the Kingdomes of men, Dan. 5.21. He indeed may well say, Cui voluero, do ea: and to whomsoever God giveth, he giveth liberally, and reproacheth no man, Jam. 1.5. The devill (we see) exact∣eth more than the thing is worth, and straineth the benefit of his grant with unjust convenants. But Christ goes not about to answer the devill that way: but by flying to the Scriptures, as to his surest hold. Therefore David prayes, that his minde may be inclined to Gods Law, and not to Covetousnesse, Psal. 119.36. For there is a me∣dicine for every disease, and power as well against this Temptation of Covetousnesse, as against the former: the Law of God can as well keepe a man from Covetousnesse, as from Desperation: Heaven and earth shall passe, but no one jot of this, Let therefore Haec omnia give place to Scriptum est: marry Omnia illa, which both we now enjoy,
and which are laid up for us hereafter, are come to by Scriptum est. So that Omnia haec is not all we must care for; there be things to come (besides these things which we lay hands on) farre more pre∣cious. Though here be all the Kingdomes of the earth: yet they are said to be shewed in the twinckling of an eye, so cannot the o∣ther Kingdome of exceeding glory. All the power of all the Prin∣ces on the earth, have not power over one silly soule to destroy it, Matth. 10.28. All the glory of them, is called but a great big fanne, or pompe, Act. 25.23. Solomon was the most glorious Prince that ever was, yet he was not cloathed like a Lilly, Matth. 6.29. Nor all the Lillies in the field, nor Starres in heaven, nor the Sunne and Moone it selfe, are comparable to one soule. The Scripture whereby Christ answereth the devill, is in Deut. 16.13. Thou shalt feare the Lord thy God, and serve him. If any fantasti∣call spirit oppose it selfe against Moses, let it be accursed. There is in this answer two things set downe; Worship, and Service; both which are due to God onely. Covetousnesse endeth in Idolatry, and fitly is so termed: if Christ had beene covetously minded, then he must needs have fallen downe and worshipped the devill; for Co∣vetousnesse and Idolatry being joyned together, we would not have parted from so great a benefit. Christ hath here changed a word, which the Septuaginta Translator hath; which signifyeth a service with an open testimony. So that, will ye know if a man doe be∣leeve? He beleeveth unto righteousnesse with the heart, that with the mouth confesseth to salvation, Rom. 10.10. Such as glorifie God as well in their members, as in their spirit, 1 Cor. 6.20. As Saint James saith of Faith, Shew me thy faith by thy workes: so may it be said of feare. You say you have feare, can you shew me your feare? If it be not a dead feare, it is to be seene: as Dan. 3.5. it must be shewed by fal∣ling downe, and worshipping. The servant that feared, fell downe and besought his master, Matth. 18.26. Doe you feare? then where is the outward reverence? The inward affection must appeare by the outward action: Religion is outward, as well as inward, 1 King. 19.18. There be two wayes whereby we may have traffique with the devill, either of both will serve his turne: first, homage: secondly, service of the body; and both these doth God require, even when we are in the darke, or in our chamber, Ezech. 8.12. Indeed might the devill say, this Mountaine is very open; but how say ye? will ye be content closely in a corner to worship me? If ye will not weare my cognisance on your forehead, yet ye may take my marke in your hand; then shutting your hand, no body can perceive it. If ye will not take the marke, yet take the number of the Beasts name; that is, six hundred threescore and six, Apoc. 13.17, 18. Will ye doe none of these? What then? will ye serve me? Rom. 16.18. Thus ye see what glorious termes he useth: but if one should seeme to doe one of these on courtesie, he will not be content till he doe it of duty. Now let us see first what it is to Worship. It is that which Cornelius
did to Peter, he met him, fell downe at his feet, and worshipped him, Act. 10.25. And that which John did to the Angell; that is, he fell downe before his feet to worship him, Apoc. 19.10. It is, when one on the knees doth a bodily worship. I will shew it you in Davids words: for I cannot tell it ye better. When Michol scoffed at Da∣vid, for being bare-headed before the Arke, he saith; I will be more vile than thus, and will be low in mine owne sight, 2 Sam. 6.22. A man can never be too reverent to God: we thinke it a great disgrace, and debasing of our selves, if we use any bodily worship to God. It may be said to them, as it was to him, that feared to doe too much reve∣rence to Caesar, Hic homo timet timere Caesarem. Our religion and Cul∣tus must be uncovered, and a bare-faced religion: we would not use to come before a meane Prince, as we doe before the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, even the God of heaven and earth. The foure and twenty Elders fell downe before him that sate on the Throne, and worshipped him that liveth for ever, and cast their crownes be∣fore his Throne. The wandring eye must learne to be fastened on him, Luke. 4.20. and the worke of Justice and Peace, Esa. 32.17. The worship of the knees to bow, Ephes. 3.14. and kneele before the Lord their Maker, Psal. 95.6. Our feet are to come before his face: For the Lord is a great God; and a great King above all Gods, Psa. 95.2, 3. Jacob, though he were not able to stand, or kneele: yet (because he would use some corporall service) leaned upon his staffe, and worshipped God, as ap∣peareth, Gen. 49.33. and Heb. 11.21. This must be done as duty due unto God, and in regard of those that be strangers. Secondly, what it is to Serve. This is to bow the soule, as the other is to bow the body. For the King to serve and speake kindly to the people, that they may serve him for ever after, 1 King. 12.7. is not the service he meaneth, nor to do all that the King commands, 2 Sam. 15.15. For God must be above all: and of whomsoever a man is overcome, to him he is in bondage, 2 Pet. 2.19. We must serve God with our sacrifices, but not with our sinnes, nor weary him with our iniquities, Esay 43.23. We may not make a dung cart of him, to load him with our sinne and filth, Amos 2.13. and when he comes againe to have as much more for him. [Onely.] The devill himselfe would grant, that God is to be served; his meaning was, that a man might serve God, and him too: but Christ saith, God onely. But it may be said, this word [Onely] is not in the Scripture whence Christ citeth this sentence, and so Christ hath added to the word of God. Indeed, in Deut. 6.13. Alone is not, but in the next ver. it is said, Doe not follow after other Gods, which is in ef∣fect, God onely. The Papists aske, where we find Onely in justification by faith? In∣deed we doe not finde it, but we doe find, that by faith and nothing else we are justified, Rom. 3.28. and so we may well collect it, by faith onely. By grace we are saved through faith: and that not of our selves; it is the gift of God, Ephes. 2.7. And on this warrant have many of the Ancient Fathers beene bold, to adde the word Onely: as Origen
upon Rom. 3.28. Hilary upon Matth. 8. and divers others say, Faith onely justifyeth. God is onely to be worshipped and served, and none besides him. Zephaniah prophecyeth against them that serve the hoste of heaven upon the house top, and sweare by Malcham, Zepha. 1.5. But Jacob sware by the feare of his Father Isaac: and it is said, They feared the Lord, & served their Idols also, Gen. 32.53. 2 Kin. 17.41. It is the proper∣ty of Aarons rod, that being turned into a Serpent, if the Magicians turne theirs also into Serpents, Aarons will devoure the rest, Exo. 7.15. Bring the Arke into the Temple of Dagon, Dagon will fall downe and break his face, and though it were lifted up againe, yet it fell down a∣gaine, 1 Sam. 5.3. The stories beare witnesse, that the gods of the He∣brews would not come into Pantho. Samuel bade the people, If they were come againe to the Lord with all their hearts, to put away their strange gods from amongst them, 1 Sam. 7.4. If there were any other (be∣side him) that were able to helpe up, we might have some reason to serve other: but since it is he that must helpe us in all necessities, we must worship him alone: otherwise, when we pray to him, he may send us to the gods which we have chosen to serve, for our helpe, Judg. 10.14. If we could finde an equall, or a better than God, we had some reason to make him a partner in his worship: but if none be worthy once to be named with him, (so farre is all beneath him) we shall offer him too much disgrace and injury in so doing. It is an embasing of gold to have any other metall joyned with it: yea, though it be silver: The Sonne (saith Malachi, Chap. 1.6.) honoureth his Father, and the servant his Lord: if I be your Father, where is your honour which you doe me? if your Lord, where is your reverence? Whe∣ther we account of God, as of our Lord and Master; or whether we take him for a Father, a man can have but one father, except he be a bastard, Esay 2.14. and so be Filius populi: if for a husband, not two husbands, for he is a jealous God, and cannot abide that. No man can serve two masters, but he must love the one, and despise the o∣ther; no man can love God and Mammon. Verse 11. Then the Devill left him. BLessed is the man (saith Saint James, Chap. 1.12.) that endureth temptation: for when he is tryed, he shall receive the Crowne of life. Christ hath endured the temptation, now followes the blessing. Ja∣cob would not let the Angell depart (with whom he strove,) before he had blessed him, Gen. 32.26. Job (after his afflictions) received his twofold blessing, Job 42. the woman of Canaan first heareth her selfe accounted a dogge: but at last she heard, Fiat tibi. Paul was first buffeted by the pricke of the flesh: and after heard, My grace is sufficient for thee. So here at last, when the devill saw it was bootlesse to stay any longer, there was no good by him to be done, he leaves our Saviour: but yet he went not away willingly of himselfe, but was sent away with an Avant. Which is a comfort to us to think we
stand not at the devils courtesie, and that he shall not attempt us so long as the list, for God hath the devill in a chaine, Apoc. 20.2. and will not suffer him to tempt us above our strength, 1 Cor. 10.13. For the rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lot of the righteous, lest the righteous put forth their hand to wickednesse, Psal. 125.3. To have the devill not to come to us is a great favour, but to have him come, and goe a∣way conquered, is exceeding mercy. For tribulation brings patience, and patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not asha∣med, Rom. 5.4. As God said of Job, 2.3. Hast thou marked my servant Job, who keepeth still his integrity? And behold, the Angels came, and ministred unto him. And as Luke saith, Chap. 15.10. There is joy with the Angels in hea∣ven, upon the conversion of every sinner. For we are made a spectacle unto men and Angels, 1 Cor. 4.9. Before God, are said to stand, ten thousand Angels, Dan. 7.10. and to minister before him. He hath a greater pre∣heminence, but we are also herein partakers of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. either because we are fed by Angels, as Elias was, 1 King. 19.5. or defended by them, or watched of them. But saith Esay Chap. 18.18. He that beleeveth makes not haste. Christ was not hasty, but stay∣ed Gods good time: he would not make his owne bread, but stay∣ed till the Angels ministred unto him. Then there appeared an Angell to comfort him, Luk. 22.43. This wisdome must we learne by holding our tongue; Job 33.33. otherwise one of these two extremes shall we come to: either Extremum luctus gaudium occupat: or Extrema gaudii luctus occupat, saith Bernard, Luk. 16.25. The world is like Jael, who meetes Sisera, Judg. 4.19. and enter∣taines him at first very friendly, shee allures him to her, and gives him drinke, and layes him downe: but so soone as he was asleepe, she smites a naile into his temples: The world beginnes with milke, and ends with a hammer. But our Saviours meaning is cleane con∣trary. The world first uttereth good wine; and when men have well drunke, then that which is worst, Joh. 2.10. But Christ hath kept backe the good wine till now, Chap. 2.9. Matthew saith, Chap. 13. v. 14. The Sonne of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his Kingdome, all things that offend, and them which doe iniquity: and shall cast them into a furnace of fire, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: Then shall the Just shine as the Sunne, in the Kingdome of their Father. Our Saviours method is, to give bitter first, and sweet after∣ward. Wherefore we are to wish, that here we may suffer afflicti∣on, that we may after be Crowned by him. FJNJS.
