A3268 R14812 11922342 50983
Another Great VICTORY Obtained by the Lord LAMBERT AGAINST Sir George Booth, On SUNDAY Morning last; With the manner of His taking the City of Chester, and throwing open the Gates; the taking of Five Hundred prisoners, and divers eminent Commanders; viz. Maj. Gen. Egerton, The Lord Kilmur∣rey, Col. Brooks, And Sir Wil. Neal. AS ALSO, Another desperate Fight at Lever∣pool: the taking of the Town; the beating and pursuing of the Enemy towards Wales; and the Escape of Sir George Booth, with 200 Horse, to Cherk Castle. London, Printed for EDW, HORTON, 1659.
Another Great VICTORY OBTAINED By the Lord Lambert, against the Forces of Sir George Booth; and the taking of the City of CHESTER. THe Parliament having received a Letter from the Lord Lambert, giving an Ac∣count of the Defeat and routing of the Forces under the command of Sir Geo. Booth, near Northwitch in Cheshire, ano∣ther Express likewise came on Tuesday morning, of their taking of the City of Chester; A perfect Narra∣tive whereof, together with the Dispute and Engage∣ment, we shall here impartially communicate, viz. The Lord Lambert understanding that Sir George Booth was marching towards him with an intention to sight, drew out his Army into Battalia on Friday morning last, neer Northwitch, where the Enemy
quartered that night; who being discovered, drew out of the Town amongst the Inclosures, where it was impossible for horse to do service, and not without difficulty for the Foot to break through. Nevertheless the Lord Lambert presently drew out a party to en∣gage them, and after a short dispute, and some small skirmishes, (but gallant vollies,) they quitted their grounds, and retreated from hedge to hedge, yet in that order as they suffered very little damage, it be∣ing impossible for our horse to fall in amongst them; and at length drew back to Winington Bridge, behind which they retreated, without any other loss than that of Reputation, and discouragement in meeting with those whom they found of equal courage, but engaged in a better Cause. Their next endeavour was to secure the Bridge, where they drew up their Foot on both sides, and their horse upon a Hill be∣hind them; great Advantages they had, both in re∣gard the River was unfordable, the Bridge narrow, flanker'd with a strong Ditch on the Farr-end, and the Hill so high, up which no horse could pass otherwise than along the side in a narrow path. But the Van of our foot, which was Col. Hewsons Regiment, advan∣ced up with 3 Troops of horse within half Pistol shot, receiving two vollies of shot from the Enemy: Upon which we charging, the Enemies foot threw down their Arms, quit their station, and fled to their horse, scrambling up the Hill, after their flying Co∣lours. Major Creed pursued with a party of horse; and marching up the Hill in pursuance of the Enemy, who had rallied some foot on the top of the Hill, they fited on him, but he answering their charge, their hors fled. But, to speak truth, they fought gallantly at the first; and, to the fame of both it may be said, the acti∣on
of the horse was performed on both sides like Eng∣lish-men. We had the pursuit of them above a quar∣ter of a mile, where they again made Head, but were routed, and thereupon their Horse and Foot fled on all hands, and our work was onely to give them Chase. Most of their Foot got into Inclosures, and escaped; our wearied Foot not able to overtake them, nor pos∣sible for the horse to get to them. During the time of this Dispute, the enemy had left in Northwich two Companies of Foot, and two Troops of horse; which when the Lord Lambert heard of, sens the Adjutant General, with Cap. Evanson's Troop, and a Troop of Dragoons, who advancing up to the bridge and firing upon them, the enemy drew off in good order; but not being able to make their re∣treat, was routed, and pursued within 2 or 3 miles of Manchester. For the number slain and hurt, we shall refer you to the Letter hereunto annexed, sent from a Surgeon in the Army, to his Friend in London; a true Copy whereof followeth: SIR, I Am now (blessed be God) furnished with Newes for you: no less then the routing and total defeat∣ing of Sir George Booth's Army this day. Yester∣day we marched from Nantwich, (having stayed for some time there to refresh our men, and the coming up of the rest of our Foot) intending to march to Tar∣poley within 7. miles of Chester: But understanding by some Warrants of theirs; by which they had re∣quired Provisions to be brought to them that morn∣ing for 5500 Foot and Horse; that they were for a March; and having certain Intelligence they march∣ed towards Northwich, my Lord altered his first In∣tentions,
and marched after them over the Forrest of Delamore: and when we were a little entred upon the Forrest; we discerned their Body; It being a fine Champion, we made all the haste we could: but they marched off the Forrest before we could come up; onely our Scouts fell upon their Rear, and took some prisoners; but night coming on, hindred any further action; and so we marched into Waram, and they into Northwich, two miles distant. This morn∣ing we drew out as soon as we could see, & gave them a great Alarm, and drew into Battalia upon Hartford Green, between Waram and Northwich; and they drew forth of Northwich towards us, as though they would have fought; but we pressing upon them, their Van marched over Winnington Bridge leading to Warring∣ton, thinking to escape us: but We fell on upon their Rear, and put them to flight: They thought to have kept the Bridge, which was of great advantage to them, and disadvantage to Us; they having at the end of the Bridge, Hedges and a Bark: yet after a short Dispute, our Foot undauntedly marched over the Bridge, and put them to rout, up a high Hill, where their Horse were drawn up, and the hedges lined with Foot; from whence also they were quickly beat, and put to a total rout, throwing down Arms & Colours, and we had the pursuit of them a great way in Lanes and Inclosures: Their Foot are all broke and di∣sperst; If it had been a Champion Countrey, few of them had escaped to carry home Newes. One party of them fled to Chester, and another to Warrington; the Horse are still in the pursuit of them: One is return∣ed from our horse, who brings word, that Major Creed pursued them within 5. miles of Chester, and went still on. Our wearied Foot returned here from the pursuit about twelve or one of the clock to Quarters.
Here are in the Church about 200 prisoners. I can∣not give you particulars, divers are killed: I do not know or hear of any we have had killed, and but a few wounded, and I hope none mortally; I was with them, and drest some few. We had a sore March upon Thursday, but God carried us thorow all; and with that Courage and Alacrity, that I have not seen. Our Men went on with such Shouts and Acclamati∣ons, that I think astonished the Enemy. The terror of the Lord of Hosts was surely upon them. Com∣municate this, that God may have the glory. I rest. &c. My Lord marches to morrow to Chester, and also sends a smart party to Warrington and Manchester. Northwich, Aug. 19. 1659. POSTSCRIPT. The Enemy left in Chester 4. Companies of Foot, a Troop of Horse, besides what escap'd thither from the Fight near Northwich, and what that disaffected City will afford in Townesmen. Sir George Booth fly∣ing with some horse toward Chester, was pursued by Major Creed within two miles of the City. Another party of them running towards Manchester, were pur∣sued by Col. Swallow; and Col. Ireland, with 100 horse, ran towards Leverpool. Their Horse at first were a gal∣lant Body, about 1800. The Officers taken prisoners, are, viz. Col. William Massey. Major Harrison, lately a Capt. in the Parliaments Army. Cap. Philip Egerton. Major James Scotfield. Capt. Martland. Capt. Smith. Sir Richard Gresvener's son. Capt. Cosel. Capt. Stutley, Capt. Davies. Lieut. Davies. Lieut. Seare. Cornet Gill. Ensign Ward. Ensign Langshaw; and John Brom∣ley of Wolverhampton, Gent. The number of private
Souldiers then taken were 236. 30 Colours, and many Horse. Their Word was, Have at All. Ours was, God with Us. The Lord Lambert pursuing this seasonable Victory, on Saturday last in the afternoon sate down before Chester; And on Sunday morning the Citizens opened the Gates to let him in, being welcomed with several Vo∣lies of shot from the great Guns in the Castle, and joyfully entertained by Col. Croxton the Governour. The Horse and Foot left by Sir George Booth to maintain the City, are most of them taken, 500 being prisoners; as also divers eminent Commanders; among whom are, Major General Egerton, The Lord Kilmurrey, Collonel Brooks, Sir William Neal. Sir George Booth is fled with 200 horse to Cherk Castle; and Col. Ireland, and some of the great Ones to Leverpool. The Lord Lambert hath secured Chester, and is in pursuit of them with a considerable party of Horse and Dragoons towards North wales. The hearts of the enemy begin to melt like water within them, and Leverpool offers to surrender. The rest are in a languishing condition, and know not where to take San∣ctuary; there being no means left unassayed, to prevent their imbarquing beyond the Seas. Thus may we see the Lord eminently continuing his wonted hand of mercy, toward them that fear him, and so apparently blasting the Traiter∣ous undertakings of Adversaries, in every Corner of the Countries. Since the receit of this News, another Messenger arrived at White-hall, on Tuesday the 23 instant, in the afternoon, who advertizeth, That Col. Ashfield, and Lieu. Col. Duckenfield, with a Party of horse and foot, bear upon the Enemies Rear, in their Retreat to Leverpool; and pursuing so close, fell upon them in the Town, bear them out, killed some, took divers prisoners; the rest fled towards Cherk Castle, but are close pursued. FINIS.
