B2402 16387784 105331
THE PSALTER OF DAVID WITH Titles and Collects accor∣ding to the matter of each PSALME. OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the Vniversity. 1644.
The Preface. IT is Naturall for all men when they are straitned with feares, or actuall infeli∣cities, to run for succour, to what their fancy or the next opportunity presents, as an instrument of their ease and remedy. But that which di∣stinguishes men in these cases, is the choyce of their Sanctuary: for to rely upon the Reeds of Egypt, or to snatch at the Bulrushes of Nilus, may well be∣come a drowning man, whose reason is so wholly in∣vaded and surprized by feare▪ as to be uselesse to him in that confusion: But he whose condition (al∣though it be sad) is still under the Mastery of rea∣son, and hath time to deliberate, unlesse he places his hopes upon something that is likely to cure his misery, or at least to ease it, by making his afflicti∣on lesse, or his patience more, does deserve that mi∣sery
he groanes under: stripes and remedilesse mise∣ries are the lot of Fooles, but afflictions that hap∣pen to wise men or good men, represent indeed the sadnesses of mortality, but they become Monuments and advantages of their Piety and Wisdome. In this most unnaturall Warre commenced a∣gainst the greatest solennities of Christianity, and all that is called, God, I have been put to it to run somewhether to Sanctuary; but whether, was so great a question, that had not Religion been my guide, I had not known where to have found rest or safety, when the King and the Lawes, who by God and Man respectively are appointed the protectors of Innocence and truth, had themselves the greatest need of a Protector. And when in the beginning of these troubles I hastened to His Majesty, the case of the King and His good Subjects, was something like that of I saack, ready to be sacrificed, the wood was prepared, the fire kindled, the knife was lift up, and the hand was striking, that if we had not been something like Abraham too, and against hope have believed in hope, we had been as much without comfort, as we were in outward appearance with∣out remedy. It was my custome long since to secure my selfe against the violences of Discontents abroad, as Gerson did against temptatiōs, in angulis & libel∣lis, in my bookes and my retirements: But now I
was deprived of both them, and driven to a publike view and participation of those dangers and mise∣ries which threatned the Kingdom, and disturb'd the evennesse of my former life. I was therefore constrained to amasse together all those arguments of hope and comfort, by which Men in the like con∣dition were supported; & amongst all the great ex∣amples of trouble and confidence, I reckon'd King David one of the biggest, and of greatest considera∣tion. For considering that he was a King, vexed with a Civill-Warre, his case had so much of ours in it, that it was likely the devotions he used might fit our turne, and his comforts sustaine us. And in∣deed when I came to look upon the Psalter with a neerer observation, and an eye diligent to espy my advantages and remedies there deposited, I found very many Prayers against the enemies of the King and Church, and the miseries of Warre. I found so many admirable promises, so rare variety of ex∣pressions of the mercies of God, so many consolatory hymnes, the commemoration of so many deliveran∣ces from dangers, and deaths, and Enemies, so ma∣ny miracles of mercy and salvation, that I began to be so confident as to believe there could come no af∣fliction great enough, to spend so great a stock of comfort as was laid up in the treasure of the Psal∣ter: the saying of S. Paul was here verified, if sinne [and misery] did abound, then did grace supera∣bound,
and as we believe of the Passion of Christ, it was so great as to be able to satisfy for a thousand Worlds; so it is of the comforts of Davids Psalmes, they are more then sufficient to repaire all the brea∣ches of Mankind. But for the particular occasion of creating confidences in us that God will defend his Church, and his Annoynted, and all that trust in him, against all their Enemies, (which was our case, and contained in it all our needs for the pre∣sent) I found so abundant supply, that of 150. Psalmes, some whereof are Historicall, many En∣charisticall, many Propheticall, and the rest Pray∣ers for severall occasions. 34 of them are expresly made against Gods and our Enemies; Eleven ex∣presly for the Church, foure for the King; that is, a third part of the Psalmes relate particularly to the present occasion, besides many clauses of respersion in the other which if collected into one, would of themselves be great arguments of hope to prevaile in so good a cause. This which experience taught me now, I was promised before by a frequent testimony of the Do∣ctors of the Church, who give the Psalter such a Character as is due to the best and most usefull book in the whole World. viz. The most profitable of books: the treasure of Holy instructions, consum∣mationem totius paginae Theologicae, the perfe∣ction of the whole Scripture; so the ordinary Glosse
calls it; arma juvenum, parva Biblia, tribulatorum solatia, the young mans armory, the little Bible, the comfort of the distressed, so others; to be said by all men upon all occasions, is the counsell of the most devout amongst them. But concerning the Psalter there are good words enough, and reall observation of advantages in the severall prefaces before the Commentaries upon the Psalmes, set forth by the Fathers and Writers of the first and middle ages. I leave the particular enumeration of them, to the Learned Divines of our Church, to whom it is more proper; the summe of them is this which Tertullian alone hath expressed in his Apology against the Gentiles, Omnes Bibliothecas, & omnia monu∣menta unius Prophetae serinium vincit, in quo, vi∣detur thesaurus collocatus esle to totius Iudaici Sa∣cramenti. & inde etiam nostri, this book alone of the Prophet David, hath in it some excellencies be∣yond all the monuments of Learning in any Library whatsoever, and is the store house both of the Iew∣ish and Christian Religion. But that which plea∣ses me most is the fancy of S. Hilary, expounding the Psalter to be meant by the Key of David, spo∣ken of by S. Iohn in his Revelation: And properly enough; for if we consider how many mysteries of Religion are open'd to us in the Psalter, how many things concerning Christ, what cleare vaticinati∣ons concerning his Birth, his Priesthood, his King∣dom,
his Death the very circumstances of his Passi∣on, his Resurrection, and all the degrees of his Ex∣altation more cleerly and explicitely recorded in the Psalter, then in all the old Prophets besides, we may easily believe that Christ with a Key of David in his hand, is nothing else but Christ fully open'd and manifested to us in the Psalmes in the whole myste∣ry of our Redemption. Omnes penè psalmi Chri∣sti personam sustinent, saith Tertullian. Almost all the Psalmes represent the person of Christ. Now this Key of David, opens not only the Kingdom of Grace, by Revelation of the mysteries of our Religi∣on, but the Kingdom of Heaven too, it being such a Collection of Prayers, Eucharist, acts of hope, of love, of patience, and all other Christian virtues, that as the everlasting Kingdome is given to the Heire of the House of David, so the Honour of o∣pening that Kingdom is given to the first Prince of that family; the Psalmes of his Father David are one of the best inlets into the Kingdom of the sonne. Something to this purpose is that saying of one of the old Doctors, vox psalmodiae si recto corde di∣rigatur, in tantum omnipotenti Deo aditum ad a∣nimum aperit, ut intentae animae vel Prophetiae mysteria, vel compunctionis spiritum infundat. The saying or singing of Psalmes opens a way so wide for God to enter into the heart, that a devout soule does usually from such an imployment receive
the grace of compunction and contrition, or of un∣derstanding Prophecies. Vpon such premises as these, or better, the Church of God in all ages hath made Davids Psalter the greatest part of her publike and private devotions; sometimes dividing the Psalter into seven parts, that every weeks devotion might spend it all. Sometimes decreeing that it should be said day and night. Otherwhile injoyned the recitation of the whole Psalter before the celebration of the bles∣sed Sacrament; and after some time it was made the publique office of the Church. It was the generall use of Christendome, to say the Psalmes Antiphonatim, by way of verse and an∣swer, saith Suidas; and so Ancient, that the Religi∣ous of S. Marke in Alexandria used it▪ saith Philo the lew; and S. Ignatius, or else Flavianus and Dio∣dorus brought it first into the Church of Antioch. And for the private Devotions, that they chiefly consisted of the Psalmes we have great probability from the strict requiring it of the Clergy, and par∣ticularly from them who came to be ordayned, great readinesse of saying the Psalter by heart. It was S. Hieroms counsell to Rusticus, and when S. Grego∣ry was to ordaine the Bishop of Ancona, his inquiry concerning his Canonicall sufficiency was, if he could say Davids Psalmes without book; and for a disabi∣lity of doing it, Iohn the Priest was rejected from
the Bishopricke of Ravenna. But this I conceive more relates to their private, then to their publike devotions, for I cannot thinke but that in respect of the publike Liturgy, it was enough for Bishops and Priests to read the Psalmes; the requiring abi∣lity remember them was to ingage them to a fre∣quent use of so admirable devotions in their private offices. But the Psalmes were not only of use to the Church, as they lay in their owne position and forme, but the devout men of severall ages drew them into Collects, Antiphonaries, Responsories, and all other parts of their devotions. They made their Prayers out of the Psalmes, their confessions, their doxologies, their ejaculations for the most part were clauses or peri∣ods of the Psalter. St Hierome made a collection of choice versicles, and put them together into their se∣verall classes, and that was much of his devotion▪ the Collection is still extant under the Name of St Hie∣rom's Psalter. S•^ Athanasius made an Index of the severall occasions and matters of prayer and Eucha∣rist, and fitted Psalmes to each particular, that was his devotion, the Psalmes intire as they lay, only he made titles of his owne. I have seen of latter time a short hymne of some eight verses, which are indeed very choice sentences out of severall Psalmes set to∣gether to make up a compendium of Liturgy or Bre∣viary of our necessities and devotions, collected by St
Bernardine, it is a very good Copy to be followed. But if we look into the old Liturgies of the Eastern and Western Churches▪ and where we will almost in∣to the private devotions of the old writers, we may say of them in the expression of the Prophet, Haui∣eeant aquas è fontibus Salvatoris, they drew their waters from the fountaines of our Blessed Saviour, but through the limbecks of David. But the practice of this devotion I derived from a higher precedent, even of Christ and his Apostles: for before the passion immediatly, they sung a Psalm, saith the Scripture, Hymno dicto, saith the vulgar Latine, having recited or said a Psalme. But how∣ever, it was part of Davids Psalter that was sung, it was the great Allelujah, as the Jewes called it, be∣ginning at the 113 psalme, to the 119 exclusively, part of that was sung. But this devotion continued with our Blessed Saviour as long as breath was in him, for when he was upon the Crosse he recited the 22th Psalme ad verbum, saith the tradition of the Church, and that he began it, saith the Scripture, My God, My God, why hast thou forsaken me? The whole psalme is rather a history ▪ then a prediction of the passion; and what Tertullian saith of the whole Psalter is particularly verified of this, filium ad Patrem, id est, Christum ad Deum verba facien∣tem representat, it represents the Sonnes addresse to his Father, that is, Christ speaking to God, Against
the example of Christ if we confront the practice of Antichrist, nothing can be said greater in commen∣dation of this manner of devotiō: for B. Hippolytus, in his oration of the end of the world, saith, that in the dayes of Antichrist, Psalmorum decantatio ces∣sabit, they shall then no more use the singing or saying of the Psalmes; which when I had observed. with∣out any further deliberation I fix'd, upon the Psal∣ter, as the best weapon against him, whose comming we have great reason to believe is not farre off, so great preparation is making for him. From the example of Christ this grew to be a Practice Apostolicall, and their devotion came ex∣actly home to the likenesse of the designe of this very Booke: they turn'd the Psalmes into prayers. Thus it was said of Paul and Silas. Act. 16. They prayed a Psalme, so it is in the Greeke; and we have a Copy left us of one of the prayers or col∣lects which they made out of the bowells of the se∣cond psalme, it is in the fourth Chapter of the Acts, beginning at the 24 verse, and ends at the 31. And now I have showne the reasons of my choice, and the precedents that I haue followed. This last coms home to every circumstance of my Book. I only adde this, that since according to the instruction of our blessed Saviour, God is to be worshipped in Spirit and in truth, no worshipping can be more true, or more spi∣rituall then the Psalter said with a pure mind and a
hearty devotion. For David was Gods instrument to the Church, teaching and admonishing us (as our duty is to each other) in Psalmes and Hymnes, and spirituall Songs, and the spirit of truth was the Grand Dictator of what David wrote; so that we may confidently use this devotion as the Church of God ever did, making her addresses to God most fre∣quently by the Psalmes: so Prudentius reports the guise of Christendome. Te mente purâ, simplici, Te voce, te cantu pio, Rogare curvato genu, Flendo & canendo discimus. hymn. 2. Cathemer, The Prayers which I have collected out of the Psalmes are nothing else, but the matter of the Psalmes put into another mood, and fitted to the ne∣cessities of Christendome, and of our selves in parti∣cular, according to the first designation or secondary intention of the blessed Spirit: for the use of them could not expire in the person of David, though first occasioned (many of them) by his personall necessi∣ties: for all Scripture was written for our learning upon whō the ends of the world are come, (saith the Apostle) & Christ, & his Apostles, and the Church of all ages, hath taught us by their example and pre∣cepts, that the purposes of the holy Ghost were of great extent, and the profits universall both for times and occasions: so also were the prayers which
the Church made out of the Psalmes and sung them in her publike offices. S. Austin found great advan∣tages by such devotions, as himselfe witnesses; Cùm reminiscor lacrymas meas quas Fud ad cantus Ec∣clesiae in primordijs recuperatae fidei meae, mag∣nam instituti hujus utilitatem agnosco. When I call to mind the many teares I shed when I heard the Hymnes and Psalmes of the Church, I cannot but acknowledge the great benefit of this institution. And yet besides the spirituall sense of an actuall devotion, which is sooner had in this use of the Psalmes then of other prayers, I have had a medi∣tation that this manner of devotion might be a good Symbol and instrument of Communion betweene Christians of a different perswasion: For if we all would communicate in the same private devotions, it were a great degree of Peace and Charity. The Nicene Fathers in their zeale against Heresie, for∣bad their People to be present at the prayers of He∣retickes; and they had great reason so long as they derived their Heresie into their Liturgy, into their very formes of baptisme: But I am much scandali∣zed, when I see a man refuse to communicate with me in my prayers even such as are in his owne brevi∣ary or Manuall. For me thinkes it is strange that the Lords Prayer it selfe should be unhallowed in the mouth of a Protestant, and yet the whole office from the mouth of one of their Priests, though never so
wicked, though a Necromaneer, a secret Jew, or any thing, so of their Communion, shall loose no tittle of its sanctity and value. So long as nothing of contro∣versie is brought into our prayers (and certainly we may very well pray to God without disputing) and devotion is not made a party, he that refuses to joyne with me in what himselfe confesses true and holy upon pretence I am a hereticke, will certainly prove himselfe a Schismaticke. For true it is, a Heretick is to be avoyded, that is in his temptation and in his heresie, just as a notorious Fornicator, an Adulte∣rer, a sentenc'd drunkard, and no more, the Apostles rule excommunicates all alike, with such men no not to eate, and this rule cannot with so much ease and certainty be put to practise in the case of heresie, as in the case of drunkennesse, because heresie is as much harder to be judg'd, as the soule is more invisible then the body, especially if we make heresie to be an error, not in the great articles of faith only, but to consist in minutes also, as all they doe who refuse to commu∣nicate with Persons disagreeing even in the smallest article. But he that is ready to joyne with all the societies of Christians in the world, in those things which are certainly true, just and pious, gives great probation that he hath at least, animum Catholicum, no Schis∣maticall soule, because he would actually communi∣cate with all Christendome, if bona sides in falso ar∣ticulo,
a sincere per swasion (be it true or false) did not disoblige him, since he clearly distinguishes per∣sons from things, and in all good things communi∣cates with persons bad enough in others. This is the Communion of charity, and when the Communion of beleefe is interrupted by misperswasion on one side, and too much confidence and want of charity on the other, the erring party hath humane infirmity to ex∣cuse him, but the uncharitable nothing at all. This therefore is the best and surest way, because we are all apt to be deceived, to be sincere in our disquisiti∣ons, modest in our determinations, charitable in our censures, and apt to communicate in things of evi∣dent truth and confessed holinesse. And such is this devotion; the whole matter whereof is the Psalmes of David, and the prayers Symbolicall, and alike in substance, and of the same expression throughout where it is not altered by circumstances. So that I thought I might not imprudently intend this Booke as an instrument of publike charity to Christians of different confessions. For I see that all sorts of people sing or say Davids Psalmes, and by that use, if they understand the consequences of their owne Religion, accept set formes of prayer for their Liturgy, and this forme in speciall is one of their owne choices for devotion; so that if all Christians, that thinke Davids Psalmes lawfull devotion, and shall observe the Collects from them to be just of the
same Religion, would joyn in this or the like form, I am something confident the product would be ch∣rity, besides other spirituall advantages. For my owne particular since all Christendome is so much divided, and subdivided into innumerable Sects, I knew not how to give a better evidence of my owne beliefe, and love of the Communion of Saints, and detestation of Schisme, then by an act of Religion, whose consequence might be (if men please) the ad∣vancement of an vniversall Communion. For in that which is most concerning and is the best preser∣ver of charity, I meane practicall devotion and active piety, the differences of Christendome are not so great and many, to make an eternall disunion and fracture; and if we instance in prayer, there is none at all abroad (some indeed we have commens'd at home, but) in the great divisions of Christendome, none at all but concerning the object of our prayers and adorations. For the Socinian shuts the Holy Ghost from his Letanies, and places the Sonne of God in a lower forme of addresse. But concerning him I must say, as S. Paul said of the Unbeleevers, what have I to doe with them that are without? For this very thing that they disbelieve the ar∣ticle of the holy Trinity, they make themselves un∣capable of the communion of other Christian people of the Nicene Faith, and we cannot so much at joyne with them in good prayers, because we are not
agreed concerning the persons to whom our devoti∣ons must be addressed; and Christendome never did so lightly esteem the article of the holy Trinitie, as not to glorie in it, and confesse it publiquely, and expresse it in all our offices. The holy Ghost toge∣ther with the Father and the Son must be worship∣ped and glorified. But since all Christians of any publike confession and government, that is, all particular and nationall Churches agree in the matter of prayers, and the great object, God in the mysterie of the Trinitie, if the Church of Rome would make her addresses to God onely, through Jesus Christ our Lord, and leave the Saints in the Calendar, without drawing them into her offices (which they might do without any preiudice to the suits they aske, unlesse Christs intercession without their coniuncture were imper∣fect.) that we might all once pray together, we might hope for the blessings of peace and charitie to be up∣on us all. I am sure they that have commenced this war against the King and the Church, first fell out with our Liturgie and refused to ioyne with us in our prayers: I have therefore a strong perswasion, that if we were ioyned in our prayers, we should quickly be united in affections: and to this purpose I have some reason to believe this Psalter may do good service. For I have seen an Essay of this designe made by
that prudent and pious moderator of controversies, George Cassander, who did much for the peace of Christendom, when disagreeing interests and opini∣ons made the great Schisme in the Westerne Chur∣ches, he put forth devotions, and with them Collects for each Psalme. But I said, it was a meere Essay, they are short of what he could have done: but when I saw his name at them, I guessed what every man else would have guessed concerning him, it was a pursuance of his great designe for peace and cha∣ritie. I have seen three more, the first by an old Sa∣xon Priest or Bishop▪ in which there is nothing of offence, nothing but pious and primitive for the matter, but the Collects so short, that the Psalme did scarce passe through the Prayer, so little of the relish is left, that the percolation is scarce discerua∣ble. A second was printed at Lyons, 1545. without the Authours name, with a complying designe of avoiding all offence, and a not engaging God in our scholasticall wranglings, but quite contrary to the Saxon; the prayers are so full of paraphrase, that I resolved to go further, and see if I could speed bet∣ter, and at last met with a Psalter printed lately at Antwerp by command, very fairly indeed, with a Title and a Collect to every Psalme, all free from dispute, and partaking in the questions of Christen∣dome, not so much as a gust or relish of his owne partie till the Psalter be done, the prayers all good,
and here I had fixed, but that I had found them very often to be impertinent. But that which I ob∣served in all these is, that the designe seemes alike, and they are a forme of devotion made for no pri∣vate Sect, but for the benefit of all Christian people, which the Authour of the Antwerp Psalter de∣clines in his additionall Devotions, where he brings in Letanies to Saints as grossely as he had before avoided it with discretion. If any mans pietie receives advantage by this intendment, it is what I wish; but I desire that his charitie might increase too, and that he would say a hearty prayer, when his devotion growes high and pregnant, for me and my family; for I am more desi∣rous my posteritie should be pious than honourable. I have no ends of my own to serve, but to purchase an interest of prayers; for I would fain have these Devotions go out into a blessing to all them that shall use them, and yet returne into my own bosome too: and if I may but receive the blessings of the Psalter, even the sure mercies of David, it will be like the reward of five Cities for the improvement of a few talents; I shall venture again in a greater negotiation, and traffique for ten talents; for there is no honour so great as to serve God in a great ca∣pacitie; and though I wait not at the Altar, yet I will pay there such oblations of my time and indu∣stris, as I can redeem from the services of his Ma∣iestie, and the impertinencies of my own life.
THE PSALTER OF DAVID, with Titles and Collects fitted to each Psalme, &c. PSALM. 1. A Prayer that we may continually meditate in God's law, & have no fellowship with wick∣ed persons in the manner of their living or dy∣ing. MORNING PRAYER. Blessed is the man that hath not walk∣ed in the counsell of the ungodly, nor stand in the way of sinners: and hath not sit in the seat of the scorn∣full. 2 But his delight is in the Law of the Lord: & in his Law will he exercise himself day and night. 3 And he shall be like a tree planted by the water side: that will bring forth his fruit in due season.
4 His leaf also shall not wither: & look what∣soever he doth, it shall prosper. 5 As for the ungodly, it is not so with them: but they are like the chaffe, which the wind scat∣tereth away from the face of the earth. 6 Therefore the ungodly shall not be able to stand in the iudgement: neither the sinners in the Congregation of the righteous. 7 But the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous: and the way of the ungodly shall perish. The Prayer. O Holy Iesu, fountain of all blessing, the word of the Eternall Father, be pleased to sow the good seed of thy word in our hearts, and water it with the dew of thy divinest Spirit, that while we exercise our selves in it day and night, we may be like a tree planted by the water side, bringing forth in all times and seasons the fruits of a holy conversation, that we may never walke in the way of sinners, nor have fellowship with the unfruitfull works of darknesse, but that when this life is ended, we may have our portion in the congregation of the righteous, and may be able to stand upright in judgment, through the supporting arme of thy mercy, O blessed Savi∣our and Redeemer Iesu. Amen,
PSALM. 2. A Prayer to promote Christs Kingdom, and for grace to serve him with feare and Reverence. VVHy do the heathen so furiously rage to∣gether: and why do the people imagine a vaine thing? 2 The Kngs of the earth stand up, and the rulers take counsell together: against the Lord, and against his Anointed. 3 Let vs break their bonds asunder: and cast away their cords from vs. 4 He that dwelleth in heaven shall laugh them to scorne: the Lord shall have them in derision. 5 Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath: and vex them in his sore displeasure. 6 Yet have I set my King: upon my holy hill of Sion. 7 I will preach the law whereof the Lord hath said unto me: Thou art my Sonne, this day have I begotten thee. 8 Desire of me, and I shall give thee the hea∣then for thine inheritance: & the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. 9 Thou shalt bruise them with a rod of yron▪ and break them in pieces like a potters vessell. 10 Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings: be learned, ye that are iudges of the earth.
11 Serve the Lord in feare: and rejoyce un∣to him with reverence. 12 Kisse the Sonne, least he be angry, and so ye perish from the right way: if his wrath be kind∣led (yea but a little) blessed are all they that put their trust in him. The Prayer. O Blessed Iesu, into whose hands is commit∣ted all dominion and power in the King∣domes and Empires of the world, out of whose mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it thou mightest smite the Nations and rule them with a rod of yron, on whose vesture and on whose thigh a name is written, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, we adore thee in thy infinite excellency and most glorious exaltation, beseeching thee to reveale thy name and the glory of thy Kingdome to the Heathen which know thee not, and to the uttermost parts of the earth which are given thee for thy possession and inheritance. And to us give thy grace to serve thee in fear, and plant the re∣verence of thy law and of thy name in our hearts least thy wrath be kindled against us, and tho break us in peeces like vessels of dishonour. Have mercy on us▪ O King of Kings, for we have put our trust in thee, thou art our Saviour & Redeem∣er Iesu, Amen.
PSALME 3. A Prayer for defence against all our Ene∣mies, Bodily and Ghostly. LOrd, how are they increased that trouble me: many are they that rise against me. 2 Many one there be that say of my soule: There is no help for him in his God. 3 But thou, O Lord, art my defender: thou art my worship, and the liter up of mine head. 4 I did call upon the Lord with my voice: and he heard me out of his holy hill. 5 I laid me down and slept, & rose up againe: for the lord sustained me. 6 I will not be afraid for ten thousands of people: that have set themselves against me round about. 7 Up Lord, and held me, O my God: for thou smitest all mine enemies upon the cheek-bon, thou hast broken the teeth of the ungodly. 8 Salvation belongeth unto the Lord: and thy blessing is upon thy people. The Prayer. O Lord our defender have pitty upon us, be∣hold the armyes of the flesh, the world, and the Divell fight against our Soules, and multiply against us every day temptations and disadvanta∣ges.
We are not able of our selves, as of our selves, to think a good thought, much lesse to put to flight the armies of them that have set themselves against us round about. But thou, O Lord, art our defender, thou art our worship and the lifter up of our heads. Vp Lord & help us, arme us with the shield of faith, & the sword of the Spirit, & in all times of temptation and battaile cover our heads with the helmet of Salvation, so shall wee not be afraid for ten thousands of our enemies, for salva∣tion belongeth unto thee, through Iesus Christ our Lord, AMEN. PSALME 4. A Prayer in which we exercise an act of hope in God, and desire his providence over us. HEare me when I call, O God of my righte∣ousnesse, for thou hast et me at liberty when I was in trouble, have mercy upon me, and hear∣ken unto my prayer. 2 O ye sonnes of men, how long will ye blas∣pheme mine honour: and have such pleasure in va∣nity, and seek after leasing? 3 Know this also, that the Lord hath chosen to himselfe the man that is godly: when I call up∣on the Lord, he will heare me. 4 Stand in awe, and sinne not: commune
with your own heart, and in your chamber, and be still. 5 Offer the sacrifice of righteousnesse: and put your trust in the Lord. 6 There be many that say: who will shew us any good. 7 Lord, lift thou up: the light of thy counte∣nance upon us. 8 Thou hast put gladnesse in my heart: since the time that their corne, and wine and oyle in∣creased▪ 9 I will lay me downe in peace, and take my rest: for it is thou Lord onely that makest mee dwell in safety. The Prayer▪ O God who art the author of all righteous∣nesse, from whom all grace, and safety, and glory does proceed, hear the prayers of thy hum∣ble servants whensoever we call upon thee in our trouble, for our trust is in thee alone, and no crea∣ture can shew us any good unlesse it derives from thee, shew the light of thy countenance upon us, let thy providence guide all our actions & suffer∣ings to thy glory, and our spirituall benefit, and consigne us to the blessednesse of thy Kingdome by the testimony of thy holy spirit, that we may not place our joyes and hopes upon the good
things of this life which perish and cannot satis∣fie, but in the Eternall fountaine of all true felici∣ties, that thou being our treasure, our hearts may be fixed upon thee by the bands of Charity and Obedience, that thou mayst make us to dwell in safety here, and when our dayes are done, we may lay us down in peace and take our rest in thy armes, expecting the comming of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, Amen. PSALME 5. A prayer for blessing upon all pious people, and for protection against the malice of wicked men. POnder my words, O Lord: consider my me∣ditation. 2 O hearken thou unto the voyce of my cal∣ling, my King and my God: for unto thee will I make my prayer. 3 My voyce shalt thou hear betimes. O Lord: early in the morning will I direct my prayer un∣to thee, and will looke up. 4 For thou are the God that hast no pleasure in wickednesse: neither shall any evill dwell with thee. 5 Such as be foolish shall not stand in thy sight: for thou hatest all them that work vanity. 6 Thou shalt destroy them that speak lea∣sing:
the Lord will abhorre both the bloudthirstie and deceltfull man. 7 But as for me, I will come into thy house, even upon the multitude of thy mercy: and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple. 8 Lead me, O Lord, in thy righteousnesse be∣cause of mine enemies: make thy way plain before my face. 9 For there is no faithfulnes in his mouth: their inward parts are very wickednesse. 10 Their throat is an open sepulchre: they flatter with their tongue. 11 Destroy thou them, O God, let them pe∣rish through their own imaginations: cast them out in the multitude of their ungodlines, for they have rebelled against thee. 12 And let all them that put their trust in thee, reioyce: they shal ever be giving of thanks, because thou defendest them, they that love thy name shall be ioyfull in thee. 13 For thou Lord wilt give thy blessing un∣to the righteous: and with thy favourable kinde∣nes wilt thou defend him, as with a shield. The Prayer. O Most Holy and blessed Lord God, who canst take no pleasure in wickednesse, neither can evill come nigh thy dwelling, defend us and
all thy holy Church from the fraud and malice of bloud-thirsty and deceitfull men, and from the crafty insinuations of all them that work vanity: but let thy blessings be upon the righteous, and let thy favourable kindnesse defend thy whole Church as with a shield, that all those who put their trust in thy mercy may be ever giving of thanks, & may be joyfull in thee. O lead us in thy righteousnesse that we become not a rejoyceing to our enemies, but that we may worship thee in feare, and come into thy house to make our pray∣ers unto thee, and to give thee thanks for the mul∣titude of thy mercies which thou hast given us in our Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen. PSALME 6. A Prayer of a penitent person for remissi∣on of his sinnes. EVENING PRAYER. O Lord rebuke me not in thine indig∣nation: neither chasten me in thy dis∣pleasure. 2 Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord heal me, for my bones are vered. 3 My soul is also sore troubled: but Lord how long wilt thou punish me?
4 Turn thee, O Lord, and deliver my soul: O save me for thy mercies sake. 5 For in death no man remembreth thee: and who will give thee thanks in the pit? 6 I am weary of my groaning, every night wash I my bed: and water my couch with my teares. 7 My beauty is gone for very trouble: & worn away because of all mine enemies. 1 Away from me all ye that work vanity: for the Lord hath heard the voyce of my weeping. 9 The Lord hath heard my petition: the Lord will receive my prayer. 10 All mine enemies shall be confounded and sore vexed: they shall be turned back, & put to shame suddenly. The Prayer. O Most mercifull God, whose property is al∣waies to have mercy and to forgive, behold with the eyes of thy pitty & compassiō the estate of thy humble servants, made most miserable by reason of our sinnes. Hear the voyce of our weep∣ing, pitty our groaning, strengthen us, for we are weak, heale us, for our bones are vexed, and deli∣ver our soules from death, that being saved from the bottomlesse pit, we may give thanks to thy holy name. O turn from the severity of thy
displeasure, and visit us with thy mercy and salva∣tion. For all our sinnes give us a great sorrow and contrition, and in our `sorrowes let thy comforts sustain us, through Iesus Christ our Lord, Amen. PSALME 7. A prayer for defence of our Innocence against the uniust molestation of our enemies. O Lord my God, in thee have I put my trust, save me from all them that persecute me, & deliver me. 2 Least he devour my soule like a Lion, & tear it in pieces: while there is none to help. 3 O Lord my God, if I have done any such thing: or if there be any wickednes in my hands. 4 If I have rewarded evill unto him that dealt friendly with me: yea, I have delivered him that without any cause is mine enemy. 5 Then let mine enemy persecute my soule, & take me: yea, let him tread my life down upon the earth, and lay mine honour in the dust. 6 Stand up, O Lord, in thy wrath, and lift up thy selfe: because of the indignation of mine ene∣mies, arise up for me in the iudgement that thou hast commanded. 7 And so shall the congregation of the people come about thee: for their sakes therefore lift up thy selfe again.
8 The Lord shall iudge the people, give sen∣tence with me, O Lord: according to my righte∣ousnesse, and according to the innocencie that is in me. 9 O let the wickednesse of the ungodly come to an end: but guide thou the iust. 10 For the righteous God: trieth the very hearts and reins. 11 My help commeth of God: which preser∣veth them that are true of heart. 12 God is a righteous iudge, strong and pati∣ent: and God is provoked every day. 13 If a man will not turn, he will wht his sword: he hath bent his bow, and made it ready. 14 He hath prepared for him the instruments of death: he ordaineth his arrows against the per∣secutours. 15 Behold, he travaileth with mischief: he hath conceived sorrow, and brought forth ungod∣lines. 16 He hath graven and digged up a pit: and is fallen himself into the destruction that he made for other. 17 For his travail shall come upon his own head: and his wickednesse shall fall on his owne pate. 18 I will give thanks unto the Lord, accor∣ding to his righteousnes: and will praise the
name of the Lord the most High. The Prayer. O God from whom commeth our help, thou art a righteous Iudge and preservest all that are true of heart, deliver us from our persecutors who travail with mischief against us, and have digged a pit for our destruction. O let their wick∣ednesse and malicious devices against thy servants come utterly to an end for evermore. Thou, O Lord, art strong and able to take vengeance, & yet being provoked every day still art patient to∣wards us & compassionate. Deliver us from their wrath to whom we have done no injustice or dis∣pleasure: pardon our offences against thee, & pro∣tect our Innocency against them, that we may praise thy name and give thanks unto thee for thy righteousnesse and salvation, who art blessed for e∣vermore. Amen. PSALME 8. A Contemplation of the Divine beauty and excel∣lency manifested in his Creatures. O Lord our governour, how excellent is thy name in all the world: thou that hast set thy glory above the heavens! 2 Out of the mouth of very babes and suck∣lings
hast thou ordained strength, because of thine enemies: that thou mightest still the enemy and the avenger. 3 For I will consider the heavens, even the works of thy fingers: the moon and the starres which thou hast ordained. 4 What is man that thou art mindfull of him: and the sonne of man that thou visitest him? 5 Thou madest him lower then the angells: to crown him with glory and worship. 6 Thou makest him to have dominion of the works of thy hands: and thou hast put all things in subiection under his feet. 7 All sheep and oxen: yea, and the beasts of the field. 8 The fowls of the aire, and the fishes of the sea: and whatsoever walketh through the paths of the seas. 9 O Lord our governour: how excellent is thy name in all the world! The Prayer. O Lord God, Father of men and Angells, God of all the Creatures, who hast created all things in a wonderfull order, and hast made them all conveyances of thy mercies to mankinde, give us great and dreadfull apprehensions of thy glory and immensity, thy Majesty and mercy,
that we may adore thee as our Creator, love thee as our redeemer, fear thee as our God, obey thee as our Governour, and praise thee as the author & fountaine of all perfections, and all good which thou hast communicated to thy creatures, that they may all in their proportions doe thee service, who hast to that end made the world & redeem∣ed us by our Lord & Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen. PSALME 9. A prayer of poore and oppressed people against their persecutors. MORNING PRAYER. I Will giue thanks unto thee, O Lord, with my whole heart: I will speak of all thy marvellous works. 2 I will be glad and reioyce in thee: yea, my songs will I make of thy name, O thou most Highest. 3 While mine enemies are driven back: they shall fall and perish at thy presence. 4 For thou hast maintained my right, and my cause: thou art set in the throne that iudgest right. 5 Thou hast rebuked the heathen, and de∣stroyed the vngodly thou hast put out their
name for ever and ever. 6 O thou enemy, destructions are come to a perpetuall end: even as the cities which thou hast destroyed, their memoriall is perished with them. 7 But the Lord shall endure for ever: he hath also prepared his seat for iudgement. 8 For he shall iudge the world in righteous∣nesse: and minister true iudgement unto the peo∣ple. 9 The Lord also will be a defence for the op∣pressed: even a refuge in due time of trouble. 10 And they that know thy name, will put their trust in thee: for thou Lord hast never failed them that seek thee. 11 O praise the Lord which dwelleth in Si∣on: shew the people of his doings. 12 For when he maketh inquisition for bloud, be remembreth them: and forgotteth not the com∣plaint of the poore. 14 Have mercy upon me, O Lord: consider the trouble which I suffer of them that hate mee: thou that liftest me up from the gates of death. 14 That I may shew all thy praises within the ports of the daughter of Sion: I will reioyce in thy salvation. 15 The heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made: in the same net which they hid privi∣ly, is their foot taken.
16 The Lord is known to execute iudge∣ment: the ungodly is trapped in the work of his own hands. 17 The wicked shall be turned into hell: and all the people that forget God. 18 For the poore shall not alway be forgot∣ten: the patient abiding of the meek shall not pe∣rish for ever. 19 Up Lord, and let not man have the upper hand: let the heathen be iudged in thy sight. 20 Put them in fear (O Lord:) that the hea∣then may know themselves to be but men. The Prayer. O Lord God who art a defence for the op∣pressed, and a refuge in due time of trouble, have mercy upon us thy servants, who are violent∣ly assaulted by enemies without, and weaknesses and temptations within. Thou never failest them that seek thee, but lovest to heare the poore make their complaint unto thee in their trouble, and art known to execute judgement upon them that oppresse them. Pitty us, and look upon the trouble we suffer of them that hate us: deli∣ver us from the strivings of our adversaries, lift us up from the gates of death, that being safe under thy mercies and protection, we may give thankes unto thee with our spirits & voyces, we may em∣brace
thee with a lively faith, feare thee with all our hearts, serve thee with all our powers & fa∣culties both of soule and body, all the dayes of our life, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 10. A prayer to God in times of Persecution and Warre against the Church. VVHy standest thou so farre off (O Lord) and hidest thy face in the needfull time of trouble? 2 The ungodly for his own iust doth persecute he poore: let them be taken in the crafty wilines that they have imagined. 3 For the ungodly hath made boast of his own eares desire: and speaketh good of the covetous whom God abhorreth. 4 The ungodly is so proud that he careth not for God: neither is God in all his thoughts. 5 His wayes are alway greivous: thy iudge∣ments are farre aboue out of his sight, & therefore efieth he all his enemies. 6 For he hath said in his heart, Tush, I shall ever be cast down: there shall no harm happen into me. 7 His mouth is full of cursing, deceit, and aud: under his tongue is ungodlinesse and va∣ity.
8 He sitteth lurking in the theevish corners of the streets: and privily in his lurking dennes doth he murder the innocent, his eyes are set against the poore. 9 For he lieth waiting secretly, even as a li∣on lurketh he in his denne: that he may ravish the poore. 10 He doth ravish the poore: when he getteth him into his net. 11 He falleth own and humbleth himselfe: that the congregation of the poore may fall into the hand of his Captains. 12 He hath said in his heart, Tush, God hath forgotten: he hideth away his face, and he will ne∣ver see it. 13 Arise (O Lord God) and lift vp thine hand: forget not the poore. 15 Wherefore should the wicked blaspheme God: while he doth say in his heart, Tush, thou God carest not for it? 15 Surely thou hast seen it: for thou behold∣est ungodlinesse and wrong. 16 That thou mayest take the matter into thy hand: the poore committeth himself unto thee, for thou art the helper of the friendlesse. 17 Break thou the power of the ungodly & malicious: take away his ungodlinesse, and thou shalt find none.
18 The Lord is King for ever and ever: and the heathen are perished out of the land. 19 Lord, thou hast heard the desire of the poor: thou preparest their heart, and thine eare hearken∣eth thereto. 20 To help the fatherlesse and poore unto their right: that the man of the earth be no more exalted against them. The Prayer. O Lord God, who beholdest all the actions of men, and seest all the ungodlinesse of sin∣ners and the wrong they doe unto thy servants, we flye unto thee for succour and defence in this our needfull time of trouble. Behold, ô Lord, how the Enemies of thy Church have set their eyes against her, and use all violences and arts that thy poore servants may fall under the hands of their Captaines. Thou seest their malice and their con∣fidences, they feare thee not, neither art thou, O God, in all their thoughts. But thou art our King for ever and ever, and the helper of the friend∣lesse. We commit our selves wholly to thy mer∣cy & providence, take the matter into thine own hand, let them perish out of the land that are ex∣alted against thee, and against thy Church, that we being delivered from feare of our enemies, may serve thee with constant and regular devotions
all the dayes of our life, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 11. An addresse to God by way of hope and confidence in him, and a prayer against our secret Enemies. IN the Lord put I my trust: how say ye then to my soul, that she should flee as a bird unto the hill? 2 For lo, the ungodly bend their bow, and make ready their arrows within the quiver: that they may privily shoot at them whith are true of heart. 3 For the foundations will be cast down: and what hath the righteous done? 4 The Lord is in his holy temple: the Lords seat is in heaven. 5 His eyes consider the poore: and his eyelis trieth the children of men. 6 The Lord alloweth the righteous: but the ungodly, and him that delighteth in wickednesse doth his soul abhorre. 7 Upon the ungodly he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, storm and tempest: this shall be their portion to drink. 8 For the righteous Lord loveth righteous∣nesse:
his countenance will behold the thing that is iust. The Prayer. O Lord who art our hope and our refuge, and the exceeding great reward of all that trust in thee, have mercy upon us thy servants, who have no confidences but upon thy mercies and in∣finite loving kindnesse. Defend us from all secret plots & designes, intended against our peace and securities by them that privily shoot at us, and would overthrow the foundations of our repose and safety. And that we may be better intitled to thy protection and care over us, make us to love righteousnesse, and to follow the things that are just, that by thy grace we being defended from taking delight in wickednesse, may also be deli∣vered from the portion of the ungodly, which thou givest them to drink, upon whom thou rain∣est snares, fire and brimston, storm and tempest. Deliver us, O Lord, from the eternall pressure of thy wrath, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME 12. A prayer for defence against the dan∣gers of evill Company. EVENING PRAYER. HElp me, Lord, for there is not one godly man left: for the faithfull are minished from among the children of men. 2 They talk of vanity every one with his neighbour: they do but flatter with their lips, and dissemble with their double heart. 3 The Lord shall root out all deceitfull lips: and the tongue that speaketh proud things. 4 Which have said, With our tongue we will prevail: we are they that ought to speak, who is Lord over us? 5 Now for the comfortlesse troubles sake of the needy: and because of the deep sighing of the poore. 6 I will up (saith the Lord:) and will helpe every one from him that swelleth against him, and will see them at rest. 7 The words of the Lord are pure words: e∣ven as the silver which from the earth is tried, & purified seven times in the fire, 8 Thou shalt keep them, O Lord: thou shalt preserve him from this generation for ever.
9 The ungodly walk on every side: when they are exalted, the children of men are put to rebuke. The Prayer. O Most blessed Iesu, who in thy eternall provi∣dence doest suffer the ares and the wheat to grow together untill the harvest, permitting hereticks and vitious persons to communicate in the externall Society of thy people, grant us thy grace, that we may so believe, & heartily obey all thy pure words and dictates, which thou hast taught us in thy holy Gospell, that we may be kept unspotted of the world, and although the ungodly walke on every side, yet we may perse∣vere in the wayes of righteousnesse, and increase the number of the godly, that at last we may be admitted into the glorious fellowship of Saints & Angells, who behold thy face & the glories of thy Kingdome, where thou livest and raignest, with the Father & the holy Ghost, Eternall God world without end. Amen. PSALME 13. A Prayer in time of temptation. HOw long wilt thou forget me (O Lord) for ever: how long wilt thou hide thy face from me?
2 How long shall I seek counsell in my soul, & be so vexed in my heart: how long shall mine enemies triumph over me? 3 Consider and heare me, O Lord my God: lighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in death. 4 Lest mine enemy say, I have prevailed a∣gainst him: for if I be cast down, they that trou∣ble me will reioyce at it. But my trust is in thy mercy: and my heart is ioyfull in thy salvation. I will sing of the Lord, because he hath dealt so lovingly with me: yea, I will praise the name of the Lord most Highest. The Prayer. O God the giver of all grace, the author of all Ghostly strength, look with compassion up∣on our infirmities, and how unequally we are as∣saulted by many, by powerfull, by malicious ad∣versaries. How long, O Lord, how long shall we seek for rest and finde none? O give us either peace or victory, and preserve us that we sleep not in the death of sinne, least our grād enemy the Divell, say, he hath prevailed against us. Our trust is in thy mercy, and thy delight is in it; strengthen us so with thy grace that we may fight a good fight, and conquer, and be crown'd with a crown of righteousnesse, which we begge we may re∣ceive
from the hands, and by the mercies of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen. PSALME 14. A Prayer against Atheisme and irreligion. THe fool hath said in his heart: There is no God. 2 They are corrupt and become abominable in their doings: there is not one that doth good, (no not one.) 3 The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men: to see if there were any that would understand and seek after God. 4 But they are all gone out of the way, they are altogether become abominable: there is none that doth good, no not one. 5 Their throat is an open sepulchre, with their tongues have they deceived: the poison of asps is under their lips. 6 Their mouth is tull of cursing and bitter∣nes: their feet are swift to shed bloud. 7 Destruction and unhappinesse is in their waies, and the way of peace have they not known: there is no feare of God before their eyes. 8 Have they no knowledge, that they are all such workers of mischief: eating up my people as it were bread?
9 And call not upon the Lord, there were they brought in great fear (even where no feare was:) for God is in the generation of the righte∣ous. 10 As for you, ye have made a mock at the counsell of the poore: because he putteth his trust in the Lord. 11 Who shall give salvation unto Israell out of Sion: when the Lord turneth the captivity of his people, then shall Iacob reioyce, and Israell shall be glad. The Prayer. O Eternall God, Creator of the world, conser∣ver of the Creatures, whose essence and goodnesse and perfections are infinite, and made so manifest in the creation, order, protection, and disposition of thy creatures, that without the grea∣test sinne and folly in the world, we cannot but acknowledge thee, and adore thee with the low∣est adorations of soul and body, and with the most profound humility. Preserve us, O Lord, in great Religion, Veneration, and reverence of thy Di∣vine perfections. Keep us from all distrust of thy providence, all doubtings of thy infinitnesse, or of any other article of our faith, and grant that wee confessing thee before all the world, may be ac∣knowledged for thy children, and rewarded a∣mong
thy servants, not for our righteousnesse but through the merits and mercies of our dearest Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen. PSALME 15. Which is a short rule of a good life, and a desire of innocency and sanctity. MORNING PRAYER. LOrd, who shall dwell in thy taberna∣cle: or who shall rest upon thy holy hill? 2 Even he that seadeth an uncor∣rupt life: and doth the thing which is right, and speaketh the truth from his heart. 3 He that hath used no deceit in his tongue, nor done evill to his neighbour: & hath not stande∣red his neighbour. 4 He that setteth not by himselfe, but is low∣ly in his own eyes: and maketh much of them that feare the Lord. 5 He that sweareth unto his neighbour, and disappointeth him not: though it were to his own hinderance. 6 He that hath not given his mony upon usu∣ry: nor taken reward against the innocent. 7 Whoso doth these things: shall never fall.
The Prayer. O Lord let thy mercy preserve us in holinesse and innocency, or if through infirmity wee fall, make us to rise again by penitence, that wee may lead an uncorrupt life with humility, and truth, and justice, not slandering our neighbour, not invading his right, not breaking our trust, not oppressing the indigent and necessitous, but do∣ing good to all, and especially making much of them that feare the Lord; that we may never fall from thy favour, but at the end of our weary pil∣grimage we may take our rest upon thy holy hill, and dwell in thy tabernacle where thou raignest with infinite glory and felicities, God Eternall, world without end. Amen. PSALME. 16. A Prayer for the blessings of God providence and preservation in this life, and for glory hereafter. PReserve me, O God: for in thee have I put my trust. 2 O my soul, thou hast said unto the Lord: Thou art my God, my goods are nothing un∣to thee. 3 All my delight is upon the Saints that are
in the earth: and vpon such as excell in vertue. 4 But they that run after another god: shall have great trouble. 5 Their drink offerings of bloud will I not offer: neither make mention of their names within my lips. 6 The Lord himselfe is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup: thou shalt maintain my lot. 7 The lot is fallen unto me in a fair ground: yea, I have a goodly heritage. 8 I will thank the Lord for giving me war∣ning: my reins also chasten me in the night season. 9 I have set God alwayes before me: for he is on my right hand, therefore I shall not fall. 10 Wherefore my heart was glad, and my glory reioyced: my flesh also shall rest in hope. 11 For why? thou shalt not leave my soul in hell: neither shalt thou suffer thine Holy one to see corruption. 12 Thou shalt shew me the path of life, in thy presence is the fulnesse of ioy: and at thy right hand there is pleasure for evermore. The Prayer. O God, who art the portion of our inheri∣tance, our God, and our preserver, pre∣serve
and maintaine all those good things which thou hast wrought in us, and for us, and that we may never fall, give us thy grace, that we may set thee alwayes before us, rejoycing in thee, and delighting in the Saints that are upon the earth, that when our flesh shall see corruption, our Soules may not be left in hell, but may walke in the paths of life, and in the day of restitution of all things, both bodies and Soules may have a goodly heritage, even the lot of thy right hand where there is pleasure for evermore, and where we may see the face, and the glory of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen. PSALME. 17. A Prayer for protection against the injuries of our Enemies, Bodily and Ghostly. HEare the right, O Lord, consider my com∣plaint: and hearken unto my prayer, that goeth not out of feigned lips. 2 Let my sentence come forth from thy pre∣sence: and let thine eyes look upon the thing that is equall. 3 Thou hast proved and visited mine heart in the night season, thou hast tried me, and shalt find no wickednesse in me: for I am utterly pur∣posed, that my mouth shall not offend.
4 Because of mens works that are done a∣gainst the words of my lips: I have kept me from the wayes of the destroyer. 5 O hold thou up my goings in thy paths: that my foot-steps slip not. 6 I have called upon thee, O God, for thou shalt heare me: encline thine eare to me, and hearken unto my words. 7 Shew thy marvellous loving kindnes, thou that art the Saviour of them which put their trust in thee: from such as resst thy right hand. 8 Keep me as the apple of an eye▪ hide me under the shadow of thy wings. 9 From the ungodly that trouble me: mine enemies compasse me round about, to take away my soul. 10. They are inclosed in their owne fat: and their mouth speaketh proud things. 11 They lie waiting in our way on every side: turning their eyes down to the ground. 12 Like as a lyon that is greedy of his prey and as it were a lions whelp lurking in secret places. 13 Up Lord, disappoint him, and cast him down: deliver my soul from the ungodly, which is a sword of thine. 14 From the men of thy hand, O Lord, from
the men, I say, and from the evill world: which haue their portion in this life, whose bellies thou fillest with thy hid treasure. 15 They haue children at their desire: and leave the rest of their substance for their babes. 16 But as for me, I will behold thy presence in righteousnesse: and when I awake up after thy likenesse, I shall be satisfied with it. The Prayer. O Most mercifull Iesu, thou that art the Savi∣our of them that put their trust in thee, de∣fend us, and deliver us from the hands of all our Enemies, and although they are a sword of thine, and an instrument sent from thee, to chastise us for our sinnes, yet arise, O Lord, in mercy and strength, disappoint them and cast them down, least they destroy our soules, that when thou hast visited us with thy fatherly correction, and tryed us like as Silver is tryed, thou maist find no wick∣ednesse in us. Sanctify our hearts and lips, that we may not think a thought displeasing unto thee, and that our mouth may not offend: Keep us as the apple of an eye, hide us under the shadow of thy wings of mercy and providence: keep us from the wayes of the destroyer, and hold up our goings in thy paths, that we may persevere in righteousnesse, and our footsteps may not slip:
that in the day of the resurrection of the Iust, we may behold thy presence, and receive infinite satisfactions in the vision beatificall. Grant this O mercifull Saviour and Redeemer Iesu. Amen. PSALME. 18. A Prayer for strength and Victory in Warre, temporall or spirituall, together, with an act of hope and confidence in God. EVENING PRAYER. I Will love thee (O Lord) my strength, the Lord is my stony rock and my defence: my Savi∣our, my God, and my might, in whom I will trust, my buckler, the horn also of my salvation, and my refuge. 2 I will call upon the Lord, which is wor∣thy to be praised: so shall I be safe from mine enemies. 3 The sorrowes of death compassed me: and the overflowings of ungodlinesse made me afraid. 4 The pains of hell came about me: the snares of death overtook me. 5 In my trouble I will call upon the Lord and complain unto my God.
6 So shall he heare my voice out of his holy temple: and my complaint shall come before him, it shall enter even into his eares. 7 The earth trembled and quaked: the very foundations also of the hills shook and were re∣moved, because he was wroth. 8 There went a smoke out of his presence: and a consuming fire out of his mouth, so that coals were kindled at it. 9 He bowed the heavens also & came down: and it was dark under his feet. 10 He rode upon the cherubims, & did flie: he came flying upon the wings of the wind. 11 He made darknesse his secret place: his pavilion round about him, with dark water, and thick clouds to cover him. 12 At the brightnesse of his presence, his clouds removed: haile stones and coales of fire. 13 The Lord also thundered out of heaven, and the highest gave his thunder: hailstones and coals of fire. 14 He sent out his arrowes and scattered them: he cast forth lightnings & destroyed them. 15 The springs of waters were seen, and the foundations of the round world were disco∣vered at thy chiding, O Lord: at the blasting of the breath of thy displeasure. 16 He shall send down from the high to
fetch me: & shall take me out of many waters. 17 He shall deliver me from my strongest enemy, and from them that hate me: for they are too mighty for me. 18 They prevented me in the day of my trouble: but the Lord was my upholder. 19 He brought me forth also into a place of liberty: he brought me forth, even because he had a favour unto me. 20 The Lord shall reward me after my righteous dealing: according to the cleannesse of my hands shall he recompense me. 21 Because I haue kept the wayes of the Lord: & haue not forsaken my God as the wick∣ed doth. 22 For I have an eye unto all his laws: and will not cast out his Commandements from me. 23 I was also uncorrupt before him: and eschewed mine owne wickednesse. 24 Therefore shall the Lord reward me af∣ter my righteous dealing: and according unto the cleannesse of my hands in his eye-sight. 25 With the holy thou shalt be holy: & with a perfect man thou shalt be perfect. 26 With the clean thou shalt be clean: and with the froward thou shalt learne froward∣nesse. 27 For thou shalt save the people that are in
adversity: and shalt bring down the high looks of the proud. 28 Thou shalt also light my candle: the Lord my God shall make my darkenesse to be light. 29 For in thee I shall discomfit an host of men: and with the help of my God I shall leap over the wall. 30 The way of God is an undefiled way: the word of the Lord also is tried in the fire, he is the defender of all them that put their trust in him. 31 For who is God but the Lord: or who hath any strength except our God? 32 It is God that girdeth me with strength of warre: and maketh my way perfect. 33 He maketh my feet like Harts feet: and setteth me up on high. 34 He teacheth mine hands to fight: and mine arms shall break even a bow of steel. 35 Thou hast given me the defence of thy salvation: thy right hand also shall hold me up, & thy loving correction shall make me great. 36 Thou shalt make room enough under me for to go: that my foot steps shall not slide. 37 I will follow upon mine enemies, and overtake them: neither will I turn again till I have destroyed them. 38 I will smite them, that they shall not be
able to stand: but fall under my feet. 39 Thou hast girded me with strength unto the battell: thou shalt throw down mine enemies under me. 40 Thou hast made mine enemies also to turn their backs upon me: and I shall destroy them that hate me. 41 They shall cry, but there shall be none to help them: yea even unto the Lord shall they cry, but he shall not heare them. 42 I will beat them as small as the dust be∣fore the winde: I will cast them out as the clay in the streets. 43 Thou shalt deliver me from the strivings of the people: and thou shalt make me the head of the heathen. 44 A people whom I haue not knowne: shall serve me. 45 Assoon as they heare of me, they shall obey me: but the strange children shall dissemble with me. 46 The strange children shall fail: and be afraid out of their prisons. 47 The Lord liveth, & blessed be my strong helper: & praised be the God of my salvation. 48 Even the God that seeth that I be aven∣ged: and subdueth the people unto me. 49 It is he that delivereth me from my
(cruell) enemies, and setteth me up aboue mine adversaries: thou shalt id me from the wicked man. 50 For this cause will I giue thanks unto thee (O Lord) among the Gentiles: and sing praises unto thy name. 51 Great prosperity giveth He unto his King: and sheweth loving kindnesse unto David his anointed, & unto his seed for evermore. The Prayer. O God our Saviour, the rock upon whom all our hopes are built, our strength and de∣fence, our salvation and our refuge; heare our voyce out of thy holy temple, let our complaint come before thee, and enter even into thy Eares. The sorrowes of death compasse us, and we are afraid, because of the overflowings of ungodli∣nesse: Our enemies are strong, yea, they are too mighty for us, and we have no hope to escape, unlesse thou preventest them in the day of our trouble, and deliverest us from the strivings of our enemies. But in thee, O Lord, is our hope, doe thou teach our hands to fight, and gird us with strength unto the battell: Make us to have an eye unto all thy lawes, that we may eschew our own wickednesse, and be uncorrupt before thee, then shalt thou give us the defence of thy salvation,
and we shall give thankes unto thee, ô Lord, and sing praises unto thy name, who art become our strong helper, and the God of our Salvation, which thou hast given unto us in our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen. PSALME 19. A Prayer for preservation from sinne, and for love of Gods law. MORNING PRAYER. THe heavens declare the glory of God: and the firmament sheweth his handy work. 2 One day telleth another: and one night certifieth another. 3 There is neither speech nor language: but their voyces are heard among them. 4 Their sound is gone out into all lands: and their words into the ends of the world. 5 In them hath he set a tabernacle for the sunne: which cometh forth as a bridegroom out of his chamber, and reioyceth as a giant to run his course. 6 It goeth forth from the uttermost part of the heaven, and runneth about unto the end of it again: and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.
7 The law of the Lord is an undefiled law converting the soul: the testimonie of the Lord is sure, and giveth wisdome unto the simple. 8 The statutes of the Lord are right, and re∣ioyce the heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure, and giveth light unto the eyes. 9 The feare of the Lord is clean, and endu∣reth for ever: the iudgements of the Lord are true, and righteous altogether. 10 More to be desired are they then gold, yea then much fine gold: sweeter also then hony & the hony combe. 11 Moreover by them is thy servant taught: and in keeping of them there is great reward. 12 Who can tell how oft he offendeth? O cleanse thou me from my secret faults. 13 Keep thy servant also from presumptuous sinnes, least they get the dominion over me: so shall I be undefiled and innocent from the great offence. 14 Let the words of my mouth, & the medita∣tion of my heart: be alway acceptable in thy sight. 15 O Lord: my strength, and my redee∣mer. The Prayer. O Most blessed Iesu, thou sonne of righteous∣nesse, who camest forth from the bosome
of thy Eternall Father, as a Bridegroom out of his chamber, be pleased to plant in our hearts the feare of the Lord, and in our bodies the purity and cleanesse of chastity, and make them to abide there for ever: Lighten our eyes with the light of thy Gospell, and the bright revelation of thy whole will and pleasure, that so being guided by thy grace, we may be cleansed from all our secret sinnes, and preserved from presumptuous and great offences, so shall the thoughts and medita∣tion of our heart, the words of our mouth, and all our actions be alway acceptable in thy sight, O Lord our Saviour, our strength, and our redeemer Iesus. Amen. PSALME 20. A Prayer that God would heare our petitions which we make to him in times of trouble. THe Lord heare thee in the day of trouble: the name of the God of Iacob defend thee. 2 Send thee help from the sanctuary: and strengthen thee out of Sion. 3 Remember all thy offerings: and accept thy burnt-sacrifice. 4 Grant thee thy hearts desire: and fullfill all thy minde. 5 We will reioyce in thy salvation, and tri∣umph
in the name of the Lord our GOD: the Lord perform all thy petitions. 6 Now know I that the Lord helpeth his anointed, and will heare him from his holy hea∣ven: even with the wholsome strength of his right hand. 7 Some put their trust in chariots, and some in horses: but we will remember the name of the Lord our God. 8 They are brought down and fallen: but we are risen, and stand upright. 9 Save Lord, & heare us, O King of heaven: when we call upon thee. The Prayer. O King of heaven, who art the health and strength of our right hand, have mercy up∣on us, and heare us when we call upon thee; let our prayers come into thy presence like a burnt offering of a sweet savour: for in all our troubles we disclaim all confidences in any of thy crea∣tures, and remember thy name only, O Lord our God. Teach us what to aske, and how to come into thy presence, that we may never begge of thee any thing but what is agreeable to thy will, and may then promote thy glory when thou sup∣pliest our necessities, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME 21. A Prayer for the King. THe King shall rejoyce in thy strength, O Lord: exceeding glad shall he be of thy salva∣tion. 2 Thou hast given him his hearts desire: and hast not denied him the request of his lips. 3 For thou shalt prevent him with the bles∣sings of goodnesse: and shalt set a Crowne of pure gold upon his head. 4 He asked life of thee, and thou gavest him a long life: even for ever and ever. 5 His honour is great in thy salvation: glory and great worship shalt thou lay upon him. 6 For thou shalt give him everlasting felici∣ty: and make him glad with the joy of thy coun∣tenance. 7 And why? because the King putteth his trust in the Lord: and in the mercy of the most Highest he shall not miscarry. 8 All thine enemies shall feel thine hand: thy right hand shall find out them that hate thee. 9 Thou shalt make them like a fiery oven in time of thy wrath: the Lord shall destroy them in his displeasure, and the fire shall consume them. 10 Their fruit shalt thou root out of the earth: and their seed from among the children of men.
11 For they intended mischiefe against thee: and imagined such a device as they are not able to perform. 12 Therefore shalt thou put them to flight: and the strings of thy bow shalt thou make ready against the face of them. 13 Be thou exalted, Lord, in thine own strength: so will we sing and praise thy power. The Prayer. O Eternall God, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, have mercy upon thy servant the King; as thou hast set a Crowne of gold upon his head, and given him power and command to rule thy people with justice and piety, so doe thou heare the request of his lipps, grant him the desire of his heart, and prevent both his desires and re∣quests with the blessings of thy goodnesse: give him great honour and Reverence in the sight of his People, and of all the Nations round about: let all his enemies feele thine hand, and put them to flight that arise up against him, that when thou hast given him the blessings of a long life and prosperous, and made him glad with the joy of thy countenance, at last he may be crown'd with everlasting felicity, and reigne with thee in thy eternall Kingdome, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME 22. A meditation upon the Passion of our Blessed Saviour. EVENING PRAYER. MY God, my God, (look upon me) why hast thou forsaken me: and art so farre from my health, and from the words of my complaint. 2 O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hearest not: and in the night season also I take no rest. 3 And thou continuest holy: O thou worship of Israel. 4 Our fathers hoped in thee: they trusted in thee, and thou didst deliver them. 5 They called upon thee, and were holpen: they put their trust in thee, and were not confoun∣ded. 6 But as for mee, I am a Worm and no man: a very scorn of men, and the outcast of the people. 7 All they that see me, laugh me to scorne: they shoot out their lips, and shake their heads, saying, 8 He trusted in God, that he would deliver
him: let him deliver him if he will have him. 9 But thou art he that took me out of my mothers wombe: thou wast my hope when I hanged yet upon my mothers brests. 10 I have been left unto thee ever since I was borne: thou art my God, even from my mo∣thers wombe. 11 O go not from me, for trouble is hard at hand: and there is none to help me. 12 Many oxen are come about mee: fat bulls of Basan close me in on every side. 13 They gape upon mee with their mouthes: as it were a ramping and roaring lion. 14 I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of ioynt: my heart also in the midst of my body is even like meling wax. 15 My strength is dried up like a pot-sheard, and my tongue cleaveth to my gummes: and thou shalt bring me into the dust of death. 16 For (many) dogs are come about me: and the counsell of the wicked layeth siege against mee. 17 They pierced my hands and my feet, I may tell all my bones: they stand staring and loo∣king upon me. 18 They part my garments among them: and cast lots upon my vesture. 19 But be not thou farre from me, O Lorde
thou art my succour, hast thee to help me. 20 Deliver my soul from the sword: my darl∣ing from the power of the dog. 21 Save me from the lions mouth: thou hast heard me also from among the hornes of the uni∣corns. 22 I will declare thy name unto my bre∣thren: in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee. 23 O praise the Lord ye that feare him: ma∣gnifie him all ye of the seed of Iacob, and feare him all ye seed of Israel. 24 For he hath not despised nor abhorred the low estate of the poore, he hath not hid his face from him: but when he called unto him, he heard him. 25 My praise is of thee in the great congre∣gation: my vowes will I performe in the sight of them that fear him. 26 The poor shall eat and be satisfied: they that seek after the Lord, shall praise him, your heart shall live for ever. 27 All the ends of the world shall remember themselves, and be turned unto the Lord: and all the kindreds of the nations shall worship before him. 28 For the Kingdom is the Lords: and he is the governour among the people.
29 All such as be fat upon earth: have eaten and worshipped. 30 All they that go down into the dust shall kneel before him: and no man hath quickned his own soule. 31 My seed shall serve him: they shall be couu∣ted unto the Lord for a generation. 32 They shall come, and the heavens shall de∣clare his righteousnesse: unto a people that shall be born, whom the Lord hath made. The Prayer. O Mercifull Iesu, who for our sakes did'st suf∣fer thy selfe to be betrayed, tormented, spitupon, crucified, and to dye, that thou mightest purchase for us redemption from the sting of death, the miseries of hell, the malice and pow∣er of the Divell, deliver our soules from the sword of thy Vengeance, cut us not off by un∣timely death, free our darling from the power of the dog, our soules from being a prey unto the Divell, snatch us out of the Lions mouth, who goeth up and downe seeking whom he may de∣voure. O Iesu, be a Iesus unto us, and let those victories which thou hast obtained over Satan, and Hell, and the grave, bring us peace and Righ∣teousnesse, and a Crown of glory in the Heavens where thou livest and reignest, in the great con∣gregation
of Saints and Angells, one God world without end. Amen. PSALME 23. A prayer that God would guide, and feed, and support us as a sheapherd doth his flock. THe Lord is my sheapherd: therefore can I lack nothing. 2 He shall feed me in a green pasture: and lead me forth beside the waters of comfort. 3 He shall convert my soul: and bring me forth in the paths of righteousnesse for his names sake. 4 Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evill: for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staffe comfort me. 5 Thou shalt prepare a table before me a∣gainst them that trouble me: thou hast anointed my head with oyle, and my cup shall be full. 6 But thy loving kindnesse and mercy shall follow me all the dayes of mylife: & I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. The Prayer. O Blessed Iesu, thou great Sheapherd and Bishop of our Soules, let thy grace convert us, let thy mercy guide us in the paths of righte∣ousnesse: feed us with thy Word and Sacra∣ments,
refresh us with the comforts of thy Holy Spirit, and in the whole course of our life, which is nothing else but a valley of miseries, and a sha∣dow of death, let thy rod correct us like a Father when we doe amisse, and thy staffe support us in all our troubles and necessities. O let thy loving kindnesse and mercy follow us all our daies, that after this life, we may dwell in thy house for e∣ver, where thou hast prepared a Table, and a full cup of blessing for thy People, and shalt anoynt their heads with the oyle of an eternall gladnesse in the fruition of thy glories, ô blessed Saviour and Redeemer Jesu. Amen. PSALME 24. A Meditation upon the ascension of our Blessed Saviour, and a Prayer for Sanctity, that we may ascend where he is. MORNING PRAYER. THe earth is the Lords, and all that therein is: the compasse of the world, and they that dwell therein. 2 For he hath founded it up∣on the seas: and prepared it upon the flouds.
3 Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord: or who shall rise up in his holy place? 4 Even he that hath clean hands, and a pure heart: and that hath not life up his mind unto vanity, nor sworn to deceive his neighbour. 5 He shall receive the blessing from the Lord: and righteousnesse from the God of his salva∣tion. 6 This is the generation of them that seek him: even of them that seek thy face, O Iacob. 7 Life up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doores: and the King of glory shall come in. 8 Who is the King of glory: it is the Lord strong and mighty, even the Lord mighty in bat∣tell. 9 Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doores: and the King of glory shall come in. 10 Who is the King of glory: even the Lord of hosts, he is the King of glory. The Prayer. O Blessed Iesu, King of glory, Lord of Hosts, and King of all the Creatures, to whom the everlasting doores were opened, that thou mightest enter into thy Kingdome, which thou didst open to all believers, after thou hadst over∣come
the sharpnesse of death: give us clean hands and a pure heart: teach us to follow thy inno∣cency, to imitate thy sanctity, that we may re∣ceive from thee our Lord the eternall rewards and blessings of righteousnesse, and ascend thither whither thou, ô God of our salvation, art gone be∣fore, who livest and raignest with the Father and the Holy Ghost eternall God world without end. Amen. PSALME 25. A penitentiall Psalme, or a prayer for deliverance from Sinne and Punishment. VNto thee, O Lord, will I lift up my soul, My God, I have put my trust in thee: O let me not be confounded, neither let mine ene∣mies triumph over me. 2 For all they that hope in thee, shall not be ashamed: but such as transgresse without a cause, shall be put to confusion. 3 Shew me thy wayes, O Lord: and teach me thy paths. 4 Lead me forth in thy truth, and learn me: for thou art the God of my salvation, in thee hath been my hope all the day long. 5 Call to remembrance, O Lord, thy tender mercies: and thy loving kindnesse which hath been ever of old.
6 Oh remember not the sinnes and offences of my youth: but according to thy mercy think thou upon me (O Lord) for thy goodnesse. 7 Gratious and righteous is the Lord: there∣fore will he teach sinners in the way. 8 Them that be meek shall he guide in iudge∣ment: and such as be gentle, them shall he learn his way. 9 All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth: unto such as keep his covenant and his testimo∣nies. 10 For thy names sake, O Lord: be merci∣full unto my sinne, for it is great. 11 What man is he that feareth the Lord: him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose. 12 His soul shall dwell at ease: and his seed shall inherit the land. 13 The secret of the Lord is among them that fear him: and he will shew them his cove∣nant. 14 Mine eyes are ever looking unto the Lord: for he shall pluck my feet out of the net. 15 Turne thee unto me, and have mercy up∣on mee: for I am desolate and in misery. 16 The sorrowes of my heart are enlarged: O bring thou me out of my troubles. 17 Look upon mine adversity and misery: and forgive me all my sinne.
18 Consider mine enemies how many they are: and they bear a tyrannous hate against me. 19 O keep my soul, and deliver me: let me not be confounded, for I have put my trust in thee. 20 Let perfectnesse and righteous dealing wait upon me: for my hope hath been in thee. 21 Deliver Israel, O God: out of all his troubles. The Prayer. OGratious and Righteous Lord God, who art the guide of the meek, and teachest the humble and gentle in thy way, forgive the sinnes and offences of our youth, and although by them we have deserved thy wrath, and that we be put to confusion, yet be pleased to think upon us for thy goodnesse, and according to thy mercy, that when thou hast forgiven us all our sinne, and ta∣ken away our adversity and all our misery, thou maist keep our soules in perfectnesse and righte∣ous dealing, that at last we may dwell at ease, free from trouble, and safe from all our enemies, even when we shall inherit the land of everlasting est, where thou livest and raignest eternall God world without end. AMEN.
PSALME 26. A Prayer of preparation to the holy Sacrament, and to death. BE thou my judge, O Lord, for I haue wal∣ked innocently: my trust hath been also in the Lord, therefore shall I not fall. 2 Examine me, O Lord, and prove me: try out my reins and my heart. 3 For thy loving kindnesse is ever before mine eyes: and I will walk in thy truth. 4 I haue not dwelt with vain persons: nei∣ther will I haue fellowship with the deceitfull. 5 I haue hated the congregation of the wick∣ed: and will not sit among the ungodly. 6 I will wash my hands in innocency, O Lord: and so will I go to thine altar. 7 That I may shew the voice of thanksgi∣ving: and tell of all thy wondrous works. 8 Lord, I haue loved the habitation of thy house: & the place where thine honour dwelleth. 9 O shut not up my soul with the sinners: nor my life with the bloud-thirsty. 10 In whose hands is wickednesse: and their right hands are full of gifts. 11 But as for me, I will walk innocently? O Lord deliver me, and be mercifull unto me.
12 My foot standeth right: I will praise the Lord in the congregations. The Prayer. O Lord our Iudge, whose loving kindnesse is great, and alwayes before our eyes ma∣nifested in the abundant acts of thy grace and providence, make us to love and frequent all the actions, ministeries, and conveyances of thy gra∣ces to us, especially thy holy Sacraments. O deare God, endue our Soules with faith and cha∣rity, and holy penitence, that our hands & hearts, our Soules and bodies, being washed in innocency and pennance, we may go to thy holy Table, and may in the whole course of our life, walk righte∣ously and in obedience to thee, that in this world hating the congregation of the wicked, and the fellowship of the deceitfull and vaine persons, at last our Soules may not be shutup with sinners, nor our lives with the bloud-thirsty, but we may have our portion in the eternall habitation of thy house, where thine honour dwelleth and reig∣neth world without end. Amen.
PSALME 27. A Prayer that, being freed from our Enemies, we may attend the services of Religion, and serve God in his holy Temple. EVENING PRAYER▪ THe Lord is my light and my salva∣tion, whom then shall I feare? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom then shall I be afraid? 2 When the wicked (even mine enemies and my foes) came upon me to eat up my flesh: they stumbled and fell. 3 Though an host of men were laid against me, yet shall not my heart be afraid: and though there rose up Warre against me, yet will I put my trust in him. 4 One thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will require: even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the dayes of my life, to behold the fair beautie of the Lord, and to visit his Temple. 5 For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his tabernacle: yea, in the secret place of his dwelling shall he hide me, and set me up upon a rock of stone. 6 And now shall he lift up mine head: above mine enemies round about me.
7 Therefore will I offer in his dwelling an oblation with great gladnesse: I will sing and speak praises unto the Lord. 8 Hearken unto my voice, O Lord, when I cry unto thee: have mercy upon me, & hear me. 9 My heart hath talked of thee, seek ye my face: thy face Lord will I seek. 10 O hide not thou thy face from me: nor cast thy servant away in displeasure. 11 Thou hast been my succour: leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my salvation. 12 When my father and my mother forsake me: the Lord taketh me up. 13 Teach me thy way, O Lord: and lead me in the right way, because of mine enemies. 14 Deliver me not over into the will of mine adversaries: for there are false witnesses risen up against me, and such as speak wrong. 15 I should utterly haue fainted: but that I beleeve verily to see the goodnes of the Lord in the land of the living. 16 O tarry thou the Lords leisure: be strong, and he shall comfort thine heart, and put thou thy trust in the Lord. The Prayer. O Lord God, thou hast been our succour, our light and salvation, leave us not, neither
forsake us when we are assaulted by enemies without, and by temptations from within, but lead us in the right way which thou hast appoin∣ted for us to walke in: and when thou hast lift up our heads above our enemies round about us, grant that we may spend our dayes in prayer, and giving prayses to thee, and in all other actions of holy Religion, visiting thy temple with frequent addresses of devotion, and contemplating, and ad∣miring the faire beauty of the Lord, that being secure in such imployments, being hid in thy Ta∣bernacle, and taking Sanctuary within the secret place of thy dwelling, we may at last come unto thy heavenly Ierusalem, where the gates of thy Temple are open day and night, there seeing the goodnesse of the Lord in the land of the living, praising thee to all eternity, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 28. A Prayer for deliverance from death and damnation. VNto thee will I cry, O Lord my strength: think no scorn of me, lest if thou make as though thou hearest not, I become like them that go down into the pit. 2 Heare the voice of my humble petitions
when I cry unto thee: when I hold up my hands toward the mercy-seat of thy holy temple. 3 O pluck me not away (neither destroy me) with the ungodly and wicked doers: which speak friendly to their neighbours, but imagine mischief in their hearts. 4 Reward them according to their deeds: and according to the wickednesse of their owne inventions. 5 Recompense them afte the work of their hands: pay them that they have deserved. 6 For they regard not in their mind the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands: therefore shall be break them down, and no build them up. 7 Praised be the Lord: for he hath heard the voice of my humble petitions. 8 The Lord is my strength and my shield, my heart hath trusted in him, and I am helped: therefore my heart danceth for ioy, and in my song will I praise him. 9 The Lord is my strength: and he is the wholesome defence of his anointed. 10 O save thy people, and give thy blessing unto thine inheritance: feed them, and set them up for ever.
The Prayer▪ O Lord my strength and confidence, my shield and the defence of all that hope in thee, heare the voyce of our humble petitions: We hold up our hands to thy mercy seat, praying thee for pitty, and pardon of our sinnes: reward us not according to our deeds, nor according to the wickednesse of our inventions; for if thou shoul∣dest deale with us according to the operation of our hands, we should be like them that go down into the pit, and our inheritance would be death and destruction. But our heart hath trusted in thee and thou hast helped us; continue thy loving kindnesse to us, and pluck us not away, neither destroy us with the ungodly and wicked doers, but magnifie thy mercies in the salvation of our soules, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 29. In which God is adored, and the mightinesse of his power and voyce is celebrated. BRing unto the Lord (O ye mighty) bring young Rammes unto the Lord: ascribe unto the Lord worship and strength. 2 Give the Lord the honour due unto his name: worship the Lord with holy worship. 3 It is the Lord that commandeth the wa∣ters:
it is the glorious God that maketh the thunder. 4 It is the Lord that ruleth the Sea, the voice of the Lord is mighty in operation: the voice of the Lord is a glorious voice. 5 The voice of the Lord breaketh the Ce∣dar trees: yea, the Lord breaketh the Cedars of Libanus. 6 He made them also to skip like a calfe: Libanus also and Sirion like a young Unicorn. 7 The voice of the Lord divideth the flames of fire, the voice of the Lord shaketh the wilder∣nesse: yea, the Lord shaketh the wildernesse of Cades. 8 The voice of the Lord maketh the Hindes to bring forth young, and discovereth the thick bushes: in his Temple doth every man speak of his honour. 9 The Lord sitteth aboue the water floud: and the Lord remaineth a King for ever. 10 The Lord shall giue strength unto his people: the Lord shall giue his people the bles∣sing of peace. The Prayer. O Most glorious God who makest the thun∣der, thy voyce is mighty in operation, and is a glorious voyce, give us grace that we may
heare thy voyce, and obey it with reverence and humility. Thou that breakest the Cedar trees, let thy word rend our hearts with sorrow and con∣trition for our sinnes, that so we may feel the power and the mercy of thy voyce, and may a∣scribe unto thee worship and strength, worship∣ping thee with a holy worship all the daies of our life, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME. 30. A Prayer for deliverance from sicknesse and death and damnation. MORNING PRAYER. I Will magnify thee, O Lord, for thou hast set me up: and not made my foes to triumph over me. 2 O Lord my God, I cried unto thee: and thou hast healed me. 3 Thou Lord hast brought my soule out of hell: thou hast kept my life from them that go down to the pit. 4 Sing praises unto the Lord (O ye Saints of his:) and give thanks to him for a remembrance of his holinesse. 5 For his wrath endureth but the twinkling
of an eye, and in his pleasure is life: heavinesse may endure for a night, but ioy commeth in the morning. 6 And in my prosperity I said, I shall never be removed: thou Lord of thy goodnesse hadst made my hill so strong. 7 Thou didst turne thy face (from mee:) and I was troubled. 8 Then cried I unto thee, O Lord: and gat me unto my Lord right humbly. 9 What profit is there in my blond: when I go down to the p t? 10 Shall the dust give thankes unto thee: or shall it declare thy truth? 11 Heare, O Lord, and have mercy upon me: Lord be thou my helper. 12 Thou hast turned my heavinesse into ioy: thou hast put off my sackcloth, and girded me with gladnesse. 13 Therefore shall every good man sing of thy praise without ceasing: O my Dod, I will give thankes unto thee for ever. The Prayer. O Lord our God whose mercy is infinite, but thy wrath endureth but the twinkling of an eye, and even in this short time of thy wrath thou remembrest mercy, we cry unto thee, and
addresse our selves unto thee right humbly: O turne not thy face away from us; keep our life from them that goe down into the pit, and pre∣serve our soules from hell; and although thou sometimes send est heavinesse unto us, and trou∣ble upon our loynes, yet let it be but as for a night, let thy mercy dawne upon us, and shine as in a glorious morning; for thou art more pleased in demonstrations of thy mercy, then in shewing thy displeasure. O Lord heale us, and be merci∣full unto us, and save us, turne our heavinesse into joy, and gird us with gladnesse, so shall we give thanks unto thee for ever, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 31. A Prayer for protection against our enemies and all dangers of soule and body, and specially at the houre of death. IN thee, O Lord, have I put my trust: let me never be put to confusion, deliver me in thy righteousnesse. 2 Bow down thine eare to me: make hast i deliver mee. 3 And be thou my strong rock, and the house of defence: that thou maist save me. 4 For thou art my strong rock, and my castle
be thou also my guide, and lead me for thy names sake. 5 Draw me out of the net that they have laid privily for me: for thou art my strength. 6 Into thy hands I commend my spirit: for thou hast redeemed me, O Lord, thou God of truth. 7 I have hated them that hold of superstitious vanities: and my trust hath been in the Lord. 8 I will be glad, and reioyce in thy mercy: for thou hast considered my trouble, and hast known my soul in adversities. 9 Thou hast not shut me up into the hand of the enemie: but hast set my feet in a large room. 10 Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am in trouble: and my eye is consumed for very hea∣vinesse; yea, my soul and my body. 11 For my life is waren old with heavi∣nesse: and my yeares with mourning. 12 My strength faileth me, because of mine iniquity: and my bones are consumed. 13 I became a reproof among all mine ene∣mies, but specially among my neighbours: and they of mine acquaintance were afraid of me, and they that did see me without, conveyed them∣selves from me. 14 I am clean forgotten as a dead man out of mind: I am become like a broken vessell. 15 For I haue heard the blasphemy of the
multitude: and fear is on every side, while they conspire together against me, and take their counsell to take away my life. 16 But my hope hath been in thee, O Lord: I haue said, Thou art my God. 17 My time is in thy hand, deliver me from the hand of mine enemies: and from them that persecute me. 18 Shew thy servant the light of thy coun∣tenance: and save me for thy mercies sake. 19 Let me not be confounded, O Lord, for I haue called upon thee: let the ungodly be put to confusion, and be put to silence in the grave. 20 Let the lying lips be put to silence: which cruelly, disdainfully, and despitefully speak against the righteous. 21 O how plentifull is thy goodnesse, which thou hast laid up for them that feare thee: and that thou hast prepared for them that put their trust in thee, even before the sonnes of men! 22 Thou shalt hide them privily by thine own presence, from the provoking of all men: thou shalt keep them secretly in thy tabernacle from the strife of tongues. 23 Thanks be to the Lord: for he hath shew∣ed me marvellous great kindnes in a strong city. 24 And when I made hast, I said: I am cast out of the sight of shine eyes.
25 Neverthelesse thou heardest the voice of my prayer: when I cried unto thee. 26 O love the Lord all ye his Saints: for the Lord preserveth them that are faithfull, and plenteously rewardeth the proud doer. 27 Be strong, and he shall stablish your heart: all ye that put your trust in the Lord. The Prayer. O God our rock and the house of our defence, let us be glad and rejoyce in thy mercies and salvation. Consider, O Lord, our trouble, and in thy pitty know our soules beset round about with enemies and adversities: Shut us not up in∣to the hands of our enemies, nor our lives within the grave. Our time, O Lord, is in thy hand, to thee pertaine the issues of life and death, and though our strength hath failed us because of our iniquity, and our bones are vexed by reason of our sinnes, yet our hope is in thee, O Lord, we have said, Thou art our God: deliver us from all our enemies bodily and ghostly: turne our sadnesse into joy, and our mourning into gladnesse, least our bodies & soules be consumed for very heavi∣nesse. Let us not be put to confusion nor to silence in the grave, but let us see thy marvellous loving kindnesse, and partake of thy plentifull goodnesse which thou hast laid up for them that feare thee,
even before the sonnes of men. O let us never be cast out of the sight of thine eyes, but deale with us in mercy & loving kindnesse. Into thy hands we commend our Spirits, resigning our selves up to thy providence and disposition, either to life or death, as thou in thy infinite wisedome shalt find most proportionable to thy glory, and our eternall good, beseeching thee to be our guide to death, and to lead us for thy Name sake to ever∣lasting life, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 32. A Confession of sinnes, and a prayer for pardon. EVENING PRAYER. BLessed is he whose unrighteous∣nesse is forgiven: and whose sinne is covered. 2 Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputeth no sinne: and in whose spirit there is no guile. 3 For while I held my tongue: my bones consumed away through my daily complaining. 4 For thy hand is heavy upon me day and night: and my moisture is like the drought in Summer. 5 I will knowledge my sinne unto thee:
and mine unrighteousnesse haue I not hid. 6 I said, I will confesse my sinnes unto the Lord: and so thou forgavest the wickednesse of my sinne. 7 For this shall every one that is godly make his prayer unto thee in a time when thou mayest be found: but in the great water flouds they shall not come nigh him. 8 Thou art a place to hide me in, thou shalt preerve me from trouble: thou shalt compasse me about with songs of deliverance. 9 I will enform thee, and teach thee in the way wherein thou shalt goe: and I will guide thee with mine eye. 10 Be ye not like to Horse and Mule, which haue no understanding whose mouthes must be holden with bi & bridle, lest they fall upon thee. 11 Great plagues remaine for the ungodly: but whoso putteth his trust in the Lord, mercy embraceth him on every side. 12 Be glad, O ye righteous, and rejoyce in the Lord: & be ioyfull all ye that are true of heart. The Prayer. O Lord God, eternall Iudge of men and An∣gells, whose property is alwayes to have mercy and to forgive, have mercy upon us who confesse our sinnes unto thee to be so great and
many, that were not thy mercy infinite, we might despaire of having our unrighteousnesse forgiven, or our sins covered. O deare God pre∣serve us from the great plagues that remaine for the ungodly, and let thy mercy imbrace us on every side. Impute not unto us the sins we have multiplyed against thee, & against all the world; for we have been like to Horse and Mule with∣out understanding, brutish in our passions, sen∣suall in our affections, of unbridled heates, and distemperatures. But thy mercy is as infinite as thy selfe; O let not thy hand be heavy upon us, but forgive the wickednesse of our sinne, and compasse us about with songs of deliverance, then shall we be glad and rejoyce in thee, O Lord, who art become our mighty Saviour and most mercifull Redeemer Iesu. Amen. PSALME. 33. A Prayer to God for the graces of feare, hope, and Religion. REjoyce in the Lord, O ye righteous: for it becometh well the iust to be thankfull. 2 Praise the Lord with harp: sing psalmes unto him with the lute and instrument of ten strings. 3 Sing unto the Lord a new song: sing
praises lustlly (unto him) with a good courage. 4 For the word of the Lord is true: and all his works are faithfull. 5 He loveth righteousnesse and iudgement: the earth is full of the goodnes of the Lord. 6 By the word of the Lord were the heavens made: and all the hosts of them by the breath of his mouth. 7 He gathereth the waters of the Sea to∣gether, as it were upon an heap: and layeth up the deep as in a treasure house. 8 Let all the earth fear the Lord: stand in awe of him all ye that dwell in the world. 9 For he spake, and it was done: he comman∣ded, and it stood fast. 10 The Lord bringeth the counsell of the Heathen to nought: and maketh the devices of the people to be of none effect, and casteth out the counsells of Princes. 11 The counsell of the Lord shall endure for ever: and the thoughts of his heart from genera∣tion to generation. 12 Blessed are the people whose God is the Lord Iehova: and blessed are the folk that he hath chosen to him to be his inheritance. 13 The Lord looked down from Heaven, and beheld all the children of men: from the habita∣tion of his dwelling he considereth all them that
dwell in the earth. 14 He fashioneth all the hearts of them: and understandeth all their works. 15 There is no King that can be saved by the multitude of an host: neither is any mighty man delivered by much strength. 16 An Horse is counted but a vain thing to save a man: neither shall he deliver any man by his great strength. 17 Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him: and upon them that put their trust in his mercy. 18 To deliver their souls from death: and to feed them in the time of dearth. 19 Our soul hath patiently tarried for the Lord: for he is our help and our shield. 20 For our heart shall reioyce in him: because we haue hoped in his holy name. 21 Let thy mercifull kindnesse (O Lord) be upon us: like as we doe put our trust in thee. The Prayer. O Lord God, who lovest righteousnesse and judgement, who fillest the earth with thy goodnesse, and lookest downe from Heaven upon the children of men: Consider us, O Lord, and let thy grace fashion our hearts, and produce in our soules such formes and impresses, as may beare
thy Image, and seem beauteous in thy eyes, that thou maist be our God, and choose us for thine inheritance. Let thy mercy feed us, thy hands de∣liver us from death, and snatch us from the jawes of hell: teach us to feare thee, to put our trust in thy mercy, patiently to tarry for thee, and the re∣velation of thy loving kindnesses, to hope in thy holy Name, and to rejoyce in thy salvation, giving thee thanks and praise with a good courage, with humble and religious affections, all the dayes of our life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME. 34. A Prayer, that we being dispos'd by Holy living, may receive and have a sense and tast of the Divine goodnesse. I Will alway give thanks unto the Lord: his praise shall ever be in my mouth. 2 My soul shall make her boast of the Lord: the humble shall heare thereof and be glad. 3 O praise the Lord with me: and let us mag∣nifie his name together. 4 I sought the Lord, and he heard me: yea, he delivered me out of all my fear. 5 They had an eye unto him, and were ligh∣tened: and their faces were not ashamed. 6 Lo, the poore crieth, and the Lord heareth
him: yea, and saveth him out of all his troubles. 7 The Angell of the Lord tarrieth round a∣bout them that fear him: & delivereth them. 8 O taste and see how gracious the Lord is: blessed is the man that trusteth in him. 9 O fear the Lord ye that be his Saints: for they that fear him lack nothing. 10 The lions doe lack, and suffer hunger: but they which seek the Lord, shall want no man∣ner of thing that is good. 11 Come ye children and hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord. 12 What man is he that lusteth to live, and would fain see good dayes: keep thy tongue from evill, and thy lips that they speak no guile. 13 Eschew evill, and doe good: seek peace, and ensue it. 14 The eyes of the Lord are over the righ∣teous: & his eares are open unto their prayers. 15 The countenance of the Lord is against them that doe evill: to root out the remembrance of them from the earth. 16 The righteous cry, and the Lord heareth them: & delivereth them out of all their troubles. 17 The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite heart: and will save such as be of an humble spirit. 18 Great are the troubles of the righteous▪
but the Lord delivereth him out of all. 19 He keepeth all his bones: so that not one of them is broken. 20 But misfortune shall slay the ungodly: & they that hate the righteous, shall be desolate. 21 The Lord delivereth the souls of his ser∣vants: and all they that put their trust in him shall not be destitute. The Prayer. O Most mercifull and gracious Lord, whose eyes are over the righteous, and thine eares are open unto their prayers, give us, we beseech thee, a contrite heart, and an humble spirit, a feare of thy Name, a watchfulnesse over our tongue, that we speak no guile, a care of our actions that we eschew all evill, and a zeale of thy Name that we may doe good; that being thus prepar'd with holy dispositions, we may be delivered out of all our troubles by the hands of thy mercy, we may be defended against our enemies by the custody of Angells, we may be provided for, so as to want no manner of thing that is good, by the ministra∣tion of thy providence, that so in all the whole course of our life, we may feel the goodnesse of the Lord, seeing and tasting the sweetnesses of thy mercy, which may be to us an antepast of eter∣nity, and as an earnest of the Spirit to consigne us
to the fruition of the glories of thy Kingdome, who livest and reignest ever one God, world without end. Amen. PSALME 35. A Prayer to be delivered from our Enemies. MORNING PRAYER. PLead thou my cause, O Lord, with them that strive with me: and fight thou against them that fight against me. 2 Lay hand upon the shield and buckler: and stand up to help me. 3 Bring, forth the spear, and stop the way against them that persecute me: say unto my soul, I am thy salvation. 4 Let them be confounded and put to shame that seek after my soul: let them be turned back, and brought to confusion, that imagine mischief for me. 5 Let them be as the dust before the winde: and the Angell of the Lord scattering them. 6 Let their way be dark and slippery: and let the Angell of the Lord persecute them. 7 For they have privily laid their net to de∣stroy
me without a cause: yea, even without a cause have they made a pit for my soul. 8 Let a sudden destruction come upon him unawares: and his net that he hath laid privily, catch himselfe: that he may fall into his own mis∣chiefe. 9 And my soul be ioyfull in the Lord: it shall reioyce in his salvation. 10 All my bones shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee, which deliverest the poor from him that is too strong for him: yea, the poore and him that is in misery, from him that spoyleth him? 11 False witnesse did rise up: they laid to my charge things that I knew not. 12 They rewarded me evill for good: to the great discomfort of my soul. 13 Neverthelesse, when they were sick, I put on sackcloth, and humbled my soul with fa∣sting: and my prayer shall turn into mine own bosome, 14 I behaved my selfe as though it had been my friend, or my brother: I went heavily as one that mourneth for his mother. 15 But in mine adversity they reioyced, and gathered them together: yea, the very abjects came together against me unawares, making mowes at me, and ceased not.
16 With the flatterers were busy mockers: which gnashed upon me with their teeth. 17 Lord, how long wilt thou look upon this▪ O deliver my soul from the calamities which they bring on me, and my darling from the lions. 18 S will I give thee thankes in the great congregation: I will praise thee among much people. 19 O let not them that are mine enemies triumph over mee ungodly: neither let them wink with their eyes that hate me without a cause. 20 And why? their communing is not for peace: but they imagine deceitfull words against them that are quiet in the land. 21 They gaped on me with their mouthes: and said, Fie on thee, fie on thee, we saw it with our eyes. 22 This thou hast seen, O Lord: hold not thy tongue then, goe not farre from me, O Lord. 23 Awake and stand up to iudge my quarrells avenge thou my cause, my God, and my Lord. 24 Iudge me, O Lord my God, according to thy righteousnesse: and let them not triumph o∣ver mee. 25 Let them not say in their hearts, There, there, so would we have it: neither let them say, we have devoured him.
26 Let them be put to confusion and shame to∣gether that reioyce at my trouble: let them be cloathed with rebuke and dishonour that boast themselves against me. 27 Let them be glad and reioyce that favour my righteous dealing: yea, let them say alway, Blessed be the Lord, which hath pleasure in the prosperity of his servant. 28 And as for my tongue, it shall be talking of thy righteousnesse: and of thy praise all the day long. The Prayer. O Lord our God, who art the shield of the oppressed, and the Buckler of all that trust in thee, deliverus from all the assaults and in∣tendments of our Enemies against us, who with∣out cause make pits for our Soules: let the Angel of the Lord scatter all their mischievous imagina∣tions, least they triumph over us, and say, we have devoured them: strive thou with them that strive with us, and fight against them that fight a∣gainst us. Preserve us in innocency, that we nei∣ther sinne against thee, nor doe injustice to them, and restore us to our Peace, so shall we talk of thy righteousnesse, and thy praise all the day long, and give thee thankes in the great congregation of Saints, because thou hast pleasure in the prospe∣rity
of thy servants, and hast redeemed them from the hands of their Enimies through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 36. A Prayer desiring the joyes of Heaven, the blessings of Eternity. MY heart sheweth me the wickednesse of the ungodly: that there is no feare of God before his eyes. 2 For he flattereth himselfe in his own sight: untill his abominable sinne be found out. 3 The words of his mouth are unrighteous, and full of deceit: he hath left off to behave him∣selfe wisely, and to do good. 4 He imagineth mischief upon his bed, and hath set himself in no good way: neither doth he abhorre any thing that is evill. 5 Thy mercy (O Lord) reacheth unto the heavens: and thy faithfulnesse unto the clouds. 6 Thy righteousnesse standeth like the strong mountains: thy iudgements are like the great deep. 7 Thou Lord shalt save both man and beast, how excellent is thy mercy, O God: and the chil∣dren of men shall put their trust under the sha∣dow of thy wings.
8 They shall be satisfied with the plenteous∣nes of thy house: and thou shalt give them drink of thy pleasures as out of the river. 9 For with thee is the well of life: and in thy light shall we see light. 10 O continue forth thy loving kindnesse unto them that know thee: and thy righteousnesse unto them that are true of heart. 11 O let not the foot of pride come against me: and let not the hand of the ungodly cast me down. 12 There are they fallen (all) that work wickednesse: they are cast down and shall not be able to stand. The Prayer. O God whose mercy reacheth unto the Hea∣vens and thy righteousnesse unto the clouds, teach us to abhorre every thing that is e∣vill, and to set our selves in every good way, that thy feare being alwaies before our eyes, and our trust being under the shadow of thy wings, thou maist continue forth thy loving kindnesse to us, all the daies of our life, that at last we may be satis∣fied with the plenteousnesse of thy house, and may drinke down rivers of pleasures, deriving from thee the eternall fountain and well of life, and in the light of thy Countenance, may see e∣verlasting
light, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 37. A Prayer that we may trust and delight in God, and that our lot may be amongst the godly, and not in the seeming prosperity of the wicked. EVENING PRAYER. FRet not thy selfe because of the un∣godly: neither be thou envious a∣gainst the evill doers. 2 For they shall soon be cut down like the grasse: and be withered even as the green hearb. 3 Put thou thy trust in the Lord, and be do∣ing good: dwell in the land, and verily thou shalt be fed. 4 Delight thou in the Lord: and he shall give thee thy hearts desire. 5 Commit thy way unto the Lord, and put thy trust in him: and he shall bring it to passe. 6 He shall make thy righteousnesse as cleare as the light: and thy iust dealing as the noon day. 7 Hold thee still in the Lord, and abide pa∣tiently
upon him: but grieve not thy selfe at him whose way doth prosper, against the man that doth after evill counsels. 8 Leave off from wrath, and let go displea∣sure: fret not thy selfe, else shalt thou be moved to doe evill. 9 Wicked doers shall be rooted out: and they that patiently abide the Lord, those shall inherit the land. 10 Yet a little while and the ungodly shall be clean gone: thou shalt look after his place, and he shall be away. 11 But the meek spirited shall possesse the earth: and shall be refreshed in the multitude of peace. 12 The ungodly seeketh counsel against the iust: and gnasheth upon him with his teeth. 13 The Lord shall laugh him to scorn: for he hath seen that his day is comming. 14 The ungodly have drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow: to cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such as be of a right con∣versation. 15 Their sword shall go through their own heart: and their bow shall be broken. 16 A small thing that the righteous hath: is better then great riches of the ungodly. 17 For the armes of the ungodly shall be
broken: and the Lord upholdeth the righteous. 18 The Lord knoweth the daies of the god∣ly: and their inheritance shall endure for ever. 19 They shall not be consounded in the pe∣rilous time: and in the daies of dearth they shall have enough. 20 As for the ungodly, they shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall consume as the fat if lambes: yea, even as the smoake shall they con∣sume away. 21 The ungodly borroweth, and payeth not again: but the righteous is mercifull and liberall. 22 Such as be blessed of God shall possesse the land: and they that be cursed of him shall be oted out. 23. The Lord ordereth a good mans going: and maketh his way acceptable to himselfe. 24 Though he fall, he shall not be cast away: for the Lord upoldeth him with his hand. 25 I have been young, and now am old: and yet saw I never the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread. 26 The righteous is ever mercifull, and lend∣eth: and his seed is blessed. 27 Flee from evill, and doe the thing that is good: and dwell for evermore. 28 For the Lord loveth the thing that is right: he forsaketh not his that he godly, but they are preserved for ever.
29 The righteous shall be punished: as for the seed of the ungodly, it shall be rooted out. 30 The righteous shall inherit the land: and dwell therein for ever. 31 The mouth of the righteous is exercised in wisdome: and his tongue will be talking of iudgement. 32 The law of his God is in his heart: and his goings shall not slide. 33 The ungodly seeth the righteous: and seeketh occasion to slay him. 34 The Lord will not leave him in his hand: nor condemne him when he is iudged. 35 Hope thou in the Lord, and keep his way, and he shall promote thee, that thou shalt posesse the land: when the ungodly shall perish, thou shalt see it. 36 I my selfe have seen the ungodly in great power: and flourishing like a green bay-tree. 37 And I went by, and lo he was gone: I sought him, but his place could no where be found. 38 Keep innocencie, and take heed unto the thing that is right: for that shall bring a man peace at the last. 39 As for the transgressours, they shall perish together: and the end of the ungodly is, They shall be rooted out at the last.
40 But the salvation of the righteous cometh of the Lord: which is also their strength in the time of trouble. 41 And the Lord shall stand by them and save them: he shall deliver them from the ungod∣ly, and shall save them, because they put their trust in him. The Prayer. O God Almighty, who never forsakest the godly, but preservest them for ever, let thy Law be in our hearts, fixed and grounded, that we may keep innocency, and take heed to the thing that is right: order our goings, and make thy way acceptable to thy selfe, that we delighting in thee alone, committing our wayes wholly to thy pro∣vidence, and putting our trust in thy mercies, we may not be confounded in the perilous times, but may be refreshed in the multitude of peace, ha∣ving peace all our dayes, and peace at the last, in the inheritance of Saints, who have refused the guilded glories of this world, which is the lot of the wicked and ungodly people, and are satisfied with the expectation of true joyes, and the re∣wards of innocency, through the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME 38. A Prayer for remission of sinnes. MORNING PRAYER. PUt me not to rebuke (O Lord▪) in thine anger: neither chasten me in thine heavy displeasure. 2 For thine arrowes stick fast in me: and thy hand presseth mesore. 3 There is no health in my flesh, because of thy displeasure: neither is there any rest in my bones, by reason of my sinne. 4 For my wickednesses are gone over my head: and are like a sore burden too heavy for me to bear. 5 My wounds stink and are corrupt: through my foolishnesse. 6 I am brought into so great trouble and mi∣sery: that I go mourning all the day long. 7 For my loyns are filled with a sore disease: and there is no whole part in my body. 8 I am feeble and sore smitten: I haue roared for the very disquietnesse of my heart. 9 Lord, thou knowest all my desire: and my groning is not hid from thee. 10 My heart panteth, my strength hath sai∣led me: and the sight of min eyes is gone from me.
11 My lovers and my neighbours did stand looking upon my trouble: and my kinsmen stood afarre off. 12 They also that sought after my life, laid snares for me: and they that went about to do me evill, talked of wickednesse, and imagined deceit all the day long. 13 As for me, I was like a deafe man, and heard not: and as one that is dumbe, which doth nt open his mouth. 14 I became even as a man that heareth not: and in whose mouth are no reproofs. 15 For in thee, O Lord, have I put my trust: thou shalt answer for me, O Lord my God. 16 I have required that they (even mine enemies) should not triumph over me: for when my foot slipt, they reioyced greatly a∣gainst me. 17 And I truly am set in the plague: and my heavinesse is ever in my sight. 18 For I will confesse my wickednesse: and be sory for my sinne. 19 But mine enemies live and are mighty: and they that hate me wrongfully, are many in number. 20 They also that reward evill for good, are against me: because I follow the thing that good is.
21 Forsake me not, O Lord my God: be not thou farre from me. 22 Hast thee to help me: O Lord God my salvation. The Prayer. O Lord who knowest all our desires, and from whom our groning is not hid, we confesse before thee our many wickednesses, and are truly sorry for our sinnes; our wickednesses are gone over our head, and are a sore burden too heavy for us to beare, our enemy the Devill is malitious and mighty, our weakenesses many, our temptations strong, our consciences do busily accuse us. Where shall we appeare in the day of judgment? How shall we stand upright in the eternall scrutiny? Our trust is in thy merits, O blessed Iesu, thou at our Iudge and our Advocate, thou shalt answer for us, O Lord our God. Put us not to rebuke, O Lord, in thine anger, for it is insupportable, nei∣ther let thy whole displeasure arise, for that is vast and mountainous as our sinnes, and will breake us in pieces. O let not the arrowes of thy vengeance stick fast in us, for our sinnes are wounds enough, and make us restlesse and miserable. Touch our sores gently, and let not thy hands presse us, unlesse to drive forth our corruption, then shall we fol∣low the thing that good is, and rejoyce greatly in
thy mercies, O Lord God of our salvation, who hast redeemed us, and saved us, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 39. A meditation of the shortnesse and vanity of our life, and a prayer preparatory to death. I Said, I will take heed to my wayes: that I offend not in my tongue. 2 I will keep my mouth as it were with a bridle: while the ungodly is in my sight. 3 I held my tongue, and spake nothing: I kept silence yea, even from good words, but it was pain and grief to me. 4 My heart was hot within me, and while I was thus musing, the fire kindled: and at the last I spake with my tongue. 5 Lord let me know mine end, and the num∣ber of my dayes: that I may be certified how long I have to liue. 6 Behold, thou hast made my dayes as it were a span long: and mine age is even as no∣thing in respect of thee, and verily every man li∣ving is altogether vanitie. 7 For man walketh in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himselfe in vain: he heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them.
8 And now Lord, what is my hope: truly my hope is even in thee. 9 Deliver me from all mine offences: and make me not a rebuke unto the foolish. 10 I became dumbe, and opened not my mouth: for it was thy doing. 11 Take thy plague away from me: I am even consumed by the means of thy heavy hand. 12 When thou with rebukes dost chasten man for sinne, thou makest his beauty to consume away like as it were a moth fretting a garment: every man therefore is but vanitie. 13 Heare my prayer, O Lord, and with thine eares consider my calling: hold not thy peace at my teares. 14 For I am a stranger with thee, and a so∣journer: as all my fathers were. 15 O spare me a little, that I may recover my strength: before I go hence, and he no more seene. The Prayer. O Eternall God, who art without beginning or end of dayes, thou hast given us a short portion of time in the generations of this world; our condition is vaine, unsatisfying and full of dis∣quiet, and we have no hope but in thee, O Lord. O teach us to number our dayes, to remember,
and to know our end, that so we may never sinne against thee; and grant that we may live as al∣wayes dying, being of mortified soules & bodies, of bridled tongues and affections, and that instead of heaping up riches, we may strive for a treasure of good workes, laying up in store against the time to come, that having recovered out strength, lost by the commission of sinnes, when we go hence, and are no more seen, we ay have a residence in those mansions which are prepared for the Saints, by our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen. PSALME 40. A Thanks giving to God for his deliverances, and a prayer for redemption from sinnes, and defence against our Enemies. I Waited patiently for the Lord: and he encli∣ned unto me, and heard my calling. 2 He brought me also out of the horrible pit, out of the mire and clay: and set my feet upon the rock, and ordered my goings. 3 And he hath put a new song in my mouth: even a thanksgiving unto our God. 4 Many shall see it, and feare: and shall put their trust in the Lord. 5 Blessed is the man that hath set his hope in the Lord: and turned not unto the proud, and
to such as go about with lies. 6 O Lord my God, great are thy wondrous works which thou hast done: like as be also thy thoughts which are to us-ward, and yet there is no man that ordereth them unto thee. 7 If I would declare them and speak of them: they should be moe then I am able to expresse. 8 Sacrifice and meat-offering thou wouldest not haue: but mine eares hast thou opened. 9 Burnt-offerings and sacrifice for sinne hast thou not required: then said I, Lo, I come. 10 In the volume of the book it is written of me, that I should fulfill thy will, O my God: I am content to doe it, yea, thy Law is within my heart. 11 I have declared thy righteousnesse in the great congregation: lo, I will not refrain my lips, O Lord, and that thou knowest. 12 I haue not hid thy righteousnesse within my heart: my talking hath been of thy truth, and of thy salvation. 13 I haue not kept back thy loving mercy and truth: from the great congregation. 14 Withdraw not thou thy mercy from me, O Lord: let thy loving kindnesse and thy truth alway preserve me. 15 For innumerable troubles are come a∣bout me, my sinnes haue taken such hold upon me,
that I am not able to look up: yea, they are moe in number then the haires of mine head, and my heart hath failed me. 16 O Lord, let it be thy pleasure to deliver me: make hast (O Lord) to help me. 17 Let them be ashamed and confounded to∣gether that seek after my soul to destroy it: let them be driven backward and put to rebuke that wish me evill. 18 Let them be desolate and rewarded with shame, that say unto me: Fie upon thee, fie upon thee. 19 Let all those that seek thee, be ioyfull and glad in thee: and let such as love thy salvation, say alway▪ The Lord be praised. 20 As for me, I am poor and needy: but the Lord careth for me. 21 Thou art my helper and redeemer: make no long tarrying, O my God. The Prayer. O Lord our God whose works are wondrous, and thy thoughts which are to us-ward full of mercy and admirable in wisdome; we adore and worship thy infinite perfections, and thy pro∣vidence in the disposing of all thy creatures, and the effects of all causes, which in an infinite va∣riety thou orderest to thy glory, and the good of
all faithfull people. Thou hast dealt with us in mercy; and although our sinnes are so multiplied that they are moe in number then the haires of our head, yet thou hast not suffered us to fall into the horrible pit of eternall misery and destructi∣on, but hast set our feet upon the rock Christ Jesus, and by his graces and holy Lawes hast or∣dered our goings. Let it be thy pleasure still to deliver us, for we are not able of our selves to look up, and our enemies still seek after our soules to destroy us. Make no long tarrying,  God, shew thy selfe our helper and redeemer, so shall we talke of thy truth and of thy salvation, in the assemblies of thy servants in this life, hoping that we shall hereafter declare thy righteous∣nesse in the great congregation of Saints and An∣gels, singing eternall praises to God the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost, Amen.
PSALME. 41. A Prayer for the grace of charity, for pardon of sinnes, and for deliverance from false friends and Traitors. EVENING PRAYER. BLessed is he that considereth the poore (and needy:) the Lord shall deliver him in the time of trouble. 2 The Lord preserve him and keep him alive, that he may be blessed upon earth: and deliver not thou him into the will of his enemies. 3 The Lord comfort him when he lieth sick upon his bed: make thou all his bed in his sick∣nesse. 4 I said, Lord, be mercifull unto me: heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee. 5 Mine enemies speak evill of me: when shall he dye, and his name perish? 6 And if he come to see me, he speaketh vani∣ty: and his heart conceiveth falshood within him∣selfe, and when he commeth forth, he telleth it. 7 All mine enemies whisper together against me: even against me doe they imagine this evil. 8 Let the sentence of guiltinesse proceed a∣gainst him: and now that he lieth, let him rise up no more.
9 Yea, even mine own familiar friend whom I trusted: which did also eat of my bread, hath laid great wait for me. 10 But be thou mercifull unto me, O Lord: raise thou me up again, and I shall reward them. 11 By this I know thou favourest me: that mine enemy doth not triumph against me. 12 And when I am in my health, thou up∣holdest me: and shalt set me before thy face for ever. 13 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel: world without end. Amen. The Prayer. O Blessed Jesu, Saviour of the World, be mercifull unto us, and heale our sinnes, for we have sinned against thee, and are no more worthy to be called thy children, but yet make us thy servants, and give us testimony that we are translated from death to life, by charity and love to all our Brethren. O make our bowels yearne with pitty and compassion over the neces∣sities of the poor and needy, and give us grace and power to help them and relieve their mise∣ries, that we being mercifull as our Heavenly Father is, may receive such blessings and assistan∣ces as thou hast provided for the charitable, de∣liverance from our open enemies, safety from
private treachery and conspiracies, comfort in our sicknesses, health of body and pardon of our sinnes, through thy mercies and blessed charity, ô most mercifull Saviour and Redeemer Iesu. A∣men. PSALME. 42. A Prayer for comfort in spirituall desertion, and drynesse of affection, and that we may long and sigh after God. LIke as the hart desireth the water brooks: so longeth my soul after thee, O God. 2 My soul is a thirst for God, yea, even for the living God: when shall I come to appeare be∣fore the presence of God? 3 My teares have been my meat day and night: while they daily say unto me. Where is now thy God? 4 Now when I think thereupon, I poure out my heart by my selfe: for I went with the multitude, and brought them forth into the hense of God. 5 In the voice of praise and thanksgiving: a∣mong such as keep holy day. 6 Why art thou so full of heavinesse (O my soul:) and why art thou so disquieted within me? 7 Put thy trust in God: for I will yet give
him thanks for the help of his countenance. 8 My God, my soul is vexed within me: therefore will I remember thee concerning the land of Iordan, and the little hill of Hermon. 9 One deep calleth another, because of the noyse of the water-pipes, all thy waves and stormes are gone over me. 10 The Lord hath granted his loving kind∣nesse on the day time: and in the night season did I sing of him, and made my prayer unto the God of my life. 11 I will say unto the God of my strength, Why hast thou forgotten me: why go I thus hea∣vily, while the enemy oppresseth me? 12 My bones are smitten asunder as with a sword: while mine enemies (that trouble me) cast me in the teeth. 13 Namely, while they say daily unto mee: Where is now thy God? 14 Why art thou so vexed, O my soule: and why art thou so disquieted within me? 15 O put thy trust in God: for I will yet thank him which is the help of my countenance, and my God. The Prayer. O Eternall and living God, thou art the help of our countenance and our God, thou art
the thing that we long for, and our hearts are vexed within us, and disquieted when we feel not the comforts of thy spirit, and those actuall exultations, and that spirituall gust, which thou doest often give to thy people, as earnests of a glo∣rious immortality. O Lord pitty our infirmities, and give us earnest longings for the fruition of thee our God in the actions of holy Religion: Grant to us vivacity of spirit, unweariednesse in devotion, delight and complacency in spirituall exercises, that when our soules are vexed with temptations and sadnesses, we may remember thee concerning the land of promise, and be comforted and incouraged in our duties, by the expectation of those glories which thou hast laid up for them that love the appearing of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen. PSALME 43. A Prayer for cheerfulnesse of spirit in our devotions. GIve sentence with me, O God, and defend my cause against the ungodly people: O de∣liver me from the deceitfull and wicked man. 2 For thou art the God of my strength, why hast thou put me from thee: and why go I so hea∣vily, while the enemy oppresseth me?
3 O send out thy light and thy truth, that they may lead me: and bring me unto thy holy hill, and to thy dwelling. 4 And that I may goe unto the altar of God, even unto the God of my ioy and gladnesse: and upon the harp will I give thanks unto thee, O God my God. 5 Why art thou so heavy, O my soul: and why art thou so disquieted within me? 6 O put thy trust in God: for I will yet give him thankes, which is the help of my counte∣nance, and my God. The Prayer. O God our defender and deliverer, thou art the God of our strength, and our ghostly confidence: let the light of thy countenance pro∣duce the beams of spirituall joy in our soules, and let thy truth lead us in the way of thy salvation, that when we goe unto thy dwelling places where thou manifestest thy presence, we may approach unto thee with joy and gladnesse, re∣joycing in nothing more then in doing thee ser∣viee, and singing praises to thy name for the help of thy countenance, which thou givest us in our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ, Amen.
PSALME 44. A Prayer in time of Warre. MORNING PRAYER. WE haue heard with our eares, O God, our fathers haue told us: what thou hast done in their time of old. 2 How thou hast driven out the Heathen with thy hand, and planted them in: how thou hast destroyed the Nations, and cast them out. 3 For they gat not the Land in possession through their own sword: neither was it their own arm that helped them. 4 But thy right hand and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance: because thou hadst a favour unto tham. 5 Thou art my King (O God:) send help unto Iacob. 6 Through thee will we overthrow our ene∣mies: and in thy name will we tread them un∣der that rise up against us. 7 For I will not trust in my bow: it is not my sword that shall help me. 8 But it is thou that savest us from our ene∣mies: & puttest them to confusion that hate us.
9 We make our boast of God all day long: and will praise thy name for ever. 10 But now thou art farre off, and puttest us to confusion: and goest not forth with our Armies. 11 Thou makest us to turn our backs upon our enemies: so that they which hate us spoil our goods. 12 Thou lettest us to be eaten up like sheep: and hast scattered us among the Heathen. 13 Thou sellest thy people for nought: and takest no money for them. 14 Thou makest us to be rebuked of our neighbours: to be laughed to scorn, and had in derision of them that are round about us. 15 Thou makest us to be a by-word among the heathen: and that the people shake their heads at us. 16 My confusion is daily before me: and the shame of my face hath covered me. 17 For the voice of the slanderer aud blas∣phemer: for the enemy and avenger. 18 And though all this be come upon us, yet doe we not forget thee: nor behave our selves frowardly in thy covenant. 19 Our heart is not turned back: neither our steps gone out of thy way. 20 No not when thou hast smitten us into
the place of Dragons: and covered us with the shadow of death. 21 If we have forgotten the name of our God, and holden up our hands to any strange god: shall not God search it out? for he knoweth the very secrets of the heart. 22 For thy sake also are we killed all the day long: and are counted as sheep appointed to be slain. 23 Up Lord, why sleepest thou: awake, and be not absent from us for ever. 24 Wherefore hidest thou thy face: and for∣gettest our misery and trouble? 25 For our soul is brought low even unto the dust: our belly cleaveth unto the ground. 26 Arise and help us: and deliver us for thy mercies sake. The Prayer. OLord God of hosts, who for our sinnes hast suffered the sword to take vengeance upon us, and to plead thy cause againstus, O hide not thy face from us, and forget not our misery and trouble. We are killed all day long, and are ac∣counted as sheep appointed to be slaine, we are covered with the shadow of death', and they which hate us, spoil our goods. Deale with us in pitty, and as thou hast done to our Fathers of old
time, when they called upon thee in their trou∣ble, so deale with us: thou overthrewest their enemies, and didst tread them under that arose up against them. Arise, and helpe us, and deliver us also for thy mercy sake: our owne sword cannot helpe us, but let thy right hand, and thine arme, and the light of thy countenance worke delive∣rance and salvation for us. Goe forth with our Armies, O thou God of Hosts, doe thou fight our Battells, that we may not turne our backs upon our enemies, but Crowne us with Victory and Peace, that we may make our boast of thee all day long, and praise thy Name for ever, who art holy, and just, and mercifull, the great God of Battells and recompences. From thee let mercy now & ever proceed, and to thy Name let honour be for ever ascribed of all the Hosts of Heaven and Earth, world without end. Amen. PSALME. 45. A Prayer for the conversion of the Heathen, and prosperity of the Church. MY heart is enditing of a good matter: I speak of the things which I haue made unto the King. 2 My tongue is the pen: of a ready writer. 3 Thou art fairer then the children of men:
full of grace are thy lips, because God hath bles∣sed thee for ever. 4 Gird thee with thy sword upon thy thigh, O thou most mighty: according to thy worship and renown. 5 Good luck haue thou with thine honour: ride on, because of the word of truth, of meeknesse and righteousnesse, and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things. 6 Thy arrows are very sharp, and the peo∣ple shall be subdued unto thee: even in the mid∣dest among the Kings enemies. 7 Thy seat (O God) endureth for ever: the scepter of thy Kingdome is a right scepter. 8 Thou hast loved righteousnesse, and hated iniquity: wherefore God (even thy God) hath anointed thee with the oyl of gladnesse aboue thy fellows. 9 All thy garments smell of myrrhe, aloes, and cassia: out of the ivorie palaces, where by they haue made thee glad. 10 Kings daughters were among thy ho∣nourable women: upon thy right hand did stand the Queen in a vesture of gold (wrought about with divers colours.) 11 Hearken (O daughter) and consider, encline thine eare: forget also thine own people, and thy fathers house.
12 So shall the King haue pleasure in thy beauty; for he is thy Lord (God) and worship thou him. 13 And the daughter of Tyre shall be there with a gift: like as the rich also among the peo∣ple shall make their supplication before thee. 14 The Kings daughter is all glorious within: her clothing is of wrought gold. 15 She shall be brought unto the King in raiment of needle-works the virgins that be her fellowes shall bear her company, and shall be brought unto thee. 16 With joy and gladnesse shall they be brought: and shall enter into the Kings Palace. 17 In stead of thy fathers thou shalt haue children: whom thou mayest make Princes in all Lands. 18 I will remember thy name from one ge∣neration unto another: therefore shall the peo∣ple giue thanks unto thee world without end. The Prayer. O Blessed Iesu, Prince of the Catholike Church, thou art fairer then the children of men, thy lips are full of grace, thine Armies mighty, thy head is Crowned with Majesty, and clothed with worship and renowne: have mercy upon thy holy Church, blesse her for ever with
righteousnesse, and let the oyle of gladnesse re∣fresh her amidst the multitude of her sorrows and afflictions: And because she is the daughter of a King, and thou takest pleasure in her beauty, let her not alwayes be clothed in mourning gar∣ments, but let her be decked with exteriour Or∣naments and secular advantages, such as may tru∣ly promote the interests of holy Religion. Let Kings and Queenes be nursing Fathers, and nur∣sing Mothers unto her, and so let the sound of thy Gospell goe into all the Earth, that her children may be Princes in all Lands, and Ministers of thy Kingdome, advancing thy honour, and furthering the salvation of all men, for whom thou did'st give thy precious bloud, that all people may wor∣ship thee, and give thee thankes for ever, who together with the Father and the holy Ghost, livest and reignest one God world without end. Amen. PSALME 46. A Prayer for protection, and for confidence in God in times of publike distractions, and for the peace of Christendome. GOd is our hope and strength: a very pre∣sent help in trouble. 2 Therefore will we not fear though the
earth b moved: and though the hills be carried into the midst of the Sea. 3 Though the waters thereof rage & swell: and though the mountains shake at the tempest of the same. 4 The rivers of the floud thereof shall make glad the City of God: the holy place of the taber∣nacle of the most highest. 5 God is in the midst of her, therefore shall she not be removed: God shall help her, and that right early. 6 The Heathen make much adoe, and the Kingdomes are moved: but God hath shewed his voice, and the earth shall melt away. 7 The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Iacob is our refuge. 8 O come hither, and behold the works of the Lord: what destruction he hath brought upon the earth. 9 He maketh Warres to cease in all the World: he breaketh the bow, and knappeth the spear in sunder, and burneth the Chariots in the fire. 10 Be still then, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the Heathen, and I will be exalted in the earth. 11 The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Iacob is our refuge.
The Prayer. O most mercifull Saviour Iesu, Prince of Peace, at whose birth all the Kingdoms of the World were in Peace and tranquillity, be thou in the midst of us for our refuge and present help in times of trouble and publike calamities, when the Kingdome is moved, and the hearts of men shake at the tempest of the same. Deare God, unite all the parts of Christendom with the union of Faith & Charity, and the fruits of them, a blessed & universall Peace. Break the bow of the mighty, knappe the spear of the Warriour in sunder, and burn the Chariots in the fire, tha Warres may cease in all the World, and we all may feel the promised blessing of the Gospell, that our Swords may be converted into plow∣shares, and our Speares into pruning hooks, that thy Name and thy Kingdome may be exalted a∣mong the heathen, and in all the Nations of the earth, who livest and reignest over all, in the uni∣ty of the blessed Trinity, God eternall, world without end. Amen.
PSALME 47. A Prayer for the exaltation of Christs King∣dome, and that all the Princes of the World may joyntly adore Iesus reigning in the Heavens. EVENING PRAYER. O Clap your hands together (all ye people:) O sing unto God with the voice of melody. 2 For the Lord is high, and to be feared: he is the great King upon all the earth. 3 He shall subdue the people under us: and the nations under our feet. 4 He shall choose out an heritage for us: e∣ven the worship of Iacob whom he loved. 5 God is gone up with a merrie noise: and the Lord with the sound of the trump. 6 O sing praises, sing praises unto (our) God: O sing praises, sing praises unto our King. 7 For God is the King of all the earth: sing ye praises with understanding. 8 God reigneth over the heathen: God sit∣teth upon his holy seat. 9 The Princes of the people are ioyned unto the people of the God of Abraham: for God
(which is very high exalted) doth defend the earth as it were with a shield. The Prayer. O Lord God King of Heaven, who raignest a great King in all the Earth; thou art high above all creatures, and art to be feared in all the Kingdoms of the earth, let the seed of thy Gospell be disseminated in all the corners of the habita∣ble World: let thy grace break downe all the strong holds of sinne and Satan, subduing all peo∣ple under thee, and the Nations under thy feet, that the Princes of the Nations, that have not known thy name, may be joyned to thy people, the people of the God of Abraham, becomming one sheepfold under one sheapheard, Iesus Christ our blessed Lord, our Saviour and Redeemer. Amen. PSALME 48. A Prayer for the prosperity of the Church. GReat is the Lord, and highly to be praised: in the City of our God, even upon his holy hill. 2 The hill of Sion is a fair place, and the ioy of the whole earth: upon the north side lieth the City of the great King, God is well known
in her palaces as a sure refuge. 3 For lo, the Kings of the earth are gathered, and gone by together. 4 They marbelled to see such things: they were astonied and suddenly cast downe. 5 Feare came there upon them, and sorrow: as upon a woman in her travail. 6 Thou shalt break the ships of the sea: through the east wind. 7 Like as we have heard, so have we seen in the City of the Lord of hosts, in the City of our God: God upholdeth the same for ever. 8 We wait for thy loving kindnesse (O God:) in the midst of thy temple. 9 O God, according unto thy name, so is thy praise unto the worlds end: thy right hand is full of righteousnesse. 10 Let the mount Sion reioyce, and the daughters of Iuda be glad: because of thy iudge∣ments. 11 Walk about Sion, and go round about her: and tell the towers thereof. 12 Mark well her bulwarks, set up her hou∣ses: that ye may tell them▪ that come after. 13 For this God is our God for ever and e∣ver: he shall be our guide unto death.
The Prayer. O Great God, who art highly to be praised, who hast manifested thy power and thy mercy in the constitution, propagation, and de∣fence of thy Holy Church, by the miraculous as∣sistances and effects of thy Holy Spirit, insomuch that the Kings of the earth marvailed to see such things, and were astonied and suddenly cast down, acknowledging the powers of thy King∣dome, and submitting to thy lawes with faith and obedience: be pleased, according to thy gra∣cious promise, to uphold the same for ever, let not the gates of Hell prevaile against thy Church, be thou known in her palaces as a sure refuge, make her the joy of the whole earth, and let her be glad and rejoyce because of thy judgements, so shall we praise thee in the midst of thy Tem∣ple, wayting for thy loving kindnesse, that accor∣ding as thy name is, so may thy praise be, infinite and eternall, world without end. Amen. PSALME 49. A Prayer that we may despise perishing riches, and put our trust in God only. O Heare ye this, all ye people: ponder it with your eares all ye that dwell in the world.
2 High and low, rich and poore: one with a∣nother. 3 My mouth shall speak of wisdome: and my heart shall muse of understanding. 4 I will encline mine eare to the parable: and shew my dark speech upon the harp. 5 Wherefore should I feare in the dayes of wickednesse: and when the wickednesse of my heels compasse me round about? 6 There be some that put their trust in their goods: and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches. 7 But no man may deliver his brother: nor make an agreement to God for him. 8 For it cost more to redeem their souls: so that he must let that alone for ever. 9 Yea, though he live long: and see not the grave. 10 For he seeth that wise men also dye, and perish together: as well as the ignorant and foo∣lish, and leave their riches for other. 11 And yet they think that their houses shall continue for ever: and that their dwelling places shall endure from one generation to another, and call the lands after their own names. 12 Neverthelesse, man will not abide in ho∣nour: seeing he may be compared unto the beasts that perish, this is the way of them.
13 This is their foolishnesse: and their po∣sterity praise their saying. 14 They lie in the hell like sheep, death gnaw∣eth upon them, and the righteous shall have do∣mination over them in the morning: their beau∣ty shall consume in the sepulchre out of their dwelling. 15 But God hath delivered my soul from the place of hell: for he shall receive me. 16 Be not thou afraid though one be made rich: or if the glory of his house be increased. 17 For he shall carry nothing away with him when he dieth: neither shall his pomp follow him. 18 For while he lived, he counted himself an happy man: and so long as thou dost well unto thy selfe, men will speak good of thee. 19 He shall follow the generation of his fa∣thers: and shall never see light. 20 Man being in honour hath no understan∣ding: but is compared unto the beasts that pe∣rish. The Prayer. O Blessed Iesu, thou only Redeemer of soules, who by thy death and passion hast delive∣red us from the place of Hell, give us grace to put our whole trust in thee, and in the riches of
thy mercy and loving kindnesse, alwaies remem∣bring our end, the vanity and shortnesse of our lives, the certainty of our departure: Teach us to despise the world and worldly things, and to lay our treasure up in heaven by charity and actions of religion, that while we live here, we may have our conversation in heaven, by love, by hope, and by desires, that when our beauty shall consume in the sepulchre out of our earthly dwellings, we may be received into everlasting habitations, alwayes to enjoy thee, who livest and reignest eternall God world without end. Amen. PSALME 50. A Prayer that we may lead a Holy life, and find mercy in the day of judgement. MORNING PRAYER. THe Lord, even the most mighty God hath spoken: and called the world, from the rising up of the sunne, unto the going down thereof. 2 Out of Sion hath God appea∣red: in perfect beauty. 3 Our God shall come, and shall not keep si∣lence: there shall goe before him a consuming fire,
and a mighty tempest shall be stirred up round about him. 4 He shall call the heaven from above: and the earth, that he may iudge his people. 5 Gather my Saints together unto me: those that haue made a covenant with me, with sacrifice. 6 And the heavens shall declare his righte∣ousnesse: for God is iudge himselfe. 7 Heare, O my people, and I will speak: I myself will testifie against thee, O Israel, for I am God, even thy God. 8 I will not reprove thee because of thy sa∣crifices, or for thy burnt-offerings: because they were not alway before me. 9 I will take no bullock out of thine house: nor he-goats out of thy folds. 10 For all the beasts of the forrest are mine: and so are the cattells upon a thousand hills. 11 I know all the fowles upon the moun∣tains: and the wilde beasts of the field are in my sight. 12 If I be hungry I will not tell thee: for the whole world is mine, and all that is therein. 13 Thinkest thou that I will eat bulls flesh: and drink the bloud of goats? 14 Offer unto God thanksgiving: and pay thy vows unto the most Highest.
15 And call upon me in the time of trouble: so will I heare thee, and thou shalt praise me. 16 But unto the ungodly said God: Why dost thou preach my Laws, and takest my Cove∣nant in thy mouth? 17 Whereas thou hatest to be reformed: and hast cast my words behind thee. 18 When thou sawest a Thiefe, thou con∣sentedst unto him: and hast been partaker with the Adulterers. 19 Thou hast let thy mouth speak wicked∣nesse: and with thy tongue thou hast set forth deceit. 20 Thou satest and spakest against thy bro∣ther: yea, and hast sandered thine owne mo∣thers sonne. 21 These things hast thou done, and I held my tongue, and thou thoughtest wickedly, that I am even such a one, as thy selfe: but I will re∣prove thee, and set before thee the things that thou hast done. 22 O consider this, ye that forget God: lest I pluck you away, and there be none to deliver you. 23 Whoso offereth me thanks and praise, he honoureth me: and to him that ordereth his conversation right, will I shew the salvation of God.
The Prayer. O Most mighty God, who art more pleased with the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and the oblation of our soules in the vowes of obedience and a holy life, then with the burnt offerings and sacrifices of Bullocks and Goates: let thy grace reforme our lives and manners: keep our mouth from slander and obloquy, from guile and deceit: let us never consent to actions of injustice or un∣cleanesse, that we partake not with Thieves or with Adulterers, either in their sinne or punish∣ment, that when thou shalt appeare in perfect beauty with a consuming fire before thee, and a tempest round about thee, with terrors and glo∣rious Majesty, calling the heavens and the earth together, that thou mayest judge all thy people, thou mayest gather us among thy Saints, and give us the mercies and the portion of thine inheri∣tance, that so we may honour thee by an eter∣nall oblation of praise and thanksgiving in the Heavens, where thou, O God, declarest thy sal∣vation to all thy elect people, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME 51. A Prayer for pardon of sinnes, and the restitution of Gods favour. HAve mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodnesse: according to the multitude of thy mercies do away mine offences. 2 Wash me throughly from my wickednes: and cleanse me from my sinne. 3 For I knowledge my faults: and my sinne is ever before me. 4 Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evill in thy sight: that thou mightest be iusti∣fied in thy saying, & cleare when thou art iudged. 5 Behold, I was shapen in wickednesse: and in sinne hath my mother conceived me. 6 But lo, thou requirest truth inward parts: and shalt make me to understand wisdome secretly. 7 Thou shalt purge me with hyssope, and I shall be clean: thou shalt wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow. 8 Thou shalt make me heare of ioy and glad∣nesse: that the bones which thou hast broken may reioyce. 9 Turn thy face from my sinnes: and put out all my misdeeds.
10 Make me a clean heart, O God: and xe∣new a right spirit within me. 11 Cast me not away from thy presence: and take not thy holy Spirit from me. 12 O giue me the comfort of thy help again: and stablish me with thy free Spirit. 13 Then shall I teach thy wayes unto the wicked: & sinners shall be converted unto thee. 14 Deliver me from bloud-guiltinesse, O God, thou that art the God of my health: and my tongue shall sing of thy righteousnesse. 15 Thou shalt open my lips (O Lord:) and my mouth shall shew thy praise. 16 For thou desirest no sacrifice, else would I give it thee: but thou delightest not in burnt∣offerings. 17 The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit: a broken and a contrice heart (O God) shalt thou not despise. 18 O be favourable and gracious unto Si∣on: build thou the walls of Ierusalem. 19 Then shalt thou be pleased with the sa∣crifice of righteousnesse, with the burnt-offerings and oblations: then shall they offer young bul∣locks upon thine altar.
The Prayer. O Most mercifull God, whose goodnesse is great, and the multitudes of thy mercies are innumerable, have mercy upon us, for our sinnes are ever before us represented, by the continuall accusations of a troubled conscience. We have sinned against thee, and done evill in thy sight, and yet because thou art the God of mercy, and fountaine of eternall purity, delighting in the conversion and salvation of a sinner, we present unto thee, the sacrifice of a troubled Spirit, of broken and contrite hearts, beseeching thee to let the dew of thy favour, and the fire of thy love wash away our sinnes, and purifie our soules. Make us cleane hearts, O God, and pure hands: though our sinnes be as scarlet, yet make them like wooll, though they be as purple, yet make them as white as snow. Restore the voice of joy and gladnesse to us, let us not be for ever separate from the sweet refreshings of thy favour & pre∣sence, but give us the comforts of thy help again, and let thy free Spirit loose us from the bondage of sinne, and establish us in the freedome and li∣berty of the Sonnes of God, so shall we sing of thy righteousnesse, and our lips shall give thee praise in the congregation of thy Redeemed ones, now, henceforth, and for ever. Amen.
PSALME 52. A Prayer for deliverance from tyranny, oppression, and slander. VVHy boastest thou thy self, thou tyrant: that thou canst do mischief? 2 Whereas the goodnesse of God: endureth yet daily. 3 Thy tongue imagineth wickednesse: and with lies thou cutest like a sharp rasour. 4 Thou hast loved unrighteousnesse more then goodnesse: and to talke of lies more then righteousnesse. 5 Thou hast loved to speak all words that may do hurt: O thou false tongue. 6 Therefore shall God destroy thee for ever: he shall take thee, and pluck thee out of thy dwel∣ling, & root thee out of the land of the living. 7 The righteous also shall see this, and fear: and shall laugh him to scorn. 8 Lo, this is the man that took not God for his strength: but trusted unto the multitude of his riches, and strengthened himself in his wick∣ednesse. 9 As for me, I am like a green olive-tree in the house of God: my trust is in the tender mer∣cy of God for ever and ever. 10 I will alwayes giue thanks unto thee for
that thou hast done: and I will hope in thy name, for thy Saints like it well. The Prayer. O Almighty God, whose goodnesse endureth daily, extend this thy goodnesse towards us thy servants, and defend us from the tyranny and malice of all our Enemies, who boast themselves in mischiefe: keep us from the obloquy of false tongues, and from the slander of lying persons, who talke of lyes more then righteousnesse, that we being nourished by thy goodnesse, and wate∣red with the dew of divine blessings, may flou∣rish like a green olive in the house of God, bring∣ing forth the fruits of tender mercy, and abound∣ing in peace, and that we may by the suffusion of anointing of the holy Ghost, be consign'd to thy everlasting Kingdome, there to reign with thee, who reignest eternally, one God world without end. Amen.
PSALME 53. A Prayer for Redemption of the Church from the persecution of Atheists, and Persons irreligious. EVENING PRAYER. THe foolish body hath said in his heart: There is no God. 2 Corrupt are they and become abominable in their wickednesse: there is none that doth good. 3 God looked downe from heaven upon the children of men: to see if there were any that would understand and seek after God. 4 But they are all gone out of the way, they are altogether become abominable: there is also none that doth good, no not one. 5 Are not they without understanding that work wickednes: eating up my people as if they would eat bread? they haue not called vpon God. 6 They were afraid where no fear was: for God hath broken the bones of him that besieged thee, thou hast put them to confusion, because God hath despised them. 7 Oh that the salvation were given unto Is∣rael out of Sion: oh that the Lord would deliver his people out of captivitie!
8 Then should Iacob rejoyce: and Israel should be right glad. The Prayer. O Lord God who dwellest in heaven, and lookest downe from thence upon the chil∣dren of men, be pleased to give salvation to thy people out of Sion thy holy habitation, and pre∣serve thy Church from the malice of such per∣sons as have not called upon thee, but would eate up thy people, as they would eate bread; that we being delivered from the captivity of sinnes & miseries, may serve thee with freedome of spirit, in joy and spirituall rejoycing, all the dayes of our life, through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen. PSALME 54. A Prayer for deliverance from our Enemies. SAve me, O God, for thy names sake: and avenge me in thy strength. 2 Heare my prayer, O God: and hearken unto the words of my mouth. 3 For strangers are risen up against me: and tyrants (which haue not God before their eyes) seek after my soul.
4 Behold, God is my helper: the Lord is with them that uphold my soul. 5 He shall reward evill unto miue enemies: destroy thou them in thy truth. 6 An offering of a free heart will I giue thee, and praise thy name (O Lord:) because it is so comfortable. 7 For he hath delivered me out of all my trouble: and mine eye hath seen his desire upon mine enemies. The Prayer. O Blessed Jesu, our God and our helper, whose Name is comfortable, the hope of all that are miserable, and the reliefe of the oppres∣sed, hearken unto our prayers, and for thy Names sake, save us from the tyranny of those that are risen up against us, and seek after our soules. Give us thy grace, that we may set thee alwayes before our eyes, to obey thy Lawes, to follow thy example, to trust in thy protection, to give prayses unto thy holy Name, who livest and reig∣nest with the Father and the holy Ghost, one God world without end. Amen.
PSALME 55. A Prayer for deliverance from treachery, and the conspiracies of our secret Enemies. HEare my prayer, O God: and hide not thy self from my petition. 2 Take heed unto me, and heare me: how I mourn in my prayer, and am vexed. 3 The enemy crieth so, and the ungodly cometh on so fast: for they are minded to do me some mischiefe, so malitiously are they set a∣gainst me. 4 My heart is disquieted within me: and the fear of death is fallen upon me. 5 Fearfulnesse and trembling are come up∣on me: and an horrible dread hath overwhel∣med me. 6 And I said, Oh that I had wings like a dove: for then would I flie away, & be at rest. 7 Lo then would I get me away farre off: and remain in the wildernesse. 8 I would make hast to escape: because of the stormy winde and tempest. 9 Destroy their tongues (O Lord) and di∣vide them: for I haue spied unrighteousnesse and strife in the City. 10 Day and night they go about within the
walls thereof: mischief also and sorrow are in the mids of it. 11 Wickednesse is therein: deceit and guil go not out of their streets. 12 For it is not an open enemy that hath done me this dishonour: for then I could haue born it. 13 Neither was it mine adversary that did magnifie himselfe against me: for then (perad∣venture) I would haue hid my self from him. 14 But it was even thou my companion: my guide and mine own familiar friend, 15 We took sweet counsell together: and walked in the house of God as friends. 16 Let death come hastily upon them, and let them go down quick into hell: for wicked∣nesse is in their dwellings, and among them. 17 As for me, I will call upon God: and the Lord shall saue me. 18 In the evening, and morning, and at noon day will I pray, and that instantly: and he shall heare my voice. 19 It is he that hath delivered my soul in peace, from the battell that was against me: for there were many with me. 20 Yea, even God that endureth for ever, shall heare me, and bring them down: for they will not turn, nor fear God.
21 He laid his hands upon such as be at peace with him: and he brake his covenant. 22 The words of his mouth were softer then butter, having warre in his heart: his words were smoother then oyl, and yet be they very swords. 23 O cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee: and shall not suffer the righte∣ous to fall for ever. 24 And as for them: thou, O God, shalt bring them into the pit of destruction. 25 The bloodthirstie & deceitfull men shall not live out half their dayes: neverthelesse, my trust shall be in thee, O Lord. The Prayer. O Eternall God, who hast promised to nourish and defend all them that cast their burden upon thee, deliver the soules of thy servants in peace from the battell that is against us: Feare∣fulnesse and trembling are come upon us, and the feare of death is fallen upon us, for our Enemies are malitiously set against us, and minded to doe us mischiefe, and we know not whether to flee away or be at rest, for mischiefe and sorrow are round about us. O rescue us from the publike en∣mity of our open adversaries, and from the secret conspiracies of all our private Enemies, so shall
we pray unto thee, and that instantly, and praise thy Name, in the Evening, in the Morning, and in the noon day, dedicating to thy honour and worship, the beginning, the growth, and the de∣crease of our life, even all our dayes, because thou hast not suffered us to fall for ever, but hast brought us from the pit of destruction, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 56. A Prayer that we may trust in God, and have such carefulnesse over our wayes, that we give our Enemies no advantage. MORNING PRAYER. BE mercifull unto me, O God, for man goeth about to devoure me: he is daily fighting and troubling me. 2 Mine enemies are daily in hand to swallow me up: for they be many that fight against me, O thou most Highest. 3 Neverthelesse, though I am sometime afraid: yet put I my trust in thee. 4 I will praise God because of his word: I have put my trust in God, and will not fear what flesh can doe unto me.
5 They daily mistake my words: all that they imagine is to doe me evill. 6 They hold all together, and keep them∣selves close: and mark my steps when they lay wait for my soul. 7 Shall they escape for their wickednesse: thou (O God) in thy displeasure shalt cast them downe. 8 Thou tellest my flittings, put my teares into thy bottle: are not these things noted in thy book? 9 Whensoever I call upon thee, then shall mine enemies be put to flight: this I know, for God is on my side. 10 In Gods word will I reioyce: in the Lords word will I comfort me. 11 Yea, in God have I put my trust: I will not be afraid what man can doe unto me. 12 Unto thee (O God) will I pay my vows: unto thee will I giue thanks. 13 For thou hast delivered my soul from death, and my feet from falling: that I may walk before God in the light of the living. The Prayer. O Lord God, in whom we have trusted, have mercy upon us, who are daily troubled with sadnesses in the world, temptations of the Devill,
weakenesses of the flesh, malitious surmisings and mistakings of our Enemies, and whatsoever may make us miserable, and disturbe our peace: give us great assistances of thy grace, that we may walk without scandall, resist and overcome the Divell, despise the things of this world, and be strengthened in our spirits with ghostly confi∣dence, that whensoever we call upon thee, we may have thee on our side, and our enemies be put to flight; that our soules being delivered from death, and our feet from falling, we may at last be admitted into the light of the living, there to walke eternally before thee our God, who livest and reignest in the Vnity of the blessed Trinity, world without end. Amen. PSALME. 57. A Prayer to be delivered from the power of the Devill, and slander of men, and that we may put our confidence in God. BE mercifull unto me, O God, be mercifull unto me, for my soul trusteth in thee: and under the shadow of thy wings shall be my refuga untill this tyranny be overpast. 2 I will call unto the most high God: even unto the God that shall performe the cause which I haue in hand.
3 He shall send from heaven: and save me from the reproof of him that would eat me up. 4 God shall send forth his mercy and truth: my soul is among Lions. 5 And I lie even among the children of men (that are set on fire:) whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword. 6 Set up thy self, O God, aboue the hea∣vens: and thy glory aboue all the earth. 7 They haue laid a net for my feet: and pres∣sed down my soul: they haue digged a pit before me, & are fallen into the mids of it themselves. 8 My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed: I will sing and give praise. 9 Awake up my glory, awake lute and harp: I my self will awake right early. 10 I will giue thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the people: and I will sing unto thee a∣mong the Nations. 11 For the greatnesse of thy mercy reacheth unto the Heavens: and thy truth unto the Clouds. 12 Set up thy self, O God, aboue the heavens: and thy glory above all the earth. The Prayer. O Most high and mighty God, who hast set thy selfe above the heavens, and thy glory
above all the earth, doe thou send from heaven and save us from the reproofe of all our ghostly Enemies, who would eate us, for our soul is among Lions, and the Devill is busie seeking to devoure us. O send out thy mercy and truth, deliver us from the malitious slander of men, and from the dreadfull accusations of the Devills at the day of judgement, who are set on fire against us, and their teeth are speares and arrowes, gnashing at us to teare us in pieces. Let thy mercy sustaine us, let thy righteousnesse be interpos'd in answer for us, that as our enemies accuse us, thy mercies may acquit us, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 58. A Prayer that Gods people may be delivered from the malice of wicked men. ARe your mindes set upon righteousnesse, O ye congregation: and do ye iudge the thing that is right, O ye sonnes of men? 2 Yea, ye imagine mischief in your heart upon the earth: and your hands deal with wick∣ednesse. 3 The ungodly are froward even from their mothers wombe: assoon as they be born, they go astray, and speak lies. 4 They are as venemous as the poyson of a
serpent: even like the deaf adder that stoppeth her eares. 5 Which refuseth to heare the voice of the charmer: charm he never so wisely. 6 Breake their teeth (O God) in their mouthes, smite the iaw-bones of the Lions, O Lord: let them fall away like water that runneth apace, and when they shoot their arrows, let them be rooted out. 7 Let them consume away like a sail, and be like the untimely fruit of a woman: and let them not see the sunne. 8 Orever your pots be made hot with thorns: so let indignation vex him even as a thing that is raw. 9 The righteous shall reioyce when he seeth the vengeance: he shall wash his foot steps in the bloud of the ungodly. 10 So that a man shall say, Uerily there is a reward for the righteous: doubtlesse there is a God that iudgeth the earth. The Prayer. O Almighty Lord, thou God that judgest the earth, who preparest rewards for the righ∣teous, and executest vengeance against the un∣godly, deliver all thy chosen people from the peevishnesse of froward and ungodly men, whose
hands deale with wickednesse, and they imagine mischiefe in their hearts. And to thy servants give thy grace, that our minds may be set upon righteousnesse, that we may judge the thing that is right, never refusing to heare thy voyce, or stopping our eares like the deafe adder against thy holy precepts, that we may have no iniquity in our mouthes, nor unrighteousnesse in our acti∣ons, and at last we may have the reward of the righteous, the inheritance of thy Kingdome, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME. 59. A Prayer against Hereticks, and all other Enemies of the Church. EVENING PRAYER. DEliver me from mine enemies, (O God:) defend me from them that rise up against me. 2 O deliver me from the wicked doers: and save me from the bloud∣thirsty men. 3 For lo, they lye waiting for my soul: the mighty men are gathered against me, without a∣ny offence or fault of me, O Lord. 4 They run and prepare themselves with∣out
my fault: arise thou therefore to help me, and behold. 5 Stand up (O Lord God of hosts) thou God of Israel, to visit all the heathen: and be not mercifull unto them that offend of malicious wickednesse. 6 They go to and fro in the evening: they grin like a dog, and runne about through the city. 7 Behold, they speak with their mouth, and swords are in their lips: for who doth heare? 8 But thou, O Lord, shalt have them in de∣rision: and thou shalt laugh all the heathen to scorn. 9 My strength will I ascribe unto thee: for thou art the God of my refuge. 10 God sheweth me his goodnesse plente∣ously: and God shall let me see my desire upon mine enemies. 11 Slay them not, least my people forget it: but scatter them abroad among the people, and put them down, O Lord our defence. 12 For the sinne of their mouth, and for the words of their lips, they shall be taken in their pride: and why? their preaching is of cursing and lies. 13 Consume them in thy wrath, consume them, that they may perish: and know that it is God which ruleth in Iacob, and unto the ends of the world.
14 And in the evening they will returne: grin like a dog, and will goe about the City. 15 They will run here and there for meat: and grudge if they be not satisfied. 16 As for me, I will sing of thy power, and will praise thy mercy be times in the morning: for thou hast been my defence and refuge in the day of my trouble. 17 Unto thee (O my strength) will I sing: for thou, O God, art my refuge, and my merci∣full God. The Prayer. O Lord God of Israel, visit us with thy salva∣tion, and deliver us from the malice of wicked doers, and the violences of blood thirsty men. Let not them prosper, ô Lord, in their ma∣chinations, whose preaching is of cursing and lies, and who offend of malicious wickednesse: shew us thy goodnesse plenteously, that we may never forget thy mercies or thy Lawes, for thou art our defence and refuge, and our mercifull God, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME. 60. A Prayer in time of Warre or temptation. O God, thou hast cast us out, and scattered us abroad: thou also hast been displeased, O turne thee unto us again. 2 Thou hast moved the land, and divided it: heal the sores thereof, for it shaketh. 3 Thou hast shewed thy people heavy things: thou hast given us a drink of deadly wine. 4 Thou hast given a token for such as fear thee: that they may triumph because of the truth. 5 Therefore were thy beloved delivered: help me with thy right hand, and heare me. 6 God hath spoken in his holinesse, I will re∣ioyce and divide Sichem: and mete out the val∣ley of Succoth, 7 Gilead is mine, and Manasses is mine: E∣phraim also is the strength of my head, Iuda is my lawgiver. 8 Moa is my washpot, over Edom will I cast out my shoe: Philistia be thou glad of me. 9 Who will lead me into the strong city: who will bring me into Edom? 10 Hast thou not cast us out, O God: wilt not thou, O God, go out with our hosts? 11 O be thou our help in trouble: for vain is the help of man.
12 Through God will we doe great arts: for it is he that shall tread downe our enemies. The Prayer. O Lord God, who for our sinnes hast shewed us heavy things, and given us a drink of deadly Wine, and yet hast never failed them that feare thee, but hast given them a token that they may triumph because of thy truth and mercy, consigning them to redemption and deliverance by the testimony and comforts of the Holy spirit: Obe thou our help in trouble, for all our hope is in thee, and we disclaime all confidence in our selves, or in the arme of flesh, praying thee for ayde, that in thy strength we may tread down our enemies, and give thee thankes who art the fountain of strength, and the disposer of victories, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 61. A Prayer for the King, and for comfort in sadnesse. HEare my crying, O God: give eare unto my prayer. 2 From the ends of the earth will I call unto thee: when my heart is in heaviness. 3 O et me up upon the rock that  higher
then I: for thou hast been my hope, and a strong tower for me against the enemy. 4 I will dwell in thy labernacle for ever: and my trust shall be under the covering of thy wings. 5 For thou, O Lord, hast heard my desires: and hast given an heritage unto those that feare thy name. 6 Thou shalt grant the King a long life: that his yeares may endure thorough out all generati∣ons. 7 He shall dwell before God for ever: O pre∣pare thy loving mercy and faithfulnesse, that they may preserve him. 8 So will I alwaies sing praise unto thy name: that I may dayly performe my vowes. The Prayer. O Blessed Iesu, thou that art the rock higher then all the world, upon whom thy Church is built, and all our hopes rely: be mercifull unto us, and give eare unto our prayers, be unto us a fountain of comfort whensoever our heart is in heavinesse, for under the covering of thy wings there is joy, and health, and safety: save all those that feare thy name, and give thy blessing to thine heritage; and that the blessings of thy peo∣ple may be lasting and perpetuall, give unto thy
servant the King long life, let thy loving kind∣nesse and faithfulnesse alway preserve him, be a strong tower for him against all his enemies, and at last bring him to an eternall Kingdome, where no enemies shall assault or disturbe his Peace, that he may dwell before thee for ever, and rejoyce in the participation of the blessings of thy king∣dome, who livest and raignest ever one God world without end. Amen. PSALME 62. A Prayer that we may trust in God onely in all our troubles. MORNING PRAYER. MY soul truly waiteth still up∣on God: for of him cometh my salvation. 2 He verily is my strength and my salvation▪ he is my defence, so that I shall not greatly fall. 3 How long will ye i∣magine mischiefe against every man: ye shall be slain all the sort of you, yea, as a tottering wal shall ye be, and like a broken hedge. 4 Their device is only how to put him out
whom God will exalt: their delight is in lies, they giue good words with their mouth, but curse with their heart. 5 Neverthelesse, my soul, wait thou still up∣on God: for my hope is in him. 6 He truly is my strength and my salvation: he is my defence, so that I shall not fall. 7 In God is my health and my glory: the rock of my might, and in God is my trust. 8 O put your trust in him alway (ye peo∣ple:) poure out your hearts before him, for God is our hope. 9 As for the children of men, they are but vain: the children of men are deceitfull upon the weights, they are altogether lighter then vanity it self. 10 O trust not in wrong and robbery, giue not your selves unto vanity: if riches increase, set not your heart upon them. 11 God spake once and twice: I haue also heard the same, that power belongeth unto God. 12 And that thou Lord art mercifull: for thou rewardest every man according to his work. The Prayer. O Lord God of whom commeth our salva∣vation, thou art our defence and strength,
our health and our glory, give us thy grace, that we may put our whole trust in thee alway, that we may poure out our hearts before thee in all our troubles, that we may wait still upon thee for the performance of our expectation in all our longings and desires. Be thou our defence, up∣hold us that we may not fall into those great sins, which lay wast our consciences, or into such mi∣series as make us without hope or remedy, the miseries of despaire, obstinate malice, or the woes of a sad eternity. Teach us to despise ri∣ches, to disclaim all trust in the creatures, not to delight in lyes, or vanity, not to multiply wrongs and robbery, that when thou shalt come with power and great glory to reward every man ac∣cording to his worke, thou mayest be mercifull unto us pardoning our sinnes, and accepting us to life eternall, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 63. A Prayer for deliverance from the miseries of our pilgrimage, with longing and desires after God, and the Joyes of Heaven. O God, thou art my God: early will I seek thee. 2 My soul thirsteth for thee, my flesh also
longeth after thee: in a barren and dry land where no water is. 3 Thus haue I looked for thee in holinesse: that I might behold thy power and glory. 4 For thy loving kindnesse is better then the life it self: my lips shall praise thee. 5 As long as I liue will I magnifie thee on this manner: and lift up my hands in thy name. 6 My soul shall be satisfied even as it were with marrow & fatnesse: when my mouth prai∣seth thee with ioyfull lips. 7 Haue I not remembred thee in my bed: and thought upon thee when I was waking? 8 Because thou hast been my helper: there∣fore under the shadow of thy wings will I re∣ioyce. 9 My soul hangeth upon thee: thy right hand hath upholden me. 10 These also that seek the hurt of my soul: they shall go under the earth. 11 Let them fall upon the edge of the sword: that they may be a portion for foxes. 12 But the King shall reioyce in God, all they also that swear by him shall be commended: for the mouth of them that speak lies, shall be stopped.
The Prayer. O Mercifull and deare God, whose loving kindnesse is better then the life it selfe, defend us against the malice and designes of all them, that seek the hurt of our soules, and make us to rejoyce in thy helpe, and under the shadow of thy wings. O let the day-spring of thy favour visit us from on high, that we may seek thee with an early devotion, pursue after thee with a con∣stant, and an active industry, and at last possesse thee with the firme comprehensions of love and charity; that in this world, we looking for thee in holinesse of living, longing and thirsting after thee with fervent desires, may for ever hereaf∣ter behold thy power and glory, and our soules be eternally satisfied, even as with marrow and fatnesse, when our lips and hearts shall praise thee to all eternity. Grant this, for the love and honour of Iesus Christ, our only mediator and Redeemer. Amen. PSALME 64. A Prayer for deliverance from the slander and mischiefes of all wicked Persons. HEare my voice, O God, in my prayer: pre∣serue my life from fear of the enemy.
2 Hide me from the gathering together of the froward: and from the insurrection of wick∣ed doers. 3 Which haue what their tongue like a sword: and shoot out their arrows, even bitter words. 4 That they may privily shoot at him that is perfect: suddenly doe they hit him, and fear not. 5 They courage themselues in mischief: and commune among themselues how they may lay snares, and say that no man shall see them. 6 They imagine wickednesse, and practise it: that they keep secret among themselues eve∣ry man in the deep of his heart. 7 But God shall suddenly shoot at them with a swift arrow: that they shall be wounded. 8 Yea, their owne tongues shall make them fall: insomuch that whoso seeth them, shall laugh them to scorn. 9 And all men that see it, shall say, This hath God done: for they shall perceiue that it is his work. 10 The righteous shall reioyce in the Lord, and put his trust in him: and all they that are true of heart shall be glad.
The Prayer. O Lord God, thou that hearest the voyce of our prayers, and considerest the cryes of them that flye unto thee for succour, deliver us and all thy whole Church from the gathering to∣gether of the froward, and from the insurrection of wicked doers. Disappoint their snares, infatu∣ate their Counsells, distract their consultations, and blast all their Designes; let the swords and arrowes of their tongues be shot in vaine, that they may never hit any of thy servants, nor wound him that is perfect. Make them to fall (O God) in their hopes whereby they courage themselves in mischiefe and feare not, and doe thou laugh them to scorne, that we who have put our trust in thee, may rejoyce in thee, and confesse, that it is thy worke, to give salvation and deliverance to thy people whom thou lovest in our Lord and Sa∣viour Iesus Christ. Amen.
PSALME 65. A Prayer for spirituall blessings, and for fruitfulnesse of the Earth. EVENING PRAYER. THou O God, art praised in Sion: and unto thee shall the vow be per∣formed in Ierusalem 2 Thou that hearest the prayer: unto thee shall all flesh come. 3 My misdeeds prevail against me: O be thou mercifull unto our sinnes. 4 Blessed is the man whom thou choosest and receivest unto thee: he shall dwell in thy Court, and shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thy house, even of thy holy temple. 5 Thou shalt shew us wonderfull things in thy righteousnesse, O God of our salvation: thou that art the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of them that remain in the broad sea. 6 Which in his strength setteth fast the mountains: and is girded about with power. 7 Which stilleth the raging of the sea: and the noise of his waves, and the madnesse of his people. 8 They also that dwell in the uttermost parts of the earth, shall be afraid at thy tokens: thou
that makest the outgoings of the morning and evening to praise thee. 9 Thou visitest the earth, and blessest it: thou makest it very plenteous. 10 The river of God is full of water: thou preparest their corn, for so thou providest for the earth, 11 Thou waterest her furrows, thou sendest rain into the little valleys thereof: thou makest it soft with the drops of rain, and blessest the in∣crease of it. 12 Thou crownest the yeare with thy good∣nesse: and thy clouds drop fatnesse. 13 They shall drop upon the dwellings of the wildernesse: and the little hills shall reioyce on every side. 14 The folds shall be full of sheep: the valleys also shall stand so thick with corn, that they shall laugh and sing. The Prayer. O God the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of them that remaine in the broad Sea, be thou mercifull unto our sinnes, and let not our misdeeds prevaile against us, so as either to make us habitually sinfull, or endlessely miserable, but give us the blessings of thy chosen; let us receive the influences of thy graces and benediction, by
the participation of thy word and Sacraments in thy holy temple. And as thou embracest us with thy right hand, shewing us wonderfull things in thy righteousnesse and salvation, so let thy left hand be under our heads, and give us such a por∣tion of temporall blessings, as shall be necessary for us. Make the earth plenteous, and blesse the increase of it, crowne the yeare with goodnesse, and let the clouds drop fatnesse, that the valleys standing thick with corne, may laugh and sing thy prayses, and that we being refreshed with the multitude of thy blessings, may praise thee in Si∣on, and at last be satisfied with the pleasures of thy house in the celestiall Ierusalem, where thou livest and reignest, one God world without end. Amen. PSALME 66. A Prayer that God would support us in times of trouble and deliver us. O Be ioyfull in God all ye lands: sing praises unto the honour of his name, make his praise to be glorious. 2 Say unto God, O how wonderfull art thou in thy workes: through the greatnesse of thy power shall thine euemies he found liars un∣to hee.
3 For all the world shall worship thee: sing of thee, and praise thy name. 4 O come hither, and behold the works of God: how wonderfull he is in his doing towards the children of men. 5 He turned the sea into drie land: so that they went through the water on foot, there did we reioyce thereof. 6 He ruleth with his power for ever, his eyes behold the people: and such as will not beleeve, shall not be able to exalt themselues. 7 O praise our God (ye people:) and make the voice of his praise to be heard. 8 Which holdeth our soul in life: and suffe∣reth not our feet to slip. 9 For thou (O God) hast proved us: thou al∣so hast tried us, like as silver is tried. 10 Thou broughtest us into the snare: and lapedst trouble upon our loyns. 11 Thou sufferedst men to ride over our heads: we went through fire and water, and thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place. 12 I will go into thy house with burnt-offe∣rings: and will pay thee my vows which I pro∣mised with my lips, and spake with my mouth when I was in trouble. 13 I will offer unto thee fat burnt-sacrifices, with the incense of rammes: I will offer bullocks and goats.
14 O come hither and hearken all ye that fear God: and I will tell you what he hath done for my soul. 15 I called unto him with my mouth: and gave him praises with my tongue. 16 If I encline unto wickednesse with my heart: the Lord will not heare me. 17 But God hath heard me: and considered the voice of my prayer. 18 Praised be God, which hath not cast out my prayer: nor turned his mercy from me. The Prayer. O Lord God, who art wonderfull in thy workes, & in thy doings, towards the chil∣dren of men, thou chastisest every one whom thou receivest, proving us and trying us, like as silver is tryed, let thy mercifull hands lead us through the fire of afflictions, and the waters of temporall chastisements, so as we may not be consumed with the flames of thy wrath, nor the waters go over our soules, but that we being sustained by the comforts of thy spirit, and refreshed with the dew of thy graces, we may at last be brought out into a wealthy place, even the place of eternall treasures. O give us thy grace, that our hearts incline not to wickednesse, and that our feet slip not, that so we regarding thy lawes, and having
respect to obey thy holy will and pleasure, thou mayest heare our prayers, the greatnesse of thy power may cast down all our Enemies, that they may never be able to exalt themselves; that while thou holdest our soules in life, we may ne∣ver cease praising thee, who hast never turn'd thy mercy from us, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME. 67. A Prayer that all men may blesse God, and God may blesse all men. GOd be mercifull unto us, and blesse us: and shew us the light of his countenance, and be mercifull unto us. 2 That thy way may be known upon earth: thy saving health among all Nations. 3 Let the people praise thee, O God: yea, let all the people praise thee. 4 O let the Nations reioyce and be glad: for thou shalt iudge the folk righteously, and govern the Nations upon earth. 5 Let the people praise thee, O God: let all the people praise thee. 6 Then shall the earth bring forth her in∣crease: and God eden our own God shall giue us his blessing.
7 God shall blesse us: and all the ends of the world shall fear him. The Prayer. O Lord God, thou Governour of all Nations, and the righteous Iudge of the whole earth, be mercifull unto us and blesse us. Thou makest the Sunne to shine upon all the corners of the habitable world, giving his light both to the good and bad; let the light of thy countenance diffuse it selfe to all Nations, and to all men. Lighten all our darknesses with the beames of thy divine favour, teach thy wayes unto all the people of the earth, and give thy saving health to all Nations, that while all joyne with one con∣sent to feare thee, and to give thee praises, thou mayest governe us all in peace & righteousnesse, and when thou shalt come to judge us, we may receive thy everlasting mercies. Grant this, for Iesus Christ his sake, our only Mediator and Ad∣vocate. Amen.
PSALME. 68. A Prayer for defence and propagation of the Catholike Church. MORNING PRAYER. LEt God arise, and let his enemies be scattered: let them also that hate him, flee before him. 2 Like as the smoke vanisheth, so shalt thou drive them away: and like as wax melteth at the fire, so let the un∣godly perish at the presence of God. 3 But let the righteous be glad and reioyce before God: let them also be merry and ioyfull. 4 O sing unto God, and sing praises unto his name: magnifie him that rideth upon the Heavens, as it were upon an horse, praise him in his name, yea, and reioyce before him. 5 He is a father of the fatherlesse, and defen∣deth the cause of the widowes: even God in his holy habitation. 6 He is the God that maketh men to be of one minde in an house, and bringeth the prisoners out of captivity: but letteth the runnagates con∣tinue in scarcenesse. 7 O God, when thou wentest forth before
the people: when thou wentest through the wildernesse. 8 The earth shook, and the heavens drop∣ped at the presence of God: even as Sinai also was moved at the presence of God, which is the God of Israel. 9 Thou, O God, sentest a gracious rain upon thine inheritance: and refreshedst it when it was weary. 10 Thy congregation shall dwell therein: for thou, O God, hast of thy goodnesse prepared for the poore. 11 The Lord gaue the word: great was the company of the preachers. 12 Kings with their Armies did flee and were discomfited: and they of the houshold divi∣ded the spoil. 13 Though ye haue lien among the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a doe: that is covered with silver wings, and her feathers like gold. 14 When the Almightie scattered Kings for their sake: then were they as white as snow in Salmon. 15 As the hill of Basan, so is Gods hill▪ even an high hill, as the hill of Basan. 16 Why hop ye so ye high hills? this is Gods hill, in the which it pleaseth him to dwell: yea, the Lord will abide in it for ever.
17 The chariots of God are twenty thou∣sand, even thousands of Angels: and the Lord is among them as in the holy place of Sinai. 18 Thou art gone up on high, thou hast led captivity captive, and received gifts for men: yea, even for thine enemies, that the Lord God might dwell among them. 19 Praised be the Lord daily: even the God which helpeth us, & poureth his benefits upon us. 20 He is our God, even the God of whom cometh salvation: God is the Lord by whom we escape death. 21 God shall wound the head of his enemies: and the hairy scalp of such a one as goeth on still in his wickednesse. 22 The Lord hath said, I will bring my peo∣ple again, as I did from Basan: mine own will I bring again, as I did sometime from the deep of the sea. 23 That thy foot may be dipped in the bloud of thine enemies: and that the tongue of thy dogs may be red through the same. 24 It is well seen, O God, how thou goest: how thou my God and King goest in the san∣ctuarie. 25 The singers go before, the Mintres follow after: in the midst are the damsels play∣ing with the timbrels.
26 Giue thanks, O Israel, unto God the Lord, in the congregations: from the ground of the heart. 27 There is little Beniamin their ruler, and the princes of Iuda their counsell: the princes of Zabulon, and the princes of Nephthali. 28 Thy God hath sent forth strength for thee: stablish the thing, O God, that thou hast wrought in us. 29 For thy temples sake at Ierusalem: so shall Kings bring presents unto thee. 30 When the company of the spear-men, and multitude of the mighty, are scattered abroad among the beasts of the people (so that they hum∣bly bring pieces of silver:) and when he hath scattered the people that delight in warre. 31 Then shall the Princes come out of E∣gypt: the Morians land shall soon stretch out her hands unto God. 32 Sing unto God, O ye kingdomes of the earth: O sing praises unto the Lord. 33 Which sitteth in the Heavens over all from the beginning: lo, he doth send out his voice, yea, and that a mighty voice. 34 Ascribe ye the power to God over Isra∣el: his worship and strength is in the clouds. 35 O God, wonderfull! art thou in thy ho∣ly places: even the God of Israel, he will giue
strength and power unto his people, blessed be God. The Prayer. O Lord God, mighty and mercifull, thou ri∣dest upon the heavens, as it were upon an horse, thou art the Father of the Fatherlesse, and defendest the cause of the widdow; have merey upon thy holy Church; and since her Lord and Spouse is gone up on high, even to his holy habi∣tation, leave us not comfortiesse, but send the holy Ghost in assistances and gifts to dwell a∣mongst us; that by his ayd, we may escape death spirituall, and the bitternesse of the temporall. Send a gracious raine, even the dew of thy Di∣vine favours upon thine inheritance, to refresh us in our wearinesse and sadnesses. Make thy people innocent & chast as the dove▪ and besides the beauty of internall sanctity, let thy Church be covered with silver wings, and her feathers like gold, decked and assisted with exteriour ad∣vantages, as may best promote thy honour and the services of Religion. Let all the Princes and lands of the earth, stretch their hands out unto thee, O God, and confesse thy mightinesse and thy ho∣nour; that the Gospell going forth into all lands, peace and all thy blessings may follow it, and
thy praise be multiplyed from generation to ge∣neration, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 69. A Prayer in times of persecution for the cause of Religion. EVENING PRAYER. SAve me, O God: for the waters are come in, even unto my soul. 2 I stick fast in the deep mire where no ground is: I am come into deep waters, so that the flouds run over me. 3 I am weary of crying, my throat is drie: my fight faileth me for waiting so long upon my God. 4 They that hate me without a cause, are moe then the haires of my head: they that are mine enemies, and would destroy me guiltlesse, are mighty. 5 I payed them the things that I never took: God thou knowest my simplenesse, and my faults are not hid from thee. 6 Let not them that trust in thee, O Lord God of hosts, be ashamed for my cause: let not those that seek thee, be confounded through me, O Lord God of Israel.
7 And why? for thy sake haue I suffered reproof: shame hath covered my face. 8 I am become a stranger unto my brethren even an aliant unto my mothers children. 9 For the zeal of thy house hath even eaten me: and the rebukes of them that rebuked thee, are fallen upon me. 10 I wept and chastened my self with fast∣ing: and that was turned to my reproof. 11 I put on sackcloth also: and they iested upon me. 12 They that sit in the gate speak against me: and the drunkards make songs upon me. 13 But Lord, I make my prayer unto thee: in an acceptable time. 14 Heare me, O God, in the multitude of thy mercy: even in the truth of thy salvation. 15 Take me out of the mire that I sink not: oh let me be delivered from them that hate me, and out of the deep waters. 16 Let not the water-floud drowne me, nei∣ther let the deep swallow me up: and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me. 17 Heare me, O Lord, for thy loving kind∣nesse is comfortable: turn thee unto me, accor∣ding to the multitude of thy mercies. 18 And hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble: oh hast thee, and heare me.
19 Draw nigh unto my soul, and save it: oh deliver me, because of mine enemies. 20 Thou hast known my reproof, my shame, and my dishonour: mine adversaries are all in thy sight. 21 Thy rebuke hath broken my heart, I am full of heavinesse: I looked for some to haue pity on me, but there was no man, neither found I any to comfort me. 22 They gave me gall to eat: and when I was thirsty, they gave me vineger to drink. 23 Let their table be made a snare to take themselves withall: and let the things (that should haue been for their wealth) be unto them an occasion of falling. 24 Let their eyes be blinded that they see not: and ever bow down their backs. 25 Poure out thine indignation upon them: & let thy wrathfull displeasure take hold of them. 26 Let their habitation be void: and no man to dwell in their tents. 27 For they persecute him whom thou hast smitten: and they talk how they may vex them whom thou hast wounded. 28 Let them fall from one wickednesse to another: and not come into thy righteousnesse. 29 Let them be wiped out of the book of the living: and not be written among the righteous.
30 As for me, when I am poor and in heavi∣nesse: thy help (O God) shall lift me up. 31 I will praise the name of God with a song: and magnify it with thanksgiving. 32 This also shall please the Lord better then a bullock, that hath hornes and hoofs. 33 The humble shall consider this, and be glad: seek ye after God, and your soul shall live. 34 For the Lord heareth the poore: and de∣spiseth not his prisoners. 35 Let heaven and earth praise him: the sea, and all that moveth therein. 36 For God will save Sion, and build the Cities of Iuda: that men may dwell there, and have it in possession. 37 The posterity also of his servants shall inherit it: and they that love his name, shall dwell therein. The Prayer. O Blessed Iesu, whose loving kindnesse is comfortable, who for our sakes didst tast vi∣neger and gall, that thou mightest redeeme us from the bitternesse of death and sinne, and esta∣blish to thy selfe a Church in holy Religion, and defend it with thy favour and power: have mer∣cy upon thy servants, who suffer from the hands of their Enemies, for the testimony of a good
conscience, & the doctrines of a Catholike faith. Let not them that trust in thee, O Lord God of Hosts, be ashamed, but let them, who for thy sake have suffered reproofe, be delivered from them that hate them, and from the deep waters of per∣secutions and discomforts, that we and all thy faithfull people, being saved from our Enemies, may praise thee and thy faithfulnesse in this world, and may finally inherit the land of pro∣mise, which thou hast made to all that suffer per∣secution for a cause of righteousnesse, even the possession of thine inheritance, thy Kingdome in Heaven, where thou livest and reignest ever one God world without end. Amen. PSALME. 70. A Prayer to God for blessings upon faithfull People, and deliverance from our Enemies. HAst thee, O God, to deliver mee: make hast to help me, O Lord. 2 Let them be ashamed and confounded that seek after my soul: let them be turned backward and put to confusion, that wish me evill. 3 Let them (for their reward) be soon brought to shame: that crie over me, There, there. 4 But let all those that seek thee, be ioyfull
and glad in thee: and let all such as delight in thy salvation, say alway The Lord be praised. 5 As for me, I am poore and in misery: baste thee unto mee (O God.) 6 Thou art my helper and my redeemer: O Lord, make no long tarrying. The Prayer. O Lord God our Helper and Redeemer, have mercy upon us, and all thy faithfull people: make haste and help us, ô God, against all those that seek after our soules to doe us mischiefe: make us to delight in thee, to waite for thy salva∣tion, to trust in thy mercies, to rejoyce in thy ex∣cellencies and perfection: that our feet being di∣rected by thy guidance, our weaknesses strength∣ned by thy power, our sinnes pardoned by thy mercies, and our soules justified by thy free grace, we may alwaies give thee praise with the hum∣ble addresses of devotion and thankfulnesse, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME. 71. A Prayer for the continuance of Gods favours to us, even to our old age, and a longing for a happy departure. MORNING PRAYER. IN thee, O Lord, have I put my trust, let me never be put to con∣fusion: but rid me and deliver me in thy righteousnesse, encline thine eare unto me, and save me. 2 Be thou my strong hold, whereunto I may alway resort: thou hast pro∣mised to help me, for thou art my house of de∣fence, and my castle. 3 Deliver me, O my God, out of the hand of the ungodly: out of the hand of the unrighte∣ous and cruell man. 4 For thou, O Lord God, art the thing that I long for: thou art my hope even from my youth. 5 Through thee have I been holden up ever since I was born: thou art he that took me out of my mothers wombe, my praise shall be alway of thee. 6 I am become as it were a monster unto many: but my sure trust is in thee.
7 O let my mouth be filled with thy praise: (that I may sing of thy glory) and honour all the day long. 8 Cast me not away in the time of age: for∣sake me not when my strength faileth me. 9 For mine enemies speak against me, and they that lay wait for my soul, take their counsel together, saying: God hath forsaken him, perse∣cute him, and take him, for there is none to deli∣ver him. 10 Go not farre from me, O God: my God hast thee to help me. 11 Let them be confounded and perish, that are against my soul: let them be covered with shame and dishonour, that seek to doe me evill. 12 As for me, I will patiently abide alway: and will praise thee more and more. 13 My mouth shall daily speak of thy righte∣ousnesse and salvation: for I know no end there∣of. 14 I will go forth in the strength of the Lord God: and will make mention of thy righteous∣nesse only. 15 Thou, O God, hast taught me from my youth up untill now: therefore will I tell of thy wondrous works. 16 Forsake me not, O God, in mine old age, when I am gray-headed: untill I have shewed thy
strength unto this generation, and thy power to all them that are yet for to come. 17 Thy righteousnesse, O God, is very high: and great things are they that thou hast done, O God, who is like unto thee? 18 O what great troubles and adversities hast thou shewed me, and yet didst thou turn and refresh me: yea, and broughtest me from the deep of the earth again▪ 19 Thou hast brought me to great honour: and comforted me on every side. 20 Therefore will I praise thee and thy faithfulnesse (O God) playing upon an instru∣ment of musick: unto thee will I sing upon the harp, O thou holy one of Israel. 21 My lips will be fain when I sing unto thee: and so will my soule whom thou hast deli∣vered. 22 My tongue also shall talk of thy righte∣ousnesse all the day long: for they are confoun∣ded and brought unto shame that seek to do me evil. The Prayer. O Lord God our house of defence and our Castle, who by thy mercies and thy loving Spirit, hast taught us and led us in thy wayes, from our first years untill now, thou hast brought
us to great honour, even the honour of being Christians, the honour of adoption to be thy Chil∣dren, and heires of thy glorious promises, coheir with thy Sonne Iesus Christ, and hast comforted us on every side, with a continuall streame of thy mercies and refreshments: give us thy grace that we may love thee, and long for thee above all the things of this World: and as thou hast holden us up ever since we were borne, so let thy mer∣cy goe along with us all our daies. Cast us not a∣way in the time of age, and give us grace that we may never cast thee or thy Lawes from us. Let not thy grace, and the ghostly strength we derive from thee, forsake us when our naturall strength failes us, but let our spirit grow upon the disad∣vantages of the flesh, and begin to receive the happinesse of eternity, by an absolute conquest o∣ver the weakned and decaying body; that after we have by thy aide passed through the great troubles and adversities thou shewest unto all thy Children in this world, we may lye downe in righteousnesse and with thy favour: that when thou bringest us out from the deep of the earth againe, we may have a joyfull resurrection to the society of Saints and Angells, and the full fruition of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen.
PSALME 72. A Prayer for the exaltation and propagation of Christs Kingdome. GIve the King thy judgements (O God:) and thy righteousnesse unto the Kings sonne. 2 Then shall he iudge the people according unto right: and defend the poore. 3 The mountains also shall bring peace: and the little hills righteousnesse unto the people. 4 He shall keep the simple folk by their right: defend the children of the poore, and punish the wrong doer. 5 They shall fear thee as long as the sunne and moon endureth, from one generation to ano∣ther. 6 He shall come down like the rain into a fleece of wooll: even as the drops that water the earth. 7 In his time shall the righteous flourish: yea, and abundance of peace, so long as the moon endureth. 8 His dominion shall be also from the one sea to the other: and from the floud unto the worlds end. 9 They that dwell in the wildernesse shall kneel before him: his enemies shall lick the dust.
10 The kings of Thars and of the Isles shall give presents: the kings of Arabia and Sa∣ba shall bring gifts. 11 All kings shall fall down before him: all nations shall doe him service. 12 For he shall deliver the poor when he cri∣eth: the needy also, and him that hath no helper. 13 He shall be favourable to the simple and needy: and shall preserve the souls of the poor. 14 He shall deliver their souls from falshood and wrong: and deare shall their bloud be in his sight. 15 He shall live, and unto him shall be given of the gold of Arabia: prayer shall be made ever unto him, and daily shall he be praised. 16 There shall be an heap of corn in the earth high upon the hilles: his fruit shall shake like Li∣banus, and shall be green in the city, like grasse upon the earth. 17 His name shall endure for ever, his name shall remain under the sinne among the posteri∣ties: which shall be blessed through him, and all the heathen shall praise him. 18 Blessed be the Lord God, even the God of Israel: which only doth wondrous things. 19 And blessed be the name of his maiesty for ever: and all the earth shall be filled with his maiesty. Amen, Amen.
The Prayer. O Blessed Iesu, who didst descend from hea∣ven into the wombe of the blessed Virgin, like raine into a fleece of wooll, thou that puni∣shest the wrong doer, and defendest the children of the poore, and them that have no helper; have mercy upon thy Holy Church, be pleased by her ministery to extend thy blessings and thy domi∣nion from the one Sea to the other, even unto the worlds end, that all Kings of the earth may fall down before thee, and all Nations may doe thee service. Make thy righteous people to flou∣rish, and so subdue their enemies under them, de∣livering them from falshood and wrong, that they may be blessed with abundance of Peace, and be satisfied with thy righteousnesse and salvation through thy mercies, O blessed Saviour and Re∣deemer Jesu. Amen.
PSALME 73. A Prayer that we may have our portion in God, and not in the good things of the men of this World. EVENING PRAYER. TRuly God is loving unto Israel: e∣ven unto such as are of a clean heart. 2 Neverthelesse, my feet were almost gone: my treadings had well∣nigh spt. 3 And why? I was grieved at the wicked: I do also see the ungodly in such prosperity. 4 For they are in no perill of death: but are lusty and strong. 5 They come in no misfortune like other folk: neither are they plagued like other men. 6 And this is the cause that they be so holden with pride: and over whelmed with cruelty. 7 Their eyes swell with fatnesse: and they do even what they lust. 8 They corrupt other, and speak of wicked blasphemy: their talking is against the most Highest. 9 For they stretch forth their mouth unto the heaven: and their tongue goeth through the world.
10 Therefore fall the people unto them: and thereout suck they no small advantage. 11 Tush (say they) how should God per∣ceive it: is there knowledge in the most Highest? 12 Lo, these are the ungodly, these prosper in the World, and these have riches in possession: and I said, Then have I cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocency. 13 All the day long have I been punished: and chastened every morning. 14 Yea, and I had almost said even as they: but so, then should I have condemned the genera∣tion of thy children. 15 Then thought I to understand this: but it was to hard for me. 16 Untill I went into the sanctuary of God: then understood I the end of these men. 17 Namely, how thou dost set them in slip∣pery places: and castest them downe, and de∣stroyest them. 18 Oh how suddenly doe they consume: pe∣rish, and come to a fearfull end! 19 Yea, even like as a dream when one a∣waketh so shalt thou make their image to vanish out of the City. 20 Thus my heart was grieved: and it went even through my reins. 21 So foolish was I and ignorant: even as it were a beast before thee.
22 Neverthelesse I am alway by thee: for thou hast holden me by my right hand. 23 Thou shalt guide me with thy counsell: and after that receive me with glory. 24 Whom have I in heaven but thee: and there is none upon earth that I desire in compa∣rison of thee. 25 My flesh and my heart faileth: but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. 26 For lo, they that forsake thee, shall perish: thou hast destroyed all them that commit forica∣tion against thee. 27 But it is good for me so hold me fast by God, to put my trust in the Lord God: and to speak of all thy works (in the gates of the daugh∣ter of Sion.) The Prayer. O Lord God who art loving unto all thy Church, even unto all such as are of a clean heart, give unto us hearts humble and mercifull, that we may never be holden with pride, nor o∣verwhelmed with cruelty; and sanctify our words and lips, that we may never blaspheme thy holinesse, nor our talking be ever against thee, or thy honour. O God most Highest, give unto us such religious and mortified affections, that we may never thirst after the temporall advantages
and prosperities of the wicked: set not our fect in slippery places, least we be suddenly cast down, and have our portion in the lot of the wicked, who perish and come to a fearfull end: guide us with thy counsell, that we holding us fast by thee, and putting our trust in thee, ô God, thou mayest be the strength of our hearts, the hope of our soules, and the ground of all our confidence and content in this life, and after this life is ended, thou maiest receive us with glory, and be our portion for ever, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 74. A Prayer against Sacrilegious persons and all the Enemies of the Church. O God wherefore art thou absent from us so long: why is thy wrath so hot against the sheep of thy pasture? 2 O think upon thy congregation: whom thou hast purchased and redeemed of old. 3 Think upon the tribe of thine inheritance: and mount Sion wherein thou hast dwelt. 4 Lift up thy feet, that thou maist utterly de∣stroy every enemy: which hath done evill in thy sanctuary.
5 Thine adversaries roar in the midst of thy congregations: and set up their banners for to∣kens. 6 He that hewed timber asore out of the thick trees: was known to bring it to an excellent work. 7 But now they break down all the carved work thereof▪ with axes and hammers. 8 They have set fire upon thy holy places: and have defiled the dwelling place of thy name, even unto the ground. 9 Yea, they said in their hearts, Let us make havock of them altogether: thus have they burnt up all the houses of God in the land. 10 We see not our tokens, there is not one prophet more: no not one is there among us that understandeth any more. 11 O God how long shall the adversarie do this dishonour: how long shall the enemy blas∣pheme thy name, for ever? 12 Why withdrawest thou thy hand: why pluckest not thou thy right hand out of thy bosome to consume the enemy? 13 For God is my King of old: the help that is done upon earth, he doth it himself. 14 Thou diddest divide the sea through thy power: thou brakest the heads of the dragons in the waters.
15 Thou smotest the heads of leviathan in pieces and gavest him to be meat for the people in the wildernesse. 16 Thou broughtest out fountains and wa∣ters out of the hard rocks: thou driedst up mighty waters. 17 The day is thine, and the night is thine: thou hast prepared the light and the sunne. 18 Thou hast set all the borders of the earth: thou hast made summer and winter. 19 Remember this, O Lord, how the enemy hath rebuked: and how the foolish people have blasphemed thy name. 29 O deliver not the soul of thy turtle dove unto the multitude of the enemies: and forget not the congregation of the poor for ever. 21 Look upon the covenant: for all the earth is full of darknesse, and cruell habitations. 22 Oh let not the simple go away ashamed: but let the poor and needy give praise unto thy name. 23 Arise, O God, maintain thine own cause: remember how the foolish man blasphemeth thee daily. 24 Forget not the voyce of thine enemies: the presumption of them that hate thee, increaseth ever more and more.
The Prayer. O Lord God Blessed Iesu, who with thy pre∣cious blood hast purchased to thy selfe, and redeemed a Church, that it should serve thee in holinesse & righteousnesse, being delivered from feare of all their adversaries, forget not the con∣gregation of thy poor people for ever, maintaine thine owne cause, deliver the soule of thy Turtle dove from the multitude of her enemies. Pre∣serve with thy right band all the places appoin∣ted for thy publike service, let a guard of flaming Cherubins (as at the gate of Paradise) stand senti∣nell, and keep from the invasions of sacrilegious persons, & the pollutions of all impure Church∣robbers, all thy dwelling places, that thou mayest for ever dwell among us, defending the poore, bringing help to all thy people, and particular blessings & assistances to the tribe of thine owne inheritance, which thou hast sanctified to thy worship and service, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME 75. A Prayer against the terrors of the day of Judgement. MORNING PRAYER. VNto thee (O God) doe we give thanks: yea, unto thee doe we giue thankes. 2 Thy name also is so nigh: and that doe thy wondrous workes de∣clare. 3 When I receiue the congregation: I shall iudge according unto right. 4 The earth is weak, and all the inhabiters thereof: I bear up the pillars of it. 5 I said unto the fools, Deal not so madly: and to the ungodly, Set not up your horn. 6 Set not up your horn on high: and speak not with a stiffe neck. 7 For promotion cometh neither from the East nor from the West: nor yet from the South. 8 And why? God is the iudge: he putteth down one, and setteth up another. 9 For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the wine is red: it is full mixt, and he pou∣reth out of the same.
10 As for the dregs thereof: all the ungodly of the earth shall drink them, and suck them out. 11 But I will talk of the God of Iacob: and praise him for ever. 12 All the horns of the ungodly also will I break: and the horns of the righteous shall be exalted. The Prayer. O Lord God the Iudge of all the world, from whom commeth all promotion and all pu∣nishment, have mercy upon us now, at the houre of death, and in the day of Iudgement, when thou shalt judge all the congregations of men and An∣gells according unto right: ô give us grace to ex∣pect thy comming in humility and charity, that we be not stiffe-necked and exalted in our owne opinions and conceptions, but may submit to thy yoke with meeknesse and obedience, that when thou shalt poure forth the cup of thy vengeance upon the ungodly, we may not drinke or tast of the dregs of it, but may sit downe at thy Table in the Supper of the Lamb, and be satisfied with the blessings of eternity, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME 76. A Prayer that we may feare Gods Iudgements, and be freed from the terrors of men. IN Iury is God known: his name is great in Israel. 2 At Salem is his tabernacle: and his dwel∣ling in Sion. 3 There brake e the arrows of the bow: the shield, the sword, and the battell. 4 Thou art of more honour and might: then the hills of the robbers. 5 The proud are robbed, they haue slept their sleep: and all the men (whose hands were migh∣ty) haue found nothing. 6 At thy rebuke (O God of Iacob:) both the chariot and horse are fallen. 7 Thou even thou art to be feared: and who may stand in thy sight when thou art angry? 8 Thou didst cause thy iudgement to be heard from heaven: the earth trembled and was still. 9 When God arose to iudgement: and to help all the meek upon earth. 10 The fiercenesse of man shall turn to thy praise: and the fiercenesse of them shalt thou refraine. 11 Promise unto the Lord your God, and
keep it, all ye that be round about him: bring pre∣sents unto him that ought to be feared. 12 He shall refrain the spirit of Princes: and is wonderfull among the Kings of the earth. The Prayer. O Lord God, whose dwelling is in heaven, and thy Name is great in all the world, plant the dread and reverence of thee and thy power in our hearts: let thy threatnings and thy judgements, which are heard from heaven, and executed upon disobedient and gainsaying peo∣ple, make us to tremble at the remembrance of our sinnes, and in the consideration of our weake∣nesses and demerits: and let thy mercies and the remembrance of thy infinite loving kindnesses make our hearts still, full of evenesse & tranquil∣lity, that we may not feare the fiercenesse of man, or the wrath of those, whose Spirits thou canst refraine, least we be disturbed in our duties to∣wards thee, but let us so feare thee, that we may never offend against thee, but may passe from feare to love, from apprehensions of thy wrath, to the sense and comforts of thy mercies, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME. 77. A Prayer that the experience of Gods goodnesse may produce hope in us, and remove from us all fearfullnesse and doubting. I Will crie unto God with my voice: even un∣to God will I crie with my voice, and he shall hearken unto me. 2 In the time of my trouble I sought the Lord: my sore ran and ceased not, in the night season my soul refused comfort. 3 When I am in heavinesse I will think upon God: when my heart is vexed, I will com∣plaine. 4 Thou holdest mine eyes waking: I am so feeble that I cannot speak. 5 I haue considered the dayes of old: and the yeares that are past. 6 I call to remembrance my song: and in the night I commune with mine owne heart, and search out my spirits. 7 Will the Lord absent himselfe for ever: and will he be no more intreated? 8 Is his mercy cleane gone for ever: and is his promise come utterly to an end for evermore? 9 Hath God forgotten to be gracious: and will he shut up his loving kindnes in displeasure? 10 And I said, It is mine owne infirmitie▪
but I will remember the yeares of the right hand of the most highest. 11 I will remember the works of the Lord: and call to minde thy wonders of old time. 12 I will think also of all thy works: and my talking shall be of thy doings. 13 Thy way, O God, is holy: who is so great a God (as our God?) 14 Thou art the God that doth wonders: and hast declared thy power among the people. 15 Thou hast mightily delivered thy people▪ even the sonnes of Iacob and Ioseph. 16 The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee, and were afraid: the depths also were troubled. 17 The clouds poured out water, the aire thundred: and thine arrows went abroad. 18 The voice of thy thunder was heard round about: the lightnings shone upon the ground, the earth was moved, and shook withall. 19 Thy way is in the sea, & thy paths in the great waters: and thy footsteps are not knowne. 20 Thou leddest thy people like sheep: by the hand of Moses and Aaron. The Prayer. O God who dost wonders, and hast declared thy power amongst all people, let the ob∣servation
of thy mercies and loving kindnesses, make such deep impression in our hearts and me∣mories, that when we are in heavinesse, we may remember the yeares of thy right hand, and call to mind the wonders of old time, that although thou sometimes withdrawest the brightnesse of thy countenance from us, and shuttest up thy loving kindnesse in a short displeasure, yet the experi∣ence of thy old mercies, which never faile, may sustaine our infirmities, and the expectation of thy loving kindnesses, may cure all our impatience, till in thy due time, the sense of thy favours may actually releeve all our distresses, and thy right hand lead us like sheep into the folds of eternall rest and security, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 78. A Commemoration of Gods blessings to his Church of old, of his Judgements upon sinners, and his mercies to the penitent. EVENING PRAYER. HEare my law, O my people: encline your eares unto the words of my mouth. 2 I will open my mouth in a pa∣rable: I will declare hard sentences of old.
3 Which we haue heard and knowne: and such as our fathers have told us. 4 That we should not hide them from the children of the generations to come: but to shew the honour of the Lord, his mighty and wonder∣full works that he hath done. 5 He made a covenant with Iacob, and gaue Israel a law: which he commanded our forefa∣thers to teach their children. 6 That their posterity might know it: and the children which were yet unborn. 7 To the intent that when they came up: they might shew their children the same. 8 That they might put their trust in God: and not to forget the works of God, but to keep his Commandements. 9 And not to be as their forefathers, a faith∣lesse and stubborn generation: a generation that set not their heart aright▪ and whose spirit lea∣ved not stedfastly unto God. 10 Like as the children of Ephraim: which being haruessed and carrying bows, turned them∣selves back in the day of battell. 11 They kept not the covenant of God: and would not walk in his law. 12 But forgat what he had done: and the wonderfull works that he had shewed for them. 13 Marvellous things did he in the sight of
our forefathers in the land of Egypt: even in the field of zoan. 14 He divided the sea, and let them goe through: he made the waters to stand on an heap. 15 In the day time also he led them with a cloud: and all the night through with a light of fire. 16 He clave the hard rocks in the wilder∣nesse▪ and gaue them drink thereof, as it had been out of the great depth. 17 He brought waters out of the stony rock: so that it gushed out like the rivers. 18 Yet for all this they sinned more against him: and provoked the most Highest in the wil∣dernesse. 19 They tempted God in their hearts: and required meat for their lust 20 They spake against God also, saying: Shall God prepare a table in the wildernesse? 21 He smote the stony rock indeed, that the water gushed out, and the streams flowed with∣all: but can he giue bread also, or provide flesh for his people? 22 When the Lord heard this, he was wroth: so the fire was kindled in Iacob, and there came up heavy displeasure against Israel. 23 Because they beleeved not in God: and put not their trust in his help.
24 So he commanded the clouds aboue: and opened the doores of heaven. 25 He rained down Manna also upon them for to eat: and gaue them food from heaven. 26 So man did eat Angells food: for he sent them meat enough. 27 He caused the east winde to blow under heaven: and through his power he brought in the south-west▪winde. 28 He rained flesh upon them as thick as dust: and feathered fowles like as the sand of the sea. 29 He let it fall among their tents: even round about their habitation. 30 So they did eat and were well filled, for he gaue them their own desire: they were not dis∣appointed of their lust. 31 But while the meat was yet in their mouthes, the heavy wrath of God came upon them, and slew the wealthiest of them: yea, and smote downe the chosen men that were in Israel. 32 But for all this they sinned yet more: and beleeved not his wonderous works. 33 Therefore their dayes did he consume in vanity: and their yeares in trouble. 34 When he slew them, they sought him: and turned them early, and enquired after God. 35 And they remembred that God was
their strength: and that the high God was their Redeemer. 36 Neverthelesse, they did but flatter him with their mouth: and dissembled with him in their tongue. 37 For their heart was not whole with him: neither continued they stedfast in his covenant. 38 But he was so mercifull, that he forgaue their misdeeds: and destroyed them not. 39 Yea many a time turned he his wrath a∣way: and would not suffer his whole displeasure to arise. 40 For he considered that they were but flesh: and that they were even a winde that passeth a∣way, and cometh not againe. 41 Many a time did they provoke him in the wildernesse: and grieved him in the desert. 42 They turned back and tempted God: and moved the holy one in Israel. 43 They thought not of his hand: and of the day when he delivered them from the hand of the enemy. 44 How he had wrought his miracles in E∣gypt: and his wonders in the field of Zoan. 45 He turned their waters into bloud: so that they might not drink of the rivers. 46 He sent lice among them and devoured them up: and frogs to destroy them.
47 He gaue their fruit unto the caterpiller: and their labour unto the grahopper. 48 He destroyed their vines with hailstones: and their mulberrie trees with the frost. 49 He smote their cattell also with hailstones: and their flocks with hot thunderbolts. 50 He cast upon them the furiousnesse of his wrath, anger, displeasure, and trouble: and sent evill Angells among them: 51 He made a way to his indignation, and spared not their soul from death: but gaue their life over to the pestilence. 52 And smote all the first-born in Egypt: the most principall and mightiest in the dwellings of Ham. 53 But as for his owne people, he led them forth like sheep: and carried them in the wilder∣nesse like a flock. 54 He brought them out safely that they should not fear: and overwhelmed their enemies with the sea. 55 And brought them within the borders of his sanctuary: even to his mountain, which he purchased with his right hand. 56 He cast out the heathen also before them: caused their land to be divided among them for an heritage, and made the tribes of Israell to dwell in their tents.
57 So they tempted and displeased the most high God: and kept not his testimonies. 58 But turned their backs, and fell away like their forefathers: starting aside like a bro∣ken bow. 59 For they grieved him with their hill al∣tars: and provoked him to displeasüre with their images. 60 When God heard this, he was wroth: and took sore displeasure at Israel. 61 So that he forsook the sabernacle in Slo: even the tent that he had pitched among them. 62 He dellvered their power into captivity: and their beauty into the enemies hand. 63 He gaue his people over also unto ye sword: and was wroth with his inheritance. 64 The fire consumed their young men: and their maidens were not given to marriage. 65 Their priests were slain with the sword: and there were no widows to make lamentation. 66 So the Lord awaked as one out of sleep: and like a Giant refreshed with wine. 67 He smote his enemies in the hinder parts: and put them to a perpetuall shame. 68 He refused the tabernacle of Ioseph: and those not the tribe of Ephraim. 69 But chose the tribe of Iuda: even the hill of Sion, which he loved.
70 And there he builded his temple on high: and laid the foundation of it like the ground which he hath made continually. 71 He chose David also his servant: and took him away from the sheepfolds. 72 As he was following the ewes great with young ones, he took him: that he might feed Ia∣cob his people, and Israel his inheritance. 73 So he fed them with a faithfull and true heart: and ruled them prudently with all his power. The Prayer. O Lord God of Our Fathers, God of Abra∣ham, Isaac, and Iacob, thou that leddest thy people through the Wildernesse with a light and with a cloud, and with thy bright Angell, for their sakes turning rocks into a springing well, and making the Sea and the River become dry land, so making demonstration of the greatnesse of thy mercy, by the greatnesse of thy miracles, and didst still goe on to make all thy creatures leave their natures to serve them, even then when they tempted and provoked thee ten times in the desert: O be pleased to doe unto us as thou didst to them: lead us through the desert of this World with the light of thy holy Spirit; and from
the rock, which for our sakes thou didst smite with thy heavy rod, the rock Christ Iesus, let water and bloud streame forth, to cleanse and to refresh us. Give us of the bread that came down from heaven, the flesh of thy deare Sonne to eat, that we being purified by his bloud, and nourished by that celestiall Manna, our hearts may be set a∣right, and our spirits may cleave stedfastly unto thee, O God, that we may remember thy works, and trust in thy mercies, and may keep thy com∣mandements. O never let the fire of thy wrath be kindled towards us, nor thy heavy displeasure come up against us; let us not consume our daies in folly and vanity, least our yeares be spent in trouble, but when through infirmity we fall, let thy gentle correction call us home, that we may turne us early, and seek after thee our God, who art our strength and our mercifull Redeemer, that we may never feele the furiousnesse of thy eter∣nall wrath, nor have our portion amongst the e∣vill Angells, but may be conducted by thy mer∣cies and providence, to the border of thy sanctua∣ry, and to the mountain where thou reignest over all the creatures, one God world withoutend. Amen▪
PSALME 79. A Prayer that God would deliver his Church from the cruelty of all her persecutors. MORNING PRAYER. O God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance: thy holy temple have they defiled, and made Ierusalem an heap of stones. 2 The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls of the aire: and the flesh of thy saints unto the beasts of the land. 3 Their blood have they shed like water on e∣very side of Ierusalem: and there was no man to bury them. 4 We are become an open shame to our ene∣mies: a very scorn and derision unto them that are round about us. 5 Lord, how long wilt thou be angry: shall thy iealousie burn like fire for ever? 6 Poure out thine indignation upon the hea∣then that have not known thee: and upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy namē. 7 For they have devoured Iacob: and laid waste his dwelling place.
8 O remember not our old sinnes, but have mercy upon us, and that soon: for we are come to great misery. 9 Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: O deliver us, and be mercifull unto our sinnes for thy names sake. 10 Wherefore do the heathen say: Where is now their God? 11 O let the vengeance of thy servants bloud that is shed: be openly shewed upon the heathen in our sight. 12 O let the sorrowfull sighing of the priso∣ners come before thee: according to the great∣nesse of thy power preserve thou those that are ap∣poynted to die. 13 And for the blasphemy wherewith our neighbours have blasphemed thee: reward thou them (O Lord) seven fold into their bosome. 14 So we that be thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks for ever: and will alway be shewing forth thy praise from generati∣on to generation. The Prayer. O Lord God of thine inheritance, who con∣veyest many blessings to the children of men, by the prayers and ministery of thy Church, let our Prayers obtain of thee mercies and deli∣verances
for her. O Lord thou hast planted thy Church in the humility, and poverty, and death of thy Sonne, thou hast watered it with the blood of thy Apostles and Martyrs, thou hast made it flourish, and spread forth its branches, by the warmth, and heate, and graces of thy holy spirit, and hast according to thy promise, still preserved it in the midst of all enmities and disadvantages. Thy Lawes and righteous commandements have been a scorn and derision to Iewes and Gentiles, the flesh of thy servants have been meat for the beasts of the Land, and still she weares the pur∣ple robe of mockery, and the crowne of thornes which at first she took from the head and side of her Dearest Lord: At last, O Lord, be gratious un∣to thine inheritance, help us, ô God of our salvati∣on, for the glory of thy Name, let not thine ene∣mies devour the Church, and lay wast her dwel∣ling places: be mercifull unto our sinnes, pre∣serve all those that by malice of their enemies are appoynted to death, or prison, or any other mise∣ry: let us still enjoy the freedom of thy Gospell, the food of thy word, the sweet refreshings of thy Sacraments, publike Communions in thy Church, and all the benefits of the society of Saints, and let not our sinnes cause thee to remove the Can∣dlestick from us, but make thy people and the sheep of thy pasture secure and glad in thy salva∣tion,
that we may shew forth thy praise in this world, and in the world to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 80. A Prayer for the Church. HEare, O thou Shepheard of Israel, thou that leadest Ioseph like a sheep: shew thy self also thou that sittest upon the cherubims. 2 Before Ephraim, Beniamin, and Manas∣ses: stirre up thy strength, and come and help us. 3 Turn us again, O God: shew the light of thy countenance, and we shall be whole. 4 O Lord God of hosts: how long wilt thou be angry with thy people that prayeth? 5 Thou feedest them with the bread of tears: and givest them plenteousnesse of tears to drink. 6 Thou hast made us a very strife unto our neighbours: and our enemies laugh us to scorn. 7 Turn us again thou God of hosts: shew the light of thy countenance, and we shall be whole. 8 Thou hast brought a vine out of Egypt: thou hast cast out the heathen, and planted it. 9 Thou madest room for it: and when it had taken root, it filled the land. 10 The hills were covered with the shadow of it: and the boughs thereof were like the goodly cedar-trees.
11 She stretched out her branches unto the sea: and her boughs unto the river. 12 Why hast thou then broken down her hedge: that all they that go by, pluck off her grapes? 13 The wild bore out of the wood doth root it up: and the wild beasts of the field devoure it. 14 Turn thee again, thou God of hosts, look down from heaven: behold, and visit this vine. 15 And the place of the vineyard that thy right hand hath planted: and the branch that thou ma∣dest so strong for thy self. 16 It is burnt with fire, and cut down: and they shall perish at the rebuke of thy counte∣nance. 17 Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand: and upon the sonne of man whom thou ma∣dest so strong for thine own self. 18 And so will not we go back from thee: O let us live, and we shall call upon thy name. 19 Turn us again, O Lord God of hosts: shew the light of thy countenance, and we shall be whole. The Prayer. O Thou shepheard of Israel, thou that sittest upon the Cherubims, stirre up thy strength, and come and help thy people that prayeth unto
thee for mercy and protection. Thou hast made affliction the portion of thy Children in this life, thou feedest them with bread of teares, and gi∣vest them plenteousnesse of teares to drinke; yet be pleased to shew the light of thy countenance upon us, to lighten our darknesses, to relieve our miseries, to heal our sicknesses, and let not thy Church become a strife unto her neighbours, but reunite her divisions, and make her not a prey to them that would devoure her, and then laugh her to scorne. O Lord hedge her about with thy mer∣cies, with the custody of Angels, with the patro∣nage of Kings and Princes, with the hearts and hands of Nobles, and the defence of the whole secular arme, least the wild beasts of the field pluck off her grapes, destroy the vintage, and root up the vine it selfe: but let her so flourish under the beams of thy favour and providence, that it may take root and spread and fill all lands, that the name of the man of thy right hand, the God and Man Christ Iesus may be glorified, thy Church enlarged and defended, and we blessed with thy health and salvation. Grant this O Lord for Iesus Christ his sake our only Saviour and Re∣deemer. Amen.
PSALME 81. A festivall song and a Prayer for the grace and blessings of obedience to Gods Lawes. SIng we merrily unto God our strength: make a cheerfull noise unto the God of Iacob. 2 Take the psalme, bring hither the tabret: the merry harp with the lute. 3 Blow up the trumpet in the new moon: e∣ven in the time appoynted, and upon our solemne feast day. 4 For this was made a statute for Israel: and a law of the God of Iacob. 5 This he ordained in Ioseph for a testimony: when he came out of the land of Egypt, and had heard a strange language. 6 I eased his shoulder from the burden: and his hands were delivered from making the pots. 7 Thou calledst upon me in troubles, and I delivered thee: and heard thee what time as the storm fell upon thee. 8 I proved thee also: at the waters of strife. 9 Heare, O my people, and I will assure thee, O Israel: if thou wilt hearken unto me. 10 There shall no strange god be in thee: nei∣ther shalt thou worship any other god. 11 I am the Lord thy God, which brought
thee out of the land of Egypt: open thy mouth wide, and I shall fill it. 12 But my people would not heare my voyce: and Israel would not obey me. 13 So I gave them up unto their own hearts lust: and let them follow their own imaginations. 14 O that my people would have hearkned unto me: for if Israel had walked in my wayes. 15 I should soon have put down their ene∣mies: and turned my hand against their adver∣saries. 16 The haters of the Lord should have been found liars: but their time should have endured for ever. 17 He should have fed them also with the fi∣nest wheat-floure: and with hony out of the stonie∣rock should I have satisfied thee. The Prayer. O Lord God our strength, whose mer∣cies are infinite, whose Majesty is glo∣rious, whose goodnesse is amiable above all the excellencies in the World, enlarge our hearts with joy and rejoycings in thy glories, open our mouths wide, and fill our lips with thy prai∣ses, that upon the solemne feast daies we may commemorate thy excellencies and mercies, and the great mysteries of our redemption and Reli∣gion,
adoring thee with thankes and joyfulnesse, who art mysterious in thy words, and marvellous & mercifull in all thy works: and that we may in the best manner expresse our thankfulnes to thee, give us thy grace that we may heare thy voyce, that we may obey thee & walk in thy Laws, that we follow not our owne imaginations, nor be gi∣ven to our own hearts lusts, but that we resigning our selves only to thy holy will & pleasure, thou mayest heare our prayers when ever any storme of trouble falls upon us, and turne thine hand a∣gainst our adversaries, and that we being deliver∣ed from the burden of our sinnes, may be fed with the choicest of thy viands, and with food from the Rocke Christ Iesus, even his most precious bodie and bloud, nourishing us up to life eternall, through the same Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 82. A Prayer for the Princes and Judges of the world, that they may do right iudgement. EVENING PRAYER. GOd standeth in the congregation of Princes: he is a Iudge among gods. 2 How long will yee give wrong iudgement: and accept the persons of the ungodly? 3 Defend the poore and fatherlesse: see that
such as be in need and necessitie, have right. 4 Deliver the outcast and poore: save them from the hand of the ungodly. 5 They will not be learned, nor understand, but walke on still in darknesse: all the foundati∣ons of the earth be out of course. 6 I have said, yee are gods: and yee all are children of the most Highest. 7 But yee shall die like men: and fall like one of the Princes. 8 Arise, O God, and iudge thou the earth: for thou shalt take all the heathen to thine inheri∣tance. The Prayer. O Almighty Iudge of Men and Angels, thou God of Gods, and Prince of Princes, let thy Spirit of anointing rest upon the Princes and Ru∣lers within the pale of the Vniversall Church, and let thy righteousnesse and judgements guide all those that sit in the seat of the Iudges, that they may minister justice and true judgement unto the people, defending and promoting the interests of true Religion, relieving the oppressed, en∣couraging vertue, and dishonouring vitious per∣sons, delivering the poore, and saving them from the hand of the ungodly, that men may not walke
on still in darknesse, but their evill deeds may be discovered and brought to light, that we may all live before thee in righteousnesse, expecting the great day of righteous judgement, which we begge we may all behold with confidence, re∣ceiving thy mercies, and beholding thy face in glory thorough Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME. 83. A Prayer against the Enemies of the Church, particularly, sacrilegious persons. HOld not thy tongue, O God, keep not still silence: refrain not thy selfe, O God. 2 For lo, thine enemies make a murmuring: and they that hate thee have lift up their head. 3 They have imagined craftily against thy people: and taken counsell against thy secret ones. 4 They have said, Come, and let us root them out, that they be no more a people: and that the name of Israel may be no more in re∣membrance. 5 For they have cast their heads together with one consent: and are confederate against thee. 6 The tabernacles of the Edoinites, and the Ismaelites: the Moabites and Hgarenes.
7 Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek: the Philistines, with them that dwell at Tyre. 8 Assur also is ioyned unto them: and have holpen the children of Lot. 9 But do thou to them as unto the Madia∣nites: unto Sisera, and unto Iabin, at the brook of Rison. 10 Which perished at Endor: and became as the dung of the earth. 11 Make them and their princes like Oreb and Zeb: yea, make all their princes like as Ze∣ba and Salmana. 12 Which say, Let us take to our selves: the houses of God in possession. 13 O my God, make them like unto a wheel: and as the stubble before the winde. 14 Like as the fire that burneth up the wood: and as the flame that consumeth the mountaines. 15 Persecute them even so with thy tempest: and make them afraid with thy storme. 16 Make their faces ashamed, O Lord: that they may seek thy name. 17 Let them be confounded and vexed ever more and more: let them be put to shame and perish. 18 And they shall know that thou (whose name is Iehovah:) art onely the most highest over all the earth.
The Prayer. O Lord God who wert known to thy people Israel by thy name Iehovah, thou art onely the highest over all the earth, arise and defend thy people, and deliver thy secret ones from the murmurings, councels, and crafty imaginations of thine enemies against them. Fixe the founda∣tions of the Church upon a Rocke, and preserve thine inheritance in peace and safety. Infatuate the councels, restrain the sacrilegious appetites of all such persons who would rob all thy houses and take them to their owne possession, and make their faces so ashamed and their hearts afraid, that they may return from covetousnesse and impiety, and seek thy Name, repenting of all their sinnes, and living in justice and religion, that at last they may come into an everlasting possession of thy house, and of thy Temple where thine Honour dwelleth and reigneth eternally world without end. Amen. PSALME 84. A Prayer of desire and longings after the ioyes of Heaven. O How amiable are thy dwellings: thou Lord of hosts! 2 My soule hath a desire and longing to enter
into the courts of the Lord: my heart and my flesh reioyce in the living God. 3 Yea, the sparrow hath found her an house, and the swallow a nest, where she may lay her young: even thy altars, O Lord of hosts, my King and my God. 4 Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they will be alway praising thee. 5 Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee: in whose heart are thy wayes. 6 Which going through the vale of misery, use it for a well: and the pooles are filled with water. 7 They will go from strength to strength: and unto the God of gods appeareth every one of them in Sion. 8 O Lord God of hosts, heare my prayer: hearken, O God of Iacob. 9 Behold, O God, our defender: and look upon the face of thine Anointed. 10 For one day in thy courts: is better than a thousand. 11 I had rather be a door-keeper in the house of my God: than to dwell in the tents of un∣godlinesse. 12 For the Lord God is a light and defence: the Lord will give grace and worship, and no good thing shall he withhold from them that live a god∣ly life.
13 O Lord God of hosts: blessed is the man that putteth his trust in thee. The Prayer. O Lord God of hosts, who dwellest in the heavens, seated in essentiall and eternall felicities; fill our hearts with desires and longings to enter into those Courts where thou sittest, at∣tended with the beauteous orders of Angells, and millions of beautified spirits; and that our de∣sires may receive infinite satisfactions, give us thy helpe, that we going through the vale of mi∣sery, the pooles may be filled with water, our hearts and eyes may runne over with teares of repentance and overflow with sorrow and contri∣tion for our sinnes, that we living a godly life, going from strength to strength, from vertue to vertue, at last we may appeare in Sion unto the God of Gods, beholding the face of thine anoin∣ted, thy Christ, and our Iesus, and may dwell one day in thy Courts, even all the long day of eter∣nity, through the same Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME. 85. A thanksgiving for Gods free mercy in the pardon of our sinnes, and a prayer for the continuance and increase of his mercies to us. LOrd, thou art become gratious unto thy land: thou hast turned away the captivity of Iacob. 2 Thou hast forgiven the offence of thy peo∣ple: and covered all their sinnes. 3 Thou hast taken away all thy displeasure: and turned thy selfe from thy wrathfull indig∣nation. 4 Turn us then, O God our Saviour: and let thine anger cease from us. 5 Wilt thou be displeased at us for ever: and wilt thou stretch out thy wrath from one gene∣ration to another? 6 Wilt thou not turn againe & quicken us: that thy people may reioyce in thee? 7 Shew us thy mercy, O Lord: and grant us thy salvation. 8 I will hearken what the Lord God will say concerning me: for he shall speak peace unto his people, and to his saints, that they turne not again.
9 For his salvation is nigh them that feare him: that glory may dwell in our land. 10 Mercy and truth are met together: righte∣ousnesse and peace have kissed each other. 11 Truth shall flourish out of the earth: and righteousnesse hath looked down from heaven. 12 Yea, the Lord shall shew loving kindnesse: and our land shall give her increase. 13 Righteousnesse shall go before him: and he shall direct his going in the way. The Prayer. O Most gracious God, who art reconciled unto us in our Saviour Iesus, having for his sake forgiven the offences of thy people and covered all their sinnes with the robe of his most imma∣culate sanctity and righteousnesse, let thy grace convert and quicken us, that we may rejoyce in thee and thy salvation, in faith of thy promises, in hope of the actuall communication of thy mer∣cies to us, and in love to thee for so great blessings and redemption; and when thou hast spoken peace unto our soules and reconciled us to thy selfe in the bloud of thy Son, give us the grace of perseverance that we may never turne again to folly, but may follow mercy and truth all our dayes, and at last be satisfied with thy righteous∣nesse
and peace eternall, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 86. A prayer for sanctity and preservation. MORNING PRAYER. BOw down thine eare, O Lord, and heare me: for I am poore and in misery. 2 Preserve thou my soule, for I am holy: my God save thy servant that putteth his trust in thee. 3 Be mercifull unto me, O Lord: for I will call daily upon thee. 4 Comfort the soule of thy servant: for un∣to thee (O Lord) do I lift up my soule. 5 For thou Lord art good and gracious: and of great mercy unto all them that call upon thee. 6 Give eare, Lord, unto my prayer: and pon∣der the voyce of my humble desires. 7 In the time of my trouble I will call upon thee: for thou hearest me. 8 Among the gods there is none like unto thee (O Lord:) there is not one that can do as thou doest. 9 All nations whom thou hast made, shall
come and worship thee, O Lord: and shall glori∣fie thy Name. 10 For thou art great, and doest wonderous things: thou art God alone. 11 Teach me thy way (O Lord) and I will walke in thy truth: O knit my heart unto thee, that I may feare thy Name. 12 I will thanke thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart: and will praise thy Name for ever∣more. 13 For great is thy mercy toward me: and thou hast delivered my soule from the nethermost hell. 14 O God, the proud are risen against me: and the congregations of naughty men have sought after my soule, and have not set thee be∣fore their eyes. 15 But thou (O Lord God) art full of com∣passion and mercy: long-suffering, plenteous in goodnesse and truth. 16 O turne thee then unto me, and have mer∣cy upon me: give thy strength unto thy servant, and helpe the son of thine handmaid. 17 Shew some good token upon me for good, that they which hate me, may see it, and be asha∣med: because thou Lord hast holpen me, and comforted me.
The Prayer. O Lord God, good and gracious, and of great mercy unto all them that call upon thee, give eare unto our prayers, and ponder the voyce of our desires when ever we call upon thee in our trouble. Let the soules of thy servants be re∣freshed with thy comforts, and defend us from the congregations of proud and naughty men. Turne thee unto us with mercy, give thy strength unto us, teach us thy lawes, make us to walke in thy truth, give us the feare of thy Name, and knit our hearts to thee with the indissoluble bands of charity and obedience, that our soules being saved from the nethermost hell, we may worship thee, O Lord, & glorifie thy name, who art full of compassion and mercy, long-suffering and plenteous in goodnesse and truth which thou hast manifested to us in our deliverance and re∣demption, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen, PSALME. 87. A contemplation of the excellencies of Sion, or the celestiall Ierusalem. HEr foundations are upon the holy hills: the Lord loveth the gates of Sion more than all the dwellings of Iacob.
2 Uery excellent things are spoken of thee: thou city of God. 3 I will thinke upon Rahab and Babylon: with them that know me. 4 Behold ye the Philistims also: and they of Tyre, with the Morians, lo, there was he borne. 5 And of Sion it shall be reported, that he was borne in her: and the most High shall sta∣blish her. 6 The Lord shall rehearse it, when he wri∣teth up the people: that he was borne there. 7 The singers also and trumpeters also shall he rehearse: all my fresh springs shall be in thee. The Prayer. O Lord God who dwellest in Sion, and de∣lightest to have thy habitation in the hearts of men, thou hast built the Church as a City up∣on a hill, and laid the foundation of it upon the Apostles and Prophets, Iesus Christ being the chiefe Corner-stone, make us to be a spirituall building fit for thy habitation, and a residence for thy holy Spirit, grounding us in faith, building us up in hope, and perfecting us in charity, that we being joyned in the communion of Saints, in the union of the holy Catholike Church militant on earth, may all partake of the blessings of thy
Church triumphant in the City of thee our God, in the celestiall Ierusalem, where thou livest and reignest ever one God world without end. Amen. PSALME 88. A prayer in time of sicknesse and danger of death. O Lord God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before thee: O let my prayer en∣ter into thy presence, incline thine eare unto my calling. 2 For my soule is full of trouble: and my life draweth nigh unto hell. 3 I am counted as one of them that go down into the pit: and I have been even as a man that hath no strength. 4 Free among the dead, like unto them that be wounded and lie in the grave: which be out of remembrance, and are cut away from thy hand. 5 Thou hast laid me in the lowest pit: in a place of darknesse, and in the deep. 6 Thine indignation lieth hard upon me: and thou hast vexed me with all thy stormes. 7 Thou hast put away mine acquaintance far from me: and made me to be abhorred of them. 8 I am so fast in prison: that I cannot get forth.
9 My sight faileth for very trouble: Lord, I have called daily upon thee, I have stretched out my hands unto thee. 10 Doest thou shew wonders among the dead: or shall the dead rise up again and praise thee? 11 Shall thy loving kindnesse be shewed in the grave: or thy faithfulnesse in destruction? 12 Shall thy wondrous workes be knowne in the darke: and thy righteousnesse in the land where all things are forgotten? 13 Unto thee hae I eried, O Lord: and ear∣ly shall my prayer come before thee. 14 Lord, why abhorest thou my soule: and hidest thou thy face from me? 15 I am in misery, and like unto him that is at the point to die: (even from my youth up) thy terrours have I suffered with a troubled minde. 16 Thy wrathfull displeasure goeth over me▪ and the feare of thee hath undone me. 17 They came round about me daily like wa∣ter: and compassed me together on every side. 18 My lovers and friends hast thou put away from me: and hid mine acquaintance out of my sight.
The Prayer. O Lord God of our salvation, who for our sakes wert wounded and didst die and lie in the grave, but yet alone of all that ever died wert free among the dead, and by thine own power didst arise againe with victory and triumph; have mercy upon thy servant, for thine indignation li∣eth hard upon me, and thou hast vexed me with all thy stormes: my soul is full of trouble by rea∣son of my sinnes, and my life draweth nigh un∣to the grave; restore me unto thy favour, and let me not go down into the darke, nor my life into the place where all things are forgotten, but let me shew forth thy loving kindnesse amongst thy redeemed ones in the land of the living: for the living, the living he shall praise thee and con∣fesse the holinesse and the mercies of thy holy Name. O hide not thou thy face from me, but give me health of body and restore and preserve me in the life of righteousnesse, and so blesse me with opportunities of doing thee service, that I may redeem the time past, and by thy grace may grow rich in good workes, alwayes abounding in the worke of the Lord, that when thou shalt demand my soule to be rendred up into thy hands, my soule may not be abhorred of thee, nor suffer thy terrours, but may feele an eternity
of blessings in the resurrection of the just through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 89. A Prayer for the King in time of Warres or any publike calamitie. EVENING PRAYER. MY song shall be alway of the loving kindnesse of the Lord: with my mouth will I ever be shewing thy truth from one generation to ano∣ther. 2 For I have said, mercy shall be set up for ever: thy truth shalt thou stablish in the hea∣vens. 3 I have made a covenant with my chosen: I have sworne unto David my servant. 4 Thy seed will I stablish for ever: and set up thy throne from one generation to another. 5 O Lord, the very heavens shall praise thy wondrous workes: and thy truth in the congre∣gation of the saints. 6 For who is he among the clouds: that shall be compared unto the Lord? 7 And what is he among the gods: that shall be like unto the Lord?
8 God is very greatly to be feared in the counsell of the saints: and to be had in reverence of all them that are round about him. 9 O Lord God of hosts, who is like unto thee: thy truth (most mighty Lord) is on every side. 10 Thou rulest the raging of the sea: thou stillest the waves thereof when they arise. 11 Thou hast subdued Egypt, and destroy∣ed it: thou hast scattered thine enemies abroad with thy might arme. 12 The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine: thou hast laid the foundation of the round world, and all that therein is. 13 Thou hast made the North and the South: Tabor and Harmon shall reioyce in thy Name. 14 Thou hast a mighty arme: strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand. 15 Righteousnesse and equity is the habitati∣on of thy feat: mercy▪ and truth shall go before thy face. 16 Blessed is the people (O Lord) that can reioyce in thee: they shall walke in the light of thy countenance. 17 Their delight shall be daily in thy Name: and in thy righteousnesse shall they make their boast.
18 For thou art the glory of their strength: and in thy loving kindnesse thou shalt lift up our hornes. 19 For the Lord is our defence: the holy one of Israel is our King. 20 Thou spakest sometimes in vision unto thy Saints, and saidest: I have laid helpe upon one that is mighty, I have exalted one chosen out of the people. 21 I have found David my servant: with my holy oyle have I anointed him. 22 My hand shall hold him fast: and my arme shall strengthen him. 23 The enemy shall not be able to do him vio∣lence: the son of wickednesse shall not hurt him. 24 I shall smite down his foes before his face: and plague them that hate him. 25 My truth also and my mercy shall be with him: and in my Name shall his horne be exalted. 26 I will set his dominion also in the sea: and his right hand in the flouds. 27 He shall call me, thou art my father: my God, and my strong salvation. 28 And I will make him my first-borne: higher than the kings of the earth. 29 My mercy will I keep for him for ever∣more: and my covenant shall stand fast with him. 30 His seed also will I make to endure for
ever: and his throne as the dayes of heaven. 31 But if his children forsake my law: and walke not in my iudgements. 32 If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandements: I will visit their offences with the rod, and their sin with scourges. 33 Neverthelesse, my loving kindnesse will I not utterly take from him: nor suffer my truth to faile. 34 My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips: I have sworne once by my holinesse, that I will not faile David. 35 His seed shall endure for ever: and his seat is like as the sun before me. 36 He shall stand fast for evermore as the moon: and as the faithfull witnesse in Heaven. 37 But thou hast abhorred and forsaken thine anointed: and art displeased at him. 38 Thou hast broken the covenant of thy ser∣vant: and cast his crown to the ground. 39 Thou hast overthrowne all his hedges: and broken down his strong holds. 40 All they that goe by spoile him: and he is become a rebuke to his neighbours. 41 Thou hast set up the right hand of his ene∣mies: and made all his adversaries to reioyce. 42 Thou hast taken away the edge of his
sword: and givest him not victory in the battell. 43 Thou hast put out his glorie: and cast his throne down to the ground. 44 The dayes of his youth hast thou shorten∣ed: and covered him with dishonour. 45 Lord, how long wilt thou hide thy selfe, for ever: and shall thy wrath burne like fire? 46 Oh remember how short my time is: wherefore hast thou made all men for nought? 47 What man is he that liveth, and shall not see death: and shall he deliver his soule from the hand of hell? 48 Lord, where are thy old loving kindnesses: which thou swarest unto David in thy truth? 49 Remember (Lord) the rebuke that thy ser∣vants have: and how I doe beare in my bosome the rebukes of many people. 50 Wherewith thine enemies have blasphe∣med thee, and slandered the footsteps of thine anointed: praised be the Lord for evermore. Amen, Amen. The Prayer. O Lord God of hosts, thou art greatly to be feared in the councell of the saints, and to be had in reverence of all the world, let thy strong hand and thy mighty arme blesse and pre∣serve
thine Anointed the King; as thou hast ex∣alted thy chosen from among the People, so let the greatnesse of thy blessings and assistances di∣stinguish him from all the world: make his throne as the dayes of heaven, smite down his enemies before his face, let thy hand hold him fast that the enemy may not be able to doe him violence, and let thine arme strengthen him that the sonnes of wickednesse may not hurt him. O do thou never put his glory out, nor cover him with dishonour, but give him victory in battels, honour and re∣joycing in time of peace, confidence in thee, re∣verence amongst his people, & continual defence in thy salvation, that when thou hast finished his dayes in peace and honour, his seed may be esta∣blished in his throne and endure for ever like as the sun before thee. Grant this, O king of kings, for his sake to whom thou hast given all power and dominion in heaven and earth, even our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen.
PSALME 90. A meditation of death and a prayer preparatory to it. MORNING PRAYER. LOrd, thou hast been our refuge: from one generation to another. 2 Before the mountaines were brought forth, or ever the earth and the world were made: thou art God from everlasting, and world without end. 3 Thou turnest man to destruction: again thousayest, Come again yée children of men. 4 For a thousand yeares in thy sight, are but as yesterday: seeing that is past as a watch in the night. 5 As soon as thou scatterest them, they are even as a sleep: and fade away suddenly like the grasse. 6 In the morning it is green, and groweth up: but in the evening it is cut down, dried up, and withered. 7 For we consume away in thy displeasure: and are afraid at thy wrathfull indignation. 8 Thou hast set our misdeeds before thee:
and our secret sinnes in the sight of thy counte∣nance. 9 For when thou art angry, all our dayes are gone: we bring our yeares to an end, as it were a tale that is told. 10 The dayes of our age are threescore yeares and ten, and though men be so strong that they come to fourescore yeares: yet is their strength then but labour and sorrow, so soon passeth it a∣way, and we are gone. 11 But who regardeth the power of thy wrath: for even thereafter as a man feareth, so is thy displeasure. 12 O teach us to number our dayes: that we may apply our hearts unto wisdome. 13 Turne thee again (O Lord) at the last: and be gracious unto thy servants. 14 O satisfie us with thy mercy, and that soon▪ so shall we reioice and be glad all the dayes of our life. 15 Comfort us again now after the time that thou hast plagued us: and for the yeares where∣in we have suffered adversity. 16 Shew thy servants thy worke: and their children thy glory. 17 And the glorious maiesty of the Lord our God be upon us: prosper thou the worke of our hands upon us, O prosper thou our handy worke.
The Prayer. O Eternall God, whose being was before the mountaines were brought forth, before the earth and the vvorld vvere made, even from e∣verlasting and world without end, have mercy upon us vveake and impotent people, the chil∣dren of men vvho fade avvay suddenly like the grasse: remove our misdeeds from before thee, and our secret sinnes from the sight of thy coun∣tenance: be not angry with us, neither consume us in thy displeasure; teach us to number all the dayes of our life, and to reckon on still to the day of death, that when our dayes are gone, and our yeares are brought to an end like a tale that is told, thou mayest turne untous at the last, and be gracious unto us in the pardon of our sinnes, in the restraining the power and malice of all our ghostly enemies, in giving us opportunity of all spirituall assistances and advantages, that our lampes being trimmed and burning bright with charity and devotion, we may enter into the bride-chamber, there for ever to behold the glori∣ous majesty of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, Amen.
PSALME 91. A Prayer for protection in all dangers. VVHoso dwelleth under the defence of the most High: shall abide under the sha∣dow of the Almighty. 2 I will say unto the Lord, Thou art my hope and my strong hold: my God, in him will I trust. 2 For he shall deliver thee from the suare of the hunter: and from the noysome pestilence. 4 He shall defend thee under his wings, and thou shalt be safe under his feathers: his faithful∣nesse and truth shall be thy shield and buckler. 5 Thou shalt not be afraid for any terrour by night: nor for the arrow that flieth by day. 6 For the pestilence that walketh in darkenes: nor for the sicknesse that destroyeth in the noone day. 7 A thousand shall fall beside thee, and ten thousand at thy right hand: but it shall not come nigh thee. 8 Yea, with thine eyes shalt thou behold: and ee the reward of the ungodly. 9 For thou Lord art my hope: thou hast set thine house of defence very high.
10 There shall no evill happen unto thee: neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling. 11 For he shall give his Angells charge over thee: to keep thee in all thy wayes. 12 They shall beare thee in their hands: that thou hurt not thy foot against a stone. 13 Thon shalt goe upon the lion and adder: the young lion and the dragon salt thou tread under thy feet. 14 Because he hath set his love upon me, there∣fore shall I deliver him: I shall set him up, because he hath known my name. 15 He shall call upon me, and I will heare him: yea, I am with him in trouble, I will deli∣ver him, and bring him to honour. 16 With long life will I satisfie him: and shew him my salvation. The Prayer. O Lord God our hope and our strong hold, have mercy upon us, and defend us under the sha∣dow of thy wings, that we trusting under thy de∣fence, may by thy faithfulnesse and truth be co∣vered as with a shield and buekler. Give thy An∣gels charg concerning us and our habitations, that we may be preserved and kept in all our wayes▪ that no evill happen unto us, no plague come nigh our dwelling, no terrors of the night, no ar∣rowes
of thy vengeance by day may disturbe our peace or safety. Let thy ministring Spirits beare us in their hands, and keep us from precipice, from fracture of bones, from dislocations, noysome or sharp diseases, stupidities, and deformities, that we may tread under our feet all the snares of the roaring lion and the great dragon the Divell, who seeks our bodily and ghostly hurt. Doe thou set thy love upon us, and deliver us from all our trou∣bles, and at the end of our dayes shew us thy sal∣vation, and satisfie us with long life, even of a bles∣sed eternity in thy Kingdom, through Iesus Christ our Lord, Amen. PSALM. 92. A meditation of the great works of God in the de∣struction of the wicked, and the pre∣servation of the godly. IT is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord: and to sing praises unto thy name, O most Highest. 2 To tell of thy loving kindnesse earely in the morning: and of thy truth in the night season. 3 Upon an instrument of ten strings, and up∣on the lute: upon a loud instrument, and upon the harp. 4 For thou Lord hast made me glad through
thy works: and I will rejoyce in giving praise for the operations of thy hands. 5 O Lord, how glorious are thy works: and thy thoughts are very deep. 6 An unwise man doth not well consider this: and a foole doth not understand it. 7 When the ungodly are green as the grasse, and when all the workers of wickednesse do flou∣rist: then shall they be destroyed for ever, but thou Lord art the most highest for evermore. 8 For lo, thine enemies (O Lord) lo thine e∣nemies shall perish: and all the workers of wicked∣nesse shall be destroyed. 9 But mine horne shall be exalted like the horne of an unicorn: for I am anoynted with fresh oyle. 10 Mine eye also shall see his lust of mine e∣nemies: and mine eare shall heare his desire of the wlcked that rise up against me. 11 The righteous shall flourish like a palm∣tree: and shall spread abroad like a cedar in Leba∣nus. 12 Such as be planted in the house of the Lord: shall flourish in the courts of the house of our God. 13 They also shall bring forth more fruit in their age: and shall be fat and well liking. 14 That they may shew how true the Lord
my strength is: and that there is no unrighteous∣nesse in him. The Prayer. O Lord God, thou art the most highest for e∣vermore, thy workes are glorious, and thy thoughts are very deep, make our hearts and tongues loud instruments of thy prayses, that we may tell of thy mercy in the morning, of thy truth in the night, and that we may rejoyce in giving thee thankes for the operations of thy hands all the dayes and nights of our life. Let thy mercifull kindnesse descend evermore upon the righteous, that they may flourish like a palm tree being con∣tinually watered with the dew of temporall and spirituall blessings, and may bring forth fruits of a holy conversation; and grant that we thy ser∣vants, being planted in the house of God and firm∣ly fixed in the blessed communion of Saints, may flourish in the Courts of thy house, thy celestiall temple to all eternity. O let not our portion be a∣mongst the ungodly and unrighteous: make us, not to communicate in their wickednesse, so much as by consent or approbation, that we may never pe∣rish and be destroyed in the furiousnesse of thine anger, which thou treasurest up against the day of vengeance, & righteous judgement, even the day of the appearing of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen.
PSALME 93. A Prayer that God would preserve his Church a∣gainst the stormes and flouds of persecution. EVENING PRAYER. THe Lord is King, and hath put on glo∣rious apparell: the Lord hath put on his apparell, and girded himselfe with strength. 2 He hath made the round world so sure: that it cannot be moved. 3 Ever since the world began hath thy seat been prepared: thou art from everlasting. 4 The flouds are risen (O Lord) the flouds have lift up their voyce: the flouds lift up their waves. 5 The waves of the sea are mighty, and rage horribly: but the Lord that dwelleth on high is mightier. 6 Thy testimonies, O Lord, are very sure: ho∣linesse becometh thine house for ever. The Prayer. O Lord our King, who art girded with strength and hast prepared thy seat from e∣verlasting, establish thy testimonies in our hearts, as a sure foundation of temporall & eternall hap∣pinesse.
Preserve thy house, the holy catholique Church in peace and holinesse which is its de∣fence and ornament, and although the flouds of persecution and secular disadvantages have lift up their waves to overthrow it, yet because it is built upon a rocke, the rocke Christ Iesus, make it to stand firm and sure against all the malice of hell and earth, and all the powers of them both; for thou, ô Lord, art mightier then all the waves & stormes of her enemies. To thee, O Lord, who dwellest on high, and art mightier, be all honour and glory now and for ever. Amen. PSALME. 94. A prayer for patience, comfort, and assistance to the godly, and that God would disappoynt the designes of the wicked. O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongeth: thou God to whom vengeance belongeth, shew thy selfe. 2 Arise thou iudge of the world: and reward the proud after their deserving. 3 Lord, how long shall the ungodly: how long shall the ungodly triumph? 4 How long shall all wicked doers speak so disdainfully: and make such proud boasting? 5 They smite down thy people, O Lord and trouble thine heritage.
6 They murder the widow and the stranger: and put the fatherlesse to death. 7 And yet they say, Tush, the Lord shall not see: neither shall the God of Iacob regard it. 8 Take heed yee unwise among the peoyle: O yee fooles, when will yee understand? 9 He that planted the eare, shall he not heare: or he that made the eye, shall he not see? 10 Or he that nurtureth the heathen: it is he that teacheth man knowledge, shall not he pu∣nish? 11 The Lord knoweth the thoughts of man: that they are but vain. 12 Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest (O Lord:) and teachest him in thy law. 13 That thou mayest give him patience in time of adversitie: untill the pit be digged up for the ungodly. 14 For the Lord will not faile his people: nei∣ther will he forsake his inheritance. 15 Untill righteousnesse turne again unto iudgement: all such as be true in heart, shall fol∣low it. 16 Who will rise up with me against the wicked: or who will take my part against the e∣vill doers? 17 If the Lord had not helped me: it had not failed but my soule had been put to silence.
18 But when I said, My foot hath slipped: thy mercie (O Lord) held me up. 19 In the multitude of the sorrowes that I had in my heart: thy comforts haue refreshed my soule. 20 Wilt thou have any thing to do with the stoole of wickednesse: which imagineth mischiefe as a law? 21 They gather them together against the soule of the righteous: and condemne the innocent bloud. 22 But the Lord is my refuge: and my God is the strength of my confidence. 23 He shall recompense them their wicked∣nesse, and destroy them in their own malice: yea, the Lord our God shall destroy them. The Prayer. O Lord God, Iudge of the world, to whom vengeance belongeth and the execution of righteous judgements, have mercie upon us, cha∣sten us with thy gentlenesse and fatherly correcti∣on when we sin against thee, teach ulin thy law, be our refuge and our confidence in our troubles, and give us patience in times of adversitie, that in the multitude of sorrowes thy comforts may refresh us, thy mercies may relieve us, thy grace
may pardon and confirme us, that our feet slip not, and our soules be not put to silence. Have pittie upon all distressed and miserable people, do justice upon all that murder the widow, that put the fatherlesse to death, that grinde the face of the poore. Faile not thy people, O Lord, and for∣sake not thine inheritance, but destroy the devi∣ces of all them that imagine mischiefe as a law, and are confederate against the righteous, to con∣demne the innocent, to discountenance Religi∣on, to disadvantage thy worship and service, that in the day of eternall vengeance when thou shalt reward the proud after their deserving, and the pit be digged for the ungodly, we may have the lot of thine inheritance, and reigne in the fellow∣ship of Saints who give honour and praise to thee, O Lord God Almighty, world without end. Amen.
PSALME 95. A Hymne invitatory to the worship of God, and a prayer for obedience to his will. MORNING PRAYER. O Come, let us sing unto the Lord: let us heartily reioyce in the strength of our salvation. 2 Let us come before his pre∣sence with thankesgiving: and shew ourselves glad in him with psalmes. 3 For the Lord is a great God▪ and a great King above all gods. 4 In his hand are all the corners of the earth: and the strength of the hils is his also. 5 The sea is his and he made it: and his hands prepared the drie land. 6 O come, let us worship and fall down: and kneel before the Lord our maker. 7 For he is (the Lord) our God: and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hands. 8 To day if yee will heare his voice, harden not your hearts: as in the provocation, and as in the day of temptation in the wildernesse.
9 When your fathers tempted me: proued me, and saw my workes. 10 Forty yeares long was I grieued with this generation, and said: It is a people that do erre in their hearts, for they have not knowne my wayes. 11 Unto whom I sware in my wrath: that they should not enter into my rest. The Prayer. O Great God the Lord our Maker, who art a King above all gods, give us the graces of humility and holy religion, that we may worthily praise and worship thy glories, and perfections infinite. We are the people of thy pasture, let thy mercies leade us, and feed and refresh our soules with the divine nutriment of thy Word and Sacraments: we are the sheep of thy hands, do thou guide us that we may never go astray; or if we do, bring us home into the sheepfold of our great shepheard, that we hearing his voyce may not harden our hearts, neither tempting thy mercies, nor provoking thy wrath; that our hearts being preserved from errour, and our wayes from obliquitie and crookednesse, we may at last enter into thy eternall rest, through the merits and gui∣dance of our great Shepheard Iesus Christ our Me∣diatour and Redeemer. Amen.
PSALME 96. A hymne of adoration, and magnifying the glories of God. O Sing unto the Lord a new song: sing unto the Lord all the whole earth. 1 Sing unto the Lord, and praise his name: be telling of his salvation from day to day. 3 Declare his honour unto the heathen: and his wonders unto all people. 4 For the Lord is great, and cannot worthi∣ly be praised: he is more to be feared then all Gods. 5 As for all the gods of the heathen, they be but idols: but it is the Lord that made the hea∣vens. 6 Glory and worship are before him: power and honour are in his sanctuary. 7 Ascribe unto the Lord (O ye kindreds of the people:) ascribe unto the Lord worship and power. 8 Ascribe unto the Lord the honour due unto his name: bring presents, and come into his courts. 9 O worship the Lord in the beauty of holi∣nesse: let the whole earth stand in aw of him. 10 Cll it out among the heathen, that the
Lord is King: and that it is he which hath made the round world so fast that it cannot be moved, and how that he shall iudge the people righteous∣ly. 11 Let the heavens reioyce, and let the earth he glad: let the sea make a noise, and all that there∣in is. 12 Let the field be ioyfull, and all that is in it: then shall all the trees of the wood reioyce be∣fore the Lord. 13 For he cometh, for he cometh to iudge the earth: and with righteousnesse to iudge the world, and the people with his truth. The Prayer. O Lord God in whose sanctuary is power and honour, before whose presence is glory and and worship, fill our lips and soules with great devotion and reverence towards thee our God: Make us to love thy goodnesse, to adore thy omni∣potency, to reverence thy justice, to feare thy Majesty, to admire and tremble at thy omnisci∣ence and omnipresence, and to contemplate with the greatest zeale and affections all those glories which thou communicatest to the sonnes of men, in the revelations of thy gospell, of thy creatures, and of thy miracles, that we may tell of thy great∣nesse, and declare thy salvation from day to day;
and when thou commest with righteousnesse to judge the earth, and all people with thy truth, we may rejoyce in thee everlastingly, and sing an E∣ternall Allelujah to thee in thy sanctuary: Grant this for Iesus Christ his sake our Lord and only Sa∣viour. Amen. PSALME 97. A meditation upon the day of Iudgement, and a prayer for mercy and salvation. THe Lord is King, the earth may be glad thereof: yea, the multitude of the Isles may be glad thereof. 2 Clouds and darknesse are round about him: righteousnesse and iudgement are the habitation of his seat. 3 There shall go a fire before him: and burn up his enemies on every side. 4 His lightnings gave shine unto the world: the earth saw it, and was afraid, 5 The hills melted like war at the presence of the Lord: at the presence of the Lord of the whole earth. 6 The heavens have declared his righteous∣nesse: and all the people have seen his glory. 7 Confounded be all they that worship carved images, and that delight in vain gods: worship him all ye gods.
8 Sion heard of it, and reioyced: and the daughters of Iudah were glad, because of thy iudgements, O Lord, 9 For thou, Lord, art higher then all that are in the earth: thou art exalted farre above all gods. 10 O ye that love the Lord, see that ye hate the thing that is evil: the Lord preserveth the souls of his Saints, he shall deliver them from the hand of the ungodly. 11 There is sprung up a light for the righte∣ous: and ioyfull gladnesse for such as be true hear∣ted. 12 Reioyce in the Lord ye righteous: and give thanks for a remembrance of his holinesse. The Prayer. O Lord our King, Lord of the whole earth, have mercy upon us, and sanctifie us with thy grace, that we may hate every thing that is e∣vill, that we may love thee, give thankes unto thy name, and rejoyce in remembrance of thy ho∣linesse, that in the day of judgement and great terrors, when thou shalt sit in thy seat supported with righteousnesse and iudgement, and a fire shall go forth from thy presence, to burne up thy enemies on every side, thou maist preserve our soules in safety from the hand of our enemies, and a light may spring up unto us to preserve us
from eternall darknesse and the want of the light of thy countenance, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 98. A thankesgiving for the redemption of mankinde by Iesus Christ. EVENING PRAYER. O Sing unto the Lord a new song: for he hath done mar∣vellous things. 2 With his own right hand, and with his holy arme: hath he gotten himselfe the victorie. 3 The Lord declared his salvation: his righ∣teousnesse hath he openly shewed is the sight of the heathen. 4 He hath remembred his mercie and truth toward the house of Israel: and all the ends of the world have seen the salvation of our God. 5 Shew your selues ioyfull unto the Lord, all yee lands: sing, reioyce, and giue thankes. 6 Praise the Lord upon the harpe: sing to the herpe with a psalme of thankesgiving. 7 With trumpets also and shawes: O shew your sleves ioyfull before the Lord the King.
8 Let the sea make a noise, and all that there∣in is: the round world, and they that dwell therein. 9 Let the flouds clap their hands, and let the hills be ioyfull together before the Lord: for he is come to iudge the earth. 10 With righteousnesse shall he iudge the world: and the people with equitie. The Prayer. O Most glorious and powerfull Iesu, who with thine owne right hand, and with thy holy arme hast gotten to thy selfe on our behalfe the victory over sin, hell, and the grave, remem∣ber this thy mercy and truth which thou hast promised to all that believe on thee, giveus pardon of our sinnes seal'd unto us by the te∣stimony of the holy Spirit, and of a good consci∣ence, and grant that we by thy strength may fight against our ghostly enemies, and by thy power may overcome them, that we may rejoyce in a holy peace, and sing, and give thee thankes for our victory and our crowne. Extend this mercy and enlarge the effect of thy great victories to the heathen, that all the ends of the world may sing a new song unto thee, and see the salvation of God, that when thou commest to judge the earth
we may all finde mercy, and be joyfull together before thee in the festivity of a blessed eternity, thorow thy mercies, O blessed Saviour and Re∣deemer Iesu. Amen. PSALME 99. A prayer for the vertue of religion and devotion in holy places. THe Lord is King, be the people never so un∣patient: he sitteth between the cherubims, be the earth never so unquiet. 2 The Lord is great in Sion: and high a∣boue all people. 3 They shall giue thankes unto thy Name: which is great, wonderfull, and holy. 4 The kings power loueth iudgement, thou hast prepared equitie: thou hast executed iudge∣ment and righteousnesse in Iacob. 5 O magnifie the Lord our God: and fall down before his footstool, for he is holy. 6 Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among such as call upon his Name: these called upon the Lord, and he heard them. 7 He spake unto them out of the cloudy pil∣lar: for they kept his testimonies, and the law that he gaue them. 8 Thou heardest them (O Lord our God:)
thou forgauest them, O God, and punishedst their own inuentions. 9 O magnifie the Lord our God, and worship him upon his holy hill: for the Lord our God is holy. The Prayer. O Great God, and King of Heaven and earth, thou that sittest between the Cherubims un∣moved in the centre of thy own felicity and es∣sentiall tranquillity, undisturbed in the great con∣cussions and unquietnesse of the earth: give un∣to us thy servants venerable and dreadfull appre∣hensions of the sanctity and perfections of thy Name and Nature, which is great, wonderfull, and holy. Teach us in all the addresses of our de∣votion, and in all places appointed for thy service, by all reverence and holinesse of soule and body, to expresse the greatnesse of thy power and our weaknesse, the majesty of thy glory and the un∣worthinesse of our persons, the distance of God and man, of finite and infinite, of Lord and Ser∣vant, that the awfulnesse of thy dread majesty may check every unreverent gesture and thought in us, and teach us to mak approaches of humility, and feare, that we calling upon thy Name accord∣ing to our duties, and by the feare of thee being
taught to keep thy testimonies, and never to for∣get the Law thou givest us, we may be delivered from thy wrath and punishment, and at last praise thee upon thy holy hill in thine everlasting ha∣bitation thorough Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 100. A Psalme of praise to God for his mercy and truth. O Be ioyfull in the Lord, all yee lands: serue the Lord with gladnesse, and come before his presence with a song. 2 Be yee sure that the Lord he is God: it is he that hath made us, and not we our selues, we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture. 3 O go your way into his gates with thankes∣giving, and into his courts with praise: be thank∣full unto him, and speak good of his Name. 4 For the Lord is gracious, his mercie is everlasting: and his truth endureth from gene∣ration to generation. The Prayer. O Lord our God who hast created us out of nothing, and hast redeemed us from misery and death when we were thine enemies, shew∣ing
great expresses of thy loving kindnesse when we were vessels of wrath and inheritors of per∣dition, reveiling thy truth unto us in the Sermons of the Gospell: teach us to walke as thou hast commanded us, to believe as thou hast taught us, that we may inherit what thou hast promised us, for thou art the way, the truth, and the life: we are thy people and the sheep of thy pasture, thou art our guide and our defence; let thy grace teach us to serve thee, and thy holy Spirit assist and promote our endeavours with the blessings of gladnesse and chearfulnesse of Spirit, that we may love to speak good of thy Name, and at last may go into the courts of thy Temple with praise and a song in our mouthes, to thy honour and eternall glory, whose mercy and truth is everlasting and revealed unto the Church in our Lord and Savi∣our Iesus Christ. Amen. PSALME 101. A Prayer for a holy life. MY song shall bee of mercie and iudge∣ment: unto thee, O Lord, will I sing. 2 O let me have understanding: in the way of godlinesse. 3 When wilt thou come unto me: I will walke in my house with a perfect heart.
4 I will take no wicked thing in hand, I hate the sinnes of unfaithfulnesse: there shall no such cleave unto me. 5 A froward heart shall depart from me: I will not know a wicked person. 6 Whoso privily slandereth his neighbour: him will I destroy. 7 Whoso hath also a proud look, and high sto∣macke: I will not suffer him. 8 Mine eyes look unto such as be faithfull in the land: that they may dwell with me. 9 Whoso leadeth a godly life: he shall be my seruant. 10 There shall no deceitfull person dwell in my house: he that telleth lies shall not tarrie in my sight. 11 I shall soon destroy all the ungodly that are in the land: that I may root out all wicked doers from the citie of the Lord. The Prayer. O Lord God of eternall purity, who art of pure eyes and canst behold no unrighteous∣nesse or impurity: enlighten our understandings, that we may have knowledge in the way of god∣linesse; make our paths straight, and our hearts perfect, take from us the sinnes of unfaithful∣nesse,
correct and mortifie in us all froward and peevish dispositions, let us love the society of the saints, and hate the fellowship of the wicked, that we may not be destroyed with the ungodly, nor be rooted out from the Citie of the Lord, and banished from the sweetnes of thy presence, for with thee is light, and health, and salvation, to thy Name be all honour, and glory, and praise ascribed, world without end. Amen. PSALME 102. A Prayer for comfort in sadnesse, anxiety of spirit, sicknesse, or any other affliction. MORNING PRAYER HEare my prayer, O Lord: and let my crying come unto thee. 2 Hide not thy face from me in the time of my trouble encline thine eares unto me when I call, O heare me, and that right soon. 3 For my dayes are consumed away like smoake: and my bones are burnt up as it were a firebrand. 4 My heart is smitten down, and withered like grasse: so that I forget to eat my bread.
5 For the voyce of my groaning: my bones will scarce cleave to my flesh. 6 I am become like a pelican in the wilder∣nesse: and like an owle that is in the desert. 7 I have watched, and am even as it were a sparrow: that sitteth alone upon the house top. 8 Mine enemies revile me all the day long: and they that are mad upon me, are sworne toge∣ther against me. 9 For I have eaten ashes as it were bread: and mingled my drinke with weeping. 10 And that because of thine indignation and wrath: for thou hast taken me up, and cast me down. 11 My dayes are gone like a shadow: and I am withered like grasse. 12 But thou (O Lord) shalt endure for ever: and thy remembrance throughout all generations. 13 Thou shalt arise and have mercie upon Si∣on: for it is time that thou have mercie upon her, yea, the time is come. 14 And why? thy servants thinke upon her stones: and it pittieth them to see her in the dust. 15 The heathen shall feare thy Name, O Lord: and all the kings of the earth thy ma∣iestie. 16 When the Lord shall build up Sion: and when his glorie shall appeare.
17 When he turneth him unto the prayer of the poore destitute: and despiseth not their desire. 18 This shall be written for those that come after: and the people which shall be borne, shall praise the Lord. 19 For he hath looked down from his sanctua∣rie: out of the heaven did the Lord behold the earth. 20 That he might heare the mournings of such as be in captivitie: and deliver the children appointed unto death. 21 That they may declare the Name of the Lord in Sion: and his worship at Ierusalem. 22 When the people are gathered together: and the kingdomes also to serve the Lord. 23 He brought down my strength in my iour∣ney: and shortened my dayes. 24 But I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of mine age: as for thy yeares, they endure throughout all generations. 25 Thou Lord in the beginning hast laid the foundation of the earth: and the heavens are the worke of thy hands. 26 They shall perish, but thou shalt endure: they all shall wax old as doth a garment. 27 And as a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be changed: but thou art the same, and thy yeares shall not faile.
28 The children of thy servants shall continue: and their seed shall stand fast in thy sight. The Prayer. O Eternall God, who endurest for ever, and thy remembrance throughout all generati∣ons, have pittie upon us according to the infinite treasures of thy loving kindnesse, heare the voyce of our groaning, for thy indignation and thy wrath lieth hard upon us, and our sinnes have put an edge upon thy sword, and a thorne into our wounded consciences. O build up the ruines of our soules, repaire the breaches of our comforts and our hopes, and let thy glorie now appeare, for that shines brightest in the beames of thy mercie, and when thou turnest unto the prayer of poore wretched destitutes, it becomes an eternall mo∣nument and a record of thy honour, and all ge∣nerations which shall be borne shall praise thee. Looke downe, O Lord, from thy Sanctuary, heare the mournings of us and of all distressed people; send us health and life so long as it may be a bles∣sing, and do not shorten our dayes in wrath, but give us grace so to spend all our time in the workes of repentance and holinesse, that when our yeares faile, and our change is come, we may be translated to the new heavens which shall ne∣ver
perish and wax old, there to continue and stand fast in thy sight for ever, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 103. A thanksgiving to God for all his benefits and mercies. PRaise the Lord, O my soul: and all that is within me, praise his holy name. 2 Praise the Lord, O my soul: and forget not all his benefits. 3 Which forgiveth all thy sinne: and healeth all thine infirmities. 4 Which saveth thy life from destruction: and crowneth thee with mercy and loving kind∣nesse. 5 Which satisfieth thy mouth with good things: making thee young and lusty as an eagle. 6 The Lord executeth righteousnesse and iudgement: for all them that are oppressed with wrong. 7 He shewed his waies unto Moses: his works unto the children of Israell. 8 The Lord is full of compassion and mercy: long-suffering, and of great goodnesse. 9 He will not alway be chiding: neither
keepeth he his anger for ever. 10 He hath not dealt with us after our sinnes: nor rewarded us according to our wicked∣nesse. 11 For look how high the heaven is in com∣parison of the earth: so great is his mercy also to∣ward them that feare him. 12 Look how wide also the east is from the west: so farre hath he set our sinnes from us. 13 Yea, like as a father pittieth his own chil∣dren: even so is the Lord mercifull unto them that fear him. 14 For he knoweth whereof we be made: he remembreth that we are but dust. 15 The dayes of man are but as grasse: for he flourisheth as a flower of the field. 16 For assoon as the winde goeth over it, it is gone: and the place thereof shall know it no more. 17 But the mercifull goodnesse of the Lord endureth for ever and ever, upon them that fear him: and his righteousnesse upon childrens chil∣dren. 18 Even upon such as keep his covenant: and think upon his commandements to do them. 19 The Lord hath prepared his seat in hea∣ven: and his kingdome ruleth over all. 20 O praise the Lord, ye angells of his, ye that excell in strength: ye that fulfill his com∣mandment,
and hearken unto the voice of his words. 21 O praise the Lord all ye his hosts: ye ser∣vants of his that do his pleasure. 22 O speak good of the Lord all ye works of his, in all places of his dominion: praise thou the Lord, O my soul. The Prayer. O most mercifull God, whose mercy is as high as the heavens, as great and many as the mo∣mēts of eternity, thou hast opened thy hand wide to fill us with blessings, and the sweet effects of thy loving kindnesse, thou art pittifull as a Fa∣ther, tender as a Mother, carefull as a guardian, & exceeding mercifull to all them that fear thee: we pray thee to fill our soules with great appre∣hensions and impresses of thy unspeakable mer∣cies, that our thankfulnesse may be as great as our needs of mercy are, and let thy mercifull loving kindnes endure for ever & ever upon us all. Keep no anger in store for us, chide us not in thy displea∣sure, satisfy our mouths with good things, remove all our sinnes from us as far as the east is from the west, heale all our infirmities and save our lives from destruction, for these are mer∣cies thou delightest in: and because we cannot praise thee accordingly to thy excellencies, take
our soules in thy due time, into the land of ever∣lasting praises, that we may spend a whole eter∣nity in ascribing to thy name, praise, & honour, and dominion. Grant this for Iesus Christ his sake our Lord and only Saviour. Amen. PSALME 104. A contemplation of the wisedome and goodnesse of God, manifested in his creatures. EVENING PRAYER. PRaise the Lord, O my soul: O Lord my God, thou art become exceeding glorious, thou art clo∣thed with maiesty and honour. 2 Thou deckest thy self with light as it were with a garment: and spreadest out the heavens like a curtain. 3 Which layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters: and maketh the clouds his chariot, and walketh upon the wings of the winde. 4 He maketh his angels spirits: and his mi∣nisters a flaming fie. 5 He laid the foundations of the earth: that it never should move at any time. 6 Thou covered'st it with the deep like as with a garment: the waters stand in the hills. 7 At thy rebuke they flee: at the voice of thy thunder they are afraid.
8 They go up as high as the hils, and down to the valleys beneath: even unto the place which thou hast appointed for them. 9 Thou hast set them their bounds which they shall not passe: neither turne again to cover the earth. 10 He sendeth the springs into the rivers: which run among the hils. 11 All beasts of the field drinke thereof: and the wilde asses quench their thirst. 12 Beside them shall the fowles of the aire have their habitation: and sing among the bran∣ches. 13 He watereth the hills from above: the earth is filled with the fruit of thy workes. 14 He bringeth forth grasse for the cattell: and green herbe for the service of men. 15 That he may bring food out of the earth, and wine that maketh glad the heart of man: and oyle to make him a cheerfull countenance, and bread to strengthen mans heart. 16 The trees of the Lord also are full of sap: even the cedars of Libanus which he hath planted. 17 Wherein the birds make their nests: and the firre-trees are a dwelling for the storke. 18 The high hils are a refuge for the wilde goates: and so are the stony rockes for the confes. 19 He appointed the moon for certain sea∣sons:
and the sun knoweth his going down. 20 Thou makest darknesse that it may be night: wherein all the beasts of the forrest do move. 21 The lions roaring after their prey: do seek their meat at God. 21 The sun ariseth, and they get them away together: and lay them down in their dennes. 23 Man goeth forth to his worke, and to his labour: untill the evening. 24 O Lord, how manifold are thy workes: in wisdome hast thou made them all, the earth is full of thy riches. 25 So is the great and wide sea also: wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts. 26 There go the ships, and there is that Le∣viathan: whom thou hast made to take his pa∣stime therein. 27 These wait all upon thee: that thou mayest give them meat in due season. 28 When thou givest it them, they gather it: and when thou openest thy hand, they are filled with good. 29 When thou hidest thy face, they are trou∣bled: when thou takest away their breath, they die, and are turned again to their dust. 30 When thou lettest thy breath go forth,
they shall be made: and thou shalt renew the face of the earth. 31 The glorious maiesty of the Lord shall en∣dure for ever: the Lord shall reioyce in his workes. 32 The earth shall tremble at the look of him: if he do but touch the hills, they shall smoke. 33 I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live: I will praise my God while I have my being. 34 And so shall my words please him: my joy shall be in the Lord. 35 As for sinners, they shall be consumed out of the earth, and the ungodly shall come to an end: praise thou the Lord, O my soul, praise the Lord. The Prayer. O Lord God who art exceeding glorious, who art clothed with majesty and honour, thou hast created all things with admirable wise∣dome, established them with excellent order, and hast provided for them with mercy and sin∣gular providence, be pleased to give us grace that we may remember thou hast created us all for thy glory, that thou hast planted thine image on us, and hast crowned all our yeares with thy mercies and loving kindnesse; let us never dis∣obey thy will, forget thy mercies, or deface thine image in us, but when all thy creatures praise
thee in their manner, let not us whom thou hast made in dignity next to Angels disturbe the bles∣sed order of Creation by our sinnes and irregular disobedience. Open thy hand, O Lord, and fill us with good things both spirituall and tempo∣rall, that when thou takest away our breath that we die, and turne again to our dust, thou mayest not hide thy face away from us, but communicate to us the light of thy countenance and the glories of thy Kingdome, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 105. A commemoration of Gods care of his Church and blessings to his people. MORNING PRAYER. OBive thankes unto the Lord, and call upon his Name: tell the people what things he hath done. 2 O let your songs be of him, and praise him: and let your talking be of all his wondrous workes. 3 Reioyce in his holy Name: let the heart of them reioyce that seek the Lord. 4 Sèek the Lord and his strength: seek his face evermore.
5 Remember the marvellous workes that he hath done: his wonders, and the iudgements of his mouth. 6 O yee seed of Abraham his servant: yee children of Iacob his chosen. 7 He is the Lord our God: his iudgements are in all the world. 8 He hath been alway mindfull of his cove∣nant and promise: that he made to a thousand ge∣nerations. 9 Even the covenant that he made with Abra∣ham: and the oath that he sware unto Isaac. 10 And appointed the fame unto Iacob for a law: and to Israel for an everlasting testament. 11 Saying, unto thee will I give the land of Canaan: the lot of your inheritance. 12 When there were yet but a few of them: and they strangers in the land. 13 What time as they went from one nation to another: from one kingdome to another people. 14 He suffered no man to do them wrong: but reproved even Kings for their sakes. 15 Touch not mine Anointed: and do my Prophets no harme. 16 Moreover, he called for a dearth upon the land: and destroyed all the provision of bread. 17 But he had sent a man before them: even Ioseph which was sold to be a bond-servant.
18 Whose feet they hurt in the stockes: the iron entred into his soule. 19 Untill the time came that his cause was known: the Word of the Lord tried him. 20 The King sent and delivered him: the prince of the people let him go free. 21 He made him Lord also of his house: and ruler of all his substance. 22 That he might informe his princes after his will: and teach his senatours wisedome. 23 Israel also came into Egypt: and Iacob was a stranger in the land of Ham. 24 And he increased his people exceedingly: and made them stronger than their enemies. 25 Whose heart turned so, that they hated his people: and dealt untruly with his servants. 26 Then sent he Moses his servant: and Aa∣ron whom he had chosen. 27 And these shewed his tokens among them: and wonders in the land of Ham. 28 He sent darknesse, and it was darke: and they were not obedient unto his Word. 29 He turned their waters into bloud: and slew their fish. 30 Their land brought forth frogs: yea, even in their Kings chambers. 31 He spake the word, and there came all man∣ner of flies: and lice in all their quarters.
32 He gave them hailstones for raine: and flames of fire in their land. 33 He smote their vines also and fig-trees: and destroyed the trees that were in their coasts. 34 He spake the word and the grashoppers came, and caterpillars innumerable: and did eat up all the grasse in their land, and devoured the fruit of their ground. 35 He smote all the first-borne in their land: even the chiefe of all their strength. 36 He brought them forth also with silver and gold: there was not one feeble person among their Tribes. 37 Egypt was glad at their departing: for they were afraid of them. 38 He spread out a cloud to be a covering: and fire to give light in the night season. 39 At their desire he brought quailes: and he filled them with the bread of heaven. 40 He opened the rocke of stone, and the wa∣ters flowed out: so that the rivers ran in dry places. 41 For why? he remembred his holy promise: and Abraham his servant. 42 And he brought forth his people with ioy: and his chosen with gladnesse. 43 And gave them the lands of the heathen: and they took the labours of the people in possessi∣on.
44 That they might keep his statutes: and observe his lawes. The Prayer. O Lord God▪ who art alway mind full of thy covenant and promise to a thousand genera∣tions, and didst deliver the seed of Abraham the children of Iacob thy chosen from the slavery of Egypt, from the waves of the sea▪ from the rage of Pharaoh, from the thirst and amine of the wildernesse, continue the like mercies to all Christian people; deliver us from the bondage of our sinnes, preserve us in the Ake of the Church, that we perish not in the waves of this troublesome world; save us from the ry of all our temporall and ghostly enemies, eed us with food from heaven, and give us competency of good things on earth, that we may keep thy sta∣tutes, and observe thy Lawes, and at last receive the promises of a blessed eternity; which in the covenant of thy Gospell thou hast made unto all that believe in thee, and are obedient to thy Word. Grant this, O blessed Iesu, to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be all honour and glory, world without end, Amen.
PSALME 106. A commemoration of Gods frequent pardons and mercies to the penitent. EVENING PRAYER. OGiue thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: and his mercy endureth for ever. 2 Who can expresse the no∣ble acts of the Lord: or shew forth all his praise? 3 Blessed are they that alway keep judge∣ment: and doe righteousnesse. 4 Remember me, O Lord, according to the favour that thou bearest unto thy people: O visit me with thy salvation. 5 That I may see the felicity of thy chosen: and reioyce in the gladnesse of thy people, and give thanks with thine inheritance. 6 We haue sinned with our fathers: we haue done amisse, and dealt wickedly. 7 Our fathers regarded not thy wonders in Egypt, neither kept they thy great goodnesse in remembrance: but were disobedient at the sea▪ even at the Red sea. 8 Neverthelesse, he helped them for his
names sake: that he might make his power to be knowne. 9 He rebuked the Red sea also, and it was dried up: so he led them through▪ the deep, as through a wildernesse. 10 And he saved them from the adversaries hand: and delivered them from the hand of the enemy. 11 As for those that troubled them, the wa∣ters overwhelmed them: there was not one of them left. 12 Then beleeved they his words: and sang praise unto him. 13 But within a while they forgat his works▪ and would not abide his counsell. 14 But lust came upon them in the wilder∣nesse: and they tempted God in the desert. 15 And he gaue them their desire: and sent leannesse withall into their soul. 16 They angred Moses also in the tents: and Aaron the saint of the Lord. 17 So the earth opened and swallowed up Dathan: and covered the congregation of Abi∣ram. 18 And the fire was kindles in their compa∣ny: the flame burnt up the ungodly. 19 They made a calf in Horeb: and worship∣ed the molten image.
20 Thus they turned their glory: into the si∣militude of a calf that eateth hay. 21 And they forgat God their Saviour: which had done so great things in Egypt. 22 Wonderous works in the land of Ham: and fearfull things by the Red sea 23 So he said he would have destroyed them, had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the gap: to turn away his wrathfull indignation lest he should destroy them. 24 Yea, they thought scorn of that pleasant land: and gave no creance unto his word. 25 But murmured in their tents: and hear∣kened not unto the voice of the Lord. 26 Then lift he up his hand against them: to overthrow them in the wildernesse. 27 To cast out their seed among the nations: and to scatter them in the lands. 28 They ioyned themselves unto Baalpeor: and ate the offering of the dead. 29 Thus they provoked him to anger with their own inventions: and the plague was great among them. 30 Then stood up Phinees, and prayed: and so the plague ceased. 31 And that was counted unto him for righte∣ousnesse: among all posterities for evermore. 32 They angred him also at the waters of
strife: so that he punished Moses for their sakes. 33 Because they provoked his spirit also that he spake unadvisedly with his lips. 34 Neither destroyed they the heathen as the Lord commanded them. 35 But were mingled among the heathen: and learned their workes. 36 Insomuch that they worshipped their idols, which turned to their own decay: yea they offered their sonnes and daughters unto devils. 37 And shed innocent bloud, even the bloud of their sonnes and of their daughters: whom they offered unto the idols of Canaan, and the land was defiled with bloud. 38 Thus were they stained with their owne workes: and went a whoring with their owne inventions. 39 Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kin∣dled against his people: insomuch that he abhorred his own inheritance. 40 And he gave them over into the hand of the heathen: and they that hated them, were lords over them. 41 Their enemies oppressed them: and had them in subiection. 42 Many a time did he deliver them: but they rebelled against him with their owne inventions, and were brought downe in their wickednesse.
43 Neverthelesse▪ when he saw their adver∣sity: he heard their complaint. 44 He thought upon his covenant, and pitied them according unto the multitude of his mer∣cies: yea, he made all those that had led them away captive, to pity them. 45 Deliver us (O Lord our God) and gather us from among the heathen: that we may give thankes unto thy holy Name, and make our boast of thy praise. 46 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting, and world without end: and let all the people say, Amen. The Prayer. O Lord God, full of mercy and pity, who didst many times deliver thy people from their adversity, when thou for their rebelling against thee with their inventions hadst given them into the hand of the heathen: Remember us O Lord, according unto the favour thou bearest unto thy people, and visit us with thy salvation, that though we have done amisse, and dealt wic∣kedly against thee and against thy covenant, yet be pleased to helpe us for thy Name sake, and make ▪thy power to be known in the mighty de∣liverance and redemption of us from so great
danger and misery. Give us grace to believe thy words, to abide thy counsels, to walke in thy Lawes, to relinquish our own sinfull and vain de∣sires, to obey▪ our Governours▪ Ecclesiasticall and Civill, that we may not have the lot of Dathan and Abiram, but at last may receive our port▪ on in the felicity of thy chosen, giving thee thankes with thine inheritance, for that thou hast turned from us thy wrathfull indignation, pitying us, and saving us according to the multitude of thy mercies. Thy Name be blessed. O Lord God, everlastingly, and world without end, through Iesus Christ our Lord, Amen▪ PSALME▪ 107. A thankesgiving for delivere from miseries and dangers MORNING PRAYER. O Give thankes unto the Lord, for he is gracious: and his mercie endureth for ever. 2 Let them give thankes whom the Lord hath redeemed: and delivered from the hand of the enemy. 3 And gathered them out of the lands, from
the East, and from the West: from the North, and from the South. 4 They went astray in the wildernesse out of the way: and found no city to dwell in. 5 Hungry and thirsty: their soule fainted in them. 6 So they cried unto the Lord in their trou∣ble: and he delivered them from their distresse. 7 He led them forth by the right way: that they might go to the city where they dwelt. 8 O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodnesse: and declare the wonders that he doth for the children of men! 9 For he satisfieth the empty soule: and fil∣leth the hungry soule with goodnesse. 10 Such as si in darknesse and in the shadow of death: being fast bound in misery and iron. 11 Because they rebelled against the word of the Lord: and lightly regarded the counsell of the most High. 12 He also brought down their heart through heavinesse: they fell down, and there was none to helpe them up. 13 So when they cried unto the Lord in their trouble: he delivered them out of their distresse. 14 For he brought them out of darknesse, and out of the shadow of death: and brake their bonds in sunder.
15 O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodnesse: and declare the wonders that he doth for the children of men. 16 For he hath broken the gates of brasse: and ritten the  of  in sunder. 17 Foolish men are plagued for their offence: and because of their wickednesse. 18 Their soule abhorred all manner of meat: and they were even hard a deaths doore. 19 So when they cried unto the Lord in their trouble: he delivered them out of their distresse. 20 He sent his word and healed them: and they were saved from their destruction. 21 O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodnesse: and declare the wonders that he doth for the children of men. 22 That they would  him the sacri∣fice of thankesgiving: and  but his workes with gladnesse. 23 They that go do to the sea in ships: and occupy their businesse in great waters. 24 These men see the workes of the Lord: and his wonders in the deep. 25 For at  wor the stor wind ariseth: which lifteth up the waves thereof. 26  carried up to the heaven, and do again to the deepe their soule melteth away because of the trouble.
27 They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man: and are at their wit end. 28 So when they cry unto the Lord in their troubles he delivereth them out of their distresse. 29 For  maketh the storm▪ to cease: so that the waves thereof ar still. 30 Then are they glad, because they be at rest: and so he bringeth them unto the haven where they would be. 31 O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodnesse: and declare the wonders that he doth for the children of men. 32 That they would alt him also in the con∣gregation of the people: and praise him in the seat of the elders. 33 Which urnath the flouds into a wilder∣nesse: and drieth up the water springs. 34 A fruitfull  maketh e barren: for the wickednesse of them that dwell therein. 35 Again he maketh the wildernesse a stand∣ing water and water springs of a dry ground. 36 And there hseeth the hungry: that they may build them a city to dwell in. 37 That they  sow their land, and plant vineyards: to yeeld them fruits of increase. 38 He blesseth them, so that they multiply exceedingly: and suffereth not their cattell to de∣crease.
39 And again, when they are minished and brought low: through oppression, through any plague or trouble. 40 Though he suffer them to be evill entreat∣ed through tyrants: and let them wander out of the way in the wildernesse. 41 Yet helpeth he the poore out of miserie: and maketh him housholds like a flocke of sheep. 42 The righteous will consider this, and re∣ioyce: and the mouth of all wickednesse shall be stopped. 43 Whoso is wise will ponder these things: and they shall understand the loving kindnesse of the Lord. The Prayer. O Lord God, gracious and good, whose mer∣cy endureth for ever, have mercy upon us when in our trouble we cry unto thee; for when our hearts are brought down through heavinesse there is none to helpe us up, or to deliver us out of our distresse, but onely thou, O Lord. We have sinned, we have rebelled against thee, and lightly regarded thy counsels, we have walked and ate in darknesse and in the shadowes of death, being fast bound in the captivity and misery of sin. O bring us out of darknesse and breake our bonds
a sunder, guide us through the desert of this world, in which growes nothing but sadnesse and dis∣content; still the tempests, and smooth the slond of misery which are ready to overwhelm us, and in thy due time bring us to eternall rest, and to the haven where we would faine be, that in the congregation of thy holy people, we may praise thee for thy goodnesse, and declare, the wonders thou hast done for us in delivering us from sin, and misery, and death, and bringing us to a City to dwell in, where there is life, and light, and joy eternall in the beholding the face of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. PSALME 108. A Prayer for victory against our Enemies. EVENING PRAYER. O God, my heart is ready (my heart is ready) I will sing and give praise with the best member I have. 2 Awake thou lute and harp: I my selfe will awake right early. 3 I will give thankes unto thee. O Lord, a∣mong the people: I will sing praises unto thee among the nations.
5 For thy mercy is greater then the heavens: and thy truth reacheth unto the clouds. 5 Set up thy selfe (O God) above the hea∣vens: and thy glory above all the earth. 6 That thy beloved may be delivered: let thy right hand save them, and heare thou me. 7 God hath spoken in his holinesse: I will reioyce therefore, and divide Sithem, and mete out the valley of Succoth. 8 Gilead is mine, and Manasses is mine: Ephraim also is the strength of mine head. 9 Iuda is my lawgiver. Moab is my wash∣pot: over Edom will I cast out my shooe, upon the Philistines will I triumph. 10 Who will lead me into the strong city: and who will bring me into Edom? 11 Hast not thou forsaken us, O God▪ and wilt not thou, O God, go forth with our hosts? 12 O helpe us against the enemy: for vain is the helpe of man. 13 Through God we shall do great acts: and it is he that shall tread down our enemies. The Prayer. O Lord God, whose mercie is greater then the Heavens, and thy glory is above all the earth, be thou exalted in thine owne strength, and
magnifie thy power and thy mercy in defending us, and all thy holy Church, against all our enemies temporall and spirituall. Forsake us not O God our defence, for vain is the help of man, do thou strengthen us and go forth with our hosts to bat∣tell, that we being defended and armed by thee, may do acts great and good, fighting thy battels, and putting our confidence in thy righteousnesse onely, and salvation, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 109. A Prayer against Gods enemies, and especially Traitors, prophetically intended against the person of Iudas. HOld not thy tongue, O God of my praise: for the mouth of the ungodly, yea, and the mouth of the deceitfull is opened upon me. 2 And they hade spoken against me with false tongues: they compassed me about also with words of hatred, and fought against me without a cause. 3 For the love that I had unto them, lo, they take now my contrary part: but I give my selfe unto prayer. 4 Thus have they rewarded me evill for good: and hatred for my good will.
5 Set thou an ungodly man to be ruler over him: and let Satan stand at his right hand. 6 When sentence is given upon him, let him be condemned: and let his prayer be turned into sinne. 7 Let his dayes be few: and let another take his office. 8 Let his children be fatherlesse: and his wise a widow. 9 Let his children be vagabonds, and beg their bread: let them seek it also out of desolate places. 10 Let the extortionet consume all that he hath: and let the stranger spoil his labour. 11 Let there be no man to pitie him: nor to have compassion upon his fatherlesse children. 12 Let his posterity be destroyed: and in the next generation let his name be clean put out. 13 Let the wickednesse of his fathers be had in remembrance in the sight of the Lord: and let not the sinne of his mother be done away. 14 Let them alway be before the Lord: that he may root out the memoriall of them from off the earth. 15 And that because his minde was not to do good: but persecuted the poore helplesse man, that he might slay him that was vexed at the heart.
16. His delight was incursing, and it shall hap∣pen unto him: he loved not blessing, therefore shall it be far from him. 17 He clothed himselfe with cursing like as with a raiment: and it shall come into his bowels like water, and like oyl into his bones. 18 Let it be unto him as the cloke that he hath upon him: and as the girdle that he is alway gir∣ded withall. 19 Let it thus happen from the Lord unto mine enemies: and to those that speak evil against my soul. 20 But deal thou with me (O Lord God) ac∣cording unto thy name: for sweet is thy mercy. 21 O deliver me, for I am helplesse and poore: and my heart is wounded within me. 22 I go hence like the shadow that departeh: & am driven away as the grashopper. 23 My knees are weak through fasting: my flesh is dried up for want of fatnesse. 24 I became also a rebuke unto them: they that looked upon me shaked their heads. 25 Help me (O Lord my God:) Oh save me according to thy mercy. 26 And they shall know how that this is thy hand: and thou Lord hast done it. 27 Though they curse, yet blesse thou: and let them be confounded that rise up against me, but let thy servant reioyce.
28 Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame: and let them cover themselves with their own confusion, as with a cloke. 29 As for me, I will give great thanks unto the Lord with my mouth: and praise him among the multitude. 30 For he shall stand at the right hand of the poore: to save his soul from unrighteous iudges. The Prayer. O God of our praise, who wast contented that thy sonne Iesus Christ should be be∣trayed into the hands of sinners by one of his own Apostles, the Traitor Iudas, and in pu∣nishment of so great impiety did'st suffer Sa∣tan to stand at his right hand tempting him to despaire, and to give sentence upon himselfe to condemne himselfe, and to execute his owne judgement, and gavest his Bishoprick to ano∣ther: let thy righteous judgements finde out all those that are Traytors to their Prince, e∣nemies to the Church, Apostates from Reli∣gion, Hypocrites under specious pretences, and beauteous titles; that they may be clothed with shame, and may cover themselves with their owne confusion as with a cloke; that by thy punishments in this life, they may be driven
to a sharpe and salutary repentance, and may be saved in the life to come. Deale thou with us, O Lord, according to thy mercy, take away thy curse, and let not thy blessing be farre from us: let not our wickednesse, nor the wickednesse of our fathers be had in remembrance in thy sight, let our mindes be alway to do good, & our hearts and lips be given unto prayer, and our prayers so guided by thy assistances, that they be not turned into sin; that when we go hence like the shadow that departeth, and are driven away like the gra∣shopper, when the dayes of our vanity and re∣joycing are past, we may stand at thy right hand, and our soules be saved from the lot and portion of the unrighteous, through the righteousnesse and passion of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen. PSALM. 110. A Hymne in the honour of Christs Kingdome, and Priesthood, and exaltation. MORNING PRAYER. THe Lord said unto my Lord: Sit thou on my right hand, untill I make thine enemies thy footstoole. 2 The Lord shall send the rod of thy power out of Sion: be thou ruler even in the midst among thine enemies.
3 In the day of thy power shall the people offer thee free-will-offerings with an holy wor∣ship: the dew of thy birth is of the wombe of the morning. 4 The Lord sware and will not repent: Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek. 5 The Lord upon thy right hand: shall wound even kings in the day of his wrath. 6 He shall iudge among the heathen, he shall fill the places with the dead bodies: and smite in sunder the heads over divers countreys. 7 He shall drinke of the brooke in the way: therefore shall he lift up his head. The Prayer. O Eternall God, Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, who when thy Son had dranke of the brooke in the way to the grave and to our re∣demption (beginning his passion by the brooke Cedron, and tasting the waters of bitternesse till he had drunke of the whole chalice of thy wrath upon the Crosse) didst lift up his head, and set him at thy right hand till thou shalt make all his ene∣mies his footstoole: fill our hearts with his love and praises, that we may pay him the offerings of our soules & bodies in an holy worship, & joyfull
thankesgiving for all the parts and mysteries of our redemption, for his birth in the wombe of his holy Mother, pure and virginall, like the morning dew, for his Death and Passion, and for his conti∣nuall mediation and intercession by which hee does officiate in his eternall Priesthood, which is after the order of Melchisedk. Remember us, blessed Iesu, in the Day of thy power, when thou shalt come to judge the world, and the places fill'd with dead bodies shall give up their dead, that we may sit at thy right hand to magnifie and behold the glories of thy Kingdome for ever and ever, Amen. PSALME 111. An Eucharisticall Hymne for the benefits of the holy Gospell, particularly of the blessed Sacrament. I Will give thankes unto the Lord with my whole heart: secretly among the faithfull, and in the congregation. 2 The workes of the Lord are great: sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. 3 His worke is worthy to be praised and had in honour: and his righteousnesse endureth for ever. 4 The mercifull and gracious Lord hath so
done his marvellous workes: that they ought to be had in remembrance. 5 He hath given meat unto them that feare him: he shall ever be mindfull of his covenant. 6 He hath shewed his people the power of his workes: that he may give them the heritage of the heathen. 7 The workes of his hands are verity and iudgement: all his commandments are true. 8 They stand fast for euer and euer: and are done in truth and equity. 9 He sent redemption unto his people: he hath commanded his couenant for euer, holy and reue∣rend is his Name. 10 The feare of the Lord is the beginning of wisedome: a good understanding haue all they that do thereafter, the praise of it endureth for ever. The Prayer. O Blessed Iesu, whose righteousnesse endureth for ever, thy worke is worthy to be praised and had in honour, for that thou hast been merci∣full and gracious to us, and hast given meat, even the food of the blessed Sacrament unto them that feare thee, that by participation of thy holy Com∣munion we should have thee in remembrance, and ever be mindfull of thy covenant: plant thy fear
in our hearts, give us wisedome and good under∣standing, and make us to have pleasure in thee, and all thy workes, that we obeying the precepts of thy holy Gospell, and performing the conditi∣ons of thy covenant, which thou hast established for ever in truth and equity, in verity and judge∣ment, we may worthily praise and adore thy re∣verend and holy Name among the faithfull in this life, and in the great congregation of Saints in the life to come, through thy mercies, O blessed Iesu, to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be all honour and glory now and for ever. Amen. PSALME 112. A Prayer for the feare of the Lord, for charity, and the blessings of the righteous. BLessed is the man that feareth the Lord: he hath great delight in his commandments. 2 His seed shall be mighty upon earth: the ge∣neration of the faithfull shall be blessed. 3 Riches and plenteousnesse shall be in his house: and his righteousuesse endureth for euer. 4 Unto the godly there ariseth up light in the darknesse: he is mercifull, louing, and righ∣teous. 5 A good man is mercifull, and lendeth: and will guide his words with discretion.
6 For he shall never be moued: and the righ∣teous shall be had in an euerlasting remembrance. 7 He will not be afraid for any euill tidings: for his heart standeth fast, and belieueth in the Lord. 8 His heart is stablished and will not shrinke: untill he see his desire upon his enemies. 9 He hath dispersed abroad and giuen to the poore: and his righteousnesse remaineth for euer, his horne shall be exalted with honour. 10 The ungodly shall see it▪ and it shall grieue him: he shall gnash with his teeth, and consume away, the desire of the ungodly shall perish. The Prayer. O Lord God who art to be feared in the gene∣rations of the world, teach us the feare of thy Name, that we may feare to offend thee, and that delighting in thy Commandments, we may serve thee without feare of our enemies in holi∣nesse and righteousnesse all our dayes. Let thy light rise upon the darknesse of our understand∣ings; let thy mercies and gentlenesse cure all thoughts of unmercifulnesse in us, and make us charitable, of tender bowels, yearning with pit∣ty over the needs of the poore. Teach us to guide our words with discretion, make us never to
be moved from our purposes of holy living, sta∣blish our hearts in thy love, that in the day of re∣stitution of all things, thou mayest give us the portion of the charitable, the rewards of thy right hand, and when the wicked shall gnash with their teeth, and consume away in a sad eter∣nity, we may be satisfied with the riches and plenteousnesse of thy house for ever, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 113. A thankesgiving to God for his acts of providence, and particular care over the poore and humble. PRaise the Lord (yee seruants:) O praise the Name of the Lord. 2 Blessed be the name of the Lord: from this time forth for euermore. 3 The Lords name is praised: from the rising up of the sun, unto the going down of the same. 4 The Lord is high aboue all heathen: and his glory aboue the heauens. 5 Who is like unto the Lord our God, that hath his dwelling so high: and yet humbleth him∣selfe to behold the things that are in heauen and earth?
6 He taketh up the simple out of the dust: and lifteth the poore out of the mire. 7 That he may set him with the princes: euen with the princes of his people. 8 He maketh the barren woman to keepe house: and to be a ioyfull mother of children. The Prayer. O Lord God whose dwelling is on high, and yet thou humblest thy selfe to behold the things that are in Heaven and earth, have mercy upon us thy humble servants, and lift us up from the gates of death, take us out of the mire that we sinke not into the bottomlesse pit of misery and infelicity, and when for our sinnes thou hum∣blest us as low as the dust, let thy mercie exalt us and restore us to the light of thy countenance, and the joy of thy salvation; that when thou shalt call all the world to judgement from the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof, we may be set with the Princes of thy people, with Abra∣ham, Isaac, and Jacob, in thine eternall King∣dome, to sing praises to thy Name from this time forth for evermore. Amen.
PSALME 114. A thankesgiving to God for the deliverance of his people from bondage and misery. EVENING PRAYER. WHen Israel came out of Egypt: and the house of Iacob from a∣mong the strange people. 2 Iuda was his sanctuary: and Israel his dominion. 3 The sea saw that and fled: Iordan was driuen backe. 4 The mountaines skipped like rammes: and the little hills like young sheep. 5 What aileth thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest: and thou Iordan, that thou wast driuen backe? 6 Yee mountaines, that yee skipped like rammes: and yee little hills like young sheep? 7 Tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lord: at the presence of the God of Iacob. 8 Which turned the hard rocke into a stand∣ing water: and the flint stone into a springing well.
The Prayer. O Lord God at whose presence the earth trembles, who workest salvation and deli∣verance for thy Church in all ages, and didst de∣liver thy people from the bondage of Aegypt with a mighty hand, and an arme stretched out in miraculous effects, deliver us from the bondage of sin, from the tyrannie of the devill, from the Empire and Dominion of the flesh, that our bo∣dies and soules being mortified, our flesh brought under subjection of the spirit, our appetites made subordinate to reason, and our soules wholy conformable to thy will, our hard stony hearts may be converted into hearts of flesh, and into a springing well bringing forth the waters of repentance, and fruits spring∣ing up to life eternall, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 115. A Prayer against idolatry, and for confidence in the true God. NOt unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the praise: for thy loving mercy, and for thy truths sake.
2 Wherefore shall the heathen say: Where is now their God? 3 As for our God, he is in heaven: he hath done whatsoever pleased him. 4 Their idols are silver and gold: even the worke of mens hands. 5 They haue mouthes and speake not: eyes haue they and see not. 6 They have eares and heare not: noses haue they and smell not. 7 They haue hands and handle not, feet haue they and walke not: neither speake they through their throat. 8 They that make them, are like unto them: and so are all such as put their trust in them. 9 But thou house of Israel, trust thou in the Lord: he is their succour and defence. 10 Yee house of Aaron, put your trust in the Lord: he is their helper and defender. 11 Yee that feare the Lord, put your trust in the Lord: he is their helper and defender. 12 The Lord hath been mindfull of us, and he shall blesse us: euen he shall blesse the house of Israel, he shall blesse the house of Aaron. 13 He shall blesse them that feare the Lord: both small and great. 14 The Lord shall increase you more and more: you and your children.
15 Yee are the blessed of the Lord: which made heauen and earth. 16 All the whole heauens are the Lords: the earth hath he given to the children of men. 17 The dead praise not thee, O Lord: neither all they that go down into the silence. 18 But we will praise the Lord: from this time forth for euermore. Praise the Lord. The Prayer. O Lord God omnipotent, whose seat is in Heaven, and thou hast done whatsoever pleased thee in Heaven and earth, give us thy grace, that in all our troubles we may make thee our Succour and Defence, and put our trust in thee onely, that we receiving thy mercies and the satisfaction of all our hopes from thy plenteous∣nesse and loving kindnesse, we may give praise unto thy Name, never ascribing to our selves any honour, or the glorie and thankes of any good acti∣on or prosperous successe, but to thee who art the Authour and Giver of all good things. Preserve us from all dangers of idolatrie, from worship∣ping or loving any vain imaginations, and making any thing to be our confidence besides thee our God, that so thou mayest be mindfull of us, and blesse us in all our wayes, and when we die and
go down into the silence, we may have our porti∣on amongst the blessed of the Lord, in the inheri∣tance of thy Kingdome, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 116. An act of love and thanksgiving to God, for de∣liverance from sinne and death. MORNING PRAYER I Am well pleased: that the Lord hath heard the voice of my prayer. 2 That he hath enclined his eare unto me: therefore will I call upon him as long as I live. 3 The snares of death compassed me round about: and the paines of hell gat hold upon me. 4 I shall finde trouble and heavinesse, and I shall call upon the name of the Lord: O Lord I beseech thee deliver my soul. 5 Bratious is the Lord and righteous: yea, our God is mercifull. 6 The Lord preserveth the simple: I was in misery, and he helped me. 7 Turn again then unto they rest, O my soul: for the Lord hath rewarded thee. 8 And why? thou hast delivered my soul from
death: mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling. 9 I will walke before the Lord: in the land of the living. 10 I beleeved, and therefore will I speak, but I was sore troubled: I said in my hast, All men are liars. 11 What reward shall I give unto the Lord: for all the benefits that he hath done unto me? 12 I will receive the cup of salvation: and call upon the name of the Lord. 13 I will pay my vows now in the presence of all his people: right dear in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints. 14 Behold (O Lord) how that I am thy ser∣vant: I am thy servant, and the sonne of thine handmaid, thou hast broken my bonds in sunder. 15 I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanks∣giving: and will call upon the name of the Lord. 16 I will pay my vows unto the Lord, in the sight of all his people: in the courts of the Lords house, even in the mids of thee, O Ierusalem. Praise the Lord. The Prayer. O Lord God of eternall mercies, Gracious and Righteous, give unto us hearts filled with love and praises to thy holy name; for thou hear∣est
our prayers, thou breakest asunder the bonds of our sinnes, thou deliverest our soules from trou∣ble and heavinesse, and snatchest us from the snares of death, and savest us from the paines of hell. O mercyfull God, let our soules rest in thee, and be satisfied in the pleasures of thy mercy, that we may receive the cup of blessing and salvati∣on, and celebrate the Eucharist in honour of thy name, and in remembrance of thy infinite bene∣fits which thou hast done unto us, and at last may pay our great Allelujah to the Lord in the courts of the Lords house, in the midst of the cele∣stiall Jerusalem, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 117. An invitation to all people to praise Gods mercy and truth. O Praise the Lord all yee heathen: praise him all ye nations. 2 For his mercifull kindnesse is ever more and more towards us: and the truth of the Lord endureth for ever. Praise the Lord. The Prayer. O Blessed Iesu who art not only the glory of thy people Israel, but the light of the Gen∣tiles,
let thy mercifull kindnesse be ever more and more towards the sonnes of men, that the nations which have not known thee may hear thy truth, and feele thy mercies, and call upon thy name, and thy grace may be confirmed upon us, till we re∣ceive the fulnesse and perfection of thy graces in the full fruition of the glories of our Lord and Sa∣viour Iesus Christ. Amen. PSALME 118. A Psalme of thanksgiving for the mercies and salvation which are given us in Iesus Chrst. O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is graci∣ous: because his mercy endureth for ever. 2 Let Israel now confesse that he is gracious: and that his mercy endureth for ever. 3 Let the house of Aaron now confesse: that his mercy endureth for ever. 4 Yea, let them now that feare the Lord, con∣fesse: that his mercy endureth for ever. 5 I called upon the Lord in trouble: and the Lord heard me at large. 6 The Lord is on my side: I will not feare what man doth unto me. 7 The Lord taketh my part with them that help me: therefore shall I see my desire upon mine enemies.
8 It is better to trust in the Lord: then to put any confidence in man. 9 It is better to trust in the Lord: then to put any confidence in princes. 10 All nations compassed me round about: but in the name of the Lord will I destroy them. 11 They kept me in on every side, they kept me in (I say) on every side: but in the name of the Lord will I destroy them. 12 They came about me like bees, and are extinct even as the fire among the thorns: for in the name of the Lord will I destroy them. 13 Thou hast thrust sore at me, that I might fall: but the Lord was my help. 14 The Lord is my strength and my song: and is become my salvation. 15 The voice of ioy and health is in the dwel∣lings of the righteous: the right hand of the Lord bringeth mighty things to passe. 16 The right hand of the Lord hath the pre∣eminence: the right hand of the Lord bringeth mighty things to passe. 17 I will not die, but live: and declare the works of the Lord. 18 The Lord hath chastened and corrected me: but he hath not given me over unto death. 19 Open me the gates of righteousnesse: that I may go into them, and give thanks unto the Lord,
20 This is the gate of the Lord: the righteous shall inter into it. 21 I will thank thee, for thou hast heard me: and art become my salvation. 22 The same stone which the builders refused: is become the head stone in the corner. 23 This is the Lords doing: and it is marvel∣lous in our eyes. 24 This is the day which the Lord hath made: we will reioyce and be glad in it. 25 Help me now, O Lord: O Lord send us now prosperity. 26 Blessed be he that commeth in the name of the Lord: we have wished you good luck, ye that be of the house of the Lord. 27 God is the Lord which hath shewed us light: binde the sacrifice with cords, yea, even un∣to the horns of the altar. 28 Thou art my God, and I will thank thee: thou art my God, and I will praise thee. 29 O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gratious: and his mercy endureth for ever. The Prayer. O Most Gracious Lord, our strength & our song, thou art become our salvation, & thy mercy endureth for ever, be thou on our side, take part with them that help us, let the voyce of joy and
health be within our dwellings, and when thou chastenest and correctest us for our sinnes, give us not over unto death, but fix our faith and hopes upon the head stone in the corner, even our Lord Iesus Christ, that in all the assaults made against us by our ghostly enemies, the right hand of the Lord may have the preeminence, and bring mighty things to passe, even victory and deliverance un∣to thy servants, that we putting no confidence in the best of men, may trust in thee, O Lord, till at last, when thou openest the everlasting gates of righteousnesse, we may enter in and give thee thankes and praise, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 119. A prayer for religion, zeale, love of the law of God, and meditation in it. EVENING PRAYER. BLessed are those that are undefiled in the way: and walk in the law of the Lord. 2 Blessed are they that keepe his testimonies: and seek him with their whole heart. 3 For they which do no wickednesse: walk in his waies.
4 Thou hast charged: that we shall diligently keep thy commandments. 5 O that my waies were made so direct: that I might keep thy statutes! 6 So shall I not be confounded: while I have respect unto all thy commandments. 7 I will thank thee with an unfeigned heart▪ when I shall have learned the iudgements of thy righteousnesse. 8 I will keep thy ceremonies: O forsake me not utterly. The Prayer. O Blessed Lord God, whose words are light and life to the obedient and believing soule, let thy grace so purifie our hearts and actions, that we may be undefiled in thy way, keeping thy te∣stimonies and seeking thee with our whole heart; that our waies being made direct without wan∣dring into by-paths, we may go into our country, the land of eternall & glorious promises, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. II. VVHere withall shall a young man clense his way: even by ruling himself after thy word. 2 With my whole heart have I sought thee:
O let me not go wrong out of thy command∣ments. 3 Thy words have I hid within my heart: that I should not sinne against thee. 4 Blessed art thou, O Lord: O teach me thy statutes. 5 With my lips have I been telling: of all the iudgements of thy mouth. 6 I have had as great delight in the way of thy testimonies: as in all manner of riches. 7 I will talk of thy commandments: and have respect unto thy waies. 8 My delight shall be in thy statutes: and I will not forget thy word. The Prayer. GRant, O Lord, that our affections and endea∣vours be not divided between thee and the world, but that we may seek thee with our whole heart, clensing our waies from all impuri∣ty, giving to thy service our youth, and more per∣fect age, even all our dayes, and all our powers, taking more delight in the way of thy testimo∣nies then in all manner of riches and fading plea∣sures; that we delighting in thee, and the waies that lead to thee, may be beloved of thee with an eternall love, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
III. O Do well unto thy servant: that I may live, and keep thy word. 2 Open thou mine eyes: that I may see the wonderous things of thy law. 3 I am a stranger upon earth: O hide not thy commandments from me. 4 My soul breaketh out for the very servent desire: that it hath alway unto thy iudgements. 5 Thou hast rebuked the proud: and cursed are they that do erre from thy commandments. 6 O turn from me shame and rebuke: for I have kept thy testimonies. 7 Princes also did sit and speak against me: but thy servant is occupied in thy statutes. 8 For thy testimonies are my delight: and my counsellers. The Prayer. O Lord God, our Father and our Guardian, we are strangers upon the earth, farre removed from our country, and we are in darknesse and walke in the shadow of death, let not this dark∣nesse seize upon our soules, hide not thy comman∣dements from us, but open our eyes with the light of thy holy Spirit, that we may see the won∣drous things of thy law, and admire thy glories,
and adore thy might, and obey all thy righteous precepts: and although our hearts be already en∣kindled with the love of thy law, yet make our desires to serve thee more fervent, that our luke∣warmnesse may arise up to the flames and ardors of a Cherubim, that while we are busied in thy statutes, making them our delight and our counsel∣lors, shame and rebuke may alwayes be turned frō us, and we ever reioyce with hope and confidence in thee, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. IV. MY soule cleaveth to the dust: O quicken thou me according to thy word 2 I have knowledged my wayes, and thou heardest me: O teach me thy statutes. 3 Make me to understand the way of thy com∣mandments: and so shall I talke of thy wonde∣rous works. 4 My soul melteth away for very heavinesse: comfort thou me according unto thy word. 5 Take from me the way of lying: and cause thou me to make much of thy law. 6 I have chosen the way of truth: and thy iudgements have I laid before me. 7 I have sticken unto thy testimonies: O Lord confound me not. 8 I will run the way of thy commandments:
when thou hast set my heart at libertie. The Prayer. VVE have chosen the way of thy truth, O Lord, and laid thy judgements be∣fore us, and yet through our infirmities, and the disadvantages of the flesh, we are in heavinesse, and drive on slowly like Pharao's chariots with the wheels off; our soules and our desires cleave unto the dust, and to things below, and we are not active in thy services: O quicken us accord∣ing to thy word, refresh our wearinesse, comfort our sadnesse, take from us the way of lying and vanity, set our hearts at liberty from the bon∣dage of sinne, from the fetters of temptation, from the incumbrances of the world, and then we shall runne the way of thy commandments, never ceasing to run till we arrive at the land of eternall rest and righteousnesse, where thou livest and raignest, world without end. Amen.
V. MORNING PRAYER. TEach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes: and I shall keep it unto the end. 2 Giue me understanding, and I shall keep thy Law: yea, I shall keep it with my whole heart. 3 Make me to go in the path of thy command∣ments: for therein is my desire. 4 Encline my heart unto thy testimonies: and not to couteousnesse. 5 O turne away mine eyes, lest they behold vanity: and quicken thou me in thy way. 6 O stablish thy word in thy seruant: that I may feare thee. 7 Take away the rebuke that I am afraid of: for thy judgements are good. 8 Behold, my delight is in thy command∣ments: O quicken me in thy righteousnesse. The Prayer. O Lord God, who art of infinite Sanctity, and hast given us thy Law, that we walking in so divine a rule, may imitate the perfecti∣on
of thy holinesse, make us to go all our dayes in the path of thy Commandments: take from us all greedy and inordinate appetite of the crea∣ture, let not our hearts be inclined to covetous∣nesse, nor our eyes wander after vanity, but grant, that we being established in thy Law, and walk∣ing in thy feare, may persevere in the wayes of righteousnesse, keeping the way of thy statutes even unto the end; that the rebuke which for our sinnes we may justly, feare, may by thy mercies and pardon be taken away from us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. VI. LEt thy loving mercy also come unto me, O Lord: euen thy saluation, according unto thy word. 2 So shall I make answer unto my blasphe∣mers: for my trust is in thy word. 3 O take not the word of thy truth utterly out of my mouth: for my hope is in thy iudge∣ments. 4 So shall I alway keep thy law: yea, for euer and euer. 5 And I will walke at liberty: for I seek thy commandments. 6 I will speake of thy testimonies also, euen before kings: and will not be ashamed.
7 And my delight shall be in thy command∣ments: which I haue loued. 8 My hands also will I lift up unto thy com∣mandments, which I haue loued: and my study shall be in thy statutes. The Prayer. LEt thy loving mercy come unto us, O Lord, and thy salvation, for thou alwayes keepest promise, and never disappointest the hopes of them that trust in thee. Give us confidence and boldnesse in thee, that we may never fear or blush to confesse thee before men, but may speake of thy testimonies even before Kings, and may ne∣ver be ashamed of thy Word, which is the ground of our hope, but that our hands may be lift up to performe thy Law, and our study, our love, and our delight may be in it, even for ever and ever, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. VII. O Thinke upon thy seruant, as concerning thy word: wherein thou hast caused me to put my trust. 2 The same is my comfort in my trouble: for thy word hath quickened me. 3 The proud haue had me exceedingly in de∣rision:
yet have I not shrinked from thy law. 4 For I remembred thine euerlasting iudge∣ments, O Lord: and receiued comfort. 5 I am horribly afraid: for the ungodly that forsake thy law. 6 Thy statutes haue been my songs: in the house of my pilgrimage. 7 I haue thought upon thy name, O Lord, in the night season: and haue kept thy law. 8 This I had: because I kept thy command∣ments. The Prayer. THinke upon us, O Lord, in all our desires, in all our feares, in all our troubles; let thy Law give us comfort, redresse, and satisfaction; that in our trouble we may thence derive com∣fort, in our feares we may there fixe our anchor of hope, and from thence we may get defence a∣gainst the derisions and insolencies of the proud; and grant that thy grace may reward thy grace in us, and a further degree of sanctity may crowne the first beginnings; and when by thy assistances we thinke upon thy Name, and keep thy Law, we begge this onely that our reward may be still to keep thy Commandments. Grant this for Iesus Christ his sake, our Lord and onely Saviour. Amen.
VIII. THou art my portion, O Lord: I haue pro∣mised to keep thy law. 2 I made my humble petition in thy presence with my whole heart: O be mercifull unto mee according to thy word. 3 I called mine own wayes to remembrance▪ and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. 4 I made haste and prolonged not the time: to keep thy commandments. 5 The congregation of the ungodly haue rob∣bed me: but I haue not forgotten thy law. 6 At midnight I will rise to giue thankes un∣to thee: because of thy righteous iudgements. 7 I am a companion of all them that feare thee: and keep thy commandments. 8 The earth, O Lord, is full of thy mercy: O teach me thy statutes. The Prayer. O Beare God, be thou our portion and the lot of our inheritance, and be mercifull unto us when ever we make our humble petition in thy presence, and above all the desires of our soules let us receive satisfaction in this request: give us repentance and thy holy Spirit, that we calling
our owne wayes to remembrance, may be truly sorrowfull for our past sinnes, and may make hast, prolonging not the time, but early and instantly turne our feet unto thy testimonies, that we be∣ing companions of all that feare thee, may bee partakers of all the blessings in the communion of Saints, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. IX. O Lord, thou hast dealt graciously with thy servant: according unto thy word. 2 O learne me true understanding and know∣ledge: for I have believed thy commandments. 3 Before I was troubled, I went wrong: but now have I kept thy word. 4 Thou art good and gracious: O teach me thy statutes. 5 The proud have imagined a lye against me: but I will keepe thy commandments with my whole heart. 6 Their heart is as fat as brawn: but my de∣light hath been in thy law. 7 It is good for me that I have been in trou∣ble: that I may learne thy statutes. 8 The law of thy mouth is dearer unto me: then thousands of gold and silver.
The Prayer. THou, O Lord, art gracious even in the execu∣tion of thy judgements and displeasure a∣gainst sinners, and thou sendest chastisement and correction to us when we goe wrong, that thou mayest chide us into obedience, and the blessings of eternity: let not idlenesse and sensuality make us remisse in our duty, nor our own vanity and the sense of thy favour make us proud, nor the want of holy discipline make us impudent and refra∣ctory, but let thy mercies and thy judgements learne us thy statutes, and make them dearer to us than thousands of gold and silver, that while we make thy statutes to be our treasure, our heart may be fixed on them in a continuall meditation, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. X. EVENING PRAYER. THy hands haue made me and fashion∣ed me: O give me understanding, that I may learne thy command∣ments. 2 They that feare thee will be glad when
they see me: because I have put my trust in thy word. 3 I know (O Lord) that thy iudgements are right: and that thou of very faithfulnesse hast cau∣sed me to be troubled. 4 O let thy mercifull kindnesse be my com∣fort: according to thy word unto thy servant. 5 O let thy loving mercies come unto me, that I may live: for thy law is my delight. 6 Let the proud be confounded for they go wickedly about to destroy me: but I will be occu∣pied in thy commandments. 7 Let such as feare thee, and have known thy testimonies: be turned unto me. 8 O let my heart be sound in thy statues: that I be not ashamed. The Prayer. O Lord our Maker, thy hands have made us and fashioned us, let thy holy Spirit rege∣nerate us, and thy grace forme us anew, that the old man being destroyed, the new man may be produced in righteousnesse and sanctity; that our hearts may be sound in thy statutes without hy∣pocrisie, and inordinate ends, full of candour and ingenuity; that thy loving mercies comming un∣to us in a full streame we may live in them and
be turned unto thee, never to be removed from thy Law and love. Grant this for the love of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen. XI. MY soule hath longed for thy saluation: and I have a good hope because of thy word. 2 Mine eyes long sore for thy word: saying, O when wilt thou comfort me? 3 For I am become like a bottle in the smoke: yet do I not forget thy statutes. 4 How many are the dayes of thy servant: when wilt thou be avenged of them that persecute me? 5 The proud haue digged pits for me: which are not after thy law. 6 All thy commandments are true: they per∣secute me falsly, O be thou my helpe. 7 They had almost made an end of me upon earth: but I forsook not thy commandments. 8 O quicken me after thy loving kindnesse: and so shall I keep the testimonies of thy mouth. The Prayer. O Lord our helper, teach us to remember our end, to consider our yeares that are past, that we in consideration how few the dayes of
thy servants are which are yet to come, may quic∣ken our industry and affections to thy Law, that by a double and more active endeavour in the wayes of thy Commandments, we may redeeme the time, and by thy mercy being delivered from all them that trouble and perfecute us, we may be refreshed in thy eternall comforts, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. XII. O Lord thy word: endureth for euer in heauen. 2 Thy truth also remaineth from one generation to another: thou hast laid the founda∣tion of the earth, and it abideth. 3 They continue this day according to thine ordinance: for all things serue thee. 4 If my delight had not been in thy law: I should haue perished in my trouble. 5 I will neuer forget thy commandments: for with them thou hast quickened me. 6 I am thine, Oh saue me: for I haue sought thy commandments. 7 The ungodly laid wait for me, to destroy me: but I will consider thy testimonies. 8 I see that all things come to an end: but thy commandment is exceeding broad.
The Prayer. O Lord out Guide, thou hast laid the Founda∣tion of the earth sure, and it abideth, but thy Word endureth for ever in Heaven, and though Heaven and Earth shall passe away, yet one tittle of thy Word shall never passe in vaine and unaccomplished; teach us to obey thee with a regular obedience, that since all the creatures continue according to thine ordinance and serve thee, we onely may not disobey thee and disturbe the order of Creation by a rebellion of creatures against their Maker, least thy wrath arise upon us, and we perish in our trouble. Have mercy upon us, and deliver us from thy wrath, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. XIII. LOrd, what loue haue I unto thy law: all the day long is my studie in it. 2 Thou through thy commandments hast made me wiser then mine enemies: for they are ever with me. 3 I haue more understanding then my teach∣ers: for thy testimonies are my study. 4 I am wiser then the aged: because I keep thy commandments.
5 I have refrained my feet from every evill way: that I may keep thy word. 6 I have not shrunke from thy iudgements: for thou teachest me. 7 O how sweet are thy words unto my throat: yea sweeter then hony unto my mouth. 8 Through thy commandments I get under∣standing: therefore I hate all wicked wayes. The Prayer. O Lord our Governour, who art the Fountain of all wisedome and understanding, and hast commanded that all that lacke wisedome should aske it of thee who givest liberally; make us wise and understanding in the observation of thy Com∣mandments, that we may refraine our feet from every evill way, and never shrinke from thy judgements, but may delight and study in all the expresses of thy will which thou hast revealed to us by our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen.
XIIII. MORNING PRAYER. THy word is a lantern unto my feet: and a light unto my paths. 2 I have sworn, and am sted∣fastly purposed: to keep thy righ∣teous iudgements. 3 I am troubled above mea∣sure: quicken me (O Lord) according to thy word. 4 Let the free-will offerings of my mouth please thee, O Lord: and teach me thy judgments. 5 My soul is alway in my hand: yet do I not forget thy law. 6 The ungodly have laid a snare for me: but yet I swerved not from thy commandments. 7 Thy testimonies have I claimed as mine heritage for ever: and why? they are the very oy of my heart. 8 I have applied my heart to fulfill thy sta∣tutes alway: even unto the end.
The Prayer. O Sonne of righteousnesse, that camest to bring light unto the world by thy word, and example, and illumination of thy holy spirit; let thy spirit lead us, thy example guide us, thy word teach us, that we may not love darknesse more then light, but may keep thy righteous judge∣ments according to our many purposes and our vow of baptisme: keep us from the snare of the ungodly, and from our own selves, the dangers of our own concupiscence, and the miseries of our infirmity; leave not our soules in our own hands, but keep them under thy protection and govern∣ment, least we swerve from thy commandments, but that applying our hearts alway to fulfill thy statutes even unto the end, we may possesse thy law as our portion and inheritance for ever, Grant this, O blessed Iesu, for thy promise and for thy mercies sake, that we may glorifie thee in the unity of themost mysterious Trinity now and for evermore. Amen. XV. I Hate them that imagine evill things: but thy law do I love. 2 Thou art my defence and shield: and my trust is in thy word.
3 Away from me yee wicked: I will keep the commandments of my God. 4 O stablish me according unto thy word, that I may live: and let me not be disappoynted of my hope. 5 Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe: yea, my delight shall be ever in thy statutes. 6 Thou hast troden down all them that depart from thy statutes: for they imagine but deceit. 7 Thou puttest away all the ungodly of the earth like drosse: therefore I love thy testimonies. 8 My flesh trembleth for feare of thee: and I am afraid of thy iudgements. The Prayer. O God our defence and shield, thou that trea∣dest down all them that depart from thy law, and puttest away the ungodly of the earth like drosse, let thy mercies hold us up, that we may be safe from sinne and death eternall: make us to hate all evill things, all evill imaginations, that we being stablished with a trust in thee, and building our expectations upon thy mercies and promises, we may not be disappointed of our hope, but may live with thee eternally, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
XVI. I Deal with the thing that is lawfull and right: O give me not over unto mine oppressors. 2 Make thou thy servant to delight in that which is good: that the proud do me no wrong. 3 Mine eyes are wasted away with looking for thy health: and for the word of thy righteous∣nesse. 4 O deal with thy servant according unto thy loving mercy: and teach me thy statutes. 5 I am thy servant, O grant me understand∣ing: that I may know thy testimonies. 6 It is time for thee, Lord, to lay to thine hand: for they have destroyed thy law. 7 For I love thy commandments: above gold and precious stone. 8 Therefore hold I straight all thy command∣ments: and all false waies I utterly abhorre. The Prayer. O Lord God, thou seest with what miseries and dangers we are incompassed, our ghost∣ly enemies seek to do us wrong, and to oppresse our soules; give us not over unto their malice, but arme us against their pride and insolency by faith in thy word, by hope of thy mercies, and looking for thy health, and by love unto thy command∣ments,
that so in this world, and in the eternall retribution of the Saints, thou maist deal with thy servants according to thy loving mercy. Grant this for Iesus Christ his sake our Lord and only Saviour. Amen. XVII. THy testimonies are wonderfull: therefore doth my soul keep them. 2 When thy word goeth forth: it giveth light and understanding unto the simple. 3 I opened my mouth and drew in my breath: for my delight was in thy command∣ments. 4 O look thou upon me, and be mercifull un∣to me: as thou usest to do unto those that loue thy name. 5 Order my steps in thy word: and so shall no wickednesse have dominion over me. 6 O deliver me from the wrongfull dealings of men: and so shall I keep thy commandments. 7 Shew the light of thy countenance upon thy servant: and teach me thy statutes. 8 Mine eyes gush out with water: because men keep not thy law.
O Iust and deare God, shew the light of thy countenance upon thy servants, and let this light give unto us understanding in thy law, that our steps being ordered in thy word, thou maist deliver us from the wrongfull dealings of men, and from the malicious enmities of our Ghostly adversaries, that by their temptations, and our own weaknesse, we may never be brought under the dominion of sinne and wickednesse, that when thy word goeth forth to call to judgement all people, quick and dead, thou maist be merci∣full unto us, and save us, as thou usest to do unto those that love thy name. Grant this for the me∣rits and mercies of our dearest Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen. XVIII. RIghteous art thou, O Lord: and true is thy iudgement. 2 The testimonies that thou hast command∣ed: are exceeding righteous and true. 3 My zeal hath even consumed me: because mine enemies have forgotten thy words. 4 Thy word is tried to the uttermost: and thy servant loveth it. 5 I am small, and of no reputation: yet do I not forget thy commandments.
6 Thy righteousnesse is an everlasting righ∣teousnesse: and thy law is the truth. 7 Trouble and heavinesse have taken hold up∣on me: yet is my delight in thy commandments. 8 The righteousnesse of thy testimonies is everlasting: O grant me understanding, and I shall live. The Prayer. O Righteous Lord God, whose judgements are true, and thy testimonies exceeding righteous, enkindle our soules with zeale to thy Lawes and service, that the continuall remem∣brance of thy Commandments may so enable our soules, as to give a greatnesse and reputation to us in thy estimation, even the greatnesse of humility and obedience, which are more honourable in thy eyes than all the pompes and vanities of this world. Grant this for his sake, who for our sakes humbled himselfe to the forme of a servant, and became obedient to the death of the Crosse, even Iesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father and the holy Spirit be all honour and glory, now and for ever. Amen.
XIX. EVENING PRAYER. I Call with my whole heart: heare me, O Lord, I will keep thy sta∣tutes. 2 Yea, even upon thee do I call: helpe me, and I shall keep thy testimonies. 3 Early in the morning do I cry unto thee: for in thy word is my trust. 4 Mine eyes prevent the night watches: that I might be occupied in thy words. 5 Heare my voice (O Lord) according unto thy loving kindnesse: quicken me according as thou art wont. 6 They draw nigh that of malice persecute me: and are farre from thy law. 7 Be thou nigh at hand, O Lord: for all thy commandments are true. 8 As concerning thy testimonies, I have known long since: that thou hast grounded them for ever.
The Prayer. O Lord God of eternall mercy and truth, give us hearts fixed upon thy divine beauties, and an actuall intention in our prayers, that we may call upon thee with our whole hearts, and do thou heare in Heaven when we call upon thee: deliver us from all them that of malice draw nigh to persecute and afflict us, be thou also night at hand, and nothing can disturbe our safety. Make us to seek to thee early in the morning; let our eyes and our prayers prevent the night watches, that we may be safe in our conversation with thee, and our daily approaches to thy mercy-seat, where thou sittest attended with Cherubims and Seraphims, glorious in thy Selfe, incomprehensi∣ble in thy Attributes, and infinitely rejoycing in thy mercies which thou shewest unto us in our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. XX. O Consider mine adversity, and deliver me: for I do not forget thy law. 2 Avenge thou my cause, and deliver me: quicken me according unto thy word. 3 Health is farre from the ungodly: for they regard not thy statutes.
4 Great is thy mercie, O Lord: quicken me as thou art wont. 5 Many there are that trouble me, and perse∣cute me: yet do I not swerve from thy testimo∣nies. 6 It grieveth me when I see the transgres∣sours: because they keep not thy law. 7 Consider, O Lord, how I love thy com∣mandments: O quicken me according to thy lo∣ving kindnesse. 8 Thy word is true from everlasting: all the iudgements of thy righteousnesse endure for ever∣more. The Prayer. O Lord thy mercy is great, thy Word is true from everlasting, and in the truth of thy Word, and in the mercies of thy promises and loving kindnesse thou lovest to be knowne to the sonnes of men; O give us thy health and salvation, that our soules being delivered from the heavie pressure of sin, and quickened in thy Word, thou mayest avenge us of all our ghostly enemies, and deliver us in thy righteousnesse in the day of thy eternall vengeance upon the un∣godly, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
XXI. PRinces have persecuted me without a cause: but my heart standeth in aw of thy words. 2 I am as glad of thy word: as one that find∣eth great spoiles. 3 As for lies, I hate and abhorre them: but thy law do I love. 4 Seven times a day do I praise thee: be∣cause of thy righteous iudgements. 5 Great is the peace that they have which love thy law: and they are not offended at it. 6 Lord, I have looked for thy saving health: and done after thy commandments. 7 My soule hath kept thy testimonies: and lo∣ved them exceedingly. 8 I have kept thy commandments and testi∣monies: for all my wayes are before thee. The Prayer. ALL our wayes (O God) are before thee; let all our wayes be directed by thee, and teach us to walke as in thy presence. Make us to hate and abhorre lyes and vanitie, and give us so much love, and so much zeale of thy Name and honour, that we may make it a businesse to give thee prai∣ses with a frequent and daily devotion, that we
standing in aw of thy Word and holy Lawes, and doing after thy Commandments, our expectati∣ons may be satisfied with thy saving health, and we may at last enjoy the peace which they have that love thy Law, even the peace of a good con∣science here, and of a blessed eternity hereafter, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. XXII. LEt my complaint come before thee, O Lord: give me understanding according to thy word. 2 Let my supplication come before thee: de∣liver me according to thy word. 3 My lips shall speake of thy praise: when thou hast taught me thy statutes. 4 Yea, my tongue shall sing of thy word: for all thy commandments are righteous. 5 Let thine hand helpe me: for I have chosen thy commandments. 6 I have longed for thy saving health, O Lord: and in thy law is my delight. 7 O let my soule live, and it shall praise thee: and thy iudgements shall helpe me. 8 I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost: Oh seek thy servant, for I do not forget thy com∣mandments.
The Prayer. O Lord God, we have gone astray from thy Commandments, and been like lost sheep, thou art our Shepheard and our mercifull Guide; O seek thy servants, let thy hand helpe us, let thy care and providence reduce us into the way of thy statutes; that we being delivered according to thy Word from thy wrath, and from our owne corruptions and irregularities, may at last be satis∣fied with thy saving health, and our lips may speak of thy praise in the quire of Saints and Angels, singing glorious Anthems to all eternity, to the honour of thee, O Lord God eternall, who livest and reignest world without end. Amen. PSALM. 120. A Prayer to be delivered from false tongues, and cohabitation with wicked persons. MORNING PRAYER. WHen I was in trouble, I called upon the Lord: and he heard me. 2 Deliver my soule, O Lord, from lying lips: and from a deceitfull tongue. 3 What reward shall be given or done unto
thee, thou false tongue: even mighty and sharpe arrowes, with hot burning coales. 4 Wo is me, that I am constrained to dwell with Mesech: and to have mine habitation among the tents of Cedar. 5 My soule hath long dwelt among them: that be enemies unto peace. 6 I labour for peace, but when I speak unto them thereof: they make them ready to battell. The Prayer. O Lord God, who hearest the prayers of them that call upon thee in their calamities and di∣stresses, have mercy upon us thy servants, who live in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, whereof we our selves make too great a part; we beseech thee so to order the circumstances and opportunities of our life, that we may live in the society of holy people, whose example and con∣versation may be a continuall incentive to the wayes of peace and righteousnesse; and deliver us from a necessity of conversing with turbulent spirits, angry, and unpeacefull dispositions, who upon all occasions make themselves ready to bat∣tell. Sanctifie our hearts and lips with a burning coale from thy altar, that our words may be holy and profitable, and keep us from all slander and
scandall, and the rewards of both, the sharpe ar∣rowes of thy vengeance, the hot burning coales of thy wrath. Grant this for Iesus Christ his sake, our Lord and onely Saviour. Amen. PSALME 121. A Prayer for Gods protection over us. I Will lift up mine eyes unto the hills: from whence cometh my helpe. 2 My helpe cometh even from the Lord: which hath made heauen and earth. 3 He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: and he that keepeth thee, will not sleep. 4 Behold, he that keepeth Israel: shall nei∣ther slumber nor sleep. 5 The Lord himselfe is thy keeper: the Lord is thy defence upon thy right hand. 6 So that the sun shall not burne thee by day: neither the moon by night. 7 The Lord shall preserve thee from all euill: yea, it is even he that shall keep thy soule. 8 The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in: from this time forth for evermore.
The Prayer. O Lord God our Keeper, who dwellest upon the eternall hills from whence commeth all our helpe, let thy mercies and thy providence watch over us by day and night, that neither the vanities of the one, nor the terrours of the other may disturbe our peace or safety. Let not our feet be moved, but be fixed upon the Rocke Christ Iesus, and so order our goings, making us to walke in the way of thy Commandments, that thou mayest go in and out before us, till at last we come into thy presence to dwell with thee for ever∣more, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 122. A Prayer for the peace and prosperity of the Church. I Was glad when they said unto me: We will go into the house of the Lord. 2 Our feet shall stand in thy gates: O Ieru∣salem. 3 Ierusalem is builded as a city: that is a unity in it selfe. 4 For thither the Tribes go up, even the Tribes of the Lord: to testifie unto Israel, to give thankes unto the name of the Lord.
5 For there is the seat of iudgement: even the seat of the house of David. 6 O pray for the peace of Ierusalem: they shall prosper that love thee. 7 Peace be within thy walls: and plenteous∣nesse within thy palaces. 8 For my brethren and companions sakes: I will wish thee prosperity. 9 Yea, because of the house of the Lord our God: I will seek to do thee good. The Prayer. O Blessed Iesu, who didst descend according to thy humane Nature from the House of thy servant David, and hast planted a church, and defended it with a mighty hand and great as∣sistances, be pleased to preserve peace within her walls, and send plenteousnesse within her pa∣laces, that all that love her peace may prosper, and receive the blessings which thou givest to thy faithfull people in the communion of Saints. Take from her all schismes and divisions, that she may be like a city that is at unity within it selfe, strong in faith, abounding in hope, and rich in the treasures of charity, that at last she may be re∣moved to a fellowship of all those joyes and feli∣cities which are laid up for the inhabitants of the
heavenly Ierusalem which is from above, and is the mother of us all. Grant this, O blessed Iesu, our onely Mediatour and Redeemer. Amen. PSALME 123. An eiaculation, or a lifting up our soules to God for helpe in trouble. VNto thee lift I up mine eyes: O thou that dwellest in the heavens. 2 Behold, even as the eyes of servants look vnto the hand of their masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistresse: even so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, untill he have mercy upon us. 3 Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us: for we are utterly despised. 4 Our soule is filled with the scornfull re∣proofe of the wealthy: and with the despiteful∣nesse of the proud. The Prayer. O Lord God, that dwellest in the Heavens, have mercy upon us in all our troubles, in contempt, in our poverty, and when ever we are oppressed by any injurious practices of the proud. Thou art our Lord and Master, we are thy ser∣vants,
our eyes wait upon thee till thou have mercy upon us: let us not be ashamed of our hope, nor unfaithfull in our services, nor distrust∣full of thy providence, but make us diligent la∣bourers in our calling, good husbands of our ta∣lents, and faithfull in all thy house, that we first serving thee may at last sit downe at meat with thee at thy table in thy Kingdome, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 124. A thankesgiving for our deliverance from the power of all our enemies, and a confessing God to be the Authour of it. IF the Lord himselfe had not been on our side (now may Israel say:) if the Lord himselfe had not been on our side when men rose up a∣gainst us. 2 They had swallowed us up quicke: when they were so wrathfully displeased at us. 3 Yea, the waters had drowned us: and the streame had gone over our soule. 4 The deep waters of the proud: had gone even over our soule. 5 But praised be the Lord: which hath not given us over for a prey unto their teeth. 6 Our soule is escaped, even as a bird out of
the snare of the fowler: the snare is broken, and we are delivered. 7 Our helpe standeth in the Name of the Lord: which hath made heaven and earth. The Prayer. O Lord God, which hast made Heaven and Earth, in whose Name our helpe standeth, we praise and blesse thy Name, that in our trou∣bles and temptations thou hast stood on our side, and pleaded for us against them that rose against us. It was thy hand (O Lord) and the helpe of thy mercy that relieved us: the waters of af∣fliction had drowned us, and the streame had gone over our soule, if the Spirit of the Lord had not moved upon the waters. Thou (O Lord) didst blast the designes of our enemies with the breath of thy displeasure, and to thee (O Lord) we ascribe the praise and honour of our redemp∣tion. Perpetuate thy mercies to us, let us never be given over as a prey to our ghostly enemies, but breake their snares, discover and weaken all their temptations by which they would destroy our soules, that we being delivered from sin may be preserved from thy wrath, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME 125. A Prayer for confidence in God, and for de∣liverance from the portion of the wicked. THey that put their trust in the Lord, shall be even as the mount Ston: which may not be removed, but standeth fast for ever. 2 The hills stand about Ierusalem: even so standeth the Lord round about his people, from this time forth for evermore. 3 For the rod of the ungodly cometh not into the lot of the righteous: lest the righteous put their hand unto wickednesse. 4 Do well, O Lord: unto those that be good and true of heart. 5 As for such as turne backe unto their owne wickednesse: the Lord shall leade them forth with the evill doers, but peace shall be upon Israel. The Prayer. O Lord God, our Trust and Confidence, in whom whosoever trusteth shall never be re∣moved, but standeth fast for ever: let thy mercies and the guard of holy Angels stand round about us, and about all thy holy people, like the hills for
our defence and safety, that we may be inaccessi∣ble by all the intendments of our enemies. O let us not put our hands to wickednesse, neither let our portion be in the lot of the ungodly, whom thou leadest forth to destruction, but let us receive the blessing which our Lord Iesus left unto his Church, even the peace of God the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost; to whom be all honour and glory ascribed of men and Angels, now and for ever. Amen. PSALME 126. A contemplation of the ioyes and blessings of them that depart hence in the Lord. EVENING PRAYER. WHen the Lord turned again the captivity of Sion: then were we like unto them that dreame. 2 Then was our mouth filled with laughter: and our tongue with ioy. 3 Then said they among the heathen: The Lord hath done great things for them. 4 Yea, the Lord hath done great things for us already: whereof we reioyce. 5 Turne our captivity, O Lord: as the rivers in the south.
6 They that sow in teares: shall reap in ioy. 7 He that now goeth on his way weeping, and beareth forth good seed: shall doubtlesse come again with ioy, and bring his sheaves with him. The Prayer. O Lord God who hast promised salvation to thy people, and hast done great things for us already, deliver us from the captivity and bon∣dage of sinne and misery. Fill our hearts with ho∣ly sorrow and compunction when ever we tres∣passe against thee, and teach us so to deny our selves, to mortifie our affections, to crucifie our lusts and all the temptations of the flesh, that we going on our way with mourning and weeping, despising the pleasures of this life, may when thy great harvest shall come, and thy reapers the An∣gells shall separate the wheat from the tares, come before thee with joy, and bring our sheaves with us to be laid up in thy granary, that so we may escape the everlasting burning, through the mercies of Iesus Christ. Amen.
PSALME 127. A Prayer for God's blessing to go along with the temporall good things he gives us. EXcept the Lord build the house: their labour is but lost that build it. 2 Except the Lord keep the city: the watch∣man waketh but in vain. 3 It is but lost labour that ye hast to rise up early, and so late take rest, and eat the bread of carefulnesse: for so he giveth his beloved sleep. 4 Lo, children and the fruit of the wombe: are an heritage and gift that commeth of the Lord. 5 Like as the arrows in the hand of the gi∣ant: even so are the young children. 6 Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them: they shall not be ashamed when they speak with their enemies in the gate. The Prayer. O Lord God, without whose blessing all our labours are vain and unprofitable, and our possessions are but bitter and unpleasant: let thy blessing be upon our labours and our substance, our children, and our dwelling, that the good things of this life may be an heritage and gift from thee, issues of thy favour, and an earnest of a greater
blessing: make our soules diligent in thy service, not importunate and greedy for the increase of ri∣ches: let our dwellings be safe and peaceable, and our families increase in thy blessings, that we feel∣ing the comforts of thy favour here, may be stir∣ted up to great desires after the blessings of eter∣nity, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 128. A Prayer for the feare of God, and the blessings of the Godly. BLessed are all they that feare the Lord: and walk in his wayes. 2 For thou shalt eat the labours of thine hands: O well is thee, and happy shalt thou be. 3 Thy wife shallbe as the fruitfull vine: up∣on the walls of thine house. 4 Thy children like the olive-branches: round about thy table. 5 Lo, thus shall the man be blessed: that fear∣eth the Lord. 6 The Lord from out of Sion shall so blesse thee: that thou shalt see Ierusalem in prosperity all thy life long. 7 Yea, that thou shalt see thy childrens chil∣dren: and peace upon Israell.
The Prayer. O Lord God, who hast promised to multiply thy blessings upon them that feare thee; teach us the feare of the Lord, and let thy spirit so assist us, that we may walke in thy wayes with great observation of all our actions, and much di∣ligence to performe thy holy will, that we may receive the blessings of the righteous, blessings of the right hand, and of the left hand, and may re∣joyce in the blessing and peace of thy church, waiting for the consummation of all blessing and peace in thy eternall Kingdome, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 129. A Prayer against the enemies of the Church. MAny a time have they fought against me from my youth up: (may Israell now say.) 2 Yea, many a time have they vexed me from my youth up: but they have not prevailed against mee. 3 The plowers plowed upon my back: and made long furrows. 4 But the righteous Lord: hath hewen the snares of the ungodly in pieces. 5 Let them be confounded and turned back∣ward:
as many as have evill will at Sion. 6 Let them be even as the grasse growing upon the house tops: which withereth afore it be plucked up. 7 Whereof the mower filleth not his hand: neither he that bindeth up the sheaves, his bosome. 8 So that they which go by, say not so much as the Lord prosper you: we wish you good luck in the name of the Lord. The Prayer. O Most blessed Jesu, who for our sinnes didst suffer the plowers to plow upon thy back, and make long furrows, suffering shame and whipping for our sakes, and all the contradictions of sinners, and didst leave sorrows and afflictions intailed upon thy Church, that by suffering with thee, shee might at last raigne with thee in glory: Deliver us and all thy holy Church, from all that fight against us; hew the snares of the ungodly in pieces, let the designes of them that have evill will at thy Church, be like the grasse growing up∣on the house tops, withered and blasted before it comes to maturity; and make us to prosper under thy mercies, and in the good wishes and devout prayers of holy people, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
PSALME 130. A penitentiall Psalme, or a prayer for pardon and redemption from sinnes. OUt of the deep have I called unto thee (O Lord:) Lord hear my voyce. 2 Oh let thine eares consider well: the voyce of my complaint. 3 If thou Lord wilt be extream to mark what is done amisse: O Lord, who may abide it? 4 For there is mercy with thee: therefore shalt thou be feared. 5 I look for the Lord, my soul doth wait for him: in his word is my trust. 6 My soul fleeth unto the Lord: before the morning watch, I say, before the morning watch. 7 O Israell trust in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy: and with him is plenteous redemption. 8 And he shall redeem Israell: from all his sinnes. The Prayer. O Lord God, blessed Iesu, with whom is mer∣cy and plentious redemption, who didst re∣deem thy people from all their sinnes, paying the
ransome of thine own bloud to purchase us free∣dome and salvation: let the height of thy mercy take us up from the deep abysse of sin and misery. O be not extreme to marke what we have done amisse, for it is impossible we should abide the extremity of thy severest judgements: and as thy mercy pardons what is past, so let the sweet∣nesse of it beget thy feare in our hearts, that we may not dare to offend so gracious, so mercifull a God, but that trusting in thy Word, and flying unto thee for succour, we may wait for thee till our change commeth, looking for thee in holinesse and righteousnesse all our dayes. Grant this for thy mercies and compassion sake, O blessed Jesu, our onely Saviour and Redeemer. Amen. PSALME 131. A Prayer for the graces of humility and mortification. LOrd, I am not high minded: I have no proud lookes. 2 I do not exercise my selfe in great matters: which are too high for me. 3 But I refrain my soule, and keep it low, like as a childe that is weaned from his mother yea, my soule is even as a weaned childe. 4 O Israel trust in the Lord: from this time forth for evermore.
The Prayer. O Lord God, before whom the humble Publi∣can (who durst not lift up his eyes to Hea∣ven, but with confusion of face begged pardon) was justified and acquitted: give unto us thy ser∣vants humilty of soule, and modesty in our beha∣viour, that our lookes be not proud, nor our thoughts arrogant, nor our designes ambitious; but that our soules being refrained from all vanity and pride, our affections weaned from great opi∣nions and love of our selves, we may trust in thee, follow the example of our blessed Master, and re∣ceive thy promises which thou hast made unto us, in our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen. PSALME 132. A Prayer for the Church, for the promotion of Religion, for the King, and for the Clergie. MORNING PRAYER. LOrd remember David: and all his trouble. 2 How he sware unto the Lord: and vowed a vow unto the Almighty God of Iacob.
3 I will not come within the tabernacle of my house: nor climbe up into my bed. 4 I will not suffer mine eyes to sleep, nor mine eye lids to slumber: neither the temples of my head to take any rest. 5 Untill I finde out a place for the temple of the Lord: an habitation for the mighty God of Iacob. 6 Lo, we heard of the same at Ephrata: and found it in the wood. 7 We will go into his tabernacle: and fall low on our knees before his footstool. 8 Arise, O Lord, into thy resting place: thou and the arke of thy strength. 9 Let thy priests be clothed with righteous∣nesse: and let thy saints sing with ioyfulnesse. 10 For thy servant Davids sake: turne not away the presence of thine anointed. 11 The Lord hath made a faithfull oath unto David: and he shall not shrinke from it. 12 Of the fruit of thy body: shall I set upon thy seat. 13 If thy children will keep my couenant and my testimonies that I shall learne them: their children also shall sit upon thy seat for evermore. 14 For the Lord hath chosen Sion to bean habitation for himselfe: he hath longed for her. 15 This shall be my rest for ever: here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein.
16 I will blesse her victuals with increase: and will satisfie her poore with bread. 17 I will decke her priests with health: and her saints shall reioyce and sing. 18 There shall I make the horne of David to flourish: I have ordained a lanterne for mine anointed. 19 As for his enemies. I shall cloth them with shame: but upon himselfe shall his crowne flourish. The Prayer. O Lord God, who dwellest not in Temples made with hands, and yet hast been pleased to manifest thy presence by speciall blessings and assistances, in places set apart for thy worship, be pleased to heare our prayers, & accept our ser∣vices when ever we make our addresses to thee in the house of prayer, & fall downe low on our knees before thy footstool▪ let thy Priests be cloth∣ed with righteousnesse, & let thy Saints sing with joyfulnes, & let all those that make their approa∣ches unto thee purifie their hearts and hands, that they may offer to thee a pure sacrifice even the sacrifice of obedience and holinesse, and the ex∣presses of true Religion. Blesse (O Lord) thy ser∣vant the King, whom thou hast made the Patron
and Defender of the Church, make his horne to flourish and be exalted above all his enemies, and let thy Word be as a lanterne for thine Anointed, to shew him thy holy will and pleasure, that he seeking thy honour and glory, thy Church may flourish under the covert of his shield and patro∣nage, her victuals may be blessed with increase, her poore satisfied with bread, her Priests decked with health, her Saints with joy, and himselfe with honour and great renown, and a flourishing Diademe, while his enemies sit clothed in shame and misery. Grant this, O blessed God, for Iesus Christ his sake, our Lord and onely Saviour. Amen. PSALME 133. A Prayer for unity in the Church, in a Kingdom, or family. BEhold how good and ioyfull a thing it is: bre∣thren to dwell together in unity. 2 It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that an down unto the beard: euen unto Aarons beard, and went down to the skirts of his clothing. 3 Like as the dew of Hermon: which fell upon the hill of Sion. 4 For there the Lord promised his blessing: and life for euermore.
The Prayer. O Blessed Is, in whose garment was variety but no rent or seame, have mercy upon thy holy Catholike Church, and all Christian King∣domes and Families; and so unite all our hearts and affections by the union of Faith and Charity, that we be not torne into Factions and Schismes, but being anointed with the precious ointment, even the anointing of thy Spirit from above, we may keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; and grant that this holy ointment may so knit together the Guides of thy Church, the Ru∣lers of Kingdomes, the Princes of the Nations, that the blessings of it may descend to the skirts of the people, and that thou mayest blesse us with thy graces here and hereafter, give us life for evermore in the participation of thy glorious Kingdome, where thou livest and reignest ever one God, world without end. Amen. PSALME 134. An invitation to the Clergie to be diligent in singing Gods praises publikely. BEhold (now) praise the Lord: all ye seruants of the Lord. 2 Yee that by night stand in the house of the
Lord: even in the courts of the house of our God. 3 Lift up your hands in the sanctuary: and praise the Lord. 4 The Lord that made heauen and earth: giue thee blessing out of Sion. The Prayer. O Lord, Creatour and Governour of all the world, thou that madest Heaven and Earth, that all should celebrate thy praise and the glory of thy Name, give great Religion and devout affections to thy Ministers, that by frequent eleva∣tion of their hands and hearts in thy Sanctuary, in behalfe of themselves and all the people, thy honour may be exalted among all thy servants, Religion may be advanced, and the love of thy Name increased, and thy blessings may descend upon us in a plentifull proportion, to supply all our necessities, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 135. A Prayer that God would avenge his People of their Enemies, and an invitation of them to praise his Name. O Praise the Lord, laud yee the name of the Lord praise it, O yee seruants of the Lord. 2 Ye that stand in the house of the Lord: in the courts of the house of our God.
3 O praise the Lord, for the Lord is gracious▪ O sing praises unto his name, for it is louely. 4 For why? the Lord hath chosen Iacob unto himselfe: and Israel for his own possession. 5 For I know that the Lord is great: and that our Lord is aboue all gods. 6 Whatsoeuer the Lord pleased, that did he in heauen and in earth: and in the sea, and in all deep places. 7 He bringeth forth the clouds from the ends of the world: and sendeth forth lightnings with the rain, bringing the windes out of his treasures. 8 He some the first-borne of Egypt: both of man and beast. 9 He hath sent tokens and wonders into the midst of thee, O thou land of Egypt: upon Pha∣raoh and all his seruants. 10 He smote diuers nations: and slew mighty kings. 11 Sehon king of the Amorites, and Og the king of Basan: and all the kingdomes of Canaan. 12 And gaue their land to be an heritage: euen an heritage unto Israel his people. 13 Thy name▪ O Lord, endureth for euer: so doth thy memoriall, O Lord, from one generati∣on to another. 14 For the Lord will avenge his people: and be gracious unto his seruants.
15 As for the images of the heathen, they are but siluer and gold: the worke of mens hands. 16 They haue mouthes and speak not: eyes haue they, but they see not. 17 They haue eares, and yet they heare not▪ neither is there any breath in their mouthes. 18 They that make them, are like unto them: and so are all they that put their trust in them. 19 Praise the Lord, ye house of Israel: praise the Lord, ye house of Aaron. 20 Praise the Lord, ye house of Leui: ye that feare the Lord, praise the Lord. 21 Praised be the Lord out of Sion: which dwelleth at Ierusalem. The Prayer. O Lord God, in whose sight the death of all the Saints is precious, and to whom the soules of the Martyrs from under the Altar call to avenge their bloud that is shed like water upon the earth; be gracious unto us thy servants, a∣venge all thy people of their enemies, that all that hate and persecute thy Church, being either brought to repentance or confusion, thy Name and thy memoriall may be celebrated to all gene∣rations, thy Kingdome and thy comming may be hastened, that the Saints may receive the con∣summation
of their glories, by resurrection of their bodies, and receiving the crowne of righte∣ousnesse which thou hast prepared for all that put their trust in thee, and that we all standing in the house of the Lord, even in the courts of the house of our God for ever, may praise thy Name which is gracious and lovely, even for ever and ever. Amen. PSALME 136. A Prayer of thankesgiving to God for his eternall mercies. EVENING PRAYER. O Giue thankes unto the Lord, for he is gracious: and his mercy endureth for euer. 2 O giue thankes unto the God of all gods: for his mercy endureth for euer. 3 O thank the Lord of all lords: for his mercy endureth for euer. 4 Which onely doth great wonders: for his mercy endureth for euer. 5 Which by his excellent wisedome made the heauens: for his mercy endureth for euer. 6 Which laid out the earth about the waters: for his mercy endureth for euer.
7 Which hath made great lights: for his mercy endureth for ever. 8 The sun to rule the day: for his mercy en∣dureth for euer. 9 The moon and the starres to gouerne the night: for his mercy endureth for euer. 10 Which smote Egypt with their first-born: for his mercy endureth for euer. 11 And brought out Israel from among them: for his mercy endureth for euer. 12 With a mighty hand and a stretched out arme: for his mercy endureth for euer. 13 Which diuided the Red sea in two parts: for his mercy endureth for euer. 14 And made Israel to go through the midst of it: for his mercy endureth for euer. 15 But as for Pharaoh and his host, he ouer∣threw them in the Red sea: for his mercy endu∣reth for euer. 16 Which led his people through the wilder∣nesse: for his mercy endureth for euer. 17 Which smote great kings: for his mercy endureth for euer. 18 Yea, and slew mighty kings: for his mer∣cy endureth for euer. 19 Sehon king of the Amorites: for his mer∣cy endureth for euer. 20 And Og the king of Basan: for his mercy endureth for euer.
21 And gaue away their land for an heritage: for his mercy endureth for euer. 22 Euen for an heritage unto Israel his ser∣uant: for his mercy endureth for euer. 23 Which remembred us when we were in trouble: for his mercy endureth for ever. 24 And hath deliuered us from our enemies: for his mercy endureth for euer. 25 Which giueth food to all flesh: for his mer∣cy endureth for euer. 26 O giue thankes unto the God of heauen: for his mercy endureth for euer. 27 O giue thankes unto the Lord of lords: for his mercy endureth for euer. The Prayer. O God of Heaven, and Lord of lords, who by thy excellent wisedome hast made the Heavens, and onely doest great wonders in Hea∣ven and Earth, making all thy creatures to be ex∣presses of thy power, and of thy loving mercy, let thy mighty hand and stretched out arme leade us through the midst of this world and the throng of all our enemies, giving us food for the suste∣nance of our bodies, the light of the sun of righ∣teousnesse to leade us in our goings, and great ap∣prehensions of thy mercy to excite in us Devoti∣on
and true Religion, that we praising thy mer∣cies, and being relieved and sustained by thy lo∣ving kindnesse, may at last come to the land of promise which thou givest for an heritage to thy people, and may receive the mercies of thy King∣dome, which endure for ever, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 137. A Prayer for redemption of the Church from captivity and persecution. BY the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept: when we remembred (thee) O Sion. 2 As for our harpes, we hanged them up: upon the trees that are therein. 3 For they that led us away captiue, requi∣red of us then a song and melody in our heavi∣nesse: sing us one of the songs of Sion. 4 How shall we sing the Lords song: in a strange land? 5 If I forget thee, O Ierusalem: let my right hand forget her cunning. 6 If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roofe of my mouth: yea, if I preferrs not Ierusalem in my mirth. 7 Remember the children of Edom, O Lord, in the day of Ierusalem: how they said, Down with it, down with it, even to the ground.
8 O daughter of Babylon, wasted with mi∣sery: yea, happy shall he be that rewardeth thee as thou hast served us. 9 Blessed shall he be that taketh thy children: and throweth them against the stones. The Prayer. O Lord our God, thou hast placed us in this world like pilgrims and strangers farre from our Countrey, farre from rest; give us soules and desires so abstract, so religious and contempla∣tive, that all our hopes, our joyes, and longings may be to enjoy thee and thy glories in the cele∣stiall Ierusalem: and let thy comforts refresh us in this our captivity and exile, that in our heavi∣nesse thou maist be our joy, our songs and melody may be the songs of Sion, the prayers of thy Name, that when thou hast delivered us from the wrath and malice of our enemies, and dashed all their wickednesse (which they have conceived and would bring forth to our destruction) against the Rocke Christ Iesus, we may be blessed a∣mongst thy children, and be carried into our Coun∣trey the Land of glorious promises, there to reigne with thee, who livest and governest all things, world without end. Amen.
PSALME 138. A Prayer and a thankesgiving for Gods mercies. I Will give thankes unto thee, O Lord, with my whole heart: even before the gods will I sing praise unto thee. 2 I will worship toward thy holy temple, and praise thy name, because of thy loving kindnesse and truth: for thou hast magnified thy name and thy word above all things. 3 When I called upon thee, thou heardest me: and enduedst my soule with much strength. 4 All the kings of the earth shall praise thee, O Lord: for they have heard the words of thy mouth. 5 Yea, they shall sing in the wayes of the Lord: that great is the glory of the Lord. 6 For though the Lord be high, yet hath he respect unto the lowly: as for the proud, he be∣holdeth them afarre off. 7 Though I walke in the midst of trouble, yet shalt thou refresh me: thou shalt stretch forth thine hand upon the furiousnesse of mine enemies, and thy right hand shall save me. 8 The Lord shall make good his loving kind∣nesse toward me: yea, thy mercy, O Lord, endu∣reth for ever, despise not then the workes of thine owne hands.
The Prayer. O Lord God, who hast magnified thy Name and Word above all things, make good thy loving kindnesses towards us, and endue our soules with much strength, that thine hand being stretch∣ed forth upon the furiousnesse of all our ghostly enemies, and we being saved by thy right hand, may praise thee, and all thy glories, serving thee here with a lowly minde, and a great industry, that at last we may worship thee in thy holy Tem∣ple, in the midst of all the Myriads of Angels, where thy glory is great and farre exalted above all gods. Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake our Lord and onely Saviour. Amen. PSALME 139. A meditation of the omnipresence of God, and a prayer that we may alwayes walke as in his sight. MORNING PRAYER. O Lord, thou hast searched me out, and known me: thou knowest my down∣sitting, and mine up-rising, thou un∣derstandest my thoughts long before. 2 Thou art about my path, and about my bed: and spiest out all my wayes.
3 For lo, there is not a word in my tongue: but thou, O Lord, knowest it altogether. 4 Thou hast fashioned me behinde and before: and laid thine hand upon me. 5 Such knowledge is too wonderfull and ex∣cellent for me: I cannot attain unto it. 6 Whither shall I go then from thy Spirit: or whither shall I go then from thy presence? 7 If I climbe up into heaven, thou art there: if I go down to hell, thou art there also. 8 If I take the wings of the morning: and remain in the uttermost parts of the sea. 9 Even there also shall thy hand lead me: and thy right hand shall hold me. 10 If I say, Peradventure the darknesse shall cover me: then shall my night be turned to day. 11 Yea, the darknesse is no darknesse with thee, but the night is as cleare as the day: the darknesse and light (to thee) are both alike. 12 For my reins are thine: thou hast covered me in my mothers wombe. 13 I will give thanks unto thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made: marvellous are thy workes, and that my soul knoweth right well. 14 My bones are not hid from thee: though I be made secretly, and fashioned beneath in the earth.
15 Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfect: and in thy book were all my members written. 16 Which day by day were fashioned: when as yet there was none of them. 17 How deare are thy counsels unto me, O God: O how great is the summe of them! 18 If I tell them, they are moe in number then the sand: when I wake up, I am present with thee. 19 Wilt thou not slay the wicked, O God: de∣part from me ye bloud-thirsty men. 20 For they speak unrighteously against thee: and thine enemies take thy name in vain. 21 Do not I hate them O Lord, that hate thee: and am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? 22 Yea, I hate them right sore: even as though they were mine enemies. 23 Trie me, O God, and seek the ground of my heart: prove me and examine my thoughts. 24 Look well if there be any way of wicked∣nesse in me: and lead me in the way everlasting. The Prayer. O Lord God, who art infinite in wisedom, and present in all place, filling heaven and earth and hell with the effects of thy mighty po∣wer,
and communications of thy glorious essence: let thy hand lead us, and thy right hand hold us in all our waies, alwaies considering that thou art present, understanding our thoughts and words, even long before they are, & seeing our most se∣cret waies as clearely as in the sight of the sunne: print thy feare mightily upon our soules, that we may be as fearfull of committing sinnes in secret, as in the eyes of all the world, that we hating all iniquity, and loving thy counsels as our dearest treasures and guide, may, by the paths of a holy life, be conducted into the way everlasting, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 140. A Prayer for deliverance from the mischiefe of all wicked persons. DEliver me, O Lord, from the evil man: and preserve me from the wicked man. 2 Which imagine mischiefe in their hearts: and stirre up strife all the day long. 3 They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent: adders poison is under their lips. 4 Keep me, O Lord, from the hands of the un∣godly: preserve me from the wicked men, which are purposed to overthrow my goings. 5 The proud have laid a snare for me, and
spread a net abroad with cords: yea, and set traps in my way. 6 I said unto the Lord, Thou art my God: hear the voice of my prayers, O Lord. 7 O Lord God, thou strength of my health: thou hast covered my head in the day of battle. 8 Let not the ungodly have his desire, O Lord: let not his mischievous imagination prosper, least they be too proud. 9 Let the mischief of their own lips fall upon the head of them: that compasse me about. 10 Let hot burning coales fall upon them: let them be cast into the fire and into the pit, that they never rise up again. 11 A man full of words shall not prosper upon the earth: evill shall hunt the wicked person to overthrow him. 12 Sure I am that the Lord will avenge the poore: and maintain the cause of the helplesse. 13 The righteous also shall give thankes un∣to thy name: and the iust shall continue in thy sight. The Prayer. O Lord God, thou strength of our health, thou that avengest the poore, and maintainest the cause of the helples, deliver us, ô Lord, & preserve us from the evill & wicked man, that neither hi example may corrupt us, nor his counsels mislead
us, nor his prosperity scandalize us, nor his strife disquiet us, nor his mischiefe disturb our safety; but do thou cover our heads in the day of battle and contestation against all our bodily and ghostly enemies, that although they hunt us to overthrow us, yet we may prosper upon earth under thy fa∣vour and protection, and at last being removed from all fears, an sadnesse, and dangers, may con∣tinue in thy sight, amongst the Congregation of the just for ever, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 141. A Prayer for the virtue of religion, for holynesse of life, and for deliverance for the snares of our enemies. LOrd, I call upon thee, hast thee unto me: and consider my voyce, when I cry unto thee. 2 Let my prayer be set forth in thy sight, as the incense: and let the lifting up of my hands be an evening sacrifice. 3 Set a watch (O Lord) before my mouth: and keep the doore of my lips. 4 O let not mine heart be inclined to any evil thing: let me not be occupied in ungodly works, with the men that work wickednesse, least I eat of such things as please them.
5 Let the righteous rather smite me friendly▪ and reprove me. 6 But let not their precious balms break mine head: yea, I will pray yet against their wick∣ednesse. 7 Let their iudges be overthrown in stony places: that they may hear my words, for they are sweet. 8 Our bones lie scattered before the pit: like as when one breaketh and heweth wood upon the earth. 9 But mine eyes look unto thee, O Lord God: in thee is my trust, O cast not out my soul. 10 Keep me from the snare which they have laid for me: and from the traps of the wicked doers. 11 Let the ungodly fall into their own nets to∣gether: and let me ever escape them. The Prayer. O Lord, our trust and confidence, hast thee un∣to us, and consider our voyce when we call upon thee in our trouble and necessity; let our pra∣yers ascend up unto thee as incense, and e as the savour of the evening and the morning sacrifice. We begge of thee nothing but grace and power to fulfill thy will; let not our hearts be inclined
to any evill: set a watch, O Lord, before our mouth and keep the doore of our lips, let us not be busied in ungodly workes, that we may never offend in our thoughts, or words, or actions: and when we do amisse, do thou smite us friendly and reprove us with the checks of a tender conscience, that thy fatherly correction may like precious balme cure all the wounds made by our own infirmities; that we escaping all the snares of wickednesse, may for ever heare and obey thy sweet words, and our soules may never be cast out of thy pre∣sence, but for ever may rejoyce in our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen. PSALME. 142. A Prayer in all sadnesse, and in the houre of death. EVENING PRAYER. I Cried unto the Lord with my voice: yea, even unto the Lord did I make my supplication. 2 I poured out my complaints before him: and shewed him of my trouble. 3 When my spirit was in heavinesse, thou knewest my path: in the way wherein I walked have they privily laid a snare for me.
4 I looked also upon my right hand: and saw there was no man that would know me. 5 I had no place to flee unto: and no man ca∣red for my soul. 6 I cryed unto thee, O Lord, and said: Thou art my hope and my portion in the land of the li∣ving. 7 Consider my complaint: for I am brought very low. 8 O deliver me from my persecutors: for they are too strong for me. 9 Bring my soul out of prison that I may give thanks unto thy name: which thing if thou wilt grant me, then shall the righteous resort unto my company. The Prayer. O Lord God, thou art our hope, and our porti∣on in the land of the living, consider our complaint and misery, thou art our place to flee unto, thou only art our sanctuary; O hide us un∣der the covert of thy wings, keep us from all the dangers which multiply upon us when our spirits are in heavinesse, and our bodies pressed with in∣firmities: be thou alwaies at our right hand, and assist us so with the strength of thy grace, that out temptations, & our enemies not being above our strength deriv'd from thee, our soul may with
confidence go forth of prison, and give eternall thanks unto thy name, in the companies of the Righteous, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 143. A Prayer that God would pardon our sinnes, and direct us in the way of righteousnesse. HEare my prayer, O Lord, and consider my desire: hearken unto me for thy truth and righteousnesse sake. 2 And enter not into iudgement with thy ser∣vant: for in thy sight shall no man living be iusti∣fied. 3 For the enemy hath persecuted my soul, he hath smitten my life down to the ground: he hath laid me in the darknesse, as the men that have been long dead. 4 Therefore is my spirit vexed within me: and my heart within me is desolate. 5 Yet do I remember the time past, I muse upon all thy works: yea, I exercise my selfe in the works of thy hands. 6 I stretch forth my hands unto thee: my soul gaspeth unto thee as a thirsty land. 7 Hear me, O Lord, and that soon, for my spirit waxeth faint: hide not thy face from me, let I be like unto them that go down into the pit.
8 O let me hear thy loving kindnesse betime in the morning, for in thee is my trust: shew tho me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up m soul unto thee. 9 Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies▪ for I flee unto thee to hide me. 10 Teach me to do the thing that pleaseth thee, for thou art my God: let thy loving spirit lead me forth into the land of righteousnesse. 11 Quicken me, O Lord, for thy names sake: and for thy righteousnesse sake bring my soul out of trouble. 12 And of thy goodnesse slay mine enemies: and destroy all them that vex my soul, for I am thy servant. The Prayer. O Lord our Iudge, and our redeemer, hear∣ken unto us for thy truth and righteousnesse sake; deliver us from the guilt of all our sinnes, and those great punishments which are due to us for the same. Enter not into judgement with us, for in thy sight no man can be justified by any worthi∣nesse of his own. Endue our soules with the righ∣teousnesse of a holy faith, living and working by charity. Shew us the way that we should walke in, teach us to do whatsoever pleaseth thee, quic∣ken our soules in the paths of life, and so continue
the conduct of thy spirit to us, that it may never leave us till we be brought forth of this world, in∣to the land of righteousnesse to dwell with thee eternally, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 144. A thanksgiving for victory, and a prayer for the blessings of Peace. MORNING PRAYER. BLessed be the Lord my strength: which teacheth my hands to war, and my fingers to fight. 2 My hope and my fortresse, my castle and deliverer, my de∣fender, in whom I trust: which subdueth my people that is under me. 3 Lord, what is man that thou hast such re∣spect unto him: or the sonne of man that thou so re∣gardest him? 4 Man is like a thing of nought: his time pas∣seth away like a shadow. 5 Bowe the heavens, O Lord and come down: touch the mountains, and they shall smoke. 6 Cast forth thy lightning, and teare them: shoot out thine arrows, and consume them. 7 Send down thy hand from above: deliuer
me and take me out of the great waters, from the hand of strange children. 8 Whose mouth talketh of vanity: and their right hand is a right hand of wickednesse. 9 I will sing a new song unto thee, O God▪ and sing praises unto thee upon a ten-stringed ute. 10 Thou hast given victory unto kings: and hast delivered David thy servant from the perill of the sword. 11 Save me and deliver me from the hand of strange children: whose mouth talketh of vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of iniquity. 12 That our sonnes may grow up as the young plants: and that our daughters may be as the po∣lished corners of the temple. 13 That our garners may be full and plenti∣ous with all manner of store: that our sheep may bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in our streets. 14 That our oxen may be strong to labour, that there be no decay: no eading into captivity, and no complaining in our streets. 15 Happy are the people that be in such a case: yea, blessed are the people which have the Lord for their God.
The Prayer. O Lord our strength, our hope and ortresse, our castle and deliverer, our defender in whom we trust; bowe the heavens, O Lord, come down and save us, send down thine hand from a∣bove, deliver us, and take us from the great wa∣ters, from those miseries and afflictions which come upon us by reason of our sinnes, from the condition of mortality, and from the hand of strange children, whose right hand is a right hand of wickednesse. Give us, O Lord, victory and peace, and all the blessings of thy peace, with which thou usest to adorne & beautifie the dwel∣lings of the righteous, that we may be happy in the continuall descent of thy favours, but above all, our happinesse may consist in being thy peo∣ple, and thou being our God, that we may be blessed for ever in so blessed a relation, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 145. A Meditation of the glory and Maiesty of God, and the mightinesse of his kingdome. I Will magnifie thee, O God, my King: and I will praise thy name for ever and ever▪
2 Every day will I give thanks unto thee: and praise thy name for ever and ever. 3 Great is the Lord, and marvellous wor∣thy to be praised: there is no end of his greatnesse. 4 One generation shall praise thy works un∣to another: and declare thy power. 5 As for me, I will be talking of thy worship: thy glory, thy praise, and wonderous works. 6 So that men shall speak of the might of thy marvellons acts: and I will also tell of thy great∣nesse. 7 The memoriall of thine abundant kindnesse shall be shewed: and men shall sing of thy righte∣ousnesse. 8 The Lord is gracious and mercifull: long∣suffering, and of great goodnesse. 9 The Lord is loving unto every man: and his mercy is over all his works. 10 All thy works praise thee, O Lord: and thy saints give thanks unto thee. 11 They shew the glory of thy Kingdome: and talk of thy power. 12 That thy power, thy glory, and mighti∣nesse of thy Kingdome: might be known unto men. 13 Thy kingdome is an everlasting king∣dome: and thy dominion endureth throughout all ages.
14 The Lord upholdeth all such as fall: and lifteth up all those that be down. 15 The eies of all wait upon thee, O Lord: and thou givest them their meat in due season. 16 Thou openest thine hand: and fillest all things living with plenteousnesse. 17 The Lord is righteous in all his waies: and holy in all his works. 18 The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him: yea, all such as call upon him faithfully. 19 He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their cry, and will help them. 20 The Lord preserveth all them that love him: but scattereth abroad all the ungodly. 21 My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord: and let all flesh give thanks unto his holy name for ever and ever. The Prayer. O God our King, thou art marvellous worthy to be praised, and there is no end of thy greatnesse; give us enlarged and sanctified hearts, and lips that we may sing of thy righteousnesse, & magnifie thy glory, thy worship, and wondrous works. All thy works praise thee, O Lord, and thy saints give thanks unto thee. Make us holy
and righteous in thy sight, we are already the works of thine hands, and then, we have a double title to praise thee. Vphold us, O Lord, that we fall not, and lift us up when we are down; give us meat in due season for our soules, and for our bo∣dies, that we being filled with the plenteousnesse of thy mercies here, may have our best, and all our desires fulfilled and satisfied hereafter, amongst such as fear thee, and give thanks unto thy holy name for ever. Grant this for Iesus Christ his sake, to whom with thee, O Father, and the holy spirit, be all honour and glory now and for ever. Amen. PSALME 146. A Prayer that we may trust in God only and not in an arme of flesh. PRaise the Lord, O my soul, while I live will I praise the Lord: yea, as long as I have any being, I will sing praises unto my God. 2 O put not your trust in princes, nor in any child of man: for there is no help in them. 3 For when the breath of man goeth forth, he shall turn again to his earth: and then all his thoughts perish. 4 Blessed is he that hath the God of Iacob for his help: and whose hope is in the Lord his God.
5 Which made heaven and earth, the sea and all that therein is: which keepeth his promise for ever. 6 Which helpeth them to right that suffer wrong: which feedeth the hungry. 7 The Lord looseth men out of prison: the Lord giueth sight to the blinde. 8 The Lord helpeth them that are fallen: the Lord careth for the righteous. 9 The Lord careth for the strangers, he de∣fendeth the fatherlesse and widow: as for the way of the ungodly, he turneth it upside down. 10 The Lord thy God, O Sion, shall e King for evermore: and throughout all generations. The Prayer. O Lord God, who reignest a King for ever∣more, give us grace that we may make thee our helpe, and fixe our hopes in thee, for thou onely art able to give deliverance. Feed our soules, O Lord, and satisfie us with thy salvation when we hunger and thirst after righteousnesse; helpe us to right when we suffer wrong, heale our back slidings, raise us when we are fallen, en∣lighten the eyes of our soules that we walke not in darknesse and the shadow of death, and do thou take care for us in all our wayes, and in all our necessities, that when our breath goeth forth, and we turne again to our earth, we may reigne
with thee in Sion, thy celestiall habitation, for evermore, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 147. A celebration of Gods wisedome and providence in the ministration of the things of the world, and of his goodnesse towards them that feare him. EVENING PRAYER. O Praise the Lord, for it is a good thing to sing praises unto our God: yea, a ioyfull and pleasant thing it is to be thankfull. 2 The Lord doth build up Ie∣rusalem: and gather together the outcasts of Israel. 3 He healeth those that are broken in heart: and giveth medicine to heale their sicknesse. 4 He telleth the number of the starres: and calleth them all by their names. 5 Great is our Lord, and great is his power: yea, and his wisedome is infinite. 6 The Lord setteth up the meek: and bring∣eth the ungodly down to the ground. 7 O sing unto the Lord with thankesgiving: sing praises upon the harpe unto our God. 8 Which covereth the heaven with clouds,
and prepareth rain for the earth: and maketh th grasse to grow upon the mountaines, and herbe for the use of men. 9 Which giveth fodder unto the cattell: and feedeth the young ravens that call upon him. 10 He hath no pleasure in the strength of an horse: neither delighteth he in any mans legs. 11 But the Lords delight is in them that feare him: and put their trust in his mercy. 12 Praise the Lord, O Ierusalem: praise thy God, O Sion. 13 For he hath made fast the barres of thy gates: and hath blessed thy children within thee. 14 He maketh peace in thy borders: and fil∣leth thee with the floure of wheat. 15 He sendeth forth his commandment upon earth: and his word runneth very swiftly. 16 He giveth snow like wooll: and scattereth the hoar frost like ashes. 17 He casteth forth his ice like morsels: who is able to abide his frost? 18 He sendeth out his word, and melteth them: he bloweth with his winde, and the waters flow. 19 He sheweth his word unto Iacob: his sta∣tutes and ordinances unto Israel. 20 He hath not dealt so with any nation: nei∣ther have the heathen knowledge of his lawes.
The Prayer. O Lord God, whose power is great, and thy wisedome infinite, give us broken and con∣trite hearts, meek spirits, a feare of thy Name, and a trust in thy mercy, that thou maist arise upon us with healing in thy wings, giving us medicine to heale all our ghostly sicknesses, and thy delight may be in us, delighting to do us good, to feed us when we call upon thee, to set us above our ene∣mies, to give us knowledge of thy Lawes, to build up Ierusalem, and to repaire the breaches of thy Church, that we may sing praises unto thee O God, and be thankfull to all eternity, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 148. An invitation of all the creatures of the world to praise God. O Praise the Lord of heaven: praise him in the height. 2 Praise him all yee angels of his: praise him all his host. 3 Praise him sun and moon: praise him all yee starres and light. 4 Praise him all yee heavens: and yee waters that be above the heavens. 5 Let them praise the name of the Lord: for he spake the word, and they were made: he com∣manded, and they were created.
6 He hath made them fast for ever and ever: he hath given them a law which shall not be broken. 7 Praise the Lord upon earth: yee dragons and all deepes. 8 Fire and haile, snow and vapours: winde and storme, fulfilling his word. 9 Mountaines and all hills: fruitfull trees, and all cedars. 10 Beasts and all cattell: wormes and fea∣thered fowles. 11 Kings of the earth, and all people: princes and all iudges of the world. 12 Young men and maidens, old men and children, praise the name of the Lord: for his name onely is excellent, and his praise above hea∣ven and earth. 13 He shall exalt the horne of his people, all his saints shall praise him: even the children of Israel, even the people that serveth him. The Prayer. O Lord God, whose Name onely is excellent, and thy praise above Heaven and Earth, we adore and blesse thy mercy and thy power for creating us after thine owne Image: thou spakest the word, and we were made, thou commandedst and we were created, and as thou hast established thy Creation with a Law for ever, that all should
minister to thy praises in their severall proporti∣ons; so give us grace that the lawes of sanctity, of Faith, and obedience, which thou hast given to us may never be broken, that we serving thee not onely in the order of thy creatures, but in the ca∣pacity of thy children, may sing thy praises a∣mongst the Angels and the numerous host of Saints reigning in thy Kingdome for ever and ever. Amen. PSALME 149. A meditation of the ioyes of Heaven prepared for the Saints. O Sing unto the Lord a new song: let the con∣gregation of saints praise him. 2 Let Israel reioyce in him that made him: and let the children of Sion be ioyfull in their King. 3 Let them praise his name in the dance: let them sing praises unto him with tabret and harpe. 4 For the Lord hath pleasure in his people: and helpeth the meek hearted. 5 Let the saints be ioyfull with glory: let them reioyce in their beds. 6 Let the praises of God be in their mouth: and a two-edged sword in their hands. 7 To be avenged of the heathen: and to re∣buke the people. 8 To binde their kings in chaines: and their nobles with linkes of iron.
9 That they may be avenged of them, as it is written: Such honour have all his saints. The Prayer. O Lord our King, in whose honour and salva∣tion all thy Saints rejoyce, give unto thy holy Gospell a free passage in all the world, that Kings and Nobles may be bound with the chaines of obedience, discipline, and subordination to all thy holy Lawes, and grant to us thy servants that thy Lawes may be so fixed in our hearts, and thy praises in our mouthes, and righteousnesse in all our actions, that we may be written among the righteous, and have our portion with the Saints, who rejoyce in their beds of eternall rest, and are joyfull in the glories of thy Kingdome, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. PSALME 150. An invitation to praise God with all our faculties and powers. O Praise God in his holinesse: praise him in the firmament of his power. 2 Praise him in his noble acts: praise him ac∣cording to his excellent greatnesse. 3 Praise him in the sound of the trumpet: praise him vpon the lute and harpe. 4 Praise him in the cymbals and dances: praise him upon the strings and pipe.
5 Praise him upon the well tuned cymbals: praise him upon the loud cymbals. 6 Let every thing that hath breath: praise the Lord. The Prayer. O Eternall God, thy holinesse and power and excellent greatnesse are farre above all the praises of men and Angels, and yet thou art plea∣sed in the harmony and consent of a thankfull heart, and a thankesgiving tongue; touch our hearts with admirable apprehensions of thy Di∣vine perfections, that our songs of thy honour may be devout and illuminate to the height of ex∣tasies, and the devotions of a Seraphim, for nothing is proportionable to thy glories but what is infi∣nitely beyond our infirmities. Make us to sing Thee and thy Name while we have breath; and when we are breathlesse, let our hearts fill up the harmony, and thinke thy praises so cordially, till our soules being separated from the harsh sound of our bodily organs, we may praise thee when we are all spirit in the state of separation, and in the reunion when our bodies shall be made spirituall, singing to thee exalted praises for ever and ever. To thee O blessed and glorious God be praises and honour and glory ascribed now, and to all eternity. Amen. Amen. FINIS.
