B3157 13109322 97595
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, The humble Remonstrance of John Blande of Lon∣don Merchant, on the behalf of the Inhabi∣tants and Planters in Virginia and Mariland, MOST HUMBLY representing unto Your Majesty the inevitable destruction of those Colonies, if so be that the late Act for encrease of Trade and Shipping be not as to them dispenc'd with: for it wil not onely ruinate the Inhabitants and Planters, but make desolate the largest, fertilest, and most glorious Plantations under Your Majesties Dominion; the which, if otherwise suspended, will pro∣duce the greatest advantage to this Nations Commerce, and considerablest Income to Your Ma∣jesties Revenue, that any part of the world doth to which we trade. And that the prejudice which this Act bringeth to those Colonies may appear to Your Majesty, I shall pre∣sume to desire, that the following particulars in order to the discovery thereof may be taken into considerati∣on, as it hath reference to the Territories of Virginia and Mariland, and then to those persons that first were the promoters of the same, for debarring the Hollanders trading to those Plantations, in the long Parliament, with their specious pretences alleged for the obtaining thereof, which are as followeth. First, That the Hollanders will not permit us to trade into their Indian Territories, therefore we should not admit them to trade in ours. Secondly, That the Hollanders admission into Virginia and Mariland spoiled our Commerce, not onely there, but in England, and hindred the increase of our Shipping. Thirdly, That the Hollanders trading into those Colonies lessen'd our Customes here in England. Before I come to shew how invalid the Pretences of the aforesaid persons be, as to the intent for which they were alleged, being onely colourable, and to hinder the Hollanders trade thither, that they might still keep the trade which they had ingrossed in their own hands. First, I will say something concerning the Persons that did solicit and procure the prohibition of the Hollan∣ders from trading into those Plantations. Secondly, Wherefore the said Act against the Dutch was procured by them, and is still sought to be con∣tinued. Thirdly, I shall take into consideration those three Motives, or Pretences, urged by the Ingrossers of the Virginia and Mariland trade, for the debarring the Hollanders from trading thither; and so speaking to each of them, demonstrate plainly, that what is alleg'd thereby to be an advantage to those Colonies, is quite con∣trary, and will in time utterly ruinate them, the Commerce, our Customes, and Shipping here in England. To the First, concerning the Persons that procured the prohibition of the Hollanders from trading into Virginia and Mariland, I give this account of them. They are no Merchants bred, nor versed in forein parts, or any Trade, but to those Plantations, and that from either Planters there, or Whole-sale Tobacconists and Shop-keepers retailing Tobacco here in England, who know no more what belongs to the Commerce of the World, or managing new discovered Countries, such as Virginia and Mariland are, than children new put out Prentice, Can it then be Rational, that such persons judgments should be taken or relyed upon for passing so important an Act? To the Second Particular, Why these men procured this Act, prohibiting the Hollanders trade into those Colonies at first, and its continuance now, was, and is, because they would keep still in their own hands that Trade which they had ingrossed, and have no body come there to hinder them, and that for the following reasons. First, That for whatever goods they carried out of England to those Plantations, the Inhabitants should pay to them what prices and rates they pleased to require, else they should have nothing at all of them to supply their necessities. Secondly, To force the Planters to deliver them such Tobaccoes, which by the labour and sweat of their browes they had made, at the rates they themselves trading thither would have it, whereby they got that of∣tentimes of the poor Planters for a half-penny, which they made us pay for here in England by Retale three or four shillings. Thirdly, That if they could not get the Planters Tobaccoes at their own rates, but that the Planters would ship it themselves for England, then would not the Traders thither let the Planters have any Tunnage in their Ships to England, excpt it were at such high freight, as the Tobacco comming for England could never yield what would satisfie the same; so that if they could not get the Planters Tobacco for nothing in the Country, They would have it for nothing when arrived in England. Fourthly, That seeing the Hollanders could not go to Virginia and Mariland, the Traders thither might car∣ry it to Holland from those Colonies themselves, and so get (besides having the Tobacco for little or nothing of the Planters) the Duties the Hollander used to pay in the Countrey for what he exported thence; and also the Custom, which ought by their own rule to have been paid in England. By which I hope its apparent, that it was nor is not their love to the Plantations, the Commerce, or to en∣crease the Duties in England, that caused them to seek the Hollanders prohibition from Virginia and Mari∣land, but their own private interests, not regarding if the Colonies and all in them perished, so they might keep the said Trade still: Surely then such men are not meet Judges for debarring of the Hollanders from trading to those Plantations. To the third Particular, wherein it is to be considered, how destructive those three motives and pretences (urged) for the obtaining this Act of prohibition to the Hollanders from trading to Virginia and Mariland are to those Colonies, the Commerce, and Your Majesties Customes here in England, I declare as followeth, To the First, in which it is alleged, That being the Hollander permits not us Trade in their Indian Do∣minions, why should we admit him Trade in ours? A good reason it were, and justly retaliated, if Virginia and Mariland were stoared with, and did produce
such rich Commodities as those Territories do, out of which the Hollanders doe debar us Trade, or that those our Plantations were inhabited with such ingenious men as theirs be, into which they wil not suffer us to trade. But seeing Virginia and Mariland have no such rich Commodities, nor ingenious people to produce them, nor plenty of any thing but what may be had every where, is it not then a madness to hinder the Hollanders or any else from trading thither? Shall we, to put out one of their eyes, lose both our own? I do hope it will be more seriously considered, and not by following the humor of a few covetous, ignorant, self-seeking men, destroy so many thousands of Your Majesties Subjects planted in those parts, and thereby lose the best and hopefullest Plantation that belongs to this Nation; but permit the Hollanders, or any other Nations that will to trade thither, untill Virginia and Mariland be capable to maintain it self by it self; then, and not till then, will it be convenient to debar Foreiners from trading thither. The second Motive alleged for the obtaining this Act against the Hollanders trading to Virginia and Mariland, is, that it hinders our Trade, not onely there, but in England, whereby the general Commerce is, and our Shipping are decreased. To explain this, and to shew, that the promoters of the Hollanders prohibition from trading to Virginia and Mariland, by reason of their ignorance and unexperiencedness in the negotiations of the world, are very unfit for States-men, and to make Laws for whole Nations, when most of them have never been farther than in their own Shops and Ware-houses wherein they were bred; so that certainly it's hard for such, especially that mind onely their own profit and interest, to set Rules for others in those things which they understand not; but with grief it may be spoken, that through the sluggishness and sloathful neglect of our most experienc'd men in this Nation, and their unwillingness to take pains, or to appear in publick business, which chiefly may be attributed for their not being encouraged and countenanced, do thereby give too much leave to hair∣brain'd Ignorance to obtain that, which doth not onely overthrow themselves, but the most ingeniousest men, and our whole Nation, whereby, and that deservedly, all perish together. Therefore before I proceed to the next particular, I pray, that the State of Virginia and Mariland, as they now are in, may be considered. Virginia and Mariland are Colonies, which though capable of better Commodities, yet for the present af∣foard onely these, Tobacco chiefly, then in the next place Corn and Cattel, Commodities almost in every Country whatever to be had; withall they are such Commodities, that except purchased in those Plantations so cheap as not else-wheie so to be had, none would ever go thither to fetch them, no not we our selves. Which being so, then certainly it cannot stand with wisdom to hinder the Hollanders from going thither, for unlesse what is there produced be fetched from thence, the Planters will have little encouragement to manure the ground, or trouble themselves to take so much pains as they do, for what, when obtained, they know not what to do therewith. Doth it not then hence appear, that unless as some plant, others go to buy what is planted, there can be no trade or commerce in such a place? Seeing then what the Commodities of Virginia and Mariland are, is it not a great advantage to those Colonies to have them by every body fetched thence? and on the contrary, must it not needs be a disadvantage to the Commerce there, not to do it? If therefore then we debar the Hollanders from going thither, see the inconveniencies that will arise thereby. The Hollander began to plant Tobacco in his own Territories, as soon as the Act for their prohibition from Virginia and Mariland in the long Parliament was obtained, will he not proceed to plant greater quanti∣ties, and so totally supply himself by his own labour? do we not force him to this our selves, and so thereby cut off our own trade? will he, after accustomed to the Tobacco of his own grouth, ever regard that which is in Virginia? will he ever afterwards be induced to fetch it thence, when he finds his profit nigher at home? and will he ever buy that of us, when by passing so many hands, and so much charge contracted thereon, is made so dear, that he can have it cheaper in his own Territories? (Surely no.) Therefore it clearly appears, that being so, of necessity we must lose that Trade and Commerce. And if it be alleged, the Tobacco planted in Holland is not so good as what comes from Virginia, none will buy Gold too dear, and being used once to bad, the best is not regarded; what growes in Holland for present spending is as good as any. Have we not in this Nation, by reason of the dearness and sophistication of Va∣na's Tobacco, accustomed our selves so to Virginia, that little Spanish, though much better, is spent amongst us at this day? And certainly, experienced men will say, it is, and will be the overthrow of our Trade and Commerce, to put any people upon necessities to seek that out in their own Territories, which we will not let them have from us, but with excessive cost and charge; which if it were otherwise to be had of us at easie rates, they would not so much as think thereof to plant it themselves, of which, many experimental examples may be shown in order thereunto. Again, If the Hollanders must not trade to Virginia, how shall the Planters dispose of their Tobacco? the English will not buy it, for what the Hollander carried thence was a sort of Tobacco not desired by any other people, nor used by us in England but meerly to transport for Holland: Will it not then perish on the Planters hands? which undoubtedly is not onely an apparent loss of so much Stock and Commoditie to the Plantati∣ons, who suffer thereby, but for want of its employment, an infinite prejudice to the Commerce in general. Then again, If you keep thence the Hollanders, can it be believed, that from England more Ships will be sent than are able to bring thence what Tobacco England will spend? if they do bring more, must they not lose thereby both Stock and Block, principal and charges? the Tobacco will not vend in England, the Hollan∣ders will not fetch it from England; what must become thereof? even flung to the Dunghil. Is not then this a destruction to the Commerce? for if men lose their Estates, certainly trade cannot be encreased. A farther prejudice doth evidently attend the Commerce by this Act, not onely in debarring Hollanders from trading to those Colonies, but thereby we do likewise debar our selves; for by the Act, no English Ships can load any goods in Virginia and Mariland to transport to any Country but our own Territories; Is not this absolutely against the very essence and being of Trade and Commerce, and cuts off all industry or ingenious designes, and is in a manner quite against, and contrary to the intent of the Act it self, which I conceive is to find out a means, that the Hollanders cheap sailing should not overthrow our Markets, our shipping going dearer set to Sea than theirs? Which I explain thus, A Ship having loaden her self in Virginia and Mariland with Tobacco, Beef, Pork, and Corn, must bring these commodities to England, or into other our Territories; being landed in England, is not the Hollander, arriving in that place, where those Goods are so landed, as free to buy them of the Impor∣ter as any other Merchant of England, that would transport them in our own ships? they then both going to one Market, hath not the Hollander the same advantage he ever had? and do what we can in such a case, will under-sell us. Is not this then a prejudice to the Commerce, and gives the Hollanders that very benefit which we strive to keep from him?
Now as this is a prejudice to the Commerce of Virginia and Mariland, so in the like it will hold in all our American Plantations; but I am, and it is my business at present onely, to plead for Virginia and Mariland, and to shew its disadvantages to those Colonies; Will not this contract a great deal of needless charges and ha∣zardous voyages, and that upon such goods and commodities as Virginia and Mariland affoard, which will not keep in long and tedious voyages? doth it not hereby then appear to be an absolute hinderance of trade and commerce, nor onely to those places, but to our selves here in England? I demand then, If it would not be better to let our English Ships, loading in those Colonies, when laden, to go whither they please, and pay in the places where they do lade (if it will not be dispenced with otherwise) the same Customs to your Majesty as they should have done in England, or give Bills from thence to pay it in England? certainly this would be more beneficial to the commerce, and security both for the ships and goods, and advan∣tageous to Your Majesty; for whilst they are comming to England they might be at the end of their intended voyages, and obtain a Market, which haply in England could not be had; and with the proceeds of those very goods return for England, and there produce more advantage to Your Majesties Customes, when as otherwise by making a double voyage run a hazard to lose all. So that by what herein hath been said, I hope it will ap∣pear, our Commerce is rather hindred than furthered. Then, as concerning our Shipping, I shall briefly shew, that the debarring the Hollanders thence doth no way encrease them. The Hollanders never from Virginia and Mariland fetched any thing else but Tobacco; neither do our English ships that sail thither ever go full loaden, as few as we send. Therefore if the Hollanders go not thither, but plant Tobacco in their own Territories, whereby they will not need ours, we shall not send ships to Virginia and Mariland to fetch thence what we cannot again dispose of; so that we shall imploy no more ships to those Colonies than will fetch as much Tobacco as will vend in England. How is it possible that this then can decrease or increase our ships, when as, when the Hollanders traded thither, we brought no less into England than we do now, nor when they trade not shall we bring the more? Doth it not plainly appear, that forein Nations trading into a Country make the people industrious, and their industry makes that Nation rich, and so by wealth comes Countries to be inhabited, which increases Trade, and the more trade the more need of shipping to manage it? So that I am of the judgment, that the freer forein Nations be admitted to those Colonies, it will the more encrease Navigation that way, and the contrary will lessen it: For if once the Inhabitants be destroyed and ruinated, where is your trade? and then, how shall we employ our shipping? Having by the foregoing reasons shewed how those Colonies will suffer, in debarring the Hollanders trade thither, and increase, if admitted, both as to the Commerce and Shipping; In the next place I come to the third Motive or pretence urged, for prohibiting the Hollanders trading to Virginia and Mariland, under this notion, that Your Majesties Customes thereby would much suffer & be lesned. This would be true, and to be allowed, if we could force the Hollanders to fetch all the Tobacco they spend out of England, and that it were not to be had but in those Plantations; but we see the contrary, it's to be had in all the parts of America that are seated by any European people; In France great quantity is planted yearly, and of late years meerly by our debarring them going to our Plantations; the Hollanders, as I said be∣fore, have planted such store, and will, if continued from going thither, plant daily more and more, that they will not need it from any other place: So that the Hollanders not fetching it from Virginia or Mariland, nor our Traders bringing it to England, it must perish in the Country; or, if brought into England, and not able to bear its charge, nor finding vend, it will undoubtedly rot in the Ware-houses. Which way then shall our Customes increase by the Hollanders not trading into those Colonies? I am sure upon the first obtaining this Act in the long Parliament, our Traders to Virginia and Mariland carried the Tobacco from those Colonies directly to Holland themselves, and neither paid Duties in the Coun∣try, nor in England, and so they would do still if permitted; wherein it is apparent, its their own interests that is sought after; for the Custom, let the Hollanders trade thither or not, will be the same in England, and rather increase than decrease if they be permitted to trade thither; for as the Colonies increase, they will grow to better husbandry, and so by the production of better Commodities make our Customs the greater. Having run through those three grand Pretences of the Traders to Virginia and Mariland, for the Hollan∣ders prohibition from trading thither, I hope it will clearly appear, that the debarring the Hollanders from going to those Plantations doth not at all advance our Commerce, or Your Majesties Customes, but on the contrary, will utterly ruinate the Colonies Commerce and Customes together in a short time; for if the In∣habitants be destroyed, of necessity the Trade there must cease. I demand then in the next place, which way shall the charge of the Governments be maintained, if the Hol∣landers be debarred trade in Virginia and Mariland, or any thing raised to defray the constant and yearly Le∣vies for the securing the Inhabitants from Invasions of the Indians? how shall the Forts and publick places be built and repaired, with many other incident charges daily arising, which must be taken care for, else all will come to destruction? for when the Hollanders traded thither, they paid upon every Anchor of Brandy, which is about 25 Gallons, 5 s. Impost, brought in by them, and upon every Hogshead of Tobacco carried thence 10s. And since they were debarred trade, our English, as they did not; whil'st the Hollander traded there, pay any thing, neither would they when they traded not, and yet they carried the Tobacco directly for Holland; So that all these charges being taxed on the poor Planters, it hath so impoverished them, that they scarce can recover wherewith to cover their nakedness. As Forein trade makes rich and populous any Country that hath within it any staple Commodities to in∣vite them thither, so it makes men industrious, striving with others to gather together in Societies, and buil∣ing of Towns, and nothing doth it sooner than the concourse of Shipping, as we may see before our eyes, Dover and Deal what they are grown unto, the one by the Flanders Trade, the other by ships riding in the Downes. Withall, Strangers will be brought to Rules and Orders when they come to other Princes Territories, which Natives are not so soon brought unto, especially our English, that except they be forced unto that which is for their advantage, they will not admit it, ever repining to be lyable to any Rule, be it never so good. So that except the Hollander be permitted to trade to Virginia and Mariland, it will never flourish or come to any thing, nor never have Town or Village in any part thereof propagated or built; for our English trading thither send no more ships than they need to fetch thence what Tobacco our Nation spends, and for it they run stragling all the Country over, abiding in no setled place, which will never bring to perfection any thing, to the wonderment of ingenuous men, that a Country so well seated, and furnished with all manner of de∣lights
and provisions of Land and Water, should be so much sleighted and dis-regarded. Further, it may be ascertained, that except there be some order or care taken, that a particular place be as∣signed for all Commerce, and Shipping to come to, and go from, in those Colonies, there can never be any encouragement for handicrafts men, or ingenious Artists to settle, or reside there; and in case they might be by some means induced thereunto, would it not be a sad thing, that after all their industry and pains taken to produce any thing worthy of regard, and more valuable than Tobacco, Corn, or Cattel, to have it left to the mercy of a few Tobacconists, and ignorant men, that know not how to prise or value the same, but to make a prey of them, as they have already done, by ingrossing their Tobacco, and so give them onely what they please for such Commodities? If that notwithstanding what is by the foregoing particulars declared, it may seem reasonable, that the Act shall stand in force against those Colonies of Virginia and Mariland, and that the Hollanders and all other forein Nations, that would go thither, shall be prohibited; Then let me on the behalf of the said Colonies of Virginia and Mariland make these following Proposals, which I hope will appear but equitable; and I dare undertake for them, that they will be very well satisfied, that those few Tobacconists that have ingrossed that Trade into their hands, shall still continue in it, without moving further against them therein. First, That the Traders to Virginia and Mariland from England shall furnish and supply the Planters and In∣habitants of those Colonies with all sorts of commodities and necessaries which they may want or desire, at as cheap rates and prices as they used to have them when the Hollander was admitted to trade thither. Secondly, That the said Traders out of England to those Colonies shall not onely buy of the Planters such Tobacco in the Colonies as is fit for England, but take off all that shall be yearly made by them, at as good rates and prices as the Hollanders used to give for the same, by Bills of Exchange or otherwise, when the said Hollanders and Dutch were permitted thither to trade. Thirdly, That if any the Inhabitants or Planters of the said Colonies shall desire to ship his Tobacco or goods for England, that the Traders from England to Virginia and Mariland shall let them have freight in their ships at as low and cheap rates, as they used to have it when the Hollanders and other Nations traded thither. Fourthly, That for maintenance of the Governments, raising of Forces to with stand the invasions of the Indians, building of Forts, and other publick works, needful in such new discovered Countries, the Traders from England to pay there in Virginia and Mariland as much yearly as was received of the Hollanders and Strangers as did trade thither, whereby the Country may not have the whole burden to lie on their hard and painful labour and industry, which ought to be encouraged, but not discouraged. Thus having proposed in my judgment what is both just and equal, to all such as would not have the Hol∣lander permitted to trade into Virginia and Mariland, I hope if they will not agree hereunto, it will easily appear, it is their own profits and interests they seek; not those Colonies, nor your Majesties service, but in contrary the utter ruine of all the Inhabitants and Planters there; and if they perish, that vast Territory must be left desolate, to the exceeding disadvantage of this Nation, and your Majesties Honor and Revenue. Now to have all parties pleased, the Traders to Virginia and Mariland, and the Inhabitants and Planters, and that all may be done for your Majesties glory and advantage, without loss to any; By way of Accommodation this I propose, Let all Hollanders and other Nations whatsoever, freely trade into Virginia and Mariland, and bring thither and carry thence whatever they please; and to counterpoise the cheapness of their sailing, with the dearnesse of our ships, to pay a set Duty and Imposition that may coun∣tervail the same; and when what they paid formerly will not do it, let it be doubled and trebled, as shall be thought meet, yet still with this caution, that it may not make it as bad as if they were totally prohibited. In the next place, that all English ships that do go thither to trade, and carry goods to any other Country besides England, may be freed of any Custome there, more than some certain Duty to the use of the Colonies; for as it is before expressed, the proceed of those goods vended abroad, will countervail at their return to Eng∣land to Your Majesty twice the Custome that should have been paid, did they come directly from those Co∣lonies to England. This being so setled, those Colonies will flourish, their respective Governors and Governments will be maintained without charge to Your Majesties Exchequer, the people will encrease, and by the bringing all trade to certain select places, riches will abound, Artists go over, Your Majesties Dominions will be enlarged, the Customs there and in England advanced, the Commerce made splendent, and all particular persons that are concerned as well as publick, receive their contentments; otherwise onely destruction must attend and be the portion of those Colonies. I have already in a few printed sheets of mine, entituled, Trade reviv'd, which I presumed to deliver to Your Majesty, declared the value of those Colonies of Virginia and Mariland, and what advantages they will yield to this Nation, if encouraged, as in folio 10 to 13. of the said Book appears, therefore I shall here say no more therein; but on the contrary, if the Hollanders and Dutch be prohibited trading thither, they will come to nothing. And being Virginia was upon its last legs, as we here were, when it pleased Almighty God by a like miracle, their Governor, under the late usurped Power dying, by an unanimous consent of the Colonies, Sir William Bartlet was restored to the Government, his worth being so well known to them, in which happiness, by Your Majesties most gracious confirming him therein, they are made more happy, his fitness for that Government being such, as few, if any there be, can parallel. Forasmuch then as God hath so wonderfully freed those Colonies, as he hath also freed us, from their Egyptian Task-masters, and given them their antient Governors as at the first, whereby they be in hopes to enjoy not onely their liberty, but their wonted trade with all Nations, and so recover out of that languishing distemper in which they were; Shall they, after so long suffering, and expectation of relief, be made more mi∣serable now than ever, and that by an established Law, meerly obtruded on them by a few covetous and self-interested men, Tobacconists, and ingrossers of that Trade? God forbid. Having therefore as briefly as I could, and the matter required, in reference to those Colonies, Remon∣strated to Your Majesty, both their agrievance by reason of the said Act, debarring them forein Trade; as also the advantage that will arise to them, the Commerce, and Your Majesties Revenue, if admitted, and the Act suspended, It is left to Your Majesties pious consideration to do therein as shall be most meet, by Your Majesties most Loyal and Obedient Subject, JOHN BLANDE.
