C2399 R28554 10629604 45456
His Maiesties Letter to both Houses of PARLIAMENT. WITH A NEW PROTESTATION Against the PARLIAMENT in ENGLAND. AND ALSO AGAINST ALL PROTESTANTS. Made by the Rebels in IRELAND. Which Protestation was read in the House of COMMONS, Ian. 20. 1641. Whereunto is added the two Petitions of the Inhabitants of the County of Essex, one to the House of Peeres, Ian. 19. The other to the Com∣mittee of the House of Commons fitting at Grocers-Hall, London. London, Printed for John Thomas, 1641.
A Copie of a Protestation shewed to me by Thomas Garreldin of Waterford Mer∣chant, about the 20. of Decemb. last, I be∣ing with him and foure others appointed to watch at the Key-gate of the said City. THat wheareas the Parliament of England, had taken away his Majesties Royall Power from him, and had left him but the name of a King, we his Highnesse Loyall Subjects of Ireland, doe pro∣test to spend our lives and Estates to maintaine his Ma∣jesties said Royall Power and prerogative to him and his Royall Successours. And whereas the said Parliament of England, hath vsed such cruelty to the poore Catholiques of Eng∣land as hath not onely extended to the losse of their E∣states, but some of their lives, and intended the like to vs (had not the Infinite goodnesse of GOD put it in∣to our hearts to raise this warre for defence of our selves) we desire this should be published, that the world may take notice of our just cause we had to take vp Armes and require all to be ayding and assisting to vs. Thomas Monck.
To the Right Honou∣rable the House of Peeres. The Humble Petition of sundry of the Knights, Gentle∣men, and other Inhabitants of the County of Essex, in their owne Names, and in the behalfe of many others. Most humbly sheweth, THat we are truely sensible of, and dayly thankefull for your care, and paines, (wilite the house of Commons) for the setling of the Church, and State, and that the reformation which is desired, be much re∣tarded, and your endeavours in a great measure, made abortiue, by the councells, and practises, of the malig∣nant Partie, of Prelates, and Popish Lords; yet your judefarigable labours, we with all thankefullnesse most humbly acknowledge, and yet we doe in all humillity represent to your most Honorable consideration, our remayning feares, and grievances arising from the de∣layes of helpe to our Brethreu in Ireland, whereby they dayly lye under many inhumane villanies, and barberous cruelties, the feares from the Tower of London, the magazine of the Kingdome, which is in∣trusted in unknowne hands, and with one whom we cannot confide, in the defect of the Armes of our Trai∣ned Bands, which were not long since taken away,
whereby a maritant County is in Part left unarmed the putting some of our Gentlemen, out of Commis∣sion for the Peace, because they would not serve the turne, of present times, the not execution of Priests, condemned by Law, whereby that party are growne insolent, seeing that Iustice against them is stopped, even in the time of Parliament, though they are Delin∣quents in the highest kind, the Prelates and Popish Lords still sitting, and Voting in your House, a thing as we conceive, most incompatible to the Office of the one, and no way fit to be allowed to the other. And lastly our feares, are from the vnparrelled breaches of the Liberties of Parliament, which are the strength and safety of your body, and the inheritance of the Subject, all which doe cause such a decay of Clo∣thing, and Farming (the two trades of our County whereby the multitudes of our People have lived) that we tremble to thinke what may follow thereupon. Most humbly praying, that bleeding Ireland, may be speedily, and strongly relieved, the Tower of Lon∣don, may be Committed, to safe hands, the Armor of Trained Bands repayred, and trusted with able and ap∣proved persons, that the County may be put into a posture of defence both by Land and by Sea, the Gen∣tlemen which have beene (for their faithfullnesse) put out of Commission, may be restored, the condemned Preists executed, the Prelates and Popish Lords may be excluded your house, the Privillidges of Parlia∣ment, may be fully assured, and the worthy Members of it, (who have beene in an unheard of, illegall way
endangered) may be vindicated, and receive reparation. And your Petitioners doe resolue in all just and Ho∣norable wayes, (according to our late Protestation) to maintaine the persons, and Privilidges, of this Honora∣ble Parliament, with our lives, and estates, against the enemies of God, the King, the State, and humbly pray. &c. To the Honourable Knights and Burgesses of the House of COMMONS in Parliament. The Humble Petition of the Knights, Gentlemen, Ministers, and other Inhabitants in the County of Essex. SHEWETH, VNto your Honourable House, that we are truely sensible of your great care, and extraordinary endeavours, to set∣tle our Religion, and Peace, and daily give thankes to GOD Almighty for it; And we doe further in all humi∣lity present to your Honourable con∣siderations, which we doe apprehend a great stop in Reformation of matters of Religion, and our selves together with you, and the whole Kingdome, to be in great danger of the Papists, and other ill-affected per∣sons,
who are every where very insolent, and are rea∣dy to act the parts of those cruell blood-suckers in Ireland, if they be not speedily prevented: by meanes whereof, our Trading, especially of Clothing, and Farming, grew a great pace, to so great a dampe, as many thousands are like to come to suddaine want. Nor can wee expect any redresse thereof, unlesse the Bishops and Popish Lords be removed out of the House of Peeres. Therefore we humbly pray, that you would ear∣nestly mediate his Majesty and the House of Peeres, That our Brethren in Ireland, may speedily be relie∣ved, And the Papists throughout the Kingdome be disarmed, And that such defects of Armes, as in your discretions, shall appeare to be meet, may be sup∣plied, and this County and Kingdome, put into such a Warlike posture, as may be best for its defence, and safety, and that the Bishops, and Popish Lords who as wee conceiue, have hindered the successe, of your godly Endeavours, may be put out of the House of Peeres, Not doubting but then our Petition formerly presented to your House, will receive a more full and speedy answer. And your Petitioners resolving in all just and Ho∣nourable wayes, according to the late Protesta∣tion, to assist you, with our lives, and Estates, against the Enemies of GOD, the KING, and State, humbly pray to Almighty GOD, for your good successe.
His Majesties Letter to both Houses of Parlia∣ment, Ian. 20. 1641. HIs Majestie perceiving the manifold distractions which now are in this Kingdome, which cannot but bring great inconvenience, and mischiefe to this whole Government; In which, as his Ma∣jesty is most chiefly interessed, so he holds himselfe by many reasons most obliged to doe what in him lyes, for the preventing thereof; Though he might justly expect (as most proper for the duty of Subjects) that pro∣positions for the remedies of these Evils, ought rather to come to him, then from him; yet his fatherly care of all his people being such, That he will rather lay by any particular respect of his owne dignity, then that any time should be lost, for prevention of these threatning Evils, which cannot admit the delayes of the ordinary proceedings in Par∣liament; Doth thinke fit to make these ensuing Propositions to both Houses of Parliament. That they will with all speed fall into a serious consideration of all those particulars, which they shall hold necessary, as well for the upholding and maintaining of His MAJESTIES just and Regall Authority, and for the setling of his Revenue; As for the pre∣sent and future establishing of their Priviledges, the free and quiet enjoy∣ing, of their Estates and Fortunes, the Liberties of their Persons, the Security of the true Religion, now professed in the Church of England and the Setling of Ceremonies in such a manner, as may take away all just offence: Which when they shall have digested, and composed into one entire body, that so His Majesty and themselves may be able to make the more clear judgement of them: It shall then appeare by what his Majesty shall do, how farre he hath been from intending or designing any of those things, which the too great fears and jealousies of some per∣sons seem to apprehend: and how ready he will be to equall and exceed the greatest examples of the most indulgent Princes in their Acts of Grace and Favour to their people. So that if all these present distractions (which so apparantly threaten the ruine of this Kingdome) doe not (by the blessing of Almighty God) end in an happy and blessed Accommodation; His Majesty will then be ready to call Heaven and Earth, God and Man to witnesse, that it hath not failed on his part. FINIS.
