E204 11849188 49880
Dr. EDWARDS's SERMON AT THE Commencement AT CAMBRIDGE.
THE Eternal and Intrinsick Reasons OF GOOD and EVIL. A SERMON PREACH'D at the COMMENCEMENT AT CAMBRIDGE, On SUNDAY the 2d Day of Iuly, 1699. By IOHN EDWARDS, D. D. CAMBRIDGE, Printed at the University Press, for Edmund Ieffery, Bookseller in Cambridge, 1699.
Imprimatur. GUL. DAWES, Procan. JO. BEAUMONT, S. Theol. Profes. REGIUS. HUMP. GOWER, D. Margaretae Professor. JO. BALDERSTON, Coll. Emman. Praefect.
PSALM cxix. cxlij. Thy Righteousness is an Everlasting Righteousness, and thy Law is the Truth. IT is not to be doubted that the Subject of this Psalm is the Moral Law, or the Precepts of Just and Righteous Living, which are contain'd in the Ten Commandments, and which we find interspersed in Moses's Writings, especially in the Book of Deuteronomy. The Royal Prophet direct∣ing here his words to God, calls these his Right∣eousness and his Law, and he adds that this Right∣eousness is Everlasting, and that this Law is the Truth. The most easy and obvious meaning of the former clause of which words is this, that this Di∣vine Law which he is speaking of, had its Existence from Everlasting, it was alwaies what it is now. Which is of the same import of what he saith in the 160. v. of this Psalm, Thy Word is True from the beginning, i. e. from Everlasting, for these two are synonymous, as appears from Prov. 8. 23. The Rules and Measures of what is Just and Right were deter∣min'd and fix'd from Eternity. And besides, they are of Perpetual and Eternal Obligation, they are such Laws as shall never be repeal'd: whence our Psalm∣ist saith in another place, All God's Commandments
are sure, they stand fast for ever and ever. Ps. 111. 7, 8. For what is Good or Evil in its own nature, can at no time, or upon any account be alter'd. Which brings me to the Interpretation of the lat∣ter Clause of the Words, Thy Law is the Truth, i. e. these Rules of Moral Righteousness must needs be Immutable and Perpetual, because they are no imaginary and precarious things, nor do they de∣pend upon humane Institution and Arbitrement; but they are Real and True in themselves, they are Solid and Substantial, there being an Intrinsick Goodness and Excellency in them. On this ac∣count they have Subsistence and Reality, and there∣fore may properly and strictly be said to be, and to be True. Which is a Notion that a Profound Man among the Gentiles had long since attain'd to; for he tells us, that the Law of Nature or True Mo∣rality is. So∣crat▪ apud Platonem. the finding of being. This then is the Proposition that I will Entertain you with at present, that the Reasons of Good and Evil are Eternal and Unchangeable; that there are such things as Right and Wrong, without any Po∣sitive Law or Constitution; that these had the start of all human Contracts and Customs; and, in short, that Religion and Virtue are ingrafted in our ve∣ry Nature, and are every waies suited to the frame of Rational Creatures. This I will evince 1. From the Nature of God. 2. From what we find in the Mind of Man. 3. From the Behaviour and Actions of Mankind. 4. From the Universal Consent of the World. 1. God's Nature or Mind is the Eternal Founda∣tion of Goodness and Righteousness, and therefore
these cannot but be Real and Eternal. It is certain that the Essential Bonity, which is in Mens Actions, is grounded on the Chief Good, that which Plato frequently calls De Leg. & alibi. Goodness it self, and the Idea and Pattern of all Goodness. For whence could Good∣ness be fetch'd, but from this Divine Source? It could neither be deriv'd from Angels nor Men, (and we can't think of any rank of Beings else whence there is a probability of its being deriv'd) because they themselves are from God, and there∣fore it would be unreasonable to think, that that which is Best in them was not from Him. Yea, from Him alone it must necessarily be, in whose Perfect Nature the Ideas and Platforms of it were from Eternal Ages: for as the Ideas of Truth were eternally Existent in God's Understanding, so his Will was pregnant and replenish'd with Goodness and Holiness. Which is a Notion that we cannot but form of the Divine Being, because he being most Perfect, we can't possibly conceive of him without apprehensions of both these, viz. his Un∣derstanding fraught with Truth, and his Will with Goodness. Now, from this Eternal Fountain the Goodness and Righteousness of Men have their Original, and consequently they can't but be Real and True, and have an inward worth in them, be∣cause whatever partakes of the Divine Nature and Perfection is really worthy and excellent. It is then the holy Nature of the Divine Being that is the prime Source, as well as Rule of human sanctity and righteousness. It is this on which they depend, for it is the Pattern of them. Goodness in us is but a Copy of that Original, that Essential and Im∣mutable
Goodness, which is in the Supreme Good. This is the true Root of all Rectitude, Justice and Righteousness. The Eternal Laws of Just and Good, which are in the Divine Mind, are the Pillars on which the Moral Goodness of Rational Beings is founded. Hence it is that the Laws of Good and Evil, of Just and Unjust among Men, are in their own nature firm and solid, and never to be abo∣lish'd, for they are eternally Good, and grounded on the unchangeableness of the Supreme Being. The Reasons of them did exist from Eternity in the Divine Nature, and they were ever conformable to the upright Will of God, and for that Reason cannot be otherwise. Thus it appears, that Moral Righteousness being originally founded in the Be∣ing and Nature of God, must consequently be Immutable. 2. The Intrinsick and unchangeable Nature of it is demonstrated, not only from our tracing it up to its First Head, but from its being seated by God in the Mind of Man. For this is the very Image and Pourtraiture of God himself, and consequently, seeing Truth and Goodness are Essential to the Di∣vine Nature (as was said before) these Excellencies are also inseparable from the Soul of Man. And therefore from the Nature of human Souls, as such, it were easy to prove that there were Innate No∣tions, not only of True and False, but of Good and Evil, imprinted on them at their first make. And tho' we have not the use of these Original Notions presently, or in our Infancy and Childhood (as some urge) yet it is ridiculous to infer thence, that they are not in the Soul: for on the same ground
it might be prov'd, that a Man hath no Rational Soul for several years, because the Faculties of it do not actually exert themselves. But we are sure that those Mental Impressions were in all Men from the beginning, because they are the First Emana∣tions of their natural frame, as they are Reasonable Beings, and as their Souls resemble the Divinity. Hence it follows, as a clear and incontestible Truth, that, tho' by the early Apostacy of the First Man our human Nature is deprav'd, our Faculties are corrupted, and we have an inward proclivity to what is vicious, so that it is the work of the Holy Spirit to enable us to do any Good that can be ac∣ceptable to God: yet there are remaining in us, as we are Human Creatures and Rational Agents, Natural Principles and Sentiments of Morality. And therefore we may observe, that One, who is an unquestionable Asserter of the original depravi∣ty of Mankind, is yet very positive in this, that Quen∣dam inesse humanae menti, & quidem naturali instinctu, divinitatis Sensum, extra con∣troversiam ponimus. Calvin. In∣stit. l. 1. c. 3. Omnious inditum esse divini∣tus Religi∣onis semen experien∣tia testa∣tur. Ibid. c. 4. there is in the Souls of Men a Sense of Divinity and Religion, and that even by a Natural Instinct; and accordingly he spends a whole Chapter to prove the existence of this Inbred Principle in the Minds of all Men. And truly, every Man alive, that is attentive and unprejudiced, may feel this in him as soon as he is arrived to the use of Reason, (for he can't exspect it should actually display it self till then) or whenever he hath occasion given him to exercise his thoughts concerning Moral and Divine things. To this the Great Apostle refers in Rom. 2. 14, 15. when he tells us, that the Gen∣tiles who have not the Law, (i. e. the written Law) do by nature (i. e. by vertue of these radical notions
of Moral Goodness in their minds) the things con∣tain'd in the Law, they are push'd on to it by this Natural Principle within them. Hence it is that tho' they have not the Law, yet they are a Law unto themselves, because they have this inward Law in their own minds, which instructs them what to do, as to the great duties of Natural Religion. Therefore he adds, that they shew the work of the Law written in their hearts, namely in these Ori∣ginal Characters by God's own hand. So that no∣thing could be said more plainly to Establish these inward Signatures and Impresses of Goodness on the Soul. And they were Engraven there for Great and Excellent Purposes in the life of Man: whence we may further evince, that there are indeed such Inbred Principles and Notions. There being so many waies of Delusion and Error in the World, such a diversity of avocations from Religion and Good∣ness, and the Worship of the Divine Being, and such Charming Temptations every where to a vi∣tious Life; it was requisite there should be such In∣ward Directors as these in Mens breasts. There being such Impediments to Truth and Goodness as Passion, Prejudice, Interest, Pleasures, and these continually operating upon us; it was necessary there should be something within us to remind us of what is True and what is Good, something within us that opposes it self to all the foresaid ob∣stacles and hindrances. There was a necessity that there should be a Divine Principle in our Souls, which should be as it were a continual Fund to our Consciences, alwaies to supply and furnish them
with Virtuous dictates. Amongst the most rude and barbarous People it is This that keeps up some kind of Notion of Honesty and Goodness. Yea, and among those that are Civiliz'd, these would be in danger of being lost, if there were not this Princi∣ple rooted in their minds. All that is Just and Right would have been banish'd out of the World, unless this prevalent Inmate had acted its part, and kept us from being wholly bereft of them. We had long since been absorpt of Atheism and Profa∣ness, if this had not powerfully secur'd us. Were it not for this active Spark, the Fire of Virtue would have been extinguish'd, and it would have been impossible to preserve it in the midst of that Deluge of Vice, which hath broken in upon us. God took care therefore, that there should be in∣grafted in the heart of every Man, learned or illi∣terate, these Moral Impressions which I am speak∣ing of, which will not suffer Mankind to be who∣ly alienated from a sense of what is Good and Vir∣tuous. It may be attributed to this, that, notwith∣standing the General Depravation and Corruption, there is yet a Face of Religion in the World. For it is an undoubted Truth, that This buoys up Goodness when it is sinking, this supports it when it is falling, this keeps it alive when it is even ex∣spiring. So absolutely necessary was the implanting of these Notions in Mens minds from their very birth. And then (which is the thing I have been proving) these Innate Principles of Good and Evil thus implanted in us, are a certain and unquestion∣able eviction of the Intrinsick Excellency of Moral Religion, and of all Virtuous and Just Actions,
which are but Transcripts and Exemplifications of those Original Conceptions placed by God in the minds of Men. 3. As the real and unchangeable nature of Moral Righteousness is proved from its conformity to the Supreme and Eternal Good, and from the Images of Good, which our minds are furnish'd with from our birth, so it may be evidenc'd from the constant Behaviour and Practice of Mankind afterwards. This I will make appear from these following par∣ticulars, 1. From Mens excusing their sins. 2. From their desiring Secrecy when they commit them. 3. From the Regrets and Remorses which they feel afterwards. 4. From the Fear of Punishment which haunts them. 5. From that Dislike and Hatred which even Bad men themselves have of Vice. First, the Intrinsick Excellency of Vertue is ma∣nifested from mens Excusing their sins and vitious practises, and devolving them upon others. This was in the World as soon as Sin it self. Adam would needs cast his Transgression and Guilt upon his Relative, and she put it off to the Serpent. This hath been the practice of sinners ever since: tho' they know themselves to be really Criminal, yet they endeavour to throw off their faults, and they use all sorts of palliations and pretences to clear themselves; and particularly they are wont to usurp the Names and Titles of Virtue to conceal their evil deeds, ondly disguising these latter under a shew and resemblance of the former. But whilst they do so, they confess, that Virtue is Excellent and Laudable, otherwise they would not emulate the likeness of it: and they acknowledge, that Vice
is in it self base and reproachful, and that the ra∣tional nature of Man is averse to it, else they would not excuse it, and shift it off: nay, 'tis certain they would own it, if it were Good and praise worthy. But they have natural convictions of the contrary, which makes them strive to clear themselves of it: and these evasions are a palpable proof that Vice is a thing opposite to the reasonable frame of their Souls, and is of its own nature Evil, and that there is a distinction between Just and Unjust, Right and Wrong, founded in the nature of things. Again, this also appears from men's desiring of Secrecy when they commit sins, and after they have committed them. For though one reason of their sculking and absconding is, because they would not be defeated in what they undertake, or be detected when it is performed; yet this is another reason of their affecting of privacy, namely, because they are ashamed to act those vile things in the Eyes of the World. Vice is so ugly and deformed, that they would not have it seen: and when it is, they blush and are confounded at their own evil doings. Which is signify'd to us in that Expostulation Rom. 6. 21. What profit had ye in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? This blushing argues an inward turpitude in vitious actions: whereas Virtue, which is Good in it self, is daring, and carries Confidence with it. If there were not a real blemish and stain in unjust and lewd practises, why should men be ashamed of them? Why should they be put out of countenance, and look like Malefactors? Why should they fly to their Coverts, and run into corners, and fear a discovery? There was an early
Example of this in the first Sinners, they retired, and hid themselves, Gen. 3. 8. On which an Antient and Pious Father of the Christian Church hath these remarkable words,S. Chry∣sost. Hom. 12. ad Pop. Antioch. Why did Adam, after he had sinned, hide himself, seeing at that time there was no written Law? The Reason was, because he had a natural inbred knowledge that he had done ill, he being self-instructed in the knowledge of Virtue. And thence arose in him that inward bashfulness and dejection of Soul after the commission of Sin, and thence he fondly attempted to hide not only himself, but his Crime from God. And it is obser∣vable that Cain refus'd to discover his murdering of his Brother; when God demanded of him where he was, his surly reply was, he knew not, Gen. 4. 9. Which concealing of Vice argues the intrinsick E∣vil of it, for why else is it mask'd with privacy and retirement, and kept from the knowledge of others as much as it is possible, yea even of those sometimes that can't hurt us? This is an argument that Virtue is good and lovely, and that the contrary is vile and de∣testable, and that the mind of Man naturally approves of Moral Goodness, and dislikes Vice and Immorality. Further, the Regrets and Remorses of Sinners for their acting contrary to the Divine Laws, are cer∣tain Testimonies of this Truth. Why do they call themselves to an account, and arraign, and pass Sentence upon themselves for what they have done? Why are they uneasy and dissatisfy'd, and find an unspeakable Trouble in their minds? Is not this from Natural Conscience, and those inbred impres∣sions, which are in the Soul of every Man? Yes, without doubt, these cause them to rebuke and
chastise themselves, and that very severely, when they offend against these inward dictates. Thence come those Vexations and Torments which willful Transgressors feel in their breasts, yea tho' their faults be kept secret, and none knows them but themselves. Notwithstanding this, they are trou∣bled and disquieted, and as the Satyrist well remarks of such men, Tacitâ sudant praecordia culpâIuv. Sat. 11. But especially the more open and profligate Sinners have frequent experience of these inward Inquie∣tudes, Sweatings and Agonies, which render them a Plague and Torment to themselves. Cain com∣plain'd, that his iniquity (for so the original word should be rendred) was greater than he could bear, Gen. 4. 13. That is, the guilt of his heinous Sin became an insupportable burden to him. So Iudas, from the horror of his guilt, sunk into despair. And who sees not that the usual effects of great and flagitious enormities are Pain and Torture of mind, Deliquiums of Soul and Body, and the wasting and macerating of the flesh and spirits, by continual restlesness and disturbance? The ground of it is obvious, for Sin is a violent distorting of the natu∣ral and primitive temper of Man, and therefore it cannot but create extreme anguish and perturbation. One reason why men are displeas'd with themselves after the commission of what is Immoral, is because they find they have acted contrary to their Native Principle, because they have done something that is unsuitable to the rational nature which they are endued with. It appears hence that Sin is naturally
Evil, and that it is an affront to our Reasons and Understandings to transgress the Laws of Morality. Thus a Man's own mind establishes the Equity and Goodness of these Laws, and convinces him that the Foundations of Moral Righteousness are sure and stable. Moreover, this may be made evident from the Fear of Punishment, which haunts and possesses the minds of Evil men. Thus Cain, the first Murderer, was afraid that every one that found him would slay him: he had a perpetual dread of the fatal recom∣pence, which was the merit of his villany. And Natural Conscience tells all other Sinners that they deserve Punishment: they know the Iudgment of God, that they who commit such things, are worthy of death, as the Apostle speaks: and this knowledge unavoidably breeds Fear and Dread. Some would needs persuade us that this Passion is rais'd by Po∣litick Heads, by Wise Rulers and Governours, merely to aw their dastard Subjects: but it is evi∣dent that this is a falsity, because Princes and Ru∣lers themselves are liable to these impressions; nay, we know they actually have been under the force and prevalency of such Principles. Belshazar the Great Babylonian Monarch fell into fits of shaking and trembling, when the Hand-writing on the Wall put him in mind of his Profaness and Debauchery, and the just Deserts of both. King Herod after the murder of Iohn Baptist was restless in his mind, and had the terrible sight of that Holy Man conti∣nually represented to his fancy, andMat. 14. 2. he thought he was risen from the dead, and was come to Torment him. Tiberius the Emperour was not able to con∣ceal
the terrors and affrightments of his Conscience, after all his unnatural Lusts and Cruelties. Nero after all his prodigious villanies could not dissemble his horrors, and his being haunted with Spirits, and tormented with Furies and Flames. Which plainly shews, that this dread of mind is no Politick Invention, no Feigned Passion and Representation, no idle Phantom or Mormo; but that it is a real thing, and flows from the natural dictates of the Mind, and not these from Fear, as some would suggest. Why should Men be affraid of the Divine Being, if they deserv'd not his Displeasure? And how can they deserve it, unless they have done some∣thing amiss, i. e. broken some Law, which they were oblig'd to keep? There must then be some obligation on Man from Nature to observe such and such Laws: for I speak even of those who have thrown off all Obligations but this. Their being conscious to themselves that they have not acted as they ought, and that thereby they are become guilty, creates this Timerousness and Dread in them, and gives them an apprehension of the great Day of Doom. In the next place I argue from that dislike and hatred, which even Bad men themselves have of some Vices, and from that great Esteem which they have of some Virtues. Pride is universally disrelish'd, and the very Persons who cherish it in themselves, abhor it in others. Nothing is more generally abominated than a Proud and Arrogant Man; and on the contrary, nothing is more valu'd, lov'd, and caress'd than one that is Humble and Meek. Even those very Persons, whose practice is a remonstrance
against Humility, have at the same time an inward liking of this Virtue, yea and outwardly express their approbation of it. The Avaritious and Sor∣did Niggard is scorn'd and laught at by every one: but the Liberal and Generous are applauded by all. Clean and Chast Discourse meets with an universal acceptance: but Obscenity and Ribaldry, tho' dress'd in the Garb of Wit, are generally nauseous and offensive, and the Organ of Hearing is as 'twere disoblig'd, and even hurt by them; and oftentimes the Hearer blushes, because the Speaker doth not. A Lyar is a Title of the greatest reproach and in∣famy among men: a lying Tongue is not only one of those things whichProv. 6. 17. the Lord hateth, but 'tis as. Plutarch. de Educat. Pueror. odious to all Men: whereas a Plain and Open Speaking, without any dissimulation or reserve, is a very graceful and amiable thing, and nothing is more valu'd and commended in the World. Again, Oppression, Violence, Rapine, Persecution, and espe∣cially if these proceed to Bloodshed and Slaughter, are hated of all Persons, yea of those who practice these Vices most of all. Iulius Caesar had ever in his mouth that of Euripides,Sueton. in Iul. Caes. If Right at all may be violated, it must be for the sake of a Crown; but in other matters let us be exactly just. The greatest Invaders acknowledge Justice to be good, and it is Interest only that warps their judgment. The Ban∣diti and Rapparees rob for mere Gain, and even Assas∣sines and Ruffians must be well paid to do their work; which shews there is no temptation in the Thing it self. A Common Thief had rather find than take away another Man's goods; and whilst he doth the latter, he disapproves of it. Or say, that he ap∣proves
of it in himself, yet he detesteth it in all others. So Perfidiousness and Treachery meet with a Catholick abhorrence; and those who reward these practises, yet hate the things themselves, and the Actors of them are alwaies odious in the World, and sometimes signally punish'd by them who set them on work. But Faithfulness, Sincerity, Ho∣nesty, Frankness and True-heartedness are belov'd by all Men. And it were easy to shew in other In∣stances, that Vicious and Immoral Actions are loath∣ed even by Sinners themselves, and that they who dare not practice Wisdom and Virtue, yetNeque enim un∣quam in tantum convales∣cet nequi∣tia, nun∣quam sic contra vir∣tutes con∣jurabitur, ut non Sa∣pientiaeno∣men vene∣rabile & sa∣crum ma∣neat. Sen. Epist. 14. praise and commend it, and are willing to see it thrive in the world. Thus from the Behaviour and deport∣ment of Men, even those who are of the worst sort, it is evident that Virtue is praise-worthy in its own Nature, and that there is an inward Principle in all Men, that makes them pay respect to Goodness and Honesty, and to disparage what is vicious and unlawful. In the last place, I will prove the Laws of Moral Goodness to be Intrinsick and Natural from their being universally receiv'd. For that of Tully is an unquestionable Maxim,Consen∣sio omni∣um genti∣um jus na∣turae pu∣tanda est. When all People agree in a thing, we are to look upon it as the Law of Nature. Now, it is evident that there is among all Men an Agreement, as to the main, about the Notion of Good and Evil. Just and Right are every where, and among all Persons the same,Tusc. Q. l. 1. as Fire burns here and in Persia, (to use the words of the famous Ethic. l. 5. c. 7. Stagyrite.) We are told by Valerius Maximus, that the very Barbarous Scythians took care of their Fathers Tombs, and religiously preserv'd them;
whereupon he makes this seasonable Remark, Prima & optima re∣rum Natu∣ra piet tis est magi∣stra▪ quae nullo vocis ministerio, nullo usu literarum indigens, propiis ac tacitis viri∣bus chari∣tatem pa∣rentum pe∣ctoribus li∣berorum infundit. lib. 5. c. 4. Solida vir∣tus nasci∣tur magis quàm fin∣gitur. Nature, the first and the best of things, is the Mi∣stress of Piety, so that we need not be taught and instructed in it. And again in the ne place, So∣lid Virtue is born with us rather than made and fa∣shion'd. And indeed it must needs be so, because the notices and impressions of Good and Evil on Mens minds are Universal: and it is impossible they should be otherwise, because they are Natural, for Nature universally spreads it self in every individual. Hence is that Common Consent in all Men concerning the grand Points of Morality: they are voted to be Reasonable and Just, by the whole Assembly of mankind throughout the World. I know this is oppos'd by the Learned MrDe Jure Nat. & Gent. l. 1. c. 6, 7. Sel∣den, and some others, especially of late, who hold that Universal Consent is no argument to prove the Law of Nature. Or rather, they say, there is no such thing as Universal Consent, there being so many various Opinions and Practices in Morality and Religion. But I desire these following things may be consider'd, which will fully answer the sug∣gestions of those who oppose this doctrine. First, I grant that God hath judicially given over some People to a reprobate sense, and that because they have given themselves over first to their Lusts, and have willfully shut their Eyes against the light. Hence it is that they have in many things corrupted and distorted the Law of Nature, and then it is no won∣der, that they have been permitted to fall into the most irrational practises, as that of Idolatry, and the like. But I add next, that this Corruption is not in
the First and General Principles of Nature, but in some undue Inferences and Deductions thence. Thus in the case of Polytheism or Idolatry, which is the adoring of False Gods, and was ever a Ca∣tholick crime among the common sort of Heathens, there is the General dictate of Natural Religion kept up, viz. the worshipping of a Deity, though they are so ignorant and corrupted as to conclude this and the other thing to be a God, tho' they are not. So there is no Man or Nation extant, who think it lawfull to hurt or injure any one: but there is some disagreement as to the Particular Inferen∣ces, which may arise from these Premises; and in some particular Instances, that may be thought by some to be hurtful and injurious, which is not deem∣ed so by others. And thus those Usages among Barbarous Nations, which are so far different from ours, may be reconcil'd, as namely, their eating the dead, in stead of burying them; and their dis∣patching their old sick Parents out of the World, which they look upon as a Courtesy done to them, and several the like practises. In which the first and general Principles of Morality are not violated, but only some false Conclusions are drawn from them. Notwithstanding which, the main and es∣sential Laws of Good and Evil are the same, and are own'd to be so. Again, with particular relation to Mr Selden's Objection (which a late Writer hath borrow'd from him, and makes great use of) viz. That there is no Natural and Universal Law of Morality, because the Gentiles are so vicious, and act so contrary to the light of Reason; I answer, that when I assert
the Law of Nature to be Universal, I mean, that it prevails among all Men in the World that are of sound minds, and who carefully attend to the di∣ctates of Natural Conscience, and who use their Understandings, and make Reflections, and exer∣cise their Faculties. But if there be some (and too many there are) who are stupid and sottish, and attend not to the Inbred Notions of their minds, (whereby these Notions are in a manner defaced, and almost extinguish'd) I am not to answer for these. When I speak of Universal Consent, I un∣derstand it of those that think and consider, and are not wont to debauch and distemper their Rea∣sons, as those Rude and Savage Gentiles do. Wherefore we are not at all concern'd for the Bra∣silians or Caribes, no nor for the Soldanians and Hotentots, with the noise of whom our Ears are mightily grated of late. The strange behaviour of these People is no real reproach to Human Nature, nor any impeachment of the General Laws of Mo∣rality, which all People agree in who rouze their inward Principle, and give heed to it. And thence I gather that the Precepts of Virtue are immovable and unalterable, for they are fix'd and riveted into the very Nature of mankind, or else there would not be an Universal Agreement about them. I might go on to farther Proofs of the Intrinsick Nature of Good and Evil, from those Absurd Con∣sequences, which would follow from the contrary. First, if there be no such thing, and if, notwitstand∣ing what hath been alledged, Virtue and Vice are casual and contingent, then our Faculties were given us to cheat and abuse us, and they are continually
impos'd upon, and that about their proper Objects: which is a doctrine that would destroy even a Deity, and we could say nothing to prove there is such a Being. Or, allowing a God, it would be a reproach to his Goodness and Wisdom, to bestow such men∣tal Powers upon us as are constantly deceiv'd, and to implant such Notions in the Souls of all Men as are false and erroneous, and which have nothing real and solid in them. Secondly, this also would be a Consequence from the premises, that we may live and act as we please: for if there be no fix'd Laws and Rules of Good∣ness and Righteousness, then nothing can be said to be Lawful, and consequently nothing can be said to be Unlawful: or what is Lawful to day, may be Un∣lawful to morrow. For if there be not any Inward Reason of the Moral Laws enjoin'd us by God, if they be not in themselves, and in their abstract nature Good; he may prescribe us other Laws, and those contrary to these which we now have; and so God may command us to hate him, and to hurt and mischief our neighbours. If these things are not intrinsically evil, so that they can never be Good, they may in time become our Duty. Thirdly, this is another Consequence, that our Happiness would be precarious and uncertain: for the Happiness of Rational Creatures depends on the Goodness of their Actions. And by this means we should be wholly unacquainted with the Great End of our lives, which is the thing that is to steer us in this World, and to direct us in all we under∣take. These are some of the egregious Blunders and monstrous Absurdities which attend the contra∣ry
Opinion, and may serve to confirm us in this weighty Point, that there is an Intrinsick Goodness in Virtuous actions, and an Intrinsick Evil in Vitious ones, and that the Reasons of both are congenite to our Rational Nature, and flow from it, and are ever agreeable to it. Thus I have Establish'd the Doctrine which I undertook to discourse of. And it was necessary to do it, because tho' the generality of mankind (as was said before) do unanimously averr, that Goodness is not plac'd in the arbitrary opinions of Men, but in nature it self; yet there have been of old, and are at this day those who contradict and oppose it. The Antient Scepticks were infamous for this, who had learnt of their Master Pyrrho, that there isLaert. in vit. Pyrrh. no difference between Good and Evil by Nature, but only by Laws and Custom Laertius acquaints us, that it was the positive opi∣nion of one of that sort of Men, that a Wise Man will not stick to commit Sacriledge, or Adultery, or to Steal, whenever he hath a fit opportunity; for, &c. Laert. in Aristip. none of these (saith he) have any Turpitude in them in their own nature, if we can but lay aside the vulgar apprehension concerning them, which the rabble of Fools and Ignorant People have taken up. Tully testifies concerning the Epicureans, that they held Honest and Iust to beTusc. Q. lib. 5. cassum quiddam, & inani vocis sono decoratum, a vain and frivolous thing, set forth and commended to the World by a mere empty sound of words. This also was the Sentiment of some that pretended to be Christians, as the Gnosticks, and especially Carpocrates, who was a Great Man with that party: he with much
earnestness avow'd, that all. Theo∣doret. hae∣ret. Fab. l. 1. Moral actions are in∣different, and that all the Good or Evil that is said to be in them, is founded not on truth, but fancy, as Theodoret bears witness concerning him, and quotes Irenaeus for it. But to come down lower, they have, it seems, a power in the Church of Rome to change the na∣ture of Vice and Virtue. It is agreed on by the the chiefest Writers of that Communion, that the Pope hath such a Plenitude of Power, that he can dispense with Just and Right, and any Law of God, excepting only the Articles of Faith. So saith the Glosse upon the Canon Law, and Panormitan ap∣proves of it. Bellarmine, their Great Champion, speaks home to the business,Si autem Papa erra∣ret praeci∣piendo vi∣tia, vel pro∣hibendo virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia credere vi∣tia esse bo∣na, & vir∣tutes ma∣las, nisi vel∣let contra conscien∣tiam pec∣care. De Sum. Pon∣tif. l. 4. c. 5. If the Pope (saith he) could erre so far as to command the practice of Vice, and to forbid the practice of Virtue, the Church in that case is oblig'd, unless it would sin against Conscience, to believe Vice to be Good, and Virtue to be Evil. Judge now whether the Reasons of Good and Evil be not taken away by the Church of Rome, when it can alter the property of Virtue and Vice, and when their People are bound in Conscience to take one for the other. Judge whe∣ther they do not ascribe more to their Great Pontif than can be attributed to God himself: for certainly it is so far from being in the power of any Man to alter the Natural and Moral Law, and to take away the obligation of it, that it is not within the verge of Divine Power it self. It is the decision of the Famous Grotius (who is alwaies very wary when he speaks concerning what God can do, as indeed it doth become us: yet it is the peremptory de∣cision
I say, of that Great Man) in his Excellent Book of the Rights of Peace and War,Lib. 1. . God him∣self cannot change this Law of Natural Goodness, he cannot make that which is intrinsically evil to be no evil. And the Reason is, because then he would not be God, for his Nature would be chang'd, which is a thing utterly impossible, and the very supposition of it is to be abhorred. The Great Gallick Philosopher, who discourses so admirably concerning the Moral Virtues, was enclin'd to think, that they were not founded on immoveable Reasons: for in some places of his E∣pistles and in his Answers, where he holds that Goodness as well as Truth eternally depended on the Divine Will and its free determination, he seems to mean that God could have determin'd them otherwise, if he had pleas'd: and so, that which is now Good, might have been Evil. But this mistaken Notion of this Learned Man arose from his not considering and remembring, that the Will of God is alwaies the same as to its real intrinsick nature, and therefore what it now is, it ever was, and can never be otherwise, and consequently Goodness is unvariable, and that which is Good now can't be Evil at another time. Which if that Excellent Per∣son had bore in his mind, he would not have argu'd from God's Will in that manner which he seems to do. But I am sorry to find that in our own Nation likewise there are those who oppose the Intrinsick Nature of Moral Goodness, and render it dubious and arbitrary. Among these ought to be mention'd in the first place that known Person, in whose State
of Nature (which he laies down as the Foundation of his whole System) nothing is virtuous or vitious, just or unjust; for he holds that these arise only from Compact and Society. The Magistrate is Mr. Hobbes's God, the Prince is the maker of Good and Evil, and he can unmake them when he pleases. Which is said well enough for such a Philosopher as holds a Man is nothing else but Body or Carkase. AnotherDe Legi∣bus Natu∣rae Disqui∣sitio Philo∣soph. Learned Writer (tho' a professed Enemy to the former) resolves all Moral Philosophy into Geometrical and Mechanick Principles: which perhaps was design'd on purpose by that profound and sagacious Person to convince some in an Age of Mathematicks. He is follow'd and vouch'd by another,Demon∣stration of the Divine Authority of the Law of Nature. And his Account of Platonick Philosophy. who undertakes to Improve him, and to thrust this Conceit on the World, that Experi∣mental Observation is the Standard of all Goodness and Morality: but I believe you will agree with me in this, that this is spoken rather like a Virtuoso than a Divine. There is another, who in his Brief Disquisition of the Law of Nature, hath refin'd upon both the for∣mer Writers, and makes it his work to shew that the proof of Natural Laws or Dictates of Reason, can be drawn only from the use of our Senses. He holds, that by the motion impress'd on the Organs of our Senses, God delineates the Ideas or Images of all Moral Actions on our minds. He thinks there is no Notion of Moral Goodness or Evil but what is communicated to us by these, and consequently it is not Innate. Tho' by the bye it is well worth our observing, that he freely grants, thatChap. 2. § 20. Beasts derive not all their knowledge from their Senses, but are
born with peculiar appetites and inclinations, and have natural Instincts, or Impressions stampt by God on their very natures. So unkind are these Philoso∣phick Masters to their own Species, as to grudge it the Prerogative and Excellency of a Brute. They not only degrade mankind, but thrust them below the rank of Irrational Beings. But if you would know the particular way how Moral Sentiments are derived to us, they tell you, this is the method, and they admit of no other; God makes external Causes operate on our bodily Organs, and by this ope∣ration and motion, in a certain and determinate man∣ner, we attain to a notion of what is Vitious or Vir∣tuous. It is by the influence of outward objects, and them only, that all Principles of Morality come to be known to us. But to disprove this, and at the same time to baffle the like Doctrine of another late Author, First, I ask, how can General Notions of Mora∣lity be produc'd by the External Senses? Is there any cognation at all between Abstract Ideas of Goodness and mere Bodily Objects? Can a Man imagine that Universal and Complex Apprehensions can be the off-spring of the particular matters of Corporeal Sense? Secondly, if this Author and his Friends be in the right, then those Beings that are destitute of Bodily Sense can have no Notion of Good and Evil. Sup∣posing Angels to be Incorporeal, Morality is a thing not known to them; nor is it known to Separate Souls, nor Saints in Heaven, nay not to God him∣self; because these are exempted from Bodily Senses, and consequently they are not capable of understand∣ing any Moral Propositions.
Thirdly, this Opinion, that Natural Motion pro∣duces Moral Goodness, is such a confounding and jumbling together of Physicks and Ethicks, that none who have clear and distinct conceptions of things will admit of it. Fourthly and lastly, this Opinion makes all Mo∣rality contingent and uncertain, for all Natural and Bodily Motion (on which he holds it depends) is so: at one time or other it varies. External and Corporeal Causes are shifting and fickle: Objects work on us differently, yea the operations of the same Objects are not alwaies the same; and there∣fore Moral Goodness, which is founded on these, is no fix'd thing, but is unsteady and floating: we know not where to have it, according to this Au∣thor. These are the Reasons why I cannot approve of this New Method, which he hath taken to demon∣strate the Truth of Morality, or rather to cashier and defeat it. Which he chuses rather to do, than to acknowledge any Inbred Principle in the Soul of Man. I could have wish'd that Mr. Norris had not so contemptibly reflected on the Inbred Notions and Characters of Truth and Goodness on Mens minds, as to reproach them with the Title ofReflections on the Essay of Humane Understan∣ding. mere Iargon and unintelligible Cant; especially seeing one that hath larded some of his Writings with so many unintelligible high-flown Strains, and Platonick Gibberish, (and even in the present matter which is before us talks of the presentialness of the Ideal World to our Souls, which is the Divine Essence, wherein we see and understand all things) might have been more favourable in his Censure.
Another late Ingenious Author will by no means hear of Natural and Congenite Principles of Mo∣rality, but roundly tells us in these express words, thatConfe∣rence with  Theist. 2d Part p. 36, 37. Men come to the knowledge of Moral Principles and Duties by Tradition: their Fathers taught them them, and their Grandfathers their Fathers, and so up to Adam the common Parent of all. And a little after he uses such language as this, Moral Duties are convey'd to all the World as Spinning and Weav∣ing, and such like inventions. Whereby he con∣founds the Notions of Natural and Reveal'd Reli∣gion, and yet it is observable that in those Dialogues he first distinctly Discourses of Natural Religion, and then of Reveal'd. Whence it is evident that he not only contradicts himself, but mightily grati∣fies the Theist, whom he hath to deal with, and pretends to confute: but he not only baulks one of the greatest and strongest proofs we have of the Truth of Moral Notions and Offices, but he ridicules all Morality, by setting it on no other bottom than what the Trade of Weavers and Spinsters hath. Thus we pull down that with our own hands which we pretend to build up; and even whilst some among us are confuting of Deism, they promote and ad∣vance it. There is another Writer yet behind, who seems to shew himself as backward to own a Natural Principle of Religion, as any of the forenam'd ones; for he sticks not to say, thatEssay of Humane Understan∣ding. Book 1. Chap. 2. there are no Notions naturally imprinted on the mind; for then, saith he, Children and Ideots would have them. But it is certain he might as strongly have argued, that there is no Reason or Prudence in mankind, because nei∣ther
Children nor Ideots are observ'd to exercise these. The Logick is every whit as good. And in another place, conformably to his denial of all Practical Principles in the mind of Man, he speaks very doubtfully of Virtue it self;Essay, B. 1. c. 3. p. 23. The name or sound of VIRTUE, saith he, is hard to be understood, it is liable to much Uncertainty in its signification: and the thing it stands for is much contended about, and difficult to be known. And again, VIRTUES and SINS are words of uncertain signification, and among different Men stand for different things. p. 24. At another time he confesses, thatEssay, B. 2. c. 28. he makes the Law, whereby we judge of Virtue and Vice, to be nothing else but the Consent of Private Men. And in the same place he is positive, that the measure of what is every where call'd and esteem'd Virtue and Vice, is Approbation or Dislike, Praise or Blame. And again,Edition the First. Nothing else but that which hath the al∣lowance of Publick Esteem is Virtue. Which words (tho' he attempts to correct them in a later Edition) I am somewhat enclin'd to understand according to the plain and obvious meaning of them, and the ra∣ther, because it is probable, that as in other very consi∣derable Points, so here he Symbolizes with the Philo∣sopher of Malmsbury, in whose steps he affects to tread, and borrows some of his Thoughts. For as he follows him in his Opinion of the Necessity of only One Fundamental Article of Christian Faith, and in his Notion of Thinking matter, and particularly in that of the likelyhood or possibility of the Materiality of Humane Souls, and of their tendency (on that Principle) to Mortality, and in his Contempt of some parts of the Holy Scripture, and in his avow'd
disbelief of the Resurrection of the same Body, and in his ridiculing of the receiv'd Explication ofLast Let∣ter to the Bishop of Worcester, pag. 361, 362, 363. the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, and in his general favouring of Scepticism and Infidelity, and in his denial of Natural and Inbred Notions; so likewise he seems to be an humble imitator of the foresaid Philosopher, in his belief of the precarious and ar∣bitrary nature of Morality: tho' it is true in a flourish he pretends at another time, that Morality as well as Mathematicks may be demonstrated. Surely that Proposition aforemention'd, viz. Nothing else but that which hath the allowance of publick Esteem is Virtue, may pass for the Leviathan Epitomiz'd. And here by the way I would observe this to you, that the Persons who speak contemptibly of Reveal'd Religion or any part of it, are, if you look narrowly into them, and their Writings, as deficient in their apprehensions and esteem of that which is Natural and merely Moral, which yet they so much pretend to cry up. Whilst they strike at the Principles of Faith, and the Fundamental Articles and Mysteries of Christianity, they cut the Sinews and take away the props of Morality it self, and discard the true Grounds and Reasons of it. Which shews that their design and project is against Virtue in general, and that their aim is to put all out of order, to transpose and ranverse what ever hath any respect to Religion, and to confound every thing belonging to it, and thereby to expose Relgion it self, and to make sport for the Atheistical and Scoffing part of the World. The greater reason therefore is there that we should be settled in our minds concerning these
things, and that we should confirm and establish our selves more and more in this necessary and im∣portant Truth, (which I have endeavour'd to make good) that there are Eternal and Immutable Rea∣sons of Good and Evil, that there is in all Immoral Actions a repugnancy to a Rule of Right in our own breasts, as well as in the mind of our Creator. This is the true account of Moral Righteousness, namely, that it is built on the Nature of God, and of Humane Souls, and the Universal Behaviour of Mankind. So that, to speak plainly, those that designedly set themselves against the Doctrine of Inbred Principles of Good and Evil, detract from the Divinity it self, and from the Essential Nature and Guise of Mankind. And we may assure our selves that such a Perswasion is the most debauching Prin∣ciple in the World, and that those who wilfully and obstinately maintain it have a very ill design upon Mankind. Which was the only ground of my so free and plain dealing with them, for 'tis in vain to Palliate where we design to Cure. It remains that in the last place I should shew the Virtue and Efficacy, the Influence and Usefulness of the Premises: which might be done in several Par∣ticulars, but I will offer only this one Practical In∣ference from the whole. Let the Doctrine discours'd of be a mighty Incentive to all Virtue and Goodness. Seeing these are consonant to our Natural Princi∣ples and dispositions, we have all the reason imagin∣able to comply with them. Why should we con∣tradict our own Propensions, and be Rebels to our Selves? As it is in Natural Motion, not Crooked lines, but Right and Streight ones are aim'd at: so
it is in Morals, Man's Reasonable Nature aims at that which is his Direct and plain duty: and when he deviates from this Right path, he acts against his true Primitive temper and genius. Let us con∣sider then, that we ought to be Virtuous, because our very Nature obliges us to it. We are invited to be Just and Good by something that is within us, and by the intrinsick Beauty of Goodness it self. We should prize Religion and a Holy Life, because they commend themselves to us by their own inhe∣rent and abstract worth. Let us not be backward in the practice of Virtue, seeing its own native ex∣cellency encourages us to it. Those were Curious and Choise words of aDio. Cass. ist. Rom. lib. 44. Gentile Writer, This is one great help and advantage, saith he, to Virtue, to be made good, , by a Congenite Preparation: and such is the Inbred Principle, that I have been speaking of, whereby we are naturally enclin'd to live Virtuously. For tho' (as was said in the beginning of this Discourse) by the Depra∣vity deriv'd from our First Progenitors, both our Understandings and Wills are miserably shatter'd; yet these Original Impressions are not effaced, be∣cause they are of the very Nature of Man as he is a Rational Creature. Therefore these cannot be wholly expung'd out of Mens hearts, they are the Indelible Stamp of God on every Soul. And the more conformable any Man's life and actions are to them, the more clear and bright is his apprehen∣sion and judgment concerning the truth and reality, as well as the excellency of them. Wherefore let us descend into our own breasts, and be acquainted with our selves: and by that
means we shall come to find in our minds a Stock of Principles, which will very much endear Religion to us: for as it will hugely please us to see a great part of our Religion born in us and bred up with us, so it will be a powerful motive to us to exert those Virtues which are so fitted to our Natures, and, as I may say, were Calculated for them. Where∣fore having this prevalent Incitement, let us not be cold and indifferent in the practice of Righteousness and Holiness; let us manfully break through all obstacles and impediments, and let us be vigorous and zealous in the waies of Religion, even of that which God by an Insite Principle dictates to us: and the rather, because this is so considerable a step to and a part of that Higher Strain and Improve∣ment, which we are chiefly to be concern'd for, namely, the Institution of the Blessed Iesus, our conformity to which is absolutely necessary in order to our Salvation and Happiness. To conclude, let us be stedfast and unmoveable in our duty, seeing the Principles and Reasons of it are such. And let it evidently appear in our lives, that the esteem and love we have for Goodness and Virtue are not Pas∣sion, but Reason▪ not Imagination, but Solid Judg∣ment. THE END.
