E2936A R219541 99831005 35467
ENGLAND Ʋniting to Her Soveraign; OR, The Advancing of the KING: A Solemne LEAGUE and COVENANT: FOR Reformation and Defence of Religion, The Honour and Happiness of the KING, and the Peace and Safety of the three Kingdomes of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND and IRELAND. ORdered, By the Parliament, That this Solemne League and Covenant be Printed and Pub∣lished, and forthwith read in every Church, and also once every Year, according to former order of Parliaments. LONDON, Printed for Charls Thomlinson, 1660.
A Solemne League and Covenant. WEE Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Bur∣gesses, Miniters of the Gospell, and Commons of all sorts in the Kingdomes of England, Scotland, and Ireland, by the providence of God living under one King, and being of one reformed Religion, having before our eyes the glory of God, and the advancement of the Kingdome of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, the Honour and Happinesse of the Kings Majesty, and his posterity, and the true pulick liberty, safety and peace of the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private condition is included, and calling to mind the treacherous and bloody plots, conspiracies attempts, and practices of the enemies of God, against the true Religion and Professors thereof in all places, especially in these three Kingdomes ever since the Reformation of Religion, and how much their rage, power, and presumption are of late, and at this teme in∣creased and exercised; whereof the deplorable estate of the Church and Kingome of Ireland, the destressed estate of the Church and Kingdome of England, and the dangerous estate of the Church and Kingdome of Scotland, are present and publicke Testimonies: We have now at last (after other means of supplication, remonstrance, protestations, and sufferings,) for the preservation of our selves and our Religion from utter ruine and destruction according to the commendahle practice of these Kingdoms in former times and the example of Gods people in o∣ther Nations, after mature deliberation, resolved and determined to enter into a mutuall and solemne League and Covenant, wherein we all subscribe, and each one o us for himselfe, with our hands lifted up to the most High od, do swear: I. THa we shall sine rely, really and constantly, through the grace of God, endeavour in our several places and callings the preseration of the Reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland, in doctrine, worship, discipline and Government, a∣gainst our common enemies, the Reformation of Religion in the King∣domes of England and Ireland, in doctrine, worship, discipline and
government, according to the word of God, and the exam∣ple of the best reformed Churches; and shall endeavour to bring the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms, to the nearest conjun∣ction and uniformity in Religion, Confession of Faith, Form of Church-government, directory for Worship and Catechizing; that we and our posterity after us may as brethren live in faith and love, and the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us. II. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, en∣deavour the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, (that is Church-go∣vernment by Arch-Bishops Bishops, their Chancellours and Com∣missaries, Deanes, Deanes and Chapters, Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresie, Schisme, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found to be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness; lest we partake in other mens sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their plagues, and that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms. III. We shall with the same sincerity, reality and constancy, in our several Vocations, endeavour with our estates and lives, mutu∣ally to preserve the Rites and Priviledges of the Parliaments, & the Liberties of the Kingdoms, and to defend the Kings Majesties person and authority, in the preservation and defence of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms, that the world may bear witnesse, with our consciences of our Loyalty, and that we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish His Majesties just power and Greatnesse. III. We shall also with all faithfulnesse endeavour the discovery of all such as have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his people, or one of the Kingdoms from another, or making any faction or parties among the people, contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to publick tral, and receive condigne punishment, as the degree of their offences shall require or deserve, or the supreme Judicatories of both King∣doms respectively, or others having power from them for that effect, shall judge convenient. V. And whereas the happinesse of a blessed Peace beween these Kingdoms, denied in former times to our Progenitors, is by the good providence of God granted unto us, and hath been lately concluded, and seled by both the Parliaments, we shall each one of us, accord∣ing to our place and interest, endeavour that they may remain con∣joyned
in a firm peace and union to all posterity, and that Justice may be done upon the wilful opposers thereof, in manner expressed in the precedent Articles. VI. We shall also according to our places and callings in this common cause of Religion, Liberty and peace of the Kingdoms, as∣sist & defend all those that enter into this League & Covenant in the maintaining and pursuing thereof, & shall not suffer our selves di∣rectly or indirectly by whatsoever Combination, perswasion or ter∣rour, to be divided & withdrawn from this blessed Union and con∣junction, whether to make defection to the contrar part, or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this cause, which so much concerneth the glory of God, the good of the King∣doms, and the honour of the King; but shall all the daies of our lives, zealously continue therein against all opposition, & promote the same according to our power, against all lets and impediments whatsoever; and what we are not able our selves to suppresse or o∣vercome, we shall reveal and make known, that it may be timely pre∣vented or removed; All which we shall do as in the sight of God. And because these Kingdomes are guilty of many sins and provocati∣ons against God, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by on pre∣sent distresses and dangers, the fruits thereof, We profess and declare before God and the world our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these Kingdomes, especially that we have not as we ought, valued the inestimable benefit of the Gospel, that we have not laboured for the purity and power thereof, and that we have not endeavoured to receive Christ in our hearts, nor to walke worthy of him in our ives, which are the causes of our sins and transgressions so much abounding amongst us; and our true and unfeigned purpose, de∣sire, and endeavour for our selves, and all others under our power and charge, both in publicke and in private, in all duties we owe to God and Man, to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the ex∣ample of a reall Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath and heavy indignation, and establish these Churches and Kingdomes in truth and peace. And this Covenant we make in the presence of Al∣mighty God the Searcher of al hearts, with a true intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at the great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed: Mot humbly beseeching the Lord to strengthen us by his Holy Spirit for this end, and to blesse our desires and procee∣dings with such sucess, as may be deliverance and sfety to his people,
and encouragement to other Chrestian Churches groaning under, or in danger of the yoke of Antichristian tyanny, to joyne in the same or like Association and Covenant, to the glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the peace and tranquillity of Christian Kingodmes and Common-wealthes. Wil. Lenthal, Speaker Beuchamp St. John Gilbert Gerrard Walter Earle James Cambell Thomas Cheeke Robert Nicholas Benjamin Rudyard John Gurdon Robert Harley Francis Knollys Edward Masser John White Anthony Stapley Dennis Bond Laurence Whitaker Michael Noble Pere. Hoby Richard Barwis Edward Baynton William Cawley John Moyle John Pyne George Searle Henr Vane Senior Nevill Poole John Yonge Henry Herbert Thomas Sandys William Jesson Philip L. Herbert Thomas Barrington Martin Lumley John Trevor Francis Godolphin Thomas Arundell Edward Stephens Gilbert Pickering John Greve Oliver Cromwell Henry Vane Junior William Cage Richard Erisey Philip L. Lisle Wil. Heveningham Isaac Pennington Richard Cresheld Thomas Pelham Thomas Parker John Leigh John Harris Augustine Skinner John Venn Will. Strickland John Franklin Samuel Brown Robert Swen Roger Hill John Button John Meyrick Ambrose Browne Richard Winn Edward Owner Charles Pym Charles L. Cranborn Ben. Wston Dubley North John Nut Jo. Corbet Roger Burgoyne Peter Temple Benjamin Valentine Tho. Walsingham Oliver Luke William Alenson Humphrey Salwey Richard Moore Will. Ashurst Thomas Moore Thomas Fountaine Will. lys Henry Shelley Rich. Shuttleworth Henry Ludlow George Gallop. Robert Wallop. Arthur Hesilrige Oliver Saint-John Thomas Grantham Francis Barnham Will. L. Fitzwiliams Edmund Dnch Henry Mildmay. Hugh Rogers Thomas Hatcher John Wray Simons D▪Ewes Anthony Bedingfield John Ashe Will. L. Munson Martin Lister Robert Goodwyn
Edward Thomas Henry Lucas Miles Corbet Philip Smith Cornelius Holland Will. Spurstowe John Lowry peter Wentworth Henry Chomley philip Stapleton Will. pierrepoint Roger North Alexander popham homas Hodges John Maynard Samuel Vassall Anthony Irby John Clotworthy John Broxolme Richard Iervoyse John Blakiton Walter Long John Rolle Robert Jennor John VVaddon VVilliam Masham John Lisle Edmund Fowell Edward Ashe Thomas Pury Richard VVhithead Richard Jenyns Humphry Tuston Thomas Dacres Thomas Erle John Downes John Goodwyn Francis Drake VVill. VValler Samuel Luke Francis Buller Richard Harman George Buller Arthur Onslowe Richard VVynwood Robert pye H L. Gray of Ruthin Richard Knightley John pym Christ. Yelverton Anthony Nicoll peter VVroth Robert Reynolds Nat. Barnardiston Henry Heyman VVilliam purefoy Valentine VValton Michael Oldesworth VVilliam VVheler Hall Ravenscroft T. L. Grey of Groby Thomas Middleton Edw. Hungerford Christopher VVrey Richard Lee Herbert Morley Thomas Lane Robert Cecill VVilliam Bell Thomas Some Herbot. Grimstone Symon Snowe John Nash Herbot Grimstone Rulph Asheton Edward Ayshcoghe Iohn Wylde Iohn Trenchard Thomas Iervoyse Richard Browne William Playters Nathaniel Stephens Richard Rose Francis Rous Gilbert Millington Walter Young Iohn Brown Iohn Hippisly Edward poole Henry pelham William Hay. Iohn Driden Nathaniel Fyennes William Lewis Giles Greene William Lytton Iohn Harvey Edward Dowce William Strode Edmond prideaux Thomas Hoyle Edward Enton Francis popham Zouch Tate Iohn Curson Alexander Bence Squire Bence Iohn Selden Iohn Glyn Richard Onslow Iohn Coke Tho. L. Wenman Bulrode Whitelock George Mountague Edward partheriche Henry Campion VVilliam VVhitaker Danzel Holles Edward VVingate Iames Fens poynings Moore
Edward Bisse, Iunior VVilliam Jerpson Edward Mountague Norton Knatchboll Thomas Eden. Edward Baynton Jo. Evelyn Jo. potts San. Rolls Ralph Asheton VVilliam Drake pereg. pelham William Brereton Thomas VVidrington Natha. Hallowes Joh. Bamfield Symond Thelwall Hen. Worsley phil. parer Edw. Boys John Alford FINIS.
