E536 12354612 60098
Approved Medicines OF Little cost, to preserve health and also to cure those that are SICK. Provided For the Souldiers Knap-sack, and the Country mans Closet. Written by RICHARD ELKES Gent. Student in the Art of Physick, living at Bagshot in the County of Surry. Medicos & Chirurgos subinde mutare; aegris tae∣dium non levamen est. Eccles. 38. 4. The Lord hath created Medicines out of the earth, and he that is wise will not abhorre them. LONDON Printed for Robert Ibbitson and are to be sold by Tho: Vere at the Angel in the Old-Baily. 1651.
TO THE High and Honourable Court of Parliament, Rich. Elkes wisheth health, peace, and tranquility. Right Honourable, FOR as much as all men ought in their severall pla∣ces and callings to endea∣vour to doe good in that Common∣wealth, wherein they live, your poor Subject hath seen many men, both Souldiers and others loose their lives, by a carelesse demeanour, some∣times ignorantly, some times wilful∣ly, sometimes for want of a Physiti∣an, and Chyrurgeon, sometimes neglecting the means when it may
be had, for the prevention thereof, I do here make bold to present unto your view some Defensives and Re∣medies, for all that desire Health. In the absence of a Learned Physi∣tian and Chyrurgion, these easie Medicines may both cure and pre∣serve health; as the learned saith, the Physitians duty consisteth, in two principall points, First, To preserve health. Secondly, To cure the sick, which I have and will indeavour to doe, according to that Tallent that Almighty God hath bestowed upon me, and rest your obedient Servant To Command, in all sub∣mission and diligence. RICHARD ELKES.
The Directions of an old Souldier in Ireland about forty years since, which became a Phy∣sitian there. AS I travelled through the Countie of Clare, I heard of an excellent Physitian which had accomplished manie rare cures, but especially the Bloo∣dy Flux. After some time spent I found the man, and conferred with him touching his Art, which he seemed willing to im∣part, requesting the like of me, and said a∣bout fortie years before that time, he came out of England a Souldier into that Coun∣try, which was in Queen Elizabeths daies; before a month was expired the Bloodie Flux seized upon him, and as he suppofed it came by eating of fresh meat, fresh fish, lying upon the ground being hot, and such like; he remembred some directions that
was given to him before he came out of England, That when you eate, give over with an appetite, drinke no more but to quench thirst, if you drink when you are hot, march after it, or stirre your body, when you rest at your fires sit not upon the cold ground, but upon wood, straw, or such like; put off your wet cloathes, and especi∣ally your Stockings and dry them, &c. And carrie in your Knap-sacke a peece of steele to heat red hot, and quench it in your beer, water or milke, and as you tra∣vel gather the leaves and bark of the Oake, and the leaves of the black-Thorn, a bagge of Salt and Oatmeale, that if the Flux should take you, you might helpe your selfe. So this old Souldier remembred his directions, and observed it diligently, when he came to their fires, to dry his cloathes, and sit upon wood, or such like, and he cast his peece of steele into the fire to warme his drink, and when they had fish or flesh boiled, he would cast into the boiler, a handfull of Oaken leaves, or bark of the Oak, or a handful of leaves of Black-Thorn, Salt and Oatmeale; and grated into his
beer some of the Oake bark; this being observed, cured himselfe, and many of his fellow Souldiers. The Wars being end∣ed, he became a Physitian, and gained both monie and credit, by curing the Flux, and some other infirmities. Thus may any Souldier observe and do for their healths in England, Ireland, and Scotland, if need require. Also the Souldi∣ers may provide in their Knap-sacks three sorts of Earth, that is Terra Lemnia, it is called in the Apothecaries shops, Terra Sigillata, Bolarmonicke, and Chalke; this Terra Lemnia commeth out of the Island of Lemnos in the Turkes Dominion, the quantity of a Bullet swallowed whole or beaten topowder, and taken in Broth or other liquor fasting, it cureth the Flux, and preserveth from the Pestilence; the best Bolarmonick commeth out of Spaine, and may be taken fasting in like quantity, or in some broth, the quantity of two Bullets to cure a Flux; the common Chalke which we have in England may be beaten to pow∣der and boiled in milke or broth, and ta∣ken fasting it cureth a Flux, if it be often
taken the quantity of a spoonfull twice in the day. Thus much of medicines with lit∣tle cost. 2 To proceed to the cure of the Flux, metho∣dically according to Art. YOu must consider what kinds of Flux the parties are grieved with, and the com∣plexion that doth predominate; first, whether it be the Flux Diarrhea, Lienteria, or Dy∣senteria, if it be Dysenteria which is most dangerous, I have read of foure kinds, but it requires a long discourse concerning al the sorts, but I omit that, because the cure differ eth but little, only this, if you find the exhul∣ceration to be in the upper & smal guts, you must minister medicines at the mouth, but if it be at the bigger or lower bowells, you must cast in glisters often, if the party be without a Feavour, give him milke newly milked, wherein a gad of steele hath been quenched, you may make Suppings or Broth with Quinces, Knot-grasse, Plan∣tain-leaves, Willow-leaves, Cumfrey∣roots, and such like, you may make Rice-Milke, or boile white Starch in Milke, eate no flesh but Partridges, Culvers, or
Birds of the mountaine, Goates and Hares flesh may be permitted; a good diet wel ob∣served, the cure is halfe accomplished. If strength doe permit, you may purge down the vicious humors with two drams of Rubarb, infused in halfe a pint of white wine, with Currans and sweet Fennell seeds, and drink it fasting to purge the vi∣cious humors, after purging, take a dram of Diascordium, thus may you purge every other day; for in a week after this, make a drink with running water of two quarts, put seeds of Sorrell, Pumgranat rindes, Knot-grasse, Cumfery roots, Bryer roots, Plantain leaves, Cinamon, Bolarmonicke, Dragons blood, and Sugar; drinke this as an ordinary drinke: Likewise you may make a drink with red wine, Cinamon, Su∣gar, Knotgrasse, and Cumfery roots to drink three times a day four spoonfuls at a time. 2 To make a Glister glutinous. REc: three pints of water, quench steel in it, untill one third part be wasted then boile in it Cumfery roots, Knotgrasse, Bryer leaves, red Rose leaves, and Plantain leaves, of each a little handfull of Acatia,
hypocischidis, ana. ℈ij. Bolarmonack; San∣guis Dragonis: ana. ℈j. the juyce of Quinces ʒj. Goates Tallow ℥j. if it may be had, and yolkes of three eggs, commixe this to∣gether and make a Glister, administer this as often as you shall see cause. 3 For an Implaister. REc. of the Oyles of Quinces, Roses Mastick ana. ℥j. of the meale of Fenny Greeke and Barley ʒj. Sanguis Dragonis Balaustia ʒss. Bolatmonicke ℥j. acalia ʒij. as much wax and Rosen as is sufficient, and make a Plaister, spread it upon leather, and apply it to the Navill over the neather Ventrick where the party complaineth most. Much more might be spoken but I leave it to the ingenious practitioner, and wish all men to be temperate, for intempe∣rance is the cause of this and many other incurable diseases. 4 Of the Pestilence or Plague. THe Pestilence is a Fevor in the highest degree, which may bee taken severall waies, by living amongst sick people, by a corrupted Aire, by rotten and corrupt Dy∣et, which filleth the body with rotten
and corrupt humors, but some bodies are stronger then others, some are more tempe∣rate in eating and drinking then others, in them rotten humours abound not, and, the infection fasteneth not so strongly upon them, but nature expelleth it, this is the reason that some people never catcheth the Pestilence, though all be in a roome toge∣ther, sometimes the infection happeneth, by living with the sick, and lodging in bed with them, drawing the breath that com∣meth from the sick party, if they approach near to them; as the office of the Lunges is to draw in fresh Aire to comfort the heart, instead thereof it drawes in a veno∣mous breath, which may be the destruction of the heart: the cause of a corrupted Aire, is by standing Ponds, or Marshes in the heat of Sumer, rotten Coleworts, rotten Roots, and fruits, & many people continuing in a close room, many dead Bodies unburied: which may happen in the time of War, dead Car∣rion and such like, immoderate heate of the Aire, and moisture in Summer time, thick Mists, especially about Autumn, that in a morning it may be smelt. The cause
of corrupt humors in the body, is by eating corrupt meates and drinks, as flesh long un∣salted, rotten fruits, Cole-worts, and rotten Cabbig, and roots: and corrupt water, or wine, or beer made with evill water, breeds rotten humors in the body, which I wish al men to have respect unto, and the best means to preserve their bodies from the Pestilence that is, is not to continue in a pe∣stilent Aire, make fires often, burne Rose∣mary, Sage, Juniper-wood and Berryes, Frankinsence, Myrrh, Pitch, and such like, what you eate let it be wholesome, glut∣tonizing doth corrupt the blood & produce dangerous diseases, as the Measles, the Pox which are the fore-runners of the Plague, alwaies eate with your meate sharp things, as Vineger, Vargis, Oringes, Lemons; let your pot-hearbs be Sage, Isope, Balme, Buglosse, and Burrage, drinke no wine but alay it with good water, eate Terra Lem∣nia or fine Bolarmonack as before is shew∣ed, carry in your Knap-sack a Box of Di∣ascordium, and Methridate, a handfull of Rue the root of Setwall, in shops Zedoary, and Elicampane roots, take either of these
it may preserve from the Infection, but a∣bove all, if you come into a house, or place that you doubt you have taken the Infecti∣on, go presently and dig a hole in the fresh earth, put in your mouth and nose, and breath into it a quarter of an hour, then re∣move from that place and dig another hole and do likewise, this you may do three or four times, and by Gods blessing the fresh earth will draw the venome from your heart, which I have proved also, if a man be in a sound, or choked in a roome, where a multitude of people are, it will as it were fetch life againe. Further if you go into a roome which is infected, hold a turffe of fresh earth to your mouth and nostrills, it will preserve you from the contagion, as I have proved: you must avoid Bathing, Venus, and violent ex∣ercise, which openeth the Pores, then the venomous Aire will have no entrance into he body to destroy it: to be Costive is hurtfull, for prevention thereof you may ive a soft Glister or Purge, with iludie Rufi, also it is good for young peo∣ple to be let blood, but remember to use
a good dyed after it, and keep in untill the blood be settled again: and avoid all per∣turbations of the minde, as wrath, melan∣cholly, and such like: Many more reme¦dies might be showed, which for brevity I omit; only this antidote you may cause to be made at any Apothecaries to carry in your Knap-sack, and for the Country man to keep in his house, to use if occasion be; Rec: of Saffron ʒss. of Alloes Epaticke of Mirrh ʒij. Mastick ℈i. Bolearmonacke ʒj. Ter∣ra Lemnia ʒij. harts-horne burnt ʒj ss. the bone of the Harts-heart, red Corrall ana. ℈j. Walnuts in number 20. Figs 13. Bay salt ʒj. of Rue a little handfull, Roots of Scabi∣us Aristolochia Rotunda ʒij. Tormentil and Pimper-nell, ana. ʒv. Bitany ʒj. Zedoary ʒj Seeds of Sorrell, and Seeds of Purslain, ana. ʒss. and make all these into an Electuary with clarified hony, or with Syrrup of Gillyflowers, and Marygolds, take every morning upon the poynt of a knife, the quantity of a Nut, it wil preserve from the infection, in like manner you may take it at any time when you come among infect¦ed persons: thus farre I have shewed you
how the Pestilence happeneth, and how to prevent it; Now I will shew you brief∣ly the simptomes and signes of it, and pro∣ceed to the cure. When the wind is often in the South and West, the Aire much al∣tered, specially in Autumn, many pimples rising: the Measles and Pox in divers places increasing, are the signes of the Pestilence ensuing: the simptomes are, the extreame parts of the sick person wil be cold, and the inward parts very hot; heavinesse, lazy and sleepy with a great pain in the head; some∣times sadnesse, sometimes raving, vomit∣ing, purging, losse of appetite, great thirst, the Pulse frequent low and deep, the tongue red, at first growing black; the Urine thick and troubled, but sometimes like the U∣rine of a healthy man, (therefore I wish you to observe other signes) most specially if there be any risings behind the eares, armepits, or groine, these are cheifly to be observed: And now I proceed to the cure. 5 The Cure of the Plague. IF you come to the sicke party, the first or second day of falling sicke, the common use hath been to open a veine in
that fide that the Botch appeareth, or that side he complaineth of: for if you let blood in the contrary side, you draw venome over the heart, and destroy the body, also if the greife be above the shoulders, cut the Cefallick veine, if below the shoulders, cut Basilica, so if it be below the neather Ven∣trick, cut the vein in the Ham, or the Anckle; but the practice of some is not to bleed, you may apply cupping-glasses: if the Pe∣stilence should seize upon a man at dinner, or Supper, give him a vomit: If it hap∣pen other times, you may give the party of the Antedote before written, the quantity of a Nut in some Scabius water, and co∣ver him very warm to sweat an hour, and cool him gentlely, it will both cure and de∣fend him from it: or you may give this Medicine following: Rec: Methridatum ℈j. Theriaca Londinensis ℈ij. Bolearmonack pre∣pared ℈jss. waters of Buglosse and Scabius as much as is sufficient to make it into an Electuary, give to the sick the quantity of a dram, and lay him in a warme bed, and cover him with clothes that he may sweat four hours, then let him be cooled gentle∣ly
by taking off the clothes one after ano∣ther; this being done, use the same the second day, and by Gods blessing it may drive the venome from the heart, unto the extreame parts, which I wil direct for the cure thereof hereafter: you may also take Electuarium de ovo the quantity of a dram or a scruple, according to the strength of the party, it is commended a∣bove all by some Physitians; but Bolar∣monick, or Terra lemnia, I have proved them the quantity of a nut given in posset-drink or in surrup of Gilloflowers, and 3 grains of Saffron powder, this will drive out the venome into Botches like Carbunckles when other Medicines be wanting, so the party hath recovered, it is also good to drive out the Measels and the Pox, remem∣ber in the time of sweating, you must not let the party sleep, nor in six houres after; you may give him Julips, made with waters of Scabius, Sorrel, Endive and Succo∣ry, surrup of Gilloflowers, of Wood sorrel, Le∣mons, Violets, and such like, for his meate, you may boile a Chick, with Sorrel, the juice of Lemons, and Burrage-flowers, or
Marigold-flowers are very good; also you may dissolve a little Saffron in his Vine∣ger to dip his meat in it, but let the Saf∣fron be very finely poudered, or tyed in a linnen cloth (as Saffron is a Cordinal, so if much be taken it hurteth) Many other cordial things may be used, wood of Aloes and Sanders grated into his beere is com∣mended. 6 The Cure of the swelling or Plague sore in the extream parts. IF the swelling wil not break it selfe, you may apply that plaister called Diachylon compositum, or Galbanum spread upon Lea∣ther, and applyed to the place: or an Onyon cut off the top, and dig out the middle, and put in London Treacle, and three or foure leaves of Rue, put this to the fire and roste it, when it is wel rosted, lay it warm to the Botch or swelling, if it break put in a Tent, and let it run what it wil, when the corruption is out; Diachilon wil heale it up againe, also you may use this; Rec. great Raisons halfe an ounce, Bay salt ʒj. Figs 6 Oyle of Cammomell, and hony, as much as wil make this into a Playster, ma∣hearbs,
ny other medicines might be set downe, but these wil easily be gotten; if you de∣sire further, repaire to your learned Phy∣sitian. 7 Of the Calenture and spotted Feavor. THese Feavors are very near unto the Pestilence, which doth often happen unto Mariners at sea, by feeding upon salt Beefe, Bacon, salt Fish, and evil water, pulse and worm-eaten bread, which cannot be a∣voided at Sea, this Feavor is known, by feel∣ing the outward mēbers cold, & those with∣in, as the Pestilence, sleepy, and heavie, the pulse very low: This Feavor bringeth death in 24 hours many times if not speedily pre∣vented: furthermore, you shal perceive the Patient as it were distracted, ready to leap into the Sea, sometimes vomit, the tongue white underneath, and black at the top, cold sweats, cramps, with many other ac∣cidents, like as in the pestilence: For the cure thereof, if the patient be able to en∣dure Flebothomy, open a vein in the arme, if he complain most in the head, cut the veine called Cephalia, if at the chest, the Basilicke vein, remove the sick into a fresh
room, make a fire in it first, then put out the fire, and refresh the room with sweet wa∣ters, or what else may be had at the Sea; if at Land cast Rushes in the Roome, and green Boughs; if the Aire be hot, misty, and moist, shut the windowes, if clear and pure let in the fresh Aire to comfort the heart: At the first you must not let the sick sleep overmuch, that will draw the venome to the heart, until it is defended by giving cordials, such as is prescribed be∣fore in the chapter of the Pestilence, his dy∣et must be Broth, made with cordial Flow∣ers, and a little Saffron tyed in a cloth, after the third day you may give crums of Bread in his Broth; for the cure, if time wil permit, give him a Glister before letting blood, in this manner make your decocti∣on with cordial flowers, after boyling dis∣solve into it Diascordium, surrup of Violets, Roses and such like; after Phlebothomy give him a cordial, and lay the party to sweat, as is taught in the chapter of the Plague: After sweating and Phlebothomy, the sick may drinke Barly-water, made with coole
Raisons of the Sun stoned, and a scruple of Saffron tyed in a cloath and boyled in the water, Lemons boyld in Milke both rinde and pulpe, untill it is turned to Curds, and Whay, drinke the Whay continually as you thirst, I have proved it of good effect. And when he hath recovered a little strength, and the venome expelled from the heart, let him be purged with this Potion; Rec. a quart of running water, or more, a handfull of cordiall Flowers, a little Cardus Benedictus, a root of Tormen∣til, a legg of a Poultry, these being boyled, take a pint of that liquor or thereabout, dissolve in it of Diaphenicon, ʒj. Diacatholicon ʒj ss. electuary of Roses ʒij. give the sick this to purge the dregs of the Feaver, as you shal see cause, adding some cordial surrups after purging, made with Diascordium, Amber Beaser, surrup of Violets, and surrup of Lemmons, waters of Buglosse, Burrage and Wood Sorrell to drinke at night, so by the blessing of God the sick may reco∣ver health againe.
8. Of the Scurvie. THere is the sea Scurvie, and the land Scurvie, both of these are a putrifa∣ction of bloud which commeth by the neglect of exercising the body, and eating rotten meates, and corrupt drinke, or wa∣ter, as is shewed in the former Chapter; the obstructions of the Spleen doe increase this evill, and the Morphew and blacke soult, the simptoms are these; the gums swell, the teeth loose, the leggs wil swell, and have spots about the anckles, some will have many tawny spots about their breast, other some have complained with a great paine in the head, with a sore∣nesse all over the head; I cured a Tanner that laboured with this evill seven yeares, chiefly in the Springe, and at the fall of the Leafe; by his owne relation in his youth he was laborious, but after he had gained a competent estate he took ease, and eate much, but of grosse meat; his drinke was made of standing water, which as he supposed made the strongest drinke, his bread was made with Barme, or Yeast, but in his youth he eate leavened bread,
so from this and such other of the same I have observed, that evill water, and un∣leavened bread doe breed this and many other dangerous diseases, for drink made of such water, the venome doth purge by the Barme, and is in it, of which bread is made, and he that eateth such bread (e∣specially in Cities and Townes) may have the Scurvie, and Feavers of all sorts, for if there be any venome in the drinke it will be in the Barme; therefore I wish all men to eate leavened bread if he can have it, and drinke made of cleare water ten dayes old at least. 9 For the Cure of the Scurvie. THe first intention is to keep a good dyet, and exercise the body mode∣rately, his meat must be meates of the best nourishment, as Birds of the Field, Mutton, or Veale, Rabbets, and Chickings, broath made with Agremony, Avins, Scabius, or Bitony, and such like; all salt meats must be avoyded, the first three dayes let him take a draught of Oximell in the morning fasting, and last at night, which is to be made in this man∣ner;
Rec. a quart of cleane water, a root or two of Fennell, three or foure roots of Parsley, a sprigge of Rosemary, a little Fumotery if it be to be had, Fennell-seeds, and Parsley-seeds of each a Dram, three spoonfuls of the best Honey, let this boyle gently, and scum it, and in the boyling put into it two spoonfuls of Vinegar, after this hath been taken three dayes, take of Rubarbe 3ij. of Sena 3j. 40 Raysons of the Sun stoned, a race of Ginger sliced, sweet Fennel-seeds, Annis-seeds of each 3j. let these be infused all night upon Coales, the next morning take halfe a pint of this and dissolve in it a Dram of Diacatholicon, take this three mornings, after this let Bloud if need require; the body being thus pre∣pared, make your Scurvye-grasse Drinke in this manner: Take a peck of Scurvie∣grasse, and a gallon of Water-cresses, and a gallon of Brook-limes, one handfull of Egremony, one handfull of Tamariske, or the buds or barke of the Ashe, Raysons of the Sunne stoned a pound, of Licorish halfe a pound, concused Fennell roots pee∣thed, and Parsley roots, Annis-seeds, and
Fennell seeds a quarter of a pound, put all these into a thin Bagge, in five gallons of Beere or Ale, put the Bagge into the Barrell when the drinke is ready to be tunned, with a stone in the bottome of the Bagge, let it hang within three or foure inches of the bottome of the Barrell, let this drinke worke with these ingredients in it, then stop it close, and at eight or ten dayes drinke of it and none other (except a little at meate) untill the Party be well; most especially in the morning drinke a pint, and exercise untill the party is ready to sweat, and keep him warme after it; the spoon-wort is good for the land Scur∣vie, used as before is directed, and taken forty dayes together. 10 Of the Flux called, the Plague in the Guts. THis Flux in England which is called by many, the Plague in the Guts, is con∣tagious as I conceive, a venomous matter cleaving to the neather or great Guts for the most part, some seeme to have no Feavor, other some have a Feavour, and complaine most in the middle Ventricle;
in briefe, I suppose the Cure is accom∣plished by giving Cordials, and sweating, and by Glisters, if the Flux appeare to be bloudy, or like scraping of Guts; with∣out a Feavour, you may proceed as I dire∣cted before in the Chapter of the Flux Dysenteria; at the first comming of this Flux, take a quart of Milke, boyle in it a handfull of Marigold Flowers, Sage, and Rosemary, Bryer leaves, and knot grasse, this being boyled take one pint of this, put into it surrup of Slowes, surrup of Gil∣ly-flowers, anna ℥j. the yolke of an egge, and a dram of Diascordium, give this bloud warme, the next day if strength per∣mit give the other pint of Milke in a Gli∣ster as before is directed, but after the first Glister hath done working, give a Cordiall thus prepared, take of the water fo Burrage, Scabius, and Marygolds, ana. ℥j. Diascordium ℥j. Confectio Alcermis ℈j. Mi∣thridates ℈ ss. surrup of Violets, surrup of Gillo-flowers, ana. ℥j. commix all this to∣gether and drinke it warme, presently af∣ter let the sick be covered warme, to sweat two houres if strength permit; in sweat∣ing,
drinke Posset wherein Saffron is boy∣led, this being used three times may cure it, for it hath recovered many of the a∣bove named Flux, keeping a good dyet without flesh; thus briefly of the Pesti∣lence, which destroyeth many, if meanes be not used to prevent it in time. 11. The cure of the Itch, and Lice. FOr cure thereof Methodically, is first to observe a good dyet (that is to say) you must eate and drinke such things that breed good bloud, and to avoyd all things that breeds evill and rotten humours, as you may see in the Chapters before going; then purge the body with pilule de fumo terrae, or pilule Inde haly, which you may have at any Apothecaries, the second day let bloud in the Basiliske veine, then make this water following; Rec. A gal∣lon of running water, or the water that Smiths use, and quench in it a gad of steele red hot untill halfe the water be wasted, then boyle in it a quarter of a pound of leafe Tobacco, of Dock roots, Willow leaves, and leaves of the Birch, of each a handfull, of Brimstone tyed in a
Cloath 3 ij. wash the sore places twice in the day and you shall be cured (except the Itch be incorrigible, which with long continuance doth bring it to passe; also if you make so much of this water as will wet your shirt twice in the weeke, the shirt being cleane washed and dryed, then dipped in this liquor, and dry it againe, it will both kill the Itch, and destroy the Lyce that are about you) I have read a story of some Souldiers that would boyle Saffron, Pepper, and Graines in running water, and in that liquor dip their shirts twice in the weeke, it will make the shirt yellow, but it destroyed Lice and Itch; o∣thers of the inferiour sort would boyle Staveacre and Tobacco in water and dip their shirts in it, and cure both Itch and Lice. Many more Medicines for the Itch have been used, as Brimstone pounded to Powder with Ginger, and tyed in a cloath, and infused in fallet Oyle nine dayes in the Sun, annoynt the sore places with this oyle and be whole (but this will smell) also Mercury sublimate ℥ ss. bea∣ten to powder, and put into a quart of
Running water three or four dayes, then with a little cloth wet the sore places, it may cure the Itch, but it is dangerous, and must not be used unto raw places, for it may poyson the blood, therefore I wish that none would use it without the advice of his Chyrurgion. So I come to speake of the incorrigible Scab called by some the Naopolitan disease, which happen, and hardly found out, the first cure (as Vigo saith) of this foul disease is called Morbus Gallicus, I wil speak little of the cure in this place, because divers have written largely of it, and the maledy be∣ing Chronicled it wil require a long time to perfect, I will onely give you some cau∣tions to preserve from the infection; if you be infected before it be confirmed, to expell it: The infection of this evill com∣meth cheifly 4 wayes, but seldome or ne∣ver by eating and drinking, with the dis∣eased as many think, the most dangerous way of catching this Maledie is by a clean body carnally acting with an unclean bo∣dy; the next way of taking it is, man and man, or woman and woman lying in
bed, the one cleane the other uncleane, the heate of their bodies do as it were par∣ticipate of each others Itch, Scab, Pox or Pestilence; The third way of taking this Infection, is by approaching so near the dis∣eased party, as to draw in its corrupt breath, as in the Pestilence; The fourth way is, Infants sucking an unclean woman. Signes how to know this disease, if it be newly taken not so easily discerned, if of long continuance, the face of some will be wan and pale, the eies hollow, and blew some scabs about the nose, sometime Vl∣cers, sometimes no Ulcers, a full paine in the head, great paines in the joynts, espe∣cially in the night, the Shin bones conti∣nually pained, the Vvula and neck swoln, the Spade bone and sinewes in pain, Lazy, and Lumpish, Gonorrhea swelling, in the Arme-pits little Knobs or Ulcers, about the privy Members, and Fundament, some∣times Scabs over all the body, with many more.
12 For cure hereof newly taken, and not confirmed. FIrst of all you shal observe a good dy∣et, that is, eate Veale, Mutton, rosted Birds of the Mountaine, Hens, Chickings, Partridges, or Phesants, and such like: All salt meat is hurtful, al fish, but Cra-fish; Garlicke Onyons, Salt, Pepper, Swines∣flesh, and White-meates, and Venus is for∣bidden; sometimes the Patient may use Burrage, Lettis, White beets in Rice broth, when he is wearyed with meat dry rosted; The second intention is to di∣gest the corrupt Matter with surrup of Vi∣olets, surrup of Fumotary, of each halfe an ounce, water of Endiffe, and Maiden haire, a spoonfull of Vineger, let this be taken over night, the next morning give him this potion, take a handfull of Bur∣rage Flowers, a handfull of Mary-goldes: 40 Raysons of the sun stoned, boile them in a quart of water, to a pinte, then take a dram of Rubarh, and insuse in it all night, in that pinte of liquor, dissolve of Diacatholicon and Diaphenicon, of each half an ounce, in the same liquor, and take it
fasting, and fast two houres, in the interim provide some thin Broth to drinke as he Purgeth, after purging give some Cordi∣al surrups with Diascordium; the second day Purge againe, the fourth day Sweat 4 hours, the sixth day Sweat 4 houres, and the eight day sweat 4 houres; in this in∣terim provide this drink, take of Lignum vite li. j. of the Barke of the said wood li. . ss. Raisons of the Sun stoned, li. j. Chinaroot ℥ij. Sassafras ℥vj. Salsaperilla ℥ix. Cardus Benedictus, and Maiden-haire Mj. of Liquo∣rish, and Annyseeds li. ss. of each, and 16 pintes of water, put all these in a pot ve∣ry close stopped, and let it stand upon the coales 24 hours to infuse, then let it boyl 24 houres gently; in the boiling, put in of white wine & quart, scum it, and save the scum, to apply to the scabby or soate pla∣ces, strein this liquor and keep it in a ves∣sel, close stopped, drink this drink and no other 40 dayes (except at meate) a little small drink may be permitted, thus havel cured many, at the first, before the evil be confirmed; also this drink wil cure al disea∣ses of the Liver, as the Dropsie, &c. if right∣ly
used: Further, if the party be Scabby, or Itchy, make this Bath following, Rec. of the Roots and Leaves of Docks, Chick∣weed, Fumoterry, of each a little bundle, Lentils, and Lupins, four handfuls bruised, Elicampane Roots, Walwort, or the roots instead of Walwort, Elder, li. ij. Black heli∣bor ℥iiij. Kneeholme li. ij. Brimstone li. ij. boyle all these in so much water as will bath a man, when the third part is wast∣ed, then let the diseased Bath and sweat in it, two or three times in a week, after Bathing, let the patient go to bed, and keepe warme, and drinke the aforesaid drinke, this hath cured many but if the Scab be more inveterate, use this unction, Rec. of Quick-silver killed with fasting spit∣tle, ℥j, in areadinesse, then take the Oyle of Bayes, and Masticke of each an ounce, and of the liquor of the Bath aforenamed a pinte, of fresh Butter, and Swines grease, ℥iij. of each; seeth all these until the li∣quor be wasted, then adde clear Turpen∣tine ℥j. of Storax liquidam ℥ss. White wax ℥iiij. Rock Allum burnt ℥j. Litarge of gold and silver ℥ij. of each, of Myrrh and Fran∣kensence,
ana. ℥ij. juyce of Lemons, ℥iij. com∣mixe all these together with the Quick-sil∣ver quenched, and annoynt the Scabs, this will cure; if you annoynt and sweat untill the Flux be moved, but if this evill be con∣firmed and ulcerated it will require a long∣er discourse, which you may have hereaf∣ter if time permit; thus briefly I thought good to direct the Souldier, and others to prevent the danger thereof. I have read that Charles the eighth, King of France, comming to Rome, and Naples with his Souldiers, they brought this Disease into France, the Spaniard instead of Silver and Gold, brought it from the Indies, but I hope better of our Country-men, and rest, &c. 13. Of the Flux of bloud in wounds, and the remedies thereof. IF the Flux be little it is the easier re∣strained, but if it flow out abundantly, there must be speedy remedy, for bloud is the treasure of life, sometimes it chanceth in the inward parts, sometimes outwardly, inwardly by violent moving, and such like may breake a veine, outwardly by
Swords, Guns, Pikes, and other Instru∣ments; also it doth happen by venomous medicines applyed to wounds, corrupting the veines, which cause a Flux; if the Flux happen in the inward parts, as in the Li∣ver, Lungs, Reines, and Bladder, it is of hard curation, yet it must not be neg∣lected, for which purpose all stipticke and conglutinating things must be used, as Cum∣frey roots, knot-grasse roots, Gum Draga∣gante, Terra Lemnia, Bolearmoniacke, Rice, Quinces, Lentils, Pomgranats, and such other cooling drinkes are best, and broths made with the above-named sim∣ples may help forward the cure, but this Medicine following I have proved; Rec. Pomgranat Rindes ℥j. Pulveris. Bolearmonack ℥ ss. Terra Sigillata ℥ij. Knot-grasse and Cumphrey roots pounded, and the juyce pres∣sed out, Gum Dragagante ℥ ss. intused in that juyce, make the said Powders into Pills, like little Bullets with this infusion, and give the sick six of them in a day, three fasting in the morning, and three of them last at night, continuing this ten dayes, and it will make you whole.
14: The Flux in outward wounds ARe chiefly two, if it flow from the veines it is grosse and red, if it come from the Arteries, it is of a purple colour, and commeth out by heaps, both these must be speedily cured, if the Orifice be large; to cure this, take of Bolearmoniack, Terra Sigillata, ana. ℥j. Dragons bloud, ℥ss. Alloes, and Frankensence, ana. ℥ij. Hares haire cut in peeces, of Spunge of the Sea dryed and burnt, Dragagant brayed, mingle all these together and binde it to the wound, and let it rest to the third day; so mans bloud dryed into powder will stench the bloud, the wound being filled: also, if need require you may binde the extreame parts, or open a veine in the contrary part, as if the right Arme be wounded, o∣pen a veine in the left; you may cautorize the place, wet Lint in Vinegar, or a cloath wet in Vinegar and put about the Codds, hath been used with good effect; besides all these, Gerrard in his Herball speakes of an Herbe called Clownes all-heale, that was found out by a Mower which wounded himselfe with his Sithe dangerously, he
not having any Chirurgion neare, by accident gathered an Herbe which stenched the bloud, and after made a Medicine of the same Herbe and healed the wound; this being knowne to Gerrard he called it Clownes all heale, this I have proved. Also it hapned that I was comming from Winche∣ster, I met with a Souldier comming from a Fight neare Ailsford, which was woun∣ded largely in the neck, so that the Flux of bloud could not be stopped, I remem∣bered an Herbe shewed me by an old Mid∣wife that groweth in shadowed places, I searched under an Apple-tree and found the same Herbe, and gathered a handfull, and rubbed it in my hands, and filled the wound there-with, it stenched immediat∣y, after I made a Salve of the same Herbe, and cured the wound in 14. dayes, only I nnoynted it with Oyle of Hipericon the second dressing, and gave directions to him to doe likewise; the same Souldier ame to my dwelling in 14. dayes perfect∣y whole, and gave me thankes; this I have often proved since that time, the name of the Herbe is, Archangel, or dead Nettle,
which carryeth a purple Flower, this I made triall of when all other Medicines could not be gotten; I write this because any Country people and Souldiers may finde this Herbe when Chirurgions be not present, and other Medicines farre di∣stant, unlesse the Souldier carry them in his Knap-sack, and the Country-man keepe them in his Closet untill time of need. 15 Of Wounds. VVOunds in generall are according to the severall Members, as wounds in the head, face, neck, shoulders, and armes, &c. but Wounds chiefly to be observed are two, that is, Mortall, and Curable; also wounds curable may be made mortall by ignorant Chirurgions, therefore I wish all men to hasten to an able Chirurgion. As wounds that are mortall is in the Braine, the Heart, the stomack, the small Guts and the Bladder, neverthelesse I wish all Chi∣rurgions not to neglect the meanes, for I have seen Gods mercy wonderfully shewn in giving strength to Nature when the judgement of man faileth; As touching wounds superficiall or deep after the Flux
of bloud is stopped as before directed, and that your Chirurgion cannot be had; first consider whether there be any dislocation of bones or fractures, or whether any veines, Arteries, sinews, ligaments, tendons, or Muscels be wounded, if you finde any of these you must proceed to the Cure very carefully, or else you may make that wound gangred or rotten, which at the first might be cured; this I have seen by ignorant people, applying hot Medicines to hot and chollerick wounds, and cold Medicines to the cold causes, as Hemlock, Henbane, and such others, which I omit, and come to show you whether there be any Dislocation or Fracture; First, com∣pare one member with the other, as if the shoulder be depressed it will be lower then the other, neither can the party lift it to his head; if the elbow be out of joynt, the hand cannot be turned about, neither wil it be like the other, for the reducing of such a member, hasten to your Bone-set∣ter, but in his absence if such a thing hap∣pen in the fingers, toes, or the elbow, two men grasping the member very fast, a third
man directing them to pull in the joynt, and the said third man with his right thumbe upon the place, the left hand turning the member into his right place, which the Patient will soone finde ease, if rightly performed. Further, if the shoul∣der be out, let that man put his arme over the round of a Ladder, or over the head of another man that is higher then he that is dislocated, the Chirurgion, or he that setteth the joynt put both his thumbs to the place, a second minister or two holding fast the lame Arme over the Lad∣der, or over the same mans head, so the sick may be above the ground, and the weight of his body with this help may re∣duce this joynt into his proper place; ma∣ny other wayes there are, but I omit, and come to Fractures, which must be very di∣ligently placed, if in the thigh, or above the elbow where is but one bone it may be broke short off, so the member wil be shor∣ter then the other; this must be drawn in∣to his proper place as before is shewed, if riven or shaken into splinters, they must be all placed and bound up in some frame or
spleets, past-board, or Iron made accor∣ding to the form of the member, if wound∣ed through the flesh, there must be a place left for the dressing of the wound, and an implaister made with Bolearmonick, Terra sigilata, Gum Dragagante, Dragons bloud, whites of Eggs laid upon Flax, and ap∣plyed round the member grieved, put in∣to the wound Oyle of Elder, and Oyle of Hipericon, also make Tents with Lint rowled in the same Oyle (but be sure make them so, that you leave none of them behind when you take them out of the wound;) above all be sure that no dust nor haires fall in the wound, nor Lint left be∣hind that commeth off the Tent; also there must be care had of wounds of dry bodies, and of moyst bodies, as tender bo∣dies are more moyst then those that la∣bour and travell, if you finde them to be moyst bodies, you may use drying powders, as Bolearmoniack, if proud flesh, or dead flesh, then use burnt Allum, or Precipitat, or you may make this powder: Rec. Sarco∣colle, ℥j. Oliban. ℥ij. Aloes Epatick ℥iij. Ma∣stick ℥j. Frankinsence, ℥ij. Dragons bloud ℥j ss.
Balaustia ℥j make this into fine powder and it will incarn wounds, if you finde the wound to be dry you may use the said oyle of Hipericon, oyle of Lillies; if the sinews be wounded, oyle of Elder is very good. To preserve a wound from Imposthumati∣on, Rec: of Mallowes, Beets, Violet leaves, and Landebeef, of each a handful, boyle them until they be soft, then put in oyle of Roses, and white Lillies, make a Cata∣plasme or Poultis, with Roses, Rye meale or Barley meale, adding some Hoglard, apply this warme until the Impostume be removed, for no wound can heale until the Impostume be cured. Likewise a Member may Cancern if not speedily removed, that Member must be taken off; to prevent this you must ob∣serve, whether the Member about the wound, do alter in coulour, glissen and of a blew colour, the member doth not quite rot, but the spirits being hindred from comming to that place, it doth mor∣tifie; which commeth by applying veno∣mous Medicines, sometimes by over∣tying of a member when a bone is broken;
sometimes by applying things that are cold, stipticke, and sharpe, these and such others may cause Cancerna, now to preserve the Member wounded from can∣cerna; Rec. oyle of Roses, Umphacin, oyle of Mirtive ana: ℥iij. the juice of Plantaine and Nightshad, ana: ℥ij. ss. let them seeth all together until the juice be wasted, then put to white Wax ℥j. ss. Flower of Beanes, Lintiles, and Barley ana: ℥ij. ss. of all the Sanders pulverised ana: ℥j. ss. Bolarmenacke ℥j. graines and mirtiles a Dram, make this into a Plaister, with oyle of Elder, labour it in a morter into a plaister, besides all these, there happneth Feavors, Cramps, Convulsi∣ons, and many other by applying evil Me∣dicines to a wound which must be remo∣ved, before the cure wil be ended; if there be a Feavor, you must give cooling Glisters and purge with Potions following, make a decoction with Cordiall flowers, in a ciate ful of that decoction, dissolve of Diacatholicon of Diaprunis, ana: ℥ss. sur∣rup of Roses ℥ss. take this fasting as a poti∣on, if pained in the head, take Pilule cho∣chie or Pilule aure, and such like; if the
Crampe assaile the body, rub the mem∣ber with warm clothes, or oyle of Hedg∣hog; if a Convulsion, rub the pole and the member with oyle of Castoreum and Sage. These impediments being removed, I pro∣ceed with the Cure as followeth; If the wound be large or dangerous, let his dyet be good Broths, and meats of easie dige∣stion, as Birds of the Hils, Mutton, Veale, Chickins and Rabbits; he must avoid salt meates, Beefe, Poulse, Cabbig, and windy meates, as fruits, nor drink no inflaming drink: The next intention is to keep the body soluble, with potions, Pils, or Glist∣ers, then you must wash the wound with this lotion, take Plantain water, Buglosse, or Burrage water, odoriserous Wine, Pomgra∣net flowers, Plantain leaves, the flowers of St. Johns wort, boyle this together and wash the wound, then make Tents and roule them in oyle of Hipericon, and fill the hollow places with them, then make Plaisters to mundisie: Rec. of clear Tur∣pentine ℥ij. Hony of Roses ℥j. Smallege ℥j. let them boyle together a little time, adde thereto the yolke of an egge, Saffron, a
little Myrrh ℥ij. of Alloes ℥j. make this into a stiffe Plaister, with oyle of Ro∣ses, and flower of Barley, this wil mundifie and clear a wound in two daies, if not very foule; after the wound is clear, you may proceed again with healing Medicines; if not mundified, you may use Unguentum E∣giptiacum, or unguentum Basilicum; and for a healing-Plaister, the wound being mun∣dified take of Clownes all-heale, falilly, Archangell, ana: one handful, pound them, and boile it in Hoglard, then straine it, let it stand to be cold, take the top of it, poure away the bottome, and boile it with wax and Rosen, so much as is sufficient to make a Plaister, this, or one of these Hearbs made in a Salve, will heale a green wound, or you may have this Implaister made at any Apothecaries, Rec. Salet oyle ℥iiij. white Wax ℥j. Turpentine ℥ss. Greek Pitch, ℥j. Frankin∣sence, and Mastick ana: ℥j Saffron ℈j. mingle these and boile them upon a gentle fire, and make Plaisters: So I end for old Ul∣cers, you may mundifie the Soare with White wine, and Aquavitae, or with the Mun∣dificatives before written, as Egiptiacum,
or unguentum apostolorum, and finish the Cure with the above named Medicines. 16 To cure a Gun-shot. THe Chyrurgeons first intention must be to stop the Flux of blood, next to search diligently, whe∣ther the bullet do remain in the member wounded, or whether the bullet have carryed any thing before it into the wound, as Paper, cloath or such like if so, the next intention is, with a Terra-bellum or other In∣strument to take it out. Make this Digestive, Rec: Turpentine washed in Aquaviter ℥iv. Vitelorum o∣vorum number ij. oyle of Roses ℥ss. Precipitat twice calcined ʒj. Saffron ℈j. commix this and make a Plaister, after this you may wash the wound with Plantain water, red Rose water, with oyle of Roses and oyle of Elder, after mundific the wound with this: Rec: Venice Turpentine washed in Aquaviter ℥iij. oyle of Egges ℥j. or Yolkes of Egges number ij. Hony of Roses, and surrup of Roses, ana: ℥ij. the bran of Fetches, Frankinsence, Mastick of each ℥ss. cover your Tents, and make Plaisters, until the wound bee cleane, then you may proceed to end the cure with the forcnamed oyle of Hipericon, and healing Salves. 17 To cure Burning with Gun-Powder, or burn∣ing with fire and scalding. IF it happen that any part of the body be burned with Gunpowder or fire; take the Juyce of O∣nyons ℥iv. and common salt ℥ss. beat them well to∣gether,
and if the burn blistered, anoint it three or four times in a day, for three dayes, then you shall proceed as followeth: but if the skin be burnt, and made raw, you must cover it all over with the finest Lawn and, anoynt it with the Juice of Onyons, and Salt, letting the Lawn lye upon the wound, un∣till it is whole; but if deeply burned, use this fol∣lowing, Rec. the finest Hoglard li. iv. Linseed oyle li. ij. oyle of Roses li. ss. of Mallow-Leaves, Violet leaves, the Brood of Bees; Plantain leaves, Burnet, Peny-wort, Tulson, Live-ever ana: Mj. infuse these 6 dayes upon a gentle fire, adde thereto white Wax li: ss, white Niter ℥vj. also you may put to Shoo∣makers peece-greace, this being used will cure it, chipping off the Lawne, as it health: if there be Blisters you must not cut them, it wil be painefull: you may make part of this Medicine if you need not the whole Receipt; Also if the burn or scald be not much, you may pound Onyons, and a little Salt, or Leeks with a little Salt, so much as will cover the soare, and let it lye 24 houres, in the interim, take a handfull of House-Leek, and the inner bark of the Elder, bruise it and boyle it in a quart of Creame into an oyle, scum off the cleare oyle as it ariseth, keep it and anoynt the soare place twice or thrice in the day, and it wil be whole, this I have often pro∣ved: You may beate into the Cream the white of an Egge, if your eyes or eye-lids should be burned. Rec: Rose water ℥iij Womans Milke ℥ij. the oyle of whites of two Eggs, Sugar Candy halfe a quartern,
mingle these and make an oyntment and annoynt a∣bout the eye-lids, and about the eyes: or you may make this, Rec: oyle of Roses ℥vj. white Lead washed in Red Rose water ℥ij. white Wax, oyle of the Whites of four Egges, the Gum called Cam∣pher, make this into an Unguent, to take away the spots and scarres, take oyle of Egges, and oyle of Al∣monds, and wash the face it cleareth the skin. Courteous Reader, Seeing many people, as wel Soul∣diers as others, have neglected the means in time of danger to preserve their health, I thought good to show you briefly some easie medicines, which may be had most of them with little cost (other Medi∣cines may be made for you at the Apothecarys) to keep in your Closets, or Knap-sacks untill time of need to make use of them in the absence of your Phy∣sitian or Chyrurgion, which I wish you to hasten unto for advice. FINIS. A Table of the Weights used by Phy∣sitians, A Scruple. ℈ A Dram. ʒ An Ounce. ℥ A Pound. li. A Quarter. q. A Halfe: ss. A Handfull. M. Of every one. ana.
