F1589 R10780 12927439 95586
THE DIFFERENCES of the TIME, IN THREE DIALOGUES. The first, anent EPISCOPACY. The second, anent the Obligation of the COVENANTS against EPIS∣COPACY. The third, anent SEPARATION. Intended for the quieting the minds of people, and settling them in more Peace, and Unity. Psal. 122.6, 7, 8, 9. Pray for the peace of Je∣rusalem: they shall prosper that love thee. Peace be within thy walls, &c. Psal. 133.1. Behold how good, and how plea∣sant it is, for brethren to dwell together in unity. Mark. 3.24. If a kingdom be divided against it self, that kingdom cannot stand. Heb. 10.25. Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is. Opinionum varietas & opinantium unitas non sunt EDINBƲRGH, Printed by the Hei of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred MAJESTY, Anno Dom. 1679.
READER, SEPARATION, which is the Epidemical Disease of the Time, came to such a height the last Summer, 1678. that like a Flood, it al∣most carried all before it, in many places of the Land. These DIALOGUES were then written. The Author living a∣mong a People who were in hazard to be drawen away with the Spait of the Time, thought it his duty to fortifie them against the danger, by letting them see the sin, and unwarrantableness of these dividing Practices, which were now grown to be in fashion. And this, together with the Activity, and Concurrance of Magistrats in the Place, who were careful to suppress the beginnings of Schism in the Bud; was found not to be in vain; for through the blessing of God that People hath hitherto
stood their ground: for which, they in∣deed deserve their commendation: though at first, sundry of them out of Novelty, went to field meetings, yet presently they returned to the ways of Peace, and Or∣der, a very few excepted. When these DIALOGUES were first written, there was no design of making them pub∣lick, but a Manuscript coming to the hands of some of Note, both for Autho∣rity and Learning; It was their Judge∣ment they should see the Light; and that through the blessing of God, some might receive good by them: yet probably they might had lurked, notwithstanding of this: But now seing it's too evident that these Schismatical Principles, and Practices are not laid aside, but endeavours made to car∣ry them on vigorously as before: It is there∣fore not only fit, but a matter of conscience, to discover to any who is not unwilling to re∣ceive information, how unwarrantable, and sinful such courses are; If Scripture, and the Doctrine, even of Presbyterian Divines (not to speak of others) shall be impartially consulted, and admitted to be Judge. It may indeed seem strange to see,
not only great numbers of the common mul∣titude, but sundry of better Note, out of zeal to Presbytrie, led away with the hu∣mour of Separation, and drinking in the principles of the Brounists: Notwithstand∣ing, these ills have been zealously testifi∣ed against, and disputed down, even by Non-conformists, and Presbyterians of for∣mer, and later times. Only the third DIALOGUE, which is anent Sepa∣ration, was at first intended: But seing people make Episcopacy, and the Cove∣nant the great grounds of their Separating. It was conceived, that to speak of Separati∣on alone, would not be enough, unless something were first spoken of the other two, to shew what a sandy ground Separation is built upon; Especially if Episcopacy shall be found in it self lawful, at least, and the Covenant in every case not obligatory. In speaking to Episcopacy, not only is the meer lawful∣ness of that Go∣vernment asserted (a thing not que∣stioned by any of the Ancients,Zanchius (speaking of Episcopacy) Observ. in sum ipsius confessi∣onem, Cap. 25. Apho∣ris. 10. & 11. fides mea nititur cum primis & simpliciter verbo Dei. Deinde non ni∣hil etiam communi to∣tius veteris Catholicae Ecclesiae consensu, si ille cum sacris literis non pugnet. credo enim quae a piis patribus in no∣mine Domini congre∣gatis, communi omni∣um consensu citra ul∣lam Scripturae contra∣dictionem, definita & recepta fuerunt: Ea etiam (quanquam haud ejusdem, cum sacris li∣teris, authoritatis) a Sp. Sancto esse. Hinc fit, ut quae sunt hujus∣modi, ea ego impro∣bare, nec velim nec audeam bona conscien∣tia. Quid autem cer∣tius ex Historiis, ex Conciliis, & ex omni∣um Patrum scriptis, quam illos Ministro∣rum ordines, de qui∣bus diximus, commu∣ni totius Reipub. Chri∣stianae consensu, in Ec∣clesia constitutos re∣ceptos{que} fuisse? Quis ego sim, qui quod tota Ec∣clesia approbavit, im∣probem? Blondel as in o∣ther places of his Apolog. So particularly, pag. 193. roundly approves of E∣piscopacy. Ʋt (saith he)  per se con∣siderata ad Ecclesia∣rum Regimen absolute,  annexa  ad Regiminis modum &  pertinet; quam suo semper arbi∣trio permissam, saecu∣lorum omnium credi∣dit Ecclesia — nec opus est quicquid Hu∣mana Christum profi∣tentium consuetudo in divinorum usu ausa est, nefas putare — suas{que} in rebus hujus∣modi Christianae pru∣dentiae partes obire licere in confesso sit, nec ulla nunc Ecclesia in exemplum trahi potest, quae ex ge∣nerali hoc praecepto 1 Cor. 14.40. quae∣cun{que} & decentiora, & commodiora se∣quendi, plenam sibi potestatem factam, non censeat. ex∣cept
Aerius, and rarely by any of the Modern, even such who think it was not the primi∣tive Government left by the Apostles, if we except some of our Divines in Britain, who be∣take themselves to Aerius, and go a greater length in opposing of Episco∣pacy, than Je∣rom can be rea∣sonably thought to have done, and whom Blondel Praefat. ad Apo∣log. pag. 59. vin∣dicats from Aeri∣anism) but also some of these proofs are set down which may, and use to be adduced,
to shew that it is the only Govern∣ment that hath best warrant in the Word, and was continued in the Church down∣ward from the A∣postles, for many years without in∣terruption. If the unlearned Reader find the first DI∣ALOGUE too high for his Capa∣city (though for his help, care is ta∣ken to translate the Latine Testimoni∣es into English) he may pass unto the other two, especi∣ally to the third anent Separati∣on, which he will find more plain, and easie to be un∣derstood:
And in it all the reasons which are brought for the Separation of the Time (in so far as the Author could learn) fairly propounded, and answered without passion, or provok∣ing expressions, which do no good, but are apt to gen∣der more strife, and alienation of minds and affecti∣on. These Confe∣rences are now suffered to go abroad out of real commiseration towards well meaning but misled people? Here is brought some Water to quench those fierce and unnatural Flames, which threaten to burn this poor Church to ashes. In the Preface before the Corpus and Syntagma of the Protestant confessions, Edit. Genev. The Church of Scotland hath this great commendation, Est Ecclesiae Scotica∣nae privilegium rarum prae multis, quod
sine Schismate, nedum Haeresi, unitatem cum puritate Doctrinae retinuerit. i. e. The Church of Scotland hath this rare priviledge above many others; That (since the Reformation) they have without Heresie, or so much as Schism, retained Ʋnity, with purity of Doctrine. O but how have we now lost our good Name! How is the Staff, BANDS, broken in the midst of us, Zech. 11.14. The Author could have wished a work of this nature had been un∣dertaken by some able hand, or at least this had been in a better dress, but now, Rea∣der, you have it such as it is, and if thou be one concerned, be intreated to lay aside prejudice: Consider what a woful thing di∣vision in a Church is, and what the fear∣ful consequences may be; A kingdom di∣vided against it self cannot stand, saith Christ, Mark 3.24. If we bite and de∣vour one another, take heed we be not consumed one of another, saith Paul, Galat. 5.15. Dissolution is the daughter of division, saith another; Omne divi∣sibile est corruptibile, saith the Philoso∣pher. Divide & impera, saith the Politi∣cian. Si collidimur, frangimur, said the two earthen Pots in the Fable that were
swiming down the Stream together. These expressions tend to shew the bad consequences of division. We have lately received a loud warning from Papists to unite: Rome knows how to fish in our troubled Waters. The Lord convince us of the necessity of Ʋnion, and teach us to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; and dis∣cover to many what smal evidence they give of friendship to the Protestant Interest, by keeping up divisions. The Reader is desired to correct these following Errors with his pen before he readeth, at least to read them right as they are here marked. ERRATA. P. L For Read. 17 17 Evangelist Evengelists 23 16 Polycrats Polycrates 23 20 either Usher 39 24 Ministrum Christi Ministrum 39 25 Christs Minister a Servant 55 20 dclared decreed 57 15 and o chage and the change 57 16 but the vestige but no vestige 74 5 me 85 12 Pt putit 94 11 pag. 2. pag. 52. 94 25 ayeth he, sayeth he, pag. 39. 99 21 Author Author 104 15 protestant protestantes 133 19 ve. 1. vers. 7.14. 142 11 Racel Rachab 150 10 fuert fuerint 155 4 db debate 157 16 Opinionem Opinionum 157 17 Opiniantium Opinantium 161 8 deney deny 165 8 Zauchius Zanchius. 166 21 Chap. Chap. 7 167 5 one n 169 21 became become 172 1   172 16 Lu. Luk. 177 7 useth use it 186 19 really real 188 12 are not all are not at all 189 4 unwarrantably warrantably 195 8 Lectures Lectores 195 27 another other 215 23 favour fervour 216 8 we leave in we live in. The Pages 46. 47. are in one anothers place. Also some Sentences wrong pointed, which the Reader may advert to.
THREE DIALOGUES Betwixt a Doubting Person and an Informer. The First anent Episcopacy. The Second anent the Obligation of the Covenants, abjuring Episcopacy. The Third anent Separation. The first Dialogue anent Episcopacy. Doub. WHat news Neigh∣bour? Inf. All the news now are about our growing Confusions and Disorders. D. I doubt you can ever expect better un∣der Bishops: I could wish they were taken away.
I. Why so? what ill have they done? D. I never heard of any good Bishops did: I doubt a Bishop can be a good Man. I. Say not so, the Histories of the Church tell us what singular good men Bishops have been, and that hundreds of them have died Martyres for the Gospel under heathen persecutors: besides what many excellent men of them suffered after∣ward by Arrians and other Hereticks. D. I doubt these were Lord Bishops, such as ours now are? I. If by Lord Bishops you mean such as have a superiority over ordinary Mi∣nisters, it's clear they were Lord Bishops in that sense: but if you mean Bishops Dignified with Titles of Honour by the secular powers, I grant they were not Lord Bishops, nor could look for any the least respect from the powers of those times, who for the most part were ene∣mies, either to Christianity altogether, or to the Orthodoxy of it. Yet at the time of the Reformation from Popery in England, in Queen Maries days, we find sundry Lord Bishops (as you call them) were Martyres for the Truth:
As for Bishops their acting in civil affairs sometimes, I will make it none of my business to debate it with you. Only that it is not altogether incompatible with Ecclesiastical Functions, may ap∣pear from these few things. The Jewish Sanhedrim (made up of the seventy El∣ders, at first appointed to be assistants to Moses in the civil Government, Numb. 11.) did consist partly of Priests, which, I suppose, few versed in the Jewish Learn∣ing will deny; see Goodwinus, his Moses and Aaron, lib. 5. Cap. 5. Junius on Numb. 11. and others. Consider Deut. 17. v. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Eli the Priest judged Israel fourty years, 1 Sam. 4.18. and after him Samuel the Prophet, (though from his birth lent to the Lord, 1 Sam. 1.28.) went in circuit yearly, judging the people, 1 Sam. 7. v, 15, 16. And under the New Testament, how much Bishops were imployed in Civil Matters, after Emperours became Christian, you may see confessed by Smectimnuus, Sect. 12. Its true Church-men should be as abstract from these incumbrances, as pos∣sibly they can; nor are they needlesly, or of choice to entangle themselves, for
no man, &c. 2 Tim. 2.4. And there∣fore, some ancient Councils have dis∣charged them to follow Military Imploy∣ments, to take Farms or the like. And some of the Fathers have complained, that themselves were too much diverted and overcharged with secular matters: Yet its hard to say that its absolutely, and in every case unlawful for Church-men to medle in these things, for then, it will follow, that a Minister may not look after any civil affair that concerns himself, and family; and yet whatever Christian neglects this, is worse then an Infidel, 1 Tim. 5.8. Some of the Fa∣thers were a gainst Churchmens being Tutors or Curators, yet, I believe, your selves do not scruple this now adays, nor Countrey Trysts neither. I need not tell you how much some Ministers in our late times medled in State affairs; Saravia at some length defends Church-mens actings in these matters. But pas∣sing this, I suppose you question the lawfulness of the Episcopal-Office it self. D. I do so, because I find no command, or express warrand in the Word for it.
I. That proves it is not simply neces∣sary, because not commanded, but prov∣eth not the unlawfulness of the Office: Many things may be lawful, yea, and expedient too, which are not comman∣ded, unless under some General, such as, That all things be done decently and in order, or, to edification, and such like: That in a meeting of Ministers, there be a Moderator and a Clerk, I know you will not say is unlawful; yet this is not any where commanded: And many lear∣ned men have thought Episcopacy lawful, though not commanded, or by any Scri∣pture president particularly warranted, so neither prohibited, but left to the prudence, and choice of Christians, as they shall find it expedient, and con∣ducing to the good and peace of the Church. D. I think it is forbidden in the Word, and therefore unlawful. I. Let me hear in what Scripture? D. In Mat. 20. ver. 25, 26, 27, 28. Where Christ forbiddeth any of his Disciples to be greater than another. I. If you think all superiority among Church-men there forbidden, you are in
a mistake: for, 1. Christ there speaks to the twelve, among whom I can grant there was to be no inequality, in respect of power, yet they were superior to the se∣venty Disciples, whom Christ also sent to preach the Gospel, as Divines com∣monly think; and appears from Act. 1. Where Matthias one of the seventy, as Clemens Alexandrin: Dorotheus, and o∣thers affirm him to have been; is solemn∣ly chosen and advanced to the Office of Apostleship, in the room of Judas; and he was numbred with the eleven Apostles, vers. 26. 2. The thing Christ there dis∣charges, is Ambition, and not Inequa∣lity, otherwise the Argument he tak∣eth from his own example, vers. 28. would not suit his purpose: For with∣out controversie Christ was in Power and authority above the twelve. But take the words as spoken against ambition, or a sinful desire of superiority (which af∣terward was Diotrephes his fault) the reason from his own example suits well; for though in power he was above all, yet in humility he was a pattern to all. Humility and Imparity can well consist together.
D. Christ there says, The Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion; but it shall not be so among you: Therefore it seems he discharges all superiority among Church-men. I. He only discharges that kind of do∣minion, which civil Princes exercise, which is dominium civile & despoticum; a civil, princely, or Lordly power: but the power of the Church is of another nature. And besides, sundry Interpre∣ters think that Christ there speaketh a∣gainst the Tyrranny, which heathen Princes of the world exercised over their miserable Vassals and Subjects. You may consult Mr. Pool's Collection of Interpre∣ters on the place. D. The Apostle, 1 Pet. 5.3. says, Be not Lords over Gods Heritage, Is not superiori∣ty among Church-men there clearly forbid∣den? I. Not at all: only Domineering and Tyranny is there forbidden, which may be the fault of an ordinary Minister to∣wards his flock. The Apostle is not there speaking of the carriage of Church-men towards Church-men, nor of the equa∣lity, or inequality of them among them∣selves:
but of Church-mens behaviour and carriage, what it ought to be to∣wards the people, who are there called the flock, and Gods heritage. D. In the New Testament, Bishop and Elder are two words signifying one and the same Officebearer: for Act. 20. these who in vers. 17. are called Elders, vers. 28. are cal∣led Bishops; also, Tit. 1. vers. 5. and 7. compared together. So that Bishop and El∣der are the same in Scripture: And the word Elder, signifies no more, but a Mini∣ster of a particular Congregation. I. I grant these two words are ofttimes in the New Testament used indifferently to express one and the same Officer; yet it will not be granted, nor can ye ever prove, that the Officer meant by these words, is never to be understood of any above the degree of an ordinary Mini∣ster, or that the word Presbyter, or El∣der signifies only a Minister of a single Congregation, and no more. For, 1. We find the name, Elder, given to the A∣postles themselves, 1 Pet. 5.1. Joh. Epist. 2.1. and Epist. 3.1. And if the Apostles be called Elders, Why may not Bishops be called so too? 2. Your selves say,
that the word, Elder, signifies not on∣ly the Preaching Elder or Minister, but also the Ruling Elder; I can upon as good, and better ground, say, It signi∣fies the Bishop and the Minister, both being Elders, but of different de∣grees: and consonant to this in some af∣ter ages, we find those who were un∣questionably Bishops, yet sometimes designed by the name of Presbyter, that is, Elder, Thus we find Victor Bishop of Rome, called Presbyter, and Iraene∣us Bishop of Lyons, called Presbyter Ec∣clesiae Lugdunensis: Though ordinarly at that time, such were called Bishops; yet some times they are called Presby∣ters, as still remembring the first times of the New Testament, when the name was indifferently given to Bishops and Ministers. D. The Apostle, Philip. 1.1. Speak∣eth of Bishops in the plural number in that Church, who were only Ministers, since there could not be many Bishops o∣ver Ministers in that one Church of Phi∣lippi. I. Ambrose, a Father of the Church, thinks the Bishops in that place not to
be understood of Bishops at Philip∣pi, but of certain Bishops who were present with Paul when he wrot that Epistle, and in whose name he writes to the Philippians, joyning them with himself. Others think there might be sundry Bishops of the Churches about conveened at that time, at Philippi, and Paul knowing of this, might write to, and salute them together with that Church: For ye see, he first names all the Saints at Philippi, as those to whom he mainly intended to write, and then the Bishops and Deacons. But granting by these Bishops and Deacons, the Officers of that same Church of Phi∣lippi, to be meant; I ask you where are the Ruling Elders here? If you say they are included in the word, Bishops, I can upon better ground affirm, that Bi∣shops, there signifies both the superior Bishop, and the ordinary Ministers un∣der him. Ministers may be called Bishops, even as in that same Epistle, Epaphroditus is called Apostle, Chap. 2. vers. 25. For the word in the Greek is Apostle; But further, I say, may be, there was no Bishop over Presbyters settled as yet at Philippi.
D. In Eph. 4.11. The Apostle reckon∣ing up Church-Officers, makes no mention of Bishops. I. It is ill reasoning, that because such an Officer is not found, in such a particular place, or in such an enume∣ration; Therefore such an Officer is no where to be found in Scripture; For how prove you that the Apostle in that place intended a full and compleat enu∣meration. 2. I say Bishops in that place may be comprehended under Pastors and Teachers, Bishops being such, though in a superior degree to ordinary Pa∣stors, and Teachers. And if you will have a perfect enumeration of all Church-Officers there, you must com∣prehend Ruling Elders and Deacons, un∣der some of those words in that place, and why may not I do so with Bi∣shops? D. Well, though may be, there is no discharge of Episcopacy, so I suppose, nei∣ther is there any ground in the word for that kind of Government, more then any o∣ther, and thus the best you can make of it will be, that it is not unlawful, so neither necessary; and therefore when it
comes to be inexpedient, it may be altered, and a better put in its place. I. If ye will promise not to stand out against Light, I shall endeavour to let you see warrant from the word for Bishops. D. I am not so settled in my perswasi∣on against Bishops, as to stand out against light, that is offered to me from the Word (for this were a great fault in me, or in any man else) yet I believe it will be hard for you to let me see any convincing Scrip∣ture Evidence for them. I. Under the Old Testament, setting aside the High-priest, who was a Type of Christ there was a subordination a∣mong the rest of the Priests, menti∣on is often made of the Chief-priests, 2 King. 19.2. Ezra. 8.29. Mat. 2.4. Act. 19.14. and over these again, there was a Chief, or High-priest, under the Highest of all, who only was Typical; hence sometimes two High-priests are mentioned, Luk. 3.2. So there was a subordination among the Levits, Ex. 6.25. Num. 3. vers. 18, 19. compared with vers. 24, 30, 32, 35. and in other places, Neh. 11. We find one over the
Levites vers. 22. named Episcopus by the Greek, and another over the Priests, vers. 14. So you see subordination a∣mong Church-men, is no such new, nor odious thing as some would make the world believe. D. I see indeed there was a subordi∣nation under the Old Testament, but that proves not that there ought to be the like un∣der the New? I. I know no reason why the Lord would have a subordination under the Old Testament, but to maintain Order and Unity in his Church, and this rea∣son is still the same, for a subordina∣tion under the New; yea, is now stron∣ger, because the Christian Church is of much greater extent than the Jewish was, and so the danger of divisions and schisms, and the necessity of pre∣venting them, greater. And what bet∣ter way for this, than Gods own way, which he prescribed under the Old Te∣stament, whereby the same way and course is examplarly pointed out to Christians, although the New Testament gave no other ground for the like. What better pattern for modelling
of Church Government can we now have, than his own pattern, who knows best what is most behoveful for his Church? and this you see was a subordination under the Old Testa∣ment. D. Yet I desire to hear what warrand you can produce for Bishops out of the New Testament? I. First I produce to you the superiori∣ty of the twelve Apostles above the se∣venty two Disciples, as is granted by Di∣vines generally. D. That was extraordinary, personal and temporary, and to expire with the A∣postles. I. Indeed in some things the Apostles were extraordinary, and their priviled∣ges to cease with themselves, such as their immediat calling, their sending to all Nations, their Infallibility, Gifts of Tongues, or whatever else was ne∣cessary for the first founding of the Christian Church. But in some other things, wherein they were superiour to other Ministers; their power was not extraordinary and temporary; but was necessary, and still to be continued in
the Church after they were gone, such as Ordination of Ministers, and governing of them by Ecclesiastical Authority: Those things which were thus necessary, they transmitted to others after them, e∣ven to the Bishops, says Augustin, on Psal. 45.16. In stead of thy fathers shall be thy children; By the Fathers, he understands the Apostles; by the Child∣ren, the Bishops, who followed after the Apostles, Hodie enim, saith he, E∣piscopi qui sunt per totum mundum, unde nati sunt? that is, the Bishops who are this day over the whole World, Whence are they born? and addeth, that the Church calleth the Apostles Fa∣thers, and did bear the Bishops as Sons, and placed them in the room of the Fa∣thers. In the next place, I produce to you Timothy and Titus, both Bi∣shops, the one at Ephesus, the other at Crete. D. All the Ministers who were at Ephesus and Crete, were Bishops too, for so Paul names them in these Epi∣stles. I. Its true Paul names Ministers, not only Presbyters but also Bishops; yet I
say, Timothy and Titus were Bishops in that sense, that the word  or Bishop, was afterward ordinarly ta∣ken in, that is, they had a power in Ordination and Jurisdiction over and above inferior Ministers. Our debate is not about the Name, but about the Office. D. That Timothy and Titus had a pow∣er in those matters over other Ministers at Ephesus and Crete, I grant, for they are taught by the Apostle how to ordain Mini∣sters, what qualifications to require in them, how to proceed in their tryal and censures, &c. But this power they had as Evangelists, that is, they were com∣panions to the Apostles in their labours and travels, and appointed by them to settle and water those Churches they had planted. I. Then it seems you would unbi∣shop Timothy and Titus, and make them extraordinary Officers, whose Office was not to continue in the Church. D. I think so, Paul, 2 Tim. 4.5. wil∣eth Timothy to do the work of an Evan∣gelist, therefore I think he was an Evan∣gelist and no Bishop.
I. Indeed he was an Evangelist in a large sense, that is, one who preached the Evangel, or Gospel; but that he was an Evangelist in the strict sense, can no more be proved from that Scrip∣ture, than that he was a Deacon, be∣cause the Apostle in that same place, saith, Fulfil thy deaconship, so the Greek word signifieth, we have it transla∣ted, Ministry, or that Philip was an ex∣traordinary Evangelist, because he is called an Evangelist, Act. 21.8. For he was a Deacon, Act. 6. And vve read, Act. 8.5. that upon the dispersion he also preached the Gospel; but find no ground, that therefore he was one of those extraordinary Evangelist, whose Office was to cease in the Church: and besides, Ordination, and Jurisdiction, is properly no work of an Evangelist, but rather preaching and spreading the Gospel. D. Philip might be both a Deacon, and an Evangelist. I. If you will have him so, why might not Timothy and Titus as well be both Evangelists and Bishops, if you will needs have them Evangelists in your sense, e∣ven
as Jerom, in Epistola ad Euagrium, and de scriptoribus ecclesiasticis, maketh Mark the Evangelist, Bishop of Alexan∣dria. D. Bishops they could not be, because we find them very unsetled, especially Timothy; had he been Bishop of Ephe∣sus, he had been confined to his charge; but 1 Tim. 1.3. He was left there only for a season, and upon an occasional busi∣ness. I. Timothy and Titus were rare and sin∣gular persons, and useful to the A∣postle in those first beginnings of the Gospel; and so no wonder though the Apostle seeth fit now and then to call them from their particular charge, when the good of the whole Church required it, Phil. 2.19, 20. 2 Cor. 8.23. Hath it not been usual in any time, and have we not seen it practised in our own time, that a Bishop or Minister be cal∣led away from his settled charge for a season, when the good of the Church requires their service elsewhere, and to return when that service is over, Ger∣hard Locor. Theologic. Tomo sexto, pag. 358. Thinketh that Timothy and Titus
were first Evangelists, and afterwards settled Bishops by Paul, the one at Ephesus the other at Crete. D. Paul Act. 20.27. Gives a charge to the Elders or Ministers of Ephesus and not to Timothy, which he would not have omitted, had Timothy been their Bishop; and it is very probable that Timothy was present at that time, for vers. 4. we find him in Pauls com∣pany. I. May be, according to Gerards opi∣nion Timothy was not as yet settled Bishop of Ephesus. 2. Iraeneus who lived not long after the Apostles, and vvas Bishop of Lions in France, lib. 3. cont. Valentin. cap. 14. is of the mind, that there were of the Asian Bishops min∣gled vvith the Elders of Ephesus, and vvith Timothy their Bishop, and that to them all in common Paul made that exhortation; and Bishops might very vvell be comprehended under the name of Elders in that place, since I shevv you before that Apostles are sometimes called Elders. D. How prove you that Timothy and Ti∣tus were Bishops, for I have great doubt about it?
I. I prove it first from this, because in these Epistles more particularly and fully then any vvhere else in the Nevv Testa, directions are given by Paul to Timothy and Titus, how to carry in Or∣dination and Jurisdiction, which two comprehend the Episcopal Office. He sheweth them what qualifications they must require in those that are to be or∣dained, that they lay hands suddenly on no man, and giveth them sundry di∣rections anent Church Government, how to rebuke offenders, no to receive an aecusation against an Elder, but before two or three witnesses, how to deal with Hereticks, &c. 1 Tim. 5.1, 19, 21. Tit. 3.10. and 1. v. 5, 10, 11. 1 Tim. 5.22, 17. also ch. 3.10. And in other places of these Epistles. Now these are directi∣ons which concern not that Age only, but all Ages of the Church; and there∣fore were given, not personally to Ti∣mothy and Titus, but in them to their Successors. Why I pray you, will any have Timothy and Titus to be extraor∣dinary Officers in their acting of these things, which they cannot deny are of ordinary use in the Church. What won∣der
(as the King in his last reply at the Isle of Wight hints) that some have affirmed those Acts of Ordination and Jurisdiction, vvere in themselves extra∣ordinary, for ye have led them the vvay, in saying that Timothy and Ti∣tus, in their exercising those Acts, vvere extraordinary Officers. Then I prove it from this, because their commission at Ephesus and Crete, vvas not voided upon the first settling of Ministers in those places: and therefore their Office vvas to be constant. For, if meerly as Evangelists they vvere to settle a Church there, then as soon as some fevv Mini∣sters had been ordained, Timothy and Titus vvere to cease, and give vvay to the Presbytrie there settled, frustra fit per plura, &c. but they did not so, nor did their Commission run so; Titus vvas left in Crete, to ordain Elders in every City, Tit. 1.5. that is, Ministers, vvhich had been needless, if some fevv Elders after they vvere ordained them∣selves, might have ordained others. Jus divinum Ministerii Evangelici, pag. 185. Defending Ordination by Church-men, against such as claimed that povver to
the people, says, Why was Titus left in Crete, to ordain Elders in every City: or Timothy at Ephesus, might not the people have done that themselves, if they have a right to do so? May not the Ar∣gument be turned against the Authors of that Book themselves; thus, Why vvas Timothy left at Ephesus, or Titus at Crete, after Ministers vvere there ordained by the Apostle himself, vvhen on the place, or after some fevv were ordained by Timothy and Titus, if those Ministers so ordained, could have or∣dained the rest. 3. I prove it from 1 Tim. 6.13, 14. Where Paul solemnly charges Timothy to keep what he had com∣manded him till the appearing of Jesus Christ; Now the Presbyterians in their Jus divinum Ministerij, pag. 74. say, that the directions given to Timothy, were not for that age only, but for all ages of the Church, and bring this place to prove it, which is like Mat. 28.20. I am with you always even unto the end of the world, and they compare the foresaid charge, with 1 Tim. 5. ver. 7, 21. Whence it would follow, that Timo∣thy and Titus were not extraordinary
Officers, but were to have successors in those Offices they then administrated; which we see were superiour to ordinary Ministers, and pag. 160. they say, Apo∣stolical examples in things necessary for the good of the Church, and which carry a per∣petual reason and equity in them, have the force of a rule: Now the Apostle, his setting Timothy and Titus single persons over those Churches, is an Apostolical ex∣ample done for the good of the Church, and hath a perpetual reason and equity in it. Lastly, I could prove this by the Testimony of many great men in the Church, both Ancient and Modern: Polycrats, born within fourty years af∣ter John wrot his Epistle to the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2. In an ancient Trea∣tise, de Martyrio Timothei (as it is ci∣ted by either in his original of Episcopacy, pag. 58.) affirms, that Timothy was Bishop of that Church. Eusebius lib. 3. cap. 4. affirms the like. Leontius Bishop of Mag∣nesia, in the general council of Chalce∣don, Act. 11. declareth, that from Ti∣mothy there had been a continued Suc∣cession of twenty seven Bishops in the Church of Ephesus. Jerom, de scriptori∣bus
Ecclesiasticis, makes Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus of Crete. Eusebi∣us lib. 3. cap. 4. doth the like. Abraham Scultetus, on Titus affirmeth, that Ti∣mothy and Titus were properly Bishops in their several places; and that the dire∣ctions given by Paul to them in these Epistles, were given to them, and to their Successors. Gerhard, Tom. 6. ma∣keth them both Bishops, as I told you before, I might produce moe Te∣stimonies, but these may suffice. D. Albeit you say much to make Timothy and Titus Bishops, yet Paul sayeth that Ti∣mothy was ordained by the Presbytrie, 1 Tim. 4.14. Therefore I think he could not be their Bishop: for a Presbytrie, which is but a company of Ministers, cannot make a bishop. I. Some, among whom Calvin, think that by Presbytery, the Apostle meaneth not a company of Ministers, but the Of∣fice of a Minister, or Presbyter. But sup∣pone the company of Presbyters be meant yet these might be, not the inferior de∣gree of Presbyters, or Ministers, but the Superior degree, who are bishops: and that bishops be called presbyters,
ought not to seem strange, since I told you the Apostles themselves are some∣times called Presbyters. 3. 2 Tim. 1.6. The Apostle sayeth, Timothy was or∣dained by the laying on of his hands, so that what was substantial in that Or∣dination, as Interpreters of good note, think, was from Paul; although the Presbytry of Ministers, if you will, might share in the ceremonial part of it. 4. If you say Timothy an Evangelist, was ordained by inferior Elders, you must confess that ordinary and infe∣rior Officers, might ordain a Supe∣ior cxtraordinary Officer, which is ab∣surd. D. Have you any proof more for bishops out of the New Testament? I. The Angels of the seven Church∣es, Rev. chap. 2. and 3. were Bishops, for it is undenyable there were many Mi∣nisters, for example, at Ephesus, Act. 20.27, 28. Yet Revel. 2. When that Church is written to, which was long after Pauls exhortation, Act. 20. and the Church was on the growing hand; yet, I say, we find but one Angel a∣mong all these Ministers, and he alone spo∣ken
to, and commended for what was praise-worthy in that Church, and blam'd for what was faulty, as he who had the chief hand in that Churches af∣fairs: So may be said of the rest; the Epistle always directed to the Angel, and he commended for what was right and discommended for what was wrong; seing by his place and autho∣rity, he ought to have seen to the preventing, or reforming of those things. D. The word, Angel, Rev. 2. and 3. denoteth not one single person, but is taken collectively for all the Mini∣sters that were in each of these Church∣es. I. I know that is the answer usual∣ly given, but have oft wondered at it. No doubt, this Scripture pincheth sore, when ye flee to such a shift; Scul∣tetus, a learned Protestant, in his ob∣servations upon Titus, hath these words, doctissimi qui{que} interpretes per septem ec∣clesiarum angelos intenpretantur septem ec∣clesiarum Episcopos, ne{que} enim aliter pos∣sunt, vim nisi textui facere velint, that is, the most learned Interpreters, all ex∣pound
the Angels of the seven Churches to be the Bishops of those Churches, neither can they expound the words o∣therwise; unless they offer violence to the text. D. But Rev. 2.24. Christ by John speaks to moe then one, for it is in the plu∣ral number  vobis. Hence it is clear to me, that by the Angel of that Church, he meant all the ministers. I. Will you be content to stand to Be∣za's exposition of the place, he says , is to you the President, and to the company of ministers, and to the rest of the people. You see the word, Angel, in his opinion, is still to be taken for a single person, and that in this place moe then the An∣gel are spoken unto. This is, as some think, an Apostrophe, which is an ordinary Figure in speech, when the speaker turns his discourse to some other than he had at first been speaking to; but that which I think should put it out of question, is the Light we have from antiquity, de∣claring to us that these Angels were single persons, and condescending upon some of their Names: for I suppose the pra∣ctise, opinions, and assertions of such
as followed hard after these Angels, should by any rational man, be acqui∣esced in, as a sufficient commentary on this and the like Scriptures, that speak of Church Governours. D. Well, What say they? I. I told you before that Polycrates who was Bishop of Ephesus, and born near to the Apostles times, speaks of seven of his predecessors, who had been Bi∣shops there before him; and Leontius Bishop of Magnesia, in the council of Chalcedon, speaks of twenty seven Bi∣shops of Ephesus, successively from Ti∣mothy: We find the Bishops of those se∣ven Churches of Asia, present at the first Council of Nice, and designed by their several Churches, Ephesus, Smyrna, &c. and subscribing the Acts of the Council with the rest of the Bishops. Jerome, de Scriptoribus Ecclesias. tells us, that Polycarp, who had been John's dis∣ciple, was by him made Bishop of Smyr∣na; so Eusebius, lib. 3. cap. 32. So Tertulli∣an praescrip. cap. 23. And Iraeneus, lib. 3. cap. 3. contra Valentin. sayes, Polycarp was by John ordained Bishop of Smyrna, and that he saw Polycarp, when he him∣self
was a child; for, says he, Polycarp lived long. Now should not these testi∣monies, think you, have weight with a∣ny man that's free of prejudice. And further, among Ignatius his Epistles, who was contemporary with the Apostle John, we find one written to this Polycarp, Bi∣shop of Smyrna, who is thought to be the very same Angel to whom John wri∣teth, Rev. 2. D. I think indeed much of these testimo∣nies, especially of that of Irenaeus, who, says he, saw Polycarp, and so knew the better that he was a Bishop: And I have heard that Irenaeus himself was a Bishop too; but for Ignatius, his testimony, I am not much moved with it, because I hear say, that these Epistles of his are forged and counterfit. I. Of these Epistles, we may have oc∣casion to speak afterward, but if you will be at the pains to see, what the most part by far, and with all the most lear∣ned of Protestant Writers, and Interpre∣ters, think of these Angels; you shall find Beza, Diodat, Marlorat, Bullinger, Gualter, Piscator, Sibelius, Pareus, Are∣tius, Fulk, Our own Countreyman Na∣pier of Marchistoun, Cartwright, the lear∣ned
Reynolds in his conference with Hart, yea, and Blondel, in the preface to his Apologia pro sententia Hieronymi, all ex∣pounding the Angel in each of these Churches, to be a single person. So true is it what I told you, Scultetus ob∣serves, doctissimi qui{que} interpretes per sep∣tem Ecclesiarum Angelos, interpretantur sep∣tem Ecclesiarum Episcopos. D. Beza, and may be, others of these Di∣vines, though they interpret the Angel to be a single person, yet they never thought that person to be a Bishop, but meerly a Mo∣derator and President, among the rest of his brethren. I. He could be no less than bishop, be∣cause the Epistle is still directed to him, though it's true, the whole Church be concerned in what is written; yet I say, the Angel is chiefly commended, or dis∣commended, according as matters were right, or wrong, which clearly imports that he had the chief hand in business, and so he chiefly capable of what Christ by John says to him: And the power we saw before in Timothy and Titus, above inferiour Ministers, may oblige us to think, no less can be allowed to the An∣gels.
And further, most of the Divines I have named do say, that these Angels were Episcopi, Bishops. And Beza himself, de Minist. Grad. doth in effect, cap. 13. give to the Angels an Episcopal power, for, he saith, Horum authoritas in Eccle∣siae regimine fuit eminentior, that is, their authority in governing the Church, was more eminent than the rest's. I might al∣so shew you how Mr. Mede is misunder∣stood, as if in his Key of the Revelation, he did teach, that the word, Angel, is commonly through the Revelation taken collectively, that is, not to signifie one person: you may see the contrary in his Key, Apocal. 9.14. and 14.6, 7. And he sayeth, the twenty four Elders about the Throne, do represent the Bishops, and Prelats of the Churches. You may also see Brightman, on cap. 7, 8. and ordinari∣ly, through the Revelation, he expounds the word, Angel, of some single person. I shall produce one place more from the New Testament, to prove Episcopacy viz. John Epist. 3. ver. 9. Diotrephes loveth the preeminence. D. I have heard that place brought a∣gainst Episcopacy, But never for it, till
now; The Apostle there speaks against pree∣minence. I. Not at all: He only speaks against ambitious seeking after preeminence, and finds fault with Diotrephes, that he was , that is, he did ambiti∣ously love to be first, or to have the chief place. An Office may be good and lawful, and yet an ambitious de∣sire after the Office, sinful. Look what the most judicious Interpreters say on the place: Beza renders the Greek word thus, qui primatum ambit. Now your selves confess it was authority over other Ministers, he looked at; and from this ye infer that the Office he aimed at, was unlawful; which will not follow, but rather that there was such an Office then in the Church, and at this time void, unto which he meant to put himself, or had already done so, out of an ambitious desire to be great, which was a sinful end. It was not the good of the Church, but himself he lookt after. Blondel con∣fesseth as much in his Apologia, pag. 54. Saying, that Diotrephes would be Primus Presbyter, to which place he willingly grants authority over the rest did belong,
though he will not call him Bishop, yet he grants to him an Episcopal power, in effect, Quis enim (saith he) praesidenti∣am sine authoritate somniet, pag. 39. But of this and the like Concessions of his, I may have occasion to speak to you after∣ward. D. If Bishops were by the Apostles left to rule the Church, as you seem to prove from the New Testament, why then do we not find them in the Church after the Apostles left the world? I. We do find them after the Apostles left the world. D. But not for a long time after the A∣postles were gone. I. You are mistaken; we find Bishops immediatly after the Apostles, which confirmeth what I have been saying for Episcopacy from the New Testament: For the Bishops found in the Church im∣mediatly after the Apostles, or even be∣fore all the Apostles were gone, are a good commentary on Timothy and Titus, and on the Angels of the seven Church∣es, and on the passage anent Diotre∣phes. D. I would gladly hear what you can say
for Bishops, about, or immediatly after the Apostles times. I. If you will credit Jerome, whom you take for the Patron of your cause, he (de Scriptor. Eccles.) speaks of sundry of these first Bishops; of James made by the Apostles, the first Bishop of Jerusa∣salem, whose successor, he saith, on Galat. 1.19. was Simeon, &c. Epaphro∣ditus Bishop at Philippi, and Mark Bishop of Alexandria, &c. Eusebius, lib. 3. Hist. Cap. 4. Cap. 33. Cap. 31.36. lib. 4. Cap. 14.25. and in other places is very express to this purpose. It's known there were in some of the Churches, many Presby∣ters, or Ministers; yet in these most ancient Records we can read, but of one Bi∣shop at a time, and after him another suc∣ceeds in his place, and that by a new Or∣dination; For, Jerome says, Jacobus ab apostolis Episcopus ordinatus est. Of Epis∣copal Ordinations, see also, Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 5. But passing these, I produce to you Ignatius, contemporary with the A∣postle John, he was Bishop of Antioch; and, as is thought, an Arch-bishop, for in his Epistle to the Romans, he stiles him∣self Bishop of the Church in Syria, which
is supposed to have hade moe Episcopal Seats in it, than only that of Antioch. This Ignatius died martyre about eight or nine years after the Death of John, he wrote Epistles to sundry Churches of that time, in which he frequently speaks of the Bishops of those Churches, and set∣teth down these three degrees of Church-Officers, viz. Deacons, Presby∣ters, or Ministers, and Bishops: And exhorts those Primitive Christians to be subject to the Bishop, as the only mean to avoid Schisme, and that without him nothing be done. D. I have heard learned men say, that these Epistles are much falsified, so that we have them not now, as they were written by Ignatius: and therefore any testimo∣ny taken from them, is the less to be va∣lued. I. Indeed the Arch-bishop of Armagh, Ʋsher, a man well read in Antiquity, as also Vedelius, who hath written on those Epistles, shew, that the Copies of these Epistles which were used, till of late years, are very faulty, which is proved from this, among other things; that many of these Quotations, which in the
Fathers are found to be cited out of Ig∣natius, are not to be found in those E∣pistles, as they have been used. But of late years, Ʋsher found two very ancient Ma∣nuscripts of these Epistles in some Libra∣ries in England, and about that same time Is: Vossius found a Greek Manuscript of them at Florence; All which three Co∣pies agreed together, and differed much from these, that were used before: and in these three were found the Fathers Quotations, which were not found in the old ones: and even in these late found Copies, the Testimonies for Bi∣shops are most clear and full. And this so much troubles Blondel in the Preface to his Apologia that he is forced to seek a new shift, viz. that even those Epistles, as we have them in the Copies found by Ʋsher, and Vossius, are vitiat also: and thinks the Fathers who cite them, were deceived by them: he thinks they have been vitiat, or forged about the year 180. Salmasius thinks, Circiter me∣dium aut initium secundi seculi, about the middle, or beginning of the second age: Now Ignatius lived about the be∣ginning of the second age; and is it
probable they could then be medled with? The reasons for this forging of them, are alledged by Blondel, and an∣swered by Doctor Hammond. Can it be imagined they should be so far vitiat that the very Scope of sundry of them should be altered, which is to perswade obedience to the Bishop, as he without whom nothing ought to be done, as they would avoid Schism, The Divines who debated with the King, at the Isle of Wight, found themselves so pinched with these Epistles, that they found no way to escape, but utterly to reject them all as counterfeit: Which, the King told them, they did without any regard, either of Ingenuity, or Truth. Sure I am neither Scultetus, nor Rivet, did presume to do so; for seven of these Epistles they own as written by Ignatius; Howbeit, they think some corruptions through time, had crept un∣to them: which corruptions they ob∣serve: but say not, that their menti∣oning of Bishops as Superiour to Presby∣ters, is one of these corruptions. Cer∣tainly, had these two judicious Divines thought this a corruption crept into
these Epistles, they would have obser∣ved, and mentioned it. You may see Scultetus in his Medulla patrum. And Rivet in his Criticus sacer, what their judgementis of these Epistles. But now of late, Doctor Pearson in England, hath largely and fully vindicat Ignatius, his Epistles; and therefore to him I refer you. D. Yet I shall be the more cleared in my doubts of these Epistles, if you can pro∣duce any other convincing Testimonies from Prime Antiquity in favours of Bi∣shops. I. I offer to your consideration, what Pius Bishop of Rome, about the year 146. writing to Justus, newly elected Bishop of Vienna, in the room of Ve∣rus, sayeth, Veri loco a fratribus consti∣tutum & collobio Episcoporum (It's thought this was the Bishop's Habit, then in use) vestitum te Presbyteri & Diaconi, non ut majorem, sed ut Ministrum Christi obser∣vent, That is, Let the Ministers and Deacons reverence and obey thee, not as one greater, but as the Servant of Christ. This passage is found in his E∣pistles, in Bibliotheca Patrum, Tom. 3.
Fol. 15. Now by Presbyters, in that place, as all along in Antiquity, are meant these, whom we call Ministers, which I suppose, will not be denyed; for both the Apostles in their Writings, and all Antiquity that followed, call them so: and yet we see these Presby∣ters at Vienna, had Justus a Bishop over them, and that Verus another Bishop had been there before Justus. D. It seems Bishops were not then ac∣knowledged superiour to Presbyters, or Mi∣nisters, since it's said, Presbyteri te non ut majorem observent, that is, let not the Ministers reverence thee, as one greater than they. I. By that same reason you should make the Bishop no greater then the Dea∣cons neither, since it's said also, Te Dia∣coni non ut majorem observent, that is, let not the Deacons reverence thee, as one greater than themselves: Yea, you will make him inferiour to both, for it is ad∣ded, Sed ut Ministrum Christi, that is, as Christs Minister. Pius there exhort∣eth Justus to humility, (a very necessar and seasonable counsel for these who are promoted to higher dignity above o∣thers)
and therefore biddeth him car∣ry rather like a Servant, then a Superi∣our; I told you before, that humili∣ty and imparity consist well. In the next place, hear what Hegesippus, sayeth, who lived in the time of Hadrian, the Emperour, before the year 140. a re∣nouned Historian, the ancientest of any that wrot the Church-history of the New Te∣stament, next to Luke, who wrot the Acts of the Apostles; Jerome (as the Magde∣burgenses, and Rivet report) sayes, He∣gesippus actus omnes a Christi passione ad sua tempora complexus est in sua historia. He was more ancient than that Hegesip∣pus, who wrot de excidio Hierosolymae; nothing of his History is now extant, ex∣cept a few fragments, cited by Eusebius, who, lib. 4. cap. 21. brings him in gi∣ving this account, Se plurimos Episcopos, cum Romam peregre proficisceretur, conve∣nisse, & eandem apud omnes doctrinam deprehendisse, That is, when he went to Rome, he met with many Bishops, and found they all held the same Doctrine; and a little after he mentions Primus, Bishop of Corinth, and afterward, Ro∣mae haesisse usque ad Anicetum, Aniceto succes∣sisse
Soterem, isti Eleutherium: in singulis successionibus & civitatibus ita habet sicut lex & dominus praedicant, that is, He stayed at Rome till the time Anicetus was made Bishop, to whom Soter succeeded, and to him Eleutherius, and that in all the successions, and Cities matters were constitute, as the Law and the Prophets, and the Lord Christ did Preach. Then speaking of the Church of Jerusalem, he says, after James, sirnamed Justus, suf∣fered Martyrdom, his Uncle Simeon was made bishop, whom all preferred, because he was Domini Consobrinus, a cousin of Christs. Further, he shews that Thebulis turned heretick, because he missed a Bishoprick, Quoniam non fuit Episcopus constitutus, and that till then the Church of Jerusalem was called a Virgine, because it had not been cor∣rupted with any false Doctrine. From which Testimonies of Hegesippus, we may gather, 1. That he speaks of Bishops in all these Churches which he mentions. 2. In every Church he speaks but of one Bishop at a time, to whom, when he is gone, another succeedeth: Yet I hope it will not be denyed by you,
that there were sundry Ministers or Pres∣byters in any one of these Churches, at one and the same time. 3. That the succession of Bishops was by election, and not by Seniority, as the instance of Simeon, chosen after James at Jerusalem, clears. 4. That some were then ambiti∣ous of a Bishoprick, as he reporteth of Thebulis, which also was Diotrephes, his fault. And Lastly, All this so shortly af∣ter the Apostles times, that none have any reason to doubt of Hegesippus, his certain knowledge what had been the Government of the Church from the A∣postles times, to his own time, more than we can doubt what hath been the Government of the Church among our selves for fourty years bygone: For Hegesippus lived next after the first suc∣cession of the Apostles, as Ʋsher in his Original of Bishops, pag. 62. gathers out of Eusebius. D: I would hear what you can say more out of prime Antiquity? I. I offer to your consideration what Dionysius, who was Bishop of Corinth, about the year 170. says, in his Epistle to the Church of Athens (Euseb. lib. 4.
cap. 22.) he mentioneth Quadratus, their former Bishop, and Publius, Bi∣shop and Martyre before him, and then Dionysius the Areopagite their first Bishop, of whom we read, Act. 17. Then in his Epistle to the Church of Gortyna, in Crete, together with the rest of the Churches there, he commends Philip their Bishop; Ʋsher thinks Philip was Arch-Bishop in Crete, Orig. of Bishops, pag. 73. for Philip is called Bishop, not only of Gortyna, but also of the rest of the  in Crete, Paraecia signified then a whole Diocess, as can easily be made out from antiquity, and we find was afterward also Metropolis, and the Bishop, the Metropolitan of the whole Island Concil. Chalcedon. Act. 6. Con∣cil. Constantinop. sub Mena, Act. 5. and 5. general. Concil. In which places, the Metropolitan of Gortyna, is found subscribing, and this authority of his o∣ver whole Crete, Eusebius deriveth from the times of Titus. Dionysius writes also to the Gnosians, and exhorteth their Bishop Pinetus, ne grave servandae castitatis onus necessario fratribus imponat. that is, that he would not lay upon his brethren the
heavy burden of an unmarried life. Where by the brethren, he must mean the Ministers under Pinetus, his Juris∣diction: For you can not think, that by the Brethren, Dionysius meant private Christians: or that Pinetus, did press private Christians to such a life. It ap∣pears then that Pinetus was above the rest of the brethren, that is, of the Mi∣nisters, and that with a power to enjoyn, as is clear from Dionysius, his counsel to him, not to make use of his power in that particular. Hear next what Irenae∣us Bishop of Lions, sayeth to this point, he was a Bishop pious and peaceable, and so answerable to his name, and lived a∣bout the year 180. You need not fear he will deceive you, but may say of him as David of Ahimaaz, he is a good man, and will bring good tidings. D. Well, let us hear him. I. Irenaeus contra Valent. lib. 3. cap. 3. says, Habemus annumerare qui ab Apo∣stolis usque ad nos instituti sunt Episcopi in Ecclesiis, & successores eorum, &c. that is, we can reckon on who have been Bishops in the several Churches, and who their successors, from the A∣postles
even to our own times: and because, he sayeth it were longsome to go through all, he mentions the succes∣sion in the Church of Rome, until he come down to Eleutherius, who was his own Contemporary: And this he doth to prove the falshood of Hereticks their Doctrine, because not agreeing with the Doctrine of the Bishops, who, from the Apostles downward, had been in the Church. And in that same place he speaketh of Polycarp, who, says he, had conversed with them who saw the Lord, and was by the Apostles made Bishop of Smyr∣na, and that when himself was young, he had seen Polycarp, for saith he, he li∣ved long. Now hence we may observe, 1. that Polycarp, contemporary with the Apostles, was even such a Bishop as Eleu∣therius of Rome, who lived in the time of Irenaeus: for Irenaeus, makes no diffe∣rence; and no doubt, Eleutherius was such a Bishop as Irenaeus, who was Bishop of Lions in France, which, I suppose, few will question. 2. That, as some have observed, Polycarp behoved to be the very same Angel of Smyrna, who was written to, Rev. 2.8. for, I∣renaeus
saith, Polycarp was ordained Bi∣shop of Smyrna by the Apostles themselves, who all lived before John, and he sur∣viving the rest, wrot at Christs com∣mand, these Epistles to the seven Angels, so that Polycarp must be that Angel of Smyrna to whom John wrot; for Polycarp lived till Iraeneus, his time, who says, when himself was a child he saw this old Bishop, for says he, Polycarp lived long, and continued in Smyrna until his last, and died a martyre. Usher in his Orig. of Bishops, pag. 60. reckons his martyrdome to have been seventy four years after Johns writing that Epistle to him: and that he continued Bishop there until his death, is collected from Euseb. lib. 4. cap. 15. 3. We see clearly, though there were in the Church of Rome many Presbyters or Ministers; yet without taking notice of them; Irenae∣neus only names one at a time, who was more eminent than the rest, and after he is gone, nameth another, who suc∣ceeded him: Now if all comes only to this, that these whom he nameth, had no more but the same authority and suc∣cession with the rest of the Presbyters;
Why are these we contend for, sing∣led out and named, and not the other Presbyters as well as they? Why are the Presbyters or Ministers passed over in silence, and only Linus, and Cletus, and Soter, &c. taken notice of in their several successions, one after another? No doubt, because they were the Bi∣shops, and had an authoritative inspecti∣on above the rest, as hath been shewed already in Timothy and Titus, and in the seven Angels, Revel. 2.3. and from the Epistles of Ignatius, and other instances. And to say they only are named for the more expedit reckoning is gratis di∣ctum, and as good as to say nothing: and whereas some object, that writers dif∣fer about the line of succession among these Primitive Bishops, therefore it may be doubted there was any such thing as Bishops, or a succession of one Bishop af∣ter another at all: The King answers at the Isle of Wight, this will no more follow, than that because Chronologers differ about the line of ancient Kings, in such a Kingdom; therefore there was no Kingly power, nor Kings there at all. 4. Observe, that Irenaeus saith, these
these ancient Bishops succeeded one another by Apostolical institution, Qui ab Apostolis in∣stituti sunt, saith he, us{que} ad nos Episcopi. 5. This Valentinus, against whom Irenae∣us writes, was a Presbyter, and turned Heretick, because he came short of a Bi∣shoprick, Tertul. adversus Valent. cap. 4. See also Irenaeus, lib. 4. cap. 43, 44. and to add a word of Irenaeus himself, he was Bishop of Lions in France, , Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 23. But after the Latine, 21. Paroeci∣arum per Galliam quas Irenaeus moderatus est. Hence it is clear he was their Bishop, or Arch-bishop, as some think, for,  then signified as much, as a Diocess now; See Can. Apost. Can. 14. Concil. Antioch. 9.14. Concil. Ancyr. Cap. 13, 18. D. Against what you speak of Irenaeus calling him a Bishop, and an Arch-bishop, I have this to say, that the Gallican Church in their letter to Eleutherius, calls Irenaeus Presbyter, and so doth Eusebius, lib. 5. cap. 4. I. Peter calleth himself a Presbyter, or Elder, 1 Pet. 5.1. And yet we know he was more. Irenaeus himself in his wri∣tings, calls Bishops Presbyters: Victor
who succeeded to Eleutherius in Rome, is called Presbyter. Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 4. and yet without all contradiction he was a Bishop,, and a great one too, when he would have extended his Jurisdiction, not only over his own, but over the Asian Churches also, Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 21, 23, 25. Salmasius in his Walo Messalinus, freely confesseth, pag. 265. Romani Pon∣tifices vocantur Presbyteri etiam postquam Episcopatus apicem supra presbyteros conse∣quuti sunt singuli in toto orbe Episcopi. But hardly will you find the name of Bishop any wherein those times given to a single Presbyter. D. What more can you say for Bishops out of the ancient Fathers? I. I could produce you Testimonies from Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, who was contemporary with Irenaeus: but something of him I spoke before, and from Clemens Alexandrinus, and other Fathers, who lived in the second age. And from Tertullian, about the year of Christ two hundred, who shews, de pre∣script. cap. 36. That the Apostolical Chairs at Corinth, Philippi, Thessalonica, were possest, not by a Presbytrie, but
by single persons. Also, cap. 11. and de baptismo, cap. 7. Dandi Baptismum jus habet summus sacerdos qui est Episcopus, Dehinc Presbyteri & Diaconi, non tamen sine Episcopi authoritate, propter honorem Ecclesiae quo salvo salva pax est, &c. That is, the Bishop hath the power of giving baptism; then the Presbyters and Dea∣cons, yet not without the Bishops autho∣rity, &c. I might produce much more from those first times, in favours of Bi∣shops. Eusebius the ancientest Church historian, now extant, all along maketh it his work to set down the succession of Bishops in the Churches of these first times, Rome, Alexandria, Antioch, &c. from the Apostles downward unto his own time; in every of which Church∣es, none that hath any skill can deny, that there were sundry Presbyters, or Ministers at the same time; and yet without noticing these, he sets down the line of Bishops, one after another, in these several Churches. And for the time that followed after Tertullian, it's undenyable by you all, there were Bi∣shops in the Church, and the Fathers who followed, were not only most of
them Bishops themselves, but looked upon Episcopacy as descending unto them from the Apostles, as can be made out from their Writings. D. You know Jerome, who lived toward the end of the fourth, or beginning of the fifth Century, saith, Episcapocy was not from the beginning in the Christian Church, Epist. ad Euag. which is the 85. Manifestissime comprabatur eundem esse Episcopum & Presbyterum quod autem postea unus electus est qui caeteris praeponeretur, in schismatis remedium factumest, ne unus∣quis{que} ad se trahens Christi Ecclesiam, rumperet. That is, It's most manifest that Bishop and Presbyter are the same, and that afterward one was chosen and set over the rest, it was done in remedy of Schism, &c. I. Jerom's meaning is, that in the ve∣ry first beginnings of the New Testa∣ment times, it was so, while the Apostles were yet alive, and did by their own presence and industrie supplie the room of Bishops, but as their presence began to sail by death, or even sooner, as their o∣ther great business called them elsewhere, upon the dayly increase and enlarge∣ment of the Church, then to prevent
Schism, that arose from equality, there were Bishops set over Presbyters. And that Jerome must be understood speaking so early of the Church, appeareth from what immediatly followeth in that same Epistle, Nam, sayes he, & Alexandriae a Marco Evangelista us{que} ad Heraclium & Dio∣nysium Episcopos, Presbyteri semper unum ex se electum & in excelsiori gradu colloca∣tum, Episcopum nominabant, quomodo si exercitus Imperatorem faciat, aut Diaco∣ni Archidiaconum, That is, at Alexandria, from Mark the Evangelist downward to Heraclius and Dionysius Bishops, the Presbyters alwise elected one from among themselves, whom they placed in a high∣er degree, and called him Bishop, even as an Army would chuse a General, or Deacons an Archdeacon. Now Mark is reckoned to have died before either Peter or Paul; and even from him down∣ward, Jerome saith, there were Bishops in that Church. It is strange to see how warily and defectively Smectimnuus cites these words of Jerome, quite beside Je∣rom's intent, to prove that Bishops were not from the beginning, and to show how they vvere brought in by Presbyters;
Which if Smectimnuus mean to have been in the Apostles ovvn times, we agree that so it was, but because they (for Smectim∣nuus is a Name composed of sundry Au∣thors) would fain have Jerome to be meant speaking of Bishops coming into Alexandria, not until the Apostles were gone, therefore they leave out his first words, a Marco Evangelista; they take what they think may seem to make for them, and leave out what is directly a∣gainst them, which is scarce fair deal∣ing: But Calvine, Institut. lib. 4. cap. 4. num. 2. citeth this passage intirely, and from it concludes that Jerome maketh Bi∣shops ancient enough. Also, you may observe, how the learned M. Durham, on Revel. pag. 225. making use of this pas∣sage of Jerome, that you do, to prove that Bishops were of later date than the Apostles; Yet he mentioneth not Jerom's words, Alexandriae a Marco, &c. in which, Jerome clearly makes the Original of Bi∣shops in that Church, as high as Mark; which passage, either destroyeth the gloss you would put upon Jerom's former words, if in them you think the Father speaks of bringing in Bishops into the
Church, not till after the Apostles times, as Mr. Durham saith expresly, or else you would make Jerome contradict him∣self. 2. Mr. Durham, as he takes no no∣tice of the Succession of Bishops at Alex∣andria, from Mark downward; so nei∣ther of the first Simile which Jerome makes use of, viz. Quomodo si exercitus impera∣torem faciat: But only of the second Si∣mile of Deacons, making an Arch-dea∣con, for helping them, saith he, in what belongeth to the orderly management of their business, which shews what kind of Prece∣dency this is he attributeth to the Bishop, even such as he would allow to a Deacon, who is advanced to some Peculiar Care by others, for some special end. Thus Mr. Durham, as he is very loath to bring in Bishops till after the Apostles times, so after they are brought in, he would have their power, as insignificant as may be; but taketh no notice of Jerome, his com∣paring the Bishop to an Emperour, or Ge∣neral of an Army, who hath, not only a Precedency, but without all controver∣sie, a Superiority of power and com∣mand. D. Jerome on Tit. 1. is very express that
Bishop and Presbyter are the same, Idem est ergo, Presbyter, qui & Episcopus, & antequam diaboli instinctu Studia in reli∣gione fierent, & diceretur in populis, E∣go sum Pauli, ego Apollo, ego autem Ce∣phae, communi Presbyterorum consilio Ec∣clesiae gubernabantur: Postquam vero unusquis{que} eos quos baptizaverat, suos putabat esse in toto orbe decretum est, ut unus de Presbyteris electus, superpo∣neretur caeteris, ad quem omnis Eccle∣siae cura pertineret, & Schismatum semina tollerentur. That is, Presbyter and Bi∣shop are the same, and before through Sa∣tans instigation there were divisions, and some said, I am of Paul, I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, The Churches were governed by Presbyters in common: but afterward when every one thought those to be his, whom he had baptized; it was declared through the whole world, that one should be set above the rest, and on him all the care of the Church devolved, and the seeds of Schisms rooted out: I. Some think Jerome in that place spea∣keth of the power, Bishops in his time had come to, beyond what the first Bi∣shops had, That at the first, Presbyters
had a hand in Government, but after∣ward, Omnis Ecclesiae cura ad unum per∣tinebat, The whole care of the Church was put over upon the Bishop alone. But if you think Jerome there speaks of the first Introduction of Bishops unto the Church, then I say, he must be meant speaking of the Apostles own times. D. What reason have you to think so? I. First, because Jerom's words import this, while he says, that the thing which gave occasion to the introducing of Bi∣shops was the divisions that arose among Christians, and some said I am of Paul, I of Apollo, &c. And then Presbyters began to think these to be theirs whom they had baptized: Now thus we read it was a∣mong the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1. And though Jerome on Tit. 1. take occasion from the Community of Name, that the Apostle there uses, while he calls the Presbyter, Bishop, ver: 5. and 7. compared together, to shew, that at first there were no Bishops above Presbyters: yet this will not necessarily infer that there was no distinction of Office betwixt Bishop and Presbyter, when the Apostle wrot to Titus, or that Jerome thought there
was no such distinction then: But that as the names were then promiscuously us∣ed by the Apostle, so sometimes there was no distinction of the Offices, till necessi∣ty introduced it, which change Jerome takes occasion to speak of from the com∣munity of Name still used by the Apostle even after the change was made. Second∣ly, because that decree which Jerome says was made over all the world for intro∣ducing Bishops; had it been after the Apostles times, we should have some ac∣count of it in antiquity, about what year, after what manner, in what Council, &c. that Decree was made, and no change that followed upon it: but the vestige of this is to be found. Thirdly, The suppo∣sing such an universal change of Govern∣ment after the Apostles were gone, will infer, that shortly after the Apostles there was an universal defection in all the Chri∣stian world from that Government, which ye think the Apostles left as unal∣terable in the Church: which is very hard to imagine. What! Not one ho∣nest man in all the world, that we hear of, to open his mouth and oppose this innovation, but without contradiction,
Toto orbe decretum est; how cold will you make the zeal of those Primitive Christi∣ans, to have been in respect of your own now adays. Fourthly, because Jerome tells us this change was made, ad tollenda schismata, And, in remedium schismatis, to take away Schism. Now to think, that the Apostles left a Government in the Church, which was liable to this great inconvenience of Schism, and that those who came after saw cause to change that Government unto ano∣ther, for shunning of the foresaid evil; Is too great an Imputation upon the wis∣dom of the Apostles, and too great a preferring of Posterity before them: But this is salv'd, if we say, that the Apostles themselves, forseeing that parity would breed Schism, did before their departure for preventing of this, set Bishops over Presbyters. Fifthly, because this same Je∣rome in sundry places of his writings, de∣rives the Original of Bishops, as high as the Apostles, if not higher, de Scriptor. Eccles. he says, Jacobus ab Apostolis sta∣tim, &c. James was by the Apostles im∣mediately after Christs Ascension made Bishop of Jerusalem, and that to him
succeded Simon. And on Galat. 1.19. He says as much of Titus at Crete, of Po∣lycarp at Smyrna, of Epaphroditus at Phi∣lippi, and again, de Scrip. Eccles. He makes Mark the first Bishop of Alexan∣dria, and in Epist. ad Euagrium, says, Ʋt sciamus traditiones Apostolicas sumptas de veteri Testamento, Quod Aaron & filij ejus & Levitae, in Templo fuerunt, hoc si∣bi Episcopi & Presbyteri & Diaconi, in Ecclesia vendicent. That is, that we may know the Apostolical Traditions to be taken out of the Old Testament; What Aaron and his Sons and the Levites were in the Temple, that Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons are in the Church: And Epist. 54. Apud nos Apostolorum locum te∣nent Episcopi; With us the Bishops hold the room of the Apostles. And Epist. 1. Ad Heliodorum. And dialog. ad∣versus Luciferianos, and Epist. ad Ripa∣rium adversus Vigilantium, Miror San∣ctum Episcopum, in cujus Paraecia esse Presbyter dicitur, acquiescere furori ejus & non virga Apostolica confringere vas ini∣tile. Where you see, he calls the Bi∣shop's power, Virga Apostolica, The Apo∣stolical Rod, or which was derived from
them. These, and moe Testimonies are brought out of Jerom's Writings, to shew that he deduces Episcopacy from the A∣postles themselves: So that if you think in some places he cryeth down Bishops as an invention later than the Apostles, you shall find that in many moe places, he makes them high enough. And if you will needs have this Father to con∣tradict himself, it will be with advantage to Bishops; For, for one word against them he speaks three for them. But if you will save his Credit, you must un∣derstand that change he speaks of, to have been in the Apostles own times. D. But Jerome says, Episcopi nove∣rint se magis consuetudine quam disposi∣tionis dominicae veritate, Presbyteris es∣se majores, That is, Let Bishops know that they are greater then Presbyters, rather by cu∣stom, then by the truth of the Lords appointment. Which words shew, that Episcopacy came into the Church by custom, not by any divine right. I. Some are of opinion that Jerome speaks of that authority Bishops were then invested with over Presbyters, be∣yond what the first Bishops were; this, he saith, they had attained to by custom:
for in the same Epistle he maketh three subordinate degrees of Clergy, and that Ex traditione Apostolica, By Apostolical Tradition (which words have much perplexed those of your perswasion) So that, if you think Jerome by, Consuetudo, meaneth Custome which came in after the Apostles times, you shall make him say, and unsay in one and the same Epistle. But if by, Consuetudo, be meant that Authority the Bishops in his time did ex∣ercise, beyond what the first Bishops did, no such inconvenience will follow. And that he is so to be understood ap∣pears from this, that in equalling the Bishop as he was at first with the Presby∣ter, he saith, Quid facit Episcopus, quod non facit Presbyter, Excepta Ordinatione, That is, What doth the Bishop, which the Presbyter doth not, except Ordi∣nation: Where you see, though he make the Bishop above the Presbyter as to Ordination, yet he seemeth to equal them as to Jurisdiction. And this seems agree∣able to what he saith, that at first, inter plures Ecclesiae cura divisa, and, Commu∣ni Presbyterorum consilio gubernatae Eccle∣siae. i. e. Presbyters did at first by com∣mon
counsel govern the Churches, which doth not necessarily exclude the first Bi∣shops. And afterward speaking of the power that accresced in after times to Bi∣shops, he saith, ad unum omnis Ecclesiae cura delata est, all the care of the Church was put over upon one. He seems to mean, that the Bishops afterward acted solely, to avoid schism that arose from the disagreeing of many Counsels, thus some answer that place of Jerome. 2. Others, as the learned Davenant, think, That by, dominicae dispositionis veritas, Jerome meant Christ's express Command, and by, Consuetudo, Apostolical practice begun by the Apostles, and continued by their Suc∣cessors. And this is very probable, for this same Jerome writing, ad Marcellum, about the observation of Lent, saith, it is apostolica traditio, and adversus Luci∣ferianos, calleth it Ecclesiae consuetudo, so that according to him, what was begun by the Apostles may be called Church cu∣stome, because continued by the Church, So then, this will be Jerom's meaning, Bishops are greater than Presbyters, not by Christ's express Command, but by custome brought into the Church by the Apostles and
continued by their Successors. And now to say no more of this Father, whom you take to be the great prop of your Cause in antiquity; consider seriously these few things anent him, 1. Doth not Jerome expresly speak of an Aposto∣lical right, at least, that Episcopacy hath, and that in very many places of his wri∣tings, as I hinted before. 2. Where he seems to speak otherwise, suppose he were to be understood in your meaning, which is, to make Bishops of later date than the Apostles: Yet doth he not with all say, that there was a necessity of bringing Bishops into the Church, that thereby Schism might be put out and kept out? And that this was done by a Decree through the whole Christi∣an World. And, 3. Did he not approve of Episcopacy from it's first Institution, down to his own time, as still necessa∣ry for preserving Unity and Peace in the Church? and submitteth to it. Now would ye all thus far go along with Je∣rome, our contests about Bishops and their first rise, might soon cease. Mr. Durham on Revel. pag. 227. answering the obje∣ction, that all antiquity did condemn
Aerius, because he took away all distin∣ction betwixt Bishop and Presbyter, an∣swers, that Aerius was condemned, not simply as maintaining any thing con∣trary to truth in this, but as imprudent∣ly brangling the order than established in the Church, to the hazard of their Union: Now setting aside the dispute anent the antiquity of Bishops. Have not we in this Land been, and are not you and many others, as chargeable with this imprudence, as ever Aerius was: for ye would take away the difference be∣twixt Bishop and Presbyter, to the hazar∣ding of Peace and Union, and so brangles that order which under Episcopacy hath been maintained in the Church for many Centuries of years? D. You say Episcopacy is necessary for preserving the Church in unity and keeping out of Schism; but I think not so, or that ever God did appoint it for this end: for the Holy Ghost would never ordain that for a remedy, which could not reach the end: but became a Stirup for the Pope to get into his Sadle, for if there be a necessi∣ty of setting up one Bishop over many Pres∣byters for preventing Schism, there is the
same necessity of setting one Arch-bishop over many Bishops, and one Patriarch over ma∣ny Arch-bishops, and one Pope over all; un∣less you imagine there is hazard of Schism only among Presbyters and not among Bi∣shops and Arch-bishops. I. When you say you think not Epis∣copacy necessary to keep out Schism, in this you forsake Jerome who makes the taking away and preventing of schism the reason of bringing Episcopacy into the Church. Also you forsake Calvine who Institut. lib. 4. cap. 4. num. 2. Say∣eth, Bishops were set over Presbyters, ne ex aequalitate, dissidia, ut fieri solet, ore∣rentur, that is, lest discords should arise from equality, as is usual to be. As for the setting up of Arch-bishops, and Pa∣triarchs, it is a thing anciently practised in the Church, as antiquity sheweth, and something of this I hinted to you before from Titus, and his Successors sup∣posed to be Arch-bishops in Crete. And from Ignatius who calleth himself Bishop of Syria, &c. And the first Council of Nice speaking of Patriarchs, call their Precedency, Mos antiquus, Can. 6. This was found to contribute to the Churches
Unity; and Calvine expresly approves of it, Institut. lib. 4. Cap. 4. Sect. 4. Quod autem singulae provinciae unum habebant inter Episcopos, Archiepiscopum, quod item in Nicaena Synodo constituti sunt Patriar∣chae, qui essent ordine & dignitate Archi∣episcopis superiores, id ad disciplinae con∣servationem pertinebat, i. e. That every Province had an Arch-bishop over Bishops, and that the Council of Nice did ap∣prove of Patriarchs over Arch-bishops, was a thing that belonged to the preser∣vation of Discipline. And in that same place Calvin saith, that although he lik∣eth not the word, Hierarchy, yet if we look upon the thing it self, saith he, that is, Church-government by Bishops, Arch-bishops and Patriarchs, Reperiemus vete∣res Episcopos non aliam regendi Ecclesiae formam voluisse fingere ab ea, quam dominus verbo suo praescripsi, i. e. We shall find those ancient Bishops had no thought of seigning any other form of Government from that which the Lord prescribed in his Word. And further, that for order's sake there was one Patriarch above the rest of the Patriarchs, with a certain kind of Priority, who was called Episcopus Pri∣mae
Sedis, Concil. Carthag. 3. can. 26. and is a thing granted by Protestant Wri∣ters. Among others, see Mysterium Iniqui∣tatis Philippi Mornaei, pag. 203. 204. &c. and Bucer, inter Scripta Anglicana, pag. 583. and all this was done to main∣tain order. You say there is no less ha∣zard of Schism among Bishops and Arch-bishops, &c. than among meer Presby∣ters. I deny not but there may be, and have been Schisms, and clashings among Bishops; yet I say, it's a Government not so liable to this incon∣venience as a meer parity is: No Go∣vernment is so exempted, but it may be abused by corrupt men; yet one form may be better in it self than another, and more conducing to the ends of Go∣vernment: Aristocratie may be abus∣ed, yet it hath in it more of the nature of Government than a meer confused Democratie. So Episcopacy is the best Government, although the Pope hath abused it. Certainly the best and most useful things in the World may be abu∣sed through the corruptions of men: are not the Scriptures of God perverted by Hereticks, and must the Scriptures
be therefore cryed down? Monarchy is oft through the default of men turn∣ed into tyrrany, must all Monarchy therefore be cryed down? Bu∣cer de vi & usu mnisterij, cap. de discipli∣na Cleric. inter scripta Anglicana, pag. 583. speaking of the Bishop of Rome abusing his primacy, saith, Episcopacy must not therefore be abolished, quia, saith he, omnino necesse est ut singuli clerici suos ha∣beant custodes & procuratores, instauran∣da est Episcoporum authoritas. D. But let us return to the Fathers. Mr. Durham on Revel. pag. 225. saith, not only Jerom was of Aerius his mind about the equality of Presbyter and Bishop, but also some other Fathers, as Augustine, Am∣brose, Chrysostome, &c. I. Mr. Durham brings this as Medina's assertion, as he is cited by Bellarmine; to which I say, 1. Suppose these Fathers to be of Jerom's opinion, no great pre∣judice will hereby ensue to Bishops, as have already shewed. 2. It's strang Mr. Durham should upon any's testimony cite Augustine as being of Aerius his judge∣ment anent Episcopacy, since he knew very well that Augustine directly makes
Aerius herein to be erroneous, and inrol∣leth him in his Catalogue of Hereticks, even for his judgement in this, Haeresi 53. Dicebat etiam Presbyterum ab Episcopo nulla differentia debere discerni, i. e. Ae∣rius also said there ought to be no diffe∣rence betwixt Presbyter and Bishop. 3. Ambrose and Chrysostome whose words are cited by Mr. Durham, are mistaken; for their Testimonies will not come up the length intended. Ambrose or one Hilary as it's thought, saith, Presbyteri & Episcopi una est ordinatio, uter{que} enim sa∣cerdos est, sed Episcopus primus est, ut om∣nis Episcopus Presbyter sit, non tamen om∣nis Presbyter Episcopus: ille enim Epis∣copus est qui inter Presbyteros primus est, i. e. both a Presbyter and a Bishop is a Priest; but the Bishop is the first, so that every Bishop is a Presbyter, but every Presbyter is not a Bishop: but he is Bishop who is first among the Presby∣ters. And Chrysostome saith, That be∣twixt a Bishop and a Presbyter there is little difference. Yet both these Fa∣thers, you see, acknowledge, that a difference there is, and they were both Bishops themselves: Their opinion
might be that Bishop and Presbyter differ, gradu non ordine, that they might be both one Order and differ only in Degree; Which is still a debate in the Schools. So may be said of the rest cited by Medina. 4. That these Fathers were for a diffe∣rence, even by Divine or Apostolick war∣rant, will appear from other places in their writings. D. What; For a Divine Right, Mr. Durham on Revel. pag. 225. saith, that after distinction was made in the Church, betwixt Bishop and Presbyter, yet was it never accounted by antiquity to be jure divi∣no, by Divine Right. I. I shew you the contrary from Ire∣naeus, Tertullian, and others, yea, and from Jerome himself. Now for those o∣ther Fathers, First, hear Ambrose in his Comment. on 1 Cor. 12.28, (Quosdam posuit apostolos) he saith, ipsi sunt Episco∣pi, firmante illud Petro, Act. 1. & Epis∣copatum ejus accipiat alter. And on vers. 29. (Nurquid omnes apostoli) ve∣rum est, saith he, quia in ecclesia unus est Episcopus. Also on Phil. 1.1. Rather then he will allow by, Bishops, in that place single Presbyters to be meant, he,
expounds those Bishops not of such as re∣sided at Philippi, because, saith he, in one Church there could be but one Bi∣shop: but of Bishops and Deacons who were with Paul when he wrot that Epistle, as I told you before. So on 1 Tim. 3. Timotheus Episcopus erat. And for Augustine on Psalm. 45.16. by, Fathers, he means the Apostles, and by, the Sons, the Bishops, who, he saith, suc∣ceeded to the Apostles. And contra Cresconium, lib. 2. Cap. 37. Ecclesiam Hie∣rosolymitanam primus Jacobus Episcopatu suo rexit. i. e. James was the first Bishop of Jerusalem. And, Epist. 122. he saith, divina voce laudatur sub Angeli nomine praepositus ecclesiae, Speaking of the An∣gels, Revel. 2.3. and contra literas Peti∣liani lib. 2. Cap. 51. Quid tibi fecit eccle∣siae Romanae cathedra in qua Petrus sedit, & in qua hodie Anastasius sedet i. e. What ill hath the Chair of Rome (so he calls the Episcopal Authority) done to thee in which Peter once did sit, and in which Anastasius now sitteth. From these and the like passages in Augustine, we ma know what his meaning is, when writig to Jerome, he saith, Qanquam secundum
honorum vocabula quae jam ecclesiae usus, ob∣tinuit Espiscopatus Presbyterio major sit. there he speaks of the use of these words, what it was at that time in respect of former times. Honorum vocabula, clear∣ly shews this. Then hear Chrysostome on 1 Tim. 4.14. (Cum impositione manuum presbyterii) Non de presbyteris loquitur sed de Episcopis: neque enim presbyte∣ri Episcopum Timotheum ordinabant. i. e. That place speaketh not of Presbyters, but of Bishops, for Presbyters did not ordain Timothy who was a Bishop. Sun∣dry Testimonies might be produced out of other Fathers, deducing the original of Bishops from the Apostles, or high∣er. Cyprian is full to this purpose. Epist. 27. ad Lapsos,, he saith, that Episcopa∣cy is founded, divina lege, by the Di∣vine Law, and Epist. 68. he calleth it, Traditio divina & observatio Apostolica, and for this adduceth Act. 1.15. Quando in ordinando in locum Judae Episcopo, Pe∣trus ad plebem loquitur. i. e. Peter there speaks to the people of ordaining a Bi∣shop in the room of Judas. See also, Epist. 69. Epist. 42. and Epist. 10, 11, 12. &c
D. What antiquity saith, moveth  not; nor resolve I in this matter to be con∣cluded by Fathers, or Councils, who wer fallible; or by Apostolical Traditions. There were many corruptions which crept into the Church in the very infancy of it, and were generally received, as the millenary opini∣on, and giving the communion to In∣fants. I. Yet you can grip very closs to the least shadow in antiquity, which seem∣eth any way to make for you in this con∣troversie, and can manage it to your best advantage: but when you say that you resolve not to be concluded by an∣tiquity herein: by this you clearly con∣fess that antiquity pincheth you sore; and you are like to be born down by the stream of it. Tertullian saith, Id verius quod prius, id prius quod ab initio, ab initio id quod ab Apostolis, id ab Apostolis traditum, quod apud Ecclesias Apostolorum fuerat sacro sanctum. As for these corruptions you name, which early crept into the Church, they were not so generally, and univer∣sally received, as Episcopacy was, nor could they ever so clearly deduce their Original from the Apostles.
D. Notwithstanding all you say to make Bishops as ancient as the Apostles, yet the authority of those great protestant Divines, who have opposed Episcopacy, prevails much with one to suspect Bishops cannot lay claim so high. I: Suffer not your judgement to be cap∣tivated by the Name or Authority of a∣ny man without proof. I fear there be too much implicite faith among us, which we condemn in Papists: and be∣sides, may be, the opposition of the most knowing, and learned Protestants to Epis∣copacy, is not so great as you imagine. D. What think you of Calvin, is not he much against Episcopacy in his Writings? as he was also in his practise, when he li∣ved a Minister at Geneve in an evenly parity with the rest of his brethren there, where Presbyterian parity as it had been in purest primitive times, was again re∣vived. I. Before you take the Government of Geneve to be a reviving of primitive parity, as you say: It is fit you first so∣lidly answer all I have produced to shew that from the Apostles dounward, there were always Bishops over Ministers, or
Presbyters even in the purest times. I will not insist to shew you, that when Geneve reformed Religion, she had no purpose to put away Episcopacy, if it could have been preserved. You may read Durel's view of Government from pag. 151. to 161. who will inform you in this. Nor will I debate whither Calvin lived in an evenly parity with the rest of his brethren, only hear what Mason a∣pologizing for the Government of Gene∣ve, defence of ordin. pag. 175. speak∣ing of Calvin and Beza saith, They be∣ing chosen to a place of eminency, and endued with Jurisdiction, they having preeminence in every action, and con∣sequently in Ordination, none can with reason deny them the substance of the Episcopal Office. This he speaketh of them in respect of the rest of the Mini∣sters at Geneve. And B. Andrews, Resp. 3. ad Molineum, speaking of Calvin and Be∣za, says, Quid attinet abolere nomen, re∣tinere rem? Nam illorum uter{que} dum vi∣xerunt, quid erant, nisi abolito nomine re ipsa Episcopi? i. e. To what purpose is it to abolish the name of Bishop, and re∣tain the thing, for both these (Calvin
and ) what were they while living, but indeed Bishops, though with∣out the name? And was it not so even among our selves, when the name of Bishop could not be endured? a meer parity is hardly practicable any where, unless it be in Ʋtopia. Now since you think Calvin, a great adversary to Bi∣shops (a mistake that many are under) I will produce some few places out of him to undeceive you. Institut. lib. 4. Cap. 4. Sect. 2. speaking of the first Bi∣shops, he citeth Jerom's words ad Eua∣grium, and then subjoyneth, alibi tamen docet quam antiquum fuerit institutum, di∣cit enim Alexandriae a Marco Evangelista usque ad Dionysium, &c. i. e. Neverthe∣less in another place, Jerome teacheth how ancient the institution of Bishops is, for he sayeth, that at Alexandria from Mark downward, there was still a Bishop, &c. Where you see Calvin passing that place of Jerome, that seemeth to make against the antiquity of Bishops, he rather lay∣eth hold on that other place that speak∣eth them as ancient as Mark the Evan∣gelist. And a little before, Calvin saith, Bishops were brought into the Church,
ne ex aequalitate, ut fieri solet, dissidia nas∣cerentur. Observe this, he saith, equa∣lity of Ministers breedeth strifes, and, ut fieri solet, so it useth to be. And from these words of Calvin, we may collect that he giveth to the first Bishops some superiority in power above the Presby∣ters, without which, saith he, dissidia nascerentur, Strifes would arise, and so he makes them more than meer Modera∣tors. Another passage of Calvin I cited to you a little before, Institut. lib. 4. cap. 4. sect. 4. Si rem omisso vocabulo intuea∣mur, reperiemus, &c. And Institut. lib. 4. Cap. 5. Sect. 11. Supersunt Episcopi & Paraeciarum rectores, qui utinam de reti∣nendo officio contenderent, libenter illis con∣cederemus eos habere pium & eximium mu∣nus, i. e. Now we are to speak of Bishops, who I wish would contend about the re∣taining of their Office, we would wil∣lingly grant unto them (He is speaking of the popish Bishops) that they have a holy and excellemt Office, if they would rightly discharge it. Where you see he cal∣leth the Office, pium & eximium munus, Holy and excellent. And again a little after, shewing how, when it is objected
to the Papists, that their Regnum, i. e. Church Government as managed by them, is antichristian tyranny, they answer, it is that venerable Hierarchy, so much and often commended by holy and great men. Which answer of theirs he repells thus, Sect. 13. Quasi vero sancti Patres quum Ec∣clesiasticam Hierarchiam aut spirituale regi∣men ut ipsis per manus ab Apostolis tradi∣tum erat, commendarent, hoc deforme & vastitatis plenum chaos somniarent, ubi Episcopi vel rudes, &c. i. e. as if forsooth the holy Fathers when they commend that Ecclesiastical Hierarchy as it was delivered, or handed unto them from the Apostles, did mean it of your deformed Govern∣ment. Where you see, he saith, that the ancient Episcopacy was delivered down to the Fathers, per manus ab A∣postolis; from the Apostles hands, or from the Apostles by hand to hand. And on Titus 1.5. He saith, We may learn from that Text, that then there was not such an equality among the Ministers of the Church, Quin unus aliquis authorita∣te & consilio praesset, i. e. But that some one person was in authority and counsel above the rest. And in a long Letter
of his to an old friend, who now was made a Bishop in the Church of Rome, Ʋeteri amico nunc Praesuli, it is to be found in the Volume of his Opuscula, pag. 72. he saith, Episcoparus ipse a Deo profectus est, Episcopacy it self is from God, & institutus, and institute by God: and within a few Lines after, addeth, In aestimando Episcopi munere ne{que} recte ne{que} tuto credi populo: Judicium unius Dei esse audiendum, Cujus & authoritate est consti∣tutum illud & legibus definitum, i. e. In esteeming of the Episcopal Office, we must not regard the people's judgement, but Gods only, by whose authority it is constitute, &c. And sundry other clear Testimonies in that Epistle, which were tedious here to recite. There he speaks not one word against the Office of a Bishop, but only against the abuses of it in the Romish Church. In one place of it, he saith, omnino tibi sane quod ab Episcopo requiritur praestandum, aut fedes Episcopi deserenda, i. e. either do the duty of a Bishop, or leave the Bishop's Seat: He willeth him not to leave it on any terms, no, but if he minds to be faithful keep it still. And in an Epistle
of his to the King of Poland, he appro∣veth of all the degrees of the Hierarchy in the ancient Church, even unto Pa∣triarchs. And in a long Epistle to the Duke of Somerset Protector of England in Edward the sixth, his Minority, as it is cited by Durel View of Govern. pag. 165. Giving his advice anent reform∣ing of many things in Religion, yet ne∣ver adviseth to remove Episcopacy out of the English Church, which had he been of your opinion, he would not have failed to have done: Only he ad∣viseth that both Bishops and Ministers be put to swear they shall deliver no other Doctrine, but such as is contained in the articles of Religion. And what is worthy the observing in that Letter, he saith, Audio esse duo seditiosorum genera, quae adversus Regem & Regni statum caput extu∣lerunt: alij enim cerebrosi quidem, viz. sub Evangelij nomine , passim inve∣ctam vellent: alij vero in superstitionibus Antichristi obdurantur: ac merentur qui∣dem tum hi tum illi gladio ultore coerceri, i. e. I hear there are two sorts of sedi∣tious persons, who have gotten up the head against the King and State of the
Kingdom: The first a kind of heady humorous people, who under pretence of the Gospel would bring in confusi∣on, and disorder every where: The other are such who are hardned in their antichristian superstitions: and these in authority should restrain both. Now how near what he saith of the first sort, may touch your selves, I leave it to your consideration: There is one passage more in Calvin, I cannot ommit, in his Treatise to the Emperour Charles the fifth, and States of the Empire, intituled, de necessitate reformandae Ecclesiae, speaking of the Popish Bishops, he saith, Talem no∣bis si Hierarchiam exhibeant, in qua sic emineant Episcopi, ut Christo subesse non recusent & ab illo tanquam unico capite pendeant & ad ipsum referantur, in qua sic inter se fraternam societatem colant, ut non alio nodo quam ejus veritate sint colli∣gati: tum vero nullo non anathemate dig∣nos fatear, qui eam non reverenter, summa∣que obedientia observent: haec vero mendax Hierarchiae larva quid habet simile? That is, if they will give us such an Hierarchy, in which Bishops will so be great, that withal they refuse not to be subject to
Christ as their only head, and aim at him, in which they so intertain brotherly so∣ciety among themselves, that they be not knit together by any bond but his Truth; Then if there be any that shall not reverence and obey such an Hierar∣chy, there is no curse or anathema which they are not worthy of. Thus he. So that if the Popish Bishops would renounce their dependance on the Pope, as their head, and in his stead own Christ, and imbrace the truth of the Go∣spel Doctrine; Calvin would have all to reverence and obey them, and thinks them worthy to be cursed, who would not. By this time you may perceive Cal∣vin is not such an opposite to Bishops as you took him to be. He knew ve∣ry well what great difference there was betwixt Primitive and Popish Episcopacy; nor would he cry down all Episcopacy as intolerable, antichristian, and I know not what, as is ordinary for many now to do, who understand little, either of the nature or antiquity of it. Saravia saith, he defendeth Calvin's opinion a∣gainst Beza: and truly although Beza be no such unfriend to Bishops as many
apprehend, yet Calvin far less. B. Hall, speaking against the common report, that fathered Presbytery upon Calvin, saith, I cannot find the Father of Presby∣tery: and Mr. Durel View of Government, Pag. 151. saith, neither was Geneve it's mother: and thinks that the juncture of affairs brought it to the doors of these Churches, where it was taken in, and maintained, and that (as he saith after∣ward) it was a Government not of choice, but of chance or necessity: He cites Mr. Hooker, who in the preface to his Ecclesiastical Policy, saith, that the Popish Bishop and Clergie being de∣parted Geneva (the Bishop was put a∣way not by the reformed, but by the Papists themselves. See Durel, Pag. 157, 158, 159.) it had been a thing impos∣sible to have chosen another in his room. And Durel, Pag. 152. saith, it doth not at all appear that the Ministers who first reformed Geneve (Calvin was not then come) did settle equality out of any dis∣like to Hierarchical subordination, but were bent upon the reforming of doctrine, and then finding themselves in an equality with∣out any Church Superior over them, they even continued so.
D. Yet since that time many able men who lived under Presbyterian parity, have defended it as good and warrantable. I. True, many have indeed brought what they could in defence of it, but the ablest and most judicious of them have only brought reasons to prove the law∣fulness, as they conceived of what was done among them, but not that there was any necessity of doing so in other reformed Churches, which had retain∣ed Bishops. Blondel concluded his Apo∣logia pro sententia Hieronimi, with words to this purpose: By all which, we have said to assert the rights of Presbytrie, it is not our purpose to invalidat the ancient and Apostolical constitution of Episcopal Preemi∣nence, but we believe, wherever it is establish∣ed conformable to the ancient Canons, it must be carefully preserved, and wheresoe∣ver by some heat of contention, or o∣therwise it hath been put down or viola∣ted, it ought to be reverently restored. See for this Durel's view of Government, Pag. 339, 340. Where also is shewed, how by the importunity of some, the author was prevailed with to leave out these words at the Press. Beza de Ministro∣rum
gradibus, Cap. 18. Speaking of En∣gland's having Bishops, saith, fruantur sa∣ne ista Dei benificentia, quae utinam illi nationi sit perpetua: That is, let England enjoy that goodness of God to them, which I wish may be perpetual to that Nation. And Cap. 21. Pag. 343. Nedum ut quod falsissime & impudentissime quidam nobis objiciunt, Cuipiam ecclesiae sequendum nostrum peculiare exemplum praescribamus imperitissimorum illorum similes, qui nihil nisi quod ipsi agunt rectum putat. i. e. Much less as if (which some most falsly and impudently charge us with) we did prescribe our example of Go∣vernment to be followed by any other Church, like those unskilfull persons who think nothing right but what they do themselves. You see then, Beza thought not other Protestant Churches were obliged to write after Geneva's Co∣py, nor did he wish a change of the En∣glish Episcopacy. D. Beza is no friend to Bishops, as ap∣pears by Saravia's writing against him. I. Beza looked not upon all kind of Episcopacy as unlawful, as you do, it's true he thought Episcopacy but an hu∣mane
Institution, as he expounds his Episcopus humanus, yet he was far from your way of condemning Episcopacy ab∣solutely, but thought it a lawful and useful order in the Church. In his dis∣pute with Saravia, he saith, Si qui sunt (Quod sane mihi non facile persuaseris) qui omnem Episcoporum ordinem rejiciunt, absit ut quisquam sanae mentis furoribus illo∣rum assentiatur, i. e. If there be any (as I hardly believe there are) who reject all the order of Bishops, God forbid a∣ny man of a sound mind, should assent to their madness Beza was not against Protestant Bishops at all, for in a Letter to Arch-bishop Whitgift, related in the said Arch-bishop's life, written by Sr. George Paul, he speaketh thus; In my writings, I ever impugned the Romish Hie∣rarchy, but never intended to touch or im∣pugn the Policy of the Church of England, or to exact of you to form your selves to our pattern. How respectfully writeth he to Grindal Bishop of London, Epist. 23. he saith, Quo majore posthac poena digni e∣runt, qui porro authoritatem tuam asperna∣buntur. i. e. How much greater punish∣ment shall they deserve who shall dis∣pise
your authority. Thus Beza speaks to that Bishop, and thinks his authority ought to be reverenced. And in the close of that same Epistle, he saith, Je∣sus te custodiat, & in tanto tibi commisso munere sancto suo spiritu regat, & magis ac magis confirmet. i. e. Jesus preserve you, govern, and more and more con∣firm you by his holy spirit, in that great Office which is committed to you. And Epist. 58. To the same Grindal, he saith, Dominus te isthic speculatorem & judicem constituit. Now from these favourable Testimonies of Beza in behalf of Episco∣pacy, we may conclude; 1. That he did not think Episcopacy unlawful, else would he have wished the continuance of an unlawful, sinful Government in England, as I shew you a little before expresly he doth? 2. If Beza thought Presbytrie the first and Apostolical Go∣vernment, yet certainly he judged it not unalterable, otherwise would he have spoken with such respect of Episcopacy, as you see he doth. The same may be said of Jewel, Bilson, Morton, &c. their concessions laboriously set down, in jus divinum Ministerij Anglic. Pag. 59, 60,
61. Certainly these Bs. if they thought not Episcopacy, jure divino, neither thought they Presbytry so, else would they have been Bishops themselves? And Calvin how respectfully writeth he to Arch-bishop Cranmer, beside what I ci∣ted out of him before? Durel View of Government, Pag. 161. Speaking of Cal∣vin, saith, he is of the mind that Epis∣copacy was the Government that Calvin approved most, and that he took it to be of Apostolical Institution; though his opinion was, that the Church according to her exigencies, in relation to places, times, and other circumstances, may dis∣pense with it. Thus he speaks of Cal∣vin, and subjoyneth a passage out of his Epistle to Cardinal Sadolet, which he conceiveth is to that purpose; Disci∣plinam qualem habuit vetus ecclesia nobis de∣esse, neque nos diffitemur, &c. D. I confess I am somewhat moved with these clear Testimonies you cite out of Calvin, and Beza; whom I ever looked on before. as stout impugners of all kind of Episcopa∣cy; Yet that I may add some moe of great∣est note, who have withstood Bishops. What say you to Salmasius, Moulin, Chamier,
Blondel? These four may come in the second rank of Protestant worthies, and have all declared themselves against Bishops; Mou∣lin de munere pastorali, and in his letters to Bp. Andrews; Salmasius in his Walo Messalinus: Chamier in his Popish Con∣troversies: Blondel in his Apologia pro sententia Hieronymi? I. Salmasius did retract his opinion, and turned to the Episcopal perswasion, as himself declares in his answer to Mil∣ton, cited by Durel, Pag. 297. speaking of Bishops, and of his own Observati∣on how confusions and strange errors sprang up in England, immediatly upon the removal of Bishops, he saith of him∣self, experientia edoctum, ut dies sequens est magister prioris, sententiam mutasse, &c. i. e. He being taught by experi∣ence, as the following day is teacher of the former, he changed his opinion. But setting this aside, as also what we heard Blondel closed his Apology with, let us but hear how far by evidence out of antiquity they are forced to yield: Sal∣masius in his Walo Messalinus grants, rem esse antiquissimam, ut hi duo ordines in ecclesia fuerint distincti, Episcoporum &
Presbyterorum; si excipiantur Apostolica tempora, i. e. It is a most ancient thing, that Presbyters and Bishops have been distinct in the Church, if we except the Apostles own times, and Cap. 4. Pag. 253. cirea medium aut initium secundi se∣culi primus singularis Episcopatus supra Pres∣byteratum introductus est, Where he grants Episcopacy about the beginning of the second age, so very near he grants Bi∣shops to the Apostles times; for the A∣postle John died about the beginning of the second age. Moulin grants, Statim post Apostolorum tempora, aut etiam eorum tempore, ut testatur historia Ecclesiastica, constitutum esse ut unus inter caeteros Pres∣byteros Episcopus vocaretur qui in collegas haberet praeeminentiam, ad vitandam con∣fusionem, quae saepe ex aequaitate nascitur, i. e. Immediatly after the Apostles, or even in their time, one among the Pres∣byters was set over the rest with the name of Bishop. Where he saith, this might have been, Apostolorum tempore, even in the Apostles time. Chamier de Oecumen. Pontif. lib. 10. cap. 6. confesses from Jerom's making Bishops as ancient at Alexandria as Mark, Inaequalitatem hanc
esse antiquissimam, that this inequality a∣mong Church-men is most ancient. And a little after he saith, Conjicere licet inno∣vationem hanc factam, aut nondum elapso aut vix elapso primo seculo. i. e. We may conjecture this change into Episcopacy was made either before the first age of the Church was ended, or scarce end∣ed. Now John the Apostle outlived the first age, and died in the beginning of the second. Now do not these con∣cessions amount to as much as a yielding of the whole Cause. But let us allow any of those four Divines as long a time after the Apostles as they will demand before Bishops were introduced: and we shall hear Blondel say, and the au∣thors of jus divinum Ministerij Anglic. Pag. 124. from him, that before the year 140. there was not a Bishop over Presbyters, and that the, Toto orbe decretum, in Jerome was not long before the said year 140. Thus Blondel who takes the longest time for bringing in Bishops, yet acknow∣ledges them so early, that within 40. years and less, after the Apostle John, Bishops are every where settled in the Church. Now from your opinion of
the unalterableness of Presbyterian Go∣vernment left by the Apostles, and from Blondel's concession, that within less than 40. years of the Apostle John, Bishops were by an universal decree received in∣to the Church: I thus reason. If there were Bishops found in the Church within less then 40. years after the Apostles times, there behoved to be Bishops in the Apostles times, otherwise one of these absurdities will follow, none of which can be admitted. 1. That that Genera∣tion of Christians who lived about 40. years and less after the Apostles, was al∣together ignorant of Christ and his A∣postles mind anent the continuing of Pres∣byterian parity as the unalterable form of Government, else they would not have adventured, and that so unanimously upon a change of that Government which had a jus divinum, for it's warrant. And is this probable, or is it possible, that those who lived so near to the Apostles, that without question, sundry of them had seen John and conversed with him: That these, I say, should all be igno∣rant of John's mind anent Church-govern∣ment. Or else it will follow (which is
yet worse) that that Generation brought in Episcopacy notwithstanding they knew Christ and his Apostles had left Parity as unalterable in the Church. And that thus over the belly of knowledge and conscience, they did all as oneman (for we hear not of the least opposition, as we read there was against other Innova∣tions, which perverse and Heretical Spi∣rits laboured to bring early into the Church) conspire against Christ and his Apostles Government. Were not this hard to be imagined, that those Chri∣stians who were daily dying for Christ and the Gospel, should at the same time be guilty of bringing into the Church, a Government contrary to his mind: and that against their own light? What remains then, but this, if within four∣ty years after the Apostles, Bishops were generally received in the Christian world, by the confession of your ablest Writers; there behoved to be Bishops even in the Apostles time. For it is not conceivable how such a great change should be made in so short a time; and that without a∣ny noise or opposition, for any thing we hear, unless you admit these absurdities,
which I think you will be loath to do. For had there been either knowledge or conscience in but a few, whither Mini∣sters or other Christians of that time; is it possible they would have suffered that change, which imported so gross a viola∣tion, pass so smoothly, and without ve∣ry great contradiction? But further, to let you see that those Divines come e∣ven as great a length as needeth to be de∣sired. Blondel in his Apologia, Pag. 25. Speaking of the very first meetings of Pres∣byters, that were in the beginning of Christianity, he saith, Antiquissimo inter Collegas primatus contigit, i. e. The prima∣cy fell upon the eldest, and Pag. 53. he grants, that this first Presbyter had the chief hand in Ordination: and after∣ward that it was for this place that Dio∣trephes made so much ado, and is called by the Apostle . And Thebu∣thus did the like at Jerusalem shortly af∣ter. And again he confesses that this Primus Presbyter had authority with his precedency, quis enim, saith he, Praesi∣dentiam sine authoritate somniet? and lest, it seems, he be thought to give too much power to that  or chief Presbyter,
as indeed he giveth him an Episcopal power, he addeth, Ego sane hanc Politi formam ab initio observatam, & Christianis traditam, libere crediderim, sed ut mutabi∣lem & pro usu & arbitrio Ecclesiae mutan∣dam. Where, after he hath confessed a first Presbyter with an Episcopal power in effect, finding this too high a concession, which yet truth enforceth him to, he sayeth, that that form was mutable at the pleasure of the Church. And Cha∣mier confesseth that there was always from the beginning, a Primus Presbyter or first Minister, and that he had Novam potestatem & Jurisdictionem, ne esset Epis∣copatus merus titulus, i. e. A new pow∣er and Jurisdiction, that his Episcopa∣cy might not be a meer title. This he confesseth when pressed with Testi∣monies out of antiquity. And what needs more than we find Blondel and him con∣fessing. And Moulen in Epist. 3. to Bishop Andrews at last granteth, that Or∣do Episcopalis est juris Apostolici, i. e. The Episcopal Order is by Apostolical right: and then lest he should seem by this con∣cession altogether to have yielded up the Cause to the Bishop: he subjoyneth a
distinction betwixt jus Apostolicum, and jus divinum. And that although he grant Episcopacy to have Apostolical war∣rant, yet that will not infer a Divine un∣alterable warrant; for, saith he, some things which were brought into the Church by Apostolical prudence, as fit for that time, are now abrogate as Dea∣conesses. Stillingfleet in his Irenicum, Pag. 230. useth this same evasion. To whom the learned and judicious Author of the ac∣count of ancient Church-government, among other things returns this answer, that it's granted, that some Apostolical practices, yea, and constitutions are alterable, be∣cause they were introduced by the A∣postles, upon reasons and considerati∣ons not holding equally for all places, times and persons: but if some be thus alterable, yet it follows not that there∣fore any or all are so. And then the question will be, who shall judge what practices are alterable, what not? or when the reasons of them are dispensable, when not? Now I suppose none can ration∣ally say, that any private man, or lesser part of a Society is competent Judge of these practices and reasons; else what
confusion will ensue, every one esta∣blishing, or abrogating what he pleas∣eth, but this belongeth to the Church in her Representativ's; and according∣ly we find Bishops and Councils have re∣tained and declared Episcopacy down∣ward from the Apostles, through many Centuries of years, as the standing un∣alterable Apostolical Government, and that reasons of its first Institution do hold still, to wit, preservation of Unity, shun∣ning of Schism and the like: But these Apostolical practices which were found∣ed on temporary reasons and occasions, were permitted to run into a desuetude. Thus you see what shifts the ablest Pens who have set themselves against Episco∣pacy, are driven unto, to shun a Con∣quest. And truely by their great con∣cessions which they are forced to from evidence in antiquity, they yield the whole Cause. Hence it is we find them speaking so uncertainly in their Wri∣tings. Sometime one would think dis∣puting down all Bishops, or rather up Presbytrie: at an other time setting up Bishops higher, and more early than their purpose can well allow, or consist with
the Scope of their Debates: sometime again expressing their great respect for Bishops, and sincere wishes that such Churches as had them might still retain that happiness, as I hinted before. And I also shew that their purpose mainly was to vindicate the practice of their own Churches in having parity, and not to cry down Episcopacy, especially that which was in Protestant Churches, as Beza expresly professes; so did Blondel in the close of his Apologia, of which, I spoke before. D. There have been many moe Protestant Divines of great note, who lived since the Reformation in Europe, may be many of those have been no friends to Episco∣pacy. I. Durel View of Government, suppos∣eth a Council to be called, consisting of the most famous Protestant Divines, who since the Reformation have lived in all the Churches abroad, France, Geneve, Switzerland, Bohem, Poland, Holland, and the sundry parts of Germany, &c. And maketh Calvin Moderator, and puts Episcopacy to the Vote among them, and out of their Writings delivereth their opi∣nions
in favours of Episcopacy. You may see this at length in Durels View of Govern∣ment, from Pag. 199. to Pag. 309. And to them I may add our own John Knox, who, as is to be seen before the old Psalm Book, in the year 1560. preach∣ed in Edinburgh, at the admission of the superintendent of the three Lothians (a diocy large enough) which act was more Episcopal like than Presbyterian. Thus I have deduced unto you Episcopacy from Scripture, from the most primitive times which followed after the Apostles, and from the confessions and concessions of the ablest Protestant Divines: all which, I think, ought, and will be very con∣vincing to any who is pleased to lay aside prejudice, and impartially make search after truth in this point. To what I have said before, I add these few things. The Author of Jus Divi∣num Ministerij Anglicani, are at great pains to produce some Fathers, School∣men, and some Episcopal Divines in En∣gland, who were of opinion, that be∣twixt Presbyter and Bishop there is little or no difference. To which, I say, that the debate among the Schoolmen is meer∣ly,
whether Bishop and Presbyter, are diversi ordines, different orders, or on∣ly diversi gradus ejusdem ordinis, divers degrees of one and the same Order. Now this says nothing against Episcopacy, for even these, who think they differ only in degree, yet notwithstanding might be of the mind, that always from the A∣postles downward there were Bishops distinct from Presbyters; howbeit the difference was not so great as to consti∣tute a different Order, but only a high∣er degree, or eminency (as some speak) in the same Order. And these Fathers, and late Episcopal Divines might be of the same mind. This is sure, all of them looked on Episcopacy as lawful and use∣ful in the Church. The said Authors of Jus Divinum Mi∣nist. Angli. Pag. 64. say, that Eusebius, Irenaeus and others, &c. were in many things deceived themselves, and the cause of deceiving others. Answ. 1. They are hard put to it when they seek to relieve themselves by discrediting these ancients. 2. Suppone it were granted that Eusebi∣us was in some things deceived, must he therefore all along be deceived when he
speaks of Bishops superior to Presbyters. He makes it a great part of his work to set down the succession of Bishops in the most famous Primitive Churches, and to say, that in all this he was deceived, is Gratis dictum, said, but not proved. 3. It's strange if also Irenaeus was decei∣ed, who flourished above a hundred years before Eusebius, and had seen Po∣lycarp, who was the Apostle John's con∣temporary and disciple. Who can believe he could be ignorant what the Govern∣ment of the Church had been from the Apostles downward, living so near to their times. 4. Is it not much more pro∣bable that Jerome might be deceived, if we understand him to speak of the intro∣ducing of Bishops after the Apostles times? Certainly it is more like he might be mistaken than either Eusebius or Ire∣naeus, who lived long before him. They say further, that Irenaeus by Bishops meant no more but Presbyters, Pag. 114, 115. And Pag. 65. that the Fathers and Coun∣cils spake of Church-Officers of former times, according to the Stile of their own times. And again when pressed with the Catologues of Bishops out of Irenaeus and
others, they say, that these Bishops were only the first ordained Presbyters, and therefore this first ordained Presbyter is named and the rest passed by for the more expedit reckoning, and the Line of Suc∣cession only drawn from the first ordain∣ed Minister. Some of these answers are inconsistent; For 1. They say, Eusebius and Irenaeus were deceived when they spoke of Bishops: and next they say that by the Bishops, Irenaeus only meant Presbyters. Now how unsatisfactory these answers and the like are, the im∣partial Reader may judge. Only hea what Bucer says, De animarum cura inter scripta Anglicana, Pag. 280. Where after he hath related Jerom's words, which seem to make Bishops of later date than the Apostles, he saith, Credibile non est, diu ne{que} etiam in cunctis Ecclesiis ita obser∣vatum esse. Nam apud patres Hieronymo etustiores clara habemus testimonia quod e∣tiam Apostolorum temporibus unus e Presby∣teris electus at{que} ordinatus est qui caeteris omnibus praevit—& Ministerium, Epis∣copale praecipue & in summo gradu gessit. Where he shews, that even from the Apostles downward there was in the chief
Churches always a Bishop over Presby∣ters. And so he goeth on to shew that James was Bishop of Jerusalem, and that the like Order was keeped in other Churches, Quantum ex omnibus historiis Ecclesiasticis cognoscere possumus, and cites Tertullian, Cyprian, Irenaeus, Eusebius, to prove this; All more ancient than Jerome. D. I confess you have cleared me of sundry doubts I had anent Bishops, I thought little or nothing could be said for them, but that they were a meer groundless, and godless u∣surpation in the Church: for we have been taught to cry them down by all means, yet there is one thing, ought, I think, barr them to the door of this Church for ever: and that is the Covenants by which we are sworn against them. But since I can stay no longer with you at this time, I am content to hear what you can say to this at next meeting. I. Much more might be said for Bi∣shops Yet there is enough said if you be free of prejudice. And since you can stay no longer, I shall be willing to com∣mune with you anent the Obligation of the Covenant against Bishops, at another time: and so I bid you farewel.
If Blondel when he says, pag. 53. Eg sane hanc politiae formam ab initio observa∣tam libere concederem, sed mutabilem ta∣men, &c. Speak of a primitive parity, yet saith, that form was mutable. Pre∣fat. ad apolog. pag. 59. Hieronymus hanc formam (i. e. Episcopacy) non modo non improbavit, sed pro pacis bono semper ad∣misit. And in that same place vindicats Jerome from Aerianism. And in that same place he says Episcopacy is forma re∣giminis non per se mala & damnabilis, sed adnatis sensim corruptelis (viz. under po∣prie) vitiatae; and denys not, but that protestanti sola corruptelarum resectione con∣tenti esse poterant, & vitiatam deplorabant. And more to this purpose, he thought therefore Episcopacy in it self lawful.
Cassand. Consult. Artic. 14. Illi certe merito reprehendendi sunt, qui odio abusuum in his ordinibus & dignitatibus, universum hunc ordinem quem Hierarchicon appel∣lant, ut nervum Antichristi sublatum vo∣lunt. Nec minus illi accusandi, qui ina∣ni titulo inflati, eoque ad dominatum quendam vel etiam ad cupiditatem & ava∣ritiam abutentes, neglecto quod Ecclesiae debent officio; hominibus etiam non ma∣lis huic Ecclesiastico ordini, detrahendi, & ab eo deficiendi, occasionem dederunt.
THE SECOND DIALOGUE Anent the Obligation of the Covenants against Episcopacy. Doub. HAving some spare time, I am come to spend it with you (as I promised at our last parting) I told you then, that Bishops are abjured in the Cove∣nant, so that none may with a good consci∣ence either submit to,  them: and we look upon all these  sters that preach under them, as perjured persons. I. Ye use indeed upon all occasions to be liberal enough in charging Ministers and many others in the time with Perju∣ry, and this ye do with the greatest free∣dome and confidence imaginable, but it is sooner said than prov'd. Ye would act more Christian like, if ye were more sparing in judging another mans Servants, who stand or fall to their own Master. Ye
use to impute unto us acting against our own Light also. I pray, learn to be more Charitable. D. You know there were Covenants sworn, wherein Bishops are abjured, and we all stand bound against them. I. All bound! There are many both people and Ministers at this day who ne∣ver took the Covenant, and think you them bound against Bishops? D. Yes, I think they are: For the Co∣venant bindeth all, not only those who took it, but their Posterity also. I. That is a strange fancy: Casuists say, Juramentum est vinculum personale, i. e. an Oath is a personal tye, that only bindeth him that took it. And so conso∣nant to this, the Covenant sayeth, We, every one for our selves: and not, for our selves and our posterity. I suppone the Father who was in his judgement against Bi∣shops did take the Covenant; his Son who groweth up afterward is in his judge∣ment for Bishops: It seemeth very hard that the Son should be by the Father's Oath prelimited in his judgement about a disputable point, or else obliged to act contrary to his judgement. Is not this very hard, think you?
D. If the Fathers Oath cannot bind the Child, What say you to the Baptismal Vow, where the father voweth for the child, and that vow obligeth the child when he groweth up? I. The father at Baptism doth not for∣mally bind in the name and room of the child, he only bindeth for his own part, that, he shall bring up the child as be∣cometh a christian parent, and mind him of his Baptismal Vow when he cometh to years: Indeed the child cometh un∣der a Vow at Baptism, which ariseth from the binding matter, which in it self is obligatory, and from the nature of the Sacrament in which the Lord and the Party Baptized do Covenant; and this maketh the childs obligation so much the stronger when his Vow is superadded to the matter, which is of it self binding, like that, Psal, 119. vers. 106. D. Yet those persons who took the Cove∣nant, are bound never to acknowledge the Bishops, and now after they have sworn they must not anymore dispute or question the obli∣gation of the Oath: for Prov. 20. vers. 25. It is a snare after vowes, to make inquiry. I. Solomon there speaketh of those
who sacrilegiously meddle with things consecrate, and would pervert them to their own private use: and who, that they may do it the better, make enqui∣ry how the Vow may be eluded, by which those things were consecrate Que∣stionless it's a snare to make inquiry out of such sacrilegious design. But Solomon meaneth not that it's simply and in every case unlawful, after we have vowed or sworn an Oath, to enquire whither our Vow or Oath be in every case: binding, yea or not: otherwise you shall lay a very great snare indeed upon such as tye themselves with a rash or sinful Oath, if you will not allow them to reflect on what they have done. What! I pray you, had it been a fault in Herod to have made enquiry after his rash Oath to He∣rodias, and to have retracted it too? Or for those who bound themselves under a curse, they would neither eat nor drink un∣til they had killed Paul? Verily I think there should be liberty allowed to many who did swear the Covenant, to make enquiry, if there were no reason but this, because many took it when they were very young at Schools and Col∣ledges,
and so by reason of none age, could very little judge of the nature of an Oath, and far less of the matter ab∣jured: and so did not swear in judge∣ment, contrary to Jerem. 4. vers. 2. such have even but reason to make a review when they come to be better able to judge. D. It may be so, yet I think when they have enquired they shall find themselves bound against Prelacy by a double tye, viz. the Na∣tional Covenant and the League. I. You think Episcopacy is abjured in the National Covenant, under the name of the Popes wicked Hierarchy. But Pro∣testant Episcopacy is not there meant, as the author of the Survey of Naphtaly ful∣ly sheweth, Part 2. from pag. 114. to 130. 1. Because King James and his Council who were the imposers of that Covenant, and took it themselves, Anno 1580. did the very next year after 1581. ratifie the agreement made at Leith be∣twixt the Commissioners of State and Church, Anno 1571. Which agreement was in favours of Episcopacy. Now if the King and his Council had by the Po∣pish Hierarchy meant all kind of Episco∣pacy,
is it probable that the very next year they would by that Ratification have acted so palpably contrary to the Covenant so lately taken by themselves, and imposed upon the Land by their Au∣thority. 2. That Protestant Episcopacy was not meant, appeareth from this, be∣cause in all the strivings the Church in those times had with the King to get him to put away Bishops even after the taking of that Covenant, we never find this used as an argument to perswade the King, because all Episcopacy was abjured in the Covenant. Which reason, no doubt, would much have been insisted on, if Ministers then had thought all kind of Episcopacy to be meant by the Popes wicked Hierarchy; and their not using this argument may be very convincing to any, that by the Popes Hierarchy no Episcopacy could be meant, but such as depended upon the Pope: for I suppose the Ministers of that time were not igno∣rant of the meaning of these words of the Covenant. I also told you at our last meeting that Beza professed be never in∣tended to write against Protestant Bi∣shops.
D. What can the Popish Hierarchy be meant of, if not of Bishops? I. The Pop's Hierarchy is meant of Po∣pish Bishops, who actually depended on the Pope: but can no more be meant of Protestant reformed Bishops, who have renounced their dependance upon the Pope, then of reformed Presbyters, or Ministers and Deacons: Otherwise ac∣cording to you, all Ministers and Dea∣cons should be abjured there als well as all Bishops: because Presbyters and Deacons are parts of their Hierarchy, as the Council of Trent determines. D. The Apologetical Narration, pag. 395. saith all Bishops depend upon the Pope: therefore all kind of Episcopacy is Po∣pish, and as such, abjured in that Cove∣nant. I. He saith indeed, all Bishops, in es∣se & operari, depend on the Pope, but how proves he it? Because, saith he, the Pope acknowledges they depend on him alone, and have no other ground to stand upon. Now what a poor, because, this is, and how weakly reasoned from the Popes saying so, ipse dixit, is too evident to any ordinary capacity. The
Apologist reasoneth like a Papist, that maintaineth the Popes infallibility, and giveth him that advantage of his arroga∣ted supremacy and usurpation over all Bishops in the Christian world now and from the beginning; as if the very first Bishops in the primitive times had depen∣ded on the Bishop of Rome. The Pope craveth no better than this. But herein Protestants oppose his usurped Suprema∣cy, and shew from antiquity that the Bi∣shops of Rome have been opposed by Councils and Fathers, when first they attempted the Supremacy. Remember what I cited to you from Calvin, at our last meeting, Talem si nobis Hierarchiam exhibeant in qua Episcopi a Christo ut uni∣co capite dependeant, tum nullo non Ana∣themate, &c Calvin thinks them wor∣thy of a curse, who will not submit to such Bishops, who renouncing the Pope, take Christ for their head. The Mini∣sters who did dispute with the Doctors of Aberdeen, declared that the Doctors might take the National Covenant, and notwithstanding, debate and vote for E∣piscopacy in a free Assembly. It seem∣eth then they thought, by the popes
Hierarchy, all kind of Episcopacy not ne∣cessarily meant. D. But the assembly at Glasgow, Anno 1638. hath put the matter out of doubt, and by their authority expounded the Popes Hie∣rarchy to be meant of all Episcopacy, and so all Episcopacy is abjured in that Cove∣nant. I. You would all along remember in this debate, that at our last conference I shew you, Episcopacy had a Divine, or Apostolical warrant at least: and if so, then the Covenant against Episcopacy (suppone it were there abjured) is null from the beginning. But passing this, to what you say of the Assembly of Glas∣gow's expounding the Popes Hierarchy to be meant of all Episcopacy, I answer, that was more than they could do; For 1. How could the Assembly put a sense upon that Oath, that was taken 58. years before, and few or none of the first ta∣kers of it were than alive; or if alive, few or none were Members of that As∣sembly? How then could the Assem∣bly come to know certainly, that their exposition of the word, Hierarchy, was according to the mind of the first impo∣sers.
2. All that the Assembly 1638. pro∣duces in their Act Sess. 16. to prove E∣piscopacy to be abjured in the National Covenant amounts only to this, That the Church about the time of the first ta∣king of that Covenant, and after, was la∣bouring against Bishops; but proves not that Episcopacy was abjured in it, or in any words of it. 3. By what warrant could the Assembly impose upon others that sense of the Covenant in which they took it themselves; they might declare their own sense of it, which might not be the sense of the first imposers, when all is done: but how could they oblige o∣thers to their sense, who had taken it be∣fore? The first imposers gave the As∣sembly no power to do so. D. Yet those who took that Covenant af¦ter the Assembly 1638. had put their sense on it, have thereby abjured Episcopacy; for the Assembly explaineth it so. I. I suppose it was not the Assemblies intention, that any should take that Co∣venant in the sense they put on it, unless it were agreeable to the sense of the first imposers, and takers, to whom the As∣sembly thought themselves subservient i
what they did. Now that the first im∣posers, and takers never meant it against all Episcopacy, is shewed: and there∣fore the Assemblies ground failing, that which they built thereupon must fail al∣so. For it were absurd to say that the Assembly putting a meaning on that Oath no way agreeable with the meaning of the first imposers; that yet this posterior meaning should oblige also, though much differing from the former: this is to make of an Oath what we please. D. In that Covenant we are sworn that we shall joyn our selves to this Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Faith, Religion, and Discipline; and that we shall continue in the Doctrine and Discipline thereof. Where, by Discipline, is meant, Presby∣terian Government. So then, we are sworn to maintain it by the National Co∣venant. I. By Discipline, cannot be meant Presbyterian Government, because at the time of the first imposing of that Cove∣nant there was no such Government in Scotland, nor for a considerable time af∣ter. Whatever essays Ministers in those times made to introduce it, yet the King
who imposed that Covenant, owned Episcopacy. Therefore, 2. If by Dis∣cipline, some one particular mode of Go∣vernment be meant, it's more then pro∣bable that it must be Episcopacy, because it was the Government then practised in this Church: And the very year after the King and Council ratified the Trea∣ty that had been concluded at Leith in favours of Episcopacy, Anno 1571. But by Dicipline, is not meant any one par∣ticular form of Government, but the substantials of it, or the essential and ut∣terly necessary policy of the Church, as it is expressed in the first Book of Discipline, Cap. 9. And this is indeed unalterable, though, as some think, there may be a change of particular Forms of Govern∣ment. D. Yet in the second Article of the League, Bishops are expresly abjured, and I hope you will confess that Protestant Bishops are there meant. I. Although Protestant Bishops be there meant, yet I question if every kind o Protestant Bishops, Timorcus Epist. dedi∣cat. Sect. 25. and pag. 14. 16. Doubteth not to say, that all kind of Prelacy is no
there abjured, but that notwithstanding the said Article, they (the English Pres∣byterians) could freely submit to the Primitive Episcopacy, that is, the pre∣cedency of one over the rest, without whom ordinarily nothing is to be done in Jurisdiction or Ordination: and as∣serts that it was only the English kind of Prelacy that was meant in the second Ar∣ticle of the League: as also appears from the explanation of that Article inclosed in the body of it, by a Parenthesis. Which kind we have not in Scotland, nor had before: although many of you think there is no difference. Mr. Vines, and Mr. Baxter, two great men of the Presbyterian way in England, say, that that second Article was not intend∣ed against all kind of Episcopacy, but only against that complex frame that con∣sists of all the Officers mentioned in the Article. And Mr. Gataker, that the most part of the Assembly of Divines was reconcile∣able to a Moderat Episcopacy. And fur∣ther, Timoreus, That the English Parli∣ament, with the Commissioners from Scotland, never intended the extirpation of all kind of Episcopacy, but only of
that in England, pag. 16. 23. See also Mr. Croston, Pag. 70, 78. So that the most judicious of the English Presbyteri∣ans who knew the mind of the Imposers, and the circumstances of that business, you see, would not cry out upon us as guilty of breach of that Article, as ye do. D. What was the Parliament of England or the Assembly of Divines, their sense of that Article, I know not: nor think I my self much concerned to enquire: but the Kirk and State of Scotland who imposed that Oath on us, meant it against all sort of Bishops. I. I pray you consider we are now speaking of the League, which was not a meer National Covenant of this King∣dom alone, but a common League of all the three Kingdoms; and therefore behoved to be sensed by the Representa∣tives of all the three. So it is not the sense that any one of the Kingdoms puts on it, you or I are to stand to; but that meaning and sense which all the three imposed on it. And what was the Par∣liament of England's sense, was as Ti∣morcus tells us, with the joynt con∣currence
of Commissioners from Scot∣land. D. In the first Article the preservation of the Government of the Kirk of Scotland is sworn to be maintained, which was Pres∣bytrie; and therefore in the second we swear against all kind of Prelacy: be∣cause Prelacy and Presbytrie are incon∣sistent. I. If you think in the first Article Presbytrie is sworn to be maintain'd, and ye that there is a liberty left in the se∣cond Article for some kind of Prelacy, which I told you the English Divines con∣fess; and if withal you think there is an inconsistency betwixt Presbytrie and any kind of Episcopacy; then it will follow, that we have sworn things contradicto∣y, viz. In the first Article that we shall admit of no kind of Prelacy, and in the second, that we may admit of some kind of Prelacy. 2. It's much doubted by learn∣ed men, whither in the first Article there be any Obligation to maintain Pres∣byterial Government in Scotland; For 1. There is no express mention there at all of Prosbyterial Government; The words are (We shall endevour the preserva∣tion
of the Reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland, In Doctrine, Worship, Dis∣cipline and Government) 2. Many known Independents took that Covenant, and yet never thought themselves bound thereby to maintain Presbytrie in any of the Kingdoms, because they thought it no part of the reformed Government: and no question the Independents had a hand in wording that Article so, that the words might not necessarily import the maintaining of any one form of Go∣vernment in particular contrary to what themselves conceived to be right: and indeed the words do not express any one form, nor yet necessarily import a∣ny one form, but with this general pro∣viso, in so far as reformed, now they did not think Presbyterial Government such. D. Yet the body of the English Parlia∣ment, who, together with our Scots Com∣missioners imposed that Oath, did by the Reformed Government in this Kirk mean, Presbytrie, which was then settled here: and therefore we were to take, an did take that first Article in the sense of th imposers; whatever were the thoughts of few Independents.
I. We are indeed to take an Oath in the sense of the Imposers: but that the English Parliament sensed the first Article as if Presbyterial Government were there sworn to be maintained, may justly be doubted, because, had that Parliament looked on Presbytery as the Reformed Government, sworn to be maintained in this Kirk, they consequently would have acknowledged themselves bound to reform England according to our pat∣tern; but they thought themselves not bound to do so, for Anno 1647. in their Declaration to the Scots Commissioners, they profess they could never find that Presbytrie is necessary by any Divine Right, and charges them for thinking there is no other lawful Church Covern∣ment, but that which they call Church Government. And also charges them with mis-interpreting the Article of the Covenant concerning Church Govern∣ment. D. It seems then that England and Scotland did not understand that Article in one and the same sense, yet since our State and Church understood it of Presbytrie, we are bound to it in that sense.
I. It seems indeed England did not un∣derstand it in our sense: but that there∣fore we are bound to it in the sense of our Church and State, will not follow; but rather that it is an Article, as to that part of it, that speaks of Government, without sense: since the Imposers who only could give the binding sense, are not agreed about it: for to say that we are bound to that sense, which our State, and Church too, if you will, had of it, is irrational,; because they were but a part of the Imposers, and the les∣ser part too, in respect of England and Ireland. And further, suppose it were granted to you, that in that first Article Presbytrie is meant, yet that therefore there can be no room left for any kind of Episcopacy in the second Article, will be denyed: for if you think there is an inconsistency betwixt Presbytrie and any kind of Episcopacy, either you are mis∣taken, or Beza. And others were, who notwithstanding their writing for Pres∣bytrie; yet confess there is a kind of Prelacy as ancient as the Apostles; beside what I cited to you from Blondel, Cha∣mier, Moulin, at our last meeting; see
Beza apud Saravium, pag. 207, 233, 235, 240, 242, 251. &c. D. I perceive you bear off all you can from acknowledging the Episcopacy now settled in this Church to be meant either in the National Covenant, or in the League: For if that were once granted, then ye could not but confess your selves guilty of Perjury. I. My denying the present Episcopacy of this Church to be meant in either of the Covenants, is grounded upon rea∣sons which I suppose can not easily be disapproven. And to what you say, that upon our acknowledging the pre∣sent Episcopacy to be meant in both, or either of the Covenants, we could not but acknowledge our selves guilty of Perjury: Though I see no reason to ac∣knowledge this present Government to be meant in either of the Covenants, but much reason to the contrary, yet I am content to make the supposition that it is abjured: giving then, though not grant∣ing that this Episcopacy was abjured in one, or both of the Covenants, you cannot so easily conclude thence, as you imagine, that therefore those who took that Oath, and now again submit to, yea, or
own this re-established Episcopacy, are per∣jured. D. That seems very strange: those who did swear against Bishops in the Cove∣nant, have they not by acknowledging them again, done contrary to their Oath, and so are perjured? I. That you may receive answer to this, you must consider the nature of Episcopacy, which is the matter supposed to be abjured. Episcopacy is either a ne∣cessary unalterable Government, as ha∣ving a Divine warrand, or at least A∣postolick, which amounts to little less then Divine, if to any thing less at all. Or it is an unlawful, sinful Government, as being contrary to some other Govern∣ment, which hath the warrant of Christ and his Apostles. Or, 3. It is of an in∣different Nature, neither commanded or forbidden, but left to Christian pru∣dence, to be used in the Church, or not, as shall be found expedient, all circumstances considered. If Episcopacy be found grounded on the Word, and to have been the only Government practi∣sed from the Apostles own times down∣ward through the purest ages of the
Church, I hope you will not think an Oath taken against it obliges to any thing but repentance, for engaging in so un∣warrantable an Oath. You are a peo∣ple who cry out Perjury Perjury; but con∣sider what I said to you at last meeting, to let you see what warrant Bishops have in the Word of God, and that it is the only Government found in the first and purest times of the Church, search when you will, and that even those who have set themselves to maintain another Go∣vernment, have from evidence of rea∣son, and Light that shines to them out of Antiquity, been forced by their own concessions to set Episcopacy high enough: and till you be able solidly to answer what I said to you then on this head, be more sober, and sparing of your hard censures: and take heed lest while you charge others with Perjury, your selves be found doing all you can sacrilegi∣ously to robb the Church of that Go∣vernment which Christ and his Apostles left her in possession of, and have bound your selves with an Oath so to do. If Episcopacy be sinful then we are bound against it antecedently to our Oath,
and whether we had abjured it or no. And if you think Episcopacy thus unlaw∣ful, you should not so much decry it upon the account of the Covenant; but because it is in it self sinful, as contrary to some Divine, or Apostolical war∣rant: although it's true a supervenient Oath makes an Obligation against a thing in it self sinful, so much the stron∣er. But as I told you before, the ablest Champions for Presbyterie, have not ad∣ventured to assert Episcopacy unlawful, as being contrary to any Divine, or A∣postolical warrant. If it be indifferent, that is, neither commanded nor forbid∣den, or lawful but not necessary, but left to Christian prudence: Then the question will be, if we could by our Oath make it absolutely, and in every case unlawful to our selves, so that we can never in any case after, own or sub∣mit to it. You are mistaken, if you think an Oath against the use of a thing in different, so binds, that in no case after, the swearer can lawfully use that thing. Casuists say, an Oath taken about an in∣different thing, may in some cases cease to bind (we now suppone Episcopacy to
be in it self indifferent) if the thing sworn against be a matter, wherein our Superiours have power to command us, They by their authority given them of God, may require obedience from us in any thing lawful; and so in that par∣ticular, they may command us to do or use that which we have sworn against, it being a thing in it self lawful: and in this case our Oath ceases to bind. 2. If af∣ter we have sworn, there come to be such an alteration in the State of affairs, that what was lawfully promised, can∣not now be lawfully performed; In this ease the Oath ceases to bind, Si res non permanent in eodem statu, say Casu∣ists, cessat juramenti obligatio. Or 3. When our Oath comes to be Impeditivum ma∣joris boni, that is, a hinderance to a great∣er good, if we still stand to what we have sworn. In such cases as these the obli∣gation of an Oath about a matter in it self not sinful, ceases to bind: as Casuists commonly teach, and the Author of the Seasonable Case; and of the Survey of Naphtaly at length applyes to the Oath of the Covenant abjuring Episcopacy, and shews, that upon supposition of the law∣fulness
of Episcopacy in it self, and that the Episcopacy of this Church is meant in the Covenant; As matters now stand, none ought to think themselves bound by their Oath to stand out against it, on Superiours now having commanded u to obey and submit to that Government; &c. And solidly repells any thing that is brought by the Apologist, or Naphtaly to the contrary. An Oath about things in their own nature not sinful, but alte∣rable, is always to be taken with this re-restriction and limitation, if not expres∣sed yet necessarily to be understood, so long as lawfully I may, for the very na∣ture and matter of such an Oath requires this: And the reason is, because the takers of such an Oath may be under pri∣or and greater obligations, (viz. Obedi∣ence to their Superiours, and the like) then any obligation they come under by their Oath, about a matter indifferent: and therefore when it comes to this, that they cannot both satisfie those greate and prior obligations and keep their Oath too; Then the Oath being the lesser obligation, must cede and give place to the greater, especially those greater
such as obedience to Superiours in things lawful, and the like, being such as God himself hath brought us under, and our Oath about a thing indifferent, being but a knot of mans casting. This should be clear and undoubted to any, that when two duties at one and the same tme, seem to require performance of us, and we cannot get them both satisfied, then and in that case, the greater must take place of the lesser, and the lesser is omitted without sin, Matth. 9.13. and 12.7. Go and learn what that mean∣eth, I will have mercy and not Sacrifice. And therefore Divines teach, that eve∣ry Command doth not oblige at every time. D. To what you say of the first case, in which a promissory Oath about a thing in∣different, may cease to bind, viz. The Au∣thority of Superiours interveening: you would do well to consider that the obligati∣on of an Oath is a very Sacred Bond, and I think it's hard to say, that the authori∣ty of any man can loose the Oath of God; In that case we should say, We have open∣ed our mouth to the Lord, and cannot go back.
I. And do you think that by your Oath you can warrantably bind your self up from obeying the Law of God in the fifth Commandment, and in many other express Scriptures, that biddeth you ho∣nour and obey your Superiours. I told you that the Law of God enjoyning obedi∣ence to Superiours layes the first and greatest obligation upon you. And fur∣ther, consider what a door you would open to frustrate Superiours of all that obedience, which Inferiours owe to them: for when these in Authority shall require obedience of their Subjects in such a par∣ticular, they may answer, hold us excu∣sed, we cannot obey you, for we have sworn not to do this thing. And if we may thus warrantably shift in one thing, why not in another thing? And so may by our Oaths pre-limite and bind up our selves from obeying any thing, which those in Authority can require of us. And thus you may see, whether that opi∣nion of yours tends, even to cast off the Yoke of all Obedience and Subjection, which the Lord so expresly in his Word hath laid upon the necks of Subjects. Read the 30. Chapter of Numbers. and
there you will see, that if the Wife, or the Daughter in the Fathers Houseshould bind themselves by a Vow, the Husband or Parent had power to anul and make it void: and by proportion and analogie, the King who is Pater Patriae, hath the same power over us. D. Yet in that 30. of Numbers, If the Father or Husband did once confirm the Vow of the Wife or Daughter, though but by a tacite consent, then there was no more voiding of it: Now our Superiours have confirmed the Oath, and therefore I think it can never be made void again. I. Read the 15. vers. of that 30. of Numbers, where you find that even after the Husband hath heard, and by his si∣lence confirmed the Wifes vow (of which was spoken, vers. 12.) he hath notwith∣standing of his tacite confirmation, still a power of anulling and making void her Vow; and if he do so, she is bound to yield to her Husbands commands, and is exonered of her Vow. Indeed if the Husband (the like may be said of the Parent) do thus without good ground, irritate and make void the Wifes Vow, he is culpable, he shall bear her sin, but
she is free, because bound to obey her Husband, as being under a prior obli∣gation of obedience unto him by the Law of God. You may consult Inter∣preters on that 15. vers. of Numbers 30. and shall find them expounding it of the Husbands voiding his Wifes Vows, even after he had confirmed them, and if he do so, he shall bear her sin: that is, say some, If there be a guilt here it shall lye one the Husband who made the Vow void, not on the Wife, who by a prior obligation was bound to obey her hus∣band, and which her posterior Vow could never free her of. Others expone these words, he shall bear her sin, thus, he shall take away her sin: Now the Hus∣band may take away the Wifes sin, she doing but her duty in obeying him; and yet he may be guiltless too, if he revock∣ed his former confirmation upon just and rational grounds. And as to the Wifes part, some Interpreters say, Mariti au∣thoritas uxorem absolvit voto & culpa, That is, the authority of the Husband absolves the Wife of her vow and sin too. Now the application of this to our own case is easie.
D. Your second case wherein you say the obligation of an Oath about a matter in its nature indifferent may cease to bind, is when there comes such a change of affairs, that the Oath can no longer oblige without sin: how apply you this to the Oath against Bi∣shops? I. Upon supposition that Episcopacy is indifferent, and that it is abjured in the Covenant: Since that Oath there is this great change of affairs, Episcopacy is by Law Re-established, and we command∣ed to submit to it: so that now we can no longer think our selves bound by our Oath, without palpable disobedience to Authority. D. But my Oath against Bishops had the first obligation on me, from which I can not be loosed by any Law of Authority that is made after. I. Your Oath hath not the first obli∣gation on you, but the Law of God that commands you to be obedient to your Superiours, viz. the fifth Commandment, 1 Pet. 2.13. and such like Scriptures. You came under an Oath at Baptism that you should obey the will of God, now this is a part of his will, that you obey
the lawful Commands of Authority: and this Oath or Vow you were under be∣fore the Covenant Oath. If you think your Oath can secure you from obedi∣ence to the Magistrate, commanding to do contrary to what you have sworn: you are in a very dangerous error, and by this means would easily elude the ex∣press Command of God, Ecclesi. 8.2. The Author of the grand Case, Pag. 56, 57. tells, that in King James his time, sundry Jesuits went from England to Rome, and there took an Oath, according to a con∣stitution of the Pope, that they should return unto England, and there Preach the Catholick Faith. Wherefore there was a Law made in England, prohibi∣ting such practices: Hereupon arose the case, whether those who had taken that Oath at Rome were obliged to obey the Law, though made after their taking of the Oath: and it it was resolved (ab∣stracting from the unlawfulness of that Oath in it self) that an Oath can not bind against a Law, though the Law be made after the Oath is taken. D. Your third case wherein an Oath ceaseth to obliege, is, when it becomes
an hinderance to a greater good. This seemeth to allow people too great a liberty, for how easily may they pretend that some great∣er good is hindered by adhering to their Oath. I. When that greater good is a certain good, and no otherwise attainable, but by the discharge of our Oath, and especially if it be a good, we are pre∣oblieged to before ever we took the Oath; then as Casuists commonly teach, the Oath ceaseth to bind. Now by our Oath against Bishops, these goods are hindred, as matters now stand, obe∣dience to Authority, avoiding of Schism, Ministers serving God in the work of the Ministry, to which they were called, &c, by our still adhering to the Oath all these good things are hindred, and are in themselves greater and better goods than our adhering to the Oath, which we now suppose is about a thing indifferent: and as to that of Ministers, choicing rather to lay aside their Ministry than their Oath, it deserves our serious thoughts, whether a Minister can warrantably by any deed of his, especially about an in∣different thing incapacitat himself, or do
that which by consequence may incapa∣tat him for the Ministry. Now many Ministers think, that by their Oath they are warrantably oblieged not to continue in their respective stations, as matters stands. It is incontroverted among Di∣vines, as I hinted before, that lesser du∣ties must give place to the greater, when they come in competition together, and the lesser is omitted, or even, may be, the contrary to it commited, without sin: as David's eating the Shew-bread, when he could have no other meat to keep him from starving. Paul and his compa∣ny, their casting the good Creatur's of God unto the Sea, to save their lives, Act. 27.38. Christ will have mercy e∣ven to our Beast (much more then to the souls of people) to be preferred to ceasing from all our works on the Sab∣bath. He will have mercy and not sacri∣fice: No doubt where he can have both, he will: but where not, he will have mercy although he lose sacrifice, yea, ra∣ther than lose mercy he will have no sacri∣fice, he prohibits sacrifice; Therefore go and learn, saith Christ: what that mean∣eth, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, as
if little understood and less practised, e∣ven by the Pharisees, the great teachers of those times, and much admired and followed by the people, yet Christ sends them to School again to learn better, and lets them see they were but blind guides, notwithstanding the great opi∣nion the people had of them. So the Rechabits judged themselves discharged of the strict observance of their Vow in case of hazard, and self-preservation, Jer. 35. vers. 9, 10, 11. D. Yet for all you have said, you know Joshua and the Princes when they had sworn to the Gibeonits. Josh. 9 They look∣ed on their Oath as so binding that they would not adventure to break it, even after it is discovered to them that these Gibeonits were of the Canaanits with whom God had commanded them to make no peace, but root out: and Joshua and the Princes might have said the command of God looseth us from our Oath, and the keeping of it will be a hinderance to a greater good: yet the tye of the Oath was so sacred to them, that they chosed rather to dispense with the command of God in that particular than with their Oath: and that their so doing was accep∣table
to God, appeareth from his displeasure against Saul, who many years after killed sundry of these Gibeonits, to whose pre∣decessors Joshua and the Princes had sworn. I. I confess, I wonder much you should make use of this argument in the manner you do to prove the obligation of your Oath against Bishops: for that place is quite mistaken by you. Therefore first. If you think Joshua was forbidden to make peace at all with any of the Canaanits up∣on any terms, but was to root them all out; and yet because of his Oath he spa∣red the Gibeonits, though it was contra∣ry to an express command of God; you run your self into a most wild and gross opinion that can not be admitted, viz. That an Oath can bind against a Com∣mand of God, whether it be a Moral, or particular Command, it is all one. And so as before you asserted an Oath to bind against the command of men in Authority; Now you go a greater length in saying an Oath bindeth against the more immediate Command of God. What man of sound judgement will ad∣mit the first, much less the second. 2. You
are in a mistake if you think Joshua had no warrant to make peace with any of the Canaanits, but was commanded with∣out so much as once treating with them, to root them all out. For Deut. 20. v. 10. He is commanded to proclaim peace to any City indefinitely he came to fight against, the Canaanits not excepted, on∣ly with this difference; 1. No Peace was to be concluded with any of the Ca∣naanits, unless they became servants, and yielded up their Lands, which the Lord had bestowed upon Israel, and embra∣ced the true Religion, abandoning their heathenish Idolatries: And hence so fre∣quently Leagues are discharged to be made with them, they reserving their heathenish Worship, lest they should draw away the Children of Israel from the true God. 2. If any City of the Canaa∣nits did refuse peace, (for there is dif∣ference betwixt a meer Peace and a League, as some have observed; and that Joshua at the first, made a League with the Gibeonits, but as soon as he knew them to be Canaanits he breaketh the League as being contrary to the Command of God, and meerly alloweth them a peace,
Josh. 9. vers. 20, 21, 22, 23.) They were to be worse dealt with than any other City that was not of the Canaanits; for Deut. 20. vers. 16, 17. in case of thei refusal, nothing was to be saved alive, while other Cities were but to lose the lives of the Males only, vers. 12, 13, 14, 15. Read Interpreters on the place: that the Israelits were to spare the lives of the Canaanits on these terms, appears from their sparing Rachel and her friends, Josh. 6.17. Which otherwise had not been lawful for them to do. And from Josh. 11. vers. 19, 20. Which place clear∣ly shews, that if other Cities of the Ca∣naanits had submitted; as Gibeon did, Joshua might have spared them. And from Solomons kindness to those Canaa∣nits in his time, 1 King. 9.20, 21. Ezra 2.55, 58. Therefore 3. I say, Joshua and the Princes by that Oath did swear nothing contrary to the Command of God, but their Oath was consonant to Gods Command, that upon such and such terms they might have peace, so that Joshua and the Princes were bound to spare them, although they had not sworn. And, 4. The Lord was angry
with Saul for slaying the Gibeonits, be∣cause it was contrary both to the Com∣mand of God, in giving them peace up∣on their submission, and also to Joshua's Oath made to their Fathers: and not meerly because it was contrary to the Oath, as you much mistake, when you think it did bind contrary to the Com∣mand of God. You may consult the Criticks, and other Interpreters, collected by Mr Pool, as also others, on Joshua 9.18. The English Annotations on vers. 15. &c. And you shall find that some indeed are of the opinion, that Joshua and the Princes were discharged to make any peace at all with any of the Canaanits (though herein they are opposed both by the most judicious and numerous) yet those who think that Joshua was com∣manded to make no peace with them, whom herein you follow, say not, that Joshua after he discovered the Gibeonits to be of the Canaanits, was bound to stand to his Oath (as ye say) It being contrary to an express Command of God: but they say Joshua and the Princes Oath did not bind. And why Joshua and the Princes did not break that Oath, which
they conceive was not Obligatory, yo will find, their conjectures on that plac You use also to bring Zedekiahs breach of Oath that he made to the King of Ba∣bylon, with which breach the Lord wa so much displeased, as a great argument for you. To which briefly, I say, tha Zedekiah held the Crown of Nebuchadne∣zar, and that the Lord by the Prophet had expresly commanded him and the Jews to submit to the King of Babylon, Jer. 27. vers. 6, 7, 8, 9, 12. And Jer. 38. vers. 17, 20, 21. So that whatever may be said for, or against the obligation of Zedekiah's Oath in it self, considered with the circumstances of it: yet the Com∣mand of God being superadded, enjoyn∣ing Zedekiah peaceably to submit under him, and no rebel. It's clear, Zedekiah was oblieged to have done so according to Gods Command, whatever he could pretend to the contrary. So that his breaking the Oath, had in it clear diso∣bedience against Gods Command. D. David Psal. 15. vers. 4. Giveth it as a mark of a blessed man, he sweareth to his own hurt and changeth not. I. Indeed a man may stand unalterably
oblieged by an Oath he hath taken to his wn hurt in many things: yet you must now, not in all things: I suppose a man hould swear to take away his own life: here an Oath to his own hurt, which I doubt you will say oblieges to any thing but repentance. But besides, when a man swears to the hurt of others, of those in Authority, of those of his Family, of the souls of people. You will not say such an Oath oblieges. D. But say what you will, we are a people very tender of Oaths. I. Every Christian ought to be so, ought to consider well before he come un∣der an Oath, and be well advised before he think himself discharged of that Bond, after he is come under it. But to think a man can not at all be discharged of an Oath about a matter in it self not neces∣sary; is to be more tender then we ought or lawfully can be. You say you are a people very tender of Oaths, how then did the Assembly at Glasgow, Anno 1638. by their Act loose all the Ministers of the Kingdom, that had entered by the Bi∣shops, from their Oath they had given to the Bishops at their entry to the Mini∣stry?
But to come nearer, how was that before Bishops were last restore your selves owned Commissaries, thoug they be expresly named in the Covenan as a part of, or Officers depending on th abjured Hierarchy, according to your ow sense: And if the Bishops of this Church b there abjured, so are the Commissaries. D. Commissaries then had no dependance on Bishops, and therefore might be owne as not contrary to the Covenant. I. Upon that ground you might have owned a Dean too, and said that then ha∣ving no actual dependance on the Bishop the owning of him was not contrary to Covenant: yea or owned a Bishop too, and said, he had no dependance then on an Arch-Bishop, for I can not see why a∣ny of those other Members of the Hie∣rarchy under the highest, might not have been owned and retained as well as the Comissary. 2. Do you not by this answer of yours come near to what I before told you from the English Divines, viz. that all kind of Prelacy is not abjured in the se∣cond Article of the League, but only that species or complex frame that consists of all the members there mentioned. But,
3. What can you say for your ownin f Commissaries now, when again actual∣ they do depend upon Bishops: I now none of you who at this day scruples or declines the Commissaries Authority nd Courts, though actually they do de∣pend upon Bishops. Yet give me leave, I think according to your principles, ye ought to disown and decline them: other∣wise I shall be glade to learn of you how you free your selves of Perjury. And if ye can acknowledge a Commissary not∣withstanding the Covenant, pray, give me your reason, why not a Bishop too? But I have yet another breach of Oath to charge you with, which ye give me but too just ground for, and that is, Schism, which is both a grievous sin in it self, and also expresly abjured in that same second Article of the League: And yet ye have been, and still are carrying on a fearful and stated Schism, whereby this poor Church is robbed of that Peace and Unity which our Lord Christ bequeath∣ed to her in Legacy: and this ye do with the greatest activity imaginable, as if you were about some unquestionable duty. But because I can stay no longer with
you at present, I shall be content to speak more of this at our next meeting. So praying the Lord to give you under∣standing in all things, I bid you fare∣well.
THE THIRD DIALOGUE Anent Separation. Doub. AT our last meeting our con∣ference was anent the Ob∣ligation of the Covenants, with breach whereof we use to charge you: And at parting, you by way of Re-crimination charged us with Schism, which indeed is both a sin in itself, and also expresly abjured in the second Ar∣ticle of the League. But I hope we be not guilty of it. I. Schism is a very grievous evil in∣deed, even a renting of the Body of Christ, which is his Church. An evil, which the Apostle sets himself much a∣gainst, Rom. 16. vers. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 1. vers. 12, 13. &c. and Chap. 3. Eph. 4. vers. 3, 4, 5. &c. Phil. 2. vers. 1, 2, 3. and in other places. An ill that Satan
began to make use of as one of his main engines against the Church, even in the Apostles times, and in sundry ages since. An ill, which sundry of the Fathers of the Church have in their Generations withstood, and given testimony against Cyprian is full to this purpose in his Book de unitate Ecclesiae, where among other things, he saith, An secum esse Christum, cum collecti fuerunt, opinantur: qui extra Christi Ecclesiam colliguntur? Tales etiam∣si occisi fuerint in confessione nminis, Ma∣cula ista nec sanguine abluitu, in expiabi∣li & gravis culpa discer a nec passione purgatur: Esse Martyr non potest, qui  Ecclesia non est: Ad regnum porvenire n poterit, qui eam, quae regnatura est, dere∣linquit. Pacem nobis Christus dedit, Con∣cordes at{que} unanimes esse praecepit, dilecti∣ones & charitatis foedera inviolatae servare mundavit. exhibere se non potest Marty∣rem, qui fraternam non tenuit charitatem. Ita Paulus, 1 Cor. 13. Etsi habuero fidem, charitatem antem non habeam, nihil sum, That is, Do those, who gather them∣selves together without the Church, think Christ is with them so gathered? such though they were even slain in
confessing his Name, yet that blot (Schism) is not washen away with their bloud, the inexpiable sin of discord is not purged by their suffering. He cannot be a Martyr, who is not in the Church: He cannot come to the King∣dom, who forsakes her (the Church) that is to reign Christ left and comman∣ded us peace, and that we keep invio∣lable the bonds of Charity, &c. And much more to this purpose that Father hath in the foresaid Book. Jerome saith, Nullum Schisma est, nisi sibi aliquam Hae∣resin confingat, ut recte ab Ecclesia recessis∣se videatur. Where he shews that Schism and Heresie, at least something like it uses to go together. And Epist. ad Pamm∣chium, Quis scindit Ecclesiam, nos quo∣rum omnis domus Bethlehem in Ecclesia communicat, an tu, qui aut bene credis & superbe de fide taces, aut male & vere scin∣dis Ecclesiam? That is, Who rents the Church, we who communicat in the Church, or you who believing well, proudly holds thy peace: or believing ill, truly rents the Church. Where he seemeth to say, That even he who holds his peace, and declares not against
Schism, is guilty of Schism too. Aug¦stin Tractat. 27. in Joannem, Anima tu non vivificat, nisi membra quae sunt in ca ne tua, &c. Haec dicuntur ut amemus u∣nitatem & timeamus separationem: Nihil enim debet sic formidare Christianus, qua separari a corpore Christi: Sic enim non est membrum ejus nec vegetatur Spiritu e∣jus. Where he shews, That Separatists are like members cut off from the body, and so can receive no life from the soul, that quickens the body. The Church is like the Lilly among Thorns, Cant. 2.2. And Schism is one of those Thorns, and the harder to be pulled out, because Schismaticks have always looked on themselves as the only men, and Chri∣stians of the first Magnitude, and so do ye, and I am heartily sorry ye give me such ground to charge you with this sin. D. Every Separation is not a sinful Schism. I. True, every Separation is not a Schism, as the word, Schism, is ordina∣rily taken to signifie a causeless separating. For Protestants justifie their separating from the Church of Rome, since they
could not hold Communion with her without sin: That Church being idola∣trous in her Worship, and in Doctrine, erronious even to the perverting of Fun∣damentals by consequence at least, as Protestant Divines shew. But I think you guilty of a sinful Separation, which is Schism: and that als groundless and unreasonable as any you shall read of in any age of the Church. D. Wherein are we guilty of Schism? I. First, in your dividing from us in that Christian Charity which ye owe un∣to us, which I may call Heart-schism, and is the ground of your external Schisms, in dividing from us in Acts of Religious Worship. Ye are a people (at least ma∣ny of you) who make difference in judgement about matters only of a se∣condary nature, such as the outward Policy or Government of the Church, a ground for difference in affection, and uncharitableness; as if such who are not of your way and perswasion in these mat∣ters could not be real Christians with your selves: And thus you put dispu∣table points of lesser concernment into your Creed: And many of you can with
great freedom un-saint all who are not of your opinion in these things: And so ye Un-church and condemn all Chri∣stians that have been in all ages almost, and places of the World since Christs time, who ye will find have owned Bi∣shops, yea, and Liturgies, Festival-days, and other Ceremonies, &c. And with whom therefore ye would have taken more ground to quarrel than with us; and if ye be come the length to think the removing of these things necessary to make a true Church (as may be some of you are) then according to you there hath not been a true Church in the World for much above a thousand years together, if according to your own cal∣culation we begin but to reckon from the second or third Century down∣ward. D. You cannot deny that many things crept into the Church. that were not from the beginning, or of Christs and his Apostles institution, and such are these things you have named. I. That all these things named have crept into the Church, as you say, since the Apostles times, will not be granted.
You know Bishops are said to have been even from the Apostles times. And Eu∣sebius, Hist. lib. 5. cap. 22. says, that in the dabate about the time of keeping of Easter betwixt Polycrates Bishop of Ephe∣sus, and Victor Bishop of Rome, Poly∣crates alledgeth the Apostle John's autho∣rity and practice for himself in that mat∣ter. But suppone it were granted to you that these things are of later date than the Apostles, will you thence inter, that those who used them could be no good Christians, or that you can not allow them your Charity. Know you not that there may be many things used about the ordering of Gods House, and his Worship, which in themselves are in∣different, neither commanded nor for∣bidden, and therefore the Church as she seeth fit, may use her Christian li∣berty about such things. I pray you, consider Rom. Chap. 14. There was a great debate among those first Christians anent the use of the Ceremonial Law, and albeit such as thought they were now no more bound by that Law, having pur∣chased their liberty by Christ, and there∣fore neither regarded one day, nor one
kind of meat above another, were in the right; yet Paul commands them to bear with the infirmities of the weak and not despise them, but still account them bre∣thren, and retain Charity, notwith∣standing of their error. The weak again were much like your selves, very ready to judge the strong, and to be unchari∣table to them: This the Apostle for∣biddeth, Who art thou who judgest another mans Servant, vers. 4? Socrates in his Church History, lib. 5. cap. 22. Tells what diversity of customs was among Christi∣ans in those first times, and yet no un∣charitable judging of one another, as ye use. How justly and severely was Victor Bishop of Rome blamed by Irenaeus for his rash uncharitable zeal, much like your own, in excommunicating all the Ea∣stern Churches, because they did not keep Easter on that day that he did. Though Irenaeus was of Victors judgement about the thing in debate, yet he much discommended his uncharitable behavior toward Polycrates and the Asian Church∣es. Euseb. lib. 5. Cap. 23. Now as ye are guilty of heart Schism, which is uncha∣ritableness, so expresly forbidden in ma∣ny
Scriptures, especially in 1 Cor. 13. Chap. throughout. So ye are guilty of External Schism; in separating from our Church-communion in the Word, and Sacraments, and all other duties of Religious Worship, contrary to the A∣postles Direction, Heb. 10.25. Forsa not the assembling of your selves together, as the manner of some is. It seems there were some Separatists even at that time, who being misled by a misinformed Judge∣ment, or by pride and singularity, (as Calvin noteth on the place) did forsake the ordinary and orderly Assemblies of Christians. It is a received Maxim a∣mong Divines, Opinionem varietas & O∣piniantium unitas, non sunt . That is, Variety of Opinions about matters of a secondary Nature and Unity among those who vary in such Opinions, may well consist together. D. All of us do not altogether forsake your Assemblies, some do but now and then leave their own Paroch Churches. I. Indeed ye are not all guilty of Se∣paration in the same degree, yet the least degree is unwarrantable and ought to be avoided. It may be observed how peo∣ple
turn not Separatists of the highest de∣gree at first; but proceed from step to step: First they begin to withdraw sometimes from their own Congregation, then they come to withdraw more ordi∣narily, and at length altogether: Some when they withdraw from their own Pa∣roch, will not go hear, ordinarily at least, such as are discharged by Law, but some other Minister who either preaches under the Government, or is Indulged by the King and his Council: and within a little, will hear none of them. Some will hear, but not partake of the Sacraments in their own Congre∣gation, and so acknowledges their Mi∣nister in one part of his Office, but not in another: Upon what grounds they do so, I confess I am not able to under∣stand; for I hope they disclaim the Po∣pish error, that the Efficacy of the Sacra∣ments depend upon the intention of the Mi∣nister. Now I say, an advised Christian will do well to take heed, and beware of any the least degree of Separation, both because unwarrantable in it self, and because it maketh way for a further degree, and that second for a third, and
so unst people may take a running that they shall not know where to make  stand. Have we not seen some turn at ength Bronnists, and some Quakers: yea, Mr. Baxter in his Cure of Church Di∣visions, Pag. 268. tells of some in En∣gland who turning Separatists, at length died Apostat Infidels, deriding Chri∣stianity, and the imortality of the Soul. D. There are among your selves who will not be constant and ordinary hearers in their own Congregations, What say you of them? I. I say, such are very reprovable, for doing that which hath in it the seeds of greater Schism. And those Ministers though conform, to whom people of a∣nothers charge, use to resort, are bound to declare against it, unless great distance of place from their own Paroch Church, or other insuperable lets hinder their or∣dinar frequenting of their own Congre∣gation, and their absence be not ground∣ed upon any disrespect unto, or dis∣esteem of their own Minister: Other∣wise, I say, that Minister to whom they come is bound to declare against such pra∣ctices:
And if he do not, it's presum'd, desire of applause, and self-love makes him hold his peace, and prevails more with him, than love to the peace and u∣nity of the Church. D. It's very hard to hinder me from go∣ing where I can be most edified, we are bid∣den covet the best Gifts, 1 Cor. 12. vers. last. And a man may go where he can have the best dinner. I. I hear that useth to be your lan∣guage: as for that place, 1 Cor. 12. last, The Apostle is not directing private Chri∣stians what Gifts in others to seek after for their edification: but shews that though there are diversities of Gifts, and every one should be content with his own Gif given him for the edification of others, yet so that he seek after better, not in others but in himself. 2. The Apostle in that Chapter is clearly pressing the Co∣rinthians to Unity, from the considera∣tion that Christians are all one body; and therefore the meanest Gifts must no more be despised than the meanest mem∣bers of our body; and Schism must be avoided, vers. 25. 3. Suppone coveting the best Gifts were spoken to Christians,
in your sense, yet it must be understood with due Limitations, such as that we covet them in an orderly way, and with respect to the Churches peace, and such like. And so many general directions in the Word, are to be understood with necessary cautions, as your self can not deney. Edification indeed is much to be set by, yet let none imagine that it is warrantable for them to seek it in a way that marrs the Churches peace, breeds in people a neglect and despising of their own Ministers, who are set over them in the Lord, and whom they are commanded to honour and reverence; that takes away the distinction of Pa∣rochs, and of one mans labours from a∣nother; as we would shun confusion; And that is contrary to laudable Canons, and Acts of the Church. You know we must not do evil that good may come of it, Rom. 3.8. D. What, Canons or Acts of the Church are against my leaving my own Paroch Mi∣nister, and going to another, by whom I think I get more good? I. I might produce sundry ancient Canons commanding Ministers not to ex∣cise
their Pastoral Office within ano∣ther's charge without leave, and that they receive not any man of another Paroch to Divine Service who neglects his own Pastor. The First Council of Nice, Can. 16. The second Council of Car∣thage, Can. 11. and Council 3. Can. 20. Concilium Nannetense, cap. 1. In which Council Presbyters or Ministers are com∣manded that at their entry to Divine Ser∣vice they ask the people if there be any present of anothers Congregation, who despising his own Minister desires to joyn with them, and if any such be found, that forthwith he be thrust out of the Church. And again in that same Coun∣cil, that no minister reset one that belongs to anothers charge, unless he be on a journey, or upon some other such relevant ground that keeps him from attending in his own congre∣gation for the time. But passing these, there is an act of the General Assembly, of this same Church of Scotland, Anno, 1647. To be found among the printed Acts of it, Intituled, Act against such as withdraw themselves from the publick Wor∣ship in their own Congregation; And it is express in discharging all Members of
this Kirk from withdrawing from their own Congregation usuallys, except in urgent cases made known unto, and ap∣proven by the Presbytrie: And if any contraveen, it's recommended first to the Minister, to whom such persons re∣sort, to deal with them to stay at home in their own Paroch; And then to the Minister and Session of the Paroch they belong to; and if need be to cite them to the Presbytrie, &c. Now, I suppose you will not decline the Authority of that Assembly, nor think the General Assem∣bly of this Church were such enemies to edification, as to have deprived Chri∣stians of this way of attaining it, if they might have allowed it to them without manifest hazard of Schism. You may think they were competent enough to judge in such a case; yea, that Act was purposely conceived to curb the be∣ginnings of Separation, and Schism, which at that time began to appear in this Church. D. If Ministers had all alike abilities, and gifts, for edification, I could say the less against that Act: but it is not so, for some Ministers excell others very far in an edifying gift.
I. Yet you see what the Assemblies mind was in this matter. Now to what you say of an edifying Gift, I wish ma∣ny of you mistake it not, if a man have a stentorian voice, or a ton, can speak loud and boldly, and can rail upon the Civil Powers, and cry down Bishops, and Curats: O, that is an edifying man! It feareth me, many of you who are pre∣tenders high enough to knowledge, and piety, can little judge of mens Gifts when all is done: and I make no doubt, oft times leaves better at home then what ye go to. But passing this, I offer to your serious consideration these few things a∣nent the diverse measures of Ministerial Gifts, and Edification by them. 1. The Lord hath not given to all Ministers alike mea∣sure of Gifts, but the Spirit distributes in what measure he pleaseth, 1 Cor. 12. and therefore to undervalue men of low Gifts, is to quarrel with the Almighty. 2. Though all have not received alike measure, we must not therefore think the meanest Gifts are useless, 1 Cor. 12. vers. 21.25. 3. The best Gifts can not of themselves work on hearts and consciences, it's on∣ly the Spirit can do this by what means
pleaseteh him, weak or strong, 1 Cor. 3. vers. 6, 7. And therefore peoples too much magnifying of Cifts is but an idoli∣zing of men, and giving Gods due to the Creature, this seems to have been the fault of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. chap. 1. and chap. 3. The learned Hieronimus Zauchius in the Epistle Dedicatory to the seventh Tom. of his Works, tells, that when first he left Italy, he came to Ge∣neve, and there observing a French man who used always to hear Calvin, and none else, he asked him his reason why he did not hear Viretus as occasion served, he answered, that if Paul were to come and preach at Geneve, Ego relicto Paulo, audirem Calvinum, i. e. he would leave Paul and go hear Calvin; which answer amazed Zauchius, and saith that he heard him, cum summa animi offensione, i. e. Zau∣chius was much troubled and offended at his answer, and observeth from it, how dangerous it is for people to admire any Minister too much, and make gods of them, as he saith, and to despise others. 4. The Lord useth oft-times to do more good by men of weak Gifts, than by greater. Christ was very far beyond Peter
in Gifts, for he received not the Spirit in measure, and his enemies did bear him witness, that never man spake like him. And in another place, They wondered at the gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth; And yet Act. 2. Peter a poor sin∣ful man, and very weakly gifted in com∣parison of Christ, at one Sermon convert∣eth three thousand. We read no where of the like success of Christs Ministry, but we hear him oft complaining of smal suc∣cess, as was before prophesied, Isai 49. vers. 4. and Chap, 53. vers. 1, 2, 3. &c. And in the Gospel frequently upbraiding these to whom he had preached, because of their unbelief, Math. 11. vers. 20, 21, 22, 23. &c. Chap. 13. vers. 14, 15. &c. Chap. 23. vers. 37. John. 5. vers. 40. and in other places. And in that famous Ser∣mon he had on the Mount, Mat. 5.6, 7. It's said Chap. vers. 28. that when he had ended his Sermon, the people were astonish¦ed, but not a word that many were con∣verted, but ground for the contrary, from Chap 8. vers. 10, 11, 12. where commending the Centurion's faith, he saith to the multitude that followed him down from the Mount, That many should
come from the East and West and sit down with Abraham, &c. And the unbeliev∣ing Jews, who were the children of the Kingdom, should be cast out. There∣fore, I say, if people would in one or∣derly way, attend the Ordinances in their own congregations, and would lay aside prejudices, and pray that the Gifts of their own Ministers may be blessed to them; they might expect it should not be in vain, 2 Cor. 4.7. We have this trea∣sure in earthen vessels that the excellency, &c. And surely the more weak and in∣sufficient the Instrument is, the more is his Omnipotency conspicuous, and his Arm revealed in doing good by weak means. Ponder these things well, which you will find do little favour your Sepa∣ration upon pretence of being edifyed. D. Though some withdraw, all will not. I. The fewer the better: yet if you withdraw, why may not others, and if some, why not all? for it is natural to people to be led by ill example. And if all withdraw, we shall have Pastors with∣out Flocks: and is it not by your means almost come to this already in sundry places; but, as I have shown, none ought to withdraw.
D. None ought to withdraw! that i strange. What obligation lyeth on me to be an ordinary hearer in my own Congrega∣tion? I. I spake somewhat before of the ob∣ligation we are under to maintain the Churches Peace, and of the Acts of the Church in ancient times, and in our own times to this purpose. And now further, do you not know that there is a recipro∣cal obligation betwixt a Minister and his People, which can not be so easily bro∣ken as you imagine. As the Minister is oblieged to labour among the people of his charge, diligently and faithfully, and that upon his peril, Ezek. 33. vers. 8. Heb. 13. vers. 17. So the people of his charge are bound to attend on his Mini∣stry among them. To esteem him high∣ly, and love him for his Works sake, Mal. 2. vers. 7. 1 Thes. 5. vers. 11, 12. To obey him, Heb. 13. vers. 17. Now how obey ye these injunctions when ye turn your backs upon your Ministers, will not receive the Law from their mouth, but do undervalue, despise, dis∣countenance, discourage, and weaken their hands by this your contempt, and
by your reproaches too, which oft ye are pleased to cast upon them? Do ye not fear what Christ hath said, He that despiseth you despiseth me? Hear I pray you what Mr. Durham (whose testimony I think ye ought to regard) saith, he speaking of a Ministers relation to a par∣ticular Congregation, on Revel. Pag. 105, 106. After he hath shewed that there is warrant from those Epistles directed to the Angels of the seven Churches, for a more special relation betwixt a Minister and such a Flock, rather than another Flock, and betwixt a Flock and such a Minister, rather than another Minister: for the Angel of Ephesus was not the An∣gel of Smyrna, nor yet the Church of Ephesus equally bound to the An∣gel of Smyrna, as to the Angel of Ephesus, he saith, Ʋpon this delegation by the master, such a people became peculiarly the people of such a Minister, and by the Ma∣sters appointment are to submit to the Ordi∣nances administred by him; because that same Lord and Master of the Mini∣ster who warrands him peculiarly to treat with such a people, being also Master of that Flock; calleth them peculiarly to sub∣mit
to that Minister from which, according to his appointment there ariseth a mutual obligation betwixt such a Minister and such a people; he is bound to Minister to them in the Gospel, and they are bound to submit to him, strengthen him, acknowledge him, communicate to him in all good things, &c. And further, he there shews, that this Obligation is not founded upon meer vo∣luntar consent, but on these Scripture com∣mands, 1 Thes. 5. vers. 12. Heb. 13. vers. 17. Galat. 6. vers. 6. and the like; al∣though there be no explicite covenanting betwixt a Minister and a People in refe∣rence to these ends. And, pag. 106. he saith, From this mutual obligation there a∣riseth a nearer sympathy betwixt that Mini∣ster and People, than betwixt him and a∣ny other People, and betwixt them and that Minister, than betwixt them and any other Minister: They have common interests, common hazards, common joy and grief: and a cross to one should be to both. And a little after he addeth, that there are peculi∣ar duties called for on both sides to each o∣ther, which are not so required betwixt them and others; and that there will be a peculiar reckoning that will follow hereupon;
As the Minister must reckon for his People, o the People for their reverencing, and incou∣aging of him in a special manner: And that n this account Paul did aggredge particu∣arly the Gentiles, their slighting and griev∣ng of him, in his Epistles to the Corinthi∣ns, and Galatians; Because of his parti∣ular delegation in reference to them. Thus Mr. Durham, who, you see, speaks ome to this point, and upon Scripture rounds binds you faster to the Ministers of your own Congregations, than you re aware. D. But there are other reasons that keep ack many of us, why we cannot have free∣om to hear and own the Ministers of the ime, were they never so able to edifie. I. What are these Reasons? D. First, They have not entered by a all from the People, as all Ministers should o, Act. 14. vers. 23. But by a Pre∣ntation from some Patron. I. Sundry of those whom ye refuse to ear, entered by the peoples call, and ch ye ought to hear, notwithstanding is reason of yours. As to that place, ct. 14.23. I know many have pleaded e peoples right to Elect their own Mi∣nister
from the Greek word  there used, which is borrowed from the Custome used in some of the ancient Greek States, where the people signifi∣ed their Election of their Magistrates, by the stretching forth of their hands, for so the word signifieth. But that place, Act. 14. and the word as it is there used, will not necessarily import the peoples choicing of their own Ministers: For, 1. Some learned Interpreters, and Cri∣ticks on that place, among whom espe∣cially, see Hammond, shews that this word is often used by Writers, to ex∣press the action of one single person, and thus it is used by the same Lut, Act. 10.41. Speaking of Gods choicing or ap∣pointing: So that the word is not ne∣cessarily to be understood of the action, or deed of many, choicing by suffrage or voices. 2. It's observed that the Gree Writers ordinarily used this word to sig∣nifie the ordaining of a person to a cer∣tain charge, which is done without suf∣frages, or choicing by votes. And tha so it must be taken here, appears from this because it is Paul and Barnabas, wh are said to do this work expressed her
by the Greek word, and not the people. Now you will not say, that Paul and Barnabas did elect Ministers to these Churches, that were to yield the questi∣on: Therefore in our Translation it is said, when they, that is, Paul and Bar∣nabas had ordained them Elders in every Church, they prayed and commended them to the Lord. Now all these were the actions of Paul and Barnabas, not of the people. And, 3. If you mean by this Word, the peoples electing Ministers by suffrages, you lose by it, and gives great advantage to Independents, who are for popular elections of Ministers: Whereas ye give this power, not to all the people, but to the Session: And therefore observing Presbyterians have forborn to press this place, as you ex∣pound it. But, 2. If you think the Mi∣nisters election either by People or Sessi∣on essential, that is, so necessary to make one a Minister to such a people, that he cannot be their Minister without it, you by this do not only nullify the Ministry of almost the whole Christian World for above a thousand years upward, but al∣so in particular, the Ministry of this
Church of Scotland, ever until the year 1649. for not till then were Patronages taken away, and the election by Sessions brought in use. Now what thanks will you get for this, even from many of your selves? For not only were all the Pro∣testant Ministers before the year 1638. entered by Presentations, but also all the Presbyterian Ministers after the year, 1638. till the year 1649. And there are some of them still in Office at this day in the same Congregations, to which they entered, not by the Sessions election, but by the Patrons Presentation: yet I think none of you will scruple to hear or own them upon that account, nor ever did. D. But I look upon Patronages as a cor∣ruption abjured in the Covenant. I. I pray you let me see in what place. And further, if Presentations and Patro∣nages be abjured, how came it to pass that this Kirk did continue so long under Perjury? For from the first taking of the Covenant, till the year 1649, Patro∣nages were still in use. And it's strange if all that while this breach of Covenant was not discerned. And I told you pre∣sently your selves do without scruple
hear Ministers of your own perswasion, who entered by Presentations from Pa∣trons. D. Many of your Ministers are ordain∣ed by Bishops, and this is another reason why we cannot hear them. I. Yet all the Ministers whom ye re∣fuse to hear were not ordained by Bi∣shops, even all who were ordained be∣twixt the year 1638. and 1662. or there∣by, and there are very many of these at this day in this Church, whom ye will not hear, though they were ordained by a Presbytrie without a Bishop. As for your not hearing of such as received Or∣dination from a Bishop, ye would for the same reason have refused to hear those ministers whom Timothy ordained in Ephesus, 1 Tim. 5.22. or whom Ti∣tus ordained in Crete, Tit. 1.5. You may see what Calvin saith on the place. And ye would have refused to hear any Mini∣ster in the World for many hundreds of years together, for all were ordained by Bishops. It was early said in the Church, Quid facit Episcopus quod non fa∣cit Presbyter, excepta Ordinatione. Or∣dination, then was accounted the pro∣per
act of the Bishop, and now Bishops ordain not without the concurrence of Ministers, who also have a hand in that action. And by this reason of yours ye would have refused to hear those Mini∣sters who were the Members of the As∣sembly of Glasgow, 1638. For though they voted down the Bishops, yet all of them generally had been ordained by Bishops, few or none excepted, and had sworn obedience to them too. And fur∣ther, by this reason ye should refuse to hear some at this day, who though they do not conform now to Episcopacy: yet were ordained by Bishops before the year 1638. and without scruple ye can hear such of the validity of Ordinati∣on by Bishops, see at length the Lon∣don Presbyterians in their Jus Divi∣num Ministerij Anglicani, from Pag. 17. especially from pag. 25. to pag. 32. or fur∣ther if you will to pag. 49. D. Though many of the Ministers of the time were ordained by Presbytrie without a Bishop, yet now they are turned Curats, no less than such as are ordained by the Bi∣shops, and we can hear none who preach un∣der Bishops, what ever way they were or∣dained,
they are now all of them the Bishops Curats. I. By your calling Ministers, Curats, I know not whither ye manifest more strength of passion or weakness of judge∣ment. For as all ye who use that word, useth to express your spleen and disdain, not fearing Christs word, be that despiseth you despiseth me: So there be very few among you who know what the word, Curate, signifieth: And even those who know that it signifieth one who hath, Cu∣ram animarum, the care of souls (a name no Minister needs be ashamed of, but should strive to be in some measure an∣swerable to it) yet I suppose, know not well, many of them, how, or in what sense it hath been used, else they would not so ignorantly misapply it: For those use to be called, Curats, who serve the Cure, as they speak, though they be not the Ministers who are presented to the place, but substituted by them to of∣ficiat in their room, and hence are cal∣led, Curats, the presented Minister be∣ing none resident. Now it is not so in this Church. But because ye call a Mi∣nister the Bishops Curate, ye seem to run
upon another mistake, as if the Bishop were, or did assume to himself to be the sole and proper Pastor of the whole Dio∣cess, and Ministers were but his substi∣tutes, deputed under him, as so many helpers. I know no Bishop who hath such thoughts of himself, or of Ministers, what ever ye think or say to cast an odi∣um upon them. But why can ye not hear them who preach under the Bishops Go∣vernment? D. They are perjured persons, and there∣fore we cannot hear them? I. All who preach under the present Government, yea, I suppose the most part of them, never took the Covenant, and therefore are not to be called perju∣red. For I told you at our last confe∣rence, the Covenant, as such cannot bind them who never took it, and so such Ministers may be heard, notwith∣standing of this reason, and even those Ministers who took the Covenant, and now upon this alteration continue in their Ministry under Bishops, are not perjured (suppose our Episcopacy be meant in the Covenant) for the reasons I gave you at our last communing. An Oath made a∣gainst
a thing in it self not unlawful, can not bind absolutely or in every case; there∣fore when it's taken, is necessarily to be understood with certain limitations and restrictions; otherwise it may come to be a bond of iniquity, as this Oath, may be, is to many through their mistake hereof. But giving though not granting, that all the Ministers who took the Covenant, and now preach under Bishops, are per∣jured, it will be hard for you to prove, That therefore they are not to be owned as truly Ministers of the Gospel, nor sub∣mitted to. It is true, personal faults and vices make a Minister justly liable to Church censure; and if they be of a high scandalous nature, to deposition; especially if he be impenitent in them: But so long as he is not convict and cen∣sured, the question is, whither or not the people may, yea, and ought to wait on his Ministry? You know Judas was sent forth to preach with the rest by Je∣sus Christ himself, and who will say that it was unwarrantable for any to hear him who came cloathed with such a mis∣sion and commission from Christ, as long as he was not convict, even though
they had known what a knave he was, for Christ knew very well what he was. And ye know what great exceptions might have been brought, both against the Life and Doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 15.23. and in other places. They were most bitter active enemies against Christ the Messiah, by all means sought to undo him, they ne∣glected the weightie duties of the Law, such as Mercy, Judgement, and Faith, were full of Pride and gross hypocrisie: I will not insist to tell you how Naphta∣ly in a great distemper, miscalls the Mi∣nisters of the time very ill: though much were true of what he saith, as God for∣bid, yet they would be no worse than the Scribes and Pharisees, yea, not so ill; for they did most maliciously oppose Christ Jesus himself, and that directly: neither have I any pleasure to make that parallel betwixt the Scribes and Pharisees, and your Preachers, ye so much glory of, that some have done, in their long prayers, devouring of widows houses, com∣passing Sea and Land to make Proselits, &c. They have given but too much ground for these comparisons. But to
our purpose, as the Scribes and Pharisees were very gross in their lives, so there was much Leaven in their Doctrine, they brought in a number of humane Traditions into the Doctrine and Wor∣ship of God and taught for Doctrines the commandments of men, they took away the Key of Knowledge, &c. Christ in his Sermon on the Mount, Mat. 5. purges the Law from their corrupt glosses: and yet for all this, Simeon and Anna, two old Saints, did not forsake the Temple, Luk. 2. Nor turned Separatists, though it was turned into a den of thieves. Jo∣seph and Mary went up yearly to the Temple to keep the Passover, and Christ himself went with them at twelve years of age. And Mat. 23. He biddeth hear the Scribes and Pharisees who sat in Moses Chair, notwithstanding their bad lives, and corrupt Doctrines, only he gives a Caveat, to bewar of their Leaven, and their ill example: Read Mr. Durham on Revel. Chap. 3. Commenting on the Epistle to the An∣gel of Sardis, who had a name that he lived, but was dead, Pag. 187. He saith, that comparing that Angel with him of
Laodicea, There is ground to say that men who are for their own case unsound, may yet be Ministers in the Church of Christ, and ought to be esteemed so, while they continue in that room; seing Christ doth so here. And again, saith, The Ordinance of Christ ought not to suffer derogation in whatsoever hands it be; And that hence the Lord re∣commends to his hearers to give due Ministe∣rial respect to the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23. Even when he is about to discover their rottenness, and that Judas was by the peo∣ple to be accounted an Ambassadour of Christ with the rest, because it is not grace that intituleth one to that charge, but Christs Call and Commission; And seing a call may be separated from grace, as grace from a call, it will follow, that according to his Soveraignity he may make use of whom he will, he may make use of men even more sin∣ful than others, that it may be known that edifying of souls doth not necessarily depend on the holiness of the Instrument, Act. 3.12. Mat. 7.23. Thus Mr. Durham. Now how can you justifie your Separation, when you dare not with any face say the Ministers of the time are as corrupt as were the Scribes and Pharisees, if there
be any other knowledge or moderation in you. And suppose you think them as bad, yet they are to be heard, as these were, read the London Mini∣sters, their Jus Divinum Minist. Anglic. pag. 2. D. Christ, Math. 23. vers, 1, 2. Bid∣deth not hear the Scribes and Pharisees, the words will not bear that. I. I hope ye will not say that he for∣biddeth to hear them, as ye use to for∣bid people to hear among us: a thing your Preachers are much on, as a ready way to gain followers to themselves. It's said, some of them are so far transport∣ed as to threaten people with damnation if they hear the Curats (so they call Mi∣nisters) how true this is, I will not po∣sitively say, the matter reported being so gross, renders it hardly credible: What truth may be in it you know bet∣ter than I. You say Christ biddeth not hear the Scribes and Pharisees; yet I told you, Mr. Durham saith, Christ there recommends to the people to give due Ministerial respect to the Scribes and Pha∣risees: Now is not hearing of them a part of due ministerial respect, think you?
Certainly without this their ministerial respect should be very lame. Christ bid∣deth the people observe and do what the Scribes and Pharisees from Moses Chair enjoyned them to observe and do, and how could they obey Christs injunction in this, unless they heard the Scribes and Pharisees teach them those things from Moses Chair. He that biddeth me obey my Ministers Doctrine delivered to me from the Word of God, his injunction carrieth also in it, an injunction to hear the Minister deliver those Doctrins to me, or presupposeth my hearing as the ordinary mean, or antecedent of my o∣bedience. Be pleased to consult Inter∣preters on the place, and you will find them generally expounding that place, both of hearing and obeying. And tru∣ly it is too clear a Scripture for you to elude, but will stand against you to your great conviction. Brounists and such like Separatists in Queen Elizabeth's time, and since, found the dint of it from the old non-conformists, who disputed against their dividing practices, which ye so much follow. D. It may be so. Yet many Episcopal Mi∣nisters
have entered in upon honest mens la∣bours: and for this reason ought not to be heard, but discountenanced as Intru∣ders. I. All the Episcopal Ministers entered not so, very many of them kept still the places the change of Government found them in: Others entered unto Churches upon the vacancies by the death of those who had been there before, or upon their transportation to some other Church. You must confess this reason sayeth no∣thing against any of those. Yet you say, many Episcopal Ministers did intrude themselves upon other mens labours. If here∣by you mean a sinful intrusion, as I know you do, let me ask you, first, were these Ministers whom you charge with Intrusion active in outing their Predeces∣sors, or did they come in upon their places till they were out, and their places declared vacant? 2. Would you, or would these Ministers who were not clear to keep their places on the terms of the change, but chosed rather to step out, have the people of such Congre∣gations left without a settled Ministrie, because they were not clear to brook
it themselves? Is this all their kindness to their people, or looks it not rather like a piece of petted self, that will nei∣ther do nor let do? And what you talk of coming in upon other mens la∣bours, is as applicable to one that cometh in upon a Ministers charge, who against his will is transported to another charge, by those who have power to dispose of him: The Minister so transported, may be, thinketh there is a wrong done both to him, and to the people he is taken from, and the people think so too; and possibly it is so: yet he who succeed∣eth him upon an orderly and fair call, you know, cannot be said to be an in∣truder, or in your sense, to come in up∣on another mans labours. I think an injury, suppose really done to the for∣mer Minister, by those who put him to the door, ought not hinder well advi∣sed people from submitting to another, for there is a necessity of a Ministrie, and knowing consciencious Christians should make the best of what they can not help in their Superiours. And if they cannot get such a Minister as they would, ought to take such as they can
have. These Ministers who were put from their charges, for asserting their duty to the King in the year 1648. had far better ground to complain that others were brought in upon their labours: yet they were silent and submissive, nor did they stir up the people to discounte∣nance such as succeeded in their places: and if the people had withdrawn, and refused to hear them that succeded, as Intruders, as people are taught now to do, without doubt, the Judicatours at that time would have noticed them se∣verely. But Lastly, ye who make so great a clamour of coming in upon o∣ther mens labours, what think ye of your own Preachers who go up and down from Paroch to Paroch through the Countrey, and any one of them will intrude himself not upon one Mini∣sters charge only, but, in so far as he can, upon the charges and labours of all the Ministers in Scotland. Alace, tell us no more of Ministers among us, who have entered upon other mens labours, they are but petty intruders, that con∣fine themselves to one Paroch; but these among you are intruders indeed,
and to purpose, Rom. 2.21. When Alexan∣der accused one that he was a Pirate, he answered, I am but a petty one, but you are the great Pirate that makes prey of whole Kingdomes and Nations. D. We are sworn by the Covenant to ex∣tirpat all that depend upon the Hierar∣chy, of which number the Episcopal Mini∣sters are: and therefore cannot law∣fully hear them, without breach of our Oath. I. Ministers are not all exprest in that Article: but suppose they were meant, yet it's said, All Ecclesiastical Officers de∣pending on that Hierarchy, that is, as I told you at our last conference, on that kind of Hierarchy that consists and is made up of all these Officers mentioned in the Article, as the English Presbyte∣rians sense it, which kind of Hierarchy we have not in this Church. But fur∣ther, if Ministers depending on Bishops be there meant, then ye by binding your selves not to hear them, have bound your selves to sin; for I told you a little before, Ministers may be very faulty, and sinful Creatures, and yet ought to be heard. But besides, I have shown
you before that Episcopacy is a most warrantable Government, which nei∣ther you nor I, nor any man could ever unwarrantably abjure, nor Ministers depending on it. So this reason of yours will come to nothing. And Lastly, by your exposition of that Clause of the se∣cond Article, ye were bound not to hear any Ministers who were in Office at the time of taking the Covenant, but to root out and extirpat them all, be∣cause all these Ministers depended on Bi∣shops as to their Ordination still, even after they took the Covenant, unless they had renounced their Ordination which they received from Bishops, and had been ordained of new by meer Pres∣byters, which they did not, nor thought themselves bound to do, notwithstand∣ing of the Covenant, otherwise it would follow, that all the time before, they were Ministers without a true Ordina∣tion, and so what should become of all their Ministeriall Acts they had perform∣ed by vertue of that Ordination they had received from Bishops: and yet to this day ye never scrupled hearing such of them as took the Covenant,
notwithstanding of their dependance foresaid, which is still a dependance in part, if they but disown the Bishops Go∣vernment for the future. D. Besides the reasons already named against hearing I have this to add: we are warranted by the Word to separate from a corrupt Church. I, If you think Bishops are a corrup∣tion in the Church, it will not be grant∣ed to you. And then you are mistaken, if you think, that every Church that hath corruption in it, is straight way to be separated from. There may be even great corruption in a Church, and yet Separation from her not lawful. Was there not great corruption of Do∣ctrine in the Church of Galatia, and ma∣ny infected with it? and in the Church of Corinth, was there not an Article of the Creed (the Resurrection of the dead) questioned? Yea, by sundrie flatly denied, 1 Cor. 15. Chap. We read of great faults in sundrie of these Church∣es, Rev. Chap. 2. and Chap. 3. And in the Church of the Old Testament sun∣drie times, read the Books of the Kings and the Chronicles, and the Prophets,
and you shall see what great corrupti∣ons oft were in that Church, and yet no command to the godly to Separate, as ong as the very substance of the Wor∣ship was not corrupted, as it was in the case of Jeroboams Calves, 2 Chron. 11.16. in the first ages of the Christian Church, it's known what Censures past against the Novatians, Donatists, and others, because they were Schismaticks, and, may be, there was as great cor∣ruptions in the Church at that time as any ye can pretend now, if not grea∣ter. D. If we may not Separate from a cor∣rupt Church, what then mean these Scriptures? 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. 1 Cor. 5.11. 2 Thes. 3.6. Rev. 18.3. I. I deny not but a Church may be corrupted in that degree, that Separa∣tion from her is warrantable, yea, and necessarie. Yet I told you everie cor∣ruption is no sufficient ground of Sepa∣rating from her. As for these Scriptures ye name, they prove not your point. In 2 Cor. 6.14. The Apostle is speaking of the dutie of Christians in Separating from Idolaters, and Heathens in their
Idolatries and ungodlie fellowships, not of withdrawing from Christian Assem∣blies. In 1 Cor. 5.11. and 2 Thes. 3.6. He tells Christians their dutie, not to keep needless fellowship in their private converse with such as are scandalous, but biddeth them not withdraw from the publick Worship of God, even though there be scandalous persons there; Wicked scandalous persons pollute not the Ordinances to us, nor is their pre∣sence at the Ordinances a ground for us to Separate, though it may be the fault of Church guides, if they be care∣less in keeping them back from such of the Ordinances as they have no right to, Rev. 18.3. is ordinarilie expound∣ed by Protestants, of leaving the Ido∣latrous Worship of the Church of Rome, where Doctrine also is much corrupted, but gives no warrant to Separate from a sound Church, where no such corrupti∣ons are. D. We think we have better reason to charge you with Schism, than ye have to charge us; for ye have departed from the Government of this Church by Presbytrie, to which we still adhere: so that ye
have made the Schism from us, not we from you. I. What, little ground ye have to charge us with Schism in respect of Go∣vernment, may appear, if ye consider, 1. That our sumbitting to the present Government by Bishops, is in obedi∣ence to the Commands, of our Superi∣ours, whom both ye and we are bound to obey in things in themselves not sin∣ful: So that our submission is dutie, and your non-submission is both disobe∣dience and Schism, disobedience to Au∣thoritie, Schism from the body of the Church. 2 If ye will consider, that Episcopacy (as at some length I shew in our first conference) is the only Govern∣ment of the Church left by Christ and his Apostles, and practised in the first and purest times after them, and so downward: Not we who now submit to this Government are the Schismaticks, but ye who refuse submission to it; here∣by ye are guilty of Schism from the whole Primitive times, alswell as from us. But besides, when we charge you with Schism, we mean it not only, nor mainly of Schism, in respect of Govern∣ment,
but of your dividing and sepa∣rating from our Christian Assemblies especially, and Divine Worship there performed; which indeed is a great Schism, even suppose there were many things wrong among us, that needed amendment, I pray you consider, I hope ye will not say, we have departed more from you and from the truth, than the Scribes and Pharisees, and the Jewish Church under them had departed from Moses Law in Christs time, and yet nei∣ther Christ nor the godly at that time, such as Simeon and Anna, Zacharias and Elizabeth, Joseph and Mary, with ma∣ny others, thought themselves oblieged to separate from that Church. Alace, then how will ye be able to justifie this Separation of yours? D. Your Ministers Lecture not to the people, therefore we will not hear them. I. Some among us did continue to Le∣cture, but that did not keep the people from the disease of the time, Separation. 2. We have the Scriptures publickly read in the Church, which is a very ancient practice, both in the Jewish and Christi∣an Church. The Jews had the five Books
of Moses or Pentatuch, which was com∣monly called the Law, divided into 53. Sections by Ezra, as some think, and every Sabbath day one of those Sections, together with a part of the Prophets was read in the Synagogues, See Act. 13. vers. 15, 27. and Act. 15.21. And that there were Lectures, that is, Read∣ers in the ancient Christian Church, is well known. So that ye who on this ground Separate now, would have se∣parate from the Church in all ages. 3. Le∣ctures as now used, have no authority from the Church nor ever had: For they are not according to the first ap∣pointment, which was, that the Mini∣ster should read a Chapter in the Old Testament, and another in the New, and where any difficult place occurred, briefly give the meaning without any more, but that way was soon left, and Ministers held with one Chapter, and many with a part of one, and not on∣ly expounded, but also raised practical observations: so that in effect, as some have expressed it, the Lecture came to be a short Sermon on a long Text: And indeed a Lecture and a Sermon af∣ter
it, are two Sermons at one dyet, and they that separate for want of this, would for the same reason separate from one who useth shorter Sermons, to a∣nother who preacheth longer: And yet long tedious Sermons are judged less edifying, caeteris paribus, and it may be a question whither it be not fitter for peoples edification to hold them with one Sermon at one dyet, than to give them two, considering their forgetful∣ness, when a great variety of purposes is accumulat, one thing puts out ano∣ther: And considering their dulness, and backwardness to receive divine things, and how soon corrupt nature will wearie and sit up, when about these ex∣ercises; is it not safer to hold with a few things, and press them home at one time? Therefore that ancient Christi∣an Pembo, an unlearned man, recor∣ded in Church Historie, desiring ano∣ther to learn him a part of a Psalm, and having heard the first verse of the 39. Psalm read, would hear no more, say∣ing it was a lesson great enough at that time, and a long time after that another asked him, if he was yet ready for ano∣ther
lesson, he answered no, for he had not sufficiently learned his first lesson. 4. Suppose our want of Lectures were a fault, yet I told you every fault or ne∣glect in a Church is not a ground to Se∣parate from her. And know you not that the ancient Jewish Church some times wanted Ordinances even of Di∣vine Institution, and that for a long time together, as Circumcision, the Pas∣over, &c. And will any say, she ought therefore to have been Separated from. 5. On this ground of yours ye would separate from all the Protestant Church∣es in the World at this day; in none of which ye will find a Lecture: Yea, ye would have separate from the Church of Scotland, ever till about the year, 1645. for till then we had no Lectures. I could wish indeed all our Sermons were more like Lectures, as Lectures have been, and are by some used, that is, that Ministers would take long Texts, and reduce them into some few points, especially insisting on the Scope, as is usual in Churches abroad, I make no doubt, people would please this way better, and retain more of what is spo∣ken,
than when Ministers confine them∣selves to short Texts, and then too oft rack both the Text, and their own Brains, seeking matter to hold out the time with. But herein I only give my own judgement. D. There is another thing yet keepeth me back from joining with you in your As∣semblies for Divine worship: If I should joyn with you, many good people would be offended, who look upon hearing among you to be a sin: and the Apostle saith, we must not give offence, nor lay a stum∣bling block before others. I. When the word forbiddeth us to give offence; First, it is meant of not doing that before others which is in it self sinful, whereby we indeed offend or grieve the godly, as also, lay a stum∣bling block in the way of others by our ill example: Now when you do your duty in obeying God, you cannot be said to give offence unto any: And if any will be offended at you, it's their own sin and weakness, for they take of∣fence where none is given, and in the present case if any will be offended at you for your maintaining unity and
peace in the Church, and for not for∣saking the assembling of your self to∣gether with the rest of his people; It's their own weakness while you give them no Offence at all, but on the contrary, by your good example is in a holy way provoking them to their duty with you: and if you shall ly by for fear of their offence, you shall both omit your own duty, and harden them in their sin. 2. Ordinarily where the Apostle for∣biddeth Christians to give offence to o∣thers, he is shewing how they ought to use their Christian liberty in things in∣different: That they must not use it to the offence of their weak brother; when either thereby he shall contrary to his conscience be emboldened to sin, 1 Cor. 8.10. or yet should be grieved with us because he thinks we sin in doing what he conceives we should not, Rom. 14. verse. 15. Yet you must know if the Com∣mand of Authority interpose, and in∣joyn me to use a thing in it self indiffe∣rent, or not use it; then and in that case it's no more indifferent to me as to that particular and time, my liberty, pro tunc, is determined and restricted by
Authority; and the thing though in it's own nature indifferent still, is by the supervenient command of Authority made necessary to me in my using, or not using it, according as Authority hath determined, Act. 15. vers. 28. These necessary things. though some of these things were not necessary in themselves, yet abstaining from them was at that time made necessary by the Authority of that Council, for the good of the Church. Then and in such a case as this, my obedience to Authority will prepon∣derat the other of not giving offence, the first being the greater duty of the two, as Divines and Casuists shew. And even in this case I give no offence, but do my duty, and if any take offence, it's cause∣less on my part, and is occasioned through my brothers weakness. It is Scandalum acceptum non datum, Scandel groundles∣ly taken by him, not at all given by me. When the Apostle forbiddeth Chri∣stians to use their liberty to the offence of the weak, he speaketh to those who were not determined by Authority. Have you any more to say for your Schism?
D. You still impute Schism to us. I. And in doing so I wrong you not, but am sorry ye give me too just ground. either ye are Schismaticks, or the christian Church never had any, ye have miserably rent the bowels of the poor Church your mother. I pray the Lord discover to you this sin, and give you repentance, ye both forsake the Church Assem∣blies, and also erect Separate meetings of your own, both in private houses, and in the fields. D. What ill in so doing? did not Christ preach in private houses and in the fields, and people hear in any place, and why may not we do the like? I. It's true, Christ preached in houses, and in the fields, and people heard. But did he so upon such grounds as ye do, to wit, that he might separate and teach people to separate from the Jewish Church: Or did he either think or teach that the Jewish teachers at that time ought not to be heard? I trow not. He was oft in the Temple, and in the Synagogues, he allowed of hear∣ing of the Scribes and Pharisees, only with this proviso, to beware of their lea∣ven
and bad lives, some whom he mira∣culouslie healed, he sent to the Priests to offer their Offering according to the Law, and did not bid people decline or disown them, for as corrupt as they were. But ye on the contrary erect mee∣tings of your own, because ye think ours unlawful to join with. But further, Christ preached in any place. 1. Be∣cause he was about the bringing in of the Gospel Doctrine into the World, and of Preaching himself the true Mes∣siah, which was necessarie to be done, and therefore took all occasions for do∣ing it in anie place, and the rather, be∣cause of the opposition this Doctrine, (though in it self most necessarie) met with from the Jewish teachers. And 2. Christ was the head of the whole Church, and therefore was not to be limited in the waie and manner of his Ministrie, as other Teachers ought and must be, but might Preach, when, and where, and to whom he pleased, for all be∣longed to his Ministrie, and I know none in the World will say, that he is universal Pastor of the whole Church, except the Pope: Nor will any say that
it is warrantable for meer men to do what Christ did in everie thing. These meetings of yours ye hold and frequent in despight of the Laws of the Land, which are verie express against them. And so to Schism ye add disobedience to the Civil Powers. D. Should I be hindered by the Law of the Land from hearing the Word of God, and other parts of his Worship: Or Mi∣nisters hindred to preach. You know it's better to obey God than men. I. The Laws of the Land hinder not, but allow and command you to hear the Word of God in your own Con∣gregations, where ye have the Gospel purelie preached by the allowance, and under the defence of Authoritie, a mer∣cie ye too little value. Is it not better to Worship God in a way not contrarie to the Law of the Land, the Law allowing me to Worship him purelie, than in a waie that is contrarie to the Law, and joyn∣ed with disobedience to it. As for what you bring out of Act. 4.19. From the Apostles their not obeying the Council of Jerusalem, discharging them to speak at all, or teach in the Name of Jesus,
it doth no waie quadrat with your case. For First, The Apostles had an imme∣diate extraordinarie call from Christ him∣self, to Preach in his Name, and so were not to be discharged by anie Power on Earth. 2. The Prohibition given to them was intended to suppress the Go∣spel absolutelie, and as such, and there∣fore it was not lawful for them to obeie: Nor was there anie other visible waie to propagate the Gospel through the World, but by their Preaching. But among us, though some Ministers be silent, there are manie others not discharged, but allowed to Preach. And, blest be God, the opposition of Authoritie is not a∣gainst the Gospel it self, but against your disorders. D. Can the King and the Laws silence a Minister that he may not preach the Word of God? I. You now give me occasion to tell you brieflie how your Preachers behave themselves in this Schism, who are indeed the great propagators of it. 1. They exerce their Ministrie contrarie to the Command of Authoritie; concerning which you ask, whether the King and
the Law can silence a Minister, that he may not preach the Word of God. To which, I say, you read of Solomons thrust∣ing out Abiathar from the Priest-hood, 1 King. 2.27. That it was a deposing of him simply from all Priestly power. I shall not debate, yet sure it was a re∣straining of his Priestly power as to the actual exercing, and officiating, which he was bound to submit to. This a King may do, he may inhibite a Minister to Preach in his Dominions, and the Minister so discharged, ought to be si∣lent, and not counteract, even suppose he think, the King and the Law wrongs him, especially when there are others to preach the Gospel, though he, or sun∣dry be silent. May be you have heard what Beza saith to this case, Epist. 12. In answer to some in England, if in case the Queen (Elizabeth) and the Bishops would either have Ministers Preach on their Terms, or not at all; they might Preach, notwith∣standing of the Prohibition of Authority: To which he answereth, Tertium enim illud nempe ut contra Regiae-Majestatis & Episcoporum voluntatem Ministerio suo fun∣gantur,
magis etiam exhorrescimus, i. e. As to the third, to wit, that Ministers exercise their Ministry contrary to the will of the Queen and the Bishops, is a thing we yet more abhore. Next, These who preach among you make themselves Ministers of the whole Church, without any fixt or settled charge. D. I have heard say that every Mini∣ster, is a Minister of the Catholick Church. I. That it is true, and that you may see in what sense, and on what grounds we say so against Independents, read Mr. Rutherfoord in his due right of Presby∣trie, pag. 204. (though wrong figured) and he tells you, that though a Pastor be Pastor of the Catholick Church, yet he is not a Catholick Pastor of the Ca∣tholick Church, as were the Apo∣stles. And that by a Calling, or Or∣dination, he is made a Pastor, but by Election is to be restricted to be or∣dinarily the Pastor of his Flock: So Mr. Durham on Rev. pag. 106, 107. saith, a Minister, though he be a Minister of the Catholick Church, yet is not a Catholick
Minister of the Catholick Church, and that there is great odds betwixt these two. The Apostles, saith he, were Catholick Mini∣sters of the Catholick Church, and such the Pope claims to be, that is, to have an im∣mediate access for exercising his Office equal∣ly, and indifferently to all places. Mini∣sters, saith he, actu primo, have a com∣mission, and power to be Ministers of the whole Church, and Watch-men of the whole Citie indefinitly: Yet, actu secundo, They are specially delegated for such and such Congregations, and Posts. But Ministers among you have made themselves actu se∣cundo, Ministers of all the Congregati∣ons of the Countrey where they can come. And from this followeth a third step, they incroach, and intrude upon the Charges of other men, of which, I spoke before, and now only shall que∣stion you by what Authoritie they do so: What call have they to preach, and administer the Sacraments to people of another Ministers Charge, not being called, or desired by the Ministers of those people, so to do? Their call is ei∣ther Ordinary or extraordinary. Ordi∣nary they have none, never being cal∣led
to be Ministers of those Congregati∣ons, nor so much as imployed by the Minister of the place, to exercise any Ministerial act among his people. And for an Extraordinary call, I think they will not pretend to it. It may be seen by Acts of Councils in ancient times, how the Church hath guarded against this kind of incroaching by one upon a∣nothers Charge: Otherwise what con∣fusions, and absurdities would inevitab∣ly follow? When these Ministers who went to Aberdeen, to perswade the ta∣king of the National Covenant, preach∣ed there without leave of the Ministers of the place, the Doctors and Ministers asked them, how it was, that without their consent, and against their will, they publickly preached to the people of their Congregations? Which they tell them was a thing repugnant to Scri∣pture, and to Canons of ancient Coun∣cils. I might further let you see by what practices ministers among you advance this Schism. They are careful to or dain men of their own way, that hereby the Schism might be perpetuated, and kept on foot. They are much in inveigh∣ing
against Bishops and Curats (as they call the Ministers) Hereby to alienate the minds of people from their own Pa∣stors. Of late they have great mixt communions, at which, persons igno∣rant of the common principles, and vi∣tious persons, may be, and I little doubt are admitted, it being hardly possible by their way, to keep them back. I might also speak of their great disswasives to people, not to hear their own Pa∣stors, and of their strange, and dread∣ful uncharitableness to such as differ from them, which sin, they have with too much unhappie success diffused among their ordinarie hearers. Mr. Baxter saith to this purpose, in the preface to his Cure of Church divisions, To Preach with∣out love, and to hear without love, and to pray without love, to any that differ from your Sect: O what a loathsome Sacrifice is it to the God of Love? If we must leave our Gift at the Altar, till we are reconciled to an offended brother, what a gift is theirs, who are unreconciled to almost all the Chur∣ches of Christ, or to multitudes of their Brethren, because they are not of their way: Yea, that make their Communion the very
badge and means of their uncharitableness, and divisions. D. I cannot deny but there may be some truth in these things, I have heard, from you. And now I must take my leave, and shall have my thoughts of what hath past be∣twixt us, now and then, when I am a∣lone. I. Do so I pray you, and seek Illu∣mination from God, and that he would remove prejudices, which too oft stand in the way of our embracing Truth. Only let me give you a few advices fur∣ther before we part. And 1. Be not too confident of your own opinions, as if you were undoubtedly in the right, but consider seriously what I have said, to inform you at our three Conferen∣ces. 2. Think not that the matters in debate among us, are the very sub∣stantials of Religion, or that people may not be of different perswasions in these things, and yet both sides main∣tain Love, and Church fellowship: for this were to run unto manifest sin, and evil, viz. Schism, which is a renting of Christs body, the Church, and ne∣glecting publick Ordinances, upon
fears of what is only disputable, and supposed to be evil. There have been far greater differences among Christi∣ans in former times, and yet Church-communion not broken. I might shew you that not only different opinions about Church Government, hath been no hinderance to keep Protestants from joyning together in the Worship of God, and other parts of Christian Communi∣on; but also when such as differed from others in the manner of their per∣forming Worship, have been occasio∣nally in one anothers Churches, they have without scruple conformed to the custome of the Church, they were in for the time. I pray you consider, if you Separate from the Church, because of Bishops, you should on this ground have been a Separatist, in almost all ages, since Christianity began: And if you think Episcopacy such an error, and corruption, that none ought to hold communion, with a Church where it is; then you must think, Christ holds no Communion with such a Church: and if so, then it will follow, that there have been sundrie ages since Christs
time, wherein he had no Church on Earth to keep communion with; Yea, that these thousand six hundred years bygone, there hath been but rarely, and very seldom a true Church on Earth. And so what should become of his Promises to his Church? that she should be built on the Rock, and a∣gainst her the gates of Hell should not prevail: and that he would be with her alway unto the end of the World, And also this were to make Christ a head without members, a King without a Kingdom, &c. Therefore, 3. Have chari∣ty for such as differ from you in the time, and beware of either thinking, or saying, they have no grace, because they are not of your way. The A∣postle spends a whole Chapter in com∣mending, and recommending chari∣ty to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 13. chap. Among whom there were corruptions, and differences, in greater matters than among us, 1 Cor. chap. 11. and chap. 15. And remember, it's usual with those, who have least truth on their side, to have least charity too, Rom. chap. 14. These weak Christi∣ans
who understood not their liberty in being loosed from the Cerimonial Law, as they had least truth on their side, in respect of the strong, who knew their liberty; so had they least charity, for, vers. 3, 4. They judged the strong. Papists will have no charity for Protestants, yet Protestants, who are in the right, dare not met back to them with that measure. 4. Consider what hazard we bring our selves under, by our unchristian divisions, Gal. 5.15. Mark 3.24. And what advantage we give to the common Enemy, not only to make us a mock, but also a prey. It was long ago observed by the Historian Dum singuli pugnant, uni∣versi vincuntur. i. e. While they fight among themselves, they are all over∣come. And the Story of Scilurus, in∣joining his Sons to maintain concord among themselves, which he elegant∣ly examplified by the Sheaf of Arrows, is known. 5. Acquaint your self with the writings of the old non-conformists in England, Cartwright, Bredshaw, Ball, Paget, Hildersham, &c. Who wrote, and testified against the Brounists, and
such like Separatists, for their separa∣ting from the Church of England, for which separation, much more could have been pretended, than ye can for sepa∣rating from us: And you will see, how zealously, and by what good argu∣ments these men battered down Separa∣tion. Also, Mr. Baxter, one of the present non-conformists in England, hath written a whole Book against Separati∣on from that Church, which he calleth, the Cure of Church divisions, where he giveth sixtie directions to people, to guard them against the sin of Separati∣on, some of which, I shall but name, omiting his enlargements. The 6. is, That we make not our Terms of Com∣munion with any Church stricker, than Christ hath done. 7. That we have deep and true apprehensions of the ne∣cessitie and reasons of Christian unity, and concord, and of the sin and mise∣ry of division, and discord; and con∣sider what the Scripture saith here∣in. 19. That we engage not our selves too far in any divided Sect, nor Spouse the Interest of any party of Christians, to the neglect and injury of the Univer∣sal
Church, and the Christian cause. 20. That we be very suspicious of our religious passions, and carefully di∣stinguish betwixt a sound, and sinful zeal; lest we father our sin on the Spi∣it of God. 25. That we be not over∣tender of our reputation, with any sort of people on Earth, nor too impati∣ent of their displeasure, censures, or contempt, but live above them. 26. That we use not our selves needlesly to the familiar company of that sort of Chisti∣ans, who use to censure them that are more sober, catholick, and charitable than themselves, &c. Where he saith, if ever we shall have peace, and love recovered, it must be by training up ung Christians under the precepts, and examples of grave, judicious, and peaceable Guides. 31. That Christians never begin too soon with doubtful opi∣nions, nor ever lay too much weight upon them. 41. That the bare favour of a Preacher, nor the loudness of his voice, or affectionate utterance, draw us not to admire him without a propor∣tion of solid understanding, and judici∣ousness. 43. That we reject not a good
cause, because, it may be owned by bad men, and own not a bad cause, for the goodness of the Patrons of it. 44. That we take the bad examples of Religious Persons to be one of our most perilous temptations, and therefore learn to discover what are the special sins of Professors in the age, we leave in, that we may be fortified against them. 56. Keep still in our eye the state of all Christs Churches on Earth, that we may know, what a people they are through the World, whom he keeps communion with, and may not igno∣rantly separate from almost all the Church∣es of Christ, while we think we sepa∣rate but from those about us. 60. That we count it als comfortable to be a Mn tyre for love and peace, by blind Zea∣lots as for the faith by Infidels, and Hea∣thens. You may perceive that many of you have need of such counsels as these. The old English non-conformists, though they did dissent from the Ceremonies of that Church, and desired a forbearance in those things, as to their own pra∣ctice, (which is not our case) yet fully declared against Separation, both
by their Practice, and Writings; some of them have called it the bitter root of Separation, the way that God never blest with Peace and Holiness. Some Passages out of the English Presbyterians, their Jus Divinum Ministerij Anglicani, anent the Unwarrantableness of Sepa∣ration, I shall name briefly. Pag. 10. It's agreeable to the will of Christ and much tending to edification, that all those that live within the same bounds, should be under the care of the same Minister, or Ministers, to be taught by them, — and to remove altogether these Parochial bounds, would open a gape to thousands to live like
sheep without a shepsherd, — And in a little time would bring in all manner of pro∣faneness and atheism. Pag. 11. Object. What if a godly man live under a wicked or heretical Minister, Ought such a Man to hear such a Minister? Ans. In such a case that man ought rather to re∣move his habitation, than that for his sake, the bounding of Parishes be laid aside. Pag. 12. In Scripture to appoint Elders in every Church, and in every City is all one. They that were converted in a City (who were at first but few in number) joyn∣ed in Church-Fellowship with the Elders and Congregation of that City, and not with any other. Pag. 25. Some evil men may, and al∣wise have, de facto, been Officers and Mi∣nisters in the Church. In the Jewish Church Hophni and Phineas: In the days of Christ, Scribes and Pharisees, yet the wickedness of such did not null or evacuat their Ministerial Acts. The Scribes and Pharisees were to be heard, though they said, and did not. Christ's commission did aswell authorize Judas as any other to preach and
baptize — The leprosie of the hand doth not hinder the growing of the Corn, which that hand soweth. Pag. 42, 43. The ten Tribes did not only worship God after a false manner; by setting up their Golden Calves in Dan and Bethel, &c. — Yet notwithstanding all this when the Prophet came to anoint Jehu, he sayeth, thus saith the Lord God of Israel, I have anointed thee King over the people of the Lord, even over Israel, &c. In Christs time, it is evident that the Office of the Priest, and high-priest was exceed∣ingly corrupted, they came ordinarily unto their Office by bribery and faction — The priests, and high-priests had the chief stroak in the crucifying of Christ. And yet we read, Joh. 11.51. Caiaphas is owned by the holy Ghost, as high-priest, &c. Act. 23. When Paul said to the high-priest, God will smite thee, thou whited wall, &c. And they that stood by said, Revilest thou the high-priest? Paul answered, I wist not, brethren, that he was the high-priest. For it is written, thou shalt not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people. Paul, as ma∣ny think, acknowledged him as high-priest,
though the priest-hood at that time was Tyrannical, Heretical, and they came by most unjust ways into their places, and offices. From all this it appears, that cor∣ruptions cleaving to Gods Ordinances, do not null his Ordinances. Thus they. Mr. Rutherfoord (a witness whom ye will not refuse) in his due-right of Presby∣trie, from pag. 220. to pag. 256. (though wrong figured) discusseth the Question, in what cases it is lawful to separate from a Church, where among sundry other things, he saith, pag. 232. Separation from a true Church, where the Orthodox Word of God is preach∣ed, and the Sacraments duly administred, we think unlawful: And at great length he vindicats, 2 Cor. 6.14. against Sepa∣ratists. Pag. 233. The personal sins of others are no warrant for Separation: For Christ himself and the Apostles did eat the passover and worship God, with one, who Christ said had a devil, and should betray the Son of Man, and was an unclean man, Joh. 13.11, 18. Ibid. If it be said, Judas was neither convicted of his treachery against Christ, nor was he known to the Apostles by name to be the man: For
some of them suspected themselves, and not Judas to be the traitor. Answ. Christ told the Disciples that they were an unclean socie∣ty, and that one had a devil: And there∣fore though they knew not the man by name, who had the devil, yet they knew the socie∣ty to have a devil, and to be unclean for that one man's cause, yet Christ and the Disciples did communicat at that Supper, not∣withstanding of this. Pag. 250. It was not lawful to separat from the Pharisees preaching the truth in Moses, his Chair. Pag. 253. The godly laudably did not separate from the Israel and Church of God, because the Altar of Damascus was set up, and because of the high places. Things de∣dicated unto Idols, as Lutheran images, may be called, and are called, 1 Cor. 10.34. Idolatry, yet are they Idolatry by parti∣cipation, and so the cup of devils, 1 Cor. 10.21. Paul doth not command Separati∣on from the Church of Corinth, and the Table of the Lord there. Pag. 254. The godly in England who refused the Ceremonies, and Bishops, did well, not to separate from the visible Church
in England. He saith indeed they separat∣ed from the Church in the worst and great∣est part: which he understands of their disowning Bishops and the Ceremonies, but yet they kept communion with that Church in unquestionable duties, as is well known, all except the Separatists, against whom, Mr. Rutherfoord is here reasoning, and against whom, the old Nonconformists did write. Ibid. If a Church be incorrigible in a wicked conversation, and yet retain the true faith of Christ, it is presumed, God hath there some to be saved, and that where Christs Ordinances be, there also his Church presence is: And therefore I doubt much if that Church should be separated from, for the case is not here as with one simple person, for it is clear, all are not involved in that incorrigible obstinacy, and that is yet a true visible communion in which we are to re∣main; for there is some Ʋnion with the Head Christ, where the faith is kept sound and that visibly. Though a private brother being scandalous and obstinatly flagitious, be to be cast off, yet are we not to deal so with an Orthodox Church, where the most part are scandalous. Ibid. I see not but we
may Separate from the Lords Supper where Bread is adored, and from Baptism, where the sign of the Cross is added to Christs Or∣dinance, yet are we not Separated from the Church, for we professedly hear the Word, and visibly allow the truth of Doctrine, main∣tained by that Church, and are ready to seal it with our blood, &c. Pag. 254, 255. There may be causes of non-union with a Church, which are not suf∣ficient causes of Separation. Paul would not separate from the Church of the Jews, though they rejected Christ, till they openly Blasphemed, Act. 13.44, 45, 46. Act. 18.16. Ibid. There is no just cause to leave a less clean Church (if it be a true Church) and to go to a purer and cleaner: Though one who is a member of no Church, may joyn to that Church which he conceiveth to be purest, and cleanest. You see then that Mr. Rutherfoord, and the En∣glish Presbyterians, in their Book cited be∣fore, teach, that neither personal faults, whether in Ministers or People (suppose they be real) nor yet real faults about the Worship of God, are sufficient grounds
of Separation; much less when but only supposed. Now to make an end, try all things impartially, and know that it is no dis∣paragement for you, nor any to retract that, wherein you have been wrong, ei∣ther in opinion, or practice. It is in∣deed somewhat hard for men to confess they have been wrong, and such are rare to be found: yet Augustin one of the most learned of all the Fathers, wrote whole Books of retractions, for which he is as deservedly famous, as for any thing else. And, saith Jerom to Ruffinus, never blush to change thy opinion, for neither you, nor I, nor any person alive, are of so great Authority as to be ashamed to confess, we have erred. The Lord bless us with Truth, and Peace, Peace be within the Walls of our Jerusalem, and Prosperitie within her Palaces, and let them prosper who love her, and her peace. Amen. D. I thank you for your free, and friend∣ly communing with me. I know the Apostle biddeth me prove all things, which I re∣solve
to do, And to begg illumination from the Father of Lights, and that he would give me understanding in all things. And what upon due tryal, I find to be right and good, I shall by his Grace hold it fast. Farewel. Schisma proles superbiae, male perseverando fit Haeresis, & mater Haereseos. FINIS.
Differences of the Time.
