F2289B R9460 13744167 101690
A Full and Perfect ACCOUNT OF THE State and Condition OF THE Province of Vlster in Ireland: In a LETTER from WEXFORD Of the 15th of January, 1689/0. Licensed and Entred according to Order. Dear Brother, I Make use of this opportunity of this small Vessel entred, for France, o let you know the sad Condition we who are in these parts are in: Both Protestants and Papists are quite weary of their Government, we are all so oppressed with Souldiers: they have hard∣ly left an Englishman the value of a Far∣thing; and such Wast is committed by them, that we all dread a Famine next Summer; so that we are all a thinking to get away as soon as the weather may fa∣vour, and the nights grow shorter a we have here a Fisher-boat by our house, which will make a hard shift for that purpose. I have often repented my riot going over with you; all you have here, as well as of all Absenters is Seized, and the old Proprie∣tors are got into part; the rest King James keeps for those who Belive themselves well this next Campagne. I have no great reason to fear any great effect it will make upon their Courage. For one while the Protestants were all in ayl, which gave the Villains an opportunity to plunder their Houses, and Rifle them of what they had▪  present they  out, but how
they will subsist I know not in the condi∣tion they are in, and now that Provisions are growing dear. I am endeavouring to dispose of what little I had, in order to come off, but here is not a penny of Mo∣ney to be had for Goods; we are forced to give eight or ten shillings in the pound to exchange Brass for Silver, and glad we can meet with it so to. Here are very few or no lows going, the silly Irish never thinking of the mor∣row, or what Misery must inevibly at∣tend them thereby. The Souldiers here are extreamly sick∣ly, and dye of a kind of Spotted Feaver: some have gone to bd well a night, and found dead in the morning: and the Soul∣diers being sent throughout the Country to Quarter, have brought the Infection a∣long with them. We hea that Macc is certainly go to  and great Rejoycings. Collonel Butler who is Governour of this place now, and had a Regiment, brought but Eighty Men from the Campagne; he is daily getting Reruits; but those who now Lift themselves in hopes of a little Winters Plunder, will I am sure desert when they know they are to go upon Service. Captain  who brought over my Lord Dever from France, is turned out of his Command, his Lordship having ac∣cused him, for being the cause why a cer∣tain Ship of Arms which accompanyed them was taken. King James has disposed of the Ship, but I hear not to who. The Irish here are daily looking out for French Succors. I with the English Fl did but appear up∣on the C, and had any Landing Men on Board, it might do great Execution upon them, now at a time they expect and only rely upon what Forreign Force they shall have, and are unprovided to re∣ceive such Gs.  to your good Family, and believe me always, Your most Affectionate Brother, FINIS. LONDON: Printed for H. Younge near Ludgate. 1690.
