F2313A R215525 99827379 31797
A Full and True Relation OF A Bloody & Dismal Fight Betwixt the Protestants. Commanded by His Grace the Duke of Schomberge, and Major General Kirk; And the Irish Rebels. Commanded by the Duke of Berwick, and Collonel Sarsefield, Near LISNEGARVEY in IRELAND. With an Account of . The Seizing of several Ships from France, Stor'd with Arms and Am∣munition. The Besieging of Charlemont, by D. Schomberg. . The miserable state of Protestants in Dublin. . The present Condition of the late K. James. . The Sickness and sad Mortality of his Soldiers. With other matterial Occurrences. LICENSED, 1689: And Entered according to Order, Dear Brother, OUR frequent Skirmishes and Fights, that have lattely hap∣pened her in Ireland, betwixt the Protestants and Papists, I ppose, has created some False and Erro∣ious Reports; therefore I have diligently nquired into the Truth of them all; and nd the Exact Account to be as followeth. That Collonel Sarsefield, with a de∣ch'd Party of Five Thousand choice en, out of the Irish Army, and joined ith Two Thousand of the Connaught orces, came first against James-Town; nd the Garrison not finding themselves able to engage with so great Numbers, as the Irish were, retreated thence to Sli∣go; killing in their Retreat, many of the Irish, with the loss of very few of their own Party, though Sarsefield pur∣sued them close to the Town; where Collonel Russel, with the Horse under his Command, apprehending Sarsefield's Party to be too strong for them, re∣treated to Bellishannon, advising the Foot also to quit the Town: But one Mon∣sieur de St. Sauvem, who commanded about Two Hundred Foot, most Grana∣deers, and Collonel Loyd, with the Innis∣killing
Foot, bravely stood to it, resol∣ving to Fight the Enemy; and upon their approaching the Town, the French Captain, with his Men; went and took a Pass, not far from the Town; which he maintained, against all Sarsefield's Force, till all their Ammunition was spent; the Monsieur himself, an Excellent Marks-Man, often Fireing in the Head of them; after which, he and his Men Retreated to the Town, with no great loss, and defen∣ded themselves with their Baggonets in their Muskets, till they took Possession of Two the Forts beyond the Town. The French Captain; and his Party, possessing the Lower Forth; and Loyd, with the Inniskilling Men, went to the Upper Forth; from whence Loyd that Night, went towards Inniskilling, falling on the Irish, in a Pass which he was to go over, and killing Two Hundred, not losing Fifteen himself: The French in their Re∣treat, carried Fire and Provisions into the Forth, wherein they found Three Barrels of Powder, with which they defended themselves bravely for Three Days; and on the Third at Night, the Irish lying secure in the Town, they sallied from the Forth, on the Irish, killed about Two Hundred, and drove the rest out of the Town; which Account being brought to Duke Schomberg, he dispatch'd away all the Inniskilling Horse, and Draggoons, with Two Regiments of Inniskilling Foot, Two Regiments of English Horse, and one of Draggoons; so that we may very suddenly expect a good Account from that Expedition, if they reach Sarse∣field, before they quit Sligo. There is also one arrived here, who left Dublin lately, who informs us, that the Late King James was returned from his Camp, that the Irish had lost at least Fifteen Thousand of their Army by Dis∣eases; that a very Malignant Feavour did rage in their Camp, and followed them to their Winter-Quatters; that Six Regi∣ments of their Horse were gone to Quar∣ter in Munster; that the Ʋlster-Men, with their Herds flying from thence, had eat up all the Grass, and Hay, in East and West Meathes, County of Kildare, King and Queens County, and were going to∣wards Mster; that in all probabil they would destroy all the Forage of the County; for (he says) they drive Th-Thousand Head of Ʋlster Cattle i Drove, and enter on any Man's Grou and eat up all his Hay, Grass, Corn, an Pettadoes; and so from Farm to Fa like ,  our all.  Report also, that they had the Accou in Dublin, of the Lord Dover's Land in the West, from France, with only o Ship, having lo a small Ship, Lad with Arms and Ammunition, which the said was taken by the English Fleet;  heard of no other Ships arriving fro France, when he left Dublin. He  says, that the Irish Court at Dublin w not (in their usual manner)  gantly Joyful, either for the Lord  Landing, or for arsefield's Success at Ja Town, or Sligo, Our last Letters likewise from Irela informs us, assured, That the Detach¦ments, which the Duke of Schomberg se to Besiege Charlemont, is now actually be¦fore the Place; and laying a close Siege and bombarding it: That since the Surre¦der of Sligo, (which the Inhabitants h done on very Honourable Terms) the  Rebels had sent out a Detachement  both Horse and Dragoons, to Ravage an Spoil the Country round about, to  great Inconvenience and Consernation the poor Protestants, and Inhabitants those parts: But that the Duke of Sch∣berg, to prevent, if possible, all the D¦struction and Mischief, that might happ thereupon, had sent out a considerab Detachement, either to engage them  Battle, or to stop their Barbarous Procee¦dings; which expedient, has Miraculous put great Heart and Life into the Coun∣try People: And we doubt not, but in  very short time, to give you a good Ac¦count of the quelling those Rebels. We have also a fresh Account, of taking several Ships from France, bount for Ire∣land; one Laden with Iron-Hoops; and a second with Arms and Ammunition, con∣sisting of at least Two Hundred Tuns, &c. which is all that at present comes from him, who is your Friend and Servant. London Printed for John Bishop in the Strand, near Charing-Cross, 1689.
