F385A R18088 12868428 94770
The Famous TRAGEDIE Of the Life and Death of MRIS. RUMP. SHEWING How She was brought to Bed of a Monster With her terrible Pangs, bitter Teeming, hard Labour, and lamentable Travell from Portsmouth to VVestminster, and the great misery she hath endured by her ugly, deformed, ill-shapen, base-begotten Brat or Imp of Reformation, And the great care and wonderful pains taken by Mris London Midwife Mris Hasterigg, Nurse. Gossip Vaine Gos. Scot & her man Litesum Gossip VValton. Gossip Martin Gossip Nevil. Gossip Lenthal Secluded Gossips. Apprentices. Together with the Exceeding great fright she took at a Free Parliament. And the Fatall end of that Grand Tyrant O. C. the Father of all Mur∣thers, Rebellions, Treasons and Treacheries committed since the year 1648, As it was presented on a burning Stage at Westminster the 29th of May, 1660. There was such horrid stinking smoak ne'r known Before; But now the Devil has his own. LONDON, Printed for Theodorus Microcosmus, 1660.
PROLOGUE. You Gallants that some idle hours have spent, Her's pastime that may give you all content. It far excels Bell's story and the Dragon, Or Pha'tons riding in the Firy Wagon. It's no Colchester Bull nor yet Mad' Ox, Nor Tyrant Nol, mounted in a Coach-box. Let merry Bells then Musick backwards Ring, Whilst we the praise of Mris Rump do sing. Let her Phanatick friends great Bonfires make Of purest straw they from Pist Beds can take; With Eccoes loud like screeking of a Cart, And with shrill noise more sweeter then a F— For now shee's safe from danger brought a Bed, Behold the Monster of her Maiden-head. The Nurse is paid, By Oaths, false Protestation, And by a new Coin called Sequestration. 'Tis strange a Rump that's roasted, boyl'd and broyl'd. Should after death bring forth a monstrous Child. Got by some Pettyfogging Knight o'th post VVho in her VVomb did leave his horrid Ghost, To vex the honest people of this Nation By her Base Brat, pretending Reformation, VVho's bred and born, and then within a day Consum'd to smoak, and clearly fled away. But yet Spectators now with Patience view, 'This Scene, 'tis cal'd a false W— never true. Enter Gossiip Vain, Scot and Nurse Haslerig. Gossip Vane. HAa, ha, ha, How bravely have we steer'd the Coast now, Is there no more reprobates left, that we may bring them under an Act of Sequestration, This parting of Estates is a rare piece of employment, my thinks 'tis a gallant frollick. Gos. Scot. Content gossip all's ours, though more would do well, what I have makes me jocund. Enter Lightsum. Jocund Mris, and well you might could you keep it. But whats the cause of this merry Vain you are in, when Mris Rump lies so sick of a Portsmouth Bastard, shee! hardly bring it safe into the World?
Mrs. Gos. Scot. How! Sick, Sirrah are you sure of that? Lightsum. As sure as you you'l live to be hang'd for murrher, Trea∣son, and Treachery. Mrs. Scot. Gallop, Ride, Trot, Amble, Go, Run amaine, withall agi∣lity, dexterity, alacrity and celerity, call Mrs. London the Midwife, and tell her that Mrs. Rump desires her to come away presently, for shee's in strong labour and endures miserable pangs and throws that comes upon her by playing the Whore at Portsmouth; pray Heavens she hath not taken some fright at the exclamations of the people a∣gainst the Arse, stump, Bum or Fag-end of a Parliament! Ile be sworn it's enough to gally a Gentlewoman of her quallity and breeding to be despised by every idle boy that makes verses, times and Songs of her, making no better of her then a common Camp or Ammunition W— turning up her Tayl to every lowsy ill-dependent, besides Martin the Town Bull. Well she is not the first that hath done amiss, these are but slips occasioned by the weakness of her Sex. I'le in and make her a spiritual Cawdle, I doubt shee'l have an ill bargaine on't. Mrs. Rump, how do you? I say Mrs. Rump will you have a little strong Water of Mrs Scots distillation, or a Cawdle of Sequestration to comfort your putrified Bum? Mrs. Rump. Oh sick, sick, I must Spew Nurse pray reach the Boul, Haw—aw—aw— Nurse. Well Mrs. fetch it up: up with it: Heaven blesse us! What's this looks so red Mrs? Mrs. Rump. Oh 'tis blood, innocent blood, that hath lay in con∣gealed clods in my Stomack a 11 years; Hark how loud it cryes for vengeance! I never felt it before I was overpowred by my Secluded Gos∣sips, onely once at Portsmouth, when I was frighted by my Gossip Fleet∣woodt party and the London Apprentices, Oh the death of my King, his blood and the fear of his Sons coming, causes my pain to encrease, I understand too late he suffered by my Tyranny, an innocent and untime∣ly end. Nurse. 'Tis well 'tis up, Mrs. cast again. Mrs. Rump. Aw—aw—aw—Oh my heart is almost burst! Nurse, Lord, Mrs. what is that looks so yellow, Is it Choller? Mrs. Rump. No Nurse 'tis Gold, accursed Gold, for love of which I sold my God, murdered my King, gave away my Soul, and pull'd down the gates, Posts, Percullisses, nay through thy instigation had like to have fired the habitation of Mrs. London my Midwife, and that for a small sum of one hundred thousand pounds Aw—, aw—, aw—.
Gossip Scot. Quickly Nurse, bring the Bason Nurse. Nurse, I come I come, Whats this looks like Parchment Rowld up in form like a Bill of Indictment? Rump. This is that black Bill drawn up by that strumpet my Mother. Bradshaw through the instigation of the Devil, and my Father Crom∣wel, against my Royal Soveraigne, for which I endure these bitter pangs. Gossip. Scot. Is Mris London come? If not, there's no help, we're all undone: what course shall we take to preserve our dearly beloved sister Rump? Gos. VValton. Call for more help. Hold fast behind gossiip Nevil, this throw I fear will be her last. Gos. Nevil. No Ile warrant you, I shall play the Oceano Dr. so well that my Eutopian Physick will bring the Brat to perfection, Tis nothing comes now but a Harp & Cross, it smells so strong of a Commonwealth it can never miscarry. Gos. Martin. In good sooth I believe so too. Could she sweat up∣on it, as I use to do at Baldwins Gardens, shee'd do well enough. G. Scot. Or as I have done at VVickam with my Bone-lace-maker, or at Lambeth with my Begger-wench, 'twould thrive in spight in of Fae. Mris Rump. I'me almost spent Oh, oh, aw—aw— Nurse. Whats this looks like Paper? Mris Rump. These are Votes and Ordinances of my own creating, contrary to Law or Reason, made only to keep out my King contrary to my Oath of Allegiance, and for sequestring my friends to stuff my own Coffers. Pray hold my back hard Nurse, or my heart will shiver in pieces. Aw—aw—aw— Nurse. Whats this that comes so strongly up? Foh, foh, foh, now it stinks all the Kingdom over, but I cannot help it? Mris Rump. Oh Nurse its too late to help now. This is that dam∣nable Declaration you causd to be lap'd up in an Oath of Abjuration, against my Soveraign Lord the King, aspersing him and his whole Line with reproachful lys, calling him Tyrant, who was the Most Just and Religious King in the World; Pray Nurse fling some hot Embers on it, and make hast for Mris Murther, Mris Rapine, and my good neigh∣bour Mris Perjury. Nurse. Ime gone, here's the Midwife, Mris Londons come for∣sooth. Mris London. Mris Rump how do you I pray?
Mrs. Rump. Oh Mrs. London, help me now or I die, never did Rump endure so much sorrow, with bitter pangs, sobs and sighs. Oh, oh I am ready to die, you need not have staid so long; there was no Gares, Portcullises or posts to hinder you, Oh I'me ready to depart! Mrs. London. Go, and the Devil go with you, I came but to laugh at thy misery, thou hast had too much of my help already, which hath em∣boldned thee to play the Strumpet. Ile not assist thee or thy brat any more Guild-hall is too empty of Bodkins, Thimbles, Rings, and Boles to maintain thy whoredom, Exit. As soon as she had made an end of speaking, in came rushing Mrs. Nevill, Mrs. Scot, Mrs. Walton, Mrs. Martin. Mrs. Vane. &c. who presently fell about her business: one held her hands, another her back, and a third her members, she being in this grievous agony (having no hopes to scape with life, desired Mrs. Haslerig to indite a bill to have her pray'd for) and that it be speedily sent by the Lord Mayor to the several Congregation within every their respective Parishes for her safe Deliverance; which most accurately she penned in form of a Declara∣tion, in these words following. The Declarations of Mrs. Rump, lying very weak, and in most grievous Pangs of Child-bearing; and cannot be Delivered. Whatsoever dangers are threatned or feared, either by the great perplexity I am at this present in (or by reason of my manifold sins that now in my weakness lie heavy upon my Conscience,) yet I have assurance, that if I confess and forsake them (as I have no such inten∣tion) I shall find mercy. Therefore I confess and acknowledge (but not from the bottom of my heart) that for the space of these 12 years I have been a most cruel murderer, not onely of Bodies, but of Souls; that I have perjur'd my self, First by my Oath of All giance, and secondly by my Solemn Covenant, wherein (as in Hos. 1.9,) I have spoken words, swearing falsly in making a Covenant; springeth up against me) like Hemlock in the furrows of the field: That I have most Trayterously betrayed, and murdered my lawful King, the Anointed of the Lord, that I have made Gods House and the Kings house a Den of Thieves: that I have loved wickedness, and practised it; that no fear hath dehorted me from doing any thing (but Justice) that I have robbed both God & the King, and have not feared the one nor honored the other: that I have used all manner of jugglings, Cousenage, contradictions and Equivoca∣tions, that my Religion hath been Railing, Blasphemy; Treason and Tautalogies,
And that I have not onely covered but by the instigation of the Devil, and against the Lawes of our Soveraign Lord King Charles, forceably taken, stole and carried away the goods and Chattells of many thousands of his Majesties Loyal and obedient Subjects; that I have made this Canaan of all happiness, a Golgotha, and Field of Blood; and have yoaked my fellow Subjects to the Pride, Tyranny and Op∣pression of my own Lust and Ambition; instead of Reforming I have deformed, instead of repairing I have pulled down; Which hath oc∣casioned all these miseries to fall upon me; My greatest grief of all be∣ing, that I know I have committed all this, and much more, but can∣not Repent for the same; therefore the several Independents, Ana∣baptists, Seekers, Ranters Quakers, &c. within the Cities of London and Westminster, and the late Lines of Communications, are desired upon next Good Fryday if I shall not be Delivered before, to keep a day of feined Humiliation, and Prating; that the heavy judgements that so inevitably threaten me, may be diverted; That so I may come in again to Rule, Reign, and Tyrannize over you, Rump everlasting, Im∣positions, Assessments and Taxations without end. Your Friend and putrified Bum of iniquity, Mrs. Rump. While this was writing Mrs. Rump grew worse and worse, and the good Wives made account she had been drawing on: therefore Mrs. London stept to her and spake as followeth viz. Mrs. London. Dear Daughter I perceive by thy pulses beating, and so much blood springing out of thy Conscience into thy Face, that thou art almost already as it were dead, and its a question whether the Child thou now art in labour with, may come to perfection or no? or live to receive its Christendom, and though I have upheld thee in all thy Actions, and safely brought thee from Portsmouth to Westminster; and succoured the Fox 12. years with Plate, Bodkins, Rings and Bowls, yet thy sins and abominations have been so great I cannot deliver thee so as to restore thee to thy former power, I advise thee therefore re∣store what is taken by thy cruel Paws from thy God, thy King, thy Neighbour, and repent of thy perjury. Whilst thus she speak the Room was fill'd with smoak, over spread clear with darkness, the Candles went out, and terrible thundrings were heard, intermixt with wawling of Catts, howling of Doggs, and barking of Wolves, which strnck a great terrour in all her Gossips; In the mean time Mrs. Rump brought forth an ugly deformed Monster without a head, goggle-ey'd, bloody hands, growing out on both sides of its de∣vouring
panch, under the belly hung a great Bag, and the Feet were like the feet of a Bear; those that will see this Brat may repair to the Plantation of Fumigosus calld Slavonia, whither she is gone to be Nurs'd by Mris Sequestration; who no sooner is gone but in comes the Secluded Gossips. Enter Secluded Gossips. What's here to do? Is no room left for us? if not, patience upon force must prove a medicine to purge this place from the usurping power of a lawless Rump. Gossip Lenthal. You are all welcome, pray sit down for I should be unwilling to lose the place of Speaking, by which my Coffers have been stuft with draining the purses and heart-blood of other mens Estates. Secl. Gossips. Nurse Lenthal, Read over some of the last Papers or manuscripts of Mrs Rump. Gossip Lenth. Here is an Act against the whole Line of King James by which its neither murther nor Treason, to Kill Kings or murther the most Loyal Subjects. And here's another rare Vote, which I look upon to be very good in Law, for the increasing my Coffers (hoping to be a sharer therein) that is, For sequestring Sir George Booth, and all those of the Royal party that assisted him. Secl. Gossiips. Stay there a while, We disown your Treasons. Those Acts we vote Null and Void. Wee'l clear the way, let the next go on where we have left, right will take place, the stinking Rump be in a rotten condition, and though it be supposed we fatte'd them, VVee'l make them Lean, and all for sorrow sing Themselves to Hell, when England hath a King. Enter Free Parl. What hideous Monster's this, that appears thus dy'd in Blood, without shape, head or Body? Mris Rump. 'Tis I that wait for Pardon. Is no Indempnity for me? though I have dlpt my hands in the Scarlet dy of Majesty, I hope your mercy will exceed my cruelty. Parl. I, as far as Law and Justice will extends; but I see little hope, therefore as thou hast sat long in pomp, so thou shalt lye in State upon a hurdle, and be drawn to thy Country house, where as much pains shall be taken for thee as Judas took for himself. She trembles. Rump. Since so it is Ile to the City and dy a martyr. Enter Prentices. Lay hands on her. They seiz on her. All. Wee'l end this stink with speed.
They fling her in the fire and write this Epitaph. Here lyes she who was (in summe) No Head or Body but all Bum, VVho did three Nations to confusio bring. She sold her God, and murthered her King. Enter Prentices with staves, and Clubs carrying the Effigies of that old Tyrant O. Cromwell. A Prentice. Lo here's the form of that Grand Traytor Noll Who gave a hundred pound a year to Pol To vindicate his bloody Scarlet pawes, Under the Notion of a Good Old Cause. All the rest. We knew it well, and did in sorrow sing Whilst Judas like he murderd Charles our King. But now wee'l make the world our deeds admire, VVith that they flung the Puppet in the fire, Which made the very dust and ashes fly, From th' earth as swift as lightning from the Sky. And such a noysome Hog and darkness fell, As if it had descended into Hell. Where (with the Rumpish Brat) a curse it lyes, As though the Devil had torn out the eyes The which was all the pay due for its hire Whose scortching Nose three Kingdoms set on sire. EPILOGUE. Rejoyce Great Brittain now, for Kings there's none Shall Govern thee, but Charles, and he alone Will Peace and Plenty to this Nation bring, VVho is the Son of Charles thy marttyr'd KING. The Rump of Traytors (that did sore so high To spill the blood of sacred Majesty. Are now defunct, Poor VVhore shee's brought a Bed Of a long Tayl, but neither brains or Head. FAG, RUMP, BUM, STUMP.
