G1321 R8785 11806055 49447
THE Christian Merchant Described in A SERMON.
THE Christian Merchant Describ'd in a SERMON At First Design'd for A Private AUDIENCE, Now Humbly Dedicated to all the Merchants of the CITY. By WILLIAM GOSTWYKE, Rector of Purley in Berks. LONDON, Printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill, M DC XC VI.
THE Christian Merchant. St. MATTH. 13. 45, 46. Again, The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Merchant-man seeking goodly Pearls: Who when he had found one Pearl of great price, he went, and sold all that he had, and bought it. THE Particle , again, we here first meet with, is rather an Introductor to the Text, then an Integral part of it; yet gives us to understand, that this is another Parable of our Savi∣our's, added to the former, more amply, and clearly to represent, and illustrate the Nature, and excel∣lency of the Kingdom of Heaven. Another, and so consequently, that there is no danger in our knowing too much of our Duty to God, or our Interest in him. And that it is but a Mistake of some men's, that Ig∣norance is the only Mother of Piety and Devotion. Another Parable, that is Similitude, or Comparison. For so St. Mark is well render'd, Whereunto shall we Mark 4. 30.
liken the kingdom of God: or with what Comparison shall we compare it? Of these the Use is very frequent in the Scriptures of both Testaments. Whether it were, that a readier Attention, a clearer Perception, a dee∣per Impression, a firmer Retention, or all these at once were wrought, or won by them, especially when explain'd or apply'd; so it was, that very often of old when a Prophet was sent on an Important Errand, it was reveal'd to him in a Vision, and to be deliver'd by him in a Parable. And of our Blessed Saviour, the same Evangelist aver's in a few Verses following, that in many such Parables he spake the word Verse 33. to the people; and adds, as they were able to hear it; that is, as was most intelligible, and withal most profitable for them, saith the learned Dr. Hammond on the place. Of this in the Text the two Terms, or Extremes are differently taken, and understood. Some take them for the Kingdom of Heaven on the one Hand, and the Pearl of Price on the other. As if it had been said, The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Pearl of great Price. By the Kingdom of Heaven meaning the Happiness of Heaven; as the Phrase often imports, especially in Promise, as in St. Matth. 5. and elsewhere. And by the Merchant-Man, the good Christian continually seeking, till he make it sure. Others take the Kingdom of Heaven indeed for the one, but for the other extream, the Merchant-man: Reading the words as they run, The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Merchant-man. These meaning by the Kingdom of Heaven, the whole
Church of Christ Militant here on Earth, but to be triumphant hereafter in Heaven: as the words some∣times signify, especially in Parable, as here. Where then, the Enallage has a favourable Aspect either to the whole Church, put for every single Member of it: or to the single Merchant-Man, put for the whole Company, of which he is a Member. And by the pearl of Price purchased, the Happiness of Heaven as before, gain'd. By the first account, the Happi∣ness of Heaven to a Christian is like a Pearl of great Price to a Merchant-Man. By the Second, the Church of Christ in gaining Heaven is like a Com∣pany of Merchant-men purchasing a Pearl of great Price. Or more particularly, and plainly thus. The good Christian aiming hereafter at Heaven is like a Merchant pursuing his best Interests here on Earth. Sensus, duplex, & uterque probandus. Both Sences are sound, both good, and not unlikely both intended by our great Master, with whom it was very usual in One Proposition, to give us more points than one of Instruction. Of this Comparison in this later sence, to which my occasions at present lead me, the Ground, or Foundation is the parity or likeness be∣tween the two Persons here compar'd. The Com∣plete Christian is very like a well accomplisht Mer∣chant. Indeed Omne simile est & dissimile: there is some odds and some advantage too, on the Christi∣ans side, as shall be shewn; but in many things they meet, and agree. They seek alike, they find alike, alike they sell all, to make a purse, or one grand
Purchase at last; that is, contentedly part with any thing of lower price, to get higher, till they can reach the Top, and compass the Sum total of their Hap∣piness once for all. This parity to make appear—, I shall give you the best account I can of the Mer∣chant in general; Divide it for clearer Process into particulars; Compare the Christian with him in each particular; and to make the Character a little fuller, touch on two or three of his many excellent Proper∣ties; and as I may, Apply. A Merchant then is a Vertuous, and Valuable Person, of great and uninterrupted Dealings, abroad, and at home, with design to make himself, and to make others happy. This I take the Merchant to be; And this with a very easie Turn is the Chri∣stian too. 1. A Vertuous Person, our Saviour here supposes him; in that he sends the Christian, not to correct, to cull, or curtail, but transcribe him. And such, for the present, I shall suppose the Christian to be. One that whatsoever things are honest, just, pure, lovely, and of good report; if there be any Vertue, if any praise, as sure enough there is; the Christian is one that , syllogizes, argues, and rea∣sons himself into the Love, pursuit and practice of these things. Now to suppose him Vertuous, is to assert him Valuable; for Vertue is at least the Basis, if not the very Essence of all true worth and value. But besides, as the World goes, there are some other things add to his Stature, and set him above many
others: as his Birth, and Breeding. First his Birth. 'Tis not for every Block to yeild a carv'd Head; nor every common Stone a curious Statue. 'Tis not for every One to put himself upon this Office; nor take upon himself this Honour; but He that is call'd, and enabled of God, and good Friends. In other, and our own Nation too, they are the Sons generally of the better sort that are dedicated to this generous Em∣ploy. And they had need of something uncommon, ex traduce, and deriv'd down to them, that are to go through all parts, and upon the whole, make any thing considerable of it. The Christian too as such, is of a Noble Extract, of a Descent indeed Divine; not born of Flesh and Blood, or of the Will of Man, but God: is origi∣nally of the Family of Heaven, and near ally'd to the Ancient of Dayes there. . His Off∣spring, Heir, and Joynt with Christ. And has a Seed remaining in him that he cannot Sin. A settled 1 Joh. 3. 1. Principle that possesses him with a just scorn of any thing base, below, or unbecoming him. Won't suf∣fer him to sneak, and slave it to Sin and Satan from day to day as others do: But as a natural Genius in∣spires him, with all that's great and good; and so worthy of his Ancestors, and of himself.—Again, His Breeding. It has been said a Poet may be Born, an Orator must be Bred: but without both, most cer∣tain, neither will be exquisite. The Merchant in his Minority is grounded in Learning, and the Lan∣guages, from the best Authors, and by the best Pro∣fessors:
At a hand is Curious, and in several of the Mathematicks made almost Master. And when bound Apprentice, that is, a Learner still, He comes from Theory to Practice. He has those special Rules set before him, that with common Care, he cannot fail in Business. His being Bound, by the way, he takes not for a trouble, much less disparagement to him. There's no Man but is bound to serve his King, his Country, his Family, and Friends some way, or other. He's bound, but 'tis to One that's bound as well to him, and is to be as just and kind on the one hand, as he is true and tractable on the other. 'Tis at a time when he needs more Care took of him, than very likely he would take of himself: And when with many others to be loose, might be to be for ever lost. And 'tis but for a time, Deus dabit huic quoque finem, will have an end: he is not to have his Ears peirc't through to perpetuate it. 'Tis upon terms easie to him, his Master being more his Father, and his Service better than many others Freedom. And Advantagious to him; at anothers Expence to make himself a Man: and by the Trail of Pike to come to be the abler General. So that in a sense, he's only bound to serve himself. The Christian has his training up in the Nurture, and Admonition of the Lord too. And as the Breast-Milk he first drew became good Bloud, and Spirits in him to his after-health, and ever better habit of Body: So the good Notions he then imbib'd, turn'd as in Timothy to Principles, and those confirm'd by
the Reverend Masters of Assemblies enoble the dispo∣sitions, and Inclinations of his Mind, and enable him to every good word and work, that is, to the whole business of his Christian Calling. Being timely told, 'tis best to bear his yoke in youth: Now is the time, he Lam. 3. 17. sets his shoulder to it. Takes his Baptismal Vow upon himself; enters the Lists in his own Person; engages to flee youthful Lusts, and manfully fight under Christ's Banner. Now, 'tis, he's taught the Use of the Bow, and Buckler; the Weapons, and Way of War offensive and defensive. Now 'tis, he resolves to know him, whom to know is Life Eternal; and to serve him, whom to serve is perfect Freedom. Now 'tis, that subacto, & puro solo, in a broken, and contrite heart, he sowes the Seed of Grace, in hopes of a plentiful and joyful Harvest. Now business comes thick upon him, and he becomes a Man. 2. Of great, and uninterrupted Dealings abroad, and at home. He seeks, he finds, he veiwes, he goes, he comes, he likes, he bids, he buyes, he takes home, he books down, he layes up: meets a new man, acts a new part, and sells to Buy: that is, to do all this over again. And this all exprest, or fairly intimat∣ed in the very Text. The many and various Deal∣ings, or rather Goods dealt in and for, by the many Eminent Merchants that are, are almost endless to instance and be particular in. Generally speaking, they are considerable either for Bulk, and Quantity; or for Worth, and Value. Such as commend them∣selves to the Uses and Necessities of the Most, or to
the Exactness and Curiosity of the greatest. Our present Merchant is for goodly Pearl: a thing well known here, in Sickness highly Cordial; in Health, as rarely Ornamental. With what he prudently be∣gan, he still, and steadily goes on to the last. Seeks till he finds, then leaves not, till he buyes. He nei∣ther starts aside to Novelties he needs not, nor makes a stand in the midway as non-plust, nor of a sudden gives off all, as if non compos, not master of his own Mind; but keeps his Course, and keeps his Pace, till he have gain'd his Point. Abroad he sends as of∣ten as the Company agrees on't; oftener, if his occa∣sions for supplies require it. And sometimes goes himself, to see who, and how they do, he deals with; or the dispose, or manage of what he deals in. Hard∣ships, and hazards may surround, but neither can surprise him, who is prepar'd for the worst that can come, come what will. At home between Export∣ing, and Importing, and all the many requisites to both successively, or together; between Creditor and Debtor, keeping accounts, and clearing them, and in Choosing the best time for all things, he is so took up, he has no leisure to listen to the Sirens of Temptation, or be taken with them. The Christian likewise has his full share of busi∣ness, and of as much Importance to him. Has fun∣damental Principles as before, while young, to learn, and make his own; in riper years, to make professi∣on of, and put in practice; and from his own Expe∣rience to Communicate at last to after-Comers, Has
Revelation to adore, and to believe; and Reason mostly in other matters, to bring himself to be rul'd by. Has Truth to vindicate, and Errour to oppose. Has Prohibitions and Threats for his Fear to work, and naked Promise now, and then, for his Faith to live upon. Has Positive Institutions; Natural, and Moral Line upon Line, and Precept upon Precept many, directed to him to Obey. A God in Heaven to know, and own; to Love, and Fear; to Serve, and Honour; to Trust, and to delight in; to Pray to, and to Praise at all times. On Earth Men: Su∣periours to be Subject; Equals to be Civil to; In∣feriours to succour, help, and comfort. Has all Men to do all that for at all times, he could wish done himself at any time in any case of need whatever. And has himself to look to, and take care of; no small Charge, no very easie task neither. He has, naturally speaking, a resty body to break, and keep under: a rambling Head, a wanton Eye, an itching Ear, a lawless Tongue, an open Sepulchre of a Throat, would swallow all that's offer'd, and an Heart deceitful above all things, to reduce to primi∣tive Use, and Institution. He has a corrupt Mind to correct, and cultivate; vain Imaginations, vile Affections, a deprav'd Judgment, an obstinate Will, many an oblique Wish, and Desire, to take to task, and set to rights. Has a pack of Russian, and Rude Passions within him to Collar, and keep in Irons, Né lanient ipsum; least they pull the whole house upon his head. Has a World of Temptations with∣out
him to escape, or overcome, or they will draw him in, and drown him in Destruction and Perdition. Has Disappointments, Losses, and Crosses to bear, and make the best of, that is, out of the Eater to get Meat, and Honey from the strong. He has the nu∣merous Appartments of a large Soul to furnish, and the chief Repository there to Enrich and Store with all the Vertues, and Graces of the Gospel: and to keep all as bright and safe, as he would his Evidences for Heaven, and his Title to a blessed Eternity. Yet hitherto his way is tolerable, his work is pretty plain, and easie, he has not yet resisted unto bloud. But now, and then he meets with knots and difficulties extraordinary to deal with. Sometimes with Cases that want a well-read Conscience to inform him in: Sometimes with Intricacies that require the best. Ad∣vice, and Council, to bring him out of: Sometimes with Stones, and Rocks of Offence, which make him need a friendly hand to help him over. Some∣times he has a sudden descent to make, is to come down from his own Will, and seeming Reason: to deny his own dear Self, perhaps in that, that's dear∣est to him, and must stoop, and take up his Cross. But mostly his Way is Up-Hill, he is to grow in Knowledge, and in Grace: to forget things past: to pass things got, and press on to a perfect Stature, and then to rise from strength to strength until he come to Zion. This is what the good Christian is to do, this is some part of it, for in this hurry, 'tis not one half that I can tell you. This is what the good
Christian does, at least, he does his best to do. What 'scapes his Hands he works out on his Knees: begs Pardon first, then Help of God: so doubles his dili∣gence, and regains his lost ground. And this he does all Enemies, and Opposition to the Contrary not∣withstanding, The Flesh flinching, the World frown∣ing, the Devil raging, the very Gates of Hell broke loose, and rattling about his Ears. As one that's Deaf, he hears not; as one that's Dumb, he opens not his Mouth. These and the like are the Goods he Merchant-like sends out. These, or in two Words, as one from Heaven Sums up a Bill of Lading, newly brought in thither, His Prayers, and Alms. These he Acts 10. 4. continually casts, as bread upon the waters, and perhaps Eccles. 11. 1. before many days, perhaps after, however, whenever he most wants it, he finds return'd, and brought home to him, in the most suitable Mercies of God upon him. The View, he takes of the Holy Land, to which his Commerce lies, is like that of Moses, from the top of Pisgah too; at distance, but brought near by the Per∣spective of a lively Faith, that shews him things in∣visible to others, things inconceivable to himself. His Timeing all things to advantage, as by good Advice, Jam. 5. 13. both makes the business easier he is to do, and makes the End the surer, he at first design'd. And that is 3. To make himself, and to make others happy. The Merchant's none of those, that Closet themselves only to catch Flies; or that work only to be weary, or worse purpose: but One that from the beginning propos'd to himself an End; and that end worthy of
all his thoughts, his Cares, his Travel, and his Pains. He seeks as readily and far forth as any man; he'l find, or make a pass per Mare, per Terras to the remotest Indies, or round the Universe, but it shall be for goodly Pearl, or what's as good. He that says this is mean or mercenary in him, reproaches all Mankind at once, as much as him. Who plants a Vineyard, or feeds a Flock for nothing? Or to look higher, What Soul∣dier 1 Cor. 9. 7. fights? What Scholar Studies? Or Courtier waits, but has preferment in his Eye? Nor without Reason, till a better Title to it, can be produced. 'Tis but Currenti Calcar, a fresh Gale, to him, that else would make the best of's way. The Merchant takes, or makes it so, who as he thrives makes every day a better Figure. At last, having improv'd the single Talents he set up with, to five's, or ten's, it may be, five, or ten times told, lives up to all, and full out like himself. He might go cloath'd in Purple every day: nay, might wear Gold that wins it, saith our Proverb. But his Moderation in this, and all things, is well known to all Men. However in the modern Phrase, He Lives well; he must, he can't be off on't. His general Acquaintance, particular Office, great Dealings as before, his observations, judgment and experience, his Correspondence, and Intelligence make him a publick Good: Company often, and sometimes Council for the Greatest. As such, he never wants Resort, nor the Respects of Visitants of good Ac∣count; nor they a Welcom, and Reception suitable. Yet is it not the Noble Necessity thus laid upon him
only, that obliges him to this, but he's as for∣ward of himself, and free, as forc't: hating with ge∣nerous Job to eat his Sweet-meats by himself alone. Nor does his Hospitality abate his Charity, but aug∣ment it: and of his Fulness the Poor receive contin∣ually to their no small Comfort. How amply he re∣quites the good Offices of those that have bin friendly, and faithful to him; especially the Pains and Prayers of the sedulous Watchman of his Soul: To what de∣gree, He relieves the opprest, and helpless, especially the persecuted for pure Conscience sake: what Sums he gives in all, to indigent Relations, which few great Merchants are without, especially to the Industrious, that strive to the utmost of their Strength, but against Stream, as Cramp't with too great Families, or ill Circumstances, and must sink irrecoverably without him: What his right hand does these wayes, his left, though else a bosom Friend, shall never know: No Eye but his, to whom all hearts are Open, and no Se∣crets hid, shall ever see. Herein He is his own Exe∣cutor, while he lives: And that he may be so to all intents and purposes, where 'tis of highest Import to him, that he should be so, that is, of his Last Will and Testament: He makes it in his best Health, while he has time to think of those old Josephs, whom his new Successor would not know: And of the Poor, who, he Exod. 1. 8. Remember's are never to receive more from him, than he now bequeaths them. And to make all clear and well, makes use in this above all of Council. And thus, though dead, he yet speaks, and acts, disposes, and
distributes as much according to his mind, as if by his own Fire-side, and amongst his old Friends still. The superlative Love he has had ever and in all places for the Honour, and Service of his King, and Country, make him extreamly dear to both. And this, together with the great plenty of the good things he enjoyes; and the far greater Pleasure of doing the many good things he does, is what he made Account at first, should make his Last days his Best: should give his old Age a writ of Ease: his hoary Head a Bed of Honour: and Em∣balm his Name to all Posterity. The good Christian has his End too, but a glorious one, and high as Heaven it self. Could he see Vertue in its Native Beauty and Brightness, 'twould need no Letters of Commendation to him. But since he wants those Opticks, and sees, and knows but in part, and that too imperfectly; he is allow'd to have regard, as well to the Price of his high Calling, as to the Race he is to run for't. 'Tis thought no diminution to a Beau∣ty to be a Fortune too. Nor is't to Piety that 'tis pro∣fitable, and has the Promises of both Lives. Nor does the great Apostle think our having those Promises, too mean an Argument to move the best of us, to perfect holiness in the fear of God, much less should any think 2 Cor. 7. 1. the Examples he gives instance in, below our Imita∣tion: As of others, so of Moses, who no minor, but when come to Age, refus'd the Crown of Egypt, and chose rather to suffer affliction with the People of God. For, he sayes, He had respect to the recompence of Reward. Heb. 11. 24. And of the blessed Jesus himself, who, he says, endured
the Cross, and despised the shame, for the joy set before him. Heb. 12. 3. With so good Reason, and in so good Company, the Christian thinks He may very fairly have an Eye to both: not put asunder what God himself has joyn'd together, the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Righte∣ousness thereof Of which vast Kingdom He is Heir in, and through Christ; looks for it, and in some measure lives up to it. He gets the Language of Canaan be∣fore hand; And puts on the Habit of the Country here: being cloth'd with Righteousness, or rather cloth'd upon, with a much better, that of the Lord of Glory. His House with respect to God is no other than an Oratory, or Temple sanctified by the Word of God, which dwells richly there, and Prayer. And where every thing else is as it should be, decent, and in Order. His House with respect to Friends, is a spiritual St. Cross A Noble Hospital near Winchester.. Where by the means of a good Conscience, he keeps continual Feast; and where whoever would come, for a supply of those wants, (which was the good-old-fashion-End of Visiting, Mal. 3. 16.) who would come might meet with ample Satisfaction. And where those few that do come, are freely entertain'd with a Collation of his Travels, Trials, Conflicts and the Successes he has had: Not to divert, so much as to direct, animate, and arm those of like Occupation, and like enough to meet with all that he has past. He shews them, where they'l be most in danger to be impos'd upon: and where to be put to't: So, where their Skill, their Caution, their Courage, and Spiritual Armour, and
what of that, will be of most use to them. Shews them, how to deal with Men cunning to deceive: and how to defeat the devices of the Devil, of which he has a great many: and of which they had not need be ignorant. And shews them, how to hold fast what they have got, that's good; that so no other take their Crown from them. Thus out of his own Stores he brings forth new, and old to those will come for them. As often as he has the honour to be himself invited to his great Masters Table, he's sure to go: and there glad to see many a Brother and Companion he has had in tribulation, in the King∣dom, and Patience of Jesus Christ. More glad to see Him by Faith whom above all his Soul Loves. In∣deed, here 'tis, He chiefly tastes, and sees how good his Lord is. Is here caress'd with Chear above that of Angels, embrac'd with Armes of kindness, and assur'd of never, never-failing Favour: In the strength Heb. 13. 5. of which he walks comfortably many dayes after. And when to take his last long Journey, being first lighten'd by Confession to, and Absolution by his most affectionate and pious Pastor; having the Recom∣mendatory Prayers of the Church more deeply ac∣cented by particular, and present Friends; And this Divine Viaticum, and Preservative in store, He doubts not to come safe and well to the end on't: and to the end withal, of all his Pains, and Patience, and be as happy as Heaven it self can make him. Thus have you seen the Merchant, and in him, as in a Glass the Christian in his Rise, Progress, and
End. For your better Acquaintance, Please to ob∣serve him in some few of his Properties: not such, as no other great Dealer has any thing of besides: but such as no Merchant is, or can be well without. As, 1. Prudence. This, like the Soul that animates, and acts him, is first, middle, last, and all in all in him. The true Gyges Ring, that penetrates most others Breasts, but renders him, when-ever he thinks fit, in∣visible. This first directs him to pitch on the most noble End: then to pursue it by the most proper means: and lastly to secure the purchase of it. This makes him observe, and take time always by the Fore∣lock: not come a day after the Fair, or ever overstand his Market. Makes him enquire how Marts, and Matters go abroad; that he may know the better how to act at home. Makes him forecast all accidents, and do alwayes, what may turn to best account. Makes him to see and know himself what he deals in, and yet upon occasion ask, and take advice too: especially as to his Grand Purchase: where though he well exa∣mine the Particular himself; yet for the Clearness of the Title consults the Learned in the Law, whose Talent lyes herein. The World is full of Cheats and Counterfeits: all is not Gold that Glitters, nor true Pearl neither that appears well. And as there's dan∣ger all along, so without this, the Merchant may make Shipwrack in the very Port. Nor is the Christian less a Man of Sence, or need he be. His being what he is; and doing what he does, is upon Choice not Chance. The Religion he espous'd betimes, and likes the better upon Use and Practice;
He Professes still. Not because 'tis the most fashion∣able, easie, or advantagious: but because 'tis the best evidenc'd, refin'd, and rational. Free from the Car∣nality of the Jew, the Sencelesness of the Heathen, and Sensuality of the Mahometan. The fittest to make him sensible of the Respects he owes to his Creatour, and Redeemer, his Fellow-Creatures, and himself. The fittest to exalt his Nature, perfect his Being, and con∣sign him to Rewards Infinite and Eternal. Nor will it let him spend his Money for that which is not Bread; on Pomp, and Pageantry; nor on an empty Noise, and next to Nothing: but on the real, and sub∣stantial Truths of God, and Solid Reason, Meat indeed. This makes him enquire after, and pray for the peace of Jerusalem, in which large Bottom his own Welfare is wound up. Makes him foresee an Evil, and season∣ably shift it, or the more bravely bear up against it. Makes him, though not for an implicit Faith, yet for more Satisfaction as to his Title to Heaven to call for, and consult his Spiritual Guide, whom, as continually attending upon this very thing, he knows Able, and in whom, upon all the many occasions he has had, to ad∣vise with him, He has always found the Grace, to be Faithful. 2. Justice. 'Tis the part of this to give every one his due, and this the Merchant makes it his Business punctually to do. To God above, in being True to his Religion, at all times, and in all places. Coelum, non animum mutat. Not turning like his Flags, and Pen∣dants, with every Wind: Nor Changing the Com∣plexion of his Conscience, as the Cameleon, Colour;
with every Country he sets his feet upon. He's true to his Devotions at Land, as well as Sea, When Safe, as when in Danger. No more robs God of his Ho∣nour, or Offerings, in Filching Tythes: than Caesar of his Tribute, and Customs in Running Goods. He won't set out without his Pastors Prayers, nor returns without Acknowledging the Benefit of them. Is true and just, as he is timely taught, in all his Dealings with all Men. False Weights, and Measures he abhor's: His are full out Statute, and Standard: Nor does he buy, and sell by different, but the same. In buying, he bids in reasonable Proportion to the Worth: in selling asks not unreasonably out of the Way. Nor is ever so fast ty'd, as when left at Liberty to set his own Price. If He know any damage, or defect, he tells it: or He sells it so much the Cheaper: But what you have his honest Word upon, you need no other Warrant for. And such every way in the same Relations is the good Christian. Adores his Maker's Greatness, and admires his Mercy: Gives His Commandments due Obedience; his Promises Faith, and full Assurance; and in all Attributes does him right. What no Pro∣fane Person can be, that the good Christian is to the full, that is, a Good Subject to his Prince. The Wick∣ed are ready to Run, before Routed, and flee when none pursues: And their very Prayers are abomina∣ble, says the same Solomon: So can neither Fight for the King, nor Pray for him as they ought. Whereas the Good Christian, that has no Reason to fear Death in a good Cause, and has a considerable Interest in the Court of Heaven, always does the one, and is always
ready to do the other. And is so free both to Associate with, and Assist those, that do, that proves his Prince bears Rule not so much over him, as in him. His Minister he respects, and loves both for his Master's, and his Work's sake: Encourages by Constant Atten∣dance, early Appearance, and Candid Audience, and maintains him above the rate of Cummin, Mint, and Annise. In all his Dealings with all men, he considers the Character he bears: and though he buy of a Turk, and sell to a Jew, He remembers still, he is a Christi∣an, and must, and will be just, and Upright. 3. A Complacent and obliging Temper, and De∣meanour. No wonder a Vessel full of Liquor boils over with froth, and fury, when either a strong fire is round it, or a ferment as fierce within it. Nor is it stranger, if any in uneasie Circumstances, be, or behave themselves accordingly. In Men sensibly decaying, in debt, in pain, or passion, disgrace, or discontent con∣siderable of any sort, who runs may read their Grie∣vances, in sudden Sighs, sower Faces, snappish An∣swers, and convulsive Motions. But the Merchant Indoeilis pauperiem pati, Untaught ill Nature by any Ill Successes, or ill Usage, who flows in Wealth, and has the World at will, that's all Serene, and calm within, and soft, and smooth without is easie to him∣self, and easie to all others. Easie to be spoke with: and easie to be spoke to. And as easily, and freely an∣swers, assists, and acts a friends part, on any call; on any occasion whatsoever. Takes every thing that's offer'd with Epictetus, by the right handle; and in all doubtful Cases, has a Comment of kindness always
ready. He is indeed Sweetness, and Candor, Respect, and Generosity in the very Abstract: nor is he ever more himself than while exerting these, or most of these. Nor is the Christians Religion an Enemy to Good Manners; Nor He any of those that please not God; and yet in this Respect, are contrary to all other Men. Much less an Enemy to good Nature: For 'tis the very design of it, to make him all such: To sweeten his Bloud and Spirits, to mollify, and meliorate his Temper, and whole Constitution. To down with every turbulent and topping Humour: to Up with every root of Bitterness within him: to out and over∣board with all Pride and Passion, lying and slandering; with all malice, and revenge; To be meek, and lowly; to be cloth'd, or grac'd rather, with Humility. To be 1 Pet. 5. 5. from ; nodus ad orna∣tum. pittiful; to be courteous; to be kindly affectioned one to another in brotherly Love; and in honour prefer∣ring one another. To be ready to distribute; and do all good Offices for all Orders, and degrees of Men, as opportunity is offer'd, especially to the Houshold of Faith. If Temptation, or Loss happen, through mis∣fortune, not his fault, he's taught to take it patiently, not be disturb'd himself, or trouble others, as if some strange thing had happened to him, or never any sor∣row were like his. If Reproach or Slander come un∣deservedly upon him, He shakes it off as unconcern'd∣ly as St. Paul the Viper, into the same fire from whence it came. Indeed, wherever the Christian Religion comes, and makes a Conquest over any person; in whom soever it has its perfect work; it transforms
him wholly by the Renewing of his Mind, so that then and thenceforth he suffers long; is kind; envies not; vaunts not himself; is not puft up; behaves himself no wayes unseemly; seeks not his own; is not easily provok't; thinks no evil; rejoices not in Iniquity, but in the Tri∣umph of Truth; bears all things, believes all things; hopes all things; endures all things. And this it never failes 1 Cor. 13. 4. to 10. to do; nor ever therefore failes to make the Christian the best Parishioner, House-keeper, Husband, Father, Master, Neighbour, Friend, and Enemy (if he can be made one) in all the World besides. Thus runs the parallel betwixt the Merchant, and the Christian upon the account of some of his many good Properties: it might be drawn to a much grea∣ter Length; but that 'tis more than time, I drew to a Conclusion. Upon the whole then, be we all per∣swaded to Consider. 1. Who we are: Christians, and Merchant-like Men. 2. Where we are: Abroad, and far from Home. 3. What we have to do: Make sure our All. Let the first of these induce Us to walk worthy of the vocation, whereby we are called; at least do nothing dero∣gatory to it. Some Merchants have bin Princes; and some Princes are Merchants still. Alexander would not enter the Lists at the Olympicks, because there were no Kings to enter with him. And shall the bare thought of being of such a Sex, and not the stronger neither, be able to secure one half the World from Indecency, and open ill? and shall not all the Reason, and Religion in the World be able to secure the other? Our Light should so shine, it should be seen; And men Glorify
our Founder, and our Faith too, for our Works sake. See how they Live! See how they Love! said the old Heathens of the first Christians. Let the second oblige us to take the Renowned Raw∣leighs advice to a young Noble about to travel. A close Mouth: An open Eye: A smooth Forehead, Let not our Tongues betray us into trouble; nor be we busy med∣lers in others matters, but mind our own. Let us prevent surprise; and not think to say too late. Alas! who would have thought it? And let them hang the head, that de∣serve the halter; The Christian that is all peace, and joy within, should keep continual Jubilee; Chear up, and look to Jesus. And let the third and last Consideration prevail upon us to secure our All: our Heaven, and everlasting Hap∣piness. The little All we are call'd to do, and can do, let us up, and be doing. Walk, and not be weary, run and not faint. Follow our works for a short time; and our works shall follow us to an endless and blessed Eterni∣ty. Here 'tis, indeed, that the Christian has the Advan∣tage of the Merchant. In the nature, and so value of the things they deal in and for. The Merchant is for Cedar, Ivory, and Arras; for Mettles, Spices, Jewels; the rich Furniture of others, and his own house: The Orna∣ment, and well-being but of the Body at best. The Christian is for what, nor Moth, nor Rust will touch, nor Thief can take; the Ornament of a meek, and gra∣cious Spirit: and the Salvation of his immortal Soul. So, In the manner of their respective dealing. The Mer∣chant must go, and come, must tread the Wine-press alone, do his business himself, or 'twill go on but heavi∣ly,
or not at all. The Christian has great Assistance, and helps for his Infirmities. Has his works done in and for him; and his strength is in a manner to sit still. But above all that is, or might be said, in the general Issue and Event of all at last; the Merchant is an Adventurer, the Christian on a sure Foundation: the Merchant may lose much, lose all he has, nay lose himself after all. But the good Christian except he will himself, can never lose his Aim. Let him be diligent and he shall thrive, and prosper in the inner man, and add daily to his Faith, Vertue Let him commit the keeping of his Soul to God, none shall pluck it out of his hand; it shall be safe. Let him continue in well-doing to the End, and he shall have his long wisht End too, and be happy. Totally happy; his Body freed from all distempers, and defects: his mind from all dissatisfaction and disease. His Body so far spiritualiz'd at least, as never more to need to sue for Alimony but be made like his Saviours glorious Body. His Soul partaker of the Divine Nature; as An∣gels, equal to Angels: nay according to their Model, God-like, perfectly happy, and Eternally happy. Am∣plifi'd in all their Powers, and Faculties first, and then fill'd over, and ever fill'd with Joy unspeakable, sur∣prise, and wonder Everlasting. O God who declarest thy Almighty power most chiefly in shewing Mercy and Pity: Mercifully Grant unto Ʋs, such a measure of thy Grace, that we running the way of thy Commandments, may obtain thy gracious promises, and be made partakers of thy heavenly Treasure, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. FINIS.
