g1476 18448547 107676
POEMS. UPON THE Death of the most Honorable, THE LADY MAREHIONESS OF WINCHESTER. By R. Graham Esq. YORK. Printed by Alice Broad. and John White. at the Sign of the Lyon and Lamb in Stonegate. 1680.
AD Honoratissimum Dominum, Dominum Marchionem Wintoniensem, in obitum Illustrissimae Dominae Marchionissae. Luctus Siste tuos tandem, Wintonia; Sponsam, Non Mors, Rivalis Jupiter ipse rapit. Inter Caelicolas titulo meliore potitur: Dixeris Uxorem, dixerit ille Deam. Quae{que} Comes fuerit Sociali fadere juncta In Terra; Coelis nunc Comes esto Jovi. AD Nobilissimas Dominas, Dominas Mariam et Elizabetham de Paulet. Quid fletis, charae Matris chaissima Proles? Quae vixit, regnat non moritura Parens; Et quot faeminei Sexus superabat Honore: Tot jam Caelestes auteit illa Deas. In caelis Honor est; induto Numine gaudens: Divina est tandem, quae pia Mater erat. TO THE Rt. Honorable the Earl of Wiltshire up∣on the Death of the Rt. Honorable the Lady Marchioness of Winchester. WHen our Illustrious fixed Star (Turn'd Planet first) began to err, Leaving the North, and then her Nation To meet with her great Constellation; We hop'd (as all Caelestials are) Her motion might be circular; Or, like great Stars might disappear, And Shine again another Year.
But she, by fatal Ordinance, In England rose to set in France; And from her lower Circle there Took flight into an higher Sphaer, That her bright Soul (by Heavens care) In vehicle of purer Air Might conduct have. Which Element Er'e since (as if 'twere penitent That it shou'd give malignant Breath, And be found guilty of her Death) Hath turn'd its clearness into Clouds, And under Mourning daily shronds. Nay France (at last) now shames to see Its Clime with Vertu disagree; And grievs the Heavens should devise Their Nation thus to Tantalize. As if they onely sent her forth, That it might know, not have, her worth. Her Fate in Clotho's Book was writ In such fair Characters, that it Was plainly read at distance by The Art of blind Astrology, And dim Star-light; which bid us fear A Northern Lady's fall this Year. As th' 'Heavens did portend her Fate: So they her Death do celebrate: And all their blazing Lights display; Turning the Night to Holy-day. Each Star's a Torch t' attend on her Dead Hears, and gvide the Marriner. Methinks at her Approach I see The Brittish channel turn'd dead Sea; Salt water beyond cours fall low, And each proud wave forget to flow. Great Neptune shakes his watry Head, As if his Tethys had bene dead. Since She is dead cease Nature hence In one to croud all Excellence. It makes our Loss too great; the Prize Too rich for pale Death's Avarice; Whose greedy Jawes hath learn'd the skill To make Distinctions; and will Not take his Prey on what is Least, But what's both Greatest and the Best. And since there is not of her Sex One left to fall Executrix To all her Vertues, let them be Distributed by Legacy.
TO THE Rt. Honorable the Lady Mary, and Lady Elizabeth Paulet. WHat greater Cure could Jove devise To stop the flowing of our Eyes, Then Her (for whom we wept) to shew Now once again alive in You? Successive Streams of Joy and Woe: By Intervals our Hearts o'reflow. Nay Contrarietys, we see, May in one Subject lodged be. For while we look, you see appear In one eye Joy, th' other a Tear. Since you, Great Ladys, do Survive An happy Mother; stay, revive Our dying Soules: Two Stars (tho' less Yet) in Conjunction may bless. Your Influence (methinks) doth give Ease to our griefe, and bids us live. By your kind Aspect we do feel Fresh Vitals our dead Nerves to swell, Our Hearts to move, a glowing Flame, To kindle in our Hearts again A new Devotion, a Hear, That bids us once again repeat Those Sacred Duties unto you, Which were your Goddess Mother's due; Or els at▪ least (if 't urge no more) As Relicts of a Saint adore. Leave not that fair House desolate, Which you, when present. Consecrate Into a Temple; where all we Desire your Worshippers to be. Leave not your Votarys (just when They may be said to live again) 'Twixt joy and grief, for fear we by Your Absence do relaps and dy. Great Phoebus, else prolong that Night Before those Angels take their Flight; And, if they needs must go away, Sleep on, forget to rise that Day FINIS.
