G278 16438404 105397
THE CONVERSION OF PHILIP CORWINE A FRANCISCAN FRYAR, To the Reformation of the PROTESTANT RELIGION, Anno 1589. Formerly Written by JOHN GARVEY Sometime PRIMATE of all IRELAND. Being a Copy of the Original Remaining amongst James Usher, late PRIMATE of the same, his Papers; and now Entred amongst Sir JAMES WARE'S Manuscripts. Published for the Good of the Protestant Church of England, by R. W. Gent. DUBLIN, Printed by Jos. Ray at Colledge-Green, for a Society of Stationers. 1681.
TO THE READER. ZEal,Acts 13. 50. the Mother of all Religions, caused the de∣vout (and otherwise honourable) Women to perse∣cute St. Paul:Phil. 3. 6. the same stirred up St. Paul to persecute Christ before he had knowledge of him. Thus was the Zeal of this Convert, which a Reverend Father of the Protestant Church wrote to be reserved for future Memory. This Narrative I shall lay before Protestant and Papist upon two accounts: First, That all men may be∣hold the Danger of immoderate Zeal against those of ano∣ther Judgment. Secondly, To shew how that Zeal and Knowledge ought to walk together. 1.The Evil E∣vent of Im∣moderate Zeal. Immoderate Zeal, saith Nazianzen, was in his time the cause of great Broyls and Troubles; insomuch that Truth it self hath been stretched too far; so that by a vehement dislike of Errour on one side, men have run into an Errour on the other,Vide Alexand. Ross his View of Religions. as Dionysius and Alexan∣drinus did, being too fervent against Sabellius: for these two first laid the Ground of Arrianisme.
2.Ovid lib. 2. Zeal without knowledge may well be compared to Phaeton in the Poet, who took upon him to drive the Chariot of the Sun, but yet through his inconsiderate Rashness set the world in a flame. St. Bernard hits full on this point, in these words; Discretion without Zeal is slow paced, and Zeal without Discretion is strong headed: let therefore Zeal spur on Dis∣cretion, and Discretion reign in Zeal. Thus the Zeal of this Convert, having joyned with the knowledge of the holy Scriptures, became a lively Faith in Christ, not choosing Saint or Angel to plead his Cause, but the best of Advocates Christ Jesus, who is the only Mediator between God and Man. R. WARE.
The Conversion of Philip Corwine a Franciscan Fryer to the Reformation of the Protestant Religion. Anno 1589. PHilip Corwine, Nephew unto Hugh Corwine late Archbishop of Dublin, supposing our Predecessor John Long late Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of all Ireland had been then living, wrote this Epistle following; which came to my hands, thinking it had been to me directed, my Name being John, and his Successor, within a little time after the Expiration of our said Predecessor, I opened it. Reverend and Worthy Father, AFter my long and tedious Travels, wandring like a Jew finding no settlement, (ever since the Reformation of the Church of England revived, and was appointed to be observed by our Gracious Soveraign the Queen and Her High Court of Parliament) I departed from Ireland into England, from thence into Spain, and so into Italy; being ambitious to visit Rome, purposely to behold her Modes and Forms: but being not satisfied with the Passages and cruel Objects which I there beheld, I returned into Spain, and took up my Lodging in St. Francis his Monastry in the City of Sevill, where I have hitherto remained, expecting your Gracious acceptance, and encouraging of a Prodigal Son to come home to the Church of Christ: For were it no other then the Tyranny of the Romish Church, and the large In∣dulgences which she hath sent abroad into most Nations, for to massacre those whom she esteems Heretical, purpose∣ly to advance her Coffers, and to raise up her luxurious Ap∣petite
it would be, for a rational man, a sufficient president to lay before him what an Idol, or rather what a devouring Dragon, he and his Ancestors have hitherto worshiped. I acknowledge I have feared this Monster beyond my Creator or Redeemer, and depended upon his sinful In∣dulgences more than on the bitter Passions of my Saviour Jesus, for which I only crave mercy from above, whose Pow∣er is most infinite. Also I have from my youth upward wandred in the paths of Idolatry, worshiping of Stocks and Stones framed into humane shapes by the Art of Man, whose Eyes behold neither my Bowing or my Kneeling, whose Ears heard not my Petitions, nor their Mouths able to return me an An∣swer: therefore I cannot but lament, both for the precious time which I have lost, and for the Happiness of which I have all this while been bereaved, all thus justly happening unto me through my perverseness in not embracing those comfortable Offertures which my Gracious deceased Uncle, Hugh late Archbishop of Dublin, proposed unto me, in case I had adhered unto the Protestant Faith, as it is now, ac∣cording to the Apostolick manner, established. Yet knowing your Fatherly Clemency, and pious Incli∣nations, by your former Correspondence with my deceased Uncle. I shall returne with the Prodigal Son, and come over, if I may be so happy to receive your Encouragement, and so end the residue of my days to Gods Glory and mine own Salvation. Sevill March 29th. 1589. Your trusty and obedient Servant Philip Corwine. To the Reverend Father in God John Archbishop of Armagh.
Upon the Receit of this Epistle,The Arch∣bishop of Ar∣magh maketh the Arch∣bishop of Dublin ac∣quainted with this Letter. rejoycing to embrace especially the Reformation of so understanding a Man as this Convert was, I returned an Answer; yet beforehand, I shewed this his Epistle unto our Judicious and most Learned Brother in Christ, Adam, now Archbishop of Dublin, and Chancellor of Ireland, with whom I consulted, and then We gave him all the encouragement imaginable; and sent him this Answer follow∣ing, by a Portugal Merchant then going from Dublin to Waterford, and from thence being bound for Spain. To Mr. Philip Corwine in St. Francis his Convent at SEVILL. Mr. Corwine, YOur Epistle is Welcome, though not coming to the hands of that Reverend Father in God John, our Predecessor, who lately departed this life, to obtain an everlasting one in the Kingdom of Heaven; although he was deprived of this happy offerture of yours (by his death) yet was it as acceptable to me his Successor, who with the rest of our Brethren in Christ, do rejoyce at your Recantation, (in a manner) as the Angels and Saints of Heaven do at the Repentance of a Sinner, which cau∣seth his Soul to enter therein. Whatever you expected from our Predecessor, shall be granted by his Successor, your humble Servant, who embraces any one who desires to become a Member of Christ, and one of his Flock. My weak endeavours shall not be wanting, neither shall the ability of our Church here be slack to assist you accordingly. I and our Brother Adam, now Arch∣bishop of Dublin, and Chancellor of this Kingdom, have unani∣mously embraced your Learned Epistle, and in token thereof we have sent you this small testimony of our affection, towards your journal expences. Therefore let this be unto you an assurance
of your kind reception by us the Clergy here; And for the future, Brotherly Love and Correspondency between You and Ʋs your Brethren and Clergy of this Nation. Dublin, June the 27th. 1589. Your True and Loving Friend, John Armachanus. Upon the receit hereof,This Con∣verts return to Ireland. this Philip beholding the Clergies Invitation, together with the Sum, (being 50l. English) which Adam our Brother a∣foresaid, and my self, had sent him for his supply in his journey, upon the first conveniency made towards Ireland, first coming into the Netherlands; where meeting with a Vessel bound for Waterford, he there landed, being civily entertained by our Brother Thomas Whitherhead, the then Bishop of that Diocess. He landed on the 22th of October follow∣ing, after the Date of this our Epistle; where this Philip tarried for some certain days, discoursing with the Bishop, wherefore he came over hither, as also shewing him our encouragement, our Brother conveyed him (send∣ing a Guide along with him) to Drogheda: Of which I having notice, sent word to the Mayor and Corporation to receive him kindly, which was ac∣cordingly performed. Some few days after this his kind reception at Drogheda,The Con∣vert designs to make an open Recan∣tation. this Philip Cor∣wine being minded to make an open manifestation of his true and hearty Conversion, desired me to give notice beforehand to the Town and Cor∣poration, that he intended (God willing) to make a Recanting Speech, and to declare therein the Reasons why he fell from the Church of Rome, and the Causes of his Adherence to the Protestant Faith. Which Speech was declared in St. Peters Church, where he chose this following Text for his Discourse.
THE TEXT; Acts the 9th. Ver. the 14th and 15th. And he fell on the Earth, and heard a voice saying un∣to him, Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? And he said, who art thou, Lord? And the Lord said unto him, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest; it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. Beloved Brethren, HEre Saul, who became afterwards an Apostle of Jesus Christ, breathed forth threatnings and slaughters a∣gainst the Church of Christ; supposing and intend∣ing to have persecuted her with much rage and fury, there∣by to have spilt innocent Blood, which he at that time thir∣sted after. This furious Intention of his declareth how much a man is led by rashness, envy, and malice, and also by a rash and blind zeal, before he can obtain the true knowledge of good. Man purposeth,With what Intention the Convert went, before his Conver∣sion, towards Rome. but God disposeth, even so did this Sinner. My self, when I departed last this Kingdom, which was up∣on the coming in of our Graciour Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth to the Crown of these Realms, departing hence with a blind zeal full of contention, proposing to my self how
I might have persecuted the Church of England now Esta∣blished by her Sacred Majesty, and her Parliaments of these Realms: Intending according to my ability to have fallen thereon with as much fury as Saul, when he journeyed to∣wards Damascus to have persecuted the poor Christians. It is true,The Con∣verts Offers which he re∣jected: as al∣so the Policy of Rome, in ab∣sconding the Truth of the holy Gospel. I had several good proffers unto me by my de∣ceased Uncle Hugh, late Archbishop of Dublin, but rejected them, being at that time puft up with the cruel Zeal of Rome, as ever St. Paul was with Judaism against Christianity: sup∣posing (with my self) it to have been a meritorious act, if I could but have extinguished the light of the holy Gospel, which the Lord hath been pleased to restore again unto these Nations, which for several Ages now past, through the Po∣licies of Rome) hath been detained from our Ancestors, both to the diminishing of Gods Glory, and to the detriment of many millions of Souls. Rome and her Emissaries thus con∣triving purposely to be the abler to usurp over Kings and Princes, and to Rule their Subjects after their power. But of late the Lord hath opened the eyes of Princes, and made them hearken to a Princely admonition: Be wise therefore O ye Kings, and he Learned ye who be Judges of the Earth. During my Travel into Spain and into Italy,Philip Corwine his sensibility of the Laws of England. how near they be to the Truth, to what other Country Laws are. where I be∣held the Slavery of the common sort of those parts, and what hardships they endure. I compared (comprehending in my mind) these Slaveries to the liberties of her Majesties Sub∣jects of these her Dominions, and to the great Blessings of God, that though he had for a while taken away the Truth, yet he had permitted the ancient Laws and Liberties to Rule and Flourish amongst our Ancestors, which was a great sign that he intended to have restored these Nations again to the Truth, as he did the Children of Israel after a long thraldom. These cogitations ran in my mind upon my return from
Rome, journeying back to Sevil: which upon my first insight of the Romish cruelty, caused me to say within my brest, that doubtless the Protestants of England were in the way of Salvation, because their Lives were so agreeable to their Faith. Secondly beholding the horrid Wickedness and Cruelties imposed on the poorer sort,He compares Romes tyran∣ny to the heathen Per∣secutions and sets forth how they rob Kings of their Titles. I then recollected the Persecu∣tions of the Primitive Fathers and Christians under the Heathen Emperor, and said within my self, O Christ thou art merciful, but how unmerciful are thy pretended Vicars (naming the Popes of Rome) which assume to themselves that Title, which their Predccessors formerly gave to all Kings and Princes, within their several Dominions. During mine abode at Rome,The cruel Martyrdom of eight per∣sons at Rome for the Truth. before I returned into Spain, eight persons were condemned to die for no other Crime, than for saying, Christ was their only Mediator between God and them, and that neither Saint nor Angel was able to medi∣ate between God and them. Upon saying of these words they were brought into St. Peters Church to confess their Crimes, (as they imputed them) where they were to kneel before the Images therein; but with the three Children they resolved rather to endure the Flames of the Fiery Oven, than to bow to an Image, or to go from what they had declared; they unanimously spake in the Italian Language these words: If a Saint or Angel cannot remit our Crimes, much less an Image, which is but dedicated to either. This strong Union,How their Union ama∣zed the Con∣vert, and was a means of his Conversion to the Truth. Resolution and Courage of these eight persons, being neither daunted nor flinching at Romes fury, started several standers by, especially pinched my Conscience, being a Spectater of these Massacres, that I fell into a deep melancholy fit, being then ashamed that the Church of Rome should be guilty of so cruel a Fact.
This melancholiness encreasing more every day then other,How the Convert thought to divert him∣self, and was prickt in con∣science. and still running in my mind, to divert my self, I took St. Hierome's translation of the Bible, and opening the same, mine eyes beheld this very Text of Scripture, which I here chose for my Recantation. So whereas Paul was Converted by the voice saying unto him, (Why persecutest thou me, &c.) Even after the same manner was I to the Truth recalled; miraculously lighting on the same words, though I heard not the voice. Taking this saying so soon into consideration after this Massacre;His second shift to di∣vert himself, and how he lighted on the xciv Psalm, be∣ing sutable for persecu∣tion and tri∣bulation. I thought still to divert my self into some other Text, and opening the same Book, I let mine eyes light on the xciv Psalm; which thus beginneth: O God the Lord, the A∣venger; O God the Avenger, shew thy self clearly, &c. Then was I in greater trouble of mind then before, thinking as if I had heard their voices crying up for vengeance; then I said, doubtless the Prophet here desired Justice, complaining of the Tyranny and Impiety of those days: And how he sets forth the Providence of Almighty God, and the Happi∣ness of Affliction, and that he is the Defender of the Af∣flicted; which Psalm coming so opportunely, I fell into a worse fit then before, so that I began to despair, having com∣plyed with the Church of Rome so long in her Tyrany, as being one of her Members. Yet to divert my self from these thoughts,How the Convert re∣solved to leave Rome, supposing thereby to divert him∣self, but still was troubled in mind. I at last resol∣ved to leave Rome, and so to turn back to the Franciscan Convent at Sevil. Coming thither, I had not long tarried, when I heard a hideous Cry in the Street, and enquiring what that Clamour might be, one replied, a Heretick is seized on for speaking of evil words: Then searching further into the Cause, I found it out, which was thus.
A Man named Leopald Donsever,How the Spanish Inqui∣sition troubled this Convert. an Innkeeper of that Ci∣ty, having said before two of mine own Order, Franciscans, that the new Law there made, called the Inquisition, would make more Hereticks than Romanists, calling Protestants Hereticks; and therefore he could wish that the Church of Rome had never set up that Statute. These words this poor Man spake innocently, out of pity and compassion to those who had felt that Roman lash; but these two Franciscans turning the interpretation otherwise, purposely for their own ends, to have their forfeitures given to their Convent, making the sense worse; informed the rest of the Convent of what this innocent Man had spoken. Immediately upon their relation of the words, they all con∣cluded that he had spoken Blasphemy against the Powers of the Church of Rome: Thereupon they not only seized on this poor wretch his person, but also upon what little sub∣stance he had, being all in this World for to have maintained his Wife and Children, who (by this Injustice) were in a short space after forced to beg the Charity of others, having before in an honest way laboured to get a livelihood for themselves and their Family. Coming to the Convent,How the Convert was rebuked by the two Franciscans for his Com∣miseration to the poor Innkeeper. and beholding these two Infor∣mers, I spake thus unto them. Could ye not have privately checked the poor man, and have laid some small pennance on him, but run thus violently on him, his Wife and Chil∣dren. By this saying of mine, I received a check in these words: We believe you will be such another. At which I withdrew, and held my tongue. Then returning into the Garden belonging to the Con∣vent,How the Convert re∣turned into the Garden to bewail himself. where there be walks both private and publick, I con∣templating with my self what warning I had by the former
two Texts of Scripture: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? &c. As also what afflictions poor Protestants endure when by the Romish Clergy Orders seized on, and the Courage the eight Persons in Rome had upon their Deaths, being brought to the Stake of Persecution, which I compared with the Psalm aforesaid, being terrified that I had persisted so long in the Romish Bloody paths, and had not returned sooner to the Faith of Christ as now I am in. Then being in a manner totally in despair of ever recei∣ving any Salvation;Here the Convert re∣ceives com∣fort, and is stedfast to his end. I in a grievous passion opened the Translation the third time, and vowed where ever I chan∣ced to fix mine eyes, there to contemplate and lay hold on the Living God. Then as if it had been with his Finger pointing out a way for Salvation, I cast mine eyes on these Words in the Prophecy of Ezekiel. Again,Ezekiel, cap. 18. ver. 27, 28. when the wicked turneth away from his Wickedness that he hath committed, and doth that which is lawful, he shall save his Soul alive. Because he considereth and turneth a∣way from his Transgressions that he hath committed, he shall surely live and shall not dye. Upon reading of this saying of the Prophet my Soul was immediately changed;How he was altered, and gave God thanks for his deliverance. so also was my Reason and Under∣standing, that I fell into a passion of weeping, which was a Joy (at that present) rather than a Grief unto my distressed Soul; yet the fierceness of my Tears brought two of the Brethren into the same Walk, who had heard my voice, and demanded of me wherefore I wept, to whom I reply∣ed, for the multitude of my Sins. But they leaving me to my self, not considering how it was because I had so long continued in the Church of Rome, and that I lamented that ever I became of their Order, and how I had worshipped
a Devouring Dragon more than my Creator or Redeemer, in observing of the Romish Laws more than the Commands of the living God, or the Precepts of Christ and his Apostles, I immediately gave my Saviour thanks that he had opened my Mouth to speak the Truth, and these two Fryers not to comprehend my meanings. During the remainder of my stay within the Convent from that instant,How he con∣cealed his Conversion. I carryed my self warily, least I should have been discovered, and have endured what this poor Innkeeper had suffered, which according to their Cruelty by this new found Inquisition, is worse then present death. Then taking the first opportunity,And how he confesseth he wrote the Letter before mentioned. I wrote a Letter to this Reverend Fathers Predecessor, supposing him then living, which, though missing its direction, came to this good Fa∣thers hands, who is able to testify the reality of my Conver∣sion to the Protestant Faith, and how earnestly I sought to become a Member thereof; who received my proffer, and assisted me in my Journal Expences, which by me was not expected: For which, the Lord reward him in the World to come. Beloved Brethren,Thus he con∣cludes with this Rapture. In this Mercy of God I ought to con∣clude with an hearty acknowledgment of the Goodness of my Saviour towards me, who hath recalled a Sinner, and hath raised me up so many Friends, nay Strangers, who have received me a poor wretch wandring (as it were in a Wil∣derness) as I was, during my being of the Church of Rome a Member thereof; and in danger of being devoured by the Dragon every moment. Therefore the Lord of his mercy grant me a broken and a contrite heart, that I might say with thy servant David, I
am a worm, and no man, by reason I have defiled the works of thy hands, who hath fashioned me, and all mankind. O Christ be thou merciful unto me a Sinner; that I may say also with thy Servant, I cryed unto the Lord, and he heard my complaint. Then shall the Soul of thy Servant rejoyce, which was driven even to the Gates of Hell, and through mercy snatched out of the paw of that Roaring Lion, who goeth about seeking whom he may devour. Praised be thou, O Lord, from this time forth and for ever more. Amen. This the Convert presented me with after he had reviewed the same, and published it before the Towns People of Drogheda in mine own hearing. I entertained this Mr. Corwine as one of my Chaplains for the space of ten Months,The Con∣verts death. all that while not having a place sufficient enough for his parts, and also to bestow on so true a Convert, who indeed ought to have been cherished. But being troubled with a Flux which seized on him, con∣tinuing for several weeks before he expired; at last it took him out of this World upon the third of September, 1590. having during his sickness received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and continuing a true Churchman unto his end. During that small time whilst I was so happy as to con∣verse with him,The projects of the Coun∣cil at Trent a∣gainst Engl. confessed to Archbishop John Garvey of Armagh, by this Con∣vert. I delighted in his conversation, and several times discoursed with him touching the late Grand Council of Trent, and of what things that Council had done, as touch∣ing the Protestants of these Her Majesties Realms, to which he seriously related, as I took the words from his own mouth, at several times upon discourse, as follows.
1. That the Council had Enacted in their Litany to be said upon every Good Friday, as also upon any great Fast proclaimed, or to be proclaimed, to Curse all Heretical Kings. Princes and States, personally naming them, amongst whom he assured me they have named her Majesty, and also all their Heretical Subjects obeying their Commands and Pow∣ers. 2. That Her Majesties Kingdoms of England and Ireland are to be given to any Prince or Nation Conquering them, especially to Spain, as He married the Queens Sister, yet to the first who shall attempt it. Ireland being not to be dis∣posed of in case of Conquest, but to be restored to the An∣cient Race lineally descended of the Princes of that Nation. They swearing unto the Chair of St. Peters, to own that See the Chief Head thereof, as it is called Insula Sacra upon Record. 3. That every Roman Catholick in England or Ireland ha∣ving two or more Sons of any Quality or Estate, should train them up in either of these Callings or Trades, Doctors of the Law, Lawyers, Physitians, Clerks, Agents, Vintners, Inn∣keepers, Apothecaries, Grocers, Brewers, Victuallers, &c. for several Causes best known to the Mother Church, as be∣ing most convenient for her Aid in service, when ever re∣quired. 4. That all Deeds held by Roman Catholicks or other Ec∣clesiastical Lands, be Entred and Reposed privately under the Signet of Rome, the Party enjoying the same until the Ca∣tholick Faith be restored; then such Deeds appearing upon Record, the possessor, if Catholick, to be reprieved out of He∣reticks Estates.
5.A good rea∣son why Pa∣pists Oaths against Pro∣testants should not be credited. That all Oaths taken by compulsion, or otherwise, are of no force or tye, as the translation of their Bible is here∣tical and false; therefore the Catholick swearing thereupon, is all one as upon any common Book; the Catholick esteem∣ing the same so to be; his Oath, though false, is no sin. 6 That no Catholick marry with any Heretick, unless it be upon great necessity, or advancement for the Catholick, who affirms before-hand, he or she doth it for no other intent but to advance the Roman Faith, and so to continue to the end. Then by a Dispensation from the Confessor, vowing to con∣tinue stedfast, and to perform the promises confessed, before the Marriage to be granted and permitted. 7. That Dispensations be granted to the Wise and Learn∣ed sort of Catholicks for Oaths, for Religion, for Place, for Office, or otherwise; provided that the Party shall four or more times in the year confess unto any Secular or Regular he is in his heart a Romanist; and so after upon Confession to testifie the certifying thereof, to shew signal assurance of their fidelity to the See of Rome. 8. That any of these sorts permitted or so licensed, shall in all Protestant Courts of Princes give monthly Intelligences more or less, as signal assurances of their stedfastness to the See of Rome. 9. That Excommunication, or a perpetual Curse light up∣on the Families of all those of the Mother Church, who will not promote or assist by means of Money, or otherwise, Mary Queen of Scotland to the Crown of England. 10. That all Roman Catholicks be and shall be obedient to those Archbishops, or other Popish Priests set over them
privately, as if they were openly ruling over them, and to re∣lieve them, pay tribute or tax proportionably for the advance of the Mother Church. 11. And lastly, that under-hand they propose a Match for the Queen, of some Catholick Roman King or Prince; or if she dye, to set up Mary Queen of Scotland, or some other Romish Prince, for the advancement of the Mother Church. These and several other like passages I heard from this good and glorious Convert, who during his life, after his Re∣cantation, made great progress in the conversion of others, and that not in vain, having converted the Mayor of Drog∣heda his Wife, and several others in the Town before his death. I dare not say that he was poysoned, but there was much suspition as if the Fryers had done something to him; for he was ever and anon arguing with them in Disputa∣tions. FINIS.
