G462 R22037 12684684 65741
VETERES VINDICATI, IN AN Expostulatory Letter TO Mr. SCLATER of PƲTNEY UPON HIS CONSENSƲS VETERƲM, &c. WHEREIN The Absurdity of his Method are shewn, The Weakness of his Reasons are shewn, His false Aspersions upon the Church of England are wiped off, and her FAITH concerning the EUCHARIST proved to be THAT of the PRIMITIVE CHURCH. Together with Animadversions on Dean Boileau's French Transla∣tion of, and Remarks upon Bertram. King Charles the Martyr to the Prince. , 27. But if you never see my face again — I do Require and intreat you as your FATHER, and your KING, that you never suffer your heart to receive the least check against, or Disaffection from the TRUE RELIGION established in the CHURCH of ENGLAND. I tell you I have TRYED IT, and after MUCH SEARCH and MANY DISPUTES have concluded IT to be BEST in the WORLD, not onely in the Community, as Christian, but also in the special notion, as Reformed; keeping the middle way between the POMP of SU∣PERSTITIOUS TYRANNY, and the MEANNESS of FANTASTICK ANARCHY. LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Church-yard, and at the White Hart in Westminster Hall. 1687.
IMPRIMATUR, Guil. Needham RR. in Christo P. ac D. D. Wilhelmo Ar∣chiep. Cantuar. à Sacr. Do∣mest. Ex Aedib. Lambeth. Apr. 7. 1687.
TO THE READER. IT is not material to thee to know what were the parti∣cular Reasons that put me upon answering this Book of Mr. Sclater: whether it were a Challenge, or a Request, both, or neither; such as it is, it was designed for a Vindication of our most Holy Mother the Church of England from those very silly, and very false Aspersi∣ons cast upon her by Mr. Sclater up and down his Book. I hope no one will think that I have been too sharp upon him, I am certain his behaviour in his Book was so very extravagant, and his abuses so open, and so intolerable, that I can assure the Reader that it was with trouble that I did restrain using oftner a just Indignation. There is no one that reads him, who, had he been to examine his Quotations as I obliged my self for t he most of them, would not, I think, have been as sharp upon him as I have any where been. It would have stirred up a very meek man's Indignation to have been served as he did me his Reader with his Quotation from Hilary,pag. 38. where having by chance cast my eye on the first part of the passage set down by him, I went hunting for the rest of it as it stood in his Book, quite through St. Hilary's whole Book from thence, and little dreamed of what I was very angry to find that I was to look backwards in St. Hilary for the other two parts of that passage. There
are other dealings in his Book much more provoking than this. However, if any one think I am too severe upon him, I must onely say, that it is perchance more pardo∣nable in me than in another: not that I have any perso∣nal quarrel against Mr. Sclater, whom I am morally cer∣tain I never spoke with in my life; but upon another ac∣count. One short Address I cannot avoid the making here to my Brethren of the Clergy, who have not opportunities of a full examination of these Controversies in Antiquity it self, that they would beware for Mr. Sclater's sake of taking things too much on trust from our Romish Ad∣versaries, or of relying too much on some extraordinary passages out of the Fathers. This Address I make, be∣cause I have been informed that this unhappy man was very much imposed upon, and perhaps almost perverted by that passage out of St. Chrysostome about St. Peter's having the Care of the whole Church committed to him: which passage therefore I was the more carefull to exa∣mine, and to confute it, that some may see how unsafe it is to rely on scraps of Fathers about these Things, and how little they ought to value even the most favourable place out of Antiquity for Popery, since the stress of all Anti∣quity is directly against it, as our excellent Writers have abundantly shewn, and even such as I are able to shew.
AN EXPOSTULATORY LETTER TO Mr. EDWARD SCLATER of PƲTNEY. SIR, THE expectation that some person of more leisure, and better abilities would have condescended to the trouble of examining this your Treatise, was the sole reason that hindred your receiving this sooner from me: I am very cer∣tain there is nothing in it, either so strong, or so well managed, that could affright any such from bringing your Book to account, and therefore I must impute their neglect herein to another cause, which I believe you are not at all desirous to hear men∣tioned by me. I am sure I have the opinion of some and those learned persons to confirm me in this my belief. 'Tis for your own sake therefore chiefly, and for those Readers who may possibly be startled at the Title of your Book, that I undertake to examine it, and to oblige you and them to see, how very little reason you had (or they to be mov'd by it) to call your Book Consensus Veterum, and what a miserable mistake you have made in this your forsaking the Communion of your Mo∣ther the Church of England, and falling to that of Rome. I hope you will not be angry that I take the same liberty to examine your method in this Change, that you say you did to
examine that of our Church. One thing I'll promise you (which I am persuaded I shall in the examining of your reasons find you very often faulty in) that I will constantly, as to my Proofs and Authorities, use all the fairness and ingenuity that becomes a Scholar, or a Christian herein. The Cause of the Church of England is so infinitely better, and more steady, than that you have so lately espoused, that it would be as extremely impru∣dent, as unjust to practise the contrary in the defence of her; as she does not need, so I am sure she does abhor, and is far from admitting any indirect, or fraudulent management of her Cause. I shall therefore without any farther Preface, prosecute my design, and begin with your Preface, which presents the Reader with a needless Apology about the Plural Title of your Tract; for if those other quotations and proofs about the true Catholick Church, and the Supremacy of St. Peter and the Bishops of Rome were of any force with you, they deserve their place in the Plural Title of your Book, if they were not, yet that other about the Eucharist, though with you All in All, can be but one, how great soever. How Transubstantiation concludes Communion under one species, I cannot understand, since if Transubstantiation was always the Opinion of the Catholick Church, as you affirm it was, from the very beginning, it would have concluded then, as well as now, which I am sure it did not; for, besides our Saviour's Institu∣tion in both kinds, and his Precept as strict for either of them singly, as for both together, his most severe imposition of both, Joh. 6.53. we can shew you herein the Obedience of the Ca∣tholick Church for above a thousand years, who were so humble, and so respectfull also, as not to think themselves either wiser than our Saviour, or above his express commands herein. After∣wards indeed one part of the Catholick Church grew more know∣ing, and the Council of Constance (maugre our Saviour's express command to be seen in the Gospels, and very particularly in St. Paul) denied one half of the Communion,1 Cor.11.24, 25. the Cup, to the Lai∣ty, and so that Church continues ever since to do. Among those several Arguments or Reasons mustered up by Gerson at the Com∣mand, and for the Defence of this bold Council, I do not remember one, that is not either ridiculous in it self, or highly reflecting upon our blessed and most wise Saviour's prudence or foresight.
But to pass by this, and your Argument from the 6th of S. John, which I shall remember when I come to that point in your Book; methinks your assuring your self, that if your former Faith was not right in this (the Eucharist), it was wrong in all controverted Parti∣culars, &c. is none of the clearest Inductions, and would have appeared something too bold, had you not helped it out a little with what I suppose you have heard some of your new Church say, that that Church hath the same Authorities and Traditions for them, as for this, &c. which I think to be one of the greatest truths in your Book, and I do assure you that I am perfectly of the same opinion, that the Church of Rome hath the same neither better nor worse Authorities and Traditions for all the Points contro∣verted betwixt the Church of England and her, that she hath for Transubstantiation, which I question not to shew, when I come to that point, to be either very bad, or none at all. Whether you have wrought in this your search according to the directions of the Church of England, will be better seen, when we come to your Proofs themselves; I cannot pass the Canon of our Church you have quoted here without making two short Remarks from it. The first of which is,Imprimis vero vide∣bunt, ne quid un∣quam doce∣ant pro Concione, quod à po∣pulo religiose teneri & credi velint, nisi quod consentaneum sit Doctrinae veteris aut Novi Te∣stamenti, quodque ex illâ ipsâ Doctrinâ Catholici Patres, & Veteres Episcopi collegerint, &c. Liber Canon. Disciplinae Ecclesiae Anglicanae, 1571. Titulo Concionatores. How little our Church is a favourer or encourager of the Private Spirit you talk so often about, or of private Interpretations, when she doth not allow the Guides of the Parochial Churches themselves to teach any thing for Faith in their Sermons, which is not agreeable to the Doctrine of the Old and New Testament, and the Interpretations of Catholick Antiquity. 2. That it is a most false as well as a most ridiculous Assertion of your new Brethren of the Church of Rome, who say, our Church slights and rejects the Fathers, because they are all against her, and that she owns they are all against her: for a clear Contra∣diction to which, I would but desire of any Romanist to reade this short Canon of a Synod of ours in the beginning of Queen Eli∣zabeth seriously over, and to consider it, and I do not question if he would but speak plainly herein, as every ingenuous man ought, that he would own such Assertours to be guilty of a down∣right Calumny.
For your Conditional Thanks that you seem willing to bestow on the Church of England for her Directions; she can have no rea∣son to expect any from you, since I am pretty well assured that you have not observed her Directions, and therefore can owe her none on that account: and for your Conditional Prayers for the Teachers of her Communion, &c. I can assure you, that they are by her Injunctions, and without any conditions, not behind-hand with you in such civilities, since thrice a week at least they are commanded in the Litany to put up constantly a Petition for you, and such as you. Galatinus and his Rabbins I shall refer to their place in your Book, to which I shall now pass, finding nothing farther in your Pre∣face, that may not be better considered in the Answers to the Particulars of your Book. CHAP. I. The Method of the Answer, and a Consideration of Mr. Sclater's Rea∣sons of doubting in our Communion. BEfore I undertake the Particulars of your Book, I cannot re∣frain the making a complaint to you, that you have not put your writing into a Method becoming a Scholar, but have ma∣naged your reasons so confusedly, and passed so abruptly from one head to another, that it is sometimes difficult to know which of your points you are then about. Method and clearness, and a fair transition from one part of a Discourse to another were never counted trifles, nor ever thought unworthy the care of any one Writer that did desire either to instruct or to convince his Rea∣ders. That I may avoid therefore my self, what I am forc'd to re∣reprehend in another, I shall in this my Expostulation confine my self to, and direct my self by, these Rules. 1. To consider the Reasons of your doubting during your conti∣nuance in our Communion whether you were in the right way, and of a true Church. 2. The Method you used for the resolving your self in your doubts. 3. The Reason or Reasons that convinced you
so far as to leave our Communion, and to espouse that of the Church of Rome. I do not believe I can wrong your Book in taking such a Method, or disoblige you or any one else that may read this. As to the first head then, the Reasons of your doubting, one might with reason have expected, that you would a little more have enlarged your self in a thing, the right managing of which was of so infinite concern, or at the least that you would have afforded the World tho' but one Reason, that might have given satisfaction. That, which you have put down, I mean the Text from S. Paul, Let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall, I am sure, cannot, since that Text may as well serve against the approaching Easter as it did against the last, and you may as well use it now as you did then; and should a giddy mind possess you, and hurry you next to Socinianism, then to the Anabaptists, and herd you at last among the Quakers, no body could refuse you your Motto, and Let him that thinketh he standeth, &c. would serve you in as much stead for any of them, as it did now. With∣out any satisfaction at all therefore about the reasons of your doubt, which I wish we had had faithfully set down, that so the World might not take that leave it does now of judging what it pleases concerning the true reasons of your leaving us, I must follow you to that wherein you are more copious, the Method you used for the resolving your self in your doubts, which you forgot to set down here. CHAP. II. His Account of Education and Interest examined and Refuted. BEfore you enter on your Method you tell us you had two very great things to conflict with, which were like to prove great obstacles in this your inquiry after truth, Education and In∣terest,pag. 1. Through Education and Confidence in the Teachers you had been inured to, you complain you had almost been hardened against the lissening to any thing contrary to those Precepts and Doctrines they had rooted in you, &c.
To hear an old Man complain of Education cannot but be a little strange, especially from one who hath been a Teacher him∣self (as he disdainfully I must believe, calls our Clergy) per∣chance betwixt Thirty and Forty Years; if Twenty, nay Ten, far too much sure for such a complaint: and in a Church too, which permits and encourages her Clergy in the perusing, canvasing and examining all Books of Controversie betwixt her self and the Church of Rome, and which is more, obliges them to a perusal and diligent examination of the Primitive Fathers by that very Canon you your self quoted in your Preface, which I have put down also.pag. 2. (1.) But this is the common voice of the Converts young or old, and therefore whether to purpose or no, you must for company use it, tho' it be really ridiculous from one in your circumstances, as I think I have made plain enough. And truly the complaint would far the handsomer become you, now when you are of a Church, that teaches her Members the pretty knack of captivating their understanding, stopping their ears, and shutting their eyes against any thing that might convince them of the Er∣rour they are in. I must confess that your Church is not singu∣lar herein, the Turks practise it as strictly as you, that they may secure their Members in their excellent and most safe (as they doubtless think it) Communion and Religion of Mahomet. But suppose Education might be a Prejudice, and would give a man a great deal of trouble to rid himself of the Prepossessions it commonly instills into green heads, yours could not give you any, since Alexander like you cut the Knot that might have gi∣ven you great trouble to unloose, by abstracting your self (when you entered on your Method) from your self and Religion too; which doubtless is both a quick and a sure way of ridding a mans self of the Prejudices from any Religion,pag. 2. by abstracting himself from Religion, and looking on himself as a Man of no Reli∣gion. I cannot but applaud your Method of getting shut of the Prejudices of Education, and cannot but admire it as the most clever, sure, short, unerring way that any man could take to get rid of Education, which I will now with you take leave of, and pass on to Interest, and see how you served it. And here again you are as concise with Interest, as you were before with Education, if a man may credit you. When I considered (say you) Solomon's Advice,pag. 2. buy the Truth, and sell
it not: I was easily persuaded to look upon Interest, as a thing worth nothing, &c. And did you serve it so? why then truly to give you your due, you are an extraordinary Person among the Converts; one to whom an Eye to worldly Interest cannot fairly be objected: and I suppose you are very willing and de∣sirous too, that the World should have such an Opinion of you; that you have fairly quitted all purely for Conscience sake; that you had two Livings indeed; but since you are convinced that you ought not to be any longer a Communicant with, much less a Minister of, the Church of England, you have sacrificed them both to the Interest of your Immortal Soul; that tho' as the World now goes, it is the sure and only way to Preferments in Church or State to continue a Member (at least outwardly) of the Church of England so called, yet you for your part have, and do count all this worldly Interest, as a thing worth nothing, and are resolved to turn your back to it, so that you may but provide for the Salvation of your Soul. This truly is the Picture of a very excellent Christian, the only question to be asked now is, whether it is Mr. Sclater's of Putney; I am sorry that I must acquaint the World, not∣withstanding your speaking so contemptibly of Interest, that really it is no more yours than the man's in the Moon; for to be more serious with you, with what face could you write this, when almost all the Kingdom knows, that you hold both your Livings still, tho' you disown your being so much as a Member of the Church of England; and how briskly you hectored and quar∣relled the Church of Worcester, when they only desired to fill the Cure of Putney with a Minister of the Church of England, which you denyed any longer to own your self to be? A great many I am sure, think you did very ill to hold those Livings in your present Condition, and I do assure you, it is in∣finitely worse to do it, and yet by writing to insinuate to the World, that you have not, but have accounted all worldly In∣terest (the Profits of two Livings may be so named I hope) as a thing worth nothing. You have not lost, or delivered up any worldly concern that I can hear of on this account, you stand I believe in as much probability as ever you did of getting more: if this be the way of slighting, and undervaluing Interest, I do assure you that all the Covetous, the Extortioners, and the worldly Hypocrites do it as much as you.
CHAP. III. His Method shewn to be Ʋnreasonable. LEaving then this false as well as disingenuous account of your setting aside, and ridding your self of Interest, I must be∣gin the Examination of your Method of resolving your self in your Doubts, which indeed is surprizing from a Minister, and became Des Cartes as to matters of Philosophy, a little better, than it can do you or any one else in Matters of Religion. Here (say you) as I had abstracted my self from my self and Religion too,pag. 2. as a man of no Religion, but contemplating all: I must lay all before me, and look studiously upon them, &c. If you mean by this account of your Method, that you really put your self into an abstracted state, and were really as of no Religion so of no Church at all during this your search for a Com∣munion wherein you might be afterwards safe, I must tell you, that as your Method was most extravagant, so it was of too short a duration for your looking studiously, contemplating and comparing the two Communions of England and Rome together, since it is as certain that you were at Mass last Easter Day, 1686, as that you did give the Communion at Putney Church on Palm Sunday before it, and therefore must have been a Minister of the Church of England on the one Sunday, and a Member of the Church of Rome on the next, during the time betwixt which two Sundays I am certain you are far from being able to have considered and examined the Merits of the two Churches: you are not so quick a Man,pag. 2. for all your pretended discovering at first sight that all other Communions were evidently confusion. But allowing that during this search you onely Ex hypothesi put your self in such a state without leaving actually our Com∣munion till your Method and Reasons were over and satisfactory, it was a very odd Method for a Man that had been so long a Mini∣ster, and was so old a Man, and would much handsomer have become you, were you coming over from Paganism, or Maho∣metism, than from one Church that evidently hath the Catholick
Faith to another. Whichsoever of the two Senses was that which you designed, I am certain that the first was fit onely for a Madman, and the other almost as much unbecoming an old Clergy Man, who after Threescore (as I believe you are) falls to abstracting and doubting, and supposing, as if he had been in a Dream all the rest (and best part) of his Days, since he was in Orders: and at last when others being to dote, he begins to doubt, to search, and to make saving discoveries. CHAP. IV. The Confusion of his search, and the Absurdity of it shewn. NOtwithstanding the Inconsistences in this your tale, which are so many as would almost ruine any ones having the least value for your Book, or for the Reasons and Arguments in it, I must follow, and see how dexterously you managed, or how well you used this your wonderous Method.pag. 2, 3. Ʋpon a reserved Principle (say you) that Christ hath a Church upon earth; in my inquiry amongst my Brethren of the Church of England (who were as much your Brethren in this state, and no more than they are Hobbes's or Spinoza's,) I gave most attention to those teachers or writers, that had most reverence for Church Authority, &c. I ap∣peal to any Man of sense whether this passage does not favour much more of a Man already a Papist, than of a mere Seeker; but to pass that, Pray, Sir, what did you want, or what was you inquiring for? was it for the Catholick Church, or for a particular Communion, wherein you might be safe? if for the Catholick Church, you needed not to be curious whom you inquired of among our Teachers and Writers, since the meanest of them could readily have told you, that the Catho∣lick Church is made up of all the Particular Churches planted in the four quarters of the World, holding from Christ the onely Head of her the true Faith, and Catholick Ʋnity; so that if you intended to find where she was fixed, that so you might in ne∣cessity tell her your grievances, she is confined to no place,pag. 5. being a Diffusive Body throughout the World.
If you wanted a Particular Communion, a true Member of the Catholick Church wherewith to communicate, and upon which to trust your Salvation, the Church of England (Particular as to place, Catholick as to Faith and Doctrine) is such; so that your inquiry might here have ended, since if you were a true Mem∣ber of Hers, you were at the same time as true a Member of the Catholick Church. Here I must take occasion to tell you, that you seem by your Abstracting your self from your self, to have wilder'd your self, and thence to have confounded the Notions of the Catholick and Particular Churches, while from our Saviour's promise that the Gates of Hell should never prevail against the Catholick Church, you argue the Church must be one, which no Body denies; that it must have one Faith, which no Body denies neither, and that it must by virtue of Christ's promise perpetually abide in this one Faith, nor is this denied any more than the other two by any of our Church; and what have you got hence? onely that Christ hath and will always have a true Church upon Earth, which I know no Body ever denied. But here is the grand pinch, and what one may easily see you aim at, and that is to have this Ca∣tholick Church, and the Church of Rome to be all one and the same; which we shall see how you prove by and by. In the mean time I must return to you, where I left you quarrelling with our Church-men, and see whether I can make an end of the Quarrel. You say that you found that those of our Church that had most Reverence for Church Authority, meant onely their own, &c. You had done the World a great kind∣ness, if you had told who they were you inquired of, and what were the Queries you put to them. I hope if you asked after the Catholick Church, they did not tell you that the Nati∣onal Church of England was the whole Catholick Church. If you asked after a Particular Church, surely you cannot blame them for asserting the Authority of their own Church. When you put the same Queries to the Romish Teachers or Writers, did they re∣ject their own Church's Authority, did not they mean their own, when they would persuade you to their Communion, as much as our Men did that of our Church, when you inquired among them? where then is the fault? what would you have had 'em to doe to please you? would you have had them to say that the
Church of England is the Catholick Church, which no one that hath any sense can say of Her any more than of the Church of Rome? would you have had 'em to say that they had a Church indeed, but that either she had no Authority, or that no Body need to submit to it? which none but a mere Ignoramus could say. This, Sir, is perfect Trifling, this is to write a Book, and yet not to know what one wants, or what he would have. I wish to God you had reserved (when you were abstracting your self) a little Logick, that a Man might have known what you meant here, and where one might have you; that so, when a Reader thinks by your Words and by Connexion that you are talking of the Catholick Church, you may not come off with a Pish, the Man understands me not, I was speaking of Particular Churches. I wish you had licked this your confused piece into a little better Method; and had bestowed on it a little thing cal∣led Intelligibility; but perhaps you thought such a stile fittest for a Man that was going to write about Transubstantiation. You are as little pleased with them, when you say they held the Scriptures in high esteem (you might without a falsity have added, in far greater than the Church of Rome does, of which you now are) though under that Notion, they understood no more,pag. 3. than what themselves were pleased to allow to be Canonical, admitting also some Traditions, but taking and refusing as they saw good, &c. To be brief with you on this point, if you speak here of particular Persons in our Church, it is utterly false, since they are all obliged to believe that to be the Canon of Scripture, which is set down in the Articles of our Church, and there is not one Man of our Church that is at liberty to believe which he pleases, and to reject which he pleases from being Canonical Scripture to him, and for Traditions received in the Church, no particular Man hath any more power over them, than over the number of the Ca∣nonical Books. But if you speak of our Church it self here, (which your words without stretching will not bear,) it is as false of Her, since she believes and delivers those Books onely as Canonical, which the Primitive Church believed and delivered down to her as such: She rejects none as Apocryphal, which were not also rejected as such by the Primitive Church, as the Famous and most Learned Bishop Cosin hath most incomparably proved it for her in that his excellent Scholastick History of the Ca∣non
of Scripture. And for Traditions she rejects none but such, as have no evidence, nor probability of their ever having been of use in the Primitive Church, or such as are of no moment; in which case I never saw reason, why the National Church of Eng∣land hath not as much Authority herein to judge of these things, as the Church of Rome her self, who (for example sake) hath left off giving the Communion to Infants, tho' a Tradition of the Catholick Church. So that I cannot for my Life see; what you would fain, tho' most ridiculously, deduce from hence, that all with us re∣solved it self into the Judgment of a Private Spirit,pag. 3. and must be (I suppose you mean the Private Spirit must be, tho' your words are far from bearing it) the chief, or rather onely support of your Protestant Faith, &c. Since it is so palpably false, as I have just now shewn, nothing as to matters of Faith, Discipline, or Church Communion among us being either left to, or guided by, or depending upon any Man, how great, or how learned soever, his private Spirit; and so ridiculous, that I could not forgive it any Man, that had not abstracted himself from his reason: but to doe you right, you have almost a mind to come off it with your Methought; and I am content without being angry that it should pass for your thought, the abstracted-no-Religion Man's. You go on to shew that you could not persuade your self that Scripture alone could be the Judge of Controversies,pag. 3. and resolve your doubts, when the Private Spirit was made the Judge of Scripture, &c. Let the private Spirit be excluded, will you admit it then? will you allow the Representative Church of England to interpret in new Emergencies, which fell not within the care of Antiquity and the Four General Councils? If you admit this, there need be no dispute, since long before your doubts, the Church of England hath by publick Authority interpreted the Scripture in all matters of Faith and Discipline, and tied up all her Members; hath in all the points of Controversie betwixt us and Rome deter∣mined, that the sense of the Scripture is directly against them, and for us: If you will not admit it, I should be glad to see one reason against it, that would not as fully fly in the face of the Church of Rome. As to the Mischief upon this Principle of the Private Spirit,pag. 3, 4. the Wars and Murders, &c. You ought to have remembred that
that Principle was not set up by, but against the Church of Eng∣land, and that it was not the Church, but the direct and sworn Enemies thereof that committed all those outrages; you cannot be ignorant that it was She only that suffered during that Rebellion and Schism: and therefore it is most unjust in you to insinuate as if She was cause of all that distraction, whereas nothing is more apparent than the contrary to it. And as to your Tan∣rum Religio, &c. I challenge you to shew any one Principle of the Church of England that encourages, or does but glance to∣wards Rebellion, Sedition, or disturbance of either Church or State: This I'll promise you for every one, I'll shew you Ten of your new Church, I'll shew you Councils for it, your own most famous of all the European Councils, the Fourth of Lateran leading the Van. Your Popes deposing Princes,pag. 84. giving away their King∣doms (as they have done ours more than once) setting up in Re∣bellion Son against Father. I'll shew you the Rebellious Holy League in France, one King most barbarously Murdered by it, a Pope [Sixtus Quintus] in a set Speech commending the Pari∣cide: the Sorbone it self making Rebellious Decrees against the Two Harries of France, both Massacred by their Catholick (as they call themselves) Subjects; but enough of this, wherein you know or at least should, that we have infinitely the advantage of your new Church as to Principles of Loyalty. The result it seems of your Inquiry and search among us was, that you could not comply with common reason if you did not dis∣claim the Judgment of your own, or any Man's private Spirit, &c.pag. 4. I have upon this but one Question to ask you, and that is how you came to be a Roman Catholick; if you disclaimed your own reason or private Spirit, pray who chose your guide or Church for you; if you disclaimed every ones else, pray tell us how any Body else could doe it for you? But notwithstanding this your disclaiming, we find you busie enough up and down the Book acting as if you never had done any such thing, discovering, judging, complying, contemplating, searching and Forty such expres∣sions which used to denote the exercise of a Man's private Judg∣ment and Reason.
CHAP. V. His Method farther exposed, and the ridiculous Fruits of it. THE Fruit of all your search hitherto hath been onely to find,pag. 4. or at least to mistrust the ground you stood upon somewhat unsure, &c. What ground it was you then stood upon, I can∣not guess, since before this you had abstracted your self from Re∣ligion, and supposed your self as of no Religion, so most certainly of no Church. But all this is assuredly but a figure to bring in the Rock, the Rock you think you were got upon, when once a Romanist. If I might have had a word with you before you had mounted your Rock, for now I am afraid there is no speaking with you, I would onely have been informed by you, whether there is but one Rock, and whether I must giveOrig. Hom. 1. in Matth. Origen the lie who tells me that all the Apostles were Rocks as well as Peter; and what I must say toPre∣script. c. 32. & 36. Edit. Franck. 1597. Tertullian and others, that tell me, other Apostles planted Churches as well as Peter and Paul at Rome; and that I might be as safe in any of them all, as in that at Rome, since they and Rome had the same Faith (asCont. Haer. l. 1. c. 2, 3. Edit. Feuard. 1625. Irenaeus says) delivered to them, and had a Ministry settled by Apostles among them. I wish I might be so happy as to have a satisfactory Answer to these Queries from you or any one else. But for the present you are too busie, having got the Text, that the Gates of Hell should not prevail (which Text by the bye how came you to interpret of a Church, since if you disclaim your private Judgment, it does, for any thing you can know, re∣late to something else?) You are sure upon it that Christ hath a Church, that that Church has but one Faith; which I have alrea∣dy told you our Church does not deny. And now you wanted nothing to find firm footing (sure footing you should have called it for Mr. Serjeant's sake) but to discover,pag. 4. whether the Church from her Original was the Commissioned Interpreter of the Sacred Writings, &c. One would expect here in a thing of that moment some well managed Reasons from Scripture, Reason, and the Consent of An∣tiquity
to prove that the Church of Rome (which you cannot de∣ny that you mean here,) was this Commissioned Interpreter; but instead of that, you think you do it cleverly enough by insinu∣ating that without it there would be no end of Controversies, which is not proving but begging. As to the choice of a Hundred Faiths (without such an Interpreter) which you say you saw you might have; if you mean in the Church of England,pag. 5. and that you must mean, having already set aside all other Communions, and being now employed in the examining whether of the Two Churches, the Church of England or Rome, you might be safe with; I am obliged to tell you that there are no fewer than Ninety Nine mistakes in this short Sentence, since the Faith of the Church of England is but one, and as much one as that of the Church of Rome her self. But for all this talk you have not got to your Church yet,pag. 5. which must be Visible; to wave needless Disputes, such the Church of England is as well as the Church of Rome. And now you want nothing but a definition of her, which you com∣plain you could not get among us, and therefore was forced to go to the Books of Catholicks: As to the complaint I answer that you needed not to have gone to the Catholicks (as you call 'em) since the Church of England's definition in her Articles will I think, satisfie any reasonable Man, whileArticle 19. it defines the Visible Church of Christ to be a Congregation of Faithfull [here Hereticks and Schismaticks are both excluded] Men, in which the pure Word of God is Preached, and the Sacraments be duly Ministred according to Christ's Ordinance [and that must be by lawfull Pastors] in all those things that of necessity are requisite to the same. You could not but know of this Definition of the Church of Christ, you had done well to have shewn particularly, wherein it failed of separating Hereticks or Schismaticks from being either Flock or Shepherds in the Church. But no Ignorance is compara∣ble to that which is affected. And since you would not be contented with ours, I'll e'en try S. N's. and see what reason it has to be prefer'd to that of the whole Church of England. The Church of Christ is one Society or company of Men.S. N. Ch. of E. S. N. The Visible Church of Christ is a Congregation.
Linked and combined together in the same Profession of Christian Faith. Of Faithfull Men.Ch. of E. S. N. Ch. of E. And use of Sacraments under lawfull Pasters. And the Sacraments be duly Administred according to Christ's Ordinance. Thus far we agree, as for S. N's addition of those Pastors al∣so under one Supreme Head Pastor or Conservator pacis & veritatis, do you or he prove it, and then put it into the Definition; its being there now is no proof of the Truth of it. However you, I perceive, were satisfied with it, and think this Definition hath brought you to the Rock, hath done your business for you. I have often heard indeed of Men disputed into a Church, of Men cajoled, and of others threatned or frighted into a Church; but must confess I never heard of any before you definitioned in∣to a Church; and truly it looks surprizing that a Man should like a Church for a Definitions sake. Suppose your Definition prove false, are you resolved to leave that Church, and go to another that hath a better Definition? If this be your Humour, the Sophisters would be too hard for you, and lead you into an endless Maze. Satisfied however you are at present, and so overjoyed at this Definition, that you forgot what was necessary for it, and that was to prove and to confirm it; instead of which you fall into extravagant Praises, and a hurry of Words and Ecsta∣sies to no purpose, whereas you neglect to prove, First, that this is a true and regular Definition, and Secondly, that it does belong to the Church of Rome so called exclusive of all other. Had you done this,pag. 6. you had acted like a Scholar, whereas the other rable of discoveries and abused Psalms prove nothing at all, and would far better have become some Woman or Poet-Con∣vert than you, who should prove these things, and let them which can doe no better, admire. After your fit of Ecstasies is over, you seem something willing to afford us some Testimonies of Antiquity, to what purpose I must now inquire that so we may avoid Confusion, and I may shorten my Answers. But here according to my own design, I must take leave of your Method of resolving your self in your doubts, being arrived at that, which I took leave for order
and clearness sake to call the Reasons of your Conversion, which convinced you so far, as to leave our Communion, and to espouse that of Rome. I will take leave of it with this Com∣plement, that it really is the most admirable one I ever heard of for a Clergy-Man of above Threescore. CHAP. VI. His Proofs of a Monarchical Church under one Supreme Head from Scripture Answered. THE Fruit of your noble Method, and the effect of all your Search hitherto hath been (as far as I can perceive) that you have met with a Definition that pleases you: Now except you take S. N. to be as infallible in making of Definitions, as the Pope is said by some (and perhaps believed by you) to be in making of Canons for the Church, and that you ought to submit to his Definition, just as you do to the Popes Decrees, with all submission, without any scruple, or examination, you know it will be expected from you to prove this his Definition to be true: I cannot dare to think you so much a Madman as to believe S. N's Infallibility at Definitions, and therefore now do wait for your proof of these two things. First, That this your espoused Definition is true, that is, that Christ his Catholick Church is Monarchical, and governed supreme∣ly by one chief Pastor,pag. 6. his Generalissimo (a very fit Title in a lite∣ral sense for some of your Popes) or Vicegerent here on Earth; and Secondly, That this Definition doth belong to the Church of Rome, and not to the Church of England: Do but prove me the first, and I'll forgive you the trouble of proving the Second, and bestow it on you, as a just reward for your pains about the first. But before we begin, I must desire you to remember not to confound Particular Churches with the Catholick Church, and not to take that as said of the one, which does certainly belong to the other. You begin your Proofs with Scripture, which a Man may ea∣sily
see is not at all on your side, you give us thence so few, and those nothing to the purpose. For as to the first out of Acts the Second,pag. 7. Verse 1. how that which is onely an Historical Relation should be a Heavenly Representation, I cannot imagine. No Body will deny that they that meet as the Apostles then were, , in one place [not  as you falsly quote it, and as ill translate it, at the same work] should be as the Apostles then were  of one accord, or of one mind; and which is more, that every Particular Church over the World should be as to the Rule of Faith  of one mind; but I can never believe that for this reason they are, can, or ought to be , always meet at the same place, which your use of it would insinuate, and must require the one as well as the other for your purpose. But what this is to a Mo∣narchical Church with a supreme Head I cannot guess; nor your other from St. Pauls frequent Injunctions to his several Plantations, that they should be all of one mind,pag. 7. and speak the same things. You had done well to have quoted some passages to have illustrated what you say, or at least to have put down some references in the Margin; but this alas was not convenient, then even those that swallow what you say without examining, could not avoid seeing the Fallacy; for whereas St. Paul writing to Particular Churches exhorts them to be at Ʋnity among themselves, you would fain turn it as if he should exhort them as to all particu∣lars and circumstances, to be at Ʋnity or to have the same with the other Churches; as if writing to Ephesus for example, he should exhort them to be of the same mind, and to speak the same things with the Church of Corinth, with the Church at Thessalo∣nica, &c. Shew this, and I'll yield the point; but remember that if you mean of the same mind and to speak the same things as to matters of Faith, this as it need not be proved, no Body gain∣saying it, so it does no ways serve what you cited it for, to prove a Monarchical Church. It cannot appear otherwise than very strange to all consider∣ing Persons, that these People should generally with so much con∣fidence affirm, that our Saviour left his Church in such a condition with a Supreme Vicegerent over it, and yet like you, when they should come to make the thing apparent from the History of those first times, penned in the Gospels, Acts and Epistles, are
forc'd to drop the proof of it, and to impose upon their Readers a scrap or two out of those writings, not one jot to the purpose oftentimes. You will easily find that I mean this of you; and I must needs say that these your two useless proofs, I mean Quotati∣ons for they are far from Proofs, forced me upon this Remark. CHAP. VII. His Arguments for a Monarchical Church out of Antiquity refuted. ONE comfort however you seem to promise us, that you will make your Reader amends by your Testimonies out of the Fathers for your being so short, and so destitute of 'em from Scripture. You begin them in a quaint stile, which I be∣lieve you took for a pretty fancy.pag. 7. I followed (say you) I must confess a loof off, her [the Kings Daughter all glorious within] Com∣panions, that followed her, &c. This passage is one of the plea∣santest that I ever met with, and the fullest of Figure: I must profess, till I saw your Book, I always took St. Dennis, Ignati∣us, Irenaeus, &c. for Members of the Church, and never in the least dreamed that these persons were her Companions, or the Virgins that are her Fellows: and I must own that it is the first time I ever heard of a Members being a companion to the Body, or that a Man without the breach of common sense may say that his Hand or Foot is a Companion of his Body. But you, Sir, had been contemplating just before the ravishing Beauty of the Kings Daughter all glorious within: and the Virgins that be her Fellows and Companions did so run in your head, that 'tis no wonder you mistook Dennis the Areopagite and the rest you mention after him for the Queens Companions. At present however we must let them pass as such, whom you followed you tell us and lissened what they said of her, and overheard, First, Dionysius the Areopagite St. Pauls Scholar. Secondly, Clemens Romanus, &c. 'Tis commonly said it's ominous stumbling at the Threshold, and a bad presage to trip at the first attempt, and this truly is your very case, for it is a great mistake you should overhear ei∣ther of them two using those passages you mention, since neither of
them ever said the things, St. Dennis having never left any thing writ at all, nor St. Clemens any thing besides his two (allowing the fragment of the Second to be his) Epistles. So that your two first quotations are pitifull Forgeries, as I shall hereafter prove: but granting the passages were true, and as old as you would have 'em:pag. 7. they are not one jot to your purpose. The first of 'em saying onely that the Apostles desired their followers by their In∣structions might be partakers of the Divine Nature; the latter, that Bishops should observe the Orders left by the Apostles;pag. 8. both which are nothing to the purpose of a Monarchical Church, but prove the contrary, if it were worth the while to shew it. Ignatius Saint and Martyr is the next you produce,pag. 8. from him you tell us, that People in all things should submit to their Bishop, that no Man can be partaker of the Eucharist, that abstains from the Bishops Altar. A Man would guess by these passages, that you had already forgot, what you were about to prove. You were to prove that Christ lest his Church under one particular Go∣vernour, and here you prove that People must be dutifull to their Bishops.pag. 8. Ay but say you, St. Ignatius tells us there is but one Al∣tar, and one Bishop, as also that there ought to be but one Church and one Faith, which is in Christ, &c. and that surely is to the pur∣pose. This I utterly deny, I grant indeed St. Ignatius in his Epistle to the Philadelphians [not as you have mistaken it, to the Philippians; to which Church he wrote no Epistle, tho' some have coined one for him] doth speak of one Altar and one Bishop; and you had done fairly to have cited the passage at large, as you did the other two, nothing to the purpose; but this is a certain sign that runs almost through your Book, that where you onely hint, or quote half, or put an &c. in the middle of a Sentence there all things will not be found fair. The passage then is this,. St. Ignat. Ep. ad Philadelph. Edit. J. Vossii. Be carefull therefore (saith he speaking to the Philadelphians) to make use of this one Eucharist: for there is but one Flesh of our Lord Jesus Christ, and one Cup to Communicate to us [or unite us to] his Blood: one Altar, as but one Bishop with the Presbyters and Deacons my fellow-servants; that whatever ye do, ye may act according to Gods appointment.
Now this passage is so far from proving what you would have it, that there is but one Supreme Bishop, who you say is he of Rome, that it asserts the direct contrary, for if it proves, as you say it does, that there is but one Altar and one Bishop, I am as certain that it proves that one Bishop to be the Bishop of Phila∣delphia, and that one Altar to be this Bishops, since he exhorts these Philadelphians to make use and keep to that Eucharist, that was to be received from that one Altar, that did belong to that one Bishop: and that one Bishop I am sure was the then Bishop of Philadelphia. I will not urge upon you any place of Ignatius, but will onely say, and will be at any time ready to prove, that he that cites Ignatius for a defender of a Monarchical Church un∣der one Head on Earth, either hath not read Ignatius, or does not understand him. What you urge from St. Cyprian is to no purpose, since eve∣ry one owns that every Member ought to keep the Ʋnity of that Church to which he doth belong, and that no Man that is disobe∣dient to the Church his Mother, will ever have God for his Father. Nor your long quotation from St. Irenaeus, where your faculty of translating appears to be none of the best,pag. 8. This Preaching and this Faith, when the Church had heard spread through the whole World, she diligently keeps, as it were dwelling in one House; to wit, having one Soul and one Heart, &c. which give me leave to alter a little to St. Irenaeus his good sense, and then you shall have my Answer about it. The [Catholick] Church having received this Preach∣ing and this Faith, although [she be] dispersed over the whole World, yet keeps and preserves them as diligently, as if she [were confined to or] did Inhabit a single House; and she doth believe them without any difference or disagreement, as tho' she had but one Soul, and but one Heart, and accordingly doth both preach, teach, and deliver these things, [these Articles of Faith] as if she had but one Mouth, &c. Of all the passages in Antiquity, I wonder what ill Fate put this piece of St. Irenaeus in your way: had you considered it well, I am sure we should not have met with it in your Book, since it does perfectly ruine the whole design of this part of your Book; for whereas the benefit you intended from it was to help you to prove that the Church of Christ is Monarchical un∣der a single head, there is nothing less here, and every thing contra∣ry; for as it speaks of the Catholick Church, as one through this
Ʋnity of Faith, so it proves (what we of the Church of Eng∣land so much contend for) that the Particular Churches of Germa∣ny, Spain, France, Aegypt and the East, of Lybia, Jerusalem, Rome, and the rest, do make up this Catholick Church, without the least hint of a Head over them all, or of any other Ʋnity than that of Faith, the Light that doth, like the Sun, equally en∣lighten every where. You will say perhaps that the Church of Rome is not expressly mentioned here, and that probably it is, because all these Particular Churches mentioned are the several parts of her Body which really is the same as the Catholick Church. But to spoil this groundless Pretence,—neque hae∣quae in Me∣dio Mundi sunt consti∣tutae. not to insist on it that by the Churches constituted in the middle of the World in this passage, She as well as Jerusalem, and the Churches betwixt them is cer∣tainly intimated; I desire you but to peruse the Third Chapter of his Third Book against Heresies. Having in the beginning of this Chapter urged against the Hereticks that none of the Apostles delivered to the Bishops their Successours any such things as they impiously taught, and that he could shew this from the Successions in all the Churches, he thus ad∣dresses them,Sed quoniam valde longum est in hoc tali volumine Omnium Ecclesiarum enumerare Successiones,—Romae fun∣datae & constitutae Ecclesiae—Traditi∣onem, &c. St. Irenaeus l. 3. c. 3. contr. Haeres. Edit. Feuardent. 1625. But because it is too tedi∣ous in such a Volume as this is to reckon up the Successions of all Churches, &c. he then reckons up that of the very great and very ancient Church founded at Rome by St. Peter and St. Paul, &c. If this passage do not prove the Church of Rome to be one of all those Churches, and as Particular a Church, as any of the rest, I will for the future (as you did) abstract my self, and deny my Eyes as well as my Reason. What you quote from Clemens of Alexandria and Tertullian, two of whose passages are part falsly,pag. 9. and part lamely translated) are nothing at all to your purpose, they only speak of the Ca∣tholick Church as one through the Ʋnity of Faith, not a word of the Church of Rome, or of her being that one Church under one Head Bishop. The same advantage and no more doth that from St. Chryso∣stom afford you,pag. 9. which says, The Apostle calls it the Church of God,—. that he may shew it may be reduced into one [which with your leave I would express thus, to shew, or having shewed, that it ought to be at Ʋnity, &c.] All which is no more than what
the Members of the Church of England have said a Hundred Thousand times, that every Church, as well as that at Corinth ought to be at Ʋnity. You might have quoted our Collect for all Conditions of Men [O God, the Creatour and Preserver of all Mankind,p. 9. &c.] instead of the passage out of Theodoret, onely you had a mind to shew your great reading, otherwise ours would have served you to all the purposes this can, they both saying the same thing, that is, not one syllable to your intentions.p. 10. St. Ambrose's and St. Hie∣rome's are just the same, speaking that which none of our Church can deny, every member of it doth believe that there is one Ca∣tholick and Apostolick Church, and at the same time is as ready to profess, that he doth no more believe than any of the Pri∣mitive Christians ever did, that the Church of Rome is that Church, or that that one Catholick and Apostolick Church is go∣verned by one Supreme Pastour the Bishop of Rome; which was the thing you were to prove, but how little you have performed it, I dare appeal to any one, that would but, as he reads, con∣sider, and compare your quotations, and what I have said upon them. More Testimonies, it seems, you could have given us,p. 10. but you say, it were too tedious, either to write or reade, &c. There is ano∣ther reason why they would be tedious, and that is, because if they are no better than these we have had already, they would have been nothing to the purpose: and to say those Testimonies you have presented us are not the best, would be to disparage your prudence and parts, which we need not doe. One more how∣ever you cannot refrain giving us for good omens sake, that of Con∣stantine the Great, whose Zeal for the Ʋnity of the Catholick Church, and his most earnest endeavours for the peace thereof all know and admire, and therefore 'twas needless to recite, since it hath not one syllable to your business, which was not to prove, what both sides affirm, that there is a Catholick Church, but that the Church of Rome is that Catholick Church governed by one Supreme Pastour. Quod restat probandum & aternùm re∣stabit. One thing I must desire of you by reason of these passages, that if ever you set up again for a Writer, you would either tell us what Editions the Books are of which you quote; or name the Books you
pick'd 'em out of; you cite the 62d Chapter; Valesius's Edition says it's the 64th: you quote the 63d, and he says it's the 65th Chapter of Eusebius's 3d Book of the Life of Constantine. CHAP. VIII. The Ridiculousness of his Attempt against Protestant Communions ex∣posed, and an Ʋnity of Faith among them proved. HERE,pag. 10. as tho' you had done wonders by your Authorities, you not without a secret vain-glory, say, What would I have once given to have found such an Ʋnity amongst Protestants? to have England, Scotland, Denmark, Zwethland, Geneva, Zurick, &c. thus Unius Labii: nay to have found but one County in my own dear Countrey, or perhaps one single Family so united a Brotherhood, &c. I wish, Sir, that it might have been my good fortune to have met you sometime with money in your Pocket in this generous mood, I do assure you that I would have been reasonable, and for one Guinea, would have proved it to you, or have forfeited 40, that all these Churches you have reckoned up in the North and Western parts of Europe are as much Ʋnius Labii, as all the Proofs you have tack'd together do either prove or require; for to repeat the substance of them, there is none of them all doth ei∣ther prove, or offer at it, that all the Particular Churches of Christ should have the same Customs, Rites, Ceremonies and Disci∣pline without any difference one from another. That which they prove, and indeed there is but one that doth it clearly, that from Irenaeus, is, that the Ʋnity of the Catholick Church dispersed throughout the world, or, which is the same thing, of all the Particular Churches every where which do make up the Catholick Church was in and from the one Faith, which she had from the Apostles: and this Faith was that which we call the Apostle's Creed, a Summary of which St. Irenaeus having set down in the short Chapter immediately before this out of which you have your quo∣tation, begins this Chapter as you have quoted that the Catholick Church, having received this Preaching and this Faith (to wit, inclu∣ded in the Apostle's Creed, doth preserve it, and teach it inviolably, &c.
and at the end of this same Chapter,Et neque qui valde praevalet in Sermone ex iis qui praesunt Ecclesiis, alia quam haec sunt, dicet. Nemo enim super Magistrum est: neque infirmus in dicendo deminorabit Traditionem. Cùm enim una & eadem fides sit, ne∣que is qui multum de ea potest dicere, amplius, (Lampliat) neque is qui minus, deminorat. S. Iraen. c. Haer. l. 1. c. 3. Edit. Feuard. he tells us, that the Church was so much Ʋnius Labii (as your phrase is) in this Faith, that neither He that was more eloquent among the Pastours of the Church, will say [or teach] any things different from these [Articles of Faith] for no Man is above his Master: nor he that is less expert, will diminish any thing from this [Faith delivered or] Tradi∣tion. For since the Faith is one and the same, neither he that can say most about it, doth add any thing to it; nor he that can say least, doth take any thing from it. This Faith then (to use St. Irenaeus's simile) like the Sun,Ibidem. enlightens all parts of the world, shines to them all, and doth influence all with her one Faith, as with a common heat, and makes all that embrace it throughout the world to become the constituent parts of the Ca∣tholick Church. By this time I do not question but that you think your Gui∣nea might have been in danger, since no man that hath common sense can deny, that the Churches of England, Denmark, Swed∣land and the rest are Ʋnius Labii in this Faith, which is equally embraced and professed by them, and therefore hath the same in∣fluence over them, that it had over the several Churches in St. Ire∣naeus his time, to make them true Members of the Catholick Church. So that as all your money would have been lost on this account, so your Pity over your own dear Countrey is not onely lost but chil∣dish and ridiculous too, and would far handsomer have be∣come a Woman that never saw farther than her Psalter, than you that pretend to such a large knowledge in Fathers and Divinity. But tho' your Pity were lost,pag. 10, 11. you are resolved your Countrey shall not want your hearty prayers, that true Charity—may possess their hearts, and that there may be a most holy love planted, and reign∣ing in their hearts for ever, &c. I used to think it was the opini∣on of the Church of Rome and her Party, that we of the Church of England wanted the true Faith, if so, you are not then so chari∣table for all your Pretences as you might be, and a little petition, that true Faith, as well as true Charity may possess our hearts, would not be so very much, or so troublesome for you, now you are on your Rock, to put up for us. But perhaps your opinion is,
that our Faith is good enough in this Church, onely that we are an ill-natured, uncharitable Church, and therefore want such an Oratour as you to obtain for us the Gift of Charity. But do we want Charity so much more, than our neighbours at Rome? God will one day judge, and let the world doe it in the mean time, whether we or they want it more, they that damn all besides their own Church, or we that hold that even they may be saved. And for our Faith neither shall we need to flatter our selves; by and by we shall be called to account by you about it, and proved to our sorrow to want that altogether as much as Charity, so that in the mean time how are you the compassionate, and charitable Man? 'Tis no wonder that one that hath made so great a mistake, as to say, there is no Ʋnity among the Reformed Communions, should make such adoe to make the Church of Rome appear great, by reckoning up all the Ʋniversities, Bishopricks, &c. that own and submit to the Pope's Jurisdiction. I have not so much time to trifle away as to examine whether your Muster be right; all that it proves is, that a great many Churches that by the Rules of Christianity, and by the ancient Laws of the Catholick Church were free and independent, do now labour (willingly or unwillingly I do not pretend to know) under the Ʋsurpation of the Church of Rome and her Ʋniversal Bishop, which Title Gregory the Great, himself a Bishop of that See, thought Antichristian. When you reckon Sicily and its Bishops, you ought to have remembred, that they have a Supreme Head of their own, the King of Spain (who is therefore once a year excommunicated by the other Supreme Head at Rome, but, for quietness sake, as constantly the next day absolved) who acts as supremely and Independently there, as the Pope himself does in Rome or any part of Italy. But this perchance you did not know, and therefore 'twould be very unreasonable to expect a true account of it from you.
CHAP. IX. A Digression, wherein is proved that the Church of Rome is a parti∣cular Church, and that the Ʋnity among the Primitive Chur∣ches was in Faith onely. YOUR next design, if I understand you right, is to prove the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome. But before I under∣take to talk with you about that, I will take leave to make a Digression, the Design of which shall be to shew you (that I may not be onely employed in pulling down what you build) how much you have been mistaken about your Notion of the Catholick Church, and how miserably that Definition of S. N. or rather the Romish Missionaries have imposed upon you. I will contract it as much as I can, and care not how short I am, so that I be but clear and intelligible. The things therefore I propose to make appear are these, First, That the Church of Rome in the Primitive times was looked upon to be as particular a Church, as any other then in being. Secondly, That as an Ʋnity in Faith was always required in every Particular Church to make it a true branch of the Catholick Church, so there were in those Primitive times always found, and always allowed of, differences as to Practices, Ceremonies, Discipline and such things between the several particular Churches without any breach of Catholick Peace and Ʋnity. 1. The first of these I am almost as much ashamed to at∣tempt, as to prove that I had a Mother, it is so plain and visible through all Antiquity: that I admire any Man that owns his Rea∣son can in the least question the Church of Rome's being as Parti∣cular a Church as any of its neighbours; such I am sure St. Paul thought it to be, when he wrote his Epistle from Corinth to that Church, and such St. Clemens knew it certainly to be, when he writes in the name of the Church settled at Rome the famous Epistle to the Church of Corinth: the Epistle St. Ignatius wrote to it, just before his Martyrdom there, does equally prove it with
the other two, and not one syllable is there to be met with in these three best Monuments of Antiquity (as far as I can see) that does at all advance her above the common level of the other her sister Churches, or in the least hint her any ways being the Mi∣stress, or Mother of them all, as the late and our modern Wise-men are pleased to say she is, but for proving it are willing to be ex∣cused. I question not but what I have cited out of St. Irenaeus proves the sentiment of him and his time to have been, that she was a particular Church among the rest in the world; he was certainly of this opinion,S. Iren. con. Haer. l. 3. c. 3. when telling the Hereticks that it would be too tedious to reckon up the Successions of ALL the CHURCHES, he puts down that of Rome, which he could not have done, had not she been one of those All he there mentions. I will but produce one more upon this too evident a point, Tertullian—Edant ergo Origines Ecclesiarum suarum: evolvant ordinem Episcoporum suorum ita per Successiones ab initio de∣currentem, ut primus ille Episcopus ali∣quem ex Apostolis vel Apostolicis vi∣ris, &c. habuerit auctorem & anteces∣sorem. Hoc enim modo Ecclesiae Apo∣stolicae census suos deferunt: sicut Smyrnaeorum Ecclesia habens Poly∣carpum ab Joanne conlocatum refert: Sicut Romanorum Clementem à Pe∣tro ordinatum edit: proinde utique & ceterae exhibent, &c. Tertull. de Prae∣script. c. 32. Edit. Franck. 1597., who challenging the Hereticks to shew the Original of their Churches, the Succession of their Bishops in a direct line from either an Apostle, or an Apostolical Person that always kept within the Ʋnity of the Church; tells them the Apostolical Churches could doe this; for ex∣ample the Church of Smyrna that had Po∣lycarp placed there [for their first Bishop] by St. John, the Church of Rome that had Clemens ordained by St. Peter, and for the rest of those Churches, that they did the same. 2. I'll pass now to the second point, to shew, That as an Ʋnity in Faith was always required in every Particular Church to make it a true part of the Catholick Church, so there were in those primitive times always found, and always allowed of, Differences as to Prac∣tice and Ceremonies, Discipline and such things between the se∣veral particular Churches without any breach of Catholick Peace and Unity. As to the Ʋnity by Faith, I need not much, if at all, insist upon the proof of it, since we both make it necessary to the be∣ing a Member of the Catholick Church:S. Irenaeus cont. Haer. l. 1. c. 3. St. Irenaeus in the Chap∣ter you and I quoted, doth sufficiently prove that it was the
Faith received from the Apostles, that made the Church one; that it was that which enlightened, and therefore saved every particu∣lar Church as well as particular Person: No Man speaks more of the beauty and necessity of Ʋnity, and yet that He meant it onely as to an Ʋnity of Faith, is very apparent from that fa∣mous Epistle to Victor Bishop of Rome, who had most imprudent∣ly and irregularly excommunicated the Asiatick Churches for not keeping Easter at the same time He and most other Christians did. In this Epistle he tells Victor that before his time, All Churches tho' several of 'em differing in this thing of the time of observing Ea∣ster preserved Catholick Peace, and did communicate one with ano∣ther, notwithstanding such a difference.Neque enim de Die (viz. celebr. Pasch.) solum controversia est, sed eti∣am de formâ ipa Jejunii. Quidam enim existimant unico die sibi esse jeju∣nandum: alii duobus, alii pluribus —nihilominus tamen & omnes isti pacem inter se retinuerunt, & nos in∣vicem retinemus. Ita Jejuniorum Di∣versitas Consensionem [] Fi∣dei commendat. apud Euseb. Hist. Ec∣cl. l. 5. c. 24. Ed. Vales. He gives him the Instance (in this same Ep.) of St. Polycarp and Anicetus, who differ∣ing and resolved so to continue in this point, did most lovingly communicate together at Rome it self: Anicetus, as a particular mark of Honour and Brother∣ly Love, permitting St. Polycarp to Con∣secrate the Eucharist in his Church and stead: and did as lovingly part. He fur∣ther informs him, that it was not about the time of observing Easter onely that there were Differences be∣tween particular Churches: he mentions the much greater vari∣ety in the great duty of Fasting, that some fasted but one Day, some two, others more: yet did however preserve Peace and Ʋnity with all that differed from them; and so he says, they still did continue to do in his time: and concludes this Narrative thus, That the Diversity of their Fasts did commend the Unity of their Faith; than which I could never desire a more evident proof for what I have affirmed, that different Customs were found and allowed of in the different particular Churches without breach of Catholick Ʋnity and Communion. Tertullian is as express in both points of the Ʋnity of Faith, and diversity of Discipline and Customs, that tho' the first is necessary to all Churches, yet that the other is lawfull and practised in dif∣ferent Communions.Regula quidem Fidei una omnino est, sola immobilis & irreformabilis, credendi scilicet in unicum Deum.—Hac Lege Pidei manante cetera jam disciplinae & conversationis admittunt novitatem correctionis. Tertul. de Vir∣gin. velandis c. 1. Edit. Franck. The Rule of Faith (says he) is altogether one, immoveable, and uncapable of any Reformation or Altera∣tion,
after which he sets down an Abridg∣ment [as Irenaeus had done above] of the Apostles Creed, and then proceeds hac Lege, &c. This Law or Rule of Faith continuing firm, the other matters of Discipline and Manners do admit of Correction or Amendment. These two eminent Writers are so clear and convincing in this matter, that I'll wave the producing any more Authorities to this purpose besides that of the very eminent and famous Firmilian Bishop of the Cappado∣cian Caesarea,Eos autem qui Romae sunt, non ea in omnibus observare quae sunt ab origine tradita, & frustra Apostolorum auctoritatem praetendere; scire quis eti∣am inde potest, quod circa celebrandos dies Paschae, & circa multa alia di∣vinae rei Sacramenta, videat esse apud illos aliquas diversitates, nec observa∣ri illic omnia aequaliter quae Hieroso∣lymis observantur. Secundum quod in caeteris quoque plurimis Provinciis, multa pro locorum & nominum (l. hominum) di∣versitate variantur; nec tamen propter hoc ab Ecclesiae Catholicae pace atque uni∣tate aliquando discessum est. Firmiliani Epistola Cypriano, inter Epist. Cypri∣ani 75. p. 220. Edit. Oxon. who in an Epistle to St. Cyprian, acquaints the World, that they of the Romish Church did not observe in all things what had been delivered from the beginning (I pray then what's become of your Palladium, Tradition) and that they did to no purpose pretend the Authority of the Apostles: he instances about the Obser∣vation of Easter, and lays further to their charge some differences about many other di∣vine affairs and administrations, and says that they do not observe the same Customs that are at Jerusalem. This he menti∣ons not to blame them for them, but to reprove their Pride and their disturbing the Peace and Ʋnity of the Catholick Church, by breaking Com∣munion with other Churches upon such accounts, for in the next words to these I cite, himself mentions that in very many other Provinces,Cum una sit Fides, cur funt Eccle∣siarum di∣versae consuetudines, &c. many things were varied according to the diversity of places and names, (men) however that the Peace and Ʋnity of the Catholick Church was not hereby broken; . 3. Interrogatio Augustini ad Gregor. M.
CHAP. X. An inquiry into Roman Ʋnity under their Dictator. HAving now discharged my self of my digression, and sa∣tisfactorily I hope proved that which I undertook in it. I do now pass to your Muster of all those places and persons un∣der the Pope, the Unity of which, your assurance is, doth hence proceed,p. 11. because they submit themselves to the Judgment and Regulation of one Dictator, who conserves the ancient Decrees of Ge∣neral Councils, deposited with him by the whole Church, from whom if any dissent, or walk irregularly, he is severed and cut off from the rest of the Members, &c. That the submission of all those Churches you mention to the Dictator at Rome, is the cause of that Ʋnity you say is among them, no Body does deny any more, than that all the Philoso∣phers among the Heathens would have been as much at Ʋnity, had they made Aristippus or Pyrrho their Ʋniversal Dictator, and resolved never to think, speak or write besides what he was pleased to command or teach them. The Question betwixt us is, whether Christ did leave his Church in a Monarchical State under the sole ordering of St. Peter at first, to be continued af∣ter his decease under the successive Bishops of Rome; and this is the thing to be proved; as for what you talk about the Roman Dictators keeping and managing the Canons of General Councils, I question not before we part upon this head to prove your Rea∣sons for it either false, or ridiculous. But before we go any further, is the Church of Rome really at that Ʋnity that one might expect from its having such an Ʋni∣versal Dictator over it? I trow not; for did you never hear of that long bandying (which perhaps is not ended) about the Im∣maculate Conception; nor of the violent Feuds betwixt the Jan∣senists and Molinists, which for all the Popes determination conti∣nue to this Day? Is that whole Community agreed about the Infallibility? How is it then that some are for the Personal In∣fallibility of the Bishop of Rome as such; some that He is so one∣ly
in Cathedra; some that onely a General Council is such? Are they agreed about his Jurisdiction? How is it then that some put him under, and others above a General Council? Is his Supremacy determined wherein it doth consist? Whence is it then that the Clergy of France so lately made Determinations for the Limi∣tation of it,1682. and to deny his Deposing Power, or Medling in Tem∣porals: And the Clergy of Hungary under the Arch-Bishop of Gran did 1684 Condemn the Determinations of France, to omit the Inquisition of Toledo doing the same thing against them? What was the reason that the Pope, who is Dictator, and might with a word as such silence these Quarrels, suffers these contrary Determinations, but that he hath wit enough to know that he is not so much a Dictator, as Mr. Sclater makes him, in France, and that his Bulls would signifie no more there about these things, than they did about the Regale. Are not the Professed Members of that Communion for all their Dictator still quarrelling and ban∣dying one against another, witness the Satyrs and virulent Libels betwixt the Jesuites and the Carmelites, to pass by the more per∣sonal ones betwixt Maimbourgh and Schelstreat, betwixt Alexan∣der Natalis and D'enghien, betwixt Arnauld and Malebranch; I will but ask you one question, why all F. Alexandre Noel's Books, wherein he hath done all he can to vindicate their Re∣ligion, were all condemned to the Fire not excepting one by this Pope's Breve in Eighty Four. I doubt we shall find that Doctors differ about the deposing Power and the Popes Supremacy in the bo∣some of the Church of Rome it self: and that the French did not submit quietly to the Condemnation of their Determinations by the Clergy of Hungary. These things perchance are most of 'em news to you, and therefore you cannot be blamed for thinking or writing that they are at Ʋnity under their Dictator at Rome, because you knew no better; but if you be angry and say you did know them, I desire to know how you could say that the Members of that Church do submit to that Dictator, and are at Ʋnity under him, whereas the Instances I have given are more than enough to con∣vince, that what you have written is but a Dream, and your own confident mistake.
CHAP. II. Arguments from the Three first Centuries and the beginning of the Fourth, for St. Peter's Supremacy, answered. TO leave this and proceed in your Book, your business be∣ing as I told you above, to prove that Christ left his Church in a Monarchical State under the sole ordering of St. Pe∣ter at first, to be continued after his decease under the successive Bishops of Rome: It is strange to see how confusedly you go about it, but much stranger that you should begin with St. Den∣nis, and not with the Scripture. But I am afraid this Book it self, as well as the private Spirit that used to sense it, are now distast∣ed by you alike, and that it is look'd upon as a far more dan∣gerous than usefull Book, and so fittest to be set aside, where there is no absolute necessity of bringing it upon the Stage. For your Testimony from St. Dennis, you know my mind al∣ready,pag. 11. and we shall have occasion by and by to talk a little more about him.pag. 11. St. Irenaeus his Testimony had come in I think, a little better under your last Head among your Testi∣monies for the Ʋnity of the Catholick Church. But how it proves St. Peters Supremacy I cannot devise, except you can prove that St. Peter and St. Paul were but One Individual, and make them two into one Man, as (p. 76.) you have made Sco∣tus Erigena into two: Nor is there a word here about Suprema∣cy; all that Irenaeus saith is, [viz. Romae,] . Iren. c. Haer. l. 3. c. 3. Edit. Feuard. that St. Pe∣ter and St. Paul by their joint endeavours having founded that Church made Linus Bi∣shop there, &c. which place seems to (if it really do not) exclude St. Peters be∣ing Bishop there himself at all, so far is it from proving his Supremacy. But if it will not serve for this purpose, lets see what it will do for to prove the Catholick Church to be Monarchical, and no other than the Church of Rome. You found (say you) Irenae∣us [I'll venture to put in, saying, for without it or such a word
I must confess that I cannot make English out of your Period,] that it was of necessity that every Church should agree with the Church of Rome, &c. Your translation here I cannot admit, for convenire ad hanc Ecclesiam is surely to come up to this Church; the reason of which St. Irenaeus makes the potentior Principalitas (which I wonder you should omit in your Translation) the more powerfull Principality, the Supreme Civil Government, Rome then being the Imperial City of the World, and the Seat of the Senate and chief Judicatures, which must of necessity bring People, Christians as well as others, thither from all parts, and therefore make the Church of Rome a most visible and eminent Church, and so the fittest for St. Irenaeus his design against the Hereticks, when he had obliged himself to reckon up the Suc∣cession of one among the several Apostolical Churches of the World. I am not ignorant your now party are very earnest upon this place, and very desirous to have it believed that by potentior Principalitas here is meant the Dignity and Jurisdiction of the Church at Rome over all other Churches, and that therefore they should resort to her as to their Head and Mistress. But not to insist on the Inconsistency of such a sense of these words with all the accounts we have of this and the rest of the Apostolical Churches from the purest Antiquity (which I could easily shew, had I room here,) I onely ask them, what every Church was to go thither for? Was it for the Catholick Faith? that St.Traditionem igitur Apostoloru in toto mundo manifestatam in Omni Ec∣clesiâ adest perspicere omnibus qui, &c. Iren. con. Haer. l. 3. c. 3. Irenaeus assures us they, every one had at home, the Apostles after their Churches planted delivering to them the true Faith, which then was kept as he assures us, invi∣olably by them, and therefore no need to go to Rome for it. Was it for Discipline? There was as little need for their going about this as for the other, since in the se∣veral Churches which they planted, the Apostles ordained them Bishops, delivering to themIdem Ibidem. suum ipsorum locum Magisterii, their own place and power of Jurisdiction, which certainly was for Discipline. If they of your Party can invent any other business for their going thither, I do not question but that any of our Writers will be able to refell it, as soon as mentioned.
By this time you have taken leave of St. Peter, and are got to that, which you will begin again two pages hence, to prove the Primacy did not dye with Peter; for Method truly I cannot but admire you: but must however take your Arguments, as they come. Well then you say of St. Clemens, that under him a great dissention arising among the Corinthians,pag. 11. He wrote power∣full Letters [I wish you had told us how many, Eusebius that had almost as good opportunities as you, heard but of one, and we commonly think it was but one that he wrote on this account] to them, compelling them to Peace, repairing their Faith, and declaring what Tradition they had lately received from the Apostles, &c. This Testimony to give it its due, if it can but pass Muster, will do your business, this compelling looks as if a Generalissimo had to do about it, and this repairing their Faith shews as clear as the Sun, that the Bishops of Rome had the sole keeping of the Apostolical Faith and Tradition, that so if any Church had lost it, they might know whither to go to have it repaired; a much nobler Province than that of conserving the ancient Decrees of Gene∣ral Councils. But is all this certainly true? why did you not then give us the passages where St. Clemens is so brisk upon the Corinthians? no Sir, if you had, they must have been of your own making, for I am pretty certain there is no such behaviour in that letter, but the direct contrary. I have particularly perused it upon this very occasion, and can meet with nothing, but suasory Argu∣ments there, such as might have become any other Bishop as well as him; and therefore I must take the freedom to tell you, that I do not believe you have read this Epistle over, and that it was those you transcribed that imposed upon you, as you have done upon your Reader: and the same opinion I must have of your next Testimony from Tertullian, for could any but one that is a stranger to that particular Book (as well as to the rest of his Writings, as I believe I shall find you) quote him call∣ing the Bishop of Rome Pontifex Maximus, Bishop of Bishops, bonus Pastor and benedictus Papa, when the Bishop of Rome is not once mentioned in this Tract; but granting him to be aimed at there, is it not as plain that all these Titles are given purely in de∣rision [and therefore prove nothing to your purpose] by Tertullian now a Heretick,De Pudi∣citiâ. and in this Tract ridiculing the
discipline of the Catholick Church? You might with as good a face have cited St. Cyprian and the African Bishops in Council with him calling the Bishop of Rome Bishop of Bishops, for him I verily believe they meant there, tho' they did not name him: but that there was such a sting in the tail of these Bishops Pre∣face to their Council, as would have spoiled all your designs, and have blown away all your groundless talk about a Supre∣macy; for after they had resolved to give their own opinions concerning what they were met about, without judging others, or denying to communicate with those that might be of a diffe∣rent Judgment, and had said that none of them made himself Bi∣shop of Bishops, or attempted to fright any of their Brother-Bishops into an Obedience, or Submission to their Opinion, (by which expressions they more than seem to wipe the Bishop of Rome) they give the reason of this their temper and modera∣tion, because every Bishop—had his own Free-will,—Quando habeat omnis Episcopus pro licentiâ libertatis & potestatis suae, arbitrium proprium; tamque judicari ab alio non possit, quam nec ipse potest judicare. Sed expectemus universi Ju∣dicium Domini nostri Jesu Christi, qui unus & solus habet potestatem & prae∣ponendi nos in Ecclesiae suae gubernati∣one, & de actu nostro judicandi. Con∣cil. Carthag. Episcoporum 87. A. D. 256. apud Cyprianum. p. 229. Edit. Oxon. and could no more be judged by another [the Bishop of Rome himself not excepted,] than judge another [Bi∣shop] and upon this conclude for them∣selves, that they must all expect the Judg∣ment of. our Lord Jesus Christ, who alone had the power as of making them Bishops for the Government of his Church, so of calling them to an account for their dis∣charge of the care and employment he had placed them in. There is no one that hath read St. Cyprian and considered him, that will not grant I might easily bring twenty places as evident as this for the Equality and Independency of Bishops: But I must remember my task is to answer yours, not to write a Book on this subject.pag. 12. However this I could not omit there∣by to obviate your quotation from him as if he should say the Church of Rome is the Mother and Root of the Catholick Church,Cypriani Epistola. 45 Cornelio. Edit. Ox∣on. Pamel. 42. whereas his advice (as he tells Cornelius here) to those persons was, upon his having communicated to them the Legality of Cornelius his Ordination about which there had been so much dissention, to keep to Ʋnity the Mother and Root of the Catholick Church; and therefore to communicate with Cornelius who was
a Catholick Bishop, and not with the Schismaticks who did not keep to the Ʋnity of the Church, for the persuading of whom to such Unity he had sent among them Caldonius and Fortunatus. A man would guess from your saying that Cyprian goes on, and advises the Bishops of Numidia, &c. that this Epistle had been writ to them, but this is but another touch of your skill, and reading the Authours you quote. But now you are returned to St. Peter again,pag. 12. whom Eusebius (you say) calls , the Prince or Prolocutor, &c. which are betwixt you and me two very different things, that he  for his virtue or zeal's sake was their Prolocutor, I easily grant, but this does not prove him their Prince or Supreme, and you ought to remember that honourary Titles or Compellations are not to be rigidly taken, or stretched too far. As to your large Title and Testimony from the Epistle of Saint Athanasius to Marcus Bishop of Rome (where again you have lest St. Peter) upon which I suppose and that out of St. Bernard you ground your former Assertion that the Bishops of Rome are the Conser∣vers of the ancient Decrees of General Councils;pag. 12. I will be brief and tell you that it is a pitifull forged nonsensical piece of stuff, that you would here impose on us for the Venerable St. Athanasius. To wave Dr. Cave, and our own Writers, who make and prove it to be a forgery, your own greatDe Scri∣ptoribus Eccles. in Athanasio. Bellarmine and Baronius had the same opinion of it, the latter of whom, as you may see in Bellarmine (de Script. Eccl. in Gratiano) hath quite rui∣ned it. And here I cannot but admire that you should offer to put off such pitifull obsolete stuff in a Nation that hath so vast a number of learned men, and thereby to make your self ridiculous and contemptible, when such learned men as Baronius and Bellar∣mine, who had as much zeal as any for the Chair at Rome, and more learning than 40000—, had already baffled the for∣gery, and caused it to be hist off the stage. But such stuff it seems will down with you, and so doth that which is as bad, you may easily guess what it is I mean.
CHAP. XII. His Arguments from the Fourth Century for St. Peter's Supremacy refuted. WHAT you wanted of evidence from the three first Centu∣ries of the Church, which are far from affording you any Practice of such a Supremacy, or any hints of there being any such thing settled at Rome, but all speak the direct contrary to it, as I could very easily shew; you think to make up from little scraps of Fathers of the fourth and fifth Centuries, whose Rhetorical and honorary Expressions ought not to be taken in a strict literal sense, because otherwise it were easie to make them contradict themselves, nay altogether unavoidable to prevent it. The In∣stance shall be in St. Hilary whom you first quote.pag. 12. He tells us (say you) Christ gave St. Peter the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and that he built his Church upon him: and yet in another part of his WorksSuper hanc igitur Confessionis Pe∣tram Ecclesiae aedificatio est—Haec Fides Ecclesiae fundamentum est. Hilarius de Trinit. l. 6. this Fa∣ther makes the Confession it self (as most of the Fathers doe) the Rock, on which our Saviour built his Church. If you will then take the words you quote in a strict sense, and I take those that I quote in as strict and literal; St. Hilary I perceive is like to suffer betwixt us, and be made directly to contradict himself. As to the keys, that I'll answer anon. As we served St. Hilary, so we must Epiphanius about the Rock, whom you quote ma∣king St. Peter,pag. 13. the first of the Apostles, the firm Rock upon which God's Church was built. Him. Epiphan. adv. Hae∣res. L. 2. Tom. 1. p. 500. Edit. Petav. I quote al∣so making St. Peter's Confession (not his person) the foundation of the Catholick Church. I must confess that it is purely necessity that forces me, or any of our Church to shew these incoherences in the Fathers if taken in a ri∣gid literal sense, whereas allowing them a latitude befitting Homi∣ties, not Controversies, Rhetorical Amplifications, not close inartificial Discourses, they are consistent enough.
And so for St. Ambrose saying, Christ left St. Peter, as it were the Vicegerent or Deputy of his Love to us;pag. 13. in another place He makes this veryStatim loci non immemor sui pri∣matum egit—primatum Confessionis utique, non honoris, primatum Fidei non Ordinis. S. Ambros. de Incarnat. c. 4. Primacy, a Primacy of Confession, not of Honour, of Faith, not of Order; which expressions of his, toge∣ther with the perfect silence of Scripture and Prime Antiquity as to the thing, make me I must confess neither Proselyte to subscribe to,pag. 13. nor an Ad∣mirer of, what you quote from St. Hierome, that although God's Church was not so altogether founded upon St. Peter, but that the other Apostles also had a share with him in the Office [with your leave from your own Margin I translate, that all the Apostles were equal in the foundation, did equally receive the power of the keys, which expressions by the bye as they contradict your own Testimonies from St. Hilary and Epiphanius, so they ruine your pretensions for the Papal Supremacy of Jurisdiction] yet one is cho∣sen amongst the Twelve, that a Head being placed over all, occasion of Schism might be taken away. I will but urge one place of Scrip∣ture, why I think I ought not to subscribe to it, and that is Acts 8.14. Now when the Apostles which were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received [by the Ministery of Philip] the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John; which had Peter been their Head [their Prince, their General, as others call him] would have looked just as well, and not a jot less, as if the College of Cardinals upon any important business into France should delegate and send the Pope and the Dean of their College thither. But to pass these Objections and to admit St. Hierome's asser∣tion,pag. 13. it nor that from Optatus concerning the Prima Cathedra prove any thing more than a Primacy of Order, which our Church I believe will not deny to the Bishop of Rome; but that's not the thing will, or ever hath for these eight or nine hundred years contented them, they are for a Supremacy of Ju∣risdiction, as well as a Primacy of Order; their chief ground for which pretension is, as I take it, the investing St. Peter their Predecessour with the power of the keys, the thing I shall accor∣ding to my promise undertake here the consideration of. The dispute betwixt us about it is, not whether the keys were given to St. Peter, which no body of our Church did ever
deny, but whether he received them in his own person, for his particular use and trust exclusively to all the rest of the Apostles. That he did not receive them in his own person, is plain from, and the Judgment of, Antiquity; to you I need onely urge your own Testimony from St.—Cuncti claves regni coelorum ac∣cipiant, & ex aequo super eos Ecclesiae fortitudo solidetur. L. 1. adv. Jovin. c. 14. Hierome who makes the Apostles equally to receive the power of the keys, and to be equal in the foundation of the Catholick Church; for others sake I might urge St. CyprianƲnus pro omnibus loquens, & Ecclesiae voce respondens. S. Cyprian. Ep. 59. Edit. Oxon., who makes St. Peter the mouth of them all, and to make that Confession (upon which the keys were bestowed) in the name of the Church. St. AugustineAugust. Ep. 165. Edit. Frob. who is of the same opinion, and others, but I had rather recur to Scripture it self, where I think it is evident enough, that he did in the name, and for the use of them all re∣ceive those keys: This I prove from St. Matthew, who brings in our Saviour (within two Chapters from thatMatth. 16.13, 14, &c., wherein the dis∣course of our Saviour with his Disciples, and his gift of the keys to Peter is recorded) speaking to his Disciples as invested already with this power of binding and loosingS. Matt. 18.17, 18. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church, but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be to thee as an Heathen man and a Publicane; verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound, &c. and whatsoever ye shall loose—shall be loosed in heaven.: which place with me puts it past all doubt, that the rest of the Apostles were equally concerned in that speech of our Saviour's to St. Peter, and thereby had equal power. But if they will not allow this place to suppose a power already given, they will not dare to deny that it doth confer, so that if he had the power given to him particularly in the Sixteenth Chapter of this Gospel, they all have it now in the Eighteenth, and thereby the same Juris∣diction and Authority in the Church; which quite destroys all you have been hitherto about, which was indeed to prove St. Peter had the same Supremacy invested on him by our Saviour, which the Bishops of Rome do since from him exercise and en∣joy; But how little you have performed, I dare appeal to any indifferent person, to your own self, if you will but compare your papers and mine together: so that I might save my self the trouble to try what you say about that Primacy not dying
with Peter; but I will not, lest you should say, I left that part unanswered. CHAP. XIII. Arguments for the Primacy not dying with Peter answered, the Proofs out of St. Chrysostome for St. Peter's Supremacy fully confuted. YOUR Arguments for the Primacy not dying with Peter are few and which is worse nothing to your purpose,pag. 13. since they are far from proving what you desire: but you ought to have remembred that it is not onely your Task to prove that there was such a Primacy, and that it was not to die with St. Peter, but that it was to descend to the successive Bishops of Rome after his decease, and not to any of the Apostles, nor to the Bishops of Antioch. But since I perceive we shall find the first, to wit of proving the Primacy not to die with St. Peter, too many for you, it would be cruel to put you upon proving any of the other: for as to that proof out of the Epistle of St. Hierome to Demetrias, all it proves is that Innocentius was Anastasius's Successour in the Apostolical Chair at Rome: now if you cannot prove hence,pag. 14. either that this was the sole and onely Apostolical Chair, or that it was always the chief and governing Chair of the Catholick Church, every one will see that you alledged a place nothing to the purpose, having not a word of St. Peter in it; that you cannot shew either of them, is what I, to prevent your trouble of inquiring among your people about it, will make appear in a very few words. That the Apostolical Chair at Rome is not the onely Chair in the Church CatholickPercurre Ecclesias Apostolicas, apud quas ipsae adhuc Cathedrae A∣postolorum suis locis praesidentur.—proxima est tibi Achaia, habes Corinthum—Philippos, —Thessa∣lonicenses,—Ephesum—Romam. Tertull. de Praescript. contr. Haeret. c. 36. Edit. Junii Franekerae. 1597., Tertullian is demon∣stration; Run over (saith he) the Aposto∣lical Churches, in which the very Chairs the Apostles used are to this day presided in by the Bishops in their several places: and then he reckons Corinth and Philippi, and Rome it self among the rest.
That it was not originally the chief or governing Chair is as plain from the account we have in Eusc∣bius from—Pest servatoris Ascensum Pe∣trum; Jacobum & Joannem, quam∣vis Dominus ipsos caeteris praetulisset, non idcirco de primo honoris gradu inter se contendisse, sed Jacobum co∣gnomine Justum, Hierosolymorum E∣piscopum elegisse. Clemens apud Eu∣seb. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 1. Edit. Vales. Clemens his Sixth Book of Insti∣tutions; That after our Lord's Ascension, Peter, James and John, tho' preferred [not Peter alone] by our Lord above the rest of the Apostles, did not thereupon con∣tend among themselves for the first place of Honour, but chose James the Just Bishop of Jerusalem. Whose Chair I am sure this passage makes Primus Honoris Gradus, the chief Cathedra in the world. Having thus spoiled this your proof, your next will give me the less trouble,pag. 14. wherein St. Hierome tells Damasus, that in this miserable condition of the Eastern Churches being over-run by Heresies, he would stick to St. Peter's Chair and that Faith commended by St. Paul, &c. which passage would have cleared it self, had you but been so just as to have translated the very next words, which bring us St. Hierome's reason for this his resolution of slighting all Hereticks, and communicating with the Apostolical Chair at Rome, because he had in that Church been first made a Christian,—Inde nunc meae animae postu∣lans cibum, unde olim Christi vesti∣menta suscepi. Hieron. Ep. Damaso. and there∣fore thence would receive the spiritual food for his Soul. Had you Mr. Scl. but made St. Hierome's resolution your own, you had never fallen from the Catholick, Apostolical and Orthodox Communion of the Church of England unto that of—. In the mean time remember that you have not proved either a Primacy, or a Succession in it for the Bishops of Rome. In the next place, as tho' conscious to your self that you had done nothing hitherto, and that your Arguments for the Supre∣macy and then for the Succession were too weak, you fall again to the proving that St. Peter was Supreme, O incomparable Me∣thod! and are now resolved to doe it to purpose. But how? out of St. Chrysostome's Homilies and Comments; There is no one that hath looked, tho' but a little, into that Father, that will not smile at this your attempt. However you tell us, and no body will deny it, that he gives St. Peter extraordinary and noble Titles,pag. 15. that he calls him, Prime Leader of the Apostles, the head of Orthodoxy, the great High-Priest of the Church—the Pillar of the
Church—the Head of the Chorus of the Apostles, and says that He took the charge of the whole Church throughout the World, &c. I have onely this question to put to you, whether you take St. Chrysostome, as to these passages concerning St. Peter (the greatest as well as the clearest of which for your purpose I have here set down) in a strict literal sense? if you own it, as you seem to do by placing them here for such a purpose, I must then plainly tell you, that you doe a very great wrong to this Holy and learned Father, than whom no one perchance ever gave him∣self a greater liberty as to Rhetorical flights in his Homilies: since in other places he bestows Titles as high and as great as these on other Apostles, which if I take in the same sense that you do these, the Good Father is made inconsistent with himself, and to preach down-right falsities and contradictions. I'll instance onely in St. John and St. Paul; do but give your self the trouble to reade over his Preface to his Comments on St. John's Gospel, and tell me then, whether you do not find him among other large Elogies calling St. John the Pillar of all the Churches through∣out the world,—. Tom. 2. p. 555. ad fin. Edit. Savil. and telling us that He had the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. But for St. Paul, I am confident I can make even you confess that He mounts him above St. Peter himself, concerning whom you have furnished a Catalogue of such glorious Titles. Look but upon his Comment on that. Chrys. Tom. 3. p. 679. saying of St. Paul's [2 Cor. 11.28.] about his care of all the Churches (a passage by the bye that is more, than all your whole Church can patch together for St. Peter,) how he advances our Apostle; there he tells us, that St. Paul had the care and charge not of a single House, but of Cities, and Countreys, and Nations, yea of the whole world—. Orat. 5. contr. Jud. Tom. 6. pag. 364.: in another place that he was intrusted with the charge and Govern∣ment of the whole world, which is the very same Commission and as full and clear as that great one (which is your chief and best) that you quote for St. Peter of his having the charge of the Church throughout the world. And he does not onely make St. Paul  equal in dignity to St. Peter, but which is much more
advances him above him, as I undertook to prove.. D. Chrys. Orat. 9. Tom. 6. p. 97. Edit. Savil. No one (says he speaking of St. Paul) is greater than he, no nor equal to him neither, &c. By this time I hope I have made it evident, that St. Chryso∣stome will not doe your business, that he is as much, nay more against you, than for you; and that you and I ought both of us to own our several Quotations for Rhetorical Flights, since in ano∣ther—. D. Chrys. Tom. 8. p. 115. Edit. Savil. place, if you and I be obstinate a∣gainst any allowances for these passages; He spoils all we have both brought, when he tells us, That the Apostles were ap∣pointed by God to be Rulers, not [Tempo∣ral] Rulers, to receive each his Nation or City, but [Spiritual Rulers] intrusted in Common All together with the Care of [the Catholick Church throughout] the World. Therefore as all your Authorities from St. Chrysostome for St. Peter's Supremacy are out of doors,pag. 15. so that from St. Augustine comes too late having the same fault, as I could most easily shew, but do not think I need to trouble my self with it,pag. 15. or what the Popes Legates said at Chalcedon, that be∣ing to make a Man his own witness. Especially since that great Council had so little value for what they said that they did (notwithstanding all the Pope's oppo∣sition) decree that Constantinople should enjoy equal Privileges with old Rome, and which is more did declare,Etenìm antiquae Romae Throno QƲOD ƲRBS ILLA IMPE∣RARET jure Patres Privilegia tri∣buere, & EADEM CONSIDE∣RATIONE moti 150 Dei aman∣tissimi Episcopi S. Sancto novae Romae Throno AEQƲALIA PRIVILE∣GIA addixerunt, &c. Concil. Chal∣ced. cap. 28. Edit. Bever. Oxon. that as well old as new Rome had such great Privile∣ges bestowed upon them, purely because they were successively the Imperial Cities of the world.
CHAP. XIV. The ridiculous Ʋse of his Testimonies shewn, and his foolish Asper∣sions upon the Church of England wiped off. THese Testimonies, say you, I content my self withall, as suffici∣ent to shew,pag. 15. I have not gone rashly on without the advice of ancient Councellors, &c. It had been one further happiness for your Testimonies could they but have contented others as well, as you say they have done you; but how can that be expected, since they are (as I think I have fully shewn) far from being satisfactory, because altogether insufficient for the design you ga∣ther'd them for. In a word, you have neither proved that Christ left his Church in a Monarchical State, nor that St. Peter was made the sole Head and Dictator (as you word it) of the Catholick Church, nor lastly that the Bishops of Rome have, and do succeed him in such, a charge. Had you done these, you had done your cause service: to attempt and not to do it, is but to tell the World that it cannot be done; and what thanks you will have for that, I can very easily guess. All these Testimonies you sum up with St. Bernard,pag. 15. but since he lived far too late to be admitted a Witness about these things, and you might as well have quoted those two Monsters of Men Gregory the Seventh and Innocent the Third for those purposes; I must set him aside. No Body ought to wonder that you are pleased with what you have thus scraped together, or that you think you have found something, since every one likes his own best; how little reason you had to flatter your self, I think I have abundantly proved; but on you go, and now strongly imagine that the wise God and his Son—could leave (which is a little too bold with God, did leave, might surely serve you) none other at his As∣cension,pag. 16. &c. To be short, Sir, all this pleasant fancy is answer∣ed already, and all you have so carefully been about hitherto, proves but a Dream, a Delusion proceeding from your examining things by false Measures, and through a false Glass. But for all
this, This must be the Church you called Catholick in your Creed, and till now, did not so well mind, &c. Alas, Sir, that a Man of your parts and years should not before this have minded what Catholick meant, and where that Church was, when there's scarce a person of any tolerable sense in England, that cannot with a great deal of readiness give a sufficient account of these things: but here is the Mystery, you have found that the Church of Rome is this very Church mentioned in our common Creed, and that when we profess we believe the Holy Catholick Church, we mean tho' we do not mind it, the Church of Rome. It is to no purpose to endeavour to reclaim such Men as you, since you seem to have abandoned the common principles by which Mankind govern themselves, for else how could you dream of a part being the whole; a Member, the Body. That the Church of Rome was from the beginning reckoned a particular Church, I think is as plain as that Rome is in Italy; I have proved it so fully above, that I almost loath such a ridiculous subject of discourse.pag. 17. And your Authorities from Pacian and Cyril of Jeru∣salem are not one jot to your purpose, if you intend them to confirm that the Church of Rome is the Catholick Church; all that they say or prove being that Catholick is the Sirname of true Christians, and that every one should enquire for, and unite with the Catholick Church into whatsoever place he comes. Now what is this to the Church of Rome, here is no mention of her here, not a syllable to determine that she is the Catholick Church, to unite with which these two Fathers are carefull to ad∣vise. These things, you tell us, gave you some small encouragement to be∣take your self to that Communion, that was both Christian and Ca∣tholick, &c. for which very reason you needed not have left the Communion of the Church of England, which is both Christi∣an and Catholick. You ought to dislike Papist upon the same ground you dis∣like Protestant, and if Christian was too large for you, you need∣ed not to leave the Church of England to be both Catholick and Christian: the Church of England denominates her self from no particular Persons good or bad, but is a True Church having law∣full Pastors and a Catholick Faith.
You next say you cannot imagine why Protestants should so de∣cline the Title (of Catholick you mean) or suffer it with so much silence to be laid aside, unless it be,pag. 18. because it imports a Faith spread throughout the World, which they very well know, would be utterly impossible to prove their Protestant Faith ever was, &c. Whether this passage is more ridiculous or false, I must own that upon the sudden I cannot tell; if you mean here as you ought the Church of England, (as you must to be consistent with your self, having a good while ago cast off all the other Reformed Communions) nothing can be more false and ridicu∣lous, since twice a Day we use it constantly in our Service, and surely you will not be so extravagantly unreasonable to say we do not Mean or Pray for our selves, when we Pray for the Good Estate of the Catholick Church: So that our decling the Title, and suffering it with so much silence to he laid aside, must be put to the account of the grosser sort of Un∣truths. And we need not wonder that you would offer a false rea∣son for a false thing; our Faith and the Faith of all the Re∣formed Churches having been already proved to be Catholick; and therefore your utterly impossible to prove it to be a Faith spread throughout the World, must be put up on the same ac∣count. Nor is there ever a Member of the Church of England of any Learning that I ever met with, or heard of, that either declined the Title of a [Reformed] Catholick, or was not ready onely to profess, but also to prove that by being a Son of the Church of England he was a Member of a Catholick Church. As to what you add about the other Adjunct in our (ours I say of the Church of England, as well as yours at Rome) Creed, Apostolical, that you saw less reason for their claim to that, and to give them their due, they were more modest than much to in∣sist upon it, &c. This Sentence is Brass every bit of it; for if you mean the Church of England here, I am astonished to think you should have so little Conscience, or so little Mode∣sty to publish such a gross untruth in the face of a Church, that is so far from not insisting on the Title of Apostolical, that it denounces every person excommunicate that shall dare to say
the ChurchWhosoever shall hereafter affirm that the Church of England by Law established under the Kings Majesty is not a TRUE and an APOSTO∣LICAL CHURCH, teaching and maintaining the DOCTRINE of the APOSTLES, let him be Excommunicated pso facto, and not restored, but onely by the Arch-Bishop, after his Repentance and publick Re∣vocation of this his WICKED ERROUR. Can. 3. of the Synod in 1603. of England is not an Apo∣stolical Church, and calls such an affirma∣tion an impious Errour. But if you are resolved to carry things at this rate by brazening us down, 'tis to no purpose to contend with you; I must needs tell you that you might as well have pub∣lished to the World that the Church of England hath no Creed in her publick Ser∣vice, nor believes a Trinity, nor hath any Bishops to preside ov, her, as this of her neither having nor pretending to Apostolical Faith and Succession. If you include also the rest of the Reform∣ed Churches, you might easily know, that there is no thing they so much insist upon as the proving their Faith and Practices to be purely Apostolical, and therefore their Churches to be such; so that neither are they so modest as not to insist on their being A∣postolical; as to the want of Succession among them that you object against 'em, and they do not deny; you your self have furnished them with an answer to your Party from St. Ambrose's words,Non habent Petri haereditatem, qui Petri Fidem non habent. de Poenit. l. 1. c. 6. that they enjoy not the inheritance [or Succession] of Peter, who have not the Faith of Pe∣ter. But here you have a mind to make the Church of England to be of your opinion, that is, that the foreign Reformed Churches have no true Ministers, because those that come out of France with the Title of Ministers, are not allowed to exercise their Ministry, before they receive the Orders of the Church of England,pag. 19. &c. It is true, they are not allowed to have a Cure of Souls here with∣out the taking of Episcopal Orders, because it is expressly pro∣vided by Act of Parliament among us, that no one shall have such a Cure of Souls without Episcopal Orders, which Act you know was fully designed against our home Dissenters, who had opportunities of Episcopal Orders at home; not against them, who could not have them at home, with whom also we had nothing to do: But since no exception was made in the Act for them, the Church cannot dispense with an Act of Parliament in their favour: However that she allows theirs to be true tho' imperfect
Churches, is hence plain, because her Members in their Travels communicate with those Churches; which thing she would ne∣ver permit, had they no Ministry; it was the Practice of our Ex∣iles in France during the long Rebellion; and Dr. R. Watson hath lately put forth the most Learned and most Religious Bishop Cozin (who was one of those noble exiled Confessors) his Defence of their communicating there with Geneva rather than Rome. So that your Argument fails you also here. CHAP. XV. More of his foul Aspersions on the Church of England exposed and confuted. YOU are next resolved to have a little fling at the Church of England about her Orders, which you say,pag. 19. they [of that Church] very much endeavour to prove, and fain would have confest to be [received from] undoubted Bishops of the Church of Rome: But here your heart failed you, and this is all you have to say against our Orders, which is nothing at all, since we are much abler, and as ready to prove the Legitimacy of our Orders, as you can those of your Pope himself: this is to bark, when you dare not come near to fasten, but if you have a mind to shew your parts upon this subject, do but undertake and answer Arch-Bishop Bramhals Confutation of the Nags-head Ordination, &c. and I'll do, as I hear you have, renounce my Orders. But Alas Sir I might as well put you upon carrying Westminster Abby to Putney, as upon the Answering that Ʋnanswerable Book. After the civil hint that the Church of England hath no true Orders, you are for making her amends, out of Reverence to her, by proving that she is a very Nonsensical foolish Church, which you attempt by two small (you have a kindness still for her, or else we might have had four, perhaps ten great) Observations. Your first is, That this reduces the Catholick Church into a nar∣row corner of the World—Toto divisos orbe Britannos,1 Obs. pag. 19. and as small a handfull in that narrow Corner, &c.
But pray Mr. Sclater how are we got hither? What is this, This, that reduces the Catholick Church, &c. Hath the Church of England denied the foreign Reformed Churches to be true Churches? Pray shew us where? But suppose she had, this will not prove that the Catholick Church is reduced into this nar∣row Corner of the World, except you shew, that she hath al∣so denied the Church of Rome, and those Churches that submit to her to be true Churches. Nor this neither will not confirm your Observation, supposing the Church of England had rejected both the foreign Reformed, and Ʋnreformed Churches out of the Catholick Church; since you have surely heard of such a Church, as the Large Greek Church under the Four Patriarchs, of the Russian Church, of the vast Aethiopian Church, of the Armenian, and of the Nestorians to omit others. Have you or can you prove that the Church of England hath excluded all these al∣so from being Parts or Members of the Catholick Church? If you cannot, how doth she confine the Catholick Church here, or what contradiction is she guilty of, that abhors the thought of such a thing as you would fasten upon her. I cannot refrain shewing a just resentment here, and there∣fore must tell you, that this your Observation is the most disinge∣nuous, and the most foolish that I ever met with in my Life, and that I could never have suspected that any Man that had common sense, and pretended to Conscience, could have been guilty of so foul a thing, had I not met with it in this Book. And just such stuff as this is the Remark in this Observation, upon our Church, that she is pleased in order to avoid the Word Ca∣tholick, to call it an Ʋniversal Church, &c. Who would expect that a Man that hath been a Minister in our Church these Thir∣ty Years, that hath used our Service perchance a Thousand times, should make such a strange Remark; hath our Church (as you say she hath) in order to avoid the Word Catholick, struck it out of that Translation of the Apostles Creed, which she appoints in her Liturgy? Hath she struck it out, and put in Ʋniversal in the Four places it used to occur in in the Creed of St. Athanasius? Is it gone out of the Nicene Creed she appoints? Pray get some Body to look those Three Creeds for you. A Man would be∣lieve
you had not seen a Common-Prayer-Book these Thirty Years, or pass a much severer Sentence upon you. Doth not the Church of England command its Daily Ʋse in the General Collect, which we daily put up for the good Estate of the Catholick Church? And further she is so far from altering or endeavouring to avoid, as you most falsly would observe she doth, the Word Catholick,See Bishop Sparrows Collection of Canons, &c. that whereas in the Injunctions of King Edward the Sixth, 1547. the Form of bidding the Common-Prayers [before Sermon] begun thus; You shall Pray for the whole Congregation of Christ's Church, and, &c. in those of Queen Elizabeth, 1559, and in the 55th of the Canons Ecclesiastical of the Synod under King James the First, 1604. the Word Catholick is put in, and every Mi∣nister is commanded to begin his bidding of Prayer in these very words, Ye shall Pray for Christs Holy Catholick Church, &c. Nay you your self used the term Catholick (while you continued, and as a Member of our Church) on last Palm-Sunday at Putney Church, or else you broke our Church Laws: So that I can∣not now avoid the asking you your self what you now think of this your Remark, and whether you had not saved your self a disparagement, had you had the good fortune not to have put it down. You have a Second Remark much akin to the First, in which you profess you can no more tell [how she can be the Catho∣lick Church] than she is able to find her self in the innumerable huddle of ten times Ten more Dissenters, Dissemblers, and Indifferents,pag. 19. than her number is able to make, &c. How you come to know the number of those that hold Communion with the Church of England to be so very small, is matter of wonder to me; but if I should say that your Calculation is most intolerably false, I am sure you cannot disprove me, since I am certain I have truth and the common Judgment of all unprejudiced Men on my side, that Calculating the numbers of the several Parishes thro' England, there are one with another Ten (I may I believe safely say Twenty) times more that hold Communion with the Church of England than dissent from it: As for Dissemblers and Indiffe∣rents how you come to know Mens Hearts so well is owing more to your new than old Religion, which would have taught you more Prudence about such things.
After you have come off so wretchedly with your first Ob∣servation, no Body will expect wonders from your second, which is,2 Obs. pag. 20. That you should have had the better Opinion of this hand∣full (as you ridiculously call the Church of England) if their Faith had been conformable to the Faith of those Bishops from whom their Bishops had their Mission, &c. That our Bishops have their Mission from Rome, is what we utterly deny, that they were, some of 'em, in the beginning of the most necessary Reformation ordained by those that held with the Church of Rome in her corrupt Faith and Practices is what we do not deny. This however we say cannot prejudice our Reformation, since if there were Errours fit to be thrown out of our Church, you your self (I am sure your Learned Men) will grant that no Ordination can prejudice or hinder such a Rejection of Errours. That there were such Errours crept in which ought to be cast out, and were at our Reformation, is what our Church-Men a Hundred times over have invincibly proved. As to the Rule you bring from St. Ambrose that they enjoy not the Inheritance of Peter,pag. 20. who receive not the Faith of Peter, we are very ready to join issue with you, or any of your Church upon it, and I question not before you and I part on this subject, to ruine the Papal and Roman Succession by your own Rule, to wit, by proving that they have receded from the Faith of Peter and the whole Primitive Church. We readily own that a true and Apostolical Mission,pag. 20. Commission and Ordination are considerable particulars, and are as ready any time to assert that our Church hath them, and to prove it against you at any time, if you have a mind to undertake this point against her.
CHAP. XVI. The Doctrine of the Church of England concerning the Eucharist put down. Mr. Scl.'s Reasons from Scripture for Transubstantiation answered. HAving traced you hitherto, and found all your Attempts vain, and your Reasons to no purpose, which you took so much pains to scrape together, to have proved that our Saviour Christ left his Catholick Church in a Monarchical State under a Particular Vicegerent, and that that Vicegerent was the Bishop of Rome, and his Church the Catholick Church. And having shewn all your At∣tacks against, and Remarks upon the Church of England to be very vain, extremely abusive, and extravagantly ridiculous; I have now onely your last, your great Reason to examine, where∣in you make an effort to prove, that her Faith concerning the Eucharist is contrary to that of the Catholick Church. If you could have proved this, I must confess your forsaking our Communion would have been much more reasonable: and therefore I question not, but that as you have mustered up a∣bundance of Authorities, so you have done all you can to make them speak and declare against us: but to how little purpose you have made all this noise and ado about this point also is what I shall quickly see. Before I enter on your particular proofs, I have a fresh com∣plaint to make, that you have not used herein that Ingenuity, that would have become a Scholar; one might very rationally have expected that as your Intentions were to prove against the Church of England, that her Faith was as to the Eucharist false and cor∣rupt, so you would have set down what that her Faith is. This would have looked like fair and ingenuous dealing, first to have put down her Faith about the Eucharist, and then to have shewn, how contrary it was to Scripture, and to the unanimous Consent of Antiquity. If you reply to this my Complaint, that her Faith is so well known that you needed not put it down together, but that you have occasionally done it up and down these Au∣thorities;
I must tell you that by the account you give of it occasionally, one would be persuaded that it is far from being so well known: I am sure that slender account, or rather hints that you so often intersperse about it, are utterly false and very foolish: so that if any one should take an account of our Churches Faith from you, and whom can they better take it from than one that was so lately a Minister among us, they must believe that we hold the Eucharist to be mere figures, mere representations, and bare signs; for that is the most you allow us to make of it that I can meet with in your Book; all which how far it is from Truth I shall quickly shew you. Well then, since you had not the Ingenuity to put down an Account of the Church of England's Faith about the Eucharist, I must, that so I may the better examine the Proofs you bring, and any one may compare the Authorities you quote, and our Faith together, and thereby more impartially judge, and more readily discover, whether Antiquity fairly laid down speak for, or against us. Concerning this Sacrament the Church of England in her 28th Article of Religion delivers her Opinion thus, The Supper of the Lord is not onely a sign of the love that Christians ought to have among themselves one to another; but rather it is a Sacrament of our Redemption by Christ's death. Insomuch that to such as right∣ly, worthily, and with Faith receive the same, the Bread which we break is a partaking of the Body of Christ, and likewise the Cup of Blessing is a partaking of the Bloud of Christ. After which having declared her self against Transubstantiation as re∣pugnant to plain Scripture, and to the nature of a Sacrament, and [against any Corporal Presence of Christ's Natural Flesh and Bloud in the Declaration about kneeling at the end of our Communion-Ser∣vice in our Liturgy,] she goes on in this Article to declare that The Body of Christ is given, taken and eaten in the Supper, onely after an heavenly and spiritual manner: and that the Mean whereby the Body of Christ is received and eaten in the Supper, is Faith; which last expressions exclude the wicked from partaking of Christ's Body, and allow them barely the Sign, or outward part of the Eucharist. In the Publick Catechism in the Liturgy, having taught her Catechumens that there are two things in each of the Sacraments,
the outward Sign, and the inward spiritual Grace, she teaches them to answer that the outward part of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is Bread and Wine, and that the inward part or thing signified, is the Body and Bloud of Christ, which are verily and indeed taken and received by the Faithfull in the Lord's Supper. These passages are sufficient to shew that our Church holds a real, but not carnal, a Spiritual and Heavenly but not Corporal, Participation of Christ's Body and Bloud, which tho' locally and na∣turally in Heaven, is yet after a Mystical and Supernatural way communicated to the Faithfull not by the mouth of the Body, but by that of Faith. Thus much for her Sentiment concerning this Sacrament,pag. 20. now I must try your Reasons against it. You tell us that you had been a long time greatly concerned for the Interpretation of but five small words of our Saviour, &c. The result of your concern I sup∣pose was that those five words (I doubt we shall find more than five, or double five concerned in this business) are to be ta∣ken in a literal sense; and that which you offer for proof of it is this. First, Because this Sacrament was his last Will and Testa∣ment, which ought not to be worded obscurely or doubtfully to prevent quarrels and divisions. Secondly, Because this Will is re∣peated by so many of his Apostles without the least variation or caution against the literal sense. Thirdly, Because it was an Oath or Sacrament, a Testament, a Precept, an Article of Faith, or a Po∣sition to continue in the Church for ever, the true Interpretation where∣of, if Catholick Tradition have not given us, it is likely it will ne∣ver be agreed on. These are the strength of what you say,  to the first of which I answer that this Will was neither worded obscurely, or of doubtfull interpretation; that there are Divisions about them is not owing to the words, but to the perverse humours of some Men, whose quarrels no plainness is able to prevent.  To your second I say, that it is utterly false that our Saviour's Will, or the Institution of this Sacrament was repeated by so many of his Apostles (allowing Mark and Luke the name of Apostles, tho' you know it is very unusual) without the least variation: to convince you of which, do but look upon this Parallel Account that I here send you out of them, and then consider what reason you had, or with what face you could affirm as you do.
St. Matth. c. 26.26, &c. —And said, take eat, This is my Body, —drink you all of this, for This is my Bloud of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the Remission of Sins. St. Luke 22.19, &c. —saying, This is my Body, which is given for you: this doe in remembrance of me: —saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my Bloud, which is shed for you. St. Mark 14.22, &c. —And said, take eat, This is my Body, —and they all drank of it, and he said unto them, This is my Bloud of the New Te∣stament, which is shed for many. St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.23, &c. —and said, take, eat, This is my Body, which is broken for you, this doe in remembrance of me. —saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my Bloud, This doe ye, as oft as you drink it in remembrance of me. For the other part of your second Argument, that the Apostles put down no caution against the literal sense, the reason is evident enough, because there was no need of it, since the Words neither then, nor now can be taken in a literal sense, as I shall quickly shew you; and since nothing was more common to the Jewish Mode of speaking, than to give the name of the thing it self to that which is the sign of it: As is most plain from the Paschal Lamb its being soDeuteron. 16.2, 5, 6. Matth. 26.17. Luke 22.7, 11. often in both Testa∣ments called the Passover, whereof all know it was but the sign; fromGen. 17.13. Cir∣cumcision its being called the Covenant, when it was but the sign of it: nay nothing is more common among us, than to say such an one lives at the Lion, the Bear, the Ship, the Bible, which yet any one, that talks with us, knows that we mean bearely the signs of them, without any Caution gi∣ven, or requisite against taking us in a literal sense. 3. Your third Argument I do not well understand, since an Oath, a Precept, an Article of Faith, and a Position are very odd terms to express this Sacrament by: and it is the first time I
ever heard it called, or knew it to be an Article of Faith, ha∣ving ever before thought it to be a divine Rite or Practice that was by Christ's Command to continue ever in the Church: but to pass over such trifles; We do affirm, that Catholick Tradi∣tion hath given us the true Interpretation of these words, which is, that they are to be taken in a Figurative sense, and that by Body here is meant—hoc est Corpus meum dicen∣do, id est Figura Corporis mei. Ter∣tull. c. Marc. l. 4. c. 40. Fi∣gura, as Tertullian, Signum, as St.Non dubitavit dicere, Hoc est Corpus meum, cum Signum daret Cor∣poris sui. D. August. contr. Adamant. c. 12. Edit. Basil. 1569. Au∣gustine, and many more acquaint us, as we shall by and by prove. In the mean time I must prove that these words, This is my Body, cannot be taken in a li∣teral sense; which our Enemies them∣selves of your Party will grant me, if I prove that the THIS mentioned here is Bread. That it was is thus cleared, That which our Saviour took into his hands (when he was about the Institution) was Bread; that which he blessed was the same thing that he had taken into his hands; that which he brake was the same thing that he had blessed; that which he gave them when he said it was his Body, was that which he had broken; But that which he broke, which he blessed, which he took into his hands was Bread: therefore it was Bread, which he gave his Disciples, and by THIS is meant This Bread. This Induction is so fair and so clear, that I am sure you can∣not evade it: but farther, If by the This here is not meant the Bread, pray let us know what it was then exclusive to Bread, and which is more; how the Bread could be by the words, This is my Body, converted into the Body of Christ, if the Bread was not mentioned here, nor meant by the word This. This matter and Argument is so demonstrative, that I cannot but stand amazed that men who pretend to Reason can refuse it; I could urge this Argument much farther, but will content my self with these few Remarks. First, That tho' our Saviour did not say plainly, This Bread is my Body, yet he said according to St. Luke and St. Paul,Luke 22.20. 1 Cor. 11.25. This CUP is the New Testament in my Bloud; which passage doth fully determine, that the Bread was as much meant in the This is my Body, as the Cup was in the
This is my Bloud,atth. 26.28. ark 14.4. in St. Matthew and St. Mark. Secondly, That our Saviour himself calls the Wine after he had consecrated it, the Fruit of the Vine, Matth. 26.29. and St. Paul does not less than three times call the Bread after Consecration1 Cor. 11.26, 27, 28. Bread; which places are evidence enough, that our Saviour neither destroyed the Substances of the Elements, nor that St. Paul, or any of the Faithfull ever believed that he had. Places I could bring enough out of the Fathers to confirm that by This they understood this Bread, but must not to avoid being tedious, one however out of your Fathers I cannot omit, which as it proves what I say, so it does prove you to be not onely a very excellent Translatour, but a very honest sincere Man. It is from your Rupertus Abbas Tuitiensis (who lived in the twelfth Century) whose words are these as you cite them, Hoc [inquit] id est hic Panis est Corpus meum, sive Caro mea, which words you thus translate,pag. 81. This (saith he) is that, This is my Body, this is my Flesh. A Translation so abominably false, and so intolerably ridicu∣lous, that when I was at School, I would have disdained to have been guilty of such pitifull stuff: look at it again Mr. Scla∣ter, fetch down your Dictionary, and try again at it, and see whether you that translate but at this rate, be fit to set up for a Book-writer, and a Manager of Controversies, and a Balancer of the Merits of the two Churches. I am ashamed that any Man our Church should either have so little brains or so little hone∣sty: but to let your Translation alone, Rupertus does confirm my reason for the determining This to mean This Bread, when he says, This [saith our Saviour] that is, This Bread is my Body or my Flesh.
CHAP. XVII. His false Slander of our Church, and his foolish Observation about Judas shewn. I Must next consider what you have of Argument in your Preface, where you would have us believe that the sixth Chapter of St. John's Gospel is to be taken in a literal sense; but since you were not at leisure to offer any Proof for it, I need spend no time to answer: one thing I must examine there, and that is the danger you said you must live and die in, under the de∣nial, or but doubting of so great a Truth,Pref. in Communion with those that said, How can this Man give us his Flesh to eat? And doth our Church say so, that our Saviour cannot give us his Flesh to eat? How is it then, that in the Prayer [We do not presume, &c. she orders her Communicants to pray to our Gratious Lord to grant to them, so to eat the Flesh of his dear Son Jesus Christ, and to drink his Bloud, that their sinfull Bodies may be made clean by his Body, and their Souls washed through his most pretious Bloud, &c. That in the Prayer of Consecration the same Petition is put up, to omit any more places? This, Sir, is very provoking, and highly unjust, that a Man, who hath perchance a hundred times used these very Prayers, who did last Palm-Sunday use them, reade them when he administred the Eucharist to the Parishioners of Putney, should in the face of the Sun, in our own Nation, in our own Language publish so gross and Ʋntruth, and affix so false a Scandal upon our Church as to say, she affirms our Saviour cannot give us his Flesh to eat. If these and such be the Fruits of your Conversion, sit anima mea cum Philosophis rather than with such Christians. Do not think to bring off your self with saying that our Church denies that any one can eat the Flesh of Christ in that sense which those people meant it that spoke these words: that will not doe your business, since that Church whereof you now are, for all its belief of Transubstantiation, abhors the Capernai∣tical
sense of these words as much as we, and are ready to say with us that our Saviour cannot, and does not give us his Flesh to eat in that carnal, sensual, abominable manner that these Capernaites talked of. Your next Observation in your Preface that Judas was one of the Disciples that went back and walked no more with our Sa∣viour, is I must confess a rarity, which hath escaped, I be∣lieve, all our Commentatours: but will your pretty (and spitefull) Observation hold?Matth. 26.23, 25. how is it then that we meet with Judas in our Saviour's dish the very night before he was Crucified? I know no other fetch that you can have to save your ingeni∣ous Observation besides that of a Gentleman, who in a dispute holding that Abraham was justified by Faith, and being pressed by the Opponent with that of St. James that Abraham was justi∣fied by Works, saved his bacon by saying that there were perhaps two Abrahams: and so you may gravely say, that there were two Judas Iscariots. CHAP. XVIII. His Authorities from Galatinus, and the Spurious Liturgies for Tran∣substantiation rejected, and the reason of it. His railing and Absurdities about these and other Spurious Pieces examined and exposed. NOW we are come to your main Battel, where, like as the Turks are said to have had a sort of Souldiers called, as I remember, Asaphi, whom they set in the front of their Bat∣tel to dull and evigorate their enemies by their cutting down of these dull Souls, so you have placed Galatinus and his Rabbins in your front to hinder your Adversaries falling with too much stomach upon your main Body. You saw it necessary how∣ever in your Preface to bespeak your Reader in favour of Gala∣tinus,Preface that he was always accounted a very learned Man. You had done well to have quoted some people on your side here, because your bare word will not pass with me, nor with any one else, that will take the pains to reade our two papers;
I am sure he shewed neither Learning nor Honesty in those pas∣sages you quote from him,See Dr. Cave's Charto∣phylax in Galatino. p. 336. since he stole them from Porchetus Salvaticus without owning in the least whence he had them: and for the Passages and Rabbins themselves, it is the Opinion of Learned Men, that there were neither such Rabbins, nor such Works of theirs as to these things, but that they are the Pious Frauds of Porchetus and others: So that I need not trouble my self, but set aside this forged stuff; your calling them Prophetick,pag. 21. and abusing the place of St. John of the Spirits blowing where it listeth, &c. would in any other sort of People have been call∣ed Enthusiasm, and downright Fanaticism. And truly you put in as fair for a touch of the latter as your veriest Enemy could desire, when instead of Argument you vent your Anger, and instead of reasoning fall into downright railing against the Impious Ambition, and unlimitted appetite of rule of the Private Spirit, which would fain soar above the Heavens, and make it self Lord even of the Writings of God also. Her pri∣vate Glosses, imperious Sentiments, and contradictory Interpretations, like the Victorious Rabble of the Fishermen of Naples, riding in Tri∣umph, and trampling under their feet Ecclesiastical Traditions, De∣crees, and Constitutions, Ancient Fathers, Ancient Liturgies, the whole Church of Christ, &c. But pray, Sir, if your Catholick fit be over, who is it that hath or own this Private Spirit you have been venting so much Spleen against? If you designed it for a Character of the Church of England, which I believe you did; I am obliged to tell you that it is a most impudent, and a most false Slander. Do but look into that Canon of our Church, which you your self quoted,See the Canon it self, and the Remarks above. p. 2. and those little Remarks I made upon it, do but peruse again, what I said above, as to our Church tying up, and obliging all her Members by her Arti∣cles without leaving any of those things to a Private Spirit: and then look at what your bitter Pen hath here vented; if it do not make you eat up these Cholerick Nonsensical Words, and re∣cant this Scandal upon an Apostolical Catholick Church, I must then tell you that you left common Honesty, and the Church of England at the same time.
But you go in your virulent strain, and tell the world that it is not likely; those who upon their own bare Authority, and private Sentiments reject what Authors they please—should with much kindness lissen to the Ancient Liturgies of Saint Peter, Saint James the Elder, Saint James the Younger, and Saint Matthew, or value the Testimonies of Saint Dionysius Saint Paul's Scholar, Saint Martialis [you should have added, Saint Dionysius his companion into France,] Clemens Romanus, Ignatius, Andreas, &c. they must suffer too. The Servant is not better than his Ma∣ster, &c. who would not guess by this stinging farewell, that the Learned Men of the Church of England had served our Sa∣viour as bad as they have done these Liturgies, Dennises, Mar∣tials, Andreases, &c. and that they had denied him as well as them. I must tell you, Mr. Sclater, that your Book is one of the most disingenuous, that I ever met with, and that this passage de∣serves much severer Language than I shall bestow upon it: but your Conclusion of it is just as true, (and not one jot more) as that of our rejecting what Authors we please upon our own bare Authority and private Sentiments: which I shall now examine, and go through the Authors, and Liturgies you put down. For the Liturgies then first you tell us you do not know why these Ancient Liturgies should be rejected, &c. to which I can an∣swer you as briefly, that I do believe you that you do not; but if you would take a little Heretical advice, I could direct you to those who might inform your Ignorance herein; but I believe you are too angry at me before this time to take my advice. Against the Liturgies I have these things to urge first, An Ʋniversal Silence concerning them for ma∣ny Ages of the Church, that of Saint James being the first heard of, and that not till after the Fifth General Council, being first mentioned in the Council held in Trullo, which was under Justinian Rhinotmetus in the Sixth Century. Eusebi∣us, than whom no one was more accurate and carefull to find out the Writings of those famous Persons whom he speaks of in his History, among all the Catalogues he reckons up of the particular Apostles and First Fathers, does not make the least mention of any of these Liturgies. All Saint Jerome's care in his time could not furnish us with one Syllable about
such Liturgies; which reasons together with those taken from the Liturgies themselves have satisfied all reasonable Men that there were no such genuine things. No Body now (I mean to Learned Man) believes Saint Peter's Liturgy, the de∣monstrative Arguments against which are many, it makes men∣tion of Saint Cyprian and Cornelius the Bishop of Rome, it prays for the Patriarch, and the very Religious Emperours. I could furnish you with more intrinsick Arguments against it and against the rest which labour under the same or worse Absurdi∣ties out of your own (to omit our) Authors; theNouvelle Bibliotheque des Auteurs &c. des Liturgies Faussement Attri∣bué es aux Apôtres. p. 21, 22, 23, 24. A. Pars. 1686. present Learned and Ju∣dicious Sorbonist Du Pin hath gathered enough against it and the rest to prove them all suppositious: if you have a mind to shew any parts in this sort of Learning, I do not question, but the worthy Doctor, or some one here in England for him, will give all due satisfaction in the point, but alas, Sir, you seem to me; who judge of you by your Book, to be far from able to meddle in such matters. One Liturgy of yours he hath not encountred, that of Saint James the Elder, not because he had nothing to object against it, but because there was no such Liturgy to be objected against: but you may pass for a Discoverer, and a bringer to light of Ancient Authors, and though you be denied a place with Balu∣zius and such, yet no Body can deny you one with honest An∣nius Viterbiensis. After all in defence of your self, some Body wiser than some Body having I suppose put it into your head, that these same Liturgies were not altogether unquestionable, you gravely tell us in your Preface that it was not your business to assert the Au∣thors of them, &c. To which I answer,Preface. that it is very well for you that it was not, since I am sure you are a very un∣fit Man for any such thing; so that now you your self are content that these Liturgy-Authors should suffer as well as their Master. You say next,pag. 28. Preface. that it is enough for your pur∣pose, if they be allow'd of that Antiquity, that may give them some competent interest in Tradition; to be short with you, they are not allowed any Authority, since not onely ours, but your own Authors, Du Pin for example, have proved them in∣vinciblement,pag. 22.
(as he words it) supposititious and Novel, either of which is enough to ruine them, and hinder their having their place in Tradition. These things are sufficient to shew that I need not say one word to your Authorities for Transubstantiation out of these forged Liturgies: I will onely remark that you begin very unluckily with them,pag. 28. and for your first, Blessed God, by whom we are vouchsafed to change the immaculate Body of Christ, and his precious Bloud, &c. I would fain know into what the Priests were vouchsafed to change the Immaculate Body of Christ, and his Bloud. This is Transubstantiation with a vengeance. I thought your business had been to prove, that the Bread is changed into the Body, the Wine into the very Bloud of Christ, but here for a leading Card, the Body and Bloud of Christ are changed into Bread and Wine, or something else. Well for a Man that keeps to his Text I know no Body like you, and for supererogating no Body can come near you. I question not but if you had a mind, you could very easily prove, that the Transubstantiation is to be from Body to Bread, not from Bread into Body; but this it is to be a Read Man, when a Man can with a wet Finger prove either way; and I verily believe you can as easily do the one as the other, and bring as many Fa∣thers for the one as for the other: But farewell Liturgies, I must now inquire about Saint Dionysius, against whom you say we have such pitifull Objections.pag. 29. Had you offered any reason for your calling them pitifull Objections, it would have looked something like a Scholar, but he that catcheth you at that, may have you for nothing: So that since you will not let me answer you, I must say what I can for the Objections against Saint Dennis his being a Writer. Eusebius is as much a Witness for us here, as against the Liturgies, though he speaks of Saint Dennis the Areopagite, yet he gives not any hint of any Writings of his, a thing he is always so carefull about, when he speaks of any of those venerable Ancients. Saint Hierome is as silent as to any Writings of his: But that which is more than these two Negative Argu∣ments, the first Men that produced these supposititious Wri∣tings of Saint Dionysius were Hereticks, and the first time
was in the sixth Century at a Conference held in the Emperour Justinian's Palace betwixt the Catholicks and the Severian Hereticks who produ∣ced them but as dubious or probable at most (sicut suspicamini,Illa enm Testimonia quae vos dicitis Dionysii Areopagitae te, unde potestis ostendire vera esse, sicut suspicamini: si enim ejus erant, non potuissent latere Beatum Cyrillum quando & Beatus Athanasius, si pro certo scisset ejus fu∣isse, ante omnia in Nicaeno concilio testimoia protulisset adversus Arii-Blasphemias Collatio CP. in T. 4. Con∣cilir. p. 176. Edit. Cossart. as the Catho∣licks told them) but were rejected by the Catholick Bishops upon the very same reasons I have urged against them: as I urged that Eusebius would have known of them, had there been any such Writings, so They urge that St. Athana∣sius would have made use of them at Nice against Arius; as I urged that St. Hierom would have mentioned them, so they urge that St. Cyril [of Alexandria] would have known of them. But besides these sufficient reasons, the Books them∣selves are the greatest Evidence of all, they being writ in a style quite different from the Apostolical Times, and treating of matters after such a different manner, and of things un∣known to those times: if you desire to see these things proved and instanced in, do but look into one of your own Writers the Learned Sorbonist I have mentioned above;Du Pin's N. Bibliothe∣que, p. 89, 90, 91, &c. and then tell me, how you could call these Arguments pitiful Objections, which are perfect Demonstrations of these Writings of St. Di∣onysius their being forged, so that we must set St. Denys aside, and call in his Companion St. Martial. But before we try him, I would fain know what you men∣tioned him for, you make no use of him or his Epistles in your Book: this is such a strange piece of hardiness of you, that I cannot but wonder at it; Methinks you had business enough on your hands to prove the Genuineness of your other Authors and Liturgies, and needed not to have brought in him by head and shoulders hither, whom I will soon dispatch; now he is here, and tell you that there was no such Man in those Times, and therefore no Epistles of his.Nouvelle Bibliothe∣que, &c. p. 496. Du Pin hath put the true Martial [if there ever were really such a Person] in the third Century, but for the Epistles (whichIn Mar∣tiali Le∣movicensi ap. Lib. de scriptor. E. Bellarmine had rejected at spurious long ago) he sayes, that no body doubts their being supposititious, which is a great mistake in this Learned Man, since you, Mr. Sclater, believe the contrary concerning them.
And truly I know not how to bring the honest Doctor off, un∣less his meaning was, that no body that had any learning or sense did, as I verily believe he meant, so that you may, if you will, tell him, as the late Hierusalem Synod have in effect the famous Monsieur Claude, that they are not ignorant and un∣learned. Having dispatch'd St. Martial, St. Clemens Romanus is next put up, whose genuine famous Epistle to the Corinthians we do with all Antiquity admit and admire; the doubtfull frag∣ment of the second Epistle withHist. Ec∣cles. l. 3. c. 38. Edit. Vales. Eusebius and Antiquity we cannot admit to the same honour the other enjoyes, howe∣ver we'l not quarrel about it, since I see nothing out of it in Controversy betwixt us: the Constitutions are the things in question among us, against the genuineness of which (tho' you like your self offer not a syllable of Argument here for them) I have this to say, thatHist. Ec∣cles. l. 3. c. 38. Eusebius rejects them in ex∣press terms as spurious, if they be the same work that in his time went under the name of Doctrina Apostolorum, as the O∣pinion of some is; but tho' these are not the same book, yetHist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 38. Eusebius doth ex Consequenti condemn them, when he ad∣mits of nothing either as genuine or probable besides the two Epistles. We have the same silence in St. Hierom as to these Constitutions, and therefore an Argument from him against them;Photii Bib∣lioth. num. 1.12. but without either of them, I think it is enough to say they are infected with Arianism, to omit other faults, as Photius long since charged upon them, and therefore can∣not be the genuine work of Clemens Romanus. S. Ignatius his seven genuine Epistles we receive with all readiness, so that he does not suffer among us as well as his Master. But for your next Author Andreas, I must confess I am mightily at a loss, I can hear no news of such an Au∣thor any where, I have examined Eusebius and St. Hierom, our Excellent Dr. Cave, your Bellarmine, and your learned Sorbonist Du Pin, and cannot hear one word of such an Author. However you quote him, and in your Margin over against the Passage out of him I find Lib. de Passione D. by which I suppose you mean a book of St. Andrews concerning the Pas∣sion of our Lord.P. 30. I must now therefore question with you, whether there be really such a book as you quote? I am
sorry I am forc't to tell you hereupon, that you have disco∣vered an intolerable and wretched Ignorance, and have exposed it more to the World your own self, than any enemy could have done it for you. I must tell you that you have most sil∣lily imposed upon your self, and that I wonder that your new Superiours (who, I am assured, perused and examined your book) should suffer the cheat upon you, and license you to put it upon the World. The Book you quote is the Passion of St. Andrew himself, of which I hope I need not any Ar∣guments to prove that himself was not the Author.Apud Sa∣rium de vi∣tis SS. ad 30 Novem. p. 619. Edit. Co∣lon. 1575. The book is said to have been writ by the Presbyters of Achaia pre∣sent at his Martyrdom. But that it is a spurious book I need not urge our own MenCharto Phylo. Eccl. p. 5. Dr. Cave, &c. onely, but your own Du Pin, who (upon reasons able to destroy the credit of it wholly) says thatNouvelle Bibliothe∣que des Au∣teurs Eccle∣siastiques, p. 48. at least it ought to be considered as a doubt∣full writing, which according to St. Hierom, one cannot make use of to prove any Article of Faith; as you have made Transub∣stantiation to be. I have been the more particular about these Liturgies and Authors to let you see how impertinent, and how unjust your railing at our Church about these Books was, and to expose your gross ignorance to your new Superiours, that they also may see (which perhaps they did not know before) how unfit a man you were to meddle with this sort of learn∣ing, and how wretchedly you have come off. CHAP. XIX. The Authorities from Ignatius, Justin Martyr and Irenaeus for Transubstantiation answered. I come now to examine, as they come to hand, your several Authorities for Transubstantiation: the Liturgies as spurious are already dispatched. The first of your Authorities from Ignatius, (which you needed not, if you really did, go to Theodoret for, since it is now common in Ignatius himself from the Florentine Copy) that the Hereticks [that denyed Christ had a true Body] abstained from the Eucharist, because
they do not confess the Eucharist to be the Flesh of our Saviour Jesus Christ,P. 30. &c. does you no service, because We of the Church of England who do not believe any Transubstantiation, say with St. Ignatius, that the Sacrament is the Body and Blood of Christ. However as we say that it is figuratively such, so there is nothing here to determine that St. Ignatius meant o∣therwise than we do, since his Argument is as strong (not to say stronger) in a figurative sense against the Hereticks; it invincibly proving (asContr. Marc. l. 4. c. 40. Tertullian does upon the very same account) that our Saviour had a true Body, since none but such could have a figurative Body, or Figure: a Figure of a Figure or Phantome being perfect nonsense: so that St. Ignatius is no help to prove a Transubstantiation, and your reasoning upon it ridiculous, since if the Hereticks had owned the Eucharist with Calvin or Zuinglius to have been the sign or Figure of Christs Body,P. 30. they had quite ruined their own doctrine, and had allowed Christ to have had a true Body, since none but such could have a Sign or Figure: but some Men are so fond of saying something, that so it be but said, they matter not, whe∣ther it be for, or against themselves, which this your reason∣ing really is. Your next Authority from St. Denys, as spu∣rious is to no purpose;P. 30. nor your next upon the same account from your Andreas, who, methinks as an Apostle, should have had the place of St. Denys, and both of them before St. Igna∣tius; but you I suppose either found them in this order, or thought Ignatius fittest to be put first, because he looked a little more to your purpose than either of them: Tho' as to the latter of them, your Andreas, had you but shewn any ingenuity in what you cite from him, he would have proved full as little to your purpose, but you cunningly slip over in this short passage that which would have told you that the Sacrifice here spoken of could be no other than a figurative and representative Sacrifice, since it is said to be offered in altari crucis, upon the Altar of the Cross; which you wisely tho' not over honestly leave out to make your Author speak something towards the purpose we meet him here for. Your Note upon this Passage that truly eaten excludes eating in sign onely or Spirit does as much discover your Ignorance of the Sense of the Genuine Fathers, as your Phrase in sign onely does
your malice, who cannot but know that the Church you have forsaken never said so: to say that he which eats both in Sign and Spirit, does not eat truely, is to give the lye to a whole Tract of S.Tracta∣tus 26 in Joann. Austins, where among twenty other Confutations you may find that such Persons as Moses, Aaron and Phineas, who pleased God, visibilem cibum spiritaliter intellexerunt, spiritaliter esurierunt, spiritaliter gustaverunt ut spiritaliter satiarentur; did spiritually understand the visible Food [the Manna,] did spiritually hunger after and tast of it, that they might be spiritually filled and satisfied: and that the true eating the Bread of Life so as not to dye does belongPerti∣nent ad vir∣tusem Sa∣cramenti, non ad visi∣bile Sacra∣mentum. Qui manducat intus non foris, qui manducat in corde, non qui premit dente. August. Tract. 26. in Joan, to the virtue of the Sacrament, and not to the visible Sacrament: and that the true receiver is he who eateth inwardly, not out∣wardly, who eateth with the heart, and not he who presseth it with his teeth. Justin Martyr you next cite, saying,P. 31. 'Tis not common Bread or common Drink we take, how then? Why as the Word of God, Jesus Christ our Saviour, was made Flesh, so we are taught that our Nourishment by Prayer, proceeding from him, being made the Eu∣charist, to be the Flesh and Blood of the same incarnate Jesus, &c. This Translation I accuse not onely of falshood, and of pervert∣ing the plain sense of St. Justin, but of direct Nonsense: for first whereas St. Justin sayes,. S. Just. M. A∣pol. 2. p. 98. Edit. Morel. Paris. 1636. We do not receive these things [the consecrated Bread and the consecrated Wine mingled with Wa∣ter] A S common Bread or common Drink, you make him say that 'iis not common Bread, or common Drink we take: which is directly contrary to the true sense of his Words, which are so far from denying, that they evidently suppose and prove them to be still Bread and Wine after Consecration, or else they could not be received in a different manner from that at common Meals. Again, whereas our Author goes on but as by the Word of God, Jesus Christ our Saviour being in∣carnate,
had both Flesh and Blood for our Salvation, you non∣sensically translate him, as the Word of God, Jesus Christ our Saviour, was made Flesh, where you not only lame his sense and obscure it, but quite pervert it, you making the Word of God to be our Saviour himself, the second Person in the Trini∣ty, whereas Justin means by it the Power of the Holy Ghost, which over-shadowed the Blessed Virgin. I will give you but another touch of your nonsense, and that is when you tran∣slate, so we are taught that our nourishment by prayer — to be the flesh, instead of, is the flesh I hate so mean an em∣ployment as to be thus taken up in ripping up your pitiful dealing, or else I could expose you further from this very pas∣sage out of Justin; but I think this enough to let you and your new Superiors see what wretched stuff we are like to be put off with, and how vastly unfit you are to meddle about such things. To leave then this miserable murthering of Justin, I come now to see what you would have thence; suppose you had known, which you did not, what the Author meant here. You argue our Saviour was made Flesh, therefore the Eucharist is Flesh, or Justin could not say they were so taught. I an∣swer, That as our Saviour was not Transubstantiated when he took our flesh upon him, so no more need was there that the Bread should be transubstantiated to become his Sacra∣mental Body and Blood. Nay, St. Justin directly supposes the contrary when he makes the Eucharist to be Bread, tho' not received then as common Bread, and proves it too, when he saysWhich words you suppress in your translation. Was you afraid we should conclude from them that Just. Mart. did not think the Acci∣dents did subsist in the Eucharist without the Substance? But let that pass. that by this consecrated nourishment [the Body and Blood of Christ] our Bodies, our Flesh and Blood are nourished, which I am sure your learned men will grant to be impious to say of the natural very Body and Blood of Christ, and impossi∣ble if no substance but that be there. So that it is evident that by the Body and Blood of Christ in this passage must be meant Christ his Symbolical Body and Blood, or the Sign or Figure of his Natural Body and Blood, the substance as well as accidents of the Elements remaining.
As to the reason you add, that Justin should have told the Emperor (if he meant no more by it) that by the Flesh and Blood of Christ, he intended only the Signs of them, since it was, he knew, objected to the Christians his Brethren, that in the Mysteries of their Religion they did eat mans flesh: I do re∣tort it upon you, and challenge you to shew, where they ever pleaded guilty, or where they ever made any Apology for, or distinction about their eating our Saviours Natural Flesh and Blood, tho' they abstained from the Blood of every thing else, as any one that is but little conversant in the first Antiquity knows they constantly pleaded against the so often objected dapes Thyesteas; upon this pointNihil ra∣tionabilius, ut quia nos jam simili∣tudinem mortis ejus in Baptismo accepimus, similitudi∣nem quoque carnis ejus sumamus, & similitu∣dine preti∣osi sangui∣nis pote∣mur: ita ut, & ve∣ritas non desit in Sa∣cramento, & ridiculum nullum fit Paganis, quod cruorem occisi hominis bibamus. Aug. apud Grat. de Consecr. Dist. 2. Sect. utrum. p. 1958. Edit. Taur. St. Austin, as quoted by Gra∣tian, is so express both against your reason and your opinion, that I cannot omit it here, he sayes, Nothing is more reasona∣ble than that as we have received the similitude of his, to wit Christs death in Baptism, so we should also receive the likeness of his Flesh, and drink the likeness of his Pretious Blood; that so neither may Truth be wanting in the Sacrament, nor Pa∣gans have an occasion of ridiculing us for drinking the Blood of one that was slain. Which it seems Pagans would then have done; had the Christians then talked of drinking lite∣rally Christs Natural Blood: and the Jews and Mahometans do now do, since some Christians took up an Opinion, and talked of doing it in a literal sense, witness that severe Ob∣servation and Reflexion of Averroes upon them sufficiently known. Your first place from St. Irenaeus is not exactly translated, eum panem in quo gratiae actae sint, &c. is not barely that Bread in the Eucharist is the Body of Christ; but that that Bread, which hath been consecrated is the Body of his Lord. This passage is so far from being for, that it is directly against you; that Bread which hath been consecrated is demon∣stration that he looked upon it, as to the substance to be Bread still; here you were forced to shew us a little of your
Legerdemain, or else I am sure this Chapter of Irenaeus had been secure enough from your quoting it, there being that in the middle of this passage (which you have slily left out) which is perfect demonstration against TransubstantiationQuomodo autem rur∣sus dicunt carnem in corruptio∣nem deve∣nire, & non percipere vitam, quae à corpore Domini & sangaine a∣litur. Iren. l. 4. c. 34. while St. Irenaeus argues for the immortality of our bodies from their having been nourished by the Body and Blood of Christ: and as much against you is your next passage from him, and as well translated by you, for as that which is Bread from the Earth, perceiving (very wise Bread truly this same was) the call of God [or as I would say, being consecrated] now is not common Bread, but the Eucharist, consisting of two things, one earthly (i. e. the accidents) and the other Spiritual: so our bodies receiving the Eucharist are not now corruptible, ha∣ving the hope of the Resurrection. What can be more plain against Transubstantiation than this place, which still suppo∣ses it to be Bread, when it sayes that after Consecration it is not common Bread; had Irenaeus taught or believed a Transub∣stantiation here, he must have said that after Consecration it is not Bread at all, and not have talked of a terrestrial or corporeal thing or part in the Eucharist, as well as a heavenly or spiritual: but you say this earthly part is the accidents. I would fain know, what part of St. Irenaeus or the Ancients you learned this from, I am sure you ought to be ashamed of talking at this ridiculous rate; there is any Body scarce, but knows that earthly and material or corporeal are Synony∣mous, but you however contrary to all Reason, and all Philo∣sophy, must be setting up material Accidents, and you might as well have told us of incorporeal bodies, and corporeal no∣things, as of earthly Accidents: but such inconsistent ridicu∣lous stuff will down it seems with a man that believes Tran∣substantiation. Your talk about imposing a new signification upon the Bread and Wine is nothing to the purpose,p. 31. since our Church makes the Elements not only to signifie, but to communicate to us the Body and Blood of Christ after a spiritual and heavenly man∣ner, which thing requires an Omnipotent Power for the in∣stituting it for such an effect, and enduing it with such a virtue or power.
CHAP. XX. His several Proofs from Tertullian answered, and his Falsifica∣tion of that Author exposed. TErtullian your next Author you have abused worse than St. Justin, I must profess that when I first took your Book into my hand, I did expect you would have had the prudence to have let him and Theodoret alone: but it seems all the Fathers either are for Transubstantiation, or you will make them so. It is pleasant to see what shufling you make about your first quotation from him, and how afraid you are of his,p. 32. id est Figura Corporis mei, that you durst not translate it; and next how sillily or rather falsly you english nisi veritatis esset Corpus, unless it had been the truth. There needs nothing else to impeach your attempt of ignorance, and a depraving Ter∣tullian than the putting his own words together. Corpus suum illum fecit, hoc est Corpus meum dicendo, id est Figura Corporis mei: Figura enim non fu∣isset, nisi veritatis esset corpus cete∣rum vacua res, quod est Phantasma figuram capere non posset. Tert. c. Marcion. l. 4. c. 40. Edit. Franck. He made [speaking of our Sa∣viour] that [Bread] his ody, when he said This is my Body, that is the Figure of my Body: Now it could not have been the Figure, unless there were a true Body [of Christ] since an empty thing as a Phantome really is, can have no figure of it self. I appeal now to your own self as well as to the world, whether any thing can be more direct against Transubstantiation, than this passage put together, and fairly translated. Nor can you make any thing out of his fecit. since he does not only sufficiently ex∣plain himself here, but a very little lower, he asks Marcion deriding him,Cur autem panem Cor∣pus suum appellat, & non magis peponem, quem Marcion cordis loco habuit? Non intelligens vterem suisse islam figuram corporis Christi dicentis per Jeremiam, &c. Idem codem loco. how our Saviour came to call Bread his Body, and not rather a Pompion? And then tells him that Bread was the antient Figure of our Saviours Body in that passage of
Jeremy ch. 11.19. according to the Version of the Septua∣gint.) So that what you would infer from the quotation is altogether groundless: and your next argument is worse that there is no such repugnancy between the Body of Christ, and the Sign and Figure of his Body, for if it is the Body, it cannot be the Figure;p. 32. if it be the Figure only, it cannot be the Body. But some men can believe as well as say any thing. You next furnish us with a plain Declaration from Tertullian,p. 33. that the Flesh is fed with the Body and Blood of Christ, &c. You ought to have put down here, whether you quoted this place for, or against, Transubstantiation: a man would suspect you had here turned the Tables, since this place is perfect De∣monstration against Transubstantiation, while it makes our bodies to be fed with Christs Body, to affirm which of his Natural Body is impious among your own learned men as well as us: but of this distinctly before we part. The bare Translation of the first passage you quoted, and I translated clearly, from Tertullian is answer enough to all your silly borrowed Criticism about Representation.p. 33. I come now to your last place from him, which I accuse of a direct falsification of the Text, as well as of perverting the sense of our Author. This you and your new Superiors may think a hea∣vy charge, and that I ought to have examined well, before I laid it upon you: to tell you and the world the truth, I did; for I did not rely onely on my own notes, nor on the Frane∣ker Edition of Junius of 1597. out of which I had them, and which I again consulted on this occasion, but I examined these several Editions, that of Rhenanus at Basil 1528. which was the second Edition of Tertullian, whom henanus printed the first time there, in 1521. I cannot find by his notes that this his second differed at all in this place in controversie from his first Edition; at the Margin of this Edition over against the passage Non sciet Maritus, &c. which you quote, he puts Eucharistia in Capital Letters, and in his Notes guesses that dicitur hath been mistook for benedicitur. I examined also another Edition of Rhenanus at Basil 1539. a third of his at Paris 1545. that of Pamelius with Latinius and Mercer at Cologne 1617. that of de La Barre at Paris 1580. that of de La Cerda at Paris 1624. that best Edition of Rigaltius at Paris 1634. the Annotationes
Diversorum upon Tertullian, wherein this passage is so often quoted and commented upon, printed at Paris 1635. that of F. George the Capuchin at Paris 1646, —48, —50. and lastly that in C. Moreau's Tertull. Omniloquium Alphabet. at Paris 1657. So that I suppose I may after an exact and troublesome search of these eleven several Editions, be allow∣ed to tell you, that you have falsified Tertullian by leaving Panem out of this short quotation, which every one of these Editions hath, to which Panem, the illum doth relate, and not to Christ: so that to confute you, I need but restore Ter∣tullian to himself, whom you make to say,Non sciet Maritus quid secreto ante om∣nem cibum gustes? & si scive∣rit PA∣NEM, non illum cre∣dit esse qui dicitur. Tertull. ad Uxorem. l. 2. c. 5. Edit. Franck. Thy Husband shall not know what thou dost taste before all other meats; (which Translation I allow, tho' some translate it interrogatively) and if he shall know, he doth not believe it to be Him, whom it is said to be; whereas his own words are, and tho' he shall know it to be BREAD, he doth not believe it to be THAT Bread, which it is said to be, to wit Eucharistical or Blessed Bread. Let any one compare our two Translations with Tertullian's own words, and then let him freely give sentence betwixt us. CHAP. XXI. The Proofs from Clemens Alex. Origen, Hilary, Gregory Naz. Basil and Macarius answered. YOur next passage out of Clemens Alexandrinus is not a jot to your purpose.p. 33. It were easie for me to bring places out of him directly contrary to Transubstantiation, but I have been forced to be so long in exposing and confuting your Authorities hitherto, that I must omit them, and shorten my answers as much as I can, having already ruined your best strength. The several passages out of Origen can do you no more service than those already answered, and are as well transla∣ted by you. You have discovered a gross ignorance in the
translation of the first Passage from him. What Nonsense do you make with translating in Specie, first in kind then in form; when as it is plain enough that by in Specie is meant clearly in opposition to the darkness of the legal Types. As to the Christian now eating the Flesh, and drinking the Blood of him, who said his Flesh was truely Meat, and his Blood Drink indeed, &c. (Which is the strength of your three first Proofs;) had you been conversant in Origens Writings, had you but read his Homilies on the Book next before this out of which you quote, I mean on Leviticus, you might have been sufficiently fore-armed against taking these Expressions in a literal sense; while Origen would have told you, that there is a letter [or literal Expressions] in the Gospel, which kills him, (look to your self Mr. Sclater) who doth not understand spiritually the things it speaks,Est & in novo Testa∣mento lite∣ra, quae oc∣cidat eum, qui non spi∣ritaliter quae dicuntur intelligit. Si enim secundum literam sequaris, hoc ipsum quod dictum est, nisi manducaveritis Carnem meam, & biberitis Sanguinem meum, occidit haec litera. Orig. Hom. 7. in Lvit. Basil. 1571. and he instances in this very thing: for if (saith he) one takes in a literal sense the Expressions of eating his Flesh, and drinking Christ's Blood, this letter [or literal sense] will kill: which is the sense of the Great St. Athana∣sus, after him, upon this Passage in the sixth of St. John. Your last place from him out of his eighth Book against Clsus,p. 34. hath not a syllable for your Transubstantiation, all it says is, that the Bread which had been offered, was become or made by Consecration , a sacred Body, that hath the virtue to sanctifie those that do with Faith receive it. Which is what we can and do subscribe to who utterly reject Transubstantiation. Your next Author is St. Cyprian,p. 34, 35. but since all Scholars are satisfied the Piece you quote is none of his, and the Learned Sorbonist Du Pin gives this short but very sharp Character of it,Nouvelle Bi∣bliotheque de Aute∣urs, &c. p. 472. that it is a ridiculous Piece, and full of Impertinences; we can neither permit it a place here nor any where else: and as short I must be with you about your next Authority of the Semi-Arian Eusbius Emissenus,p. 37. since those Homilies under his name are rejected as supposititious.
St. Hilary is your next Author,p. 38. whose words a man would believe were really thus connected, and in the same order he finds them set down by you, but I do assure every one that you are not a man to be trusted in these things. The passage ought to be divided into three distinct parts, with a mark of separation betwixt them, and which is more, the first part to be placed last, and the middle first, and the third in the middle. Certainly, Mr. Sclater, you never saw St. Hilary in your life, or you would never have been guilty of such wretched dealing, if your Skill in the Fathers lyes in playing such tricks with them, I do assure you I will never quote af∣ter you. But for the words themselves in their true order; tho' they seem to take our Saviour's words, my flesh is meat indeed in a strict sense (against the Doctrine of the much An∣tienter Writers, Tertullian, Origen and Athanasius (above quo∣ted) who expresly reject the literal sense as dangerous and ridiculous, and therefore so may we) yet do not prove any Transubstantiation; since our Saviour may be received in St. Hilary's sense cibo Dominico, in the Eucharist (not as you very homely translate it, in our Lord's meat) with the Sacra∣mental Bread, by an Ʋnion with it, whichThe Uni∣on of the most Holy Body, and precious Blood of our Lord-Jesus Christ, are the words of the Priest, when he breaks the Bread, Pag. 28. your own quo∣tation out of your St. James's Liturgy would teach, with∣out any Annihilation of the substance of the Bread, which I believe St. Hilary never so much as dreamed of, and there∣fore could be no Patron of your Novel Doctrine of Tran∣substantiation. Gregory Nazianzen's first passage says no more than our Church,p. 38. which calls the Sacred Elements the Body and Blood of Christ, and directsIn the Prayer in our Com∣munion Ser∣vice, (We do not pre∣sume, &c. her Communicants to pray that they may worthily eat the Flesh and drink the Blood of Christ. As to your Observation, that St. Gregory's advice had been needless, if we did onely eat the flesh of Christ in sign and figure: had you been skilfull, (as I suppose you are willing enough to be thought) in his Writings, you might have found, as ridicu∣lous as you think it, St. Gregory himself calling the Blessed Bread and Wine, the Antitypes or figures of the Body and Blood
of Christ, in that very Oration you your self next quote, and within a dozen lines of that very place you produce thence; where he tells us that his Sister Gorgonia, in a great sickness mingled her tears with the Antitypes or Symbols of our Saviour's precious Body and Blood,Et si quid uspiam Antityporum pretiosi corporis aut sangulnis manus recondiderat, id lacymis admiscu∣isset, ô rem admirandam, statim li∣beratam se morbo sentit. Greg. Naz. Orat. 11. in Laudem Gorgoniae, p. 187. Edit. Paris, 1630. with as many of them as she had treasured up. I hope you do not believe that she had as many Bodies of Christ, as she had in her hands parts of these Antitypes, which I do assure you do mean nothing more than Signs or Figures. This passage hath not onely confuted your first, but provided fully against the second out of him, about his Sister Gorgonia her prostrating her self before the Altar with Faith,p. 38. and praying to him with great clamour (as you neatly translate it) who is worshipped upon the Altar.Desperatis omnibus a∣liis auxili∣is ad mor∣talium om∣nium medi∣cum confu∣git, at{que} in∣tempestà nocte cap∣tatâ, cum morbus non∣nihil remi∣sisset, ad Al∣tare, &c. Idem ca∣dem Ora∣tione, p. 186. Upon this you tell us gravely, that she prayed not to Bread and Wine, and I tell you, that she prayed no more unto the Host, since neither our Bread and Wine, nor your Host were then upon the Altar, for it was at Midnight that Gorgonia went privately in∣to the Church, when there was no Priest, nor Service, nor Eucharist or Host to be worshipped, but she alone, as far as we can gather from St. Gregory, prostrated before the Altar, at or upon which God is worshipped. But some Men if they get a little thing by the end, that looks as if it might do them a Service, quickly lay hold of it; and never consider the connexion it hath in the Discourse from whence it is ta∣ken; if you had but read this Oration you so readily quote, and had but considered it, it might have saved you the making two silly remarks. You quote next St. Basil's Book, De Baptismo, c. 2. whereas the St. Basil that I use Printed at Paris hath two Books de Baptismo;p. 39. in the second of which under the third Que∣stion I find what you quote, but cannot find that it is any thing to your purpose: we say with him that every one ought to pre∣pare for the worthy receiving this holy Sacrament, and that the worthy Receiver is made Partaker of the Body and Blood of Christ. In his Antiphone the Bread and Wine are called the Types or Figures of the Body and Blood of Christ.
As far from helping to prove Transubstantiation are the two first passages from Macarius;p. 39. that he understood the eating the Flesh and drinking the Blood of Christ in the Catholick, that is, in the spiritual sense, is past question evident from his 27. Homily,. Macar. Homil. 27. pag. 164. Edit. Paris. 1621. where among other things that the Saints before our Saviour's time were ignorant of, he reckons this, that in the Church should be offered Bread and Wine, Antitypes or Symbols of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; and that those which eat of this Visible Bread, should spiritually eat the Flesh of the Lord. This passage is so convictive of it self, that it needs not help to inforce it against all literal eating of Christ's Body and Blood, and against Transubstantiation. I need say nothing to your last Testimony from him, nor shall, onely that your Translation of this short passage is very silly, and very false too. Do you or your new Superiours look at it again, and then deny it, if you can. CHAP. XXII. Arguments for Transubstantiation from Gregory Nyssen and Cyril of Hierusalem answered, and a ridiculous Mistake of Mr. Sclater's observed. GRegory Nyssen's Testimonies are the next you do produce to prove a Transubstantiation,p. 40. and do indeed promise more in order to it, than any you have hitherto produced, while they say that the sanctified Bread is changed into the Body of the Word of God. However that Gregory Nyssen meant no change of the substance of the Bread and Wine, or that they were annihilated, and the Body and Blood of Christ substituted into their place, but meerly a change in their Ʋse, Office and Virtue, is past all question evident, since in another place he illustrates this change of the Elements of Bread and Wine by, and compares it to, that of the Altar, which I hope you do
not believe,Nam & Al∣tare hocsan∣ctum, cuiad∣sistimus, la∣pis est na∣turâ com∣munis—sed quoniam Dei cultui consecra∣tum —Al∣tare imma∣culatum est—Panis item, panis est initio communis: sed ubi eum Mysterium sacrificaverit, Corpus Christi fit & dicitur.—Eadem item Verbi vis etiam Sacerdotem augustum & honorandum facit, novitate Benedictionis à communitate Vulgi sgregatum.—cum nihil vel corpore vel formâ mutatus — ille sit, qui erat, invisibili quadam vi, ac gratiâ, invisibilem animam in melius transformatam gerens.—Ac simili rationum consequetiâ, etiam aqua, cum nihil aliud sit quam aqua, supernâ Gratiâ benedicente ei, in eam, quae mente percipitur, hominem renovat regenerationem. Greg. Nyss. in Baptismum Christi Oratio, p. 802, 803. Edit. Paris. 1615. or any of your Party dare say, that upon its be∣ing dedicated to the Service of God, it undergoes any change of substance, but meerly a change of use, it being now sepa∣rated to God's Service, which before was of common use, and for the most common Services He compares it to the change in a Priest, which is not of the Substance of his Body when he is ordained, but of his Soul onely by an invisible Grace, which qualifies him for the particular office of a Priest. He compares it to the change of Water in Bap∣tism, which all the world will grant is not in the substance, but in the virtue onely, through the benediction of the divine Grace. I could bring his Comparison of the change of the Bread and Wine in the Eucharist to that of Chrism, but these I have brought, I think, are more than enough to prove that our Gregory Nyssen meant no other change of the Elements than a change of Ʋse, of Office, and of Virtue; and that if your peo∣ple are resolved that he shall mean a change of Substance, we shall have Transubstantiations enough, then the Water in Bap∣tism is no Water, though it seem such to all Senses, but is transubstantiated into a divine Grace; and you and I when we were ordained were really transubstantiated into the meer Of∣fice of a Priest, and for all our eating and drinking are as meer Accidents as those in the Eucharist: one thing I am puz∣led at, and that is what the Stones of the Altar are transub∣stanced into. These, Sir, as ridiculous as they be, must be necessary Consequences of your making our Author teach Transubstan∣tiation in the Eucharist, and all the Arts of your whole Party cannot avoid them; so that I suppose we have reason to de∣ny you Gregory Nyssen his being a Teacher, or Favourer of
your Ʋpstart Doctrine I should before parting examine your translating Gregory Nyss. but I am too much in hast to stay upon such wretched blundering, onely one observation, I must advertise the young Criticks of, and that is, that  which in all other authors, signifies put to death, in Greg. Nyss. according to the sage Mr. Sclater signifies made im∣mortal. Cyril of Jerusalems Testimonies do promise at first view,p. 40, 41. as much or more than the last from Gregory Nyssen, to prove all you intend them for, to wit, a Transubstantiation, when they not onely say with Gregory Nyssen, that the Bread and Wine after Consecration are made the Body and Blood of Christ; but which is further, that the Bread which is seen by us is not Bread, although the tast perceive it to be Bread, but the Body of Christ. To which I answer first, that St. Cyril is far from teaching Transubstantiation in these places; since what he sayes first is not denyed by our Church, that the Bread and Wine are made by Consecration the Body and Blood of Christ, and are no longer common Bread, and common Wine, which very expressions sufficiently prove, them to be as to their Substance Bread and Wine still, tho' now hereby distin∣guished from common Bread and Wine. And therefore upon this very ground Cyril advises his Ca∣techumens to consider the Elements con∣secrated,. Cyr. Myst. Catech. 4. p. 237. Edit. Paris. 1640. not as bare Bread and Wine (which certainly proves them to be so as to their substance) tho' their Senses suggested to them, that they were nothing else than bare Elements, but, as our Lord said they were, his Body and his Blood. So that we hence give a good account of that other expres∣sion that seems the more favourable to Transubstantiation, a∣bout the visible Bread being not Bread, but the Body of Christ: which we are as ready now as Cyril was then, to say is not Bread, bare Bread after consecration, but the Body of Christ, inasmuch as it is now honoured with the Title of the Body of Christ, since it is made by Consecration the Instrument to make us Partakers of the Body of Christ, as St. Paul sayes 1 Cor. 10.16. and after him Cyril himself in this Catechism
advises his Catechumens to receive with all assurance [the con∣secrated Elements] as the Body and Blood of Christ,—. &c. Idem eodem loco. upon this very reason because under the Type or Figure of Bread is given [to the worthy Receiver] the Body of Christ and under that of Wine, is given his Blood. This Passage you, (or rather Grodecius, for you do but tran∣slate him) have endeavoured to make speak for you: which is an easy thing to make any Authors do, if you should serve them, as you have done him; for 1. you make him say, Let us take the Body and Blood of Christ, whereas he hath, , here, and faith, let us take, to wit the consecrated Elements, AS the Bo∣dy and Blood of Christ (which is a trick you played St. Justin Martyr as well as Cyril:) and then you from Grodecius tran∣slate  by species, a word unknown to the Primitive Chri∣stians in the sense you Transubstantiatours use it in, witnessNon vale∣bit Christi sermo ut Species mutet Ele∣mentorum p. 48. ex Arubrosio. your own Quotations out of St. Ambrose, when as any one that knows but a little Greek, could tell you it means a Figure. But to rescue Cyril clearly out of your hands; had you but turned one leaf backward, you might have read that, which would, if you had any ingenuity in you, have hindred your bringing Cyril on the stage for a favourer or teacher of Tran∣substantiation: there in his Mystigogical Catechism about Chrism, having spoken of the use and vast benefit of it, he thus addresses his Auditors, but take heed that thou do not think that [Chrism] to be bare Oyl:, Cyr. catechism. Mystag. 3. p. 235, Edit. Paris. 1640. for as the Encharistical Bread after the Invocation [and illapse] of the Holy Spirit, is no longer ordinary Bread, but the Body of Christ: even so this holy Oyl is no longer bare or, as one may say, common Oyl after the Invoca∣tion of the Holy Spirit, but Charisma Christi the Gift or Grace of Christ: and a little after he sayes,. Idem odem loco. the Body is anointed with the Oyl that is seen by us, but the Soul is sanctified by the Holy and Quickening Spirit.
Here we meet with as high and as strange Expressions about the Chrism, as in the next Cathechism about the Eucharistical Bread and Wine: as there the Bread upon Consecration is said to be no longer common Bread; just so it is said here about the Chrism that it is not common Oyl after Consecration; as he talks there of a , which you would have us to believe is no more than the bare appearance of Bread, so here of a , which upon the same reason must be onely the appearance of Oyl without any Substance. In a word, if St. Cyril proves a Transubstantiation of the Bread and Wine there, he as certainly proves a Transubstantiation of the Chrism-Oyl here: if you say as all confess that he doth not prove this of the Oyl, I must say upon equal grounds that he doth no more prove the other of the Bread and Wine; so that St. Cyril is not for your purpose of proving Transubstantiation. But before I pass to your next Author, I have a question to ask you, and that is, why you put down the Text it self of Cyril here? whereas your English, if it be your own, is word for word translated from Grodecius his Latin Translation of St. Cyril: I appeal to your own Conscience, whether what I say is not true; but since you may be too peevish to tell me, I will give an instance or two, besides those already observed, where you have both equally added to the Text of St. Cyril, or, gros∣ly mistaken it. St. Cyril sayes  [which two last words you have altered into ,] this place you verbatim fromAquam a∣liquando mutavit in vinum, quod est sanguini propinquum, in Cana Ga∣lilaeae, sola voluntate: Grodec. Lat. Inter. Grodecius translate thus, he sometimes changed Water into Wine, which is neer to blood in Cana of Galilee, by his onely Will; whereas according to Grodecius his Greek, there is not a Syllable of such an Expression, as, which is neer to blood, and according to yours, not a Syllable for, by his onely Will; and yet you two could nick it so exactly. But that which is the pleasantest of all is, that you not onely transcribe a Blunder of his, but make it ten times worse:. Cyril. [ex Luc. 5.34.] Fili∣is Sponsi. Grodecil Interpr. Latina. To the Sons of his Spouse, Sclaters Engl. Translat. Cyril in this Passage speaks of the Children of the Bride-cham∣ber, Grodecius hath made them the Children of the Bridegroom, and you have made them the Children of the Bride, when you call them the Sons of his Spouse; by which you mean our
Saviour's Spouse which I am sure is his Bride the Church. This is translating with a witness, and this it is to make a Man's self a slave to another Man's Translation, which is guilty of such Blunders and Errours, and yet by putting your Margin full of Greek to make the World believe you had been at the Fountain-head your self. I must confess it is the first time I ever heard of a He-Bride, or could have suspected that a Man that hath so much Greek and Hebrew in his head would have translated hic Sponsus, our Saviour his Spouse. I haue been so large upon these two Fathers, St. Gregory Nyssen and St. Cyril, not onely because they are always reck∣oned the chiefest Authors for Transubstantiation, but because I might thereby very much shorten the Answers I am to make to your following Authorities, which I shall consider if they speak any thing new, if not, refer to some of my Answers already made. CHAP. XXIII. Those from Epiphanius, St. Ambrose and St. Chrysostom answered. YOur Testimony out of Epiphanius proves nothing more than your Infirmity in translating,P. 42. for he that believeth not that he is true, you have ridiculously made it, who believeth it not to be his very true Body. But such dealing is not strange to me to find in you, this Talent runs almost through your whole book. You are very copious in the next place from St. Am∣brose;P. 42. your first Testimony from him proves nothing against the Church of England, nor your second, since in our Liturgy we use in the distributing the Consecrated Bread the same Expressions used then (the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ) and our People are taught to say Amen.P. 43. Nor your third, fourth, and those which follow, wherein this Father uses so much of Allegory, and therefore is not to be confined to a literal Sense.P. 44, 45, 46, &c. Your last from him is your best one, which how∣ever proves no more than what we never deny, that the Na∣ture of the Elements are changed, as to their Virtue and Qua∣lity: but as to a change of their very substance, we do deny it upon reasons from Scripture and purer Antiquity; nor doth
this Father attempt the Proof of any such a Change. He proves the contrary,p. 43. when in your first Testimony from him he speaks of the Elements Continuing What they were [that is as to their Substance or Essence] and yet be∣ing changed into another thing,Quanto magis Operatorius est, ut sint quae erant & in aliud commu∣tentur. Ambros. de Sacram. l. 4. c. 4. which must be as to quality and Ʋse: and had you but translated this passage like a Scholar, and continued your quotati∣on a line or two further, you had found him proving this change of the Elements by, and comparing it with,Ipse dixit & factum est: ipse mandavit & creatum est. Tu ipse eras, sed eras vetus ereaturae: pe∣stea quam consecratus es, nova crea∣tura esse caepisti. Idem, Ibidem p. 439. Tom. 4. Edit. Froben. that of a man by Baptism, whom no body be∣lieves to be changed thereby as to his substance, but onely to be renewed in∣wardly, and changed from a sinful state to a state of virtue and holiness by the influence of the Spirit of God; and therefore St. Ambrose could not affirm any more of the Elements than a change of quality by an accession of virtue, and power to sanctifie and to communicate to us Christs Body and Blood, and to apply to us all the Merits of his meritorious passion. But after all this Father himself puts the thing out of de∣bate betwixt us; when, in your last Testimony,p. 49. he calls the consecrated Bread the Sacrament or Sym∣bol of his Flesh,Vere ergo carnis illius Sacramen∣tum est — ante Benedictionem ver∣borum coelestium alia species nomina∣tur, post consecrationem corpus signi∣ficatur — post consecrationem san∣guls nuncupatur. Ambros. de iis qui Mysteriis initiantur. c. 9. and says that after con∣secration it is the sign of his Body; for so I translate corpus significatur, because afterwards speaking of the Wine, he says that after consecration it is called or bears the name of his Blood. Upon this place indeed you set up for a Cri∣tick, and give us a touch of your Greek and Hebrew, which I cannot read without smiling at it: all that I will say to you upon it is, that it is very hard for those that understand not Greek and Hebrew,p. 50, 51. that they must not be allowed to know what significo means; had that word been a branch from either of those tongues your Criticism would have looked somewhat like, whereas now it is but a more formal piece of trifling.
Optatus his Testimony is nothing to the Purpose, and that from Gaudentius is so far from being for your Transubstanti∣ation, that it is directly against you, as had I time or room here, I could easily shew. St. Hierom's places prove the very same,p. 51. Nos autem audiamus, Panem, quem fre∣git Domi∣nus, dedit∣que Discipulis suis, esse Corpus Domini Salvatoris, ipso dicente ad eos. atcipite, come∣dite, Hoc est Corpus meum. St. Hieron. Hedibiae. Tom. 3. p. 144. Edit. Froben. that is against you, as first that which says it was Bread our Saviour gave to his Disciples, and that that Bread was his Body, which sort of ex∣pressions your own learned men allow to prove a figurative Body onely, since Bread can no otherwise be the Body of Christ. I wonder what you brought the Testimonies for, about the Clergy's always praying; if you did it for a touch at our mar∣ried Clergy, remember that it touches your self; and tho' it does not me,p. 53. yet this I will assure you that St. Hierom's Ar∣gument is very faulty and proves nothing at all because it proves too much, since if the Clergy must abstain from Matri∣mony, because they must always pray; upon the very same reason all the Christian Laity will be obliged also to abstain from it,1 Thess. 5.17. p. 54, 55, 56, &c. they being most expresly commanded to pray with∣out ceasing. From St. Chrysostom you have brought us a great many pas∣sages. How much that Learned Father delighted in Rheto∣rual Flights hath been already observed above, when I exa∣mined just such quotations as these about St. Peters Supremacy; and that his Homilies are not to be strictly taken, nor can be in a literal sense, hath been abundantly proved above; How∣ever here you are for having the passages you cite him for about a Transubstantiation taken in a literal sense: which no man of learning would have said, since it is impossible they should: I will instance but in one of them,. D. Chrys. in Matth. Tom. 2. p. 514. Edit. Savil. How many now say, I would see his Form, his Figure, his Garments and his Shoes, behold thou seest him, thou touchest him, thou eatest him. I appeal to that person of meanest judgment in your whole Church, whoever he be; to your own second thoughts, whether any one can or does, strictly
speaking, See, Touch or Eat our Saviour: therefore if you will have a literal sense of these and such his hyperbolical ex∣pressions, you are easily answered that these passages you quote from St. Chrysostom prove nothing at all, because they prove too much; because they assert that which all learned men nay all men except you, grant to be impossible. But besides all this, you your self afford us a little passage,. Idem. in 1 Ep. ad Corinth. Tom. 3. p. 379. which evident∣ly destroys your attempt of making St. Chrysostom a Tran∣substantiation man, which you endeavour by your English to obscure, (as you have served many a larger place in your Book) and therefore I will clear the place thus, for as that Body is united to Christ, so we also are united to him by this Bread, which sufficiently proves the Substance of the Bread to remain in the Eucharist. St. Chrysostom's opinion as to this point in controversie betwixt us is so apparent from the late recovered Epistle of his to Caesarius, as nothing can be more, I shall reserve it to a further particular occasion. CHAP. XXIV. His further Arguments for it out of St. Austin, Cyril of Alex∣andria, Theodoret, &c. Answered. I Must in the next place follow you to St. Austin,p. 59, 60, &c. and see what you would have from him, who is so extraordinary plain and so point blank against Transubstantiation. I will not onely say, that the Places you have from him, as spoken allegorically cannot do your business, tho' you help them (as you did St. Hierom, when you translated Vinum, Blood; St. Chrysostom when you translated  the Eucharist) by translating Sacramentum a Sacrifice: but will give you a place or two to convince you that St. Austin was not for Transub∣stantiation. In his Book against Adamantus, he says plainly,Non enim Dominus dubitavit dicere, Hoc est Corpus meum, cum Signum daret Corporis sui. Aug. contr. Adamant. c. 12. Edit. Basil. For our Lord made no Scruple to say, this is my Body, when he gave the Sign of his Body.
In his Epistle to Boniface he sayes,Si enim Sacramen∣ta quandam similitudi∣nem ea∣rum rerum, quarum Sa∣cramenta sunt non ha∣berent, om∣nino Sacra∣menta non essent. Ex hac autem similitudine plerumque etiam ipsa∣rum rerum nomina ac∣cipiunt. Si∣cut ergo se∣cundum quendam modum Sa∣cramentum Corporis Christi Cor∣pus Christi est, Sacra∣mentum Sanguinis Christi Sanguis Christi est, ita Sacramentum Fidei Fides est. Aug. Ep. 23. ad Boniface. P. 62, 63. P. 63. that if the Sacraments had no resemblance with those things whereof they are the Sacra∣ments, they would not be Sacraments at all: from their resem∣blance it is that they commonly bear the names of the things them∣selves: for as the Sacrament of the Body of Christ is after a certain manner the Body of Christ, so the Sacrament of Faith is Faith. I might easily shew you, how he distinguishes be∣tween Sacramentum and Res Sacramenti, that Judas onely re∣ceived Panem Domini, whereas the rest of the Apostles re∣ceived Panem Dominum; but I must hasten to your next Te∣stimonies from St. Cyril of Alexandria, the first of which hath been already more than once answered; your second is direct∣ly against your self, the Jews fault being that they understood our Saviour in a literal sense, and not in the Spiritual in which he meant it; and Nicodemus his fault was of the same nature about Regeneration, so that you certainly took this place on trust without considering it; and your Jeer at the end of it is both groundless and ridiculous; hictius doctius, hei Presto, be gone, do far better become your People who teach that upon pronouncing hoc est corpus meum the Bread is gone, and the Body of Christ is in its room in a trice: but to pass such childish stuff, your last Testimony from this St. Cyril does not deserve any consideration, it proving nothing for your purpose. I am now arrived atTheodoret. P. 63. him, whom of all men I little thought you would have cited in, and of all places you would not have medled with that you do; but to give you your due, you are a hardy man, and resolved to go through with Theodoret also, tho' you loose some Skin by it, and get never so many blows and hard words. Well then you bring us his second Dialogue against the Eutychians, where after the Que∣stions asked and answered about the Sacramental Bread and Wine, their being the symbols of the true Body and Blood of Christ, which is also received it self in the Eucharist: the.—Orthodox.— Eutychian thinking he had caught the Orthodox Adversary,
argues upon his concession, that as the Symbols then of the Body and Blood [here you make a stop, and it was time for you to do it, wherein you shew, tho' no honesty, yet some cun∣ning; but I must continue the objection of the Eutychian to make the sense clear and full, as well as to ruine your silly design hence] are one thing before Consecration, but after it are changed, and made another thing; just so the Body of our Lord after its assumption is changed into the divine Substance or Nature. This was the Eutychians Ar∣gument upon which the. The∣odoret. Dial. 2. p. 85. Edit. Sir∣mond. 1642. Orthodox makes a quick reply, and tells him that he was caught in his own Nets, since the Mystical Symbols [the blessed Bread and Wine] do not after [or upon] their Consecration depart from their essential Nature, but continue in their former Sub∣stance, Form, and Kind, and are as visible, and as palpable now, as they were before their Consecration, &c. This place of Theodoret is so demonstrative against Transubstantiation, that you had need, if you must be bringing it in for you, to obscure the sense by your abrupt & caetera, and to falsify it too as you have done here by a ridiculous Translation, which quite spoils Theodoret's Argumont hence against the Eutychians, as I shall by and by shew in one of my Corol∣laries; in the interim to let you and the world see the intole∣rable disingenuity of your Translating  appear no other than in their own nature, I will but bring a short pas∣sage out of his first Dialogue to evince it, where he sayes,. Idem. Dial. 1. p. 18. our Saviour honoured the Symbols and Signs [the Sacramental Bread and Wine] with the names of his Body and his Blood, not [by] changing at all their NATURE, but by adding of GRACE to Nature. Proclus of Constantinople your next Author is directly a∣gainst your self, ΑΥΤΟΥ . Procli C. P. de Traditione D. Liturgiae. p. 581. Edit. Romae. 1630. since it is the Presence of the Holy Ghost ac∣cording to him, and not of the Natural Body and Blood of Christ, which makes the Bread and mingled Wine, the very Body and Blood of Christ.
Your Quotation from Eucherius (p. 64.) falls in with those from St. Ambrose, and is answered there. That from Isidore Pelusiota, (p. 65.) and that from Pope Leo, which is false translated, have been answered sufficiently above. Your Story out of Gregory Turonensis, (p. 66.) were it true, makes nothing to your purpose; but you ought to remember that we always demand the genuine plain Testimonies of Fathers in the Controversie about Transubstantiation, and cannot admit, or rely upon Stories and Miracles, such as this is, and that from (p. 69.) Paulus Diaconus. I am weary of this tedious Examination of further parti∣cular places of Writers at too great a distance to be set up, were they really what they are far from being, against the Primitive Fathers as to this Controversie. I will onely vindi∣cate your Pope Gregory the Great, and our Countryman Venerable Bede,p. 68. and then leave off this Method of answering. The place you quote from Gregory does you no service, since it is so very allegorical and cannot be taken in a literal sense; but that which we meet with in hisIpsi qui sumimus Communio∣nem bujus sancti panis & Calicis, unum Chri∣sti Corpus efficemur. —Quaesu∣mus—ut illius Salu∣taris capi∣amus effe∣ctum cujus per Mysteria PIGNUS accepimus. Greg. L. Sacram. p. 1337. Ed. Par. 1695. Sacramentary is directly against Transubstantiation, where in Prayer it's said, We which do receive the Communion or Sacrament of the consecrated Bread and Cup, are made one Body of Christ. Ut videlicet pro carne Agni vel sanguinem suae carnis sanguinis{que} Sacramntn in Panis ac Vini Figurâ substituens, &c. Beda Comm. in Luc. 22. p. 424. Edit. Colon. 1612. Venerable Bede's words are as clear as we could wish, and as full against Transubstantiation as we can speak, when he sayes, that our Saviour Christ substituted into the place of the Flesh and Blood of the Paschal Lamb, the Sacrament of his own Flesh and Blood under the figure of Bread and Wine,Coenâ, in quâ Figuram sacrosancti corporis, sanguinis{que} sui Discipulis tradidit, &c. Idem in Psal. 3. p. 324. and in another place, that our Lord gave to his Disciples at his Last Supper the Figure of his sacred Body and Blood.
CHAP. XXV. Some Corollaries against Transubstantiation. HAving hitherto sufficiently answered all your pretended Proofs for Transubstantiation, and shewn in part the Sense and Arguments of the Fathers against it, instead of wea∣rying my self, or rather our Reader with any more of your Authors which you very irregularly place, and which you your self will grant to be produced to no purpose, if the former Primitive Fathers were of a contrary Faith about the Eucha∣rist: I shall here adjoyn a few Corollaries to vindicate the Faith of the Catholick and Apostolical Church of England against Transubstantiation, and will make it apparently clear that her Doctrine and Faith herein is both Primitive and Ortho∣dox, and exactly the same with that of the Fathers of the Catholick Church. My first Corollary shall be,1 Coroll. That the Fathers gave such Ti∣tles to the Consecrated Elements of Bread and Wine, as utterly exclude a Transubstantiation. It was sufficiently common with them, to call the ElementsTertulli∣an. con. Marcion. l. 4. c. 40. Beda. Com∣ment. in 3. Psalm. the Figure,August. de Doctr. Christi c. 7. Origen. Dialog. cont. Marcion. p. 116. Edit. Wets. the Sign,Basil. Anaphora. Cyril. Hierosol. Col. 4. Cat. Mys. the Type,Greg. Naz. Orat. 118. Macarius. Hom. 27. the antitype,August. in Gratiano. the Similitude,Theodoret. Dialog. 2. and the Symbols of the Body and Blood of Christ,Tom. 6. Concil. Edit. Cossart. and a whole Oecumenical Council of 338 Bishops at Constanti∣nople, A. D. 754. declare them to be the true (and onely) Image of our Saviour's Body and Blood. These Expressions and the like I argue to be utterly incon∣sistent with the Elements, being Transubstantiated into the very Body and Blood of Christ, since it is impossible any thing can be the Figure of a thing, and the thing it self; or the thing it self, and yet but the figure of it: he that will affirm this may without an absurdity say that the Sign of the King at a Tavern door is the King himself, that the Picture of the Ship
in St. Paul's Church-yard is as real a true Ship, as any on the River, and that the Image of the King in the Exchange is re∣ally King James 2d. in his very Person. In short, if any thing be the Figure, it cannot be the thing; if it be the thing it self, it cannot be the Figure of it, since nothing can be the Figure of it self. And therefore if Christ's Natural Body be really on the Altar, that which is there cannot be the Fi∣gure of it; But if (as the Fathers almost unanimously speak) that which is there be the Figure, the Sign of it, then conse∣quently our Saviour's Natural Body it self is not. This is so evident,See Tertul∣lian's 4th Book a∣gainst Mar∣cion. ch. 40th. I think I need not say any more upon this Point, I might very easily else have shewn that the Strength of one of Tertullian's Arguments, for our Saviour his having a true substantial Body, against Marcion depended wholly on the Eucharist, its being the FIGURE of his Body: but I will wave it, and conclude this Co∣rollary with that of Facundus,Et potest Sacramentum Adoptio∣nis, Adoptio nuncupari. Sicut Sacra∣mentum Corporis & Sanguinis ejus, quod est in Pane & Poculo consecrato, Corpus ejus & Sanguinem dicimus. Non quod propriè Corpus ejus sit Panis & Poculum Sanguis: Sed quod in se Mysterium Corporis ejus, sanguinis{que} contineant. Hinc & ipse Dominus be∣nedictum Panem & Calicem, quem Discipulis tradidit, Corpus & Sangui∣nem suum Vocavit. Facund. Herm. pro Defens. 3. Capit. Con. Chalced. Lib. 9. c. 5. p. 404, 405. Edit. Sirmond. 1629. Bishop of Hermiana in Africa, the Sacra∣ment of Adoption may be called by the name of Adoption, as we call the Sa∣crament of the Body and Blood of Christ, the consecrated Elements of Bread and Wine, his Body and his Blood; not that the Bread is properly his Body, or the Cup his Blood, but because they con∣tain the Mystery of his Body and Blood: upon which very account it is, that when our Lord delivered the consecrated Bread and Cup to his Disciples, he called them his Body and his Blood. One thing I must not forget here, that tho' these Fathers and the Church of England with them, look upon the consecrated Elements as Signs and Figures onely, yet they and we believe that by the Institution of Christ they are the Means of conveying all the Virtue and Benefits of our Saviour's crucifyed Body, of communicating the Blood and Body of Christ unto every worthy Communicant. This I could not omit to let you see the silliness of your foolish Cant up and down of meer Signs of what, meer figures, &c. such Expressions were designed against the Church of England,
or what do they in your Book against her; if they were, I must tell you that they are sottishly ridiculous, and most into∣lerable from a man, who was, I am sorry I can say it, a Mi∣nister of the Church of England, and therefore must so often have seen her Articles, and so often have used her Communion-Service. My Second Corollary is,2. Coroll. That such things are attributed to the Sacramental Body and Blood of Christ, by the Primitive Fa∣thers, as do altogether exclude their being transubstantiated in∣to the Natural Body and Blood of Christ. I instance in that of the Sacramental Body and Blood of Christ their being said to Nourish our Bodies. That the consecrated Elements do nourish our Bodies is very apparent from. Ju∣stin. Apo∣log. 2. St. Justin Martyr's saying that our flesh and blood are nourished by the consecrated Elements being changed into our Substance: FromQuando ergo Calix & Panis percipiunt erbum Dei, fit Eucharistia Sanguinis & Corporis Christi, ex quibus augetur & consistit Carnis nostrae Substantia. S. Iren. c. Haer. l. 5. c. 18. Irenaeus andCaro Corpore & Sanguine Christi vescitur, ut & Anima de Deo saginetur. Tert. de Resurrect. c. 8. Tertullian, that our Flesh is fed and nourished with the Body and Blood of Christ: From— Ille Cibus, qui sanctificatur per Verbum Dei, per{que} obsecrationem, juxta id quod ba∣bet materiale, in ventrem abit & in secessum ejicitur. Orig. in 15 Matt. p. 27. Origen, that the Eucharist as to its Material Part, un∣dergoes the common course of our common repasts: FromQuia sicut visibilis Panis & Vini substantia exteriorem nutrit & inebriat hominem: ita Verbum Dei, qui est Panis Vivus, participatione sui Fidelium recreat mentes. Isidor. Hispal. apud Rathramni. Lib. de Corp. & Sang. D. p. 120. Edit. Paris. Boileau. 1686. Isi∣dore of Sevil, that the Substance of the Visible Bread and Wine do nourish the outward man, that is our Bodies, as the Word of Christ, the Living Bread doth nourish the Souls of the Faithfull Communicants. Rathramne or BertramUp and down the secod part of his Book from p. 127. uses this Nourishment of our Bo∣dies by the Sacramental Body and Blood, for an Argument to prove his distinguishing betwixt the Sacramental and the Natural Body of Christ to be just and necessary:Illa Eucharistia temporaria est, non aeterna: corruptibilis; crit{que} minutim divisibilis: inter Dentes manditur, & in secessum emittitur. Homilia Anglo Sax. apud not as Whelo∣chi in Beda. L. 5. c. 22. p. 472. Edit. Cantabrig. 1644. Our Saxon
Paschal Homily, which used to be read in our Churches in the Tenth Century follows Rathramn exactly in this point, and teaches that the Sacramental Body is corruptible, because it may be broke into several pieces, grinded by the Teeth, and being swallowed down into the Stomach, is thence cast into the draught. Having collected Passages enough, that which I intend to prove from them is, that the Natural Body and Blood of Christ (into which you Transubstantiators say the Bread and Wine up∣on Consecration are transubstantiated) cannot without the greatest impiety be thus said to Nourish our Bodies. There is no one that understands what Nourishment means, how that macerating by the Teeth, Digestion in the Stomach, Separation in the Guts of the impure and excrementitious (which pas∣ses into the draught) from the purer, which passing through the Lacteals, and other chanels falls into the Common Mass of Blood, are all necessary in order to Nourishment; but must at the same time abhor the very thought of our Saviours Na∣tural Body undergoing such tortures and changes in order to the Nourishment of our Bodies. Either it is Bread or Wine, or the Natural Body and Blood of Christ that undergoes these several stages in order to our Nourishment: Neither you nor we talk of any third Body for these purposes. If there be no Bread and Wine upon Consecration left, which you affirm, then it is unavoidable that the Natural Body and Blood of Christ which are come into the others place must afford this Nourishment to our Bodies; but if you dare not affirm this, which it were most blasphemous to do; it will of necessity follow that the substances of the Bread and Wine do after consecration continue in order to this Nourishment, and there∣fore no Transubstantiation either is or could be believed by them, who did attribute this power of nourishing to the Sa∣cramental Body and Blood of Christ. My next Corallary is,3. Coroll. That the Fathers speak such things of the Eucharist, as are perfectly inconsistent with its having after Consecration the bare Accidents, and Species of Bread and Wine. The Proof of this Corollary depends upon the preceding, which shewed that the General Doctrine of the Fathers was
that our Bodies are nourished by the Sacramental Body and Blood of Christ. Now as I made it evident in the last Corol∣lary that this Nourishment was infinitely inconsistent with the Nature of Christ his Natural Body now, and for ever to con∣tinue, in a glorified state; so it is as easie to shew, that such Nourishment is as inconsistent with your upstart ridiculous Doctrine of Accidents: Since the bare Accidents and Species cannot nourish a Body, and since it is impossible that That which hath neither Substance, Matter, Quantity nor Body should give or add to another both Substance, Matter, Quan∣tity and Body, every one of which are necessary to a corpo∣ral Nourishment: from which we must conclude that the Fa∣thers never so much as dreamed of bare Accidents after Con∣secration, since They taught and wrote that which is utter∣ly inconsistent with such things, and consequently with Transubstantiation. This Corollary I intended chiefly for your sake Mr. Scla∣ter, and the late Translator's of Bertram,Printed at Pais. 16 Monsiur Bileu the Dean of Sens. As you had a mind to iose upon us that Irenaeus his pars terrena of the Eucharist was the Acci∣dents, which consequently must nourish us,p. . notwithstanding their having nothing of Substance; sop. 89. §. 19. p. 118. §. 40. p. 152, 126. §. 19, &c. he very gravely up and down his Translation, and his Remarks tells us of the Bo∣dies being nourished by that which falls under the sense, by which he onely means as he continually explains himself, the meer figure and vail, the meer Accidents of Bread and Wine, with which the Natural Body and Blood of Christ are vailed. I must acknowledge that I am astonished to see a man, who hath doubtless a great deal of Learning, write direct non∣sense with such formal Gravity: I durst appeal to his own Conscience, and am perswaded that he does not believe him∣self, that Figures, Vails and Accidents, which according to all mens notions of them are without any substance, and are perfect nothings as to Body, can give nourishment to, or in∣crease the Substances of our Bodies. A man might as well write that people may dine at Church on the Ministers voice, as that non-entities, meer nothings can nourish our Bodies. But if you two be resolved to believe so still, I would desire no other Argument to make you both recant, than that you
two (were the thing possible in Nature to separate the Ac∣cidents, Qualities, and Modifications of Bodies from the sub∣stances of the Bodies themselves) might be put up, and con∣strained to live but one fortnight upon these same Accidents and Vails, and try how nourishing they are: I am pretty certain that it would cure you of believing corporeal Acci∣dents, and him of ever writing again that Figures do, or can nourish. I will conclude this Corollary with a passage outQuis concsserit, aut cui pos∣se fieri vi∣deatur, ut id quod in Subjecto est, maneat ipso intere∣unte Subje∣cto? Mon∣struosum enim, & à veritate alienissunum est, ut id, quod non esset, nisi in ipso esset, etiam cum ip∣sum non fuerit, possit esse. D. August. Solioliq. l. 2. c. 13. p. 536. Edit. Basil. 1569. of St. Austins Soliloquies, which will abundantly confirm all that I have said in this Corollary, Who can grant, (saith he) or think it possible, that that which is in [and depends for its being upon] a Subject, can continue, when the Subject it self is perished? for it is a Monstrous thing, and as far as can be from Truth, that that which would have no Being but for the Subject in which it is, can still have a Being, when its Subject [on which it depended] hath none. Before I pass to my next Corollary, I must make a little Digression to expostulate with the French Dean about his Translation of Rathramn or Bertram, and his Remarks upon it: He must certainly think so much wrong could not be put upon so venerable a Writer, and no body would speak in his behalf; it was a strange attempt to make Bertram a good Catholick, that is in your stile, a true man for Transub∣stantiation at last, when hitherto their Church had damned this Writer to the Pit of Hell, and Mr. Sclater himself hath very chronologically put him among the followers of Berenga∣rius, who first disturbed the long peace,p. 76. p. 75. and as long continued Faith of the Catholick Church of Transubstantiation. This strange attempt was accompanied with Arts and Tricks, as strange, and unusual with all honest men, that is, with a violent perverting of the Authors sense, and an unjust, and most foolish Turn of the whole design of Bertram.In his emarks upon Ber∣tram, p. 207, 208, &c. Printed at the end of his Translation. Paris, 1686. This Gentle man makes Bertram to write his Book against some that held
our Saviour's Natural Body was received in the Eucharist with∣out any Vail or Figure, that is, to put it into downright English, with the very same dimensions, Skin, Hair, Flesh, Head, Feet and Armes that he had on the Cross. But is it probable there ever were any such men? No, it is so far from it, that it is impossible there ever could, since this Opinion must be grounded upon their seeing it so, which I am sure never was, never could be: this Gentleman thinks the veryPraes. p. 21. knowing what stercoranism means is enough to confute it; but is it not far stronger against this fancy of his, for I dare not call it any mens Opinion, since I am very well satisfied there never could be any men that held such a thing. It is pleasant however to see, how the Dean goes about to prove, that there was such an Opinion, and such men, against against which our Author did write this Tract; he tells us, that one Abbaudus, and one Gaultier, Prior of St. Victor held that our Saviour's Natural Body was palpable and sensible in the Eucharist: but since these men by his own Confession lived two or three hundred years at soonest after Bertram, it is but a very odd way of proving that there were such men in or before Bertram's time, because there were about three hundred years after. Such proof is fitter for Children, than Deans of Cathedrals to use, and ought no more to pass from him,p. 213, 214. than if it came from them: but to help himself and his ridiculous Authorities, he tells us that it is not probable, that they two were the first Authors of this Opinion; now for brevity sake to set this aside, which is pitiful begging and not proving, were these two men after all, the Abbaudus and Gualtier of this Opinion, that our Saviour's Body is received in the Eucharist without any Vail, or Figure? This is so very false, that I wonder how any man, that hath common sense or any learn∣ing could have the face to assert it;—Cogita∣vetam & illis aliqua respondere, qui dicunt ipsum Corpus non frangi, sed in Albedine ejus & Rotunditate aliquid factitari, sed re∣cogitans ineptum esse in Evangelio Christi, de Albedine & Rotunditate disptare, &c. Abbaudus p. 211. — & sensualiter, non solum Sacramento, sed etiam veriate ma∣nibus Sacerdotum tractari & frangi & fidelim dentibus attèri. Ecce Catholi Eides. Ist autem Scholasticus sic exponit, vere quidem ait, est; sed in Sacramento tantum. Gaultier p. 212. in the Remarks. they say indeed that the Natural Body of Christ is palpable and sensible in the Eu∣charist, but that they do not mean sensible to the Eye, or visible,
is hence apparent because they talk of the Whiteness and and the Roundness, which certainly are that which you call the vails of our Saviour's Body; and all the intent of their Arguments was to prove, that tho' our Saviour's Body was hid under the Accidents of Whiteness, Roundness, &c. yet that it is palpable, and subject to be broke, since Whiteness and Round∣ness which are meer Accidents, could not be broken, or parted asunder. So that now we find by this Dean's help at last, that Rathramn's or Bertram's Book was writ against no body, and about nothing, since it is impossible there ever were such Persons, or such an Opinion for any body to write against. Certainly this Gentleman thought all the world asleep be∣sides their own Party, or he could never have had the cou∣rage to have writ such stuff, and tho' I do not wonder at the French King's giving his Royal Privilege to this Book, and calling the Translator, his dearly beloved, because I suppose he does not desire to be thought to have read, or examined the Book, yet I am perfectly amazed to find the Approbation of the Sorbonne to this most ridiculous nonsensical Piece, and can give my self no other reason for it, than that those People are resolved to approve and license any thing against us, tho' it be at the same time as much against common sense and reason. I hope some one will do, what I cannot have room, or leasure to do here, that is, take this Dean Boileau's Tran∣slation, and Remarks to task, the very foundation of which I have perfectly ruined in that little I have said here; But to return, My fourth Corollary is,4 Coroll. That the Illustrations and Compa∣risons, by which the Fathers used to prove a Change in the Elements, do prove their Opinions to have been opposite to Transubstantiation. I will here instance in the several Comparisons,Greg. Nyssen Orat. in Bapt. Christi. of the Water in Baptism,Am∣bros. de Sa∣cram. l. 4. c. 4. of the Person baptized,Cyrit. Hier. Catech. Mystag. 3. of the Oyl in Chrism,Greg. Nyssen. supra. of the Ordained Person,Idem Ibidem. and of the Altar. These the Fathers made use of to prove such a change in the Elements of Bread and Wine. Now there is no man of any learning or sense will say they taught any Transubstantiation of the Water, of the Person baptized, of the Oyl, of the Stones
of the Altar, or of the Person ordained, and therefore neither any Transubstantiation of the Elements of Bread and Wine. They compare these several changes together, and make them to be parallel and equal: So that it is evident they meant an equal change in them, and no Transubstantiation of one of them, more than of the rest. And farther, all the change they attribute to any of these things, the Water, the Oyl, the Baptized person, &c. is not at all as to their substance, by removing it away; but as to the Virtue, Quality, Office, and Ʋse of them by the Accession or Influence of the Spirit of God, as I have particularly shewed above in Gregory Nyssen, Cyril of Hierusalem and St. Ambrose: so that I may hence conclude, that as the Primitive Fathers taught no substantial change of any of those things mentioned, in order to the Effects they are dedicated to, so they taught none of the Bread and Wine in order to their Communica∣ting to us the Benefits and Virtue of our Saviour's Passion. I will end this Corollary with that of Theodoret,. Theodoret. Dial. 1. p. 18. Edit. Sirmond 1642. our Saviour honoured the Symbols and Signs; the Consecrated Bread and Wine, with the Titles of his Body and his Blood, not [by] changing their NATURE at all, but [by] adding GRACE to NATURE. My fifth Corollary shall be, That the Argument from the Eu∣charist used by the Fathers to prove the Verity of the two Natures in Christ, doth evidently deny, and reject any Tran∣substantiation. This I shall demonstrate from particular Fathers, most eminent in their times; the first of which shall be the Great St. Chrysostom, in his Epistle to Caesarius a Monk, whom he was endeavouring to secure from Apollinarius his Heresie, who denyed the Truth of the two Natures in Christ. For the dis∣proving of which, false Doctrine among other Arguments, He urges this from the Eucharist.Sicut enim antequam sanctifi∣cetur Panis, Panem nominamus, divinâ autem illum sanctificantè Gratiâ, me∣diante Sacerdote, liberatus est quidem Appellatione PANIS, dignus autem habitus est Dominici Corporis AP∣PELLATIONE, etiasi NATURA PANIS in ipso permansit, & non duo Corpora, sed unum Corpus Filii praedi∣catur: Sic & hic Divina , id est, inundante Corporis naturâ, u∣num filium, unam Personam, utre{que} haec fecerunt. Agnoscendum tamen incon∣fusam, & indivisibilem rationem, non in unâ solum Naturâ, sed in duobus perfectis. D. Chrys. Ep. ad Caes. in the Appendix to the Defence of the Ex∣position, &c. p. 156. For as [in the Eucharist] before the Bread is Consecrated, we call it Bread, but after that by the mediation of the Priest, the Di∣vine
Grace hath sanctified it, it is no longer called Bread, but is honoured with the name of our Lord's Body, tho' the nature of Bread continue in it still; and it doth not become two di∣stinct Bodies, but one Body of the Son of God; even so here the Divine Na∣ture being united to the humane [or Body], they together make up but one Son, one Person. But must however be acknowledged to remain without Con∣fusion after an indivisible manner, not in one NATURE, but in TWO PERFECT NATURES. The very same Argument doth Theodoret urge against the Eutychians, whose Heresie was the same with that of Apol∣lonarius, as I have above put down his words at large from his second Dialogue against the Eutychian Heresie (p. 70.) One of your own Popes, elasius I. against the same Here∣ticks, sayes,Certe Sacramen∣ta, quae su∣mimus Cor∣poris & sanguinis Christi, Di∣vina Res est, propter quod & per eadem Di∣vinae essici∣mur Consor∣tes Naturae, & tamen esse non de∣sinit SUB∣STANTIA vel NATU∣RA PANIS & VINI: & certe IMAGO & SIMILITUDO CORPORIS & SANGUINIS Christi in Actione Mysteriorum celebrantur. Satis ergo nobis evidenter ostenditu, hoc nobis in ipso Christo Domino sentiendum, quod in ejs Imagine profitemur, celebramus & sumius. ut sie in hane, scilicet in Divinam transeunt, Sancto spiritu periciente Substantiam, PER∣MANENTE tamen in suae (rect.) suâ PROPRIETATE NATURA: Sic illud ipsum Myste∣rium Principale, cujus nobis efficientiam, virtutém{que} veraciter REPRESENTANT, ex quibus constat proprit PERMANENTIBUS Unum Christum, quiae integrum, verm{que} Permantre de∣monstrant. Gelasius Papa de duabus in Christo Naturis in Biblioth. P Prum. Parte 3. Tom. 5. p. 671. Edit. Colon. 1618. Doubtless the SACRAMENTS of the Body and Blood of Christ, which we receive, are a Divine Thing, in that they make us Partakers of the Divine Nature, though the SUBSTANCE or NATURE of the BREAD and WINE doth still Remain: and indeed the Image and Likeness of Christ's Body and Blood is celebrated in the Mysterious Action. By this therefore we are plainly taught to think the same of our Lord Christ himself, as we profess, celebrate and receive, in, or by, his IMAGE, that as the Elements pass into a Divine Nature, by the Operation of the Holy Ghost, and yet continue to have their own Proper Nature, so that principal Mystery (the Incar∣nation) the Virtue and efficacy of which the [Consecrated Elements] do truly Represent unto us, doth as evidently demon∣strate, that there is One True and entire Christ, consisting of two distinct Natures.
Ephrem, or Ephramius, the Patriarch of Antioch in the sixth Century urges the same ArgumentApud Photii Bib∣lioth. num. 229. against the same Hereticks. That which I gather from these evident places of these great Men is, that as they held the humane Nature to continue entire after its Ʋnion with the Divine into the One Person of Christ, so they held the true Substance of the Bread to continue after its Consecration into the Sacramental Body of Christ; and that if they had not believed this, they would never have used it as an Argument to prove the other. These Places and this Argument are so convictive, that I ad∣mire that any man can believe Transubstantiation, that does but reade and consider them. I know some of your Writers say, that the Fathers by Substance and Nature here mean onely the outward Appearance and the bare Accidents. But, not to insist how we shall ever know any Author's sense in any one thing, if men may take this Liberty not onely to make a word signifie what they please, but the direct contrary to what it should and alwayes doth; This is to make the whole Argument of these several Greatest Men, of a Pope himself, and him perhaps as learned as ever sat in the Chair, and as Infalli∣ble, perfect Foolery and direct Sophistry; to give up their Cause, as well as their Arguments unto the Hereticks, their Enemies, while they make these Learned Fathers to prove that Christ had not the Appearance onely (which none of the Euty∣chians did deny him) but a true humane Nature by the Exam∣ple of a Thing, which had not the true Nature of Bread, but the bare Appearance of it without any Substance. Certainly such men do not consider what great wrong they doe to these Fathers in making their Arguments so very weak, and impertinent: Had They then believed Transubstantiation, it had been perfect Madness in Them to use the Eucharist for an Argument against the Hereticks, since the Hereticks would most easily have retorted it, and shewn out of their own mouths, that as upon Consecration the Substance of the Bread is gone, and nothing but the appearance of Bread remains; so upon the Ʋnion of the two Natures the humane was absorpt, or (to borrow a word of you for the Eutychians) transubstantia∣ted into the Divine, and onely the Appearance of flesh re∣mained:
and this the Fathers could never have disproved, if they themselves had held, that the Appearance of a Thing as to Colour, Dimension, Smell, Tast, &c. might subsist without the Substance unto which those Accidents do belong. In a word, had there been such a thing as Transubstantia∣tion believed then, as the Fathers could not have urged the Example of the Eucharist its continuing in the very same NA∣TURE and SUBSTANCE it had before Consecration against the Eutychian Hereticks; so it is Morally Impossible that those Hereticks should omit so home an Argument in Defence of themselves: but since these are never known to have urged any such thing for themselves, and we find the Greatest and most Learned Fathers urging the Example of the EUCHA∣RIST its remaining in the TRUE SUBSTANCES of BREAD and WINE after CONSECRATION, we have all the Reason in the World to conclude that the Fathers neither did, nor could ever believe such a thing as Transubstantiation. I might have added another Corollary from the Distinction between the Natural and the Spiritual Flesh and Blood of Christ so much insisted on by the Fathers, Clemens of Alexan∣dria,Paedag. L. 2. c. 2. and others, and especially by Rathramn or Bertram, who hath made it the Subject of the Second Part of his Book from Section 50th. p. 127; by our CountreymenIlla Eucharistia non est C∣pus Christi CORPO∣RALITER sed SPIRI∣TƲALI∣TER non Corpus il∣lud QƲO passus est, sed Corpus illud de quo locuas est: quando Panem & Vinum in EUCHARISTIAM nocte unâ ante Passionem suam Consecravit. Al∣sric. apud Wheloci notas in Bed. H. E. l. 4. c. 24. Alfrick Arch-Bop of Canterbury in an Epistle to Wulphin Bishop of Shirburn, and by Wulphin himselfHostia illa est Christi Corpus non Corporaliter, sed Spiritualiter. Non Corpus in quo passus est, sed Corpus de quo locutus est, quando Panem & Vinum ea quae Passionem antecessit nocte in Hostiam Consecravit, & de Sa∣crato Pane dixit, Hoc est Corpus Meum, &c. Wulfini Oratio Synodica apud Ʋsser. de Christ. Eccl. Succes. & Statu. c. 2. p. 44. in a Synodical Oration of his to his Clergy, in the Tenth Century near a Thousand years after Christ. I might also have insisted on some more such, particularly on that Account in HesychiusHesychius in Levit. l. 2. c. 8. of the Custome of the Church of Jerusalem to burn what was left of the Consecrated Elements; but to avoid being tedious, those I have already made are abundantly sufficient to shew, that Transubstantiation was not, could not be the Belief of the FATHERS; that their
FAITH concerning the EUCHARIST is the very SAME with the FAITH taught and embraced by the CHURCH of ENGLAND, which was the Thing I undertook to evince. CHAP. XXIV. Two or Three Reflexions upon the Remainder of Mr. Sclater's Book: The Conclusion. HAving done This, I shall not trouble my self with the rest of your Citations, but shall wave them as not one jot to the Purpose, since if they should be against OUR CHURCH, I have already proved that they as are much against THE PRIMITIVE CHURCH, I will onely make two or three Reflections upon the Rest of your Book, and then take leave of you. The First shall be upon your Great Lateran Council,p. 84. That it did determine (allowing, what is denyed by some of your own side, that things were managed fairly at this Meeting) for Transubstantiation, and for the PAPAL POWER of DEPOS∣ING KINGS at the same time. If it erred in Determining the LATTER, why not in Determining the FIRST. I am sure that TRANSUBSTANTIATION is as MUCH against the PRIMITIVE FATHERS, as that DAMNABLE HERE∣TICAL DOCTRINE of POPES POWER of DEPOSING of KINGS, and DISPOSING of their KINGDOMS can be.A Discourse concerning Christ's Kingdom, in TWO SERMONS preached before the University of Cam∣bridge, Printed for Green, 1682, p. 18, 19. And we do not envy your having TRANSUBSTANTIATI∣ON determined by such a Council, as FIRST Conciliarly de∣termined that HELLISH DOCTRINE of DEPOSING of KINGS, a Practice so Impious that Dr. BARNES not LONG SINCE in a SERMON before the FAMOUS UNIVERSITY of CAMBRIDGE thought it to be ONE of the most IRRE∣FRAGABLE ARGUMENTS (to use his own words) to prove HIM [CHRIST his PRETENDER VICAR the POPE] to be THE ANTICHRIST, and he goes on to tell THEM, That whereas some have taken a great deal of Pains to prove HIM [the POPE] so, from the obscure Prophecies of Daniel; And
others with great Labour and Difficulties have applied all the Phae∣nomena, and Characters of the Apocalyptical falle Prophet to the POPE; THIS is a most SURE and COMPENDIOUS WAY of stamping upon HIM the MARK of the BEAST. This Doctor's words and Opinion I have chosen the rather for this Purpose, because I believe he doth not pass in the Rank of MISREPRESENTERS among YOU, and because it was in a SERMON before an UNIVERSITY,p. 18. wherein HE told them, he would deal sincerely with THEM. I am perswaded that those of your Party that know HIM will grant him to be none of our fiery Zealots,p. 49, 50. N. B. and Furioso's against Popery, tho' HE doth in the second SERMON speak of JUST EXCLA∣MATIONS against the SUPERSTITIONS and IDOLATRIES of the CHURCH of ROME, and of a COMMENDABLE IN∣DIGNATION against the WICKED and HELLISH PRA∣CTICES of the ROMISH EMISSARIES to ESTABLIH the POPISH RELIGION. My next Reflexion is,p. 75, 76. that your Account of Berengarius discovers abundance of malice and of ignorance too, because He could not be the first Disturber of the long Peace of the Church, by teaching a Doctrine opposite to Transubstantiation, since in the Century before that Berengarius lived in, not to go abroad, in our OWN NATION the SAME DOCTRINE, that Berengarius did stand up for, was the COMMON FAITH of OUR CHURCH, and was publickly taught, and believed, as appears most evidently to a Demonstration from the Publick Authorized SAXON HOMILY for EASTER, and from the Writings, and SYNODICAL ORATIONS (where∣in a Man may most reasonably expect to meet with the ge∣nuine and publick Faith of the Church) of ALFRICK ARCH∣BISHOP of CANTERBURY [our ENGLISH PATRI∣ARCH] and of WULPHINE Bishop of SHIRBOURN, as I have already observed,p. 73.81. N. B. and put down their words; and the SAME FAITH was generally believed by almost ALL the FRENCH and ITALIANS as well as by the ENGLISH in Berengarius his time, as Matthew Westminster tells usEeodem tempore Be∣rengariuin haereticam prolapsus pravitatem, omnes Gal∣los, Italos et Anglos suis jampenecor∣ruperat pra∣vitatibus. Matth. West. ad annum, 1087. who was mistaken in saying it was by the Infection of Berengarius's Doctrine, since it is certain THAT was the GENERAL and PUBLICK DOCTRINE here in the Century before; and in
FRANCE the Century before that (to wit, in the NINTH CENTURY) as one may believe from the Writingr of Ber∣tram and Erigena. And here I cannot but observe how much you discover a gross ignorance, when you make Bertram,p. 76. and Scotus Eri∣gena (whom you have split into two) Followers of Berenga∣rius, whenas They both lived two Hundred years before Him. Nay a man would believe almost from you, that Berthram was at this present alive, when you say that Berengarius's Opi∣nion and Arguments are still urged by Bertram,p. 76. lately reprinted in English. You have a great deal more of such wretched stuff, but I am so weary of it, that I will but speak a word or two to you as to the Greeks, and then pass to a sarewell request to you, and your new Superiours. That the present great Ignorance, Poverty and Ambition of the Greek Church hath taught a great many of them, lea∣ving their own ancient Faith, to embrace for lucre sake the Latin Doctrine of Transubstantiation, is what we cannot now deny, but that which we have to say upon this business is, that those persons neither learned this new fangled Doctrine from the Fathers, from their own Liturgies, or from the an∣tient Creeds, or Ecclesiastical Constitutions;See Dr. Smith of Oxford his Miscellanea that Gabriel of Philadelphia (who studied and lived so long at Padua and Venice) first broached Transubstantiation in their language, since whom many Latinized Greeks have espoused it, and the four Patriarchs, at the Instance of Monsieur Nointel,Ricaut his Preface to his Present State of the Greek Church. or ra∣ther his French Mony (as I hope a Gentleman who was then in Turkey will e're long make it sufficiently appear) subscribed the Oriental Confession (drawn up by one bred in Italy) in the year 1672. not, as you falsly tell us, 1643. As their Ignorance (which is so great, that Sr. P. Ricaut says most Mechanicks among us are more learned and knowing than the Doctors and Clergy of Greece) disposes them for any Doctrine whatever, so their great Poverty (which no body denies) and their unaccountable and prodigious Ambiti∣on hurry them on to any thing for lucre sake. The Dire effects of their extravagant Ambition are sufficient∣ly seen in that they have thereby run their poor Church into such arrears with the Port, that it will never
be able to claw off.Ricaut's Prsnt State of the Greek Church. Through their changing of Patri∣archs (whereof theyp. 102, 102, &c. p. 98. had six in eight years at Constanti∣nople) and their most unchristian shouldering of one another out, the Poor Church was indebted in the year 1672. to the Grand Segnior three hundred and fifty thousand Dollars, as Sr. Paul says he was informed by the Bishop of Smyrna. This is enough to shew the miserable Humour as well as Condition of those People, who to get monys to buy out the incumbent Patriarch and to place themselves tho' but for a month on the Patriarchal Throne at Constantinople, would I question not subscribe a worse Doctrine than that of Tran∣substantiation, since they have ignorance enough for any. The behaviour of the Arch-Bishop of Samos to Doctor Smith of Maudlins, makes me to have a very slender opinion of those sort of men:See Dr. Smiths Preface to Miscellanea when he met with him in France, then Children only received in the one kind, and they could not di∣gest Flesh; but as soon as he had crossed the Water, and breathed a little English Air, then Children did undoubted∣ly partake in both kinds, as he quickly wrote to Doctor Smith. But enough of this Man, and the Humour of that miserable People, which is nothing to the purpose of a Con∣sensus Veterum. The Request I have now to make to you Mr. Sclater is, that you would consider what a miserable mistake you have made about these things, how grievously you have suffered your self to be imposed upon, in leaving a Communion which is truly Catholick and Apostolical, and hath not one unlawful Term of Communion, and in falling to a Church which for all the Paints and Washes laid on it appears to be very deform∣ed, and hath a great many unlawful Terms of Communion. If their Condition be dangerous that were bred in that Communi∣on, if they have any opportunities (as all here in England have) of knowing more and of better information; what must be thought of yours, who can pretend no want of Infor∣mation, have had so long a Tract of opportunities to have secured you even in old age from such a doleful Fall; I do from my soul wish that you may (before death surprizes) recover your self, and return to that true Faith from which you have swerved, and that all that lye under the same
guilt may in God's good time be again gathered into our Apostolical Church. May God remove all Ostacles, that do at present hinder such a Return. And my request to your Superiours is, that if ever they think fit to have another Convert appear in Print against us, they would oblige us so far as to chuse one that hath a little more Modesty, and a little more Learning, one that can distinguish between the Presbyters of Achaia and St. An∣drew, between the Second General Council of Constantinople,p. 72. and the (reputed) Seventh at Nice, whence he quotes that impudent lye of Epiphanius the Deacon; one that can translate what he is taught to borrow; that so if ever any of our Church vouchsafe to answer him, he may not have so ma∣ny complaints to make as I have had in the Examination of Mr. Sclater's Book. March 1st. 1686. THE END.
