H1233 13296254 98890
THE Right of Succession ASSERTED, Against the False Reasonings AND Seditious Insinuations OF R. DOLMAN alias Parsons, And others. By the Learned Sir JOHN HAYWARD Kt. Doctor of Laws. Dedicated to the King; AND Now reprinted for the Satisfaction OF THE ZEALOUS PROMOTERS OF The Bill of Exclusion. LONDON: Printed for Mat. Gillyflower, Will. Hensman, and Tho. Fox; Booksellers in Westminster-hall. 1683.
TO THE KING'S Most Excellent Majesty. Most dread Soveraign, TO offer Excuse for that which I needed not to have done, were secretly to con∣fess, that having the Judge∣ment to discern a fault, I wanted the Will not to commit it. A∣gain, to seek out some colours to make it more plausible, were to bring in que∣stion the sufficiency thereof. Therefore without further insinuation either for Pardon or for Acceptance, I here present unto your Majesty this Defence, both of the present Authority of Princes, and of Succession according to Proximity of Bloud; wherein is maintained, that the People have no lawful Power to remove
the one, or repel the other: In which two Points I have heretofore also decla∣red my opinion, by publishing the tragi∣cal Events which ensued the deposition of King Richard, and Usurpation of King Henry the Fourth. Both these labours were undertaken with particular respect to your Majesties just Title of Succession in this Realm: and I make no doubt, but all true-hearted Englishmen will always be both ready and forward to defend the same with expence of the dearest drops of their bloud. The Lord vouchsafe to second your honourable Entrance to the Possession of this Crown, with a long and prosperous continuance over us. Your Majesties most humble and faithful Subject, JO. HAYWARD. Qui tibi Nestoreum concessit pectus & ora, Nestoreos etiam concedat Jupiter annos.
TO R. Dolman. YOu will think it strange, Master Dolman, that having lain these many years in qui∣et harbour from the tempest of mens Tongues, you should now feel a Storm to break upon you; peradventure you were perswaded (as every one suffereth himself to be beguiled with desire) that this silence did grow, either upon acceptance of your opinion, or from insufficiency to oppose against it: I assure you neither; but partly from contempt, and partly from fear. The contempt proceeded from the manner of your writing, wherein you regard not  but  not how either truly or penitently, but how largely you do write: endeavouring nothing else, but either to abuse weak judgements, or to feed the hu∣mours of such discontented persons, as want or dis∣grace hath kept lower than they had set their swel∣ling thoughts. The fear was occasioned by the nim∣ble Ear which lately was born to the touch of this String: For which cause our English Fugitives did stand in some advantage, in that they had free scope to publish whatsoever was agreeable to their plea∣sure;
knowing right well, that their Books could not be suppressed, and might not be answered. It may be you will question, wherefore I have not answered your Second Part: It is ready for you, but I have not now thought fit to divulge the same; part∣ly because it hath been dealt in by some ohrs; but principally because I know not how convenient it may seem to discuss such particulars, as with general both liking and applause are now determined. I forbar to express your true name; I have reserved th to my Answer to some cast Pamphlet which I eect you will cast forth against me: And I make ttle doubt but to drive you in the end to such desperate extremity, as (with Achitophel) to sacrifice your self to your own shame, because your mischievous Counsel hath not been embraced.
AN ANSWER TO THE FIRST CHAP∣ter; whereof the Title is this. That Succession to Government by nearness of blood is not by law of Nature or divine, but only by humane and positive Laws of every particular common-wealth: and conse∣quently, that it may upon just cause, be altered by the same. HERE you begin, that other conditions are requisite for coming to Government by succession, besides pro∣pinquity or priority of blood; which condi∣tions must be limited by some higher autho∣rity than that of the King, and yet are they prescribed by no Law of Nature or Divine. For otherwise, one that wanteth his wits or sences, or is a Turk in Religion, might suc∣ceed in Government; which you affirm to be against all Reason, Law, Religion, Wis∣dom, conscience, and against the first end of Institution of common wealths. And that Byl∣lay, who maintaineth the contrary, doth it in favor and flattery of some particular Prince. What conditions are requisit in succession besides priority of blood, and by what au∣thority they are to be limited, I will then examin when you shall propound: but for your reason of this assertion, you must have
other men them Billay out of credit, for rea∣son, law, conscience, and wisdom, before you carry it for clear good. As for entire contrariety in Religion, or difference in some particular points thereof, whether it be a sufficient cause of exclusion, or no, I will refer my self to that place, where you do strain your strength about it. In disabili∣ties to govern,In. c. 1. tit. de success. feud. Baldus doth distinguish, whe∣ther it be natural, or accidental, affirming, that in the first case it sufficeth to exclude, because he that is incapable of government from his birth, had never any right of suc∣cession setled in him: in the other it doth not suffice; because he that is once inveited in right of succession, cannot be deprived thereof without his fault. In quaest. a rex Franciae recognosca superiorem. In l. nemo. D. de leg L. In l. cum prae∣ror. non autem. D. de Jud.Many do follow this distinction; Io. Igne∣us doth limit it, to such dignities as are not absolute. But Iason, Angelus, and divers others do indistinctly hold, that the eldest Son of a King or other Governor, although he be born either furious, or a fool, or other∣wise defective, cannot therefore be excluded from his succession. These affirm, that any end of institution of Common-wealths is, if not fully, yet bet∣ter satisfied, by appointing a protector of the state (as upon divers occasions it hath been usual) then by acknowledging another Prince; as well for other respects, as for that by continuance of succession in one discent, a fair and ordinary occasion is removed, both of mutiny and invasion. For enemies will
not readily attempt, and subjects do most willingly obey that prince, whose ancestors have worn out those humors both of hatred and contempt which do commonly accom∣pany new raised estates. I will not confirm this last opinion, by the example of Neptune the son of Saturn; who, although he was lame on both his legs, yet had the Govern∣ment of the sea allotted to him: but I will confirm it by the practise of Athens and La∣cedaemon, the two eyes of Graecia,Apud Aristor. rhetor. 3. ca. 10 Lib 5. In cep∣sychore. as Leptines and Iustine do aptly term them. Herodous reporteth that when Alexandrides King of Sparta left 2. sons, Cleomenes the eldest, di∣stracted in wits, and Dorieus the youngest, both of ability and inclination to all actions of honor, the Lacedaemonians acknowledged Cleomenes for their King. Agesilaus also the famous King of Lacedaemon was lame, as Plutarch and Probus Aemilius do report. Paul. Orosius saith,In eju vita. Lib. 3. ca. 2▪ that the Lacedaemonians did choose to have their King halt rather than their Kingdom. Heredotus also writeth that after the death of Codrus King of Athens,Ubl. 5. Medon his eldest son, and Neleus the next, did contend for the Kingdom, because Ne∣leus would not give place to Medon, who was by reason of his lame legs, if not unable, yet unapt to govern. The matter being almost brought to the sentence of the sword, it was mediated between them, that the contro∣versie should be decided by the Oracle of A∣pollo. Apollo was consulted; by whose Judg∣ment Medon was declared King. Iosephus 1
hath left recorded,Antiqu. 14. ca. that Aristobulus and Hircanus after a long and cruel contention for the Kingdom of Jury, made Pompey the Judge of that right which by arms they were unable to decide. Hircanus alleaged that he was Eldest brother; Aristobulus ex∣cepted, that Hircanus was insufficient to govern a Realm. Hereupon Pompey gave sentencè, that Aristobulus should give over the Kingdom which he did usurp, and Hir∣canus be restored to his Estate. The like Judgment doth Livy write,Lib. 1.2. bel∣li Punici. that Annibal gave for the Kingdom of that Country, which is now called Savoy,Allobroges. restoring Bran∣cus unto his right, from which he had been by his younger brother expelled. And al∣though Pyrrus did appoint that Son to suc∣ceed, whose sword had the best edge, yet was the eldest acknowledged, who bare the least reputation for valour. Lisander moved the Lacedaemonians to decree, that the most sufficient, and not always the next in bloud, of the line of Hercules should be admitted to the Kingdom, yet Plutarch saith, that he found no man to second his advise.In Lisandr. I will add an example of later times. La∣dislaus, a man more famous for the sanctity of his life, then for his Kingdom of Hungary, left by his brother Grisa two Nephews; Co∣lomannus the elder, who was dwarfy, lame, crook-backt, crab-faced, blunt, and blear-eyed, a stammerer, and (which is more) a Priest: and Almus the younger, a man free from just exception. Yet these respects set
aside, a dispensation was obtained from the Pope, and Colomannus notwithstanding his deformities and defects, was accepted by the people for King. Girard writeth,Michael Ric∣cius. Lib 1 d l' e∣state de France that the custom of the French was to honour their Kings whatsoever they were, whether fool∣ish or wise, able or weak: esteeming the Name of King to be sacred, by whomsoe∣ver it should be born. And therefore they supported in Estate, not only Charls the sim∣ple, but Charls the 6. also, who raigned ma∣ny years in open distemperature and distur∣bance of mind. So you see, that the practise of many Na∣tions have been contrary to your conceit: and that the interpreters of the civil and Ca∣non Law (good arbitrators of natural equi∣ty) either bare against you, or stand for you only when disability is natural: adding fur∣ther, that if the excluded successor hath a Son, before or after succession doth fall, free from any such defect, the right of the King∣dom descendeth unto him. This affirmeth Baldus, Socinus, Cardinal Alexander,Cons. 389 lib. 1 Cons. 47 lib 3. In c. 1. tit. an mutus vel im∣perfectus. in c. vit. Epis. vel ab. Lib. 3. D. de in∣terdic. & rel. l. 2. C. de liberi. & cor. lib. l. divi fratres D jur. pat. l. quae ritur D. de bo. lib. panor. cons. 85. lib. 1. Io. Anno. in c. significasti de fo. comp. In l. vii. in si. de senat. and before them, Andreas Iserna. Because the Inability of Parents doth not prejudice the Children, especially in regard of their na∣tural Rights: neither is it any impediment wherefore they should not enjoy either pri∣viledge or dignity from the person of their Grand-father. Magis est (saith Vlpian) vt avi potius dignitas prosit, quam obsit casus pa∣tris. It is fitter that the Son should receive
profit by the dignity of his Granfather, then prejudice by his Fathers chance. And this (we may think) is a reasonable respect, wherefore other interpreters have not allowed their principal opinion, in re∣pelling him who is disabled by birth. For if another be once possessed of his place, it will be hard for any of his Children to at∣taine their right. Whereupon disunion, factions, Wars may easily arise. It is incon∣venient (I grant) to be governed by a King, who is defective in body or in mind: But it is a greater inconvenience, by making a breach in this high Point of State, to open an Entrance for all disorders, wherein am∣bition and insolency may range at large. For as mischief is of that Nature that it cannot stand, but by supportance of another Evil, and so multiplyeth in it self, till it come to the highest, and then doth ruine with the proper weight: So minds once exceeding the bounds of obedience, cease not to strengthen one boldness by another, until they have in∣volved the whole State in confusion. We find that Gabriel the youngest brother of the House of Saluse kept his Eldest brother in close Prion, usurped his Estate, and gave forth for satisfaction to the People, that he was mad. I could report many like Exam∣ples: But I shall have occasion to speak more hereof in the further passage betwixt us. After this you conclude three points. 1 That inclination to live in company is of nature.
2 That Government and Jurisdiction of Magistrates is also of nature. 3 That no one particular Form of Govern∣ment is natural; for then it should be the same in all Countries, seeing God and Na∣ture is one to all. But before I joyn with you, either in con∣tradiction or consent, it shall not be amiss to declare briefly, what we understand by the law of nature, and by what means it may  known. God n the creation of man, imprinted certain rules within hi soul, to direct him in all the actions of his life: Which rules, be∣cause we took them when we took our Be∣ing are commonly called the primary Law of Nature: Of which sort the canons accompt these precepts following. To worship God: To obey Parents and Governors,c. lus naturale dist. 3. and thereby to conserve common society: lawful conjunction of man and woman: succession of children: edu∣cation of children: acquisition of things which pertain to no man: equal liberty of all: to com∣municate commodities: to repel force: to hurt no man: and generally, to do to another as he would be done unto: which is the sum and substance of the second table of the deca∣logue. And this Law Thomas Aquine affirm∣eth to be much depraved by the fall of man;1.2 q. 94 d.2 and afterwards more by error, evil custom, pertinacy, and other corrupters of the mind: and yet doth it yield us so large light, that Saint Paul did esteem it sufficient to con∣demnRom. cap. 2. & 3
the Gentiles, who had no other Law written. Out of these precepts are formed certain customs, generally observed in all parts of the World: which, because they were not from the beginning, but brought in after∣ward, some as a consequence or collection, others as a practise or execution of the first natural precepts are called the secondary Law of nature, and by many also the Law of Nations.Quod naturalis ratio inter om∣nes homines constituit, id a∣pud omnes pe∣raeque custodi∣tur vocaturque ju gentium l. ix. D. de just. & jur. Just. de rer. di∣. singulorum. In re consensio omnium gen∣tium, lex natu∣rae putanda est. 1 Thuscul. In l. 1. C. de tstam. Gaius, 'saith: that which natu∣ral reason doth constitute among all men, is ob∣served by all alike, and termed the Law of Na∣tions: and the same is called by Iustinian; the Law of Nature. Cicero likewise saith: the consent of all Nations is to be esteemed the Law of Nature. But this is to be taken, not as though all Nations have at any time observed one usage alike: it is not necessary saith Baldus, that the word all should carry so large a sence: neither hath it ever been brought into know∣ledge what customs all Nations have held in use. And it is most certain, that there is not one point or precept of the Law of Na∣ture, but, by reason, partly of the weakness, partly of the corruption, which the fall of Adam did fasten in his posterity, some peo∣ple have at all times, either neglected or else depraved: some being so dull as they could not perceive, others so malicious as they would deny, that which nature did lay before them Yea, such is either the weak∣ness or wilfulness of our judgment, that
they who are not only admitted but admired for wise men, do many times disagree in de∣termining what is most agreeable to nature: much less may we either expect or imagine, that all Nations, so different, so distant, ne∣ver so much as now, and yet not now fully discovered, should jump in one Judgment for uniform observation of any custom: nei∣ther is that no natural Right,Socrat. as Zenophon noteth, which many daily do transgress. And therefore Donellus did unjustly reject the discription which Gaius gave of the Law of Nations,In com. ju. 6. by taking the word all in the amplest sence.Ad ephes. 4. Tit. S. Ambrose and S. Hierom did in this sort declare it; that we are to take that for a Decree of Nations, which suc∣cessively and at times hath been observed by all. But as for any one time, as it is to be judged the decree or custom of a whole Ci∣ty, which hath passed by consent of the most part, although all have not allowed, and some perhaps have opposed against it;C 3. de decret. ab ord. fac. l. 32. de legi. so is it to be esteemed the Law of Nations, the com∣mon Law of the whole World, which most Nations in the World are found to imbrace. And because Government was not from the beginning, but induced as a consequence of the primary Precept of Nature; to main∣tain human Society: therefore whensoever we speak of natural Government, we are in∣tended to mean the secondary Law of Na∣ture, which is the received custom, successive∣ly of all, and always of most Nations in the World.
Out of this we may gather, that three rules do chiefly lead us to the Knowledge of this Law. The first is that which Cicero in the like giveth:Ad Q. fratrem. provocandum ad sensus Interiori nes∣co qua con∣scientia iaec setimus. de util. cred. Omne malum aut timore aut pudore natura perfudit. in a∣pol. Licet possint negare, non possunt tamen non erubece∣re: 3. de offic. 14. L. 3. si auro. D. deusurp. l. 8. D. quib. mo. pi. fol. l. 15. de cond. l. 14. D. de nup. 7. var. 16. topic. prin. to appeal vnto sence: because there is no man but by the light of nature, hath some sence of that which nature doth allow. S. Augustine saith, I know not by what conscience we feel these things: and likewise Tertullian: Nature hath tainted all Evil ei∣ther with fear or shame. Whereto agreeth that which S. Ambrose saith: although they de∣ny it, they cannot but shew some tokens of shame. Hereupon the authors of the civil Law do reject that for unjust, which is not demand∣ed withou shew of shame. For, as Cassio∣dorus writeth; God hath given all men such a sence of justice, that they who know not the Laws, cannot but acknowledge the reason of truth. But because this light of nature, in many men is exceeding dim; the next rule is to ob∣serve what hath been allowed by those who are of greatest both wisdom and integrity, in whom Nature doth shew her self most clear. For as Aristotle saith; that is probable which proved men do approve. Among these, the first place pertaineth unto them, who by inspiration of God, have compiled the Books of holy Scripture: to whom as attendants we may adjoyn the antient Counsels and Fa∣thers of the Church. The next place is to be given to the Authors of the civil Law; whose Judgment hath been these many hundred Years, admired by many, approv∣ed by all, and is at this day accepted for Law,
almost in all states of the Christian common∣wealth. To these also we may adjoyn, as attendants, their interpreters of most ap∣proved note. The third place is due to Phi∣losophers, Historigraphers, Orators and the like; who have not unprofitably endeavo∣red to free nature of two clouds, wherewith she is often overcast: gross ignorance, and subtil Error. But because natural reason, as Alciate affirmeth, doth sometimes vary,5. consil. 38. according to the capacity of particular men; even as the Sun, being in it self always the same, giveth neither heat nor light to all alike: the third rule followeth,Ipsius vocem naturae▪ de na∣tur. deor. 15. prob. 3. to observe the common Use of all Nations, which Cicero calleth; the voice of Nature: because as Aristotle hath written, it is not done by chance which every where is done. Plato saith,8. de legib. this shall be the proof hereof, that no man doth otherwise speak: & likewise Baldus,4 consil. 496. I dare not disallow that which the World alloweth. And in this common Law or Custom of the World, three circum∣stances are to be considered: antiquity, continuance, and generality. Now when your first position is so clearly true, that you do but guild Gold in labour∣ing to prove it: for man is not only sociable by nature, but (as Aristotle affirmeth) more sociable than any other living creature.1. polit. These notorious points, the more we prove, the more we obscure. Your second is also true, for as Tully saith,sine imperio nec domus ul∣la, nec civitas, nec gens, nec hominem uni∣versum genus stare, nec re∣rum natura omnis nec ipse denique mun∣dus potest. 3. de legib. without Empire, neither House, nor City, nor
Nation, nor Mankind can stand, nor the Na∣ture of all things, nor in a word, the World it self. Whereto agreeth that of Aristotle: Government is both necessary and also profitable. But whereas you bring in proof hereof, that there was never People found, either in an∣tient Time, or of late Discovery, which had not some Magistrate to govern them, neither is it necessary,. 1. polit. ca. 3. and yet false. It is not ne∣cessary to have so large a consent of Nations, as I have declared before: and it is false that in all Times and Nations there have been Magistrates. After the deluge, Magistrates were not known until Kings did arise, as hereafter it shall appear. The Jews were often without either Magistrates or Govern∣ment: Whereupon in certain places of the Book of Judges it is thus written:ca. 17. ver. 6. & ca. vit. in si. In those days there was no King in Israel, but what seemed right to every man that did he. Sometimes Democratical Government doth draw to a pure Anarchie; and so doth the in∣terregnum of elective principalities. Leo Afer reporteth, that in Guzala, a country of A∣frick, the people have neither King nor form of Government; but upon days of mart, they elect a Captain to secure their traffick. The same Author delivereth, that the inha∣bitants of the Mountain Magnan, upon the frontiers of Fez, have no form of common wealth, but do stay travellers (unpartial judges) to decide their controversies. Leo himself was arrested to be their judge, and when he had spent many days in determin∣ing
their debates, he was in the end present∣ed with hens, ducks, geese and other of their country commodities, which served only to discharge his host. And if this your reason should be of force then were not sociability natural, because many men have made choice to live alone. But how then, will you say, is nature im∣mutable? It is in abstracto, but it is not in subjecto. Or thus: In it self it is not chang∣ed: in us, by reason of our imperfections, it is. Or else more plainly; it is not changed, but it is transgressed. But nature, you say, is alike to all. Not so, good sir, because all are not apt alike to receive her: even as the sun beams do not reflect alike upon a clean and clear glass, and upon a glass that is either fil∣thy or course: And in many, not only men, but nations, evil custom hath driven nature out of place, and setteth up it self in stead of nature.L. si quis post. humo. D. de lib. et post. Your third conclusion, that no particular form of Government is natural, doth not find so easie acceptance. Your only proof is, that if it were otherwise, there should be one form of Government in all Nations; because God and nature is one to all. But this reason I have encountred before: and yet you take pains to puff it up with many wast words; how the Romans changed Government, how in Italy there is, a Pope, a King and many Dukes; how Millaine, Burgundie, Loraine, Bavier, Gascoine, and Britain the less were changed from Kingdoms to Dukedoms, how
Germany was once under one King, and is now divided among Dukes, Earles, and o∣ther supreme Princes; How Castile, Aragone, Portugall, Barcelona and other countries in Spain, were first Earldoms, then Dukedoms, then several Kingdoms, and now are united into one; how Boeme and Polonia were once Dukedoms, and now are Kingdoms; how France was first one Kingdom, then divided into four, and lastly reduced into one. How England was first a Monarchy, under the Britains, then a Province under the Romans, after that divided into seven Kingdoms, and lastly reduced into one; how the People of Israel were first under Patriarcks, Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, then under Captains, then under Judges, then under high Priests, then under Kings, and then under Captains and high Priests again. I will not follow you in every by way whereinto your errors do lead (for who would have adventured to affirm, that the Children of Israel were under Abraham and Isaac; and that the Britains at the first were under one King, whereas Caesar reporteth that he found four Kings in that Country which is now called Kent) but I will only in∣sist upon the principal point, in regard where∣of, all this bundel of words is like a blown bladder, full of wind, but of no weight. For first you do but trifle upon tearms, in putting a difference between Kings, Dukes, and Earls, which hold their state with Sove∣raign power. We speak not of the names,
but of the Government of Princes. Supreme Rulers may differ in name; they may change name also, either by long use, or upon occa∣sion: and yet in Government neither differ nor change. Secondly, it is a more vain jeast to put a difference (in this regard) between a great territory and a small. If a Kingdom be en∣larged or streightned in limits, the Govern∣ment is not thereby changed; if many King∣doms be united into one; if one be divided into many; the nature of Government is no more altered, then is the tenure of land, either when partition is made, or when ma∣ny parts accrewe into one. The knot of doubt is, whether it be not natural, that one state, be it great or small, should rather be com∣manded by one person, howsoever intitled, then by many. And if we descend into true discourse, we shall find, that the very sinews of Govern∣ment do consist, in commanding and in obey∣ing. But obedience cannot be performed, where the commandments are, either re∣pugnant or uncertain; neither can these in∣conveniencies be any ways avoided, but by union of the Authority which doth com∣mand. This union is of two sorts; first, when one commandeth; secondly, when many do knit in one power and will. The first union is na∣tural; the second is by means of amity, which is the only band of this collective body, and the more they are who joyn in Government,
the less natural is their union, and the more subject to dissipation,Arduum sem per eodem lo∣ci potentiam & concordiam esse .iiii. annal. For as Tacius saith: equality and amity are scarce compatible Natural reason teacheth us, that all multi∣tude beginneth from one, and the ancient Philosophers have held, that from unity all things do proceed, and are again resolved in∣to the same.In principio lib. de vitis sen∣tentiisque Phi∣losophorum. Lib. de dogma∣tis Philosopho∣rum. In successioni∣bus Philoso∣phorum. Lib. 8. de vitis & sententils Phi∣losophorum. Lib 1. contra lovinian. C. nuptiae. 32. di. 1. Lib. 6. de lanit. tuend. In Timaeo. In Philebo. In Epinomide. Of which opinion Laertius re∣porteth that Museus of Athens was Author, who lived long before Homer: but after∣wards it was renewed by Pythagoras, as Plutarch, Alexander, and Laertius do write: who added thereunto, that Unity is the o∣riginal of good, and duality of evil: And of this opinion Saint Hierome was alo, whose sentence is repeated in the canonical decrees, but under the title & name of Saint Ambrose. Hereupon Homer doth oftentimes call good , & applyeth the terme , to affliction & trouble. Hereupon Galen also writeth, that the best in every kind is one. Plato produceth all things from one; measureth all things by one; and reduceth all things into one. The whole world is nothing but a great state; a state is no other then a great family; and a family no other then a great body. As one GOD ruleth the World, one master the family, as all the members of one body receive both sence and motion from one head, which is the seat and tower both of the understanding and of the will: so it seem∣eth no less natural, that one state should be governed by one commander. The first of these arguments was used by
Soliman, Lord of the Turks.Anno. 1552. Who having strangled Sultane Mustapha his son, because at his return out of Persia, he was received by the soldiers with great demonstrations of joy; he caused the dead body to be cast forth before the armie, and appointed one to cry; There is but one God in Heaven, and one Sultane upon Earth. The second was used by Agesilaus, to one that moved the Spartans for a popular government; go first (said he) and stablish a popular Government within your own doors.Unum imperil corpus unius a∣nimo regen∣dum videtur. 1. annal. To the third Tacitus did allude, when he said: The body of one Empire seemeth best to be governed by the soul of one man. In the Heavens there is but one Sun; which Serinus also applyeth unto Govern∣ment,, in affirming, that if we set up two Suns, we are like to set all in combustion. Many sociable creatures have for one company, one principal either Governour or guide; which all Authors take for a natural Demonstration of the Government of one. And if you require herein the testimony of men, you shall not find almost any that writeth upon this subject, but he doth,. In cap. 2. if not allege, yet allow that of Homer: : one Lord, one King. Plutarch de∣clareth both his own Judgment concerning this point, and also the consent of others, in affirming that all men did acknowledge, that the Government of a King is the most excellent benefit that God hath given unto Men.
Callimachus saith, that Kings proceed from God: Homer affirmeth, that they are cherished by God. Your self do shew out of Aristotle, Seneca, Plutarch, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostome and S. Peter, that Monarchy is the most exeellent and perfect Government, most resembling the Government of God, and most agreeable unto Nature. But what do you mean to acknowledge all this, and yet to deny that Monarchy is natural? do you take it to be above Nature? or how else is it most excellent and perfect? how is it most agreeable to Nature, and yet not natural? can any Action be most agreeable to Justice, and yet not just? I know not by what strata∣gem, or cunning crank of the Schools, you can be made agreable to your self. But now if we consider the general custom of all people, we shall find that all the anti∣ent Nations in whom the Laws of Nature were least corrupt, had no other Govern∣ment: as the Assyrians, Medes, Persans, Parthians, Indians, Scythians, Sirians, Phaeni∣cians, Arabians, Aegyptians, Africans, Numi∣dians, Mauritanians, Britans, Celtes, Gaules, Latines, Hetruscanes, Sicilians, Athenians, Lacaedemonians, Corinthians, Achaeans, Sicy∣onians,certum est omnes anti∣quas gentes regibus paru∣isse. 3. de legb. In Catilin. Principio re∣rum, gentium nationumque imperium p∣nes reges erat, lib. 1. Candians, and in one word, all. Tullie saith: it is certain, that all antient Nations were under Kings: with whch opinion Salust consenteth; and Iustine also, where he saith; the Empire of Nations at the first was in the Hands of Kings. And when the People of Is∣rael desired a King, they alledged that all o∣ther
Nations were governed by Kings. The Athenians were the first (as Plinie affirmeth) who set up the Government of many, whose example certain other Towns of Greece did follow, rather blinded by ambition,1. reg. 8.5. then led by Judgment. Among these, if the highest Authority were in the least part of the Citi∣zens, it was called Aristocracy; if in the most or in all, it was termed Democracy;In ca. 2. wherein you confess that neither they did nor could any long time continue; but after many Tu∣mults, Seditions, Mutinies, Outrages, Inju∣sticies, banding of factions, and inundations of blood, they were in the end either dis∣solved or vanquished, and reduced again under Government of one. The state of Rome began under Kings; it attained the highest pitch both of Glory and Greatness under Emperors: in the middle time, wherein it never inoyed x. years toge∣ther free from sedition, Polybius saith that it was mixed; the Consuls representing a Mo∣narchy, the Senate, an Aristrocacy, and the common People a Democracy: which opini∣on was likewise embraced by Dionysius Ha∣licarnasseus, Cicero, Cantarine and others. But many do hold that the State of Rome at that time was popular: which seemeth to be confirmed by the famous Lawyer and Coun∣seller Vlpian, where he saith: that the Peo∣ple did grant all their Power and Authority to the Prince. Whatsoever it was in show,Utpote cum lege regia quae de imperio e∣jus lata est, po∣pulus ei & in cum omne su∣um imperium & potestatem confera l. 1. D. de const. princ. Sub umbra e∣jus urbem ter∣rarum domi∣nam latere, e∣jus nutus pro decretis pa∣trum pro jussis populi esse. lib. 30. Nemo erat quo magis in∣nixa res roma∣na, quam in Papiio curso∣re extaret. lib. 9. In pelopid. In pericle, in very deed it was always governed by some one principal Man. Livie writeth of Scipio,
that under his shadow the City was prote∣cted, and that his looks were in stead of Laws: and likewise of Papirius cursor; that he su∣stained the Roman affairs. So said Thucidides, that Athens was in appearance popular, but Aristides was the true Monarch thereof: and Plutarch also affirmeth, that Pelopidas and Epaminondas were no less then Lords of the popular State of Thebes: but after the death of these Men, both the States of Athens and Thebes floated in Tumults, as the same Au∣thor observeth, like a ship in a Tempest with∣out a Pilot. So did Peter Sodarine onfalonier of Florence give forth, that the title of popu∣larity was used as a mask, to shadow the Ty∣ranny of Laurence Medices: but florence did never so flourish both in honor, wealth, and quiet, as under that Tyranny. Also in actions of weight, in great dangers and necessities the Romans had recourse to one absolute and supreme Commander, which Livie cal∣leth the highest refuge;Trepidi pattes ap summum auxlium de∣currunt Dicta∣torem dici pla∣cuit lib. 6. Dictatoris e∣dictum pro numine sem∣per observa∣tum. lib. 6. Tantus erat dictatoris ter∣ror apud ho∣tes, ut o cre∣ato statlin à manibus dis∣cesserint, lib. eo. Ut recte pru∣dentes qui∣dam de vita Augusti post mortem ejus inter se conse∣rentes, dixe∣runt, non aliud discordantis patriae reme∣dium fuisse, quam si ab uno regeretur. ann. 1, In epist. 1. ad Q. Fratrem. whose Authority as the Romans did most reverently respect, so was it many times fearful to their Enemies. Of the first, Livie saith; the Dctators edict was always observed as an Oracle: of the se∣cond, so soon as a Dictator was created, such a Terror came upon the Enemies, that they de∣parted presently from the walls. Likewise in cases of extremity the Lacedemonians had their high Governor whom they called Har∣mostes; the Thessalonians had their Archos; and the Mytileans also their great Aezymnetes. Lastly, Tacitus reporteth that certain wise
men discoursing of the like of Augustus after his death, affirmed rightly, that there was no other mean to appease the discords of the state, but by reducing it under the Govern∣ment of one. Let us now take a view of our present age. In all Asia, from whence Tully saith, civility did first spread into other parts of the World, no Government is in use but by a Monarch, as appeareth by the Tartarians, Turks, Persians, Indians, Chinans and Catajans: no other Government is found to be found∣ed in all the Countries of Affrick: in America also and all the west parts of the World, no other is yet discovered: Europe only, upon either declining or change of the Empire, a few Towns in Germany and Italy did revive again the Government of many: some are already returned to a Monarchy, and the residue in their time will do the like, even as all others have done which have been be∣fore them. What then shall we say of this so antient, so continual, so general consent of all Nati∣ons? what can we say, but conclude with Tertullian these testimonies, the more true,In apolog. the more simple; the more simple, the more common; the more common, the more natural, the more natural, the more divine. But because ambition is a most fiery affe∣ction, and carrieth men blindfold into head∣long hopes, whereby many do aspire to bear rule, neither they good, nor with any good either means or end; the Custom or Law of
Nations hath by two Reigns endeavored to keep in this raging desire: by succession and by election. And yet again, because election is most often, if not always, entangled with many inconveniences; as first, for that the outragies during the vacancy, are many and great; every one that is either grieved or in want, assuming free power both for revenge and spoile. Secondly, for that the bouldest winneth the garland more often than the best; because the favor of the People doth always tast more of affection than of judg∣ment. Thirdly, for that they who do not leave their state to their posterity, will dissi∣pate the demain and work out of it either profit or friends; for so we see that the em∣pire of Germany is pluckt bare of her fairest feathers. Fourthly, for that occasions of war are hereby ministred; and that, either when one taketh his repulse for indignity, upon which ground Francis the first, King of France, could never be driven out of pra∣ctise against Charles the 5. emperor; or else when by means of factions many are elected, as it happend in Almaine when Lewes of Ba∣vir, and Albert of Austria were elected Emperors, whereupon eight years war be∣tween them did ensue; and as it often hap∣pened in the Empire of Rome, when one Em∣peror was chosen by the Senate, and ano∣ther by the Soldiers, and sometimes by eve∣ry legion one; whereby such siers were kind∣led, as could not be quenched without much blood. For these wars are most cruelly ex∣ecuted;
because the quarrel leaveth no mid∣dle state inter summum & praecipitium; be∣tween the highest honor and the deadliest down∣fall. For these and divers other respects, it hath been observed, at most times in all nations, and at all times in most, that the royalty hath passed by succession, accoding to pro∣pinquity of blood. We read that tolomy, who after the death of Alexander the great seazed upon Aegypt, and part also of Ara∣bia and of Africk, lest that state to his young∣est son; but Trogus said, and out of him Iu∣stine,Lib. 16. that it was against the Law of Nati∣ons, and that upon this occasion one of them did work the death of the other. And therefore when afterward Ptolomy surnam∣ed Physcon, at the importunity of his Wife Cleopatra, would have preferred his young∣est son to the succession of his Kingdom,Lib. 39. Iu∣stine saith, that the People opposed them∣selves against it;Lib. 1▪ but Pausanias more proba∣bly affirmeth, that they reversed his order after his death. The same course was held in Italy by the Hetruscanes, Latines, and those Albanes from whom the Romans took their original. Livy writeth that Procas King of the Albanes ap∣pointed Numitor to succeed in his estate,Lib. 1. but Amulius his younger brother did usurp it by force:Lib. 1. hereupon Dionysius Halicarnasse∣us saith; that Amulius held the Kingdom a∣gainst right, because it appertained to his Elder brother.
Among the Graecians, during the space of six hundred Years, wherein they were go∣verned by Kings, we find but Timondas and Pittacus who were elected, the one of Corinth, the other of Negropont; the residue held their states by order of succession, as Thucidides affirmeth, encountring therein the opinion of Aristotle.Belli macedo∣nici. lib. 10. Livy writeth, that Perseus King of Macedon said, that by the order of Nature, the Law of Nations, and the ancient custom of Macedony, the eldest son was to succed in the Kingdom. Diodorus Siculus, and Iu∣stine do report,Lib. 16. Lib. 7. that by this custom Alexander succeeded his father Amyntas, before his yonger brother Philip. Herodotus declareth that the same order was observed among the Trojans; affirming, that after the death of Priamus,In Euterpe. the King∣dom was not to devolve unto Alexander, because Hector was before him in years. The same also doth appeare by that which Virgil writeth. Aeneid. 1.Praeterea Sceptrum Ilione, quod gesserat olim, Maxima natarum Priami. The Scepter which Ilione, when she the state did stay, The first daughter of Priamus, with royal hand did sway. Out of which place Servius Maurus doth collect, that women also did use to govern. But more plainly this custome of the Troians doth appear,Lib ad octav. August. by that which Messala Cor∣vinus writeth, that Trojus had two sons, Ilus and Assaracus; and that Ilus by priviledge of his age succeeeded in the Kingdom. The Persians also, who for a long time
held the reins of all the nations near unto them, had the same order of succession, as Zenophon witnesseth;In Cyropaed. which is also confirmed by two famous histories; one between Ar∣taxerxes & Cyrus,In Artaxerxe whereof Plutarch maketh mention, the other between Artabazanes & Xerxes, reported by Herodotus and Iustin;In polyhimnia. Lib. 2. wherein Artabazanes alledged, that it was a custom among all men, that the eldest son should first succeed. Agathocles, & out of him Athenaeus do write, that the Persians had a golden water (for so they term it) whereof it was capital for any man to drink, but only the king and his eldest son. Whither this water were drawn out of the River Euleus, which invironeth the Tower Susis, and the Temple of Diana, whereof Pliny writeth,Lib. 6. ca. 28. that only the kings of Persia did drink; or whether of Choaspis, whose waters Herodotus doth report to have bin boiled, and carried after the king in silver vessels; or whether both these were one River, I will neither de∣termine nor discourse. In Siria,Lib. 7. which is called Assiria (as Hero∣dotus, writeth) and also Phoenicia, Palestina, and Mesopotamia, as appeareth by Pliny, Eusebius and divers other,Lib. 5 ca. 12. De praepara. evang. lib. 10. Lib. 34. Lib. 46. the same custom is proved by that which Iustine, and L. Flo∣rus do write, that Demetrius, having bin delivered by his brother Antiochus, King of Siria, for an hostage to the Romans, and hearing of the death of Antiochus, declared to the Senate in open assembly, that as by the law of nations he had given place to his
elder Brother, so by the same law, the right of succession was then cast upon him. The Parthians, who being thrice attempted by the Romans, in the time of their chiefest both discipline and strength, were able to bear themselves victorious, did always acknow∣ledge for their king, the next of the blood of their first King Arsaces.Justin. lib. 24. & 41. Among the Ger∣mans also, who were of force to defeat five consulare armies of the Romans, Tacitus af∣firmeth that the eldest Son did intirely suc∣ceed,De morib. Ger. only the Horses did fall to the most valiant. And that this was likewise the cu∣stom of the Iews, it is evident by the whole History of their Kings, especially where it is said,2. Chron. ca. 21 that Ioram succeeded Iosaphat; and the reason added, because he was the eldest. I should but burn day (as the saying is) in running further upon particulars.In polyhimnia. Hero∣dotus doth advow it to be a general custom among all men, that the first in birth is next in succession. Certain ages after him S. Hie∣rome said,In epist. ad o∣nagrium, & in gen. 49. that a Kingdom is due unto the eldest. In late ages our selves may see, that the Tartars, Turks, Persians, and all the Asia∣ticks have no other form of constituting their Kings. No other is followed in all the Coun∣tries of Africk. In the west Indies no other is yet discovered; Insomuch as when Frances Pizarre, in the Conquest of Peru, had slain Atibalippa the King thereof, the people brake into shew, some of joy, all of contentment; because he had made his way to the King∣dom, by murthering of his Elder brother.
In Europe it is not long sine all the Monar∣chies were successive. When the Empire of Almain was made elective, it became in short time so either troublesome or base, that divers Princes refused to accept it: of late it hath been setled in one Family, but hath as yet little increased eitheir in dignity or in power. The people of Denmark, Sweden, Hungary, and Boeme,Cons. 275. vol. 2. L. Ex hoc jure D. de ju. & jure semper fuit▪ & semper erit &c. In c. Licet. de voto. Cons. 94. & 274. In proem. D▪ §. Discipull. Cons. 287. In c. prudenti∣am de offic. de leg. In l. maxi∣mum. C. de lib. praeter. & cons. 179. li. 1. Cons. 25. lib. 5. Cons. 2. Con. 67. Deci. 476. & con. 60. In c. tit. de hi qui feud. da, poss. & in c. Qualite. tit. Si de seu, tu cont. inter do. do chalenge to them∣selves a right of election, but they accept their King by propinquity of bloud. So they did in Polonia, until the line of Iagello was worn out, and then they elected for King, Henry Duke of Aniou in France: since which time, they have always in the change of their Kings, exposed their state to open danger of ruine. Upon this both general and continual cu∣stom Boldus saith, that Kingdoms are suc∣cessive by the Law of Nations; affirming fur∣ther, that always it hath been, and always it shall be, that the first born succeedeth in a King∣dom: wherein he is either followed or ac∣companied with a fair Crie of all the choise interpreters of both Laws; as namely the Glossographer, Iohan. Andreas, Hostiensis, Collect. Pet. Anchoranus, Antonius, Imola, Card. Florentinus, Abb. Panormitanus, Oldradus, Al∣bericus, Angelus, Felinus, Paul. Castrensis, Alex∣ander, Barbatius, Franc. Curtius, Guido Pape, Card. Alexander, Philip. Francus, Iason, Phi∣lippus Decius, Carol. Ruinus, Anto. Corsetta, Ripa, Calderine, Alciate, and many other of somwhat more ordinary name, Who all with
full voice do agree, that in Kingdoms and other dignities,In sub de test. lib. 6. & in c. grandi. de sup. G, prael. In l. 1. D. de const. prin. & in l. Nemo. de leg. 1. Con. 225. & 289. Cons. 25. lib. 1. Tract de pot. & excel. reg. a. q. 9. In l. quart. ad l. Falc. Cons. 9. tit. de feud. In l. Obvenire D. de verb. fig. C. jus natural. dist. 1. Zach. 12.10. 2. Reg. 13.21. In Exod. cap. 11. In serm. de sep∣tem plagis. In Gen. hom. 51. Ubi . De histo. ani∣mal. lib. 6. cap. 18. Lib. 11. cap. 40 De motu ani∣mal. lib. 3. & lib. 15. cap. 13. Histor. chilla. 4 cap. 126. In Arato. hich cannot be either va∣lued or divided but they are dismembred, the eldest Son doth entirely succeed. And this many of them do call the Law of all Nations, derived from the order of nature, and from the institution of God; and con∣firmed by the Canon, civil and other posi∣tive Laws. For the Succession of Children, is one of the primary precepts of nature: whereby his mortality is in some sort repaired, and his continuance perpetuated by his posteri∣ty. But among all the Children, nature seemeth to prefer the first born, by imprin∣ting in the mind of parents the greatest love and inclination towards them, as divers of the authors before alleaged do affirm; and as it may appear by that of the prophet Za∣charie, and they shall lament over him as men use to lament in the death of their first born, and likewise by that which is said of David, that he would not grieve his Son Ammon, for that he loved him, because he was his first born. Hereupon Lyra, and before him Saint Au∣gustin and Saint Chrysostom do affirm that the last plague of the Egyptians, which was the death of their first born, was the most sharp and heavy unto them. For nothing (saith Saint Augustin) is more dear than the first born. Aristotle, Plinie, Aelian, and Tzet∣zes do write, that the same affection is also found in certain beasts. And to this purpose is that which Herodo∣tus
reporteth, that when the Lacedaemoni∣ans had received an oracle, hat they should take for Kings the two sons of Aristodemus and Aegina, but give most honor unto the eldest, and they were ignorant which was eldest, because the Mother and the Nurse refused to declare it; they observed which of the children the mother did wash and feed first, in dialogo . Lib. 2. de Cain & Abel. cap. 2. Exod. 4. and thereby found out that Eristhenes was the eldest. Lucian citeth the love of the first born, as grown into a proverb. Gre∣gorie Nazianzene saith, that all men have a sense thereof. Saint Ambrose writeth, that in this respect God called the People of Israel his first born, for that they were, not most ancient, but best beloved. Lastly S. Chry∣sostome affirmeth that the first born were to be esteemed more honorable than the rest.Homil. 5. ad∣versus Judaeo And this natural precedence both in honor and in favor,Gen. 4.7. seemeth to be expresly ratified by God; first where he said unto Cain, of his brother Abel, His desires shall be subject unto thee, and thou shalt have dominion over him: according to which institution,Gen. 27.29. when Iacob had bought his brothers right of birth, Isaac blessed him in these words, Be Lord over thy Brethren, and lt the sons of thy mother bow be∣fore thee: Secondly,Deut. 21.17▪ where he forbiddeth the Father to disinherit the first Son of his double portion; because by right of birth it is his due: Thirdly, where he maketh choice of the first born to be sanctified to himself.Exod. 1.2 &. 22.29. & 34.19. Levit. 27.26. Num. 3.13. & 8.16. & 18.15. Nehem. 10 36. Ezech. 44 30. Luke 2.23. Matth. 19.30. & 20.16. Marc. 10.31. Luke 13 10. 1. Cor. 1. cir∣ca si. Lib. 7. And whereas God hath often preferred the youngest, as Abel, Isaac, Iacob, Iuda, Phares,
Ephraim, Moses, David, Solomon, and others; it was no other than that which Christ said, that many that were last should be first: and that which Saint Paul hath delivered, that God hath chosen the weak, and base, and contemptible things of this world, least any flesh should glory in his sight. So hath Hero∣dotus written, how Artabanus the Persian, in a complaining manner did confess, that God delighted to depress those things that were high. But if the first born dye before succession fall; or if being possessed of the Kingdom, he dye without issue; his right of birth devolv∣eth unto the next in blood;In prooem. D. §. Discipuli. Et in L. donationes C. de don. inter vir. & ux. and if he dyeth in like manner, then unto the third, and so likewise to the rest in order. This is affirm∣ed by Albericus, and may be confirmed by that which Baldus saith, that succession hath reference to the time of death,In L. 2. C. de jur. Emphyt. Per. l. Ex facto▪ Pen. D. ad Treb Cons. 275. lib. 2 In l. Proximus. D. de verb. sig. L. Ex duobus D. de vulg. & pup. In l. Si quis prioris. §. ta∣lem. D. de se∣cund. and respect∣eth the priority which is then extant. And again, He is not said the first born in Law, who dyeth before the fee openeth, but he who at that time is eldest in life. And this opinion is em∣braced by Alciate; because as Celsus saith; Primus is dicitur ante quem nemo sit, He is first who hath none before him. Iaco. Aretinus, Ci∣nus, Albericus and Baldus do form this case: There is a custom, that the first born of the first marriage should succeed in a baronny; a certain baron had three Wives; by the first he had no Children, by the other too many, the first son of the second marriage shall suc∣ceed: Because (as the glossographer there
saith) the second marriage in regard of the third is accompted first.Ibid. Baldus doth extend it further; that if he hath a son by the first marriage; and he refuse the barony, the first son by the second marriage shall succeed in his right; and so he saith it was determined in the Kingdom of Apulia, when Lewes the Kings eldest son was professed a friar. And this decision is allowed by Alexander,In addit. Bar. l. 1. §. Qui ha∣bebat. de D. bo. poss. cont. tab. & in dis∣put. incip. Si∣gismund. Cons. 92. In tract. de pot. & excel. reg. q. 10. & q. 74. In c. quaeritur. §. iem oppo∣nitur 22. q. 2. Unigenitus. C. nam & ego De ver. sig. Oldra∣dus, and Antonius Corsetta: and is proved by plain text of the Canon Law, both where the second born is called first born, when the first born hath given place; and also where he is called the only son, whose brother is dead. But because it is a notorious custom that the nearest in blood doth succed, altho perhaps removed in degree, I will labor no more to load it with proof: for who will pro∣claim that the sun doth shine? But if we should now grant unto you (which is a greater courtesie, than with mo∣desty you can require) that no particular form of Government is natural: what will you conclude thereof? what inference can you hereupon enforce? That thre is no doubt but the People have power to choose and to change the fashion of Government, and to limit the same with what conditions they please. What Sir? can you find no third? But that either one form of Government is natural, or that the People must always retain such liberty of power? Have they no power to relinquish their power? Is there no possibility that they may loose it? Whether are you so ignorant
to think as you speak, or so deceitful to speak otherwise then you think. There is no Au∣thority which the People hath in matters of state, but it may be either bound or streight∣ned by three means. The first is by cession or grant; for so the Romans by the Law of royalty yeelded all their Authority in Government to the Prince.Lex regia. L. 1. de const. princ. De rep. lib. 1. Of this Law Vlpian maketh mention; and Bodin reporteth that it is yet extant in Rome graven in stone. So the People of Cyrene; of Pergame and of Bithynia, did submit themselves to the Empire of the Romans. So the Tartarians commit absolute power both over their lives and their livings to every one of their Emperors: and so have our People many times committed to their King the Au∣thority of the Parliament either generally, or else for some particular case. For it is held as a rule, that any man may relinquish the Authority which he hath to his own be∣nefit and favor. Neither is he again at plea∣sure to be admitted to that,L. Si finia & b. Bar. & Bald. D. de dam in∣fect. L. Si quis insiu∣randum. c. de reb. cred. Inst. de jur. Person. which once he did think it to renounce. And as a private man may altogether abandon his free estate, and subject himself to servile condition, so may a multitude pass away both their Au∣thority and their liberty by publick consent. The second is by prescription and custom, which is of strength in all parts of the world, least matters should always float in uncer∣tainty,L. 1. de usucap. and controversies remain immortal. And that this Authority of the People may be excluded by prescription, it is evident by
this one reason, which may be as one in a third place of Arithmetick, in standing for a hundred. Every thing may be prescri∣bed, wherein prescription is not prohibited:L. vit. C. de praesc. long. temp. L. sicut. c. de praesc. 30. ann. L. Si de inter∣pretatione. D. de Ll. L. Omnes po∣pull. De just. & jur. l. Sed & ca. D. de legb. C. 1. de Feud. C. l. de all. Feud But there is no Law which prohibiteth pre∣scription in this case; and therefore it fol∣loweth that it is permitted. And generally, custom doth not only interpret Law, but correcteth it, and supplyeth where there is no Law; in so much as the common Law of England, as well in publick as private controversies, is no other (a few maxims excepted) but the common custom of the Realm. Baldus saith, that custom doth lead succession in principalities, which Martinus adviseth to ix in memory, because of the often change of Princes: and the particular custom of every Nation is at this day, the most usual and assured Law between the Prince and the Peple. And this do the Emperors Honor us and Arcadius,L. Testamenta▪ omnia. C. de test. in these words command punctually to be observ∣ed: Mos namque retinendus est fidelissimae vetustatis: the custom of faithful Antiquity must be retained: Which place is to this sense ballanced by Pau. Caestrensis, Franc. Aretinus, and Phil. Corneus; who termeth it a moral text. The like whereto is found also in the Canon law,C. Ridiculum 12. di. In c. Quanto de transl. prael. In c. Domino. 50. di. In L. Si vero D▪ de sol. Mat. and noted by the Glosso∣grapher, Archidiaconus, Romanus, and Ce∣pola. Neither were the Fathers of the Ni∣cene Councel of other Opinion, who thus decreed: Let antient customs stand in strength:
Whereto also agreeth that old Verse of Ennius,In tract. de im∣per. , Moribus antiquis res stat Romana viris{que} Customs and men of oldest sort, The Roman State do best support: De civit. Dei▪ lib. 2. cap. 21. Lib. 3. de repub▪ . Vive moribus praesentibus, loquere verbis praesentibus. Lib. de clar. rhetor. Lib. 15 c. 1. & lib. 1. cap 10 Quae praeter consuetudinem & morem ma∣jorum fiunt, neque placent. neque recta videntur. 4. de civit. 5. Cons. 132. Grandia la∣trocinia. Lib. 10. 1. de benefi: Orbis terra∣rum praedo. L. Post limini∣um D. de cap.Which is cited by Saint Austin; and esteemed by Cicero both for brevity and truth, as an Oracle. To the same sense Pe∣riander of Corinth said, that old Laws and new Meats were fittest for use: which say∣ing Phavorinus in Gellius did in this man∣ner a little vary: Live after the passed man∣ner, speak after the present. Hereto also per∣taineth that edict of the censors mentioned by Suetonus, and Aul. Gellius: Those things which are beside the custom and fashion of our Elders, are neither pleasing, nor to be adjudged right. Of this point I shall have occasion more particularly hereafter to write. The third means whereby the People may loose their Authority, is by way of conquest. For howsoever Saint Augustine, and after him Alciate, do disallow ambition of enlarging Empire; and term Wars upon this cause great Theeveries: Whereupon Lucane, and his Uncle Seneca, called Alex∣ander the Great, a great robber of the World, yet there is no doubt but the sentence of victory, especially if the War was under∣taken upon good cause, (as the Conqueror being made his own Arbitrator, will hard∣ly
acknowledge the contrary) is a just title of acquisition; reducing the vanquished, their priviledges, liberties and whole E∣state, under the discretion of him that is victorious. Caesar saith; He giveth all that de∣nieth right:Arma tenent omnia dat qui in ita negat. Reg. peccatum p. 2. §. 9. In rub. C. de la. li. Ut qui vicis∣ssent, iis quos vicissent, que madmo∣dum velint imperarent. Strom. 1. Archid. Which sentence is approved by Covaruvias; affirming, that the victor mak∣eth all which his sword toucheth to be his own. So saith Baldus, that he doth his plea∣sure upon the vanquished: and again Caesar in the speech of Ariovistus; it is the Law of Arms, that the victorious should command those whom they have subdued, even as they please. Clemens Alexandrinus saith, that the goods of Enemies are taken away by right of war. Isocrates hath written, that the La∣cedaemonians did by title of victory in this sort maintain their right. We hold this Land given by the Posterity of Hercules, confirmed by the Oracle of Delphos, the inhabitants thereof being overcome by War. Which was not much unlike that which Iephte captain of Israel expostulated with the Ammonites;Judic. 11.23. & 24. Are not those things thine which Chamos thy God hath possessed? but whatsoever the Lord our God hath conquered, pertaineth unto us. Yea, God doth expresly give to the People of Is∣rael, the Cities which they should subdue;Deut. 20. some into full possession, others into servi∣tude and subjection: By wich title Iacob also had given to Ioseph his partge among his brethren, even the Lad which he had taken from the Amorites with his sword and with his bow.Ge 48 22. 1. Civ. It was usual to the Ro∣mans,
and as Appian saith, just, to retain principal or direct Dominion, in all things which they brought under the sway of their sword. Brissonius hath collected certain examples of the form of yielding unto the Romans,. de form. whereby all prophane and sacred, all human and divine matters were submit∣ted unto them. Seeing therefore that the people may so many ways loose both their power and their right in affairs of state, is not your igno∣rance adventurous so generally to affirm, that if no one form of Government be na∣tural, there is no doubt but the people have power both to alter and limit the same, as they please? Can no Law, no cu∣stom, no Conquest restrain them? Your pen doth range, and your judgment rage beyond all compass and course of reaon. You should have said, that there is no doubt, but if by all or any of these means, the right both of succession and governmt be setled in one family, according to pr∣quity and priority of blood, the people may neither take away nor varie the same: and if they do, they commit iniustice, they violate the law of nations, whereby they expose themselvs, not only to the infamie and hate of all men, but to the revenge of those who will attempt upon them. For it is not only lawful but honorable, for any people, either to right or reveng the breach of this Law; against them which contemn it, as monsters; against them who know it
not, as beasts. Saint Augustine saith; If a Ci∣ty upon earth should decree some great mischiefs to be done,Vide civit. by the decree of mankind it is to be destroyed. And as in the state of one coun∣trey any man may accuse upon a publick crime, so in the state of the world,Iust. de pub. iud. any people may prosecute a common offence: for as there is a civil band among all the People of one Nation; so is there a natural Knot among all men in the World. You close your conclusion with this conceit, that the word natural Prince, or natural Successor, is to be understood of one, who is born within the same Realm, and that it is ridiculous to take it, as though any Prince had natural Interest to succeed. But what construction will you then make of that which Herodian deli∣vereth,Herod. lib. 1. in the speech of Commodus the Son of Marcus? Now hath fortune given me unto you for Prince in his stead, not drawn into the state, such as they were, who were before me; nor as one that glorieth in the purchase of the Empire: for I only am born unto you and brought up in the Court, never swathed in private Cloaths, but so soon as I was born the imperial purpure did receive me, and the Sun beheld me at once, both a Man and a Prince.Jure princi∣pem colite, non datum, sed natum. Lib. 1. de l' e∣state de France Consider these things, and honor your Prince by right, who is not given, but born vnto you. Girard goeth further in writing of Charles the Simple, that he was King before he was born. Say therefore again, that it is ridiculous to take the word natural Prince,
for one that hath right of succession in∣herent in him by birth; and I will say that this mirth will better beseem a natural indeed, then any man that is wise. But let us now consider the further passage of your discourse, both how you are able to fortifie this foundation, and what build∣ing it is able to bare.
TO THE SECOND CHAPTER, which is intituled, Of the particular Form of Monarchies and Kingdoms, and the different Laws where∣by they are to be obtained, holden and governed in divers Countries, according as each Common-wealth hath chosen and established. IN this chapter you spend much speech in praising a monarchie, and prefer∣ring it before the Government of ma∣nie; which you do to no other end, but to insinuate your self either into credit, or advantage to draw it down; even as Ioab presented Amasa with a kind Kiss, to win thereby opportunity to stab him. For in the end you fetch about, that because a Prince is subject, as other men,2 Sam. 20. Fol. 21. not only to errours in Judgment, but also to passio∣nate affections, in his will; it was necessary, that as the common wealth hath given that great power unto him so it should assigne him helps for managing the same. And that a Prince reciveth his authority from the people, you prove a little before, for that Saint Peter termeth Kings Humane creatures; which you interpret to be,Pag. 17. 1. Pet. 2. a thing created by man; because by mans free choise, both this form of government
is erected, and the same also laid upon some particular person. I know not in what sort to deal with you, concerning this interpretation. Shall I labour to impugne it by arguments? Why, there is no man that wanteth not either judgment or sincerity, but upon both the na∣tural and usual sense of the words, he will presently acknowledg it to be false. Shall I go about either to laugh, or to rail you from your errour, as Cicero in the like case perswaded to do? But this would be agree∣able neither to the stayedness of our years, nor the gravity of our professions. I am now advised what to do; I will appeal, as Machetes did before Philip of Macedon, from your self asleep, to your self awake; from your self distempered by affection,Plutarch. in probl. to your self returned to sobriety of sense. Do you think then in true earnest, that a hu∣man creature is a thing created by man, or rather that every man is a humane creature? Is a brutish creature to be ra∣ken for a thing created by a beast? Spiri∣tual, Angelical, or any other adjunct unto creature, what reference hath it to the Au∣thor of Creation? And if it were so, then should all creatures be called divine, because they were created by God, to whom only it is proper to create; and in this very point,Rom. 13. Saint Paul saith, that all au∣thority is the ordinance and institution of God. Neither needeth it to trouble us that Saint Peter should so generally injoine us
to be obedient to all men, no more than it troubled the Apostles, when Christ comman∣ded them to preach to all creatures Marc. 16.; ac∣cording to which commission, St. Paul did testifie Col. 1.23., that the Gospel had been prea∣ched to every creature under Heaven: but St. Peter doth specifie his general speech, and restrain his meaning to Kings and Governors; in which sence St. Ambrose Ad Au∣xentium. citeth this place, as it followeth: Be subject to your Lords, whe∣ther it be to the King, as to the most excellent, &c. This interpretation not onely not relieving you, but discovering very plainly either the weakness or corruption of your judgment, it resteth upon your bare word, that Kings have received their first Authority from the people; which although I could deny, with as great both countenance and facility as you affirm, yet will I further charge upon you with strength of proof. Presently after the inundation of the world, we find no mention of politick Government, but onely of oeconomical, according as men were sorted in families; for so Moses hath written Gen. 10.5., that of the progeny of Iapheth, the Isles of the Gentiles were divided after their families. The first who established Go∣vernment over many families, was Nimrod the Son of Cush, accounted by St. Chrysostome Hom. in Gen. the first King: which Authority he did not obtain by favour and election of any people, but by plain purchase of his power. Here∣upon Moses calleth him a mighty Hunter Gen. 10.9.,
which is a form of speech among the Hebrews, whereby they signifie a spoiler or oppresser. And this doth also appear by the etymology of his name; for Nimrod signifieth a Rebel, a Transgressour, and as some interpret it, a terrible Lord: And names were not imposed in ancient times by chance or at adventure, as Plato In Cra∣tylo., one of Natures chief Secretaries, and among the Latin Writers Aul. Gellius Noct. Attic. 9. cap. 4. do affirm. Many hold opinion, that this Nimrod was the same, whom the Grecians call Ninus: which seemeth to be confirmed by that which Moses saith Gen. 10, that he did build the City of Ninive. Of this Ninus, Iustine writeth Ninus primus di∣citur bello parta reti∣nusse, cum priores contenti victoria, imperio abstinues∣sent. Just. 1.; that he was the first who held that which he did subdue; others, satisfied with Victory, aspired not to bear Rule. Nimrod founded the Empire of the Assyrians, which continued by Succession in his posterity, until it was vio∣lently drawn from Sardanapalus to the Medes. From them also Cyrus by subversion of Astyages did transport it to the Persians; and from them again the Grecians did wrest it by Con∣quest. After the death of Alexander, his Cap∣tains, without any consent of the people, made partition of the Empire among them; whose successors were afterwards subdued by the Armies and Arms of Rome. And this Em∣pire, being the greatest that ever the Earth did bear, was in the end also violently distra∣cted, by divers several either Conquests or Re∣volts. Leo Afer writeth, that it is not a hun∣dred years, since the people of Gaoga in Africk
had neither King nor Lord, until one obser∣ved the greatness and Majesty of the King of Tombute, did enterprize to attain Soveraignty above them, which by violence he effected, and left the same to his posterity. And because I will not be tedious in running through parti∣culars, give you an instance of any one people, which hath not divers times received both Prince and Government by absolute constraint, Et Phillida solus habito; and I will yield to all that you affirm. But failing herein, you shall be enforced to confess, that in many, yea, in most, if not in all Countries, the people have received liberty, either from the grant or per∣mission of the victorious Prince, and not the Prince authority from the vanquished peo∣ple. What helps now do you imagine, that the people have assigned to their Prince? The first, you affirm to be the direction of Laws. But it is evident, that in the first heroi∣cal Ages,  people were not governed by a∣ny positive Law, but their Kings did both Judge and Command, by their word, by their will, by their absolute power; and, as Pompo∣nius saith L. 2. de O∣rig. jur, Omnia manu a regibus guberna∣bantur: Kings governed all things, without either restraint or direction, but onely of the Law of Nature. The first Law was promulged by Moses; but this was so long before the Laws of other Nations, that Iosephus writeth Contra Appianum, It was more ancient than their Gods: Affirming also, that the word Law is not found in Homer, or in
Orpheus, or in any Writer of like antiquity· Of this Law of Nature Homer maketh menti∣on in these words: . And they who keep the Laws which God hath prescribed. And again, . Vncivil and unjust is he, and wanting private state, Who holdeth not all civil War in horror and in hate. And of the Justice of Kings he writeth in this manner: , . on. In which verses Chrysostom affirmeth lib. 2. de regno. by the judgment of Alexander, that Homer hath de∣lineated the perfect Image of a King: but that he maketh mention of any positive Laws, I do rather doubt, than assuredly deny. For Kings in ancient times did give judgment in person, not out of any formality in Law, but onely according to natural equity. Virgil saith Aeneid. 7.: Hoc Priami gestamen erat cum jura vocatis Moredaret populis.
This was the Robe which Priamus did always use to wear, When he the People to him call'd, their causes for to hear. Which he doth also affirm of Aeneas Aeneid. 3., Dido Aeneid. 1. and of Alcestes Aeneid. 5.. This like doth Herodotus report Lib. 1. of Midas King of Phrygia, who consecrated his Tribunal to Apollo: and the like also doth Plutarch In A∣popht. of divers Kings of Macedonia: Philarchus affirmeth in Athe∣naeus, that the Kings of Persia had Palm-trees and Vines of Gold, under which they did sit to hear Causes. But because it grew both troublesome and tedious, for all the People to receive their Right from one man At cum jus aqua∣bile ab uno viro homi∣nes non conseque∣rentur, in∣ventae sunt leges, Of∣fic. 2.; Laws were inven∣ted, as Cicero saith, and Officers also appoin∣ted to execute the same. Another Original of Laws was thus occa∣sioned: When any People were subdued by Arms, Laws were laid like Logs upon their necks, to keep them in more sure subjection; which, both because it is not doubtful, and to avoid prolixity, I will manifest onely by our own example. When the Romans had reduced the best part of this Island into the form of a Province, as they permitted liberty of Law to no other Country under their obedience, so here also they planted the practice of their Laws: and for this purpose they sent over many Profes∣sors, and among others Papinian, the most fa∣mous
both for Knowledge and Integrity, of all the Authors of the Civil Law. Again, when the Saxons had forced this Realm, and parted it into seven Kingdoms, they erected so many sets of Law; of which onely two were of continuance, the Mercian Law, and the West-Saxon Law. After these, the Danes be∣came victorious; and by these new Lords new Laws were also imposed, which bare the name of Dane-law. Out of these three Laws, partly moderated, partly supplied, King Ed∣ward the Confessor composed that body of Law, which afterwards was called St. Edward's Laws. Lastly, the Normans brought the Land under their power, by whom St. Edward's Laws were abrogated, and not onely new Laws, but new Language brought into use; insomuch as all Pleas were formed in French, and in the same Tongue Children were taught the principles of Grammar. These causes we find of the beginning of Laws; but that they were assigned by the people for assistance and direction to their Kings, you bring neither Argument nor Authority for proof; it is a part of the dross of your own device. The second help, which you affirm that Commonwealths have assigned to their Kings, is by Parliaments and Privy-Councils. But Parliaments in all places have been erected by Kings; as the Parliament of Paris and of Mntpellier in France, by Philip the Fair; the Parliament in England by Henry the First; who in the sixteenth year of his Reign Anno 1116. called a Councel of all the States of his Realm
at Salisbury, which our Historiographers do take for the first Parliament in England; affirming that the Kings, before that time, did never call the common People to Councel. After this the Privy-Council, at the instance of the Archbishop of Canterbury, was also established; and since that time, the Counsellors of State have always been placed by election of the Prince. And that it was so likewise in anci∣ent times, it appeareth by that which Homer writeth: . First he established a Council of honorable old men. And likewise by Virgil: —gaudet regno Trojanus Acestes, Indicitque forum, & patribus dat jura vocatis. Acestes of the Trojan Bloud, in Kingdom doth delight; He sets a Court, and Councel calls, and gives each man his Right. I will pass over your coarse, foggy, drowsie Conceit, that there are few or none simple Monarchies in the world, (for it would tire a Dog to toyl after your impertinent errours) and will now rip up your Packet of Exam∣ples, whereby you endeavour to shew, that the Power of Kings hath been bridled by their Subjects. But what do you infer hereby? what can you inforce? will you rake over all Histories for examples of Rebellion, and then
argue, a facto ad jus; that every thing is law∣ful which you find to have been done? Iu∣stinian saith, Non exemplis, sed legibus judican∣dum l. 13. C.  Scin∣.  loc. om. id.: We must judge Facts by Law, and not Law by Facts, or by Examples; which Alciate 5. Cons. 3. & 6.50. and Deeiane 3.100. do term a Golden Law, because there is no Action either so im∣pious or absurd, which may not be paralleled by Examples. Will you prove it lawful to use carnal familiarity with the Sister, with the Mother-in-law, with the natural Mother? You have the example of Cambyses for the first, Caracalla for the second, Dionysius and Nero for the third. The Iews, upon whom God had setled his Choise, did at times (be∣side many other Enormities) erect Male∣stews 3. Reg. 14, & 15.. Of the two Nations, whose Ex∣amples you use, the Romans and the Lacede∣monians, the first did the like under divers Em∣prours, as Lampridius writeth; and in more ancient times allowed also Parricide of Chil∣dren Gell. l. 5 c. 19.: the other would sort themselves by fifteen and twenty Families together, and hold both Wives and Goods in common. I omit the unnatural customs of divers other Nations, and will now declare, how in straining a few Examples to countenance your Conceit, you are constrained to bear your self no less cun∣ning in concealing truths, than bold in avou∣ching things which are not onely uncertain, but plainly false. It is true which you write, that the Kings of Sparta, by the institution of Lyurgus, were obdient to the Officers called Ephori; but
these were Titular Kings, having no other power but a single voice among the Senators: and because all Affairs were carried by consent of the People, the Estate was then esteemed popular. Afterwards Theopompus, by pretence of an Oracle, drew this Authority from the People, to a Senate of thirty; whereby the Government did change into an Aristocracy; and yet the naked name of Kings was retain∣ed. By this shuffling-off Rule, the Lacedemo∣nians were continually tossed with Tempests of Sedition, ceasing not to wade in their own Bloud (as before you have acknowledged) un∣til in the end they were brought into subje∣ction; first, by the Macedonians; afterward, by the Achaeans; and lastly, by the Roman▪ I will not say now, what reason have we? but what a shame is it for us to open our ears to these Utopical State-writers? who being mel∣lowed in Idleness, and having neither Know∣ledge nor Interest in matters of Government, make new Models upon disproportioned joynts, borrowed from Nations most different in Rule. You affirm by the testimony of Livy, that for offence taken against Romulus, because he raigned at Pleasure, and not by Law, the Se∣nators did cut him in pieces; in which short Assertion many base untruths are included, beneath the degree of any vile word. Livy writeth, that he sorted the People into or∣der, and governed them by Laws Jura dedis., and that he was also both advised and valiant in the Field; even such a one as Homer descri∣beth:
. Both a good King, and courageous Commander. Concerning his end, Livy writeth, that in ta∣king muster of his Army, a thick Tempest did arise, after which he was never seen; wherein he is seconded by Solinus, Eutropius, and the rest: onely Livy addeth, that there was a ru∣mor, but very obscure, without any certain either Author or ground; I will adde also, without probability, that he was torn in pie∣ces: for how probable is it, that such a Fact, in the open view of his Army, could be very obscure? How probable is it also, that the People would first tear him in pieces for his Injustice, and then worship him for a God? Further, with what either confidence or con∣ceit do you alledge this Report of Livy, for his opinion? I find your fetch; you apprehend every thing which may, if not confirm, yet countenance that Doctrine which lately you have drawn out of Cerberus Den, That it is lawful to contrive the death of Kings. That the People were grieved against Ser∣vius Tullius for reigning without Election, it is a meer Fantasie, a Dream, a Device. Li∣vy saith Tanto consensu quanto haud quis∣quam alius ante Rex est decla∣ratus., that he was declared King with such a Consent as no man had been before him. That Tarquinius neglected the Laws of Go∣vernment prescribed to him by the Common∣wealth, it is an ugly untruth. Livy saith, that he brake the ancient manner of Kings before
him: But for Laws, Pomponius affirmeth In l. 2. D. de orig. jur., that at that time the Romans had no Laws but from their Kings, and that Sextus Papirius re∣duced them into one Volume, which was cal∣led the Civil Law of Papirius Jus ci∣vile Papi∣rianum.; and that when the People expelled their Kings, they abrogated their Laws also, and remained twenty years without any Law. Lastly, you adde, that the Romans did ex∣pel their Kings, and erect Consuls in their stead; but you suppress that which followed, which I hold for a common consequence of the like disorder: First, that for this cause they were presently almost overwhelmed with Wars: Secondly, that in this state they never enjoyed long time free from Sedition: Lastly, that as Tacitus saith Nullum esse discor∣dantis pa∣triae reme∣dium, quam ut ab uno re∣geretur. Annal. 1., there was no means to appease these Tumults, but by returning to a Monarchy again. All this I write, rather to manifest the manner of your dealing, than that I hold it much regardable what Romans did. Your Examples of our present Age I will wrap up in these few words: All Nations, very few excepted, do consent in this form of Government; first, to be under one Prince; secondly, to accept him by succession, accor∣ding to propinquity of Bloud: In other cir∣cumstances, either for inaugurating their Prince, or for the manner of managing and executing his Government, not two Nations in the world in all points do agree. And yet is not this diversity raised by any Laws which the People do prescribe unto their Prince, as
you do most grosly, yea peevishly, yea malici∣ously affirm; but by the particular Laws and Customs of every Nation, in which the con∣sent of the Prince, either secret or express, sometimes onely is sufficient, always princi∣pally doth concur. Upon this diversity of Customs you con∣clude, that it sufficeth not to alleadge bare propinquity of Bloud. What, not where that Custom is established, as I have declared it to be in most Nations of the World? Doth difference of Customs make all Custom void? Doth diversity of Custom in some circumstan∣ces take away the principal Custom of Succes∣sion by Bloud? This cleaveth together no su∣rer than Sand; you lose both labour and credit in obtruding unto us these weak and loose Ar∣guments, without either force of Reason, or form of Art. Your instance of the Law Salick in France, doth offer occasion to enter into a large Field, wherein I could plainly prove, that there was never any such Law made to bind the descent of the Crown of France; and that it hath been the custom in most parts of the world, not to exclude Women from succession in State: in∣somuch as Beda In Act. cap. 8. and before him Eusebius Lib 2. cap. 1. and Pliny Lib. 6. c. 29, & 30. do write, that certain People were governed onely by Princes of that Sex. But because this is a matter both of long dis∣course, and not proper to our purpose, I will contain my self within this Observation, That the Exclusion of King Edward the Third from the Crown of France, upon this pretence▪
was the cause of the effusion of their bravest Bloud, and of the spoil, waste, and conquest of all that Realm. I acknowledge that the English have lost the possession of that Con∣quest; and that was by means of domestical Wars, for excluding the nearest in Bloud from the Crown: into which unquiet Quarrel you do now endeavour again to embark us. Yet no man can assure that the miseries of France for this cause are at an end. Rams recoil to strike harder; we are gone rather back than away: I will not presage, but any man may conjecture, that our minds and our means will not always want the favour of time. After all this, you proceed a degree further, that it is lawful, upon just considerations, not onely to put back the next Inheritor of the Crown, but also to remove him who is in full possession thereof. And that is plain (you say) not onely by the grounds before by you al∣leadged, but also by example of the Romans and Grecians; and because God hath com∣monly concurred in such judicial actions of the State, not onely in prospering them, but in gi∣ving them also some notable Successour. And yet you protest you are far from their opinion, who upon every mislike are ready to band a∣gainst their Prince; and that you esteem the tenure of a Crown, if once it be setled, the most irregular, whereto every man is bound to settle his Conscience, without examination of Title or Interest; but onely by the supreme Law of Gods disposition, who can dispence in what he listeth: and that notwithstanding
you are as far from the abject flattery of Bil∣laie and others; who affirm, that Princes are subject to no Law or limitation at all, and that they succeeded by nature and birth onely, and not by admission of the people; and that there is no authority under God to chasten them. These you call absurd Paradoxes; and herewith you settle your self to shew in the next Chapter, what good success hath en∣sued the disposition of Princes. Concerning your protestation, we may say un∣to you as Isaac said to his son Iacob Gen. 27.22., The voice is Jacobs voice, but the hands are the hands of E∣sau: You speak fair, and therewith also well; but the main drift of your discourse, is nothing else but a tempestuous Doctrine of Rebellion nd Disorder; you being therein like the Boatman, who looketh one way and pulleth another; or rather like the Image of Ianus, which looked two contrary ways at once. It is a Rule in Law; That a Protestation con∣trary to a mans Act, will not serve to relieve him Prote∣statio actui contraria non rele∣vat. only this shall serve to convince you, either of false or of forgetful dealing, when we come to that place where in flat words you maintain the contrary. Concerning the quarrel which you lay a∣gainst Billaie; as I have not seen what he hath written, so will I not interpose between him and you. I never heard of Christian Prince who challenged Infinite Authority without li∣mitation of any Law, either Natural or Di∣vine. But where you term it an absurd para∣dox, that the people should not have power to
chasten their Prince, and upon just conside∣rations to remove him; I am content to joyn with you upon the issue. And first I note the manner of your dealing, in that you have omitted to express what these just considerations may be. For seeing there hath been no King, who is not noted of some defects; and again, no Tyrant, who hath not many commendable parts (as Plutarch writeth In Dio∣nys. that Dionysius excelled most Princes in divers points of Justice and Vertue) it is a matter of dangerous consequence, to leave these considerations undetermined and at large. But who seeth not, that you do it out of poli∣cy, that you may upon every particular occasi∣on, declare such causes to be sufficient as you please? How then do you prove, that upon any cause, the people have power to dispossess their Prince? This is plain (you say) not onely by the grounds before by you alleadged, but also by example of the Romans and Graecians. The grounds by you alleadged, are two: One in your first Chapter, that because no one form of Government is natural, the people have power both to choose, and to change, and to limit it as they please. The other ground is in this Chapter; that because there are di∣vers Laws and Customs in matters of princi∣pality, it sufficeth not to alleage bare proinqui∣ty of bloud. Why? but had you no Text of Scripture? no Father of the Church to alledge? no Law? no Reason? no better Example? no surer
Ground? It is more than this which you bring against your self, in citing out of St. Pe∣ter 2. c. 10.; The Lord knoweth to reserve the unjust unto the day of Iudgment; and especially them that despise Government, and speak evil of those that are in Dignity. And out of St. Iude vers. 8.▪ Likewise these dreamers despise Government, and speak evil of them that are in Authority. Be∣sides also, you have alledged out of St. Paul Rom. 13.: Let every soul be subject unto the higher power▪ for there is no power but of God: Whosoever therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God; and they that resist shall receive to them∣selves judgment. And likewise out of St. Pe∣ter c. 2. v. 13.: Submit your selves to every humane creature, whether it be to the King, or unto Gover∣vernours; for so is the will of God. To which places we may likewise add that, which St. Paul did write unto Titus Tit. 3.1.: Put them in remembrance that they be obedient to the princi∣palities and powers. And writing to Timo∣thy 1 Tim. 2.1., he exhorteth us also to pray for them▪ that we may lead under them a peaceable life. But perhaps you will say, that the Apostles did not mean this of wicked Princes. Tri∣fler, the Apostles spake generally of all: St▪ Peter 1 Pet. 2.18. maketh express mention of evil Lords. And what Princes have ever been more either irreligious or tyrannical, than Ca∣ligula, Tiberius, Nero, the infamy of their A∣ges, under whose Empire the Apostles did both live and write? Bellarmine the great master of Controver∣sies,
perceiving this to be unanswerably true, did in another sort rather cut than unty the knot: affirming, In tract. de exemp. Clerico∣rum. that at that time it was necessary to admonish the Christians to per∣form obedience to their Kings, lest the preach∣ing of the Gospel might otherwise be hindred: which is as if in direct terms he should have said, Sir Kings, whilst our heads were under your girdle, we were content to curry favour, by preaching obedience unto the peo∣ple: But now we have got the wind of you, we must plainly tell you, that you hold your Crowns at their courtesie and favour; and have no power in effect, but as Lieutenant-Generals. I know you will make a sour face at this; it will go very much against your sto∣machs; but there is no remedy, you must take it down; they are your good Lords; they may dispossess you. Prophane Bellarmine! is Christian Religi∣on a mere policy? doth it apply it self onely to the present? doth it turn always with the time? May the principal professors thereof say, as an infidel Moor did, when he violated the Faith which he had given unto Christi∣ans? We have no bone in our tongues that we cannot turn them which way we please. We see plainly that you say so: and it as is plain, that it was far from the true meaning of the Apo∣stles. St. Iude ver. 16. writeth sharply against those, who had mens persons in admiration because of advantage. St. Paul also saith Gal. 1.10.: Go I about to please men? If I should please men, I were not then the servant of Christ.
I will give you an example of another time. Nebuchadnezzer King of Assyria, wa∣sted all Palestina; took Hierusalem, slew the King, burnt the Temple, took away the holy Vessels and Treasure: the residue he permit∣ted to the cruelty and syoyl of his unmerciful Souldiers; who defiled all places with rape, ruine, and blood. After the glut of this but∣chery, the people which remained, he led cap∣tive into Chaldaea, and there commanded, that whosoever refused to worship his golden I∣mage, should be cast into a fiery furnace. What cruelty, what impiety is comparable to this? and yet the Prophets Ieremiah c. 29.7. and Baruch c. 1.11. did write to those captive Jews, to pray for the prosperity and life of him, and of Baltazar his Son, that their days might be upon Earth as the days of Heaven: and Ezekiel c. 17. both blameth and threatneth Zedechia, for his disloyalty in revolting from Nebuchadnezzar, whose homager and tributa∣ry he was. What answer will you make to this example? I am wisely busied to cast forth this question; what answer can you make, which your own knowledge will not convince? Many other places there are in holy Scrip∣ture, whereby not onely our actions are tied to obedience: He that doth presumptuously a∣gainst the Ruler of the people shall die Deut. 17.12.: but also our words, Thou shalt not speak evil against the Ruler of the people Exod. 22.28. Act. 23.5.; yea, our secret thoughts: Detract not from the King, no not in thy thought; for the fowls of the air shall
carry thy voice Eccles. 10.20.. The reason hereof is not obscure: Because Princes are the immediate Ministers of God Rom. 13.; and therefore he cal∣led Nebuchadnezzar, his servant Jer. 25.9.; and pro∣mised him also hire and wages for the service which he did Ezech. 29.18.. And the Prophet Esay c. 25. calleth Cyrus, a prophane and heathen King, the Lords Anointed. For, as Solomon saith, Prov. 21.1. The Hearts of Kings are in the hands of the Lord: and he stirreth up the spirit, even of wicked Princes, to do his will 2 Chro. 26.22.: and (as Iehoshaphat said to his Rulers 2 Chro. 19.8. they exe∣cute not the will of man, but of the Lord. In regard hereof David calleth them Gods Psal. 82.: whereof Plato also had some sense, when he said . In polit., A King is instead of God. And if they do abuse their Power, they are not to be judged by their Subjects, as being both inferi∣our and naked of Authority, because all Juris∣diction within their Realm is derived from them, which their presence onely doth silence and suspend: but God reserveth them to the sorest tryal: Horribly and suddainly (saith the wise man Sap. 6▪ will the Lord appear unto them, and a hard judgment shall they have. You Jesuits do yield a blindfold obedience to your Superiours, not once examining either what he is, or what he doth Command: and although the Pope should swerve from Justice, yet by the Canons xtra∣vag. Unam sanctam. de major. & obed., men are bound to per∣form obedience unto him, and God only may udge his doings: and may a King, the Lords Lieutenant, the Lords Anointed, in the view of his Subjects, nay, by the hands of his Sub∣jects,
be cast out of State? May he, as was Actaeon, be chased and worried by his own hounds? Will you make him of worse condi∣tion, than the Lord of a Mannor? than a Pa∣rish-Priest? than a poor Schoolmaster, who cannot be removed by those that are under their authority and charge? The Law of God commandeth that the child should die, for any contumely done unto the Parents. But what if the Father be a Robber? if a Murtherer? if for all excess of villanies odious and execrable both to God and Man? Surely he deserveth the highest de∣gree of punishment; and yet must not the Son lift up his hand against him: For, as Quintilian saith In de∣clm., No offence is so great, as to be punished by parricide. But our Coun∣try is dearer to us than our selves Cic. of∣tic. lib 1.: and the Prince is the Father of our Country Pater patriae.; whose Authority, as Baldus noteth In l. se∣nium. C. qui test. fa. poss.,  greater than of Parents: and therefore he must not be violated, how impious, how imperious soever he be. If he commandeth those things that are lawful, we must manifest our obedience by rea∣dy performing. If he enjoyn us those acti∣ons that are evil, we must shew our subjecti∣on by patient enduring. It is God onely who seateth Kings in their State; it is he on∣ly who may remove them. The Lord will set a wise King over the people which he loveth, as himself doth testifie 2 Chro. 1.. And again, For the sins of the land the Kings are changed Prov. 28.2. 2. Chron. 28.6.. A therefore we endure with patience unseasona∣ble
weather, unfruitful years, and other like punishments of God; so must we tolerate the imperfections of Princes, and quietly expect either reformation, or else a change. This was the Doctrine of the ancient Chri∣stians, even against their most mortal persecu∣tors. Tertullian saith Apo∣log. 3., For what war are we not both serviceable and ready, although une∣qual in number, who do so willingly endure to be slain? neither want we strength of number: but God forbid, that Religion should be maintained with humane fire. From him also St. Cyprian, a most studious reader of Tertullian, as St. Hie∣rom De sacr. ec. Tert. noteth, in like manner writeth Ad De∣met.: Al∣though our people be exceeding copious, yet it doth not revenge it self against violence it suffereth. St. Augustin saith Pactum societatis humanae ge∣nerale re∣gibus obe∣dire. Con∣fes. lib. 2. It is a general paction of hu∣mane society to obey Kings. Which sentence is assumed into the body of the Canon-Law Dist. 8. c. Quae con∣tra.. In a word, the current of the ancient Fathers is in this point concurrent; insomuch as among them all there is not one found, not any one: one is a small number; and yet I say confidently again, there is not any one, who hath let fall so loose a speech, as may be strai∣ned to a contrary sense. How then are you of late become, both so active and resolute to cut in sunder the reins of Obedience, the ve∣ry sinews of Government and Order? Whence had Benedtto Palmio, a Jesuit, his Warrant, to incite William Parry to undertake the par∣ricide of our Queen? whence did Annibal Codretto, another Jesuit, assure him, that the true Church made no question, but that the
fact was lawful? Whence did Guignard a Je∣suit term the Butchery of Henry late King of France, an heroical act, and a gift of the Holy Ghost? Whence did he write of the King, who now there reigneth, If without Arms he cannot be deposed, let men take Arms against him; if by War it cannot be accomplished, let him be murthered? Whence did Ambrose Verade, Rector of the Colledge of the Jesuits in Paris, animate Barriers (as he confessed) to sheath his Knife in the Kings breast; assuring him by the living God, that he could not execute any act more meritorious? Whence did the Commenter upon the Epitome of Confessi∣ons, otherwise the seventh book of Decretals, commend all the Jesuits in these terms Tyran∣os aggre∣diuntur, lo∣lium ab a∣gro domi∣nico evel∣lunt.: They set upon Tyrants, they pull the Cockle out of the Lords field? It is a Rule in Nature, that one contrary is manifested by the other. Let us compare then your boisterous Doctrine with that of the A∣postles and ancient Fathers of the Church, and we shall find that the one is like the rough Spirit which hurled the herd of Swine head∣long into the Sea Mat. 3.; the other like the still and soft Spirit which talked with Elias 1 Reg. 19.. Neither was the Devil ever able, until in late declining times, to possess the hearts of Christians with these cursed Opinions, which do evermore beget a world of Murders, Rapes, Ruines, and Desolations. For tell me, what if the Prince, whom you perswade the People they have power to depose, be able to make and maintain his Party, as King Iohn and
King Henry the Third did against their Ba∣rons? What if other Princes, whom it doth concern, as well in honour, to see the Law of Nations observed, as also in policy, to break those proceedings which may form Presidents against themselves, do adjoyn to the side? What if whilst the Prince and the People are (as was the Frog and the Mouse) in the heat of their Encounter, some other Potentate play the Kite with them both, as the Turk did with the Hungarians? Is it not then a fine piece of policy which you do plot? or is it not a gross errour to raise these dangers, and to leave the defence to possibilities doubtful? Go to, Sirs, go to, there is no Christian Country which hath not by your devices been wrapped in Wars. You have set the Empire on float with Bloud; your Fires in France are not yet extinguished; in Polonia and all those large Countries, extending from the North to the East, you have caused of late more Battels to be fought, than had been in five hundred years before. Your practices have heretofore prevailed against us: of late years you have busied your selves in no one thing more, than how to set other Christian Princes on our necks; stirring up such store of Enemies a∣gainst us, as, like the Grashoppers of Egypt Exod. 10. might fill our houses, and cover our whole land, and make more doubt of room than of resistance. Our own people also you have provoked to unnatural attempts: you have exposed our Country as a Prey to them that will either invade or betray it; supposing be∣like
that you play Christ's part well, when you may say as Christ did, Mat. 10.34. Think not that I came to send peace: I came not to send peace, but a sword. But when by the power and provi∣dence of God, all these attempts have rather shewn what good hearts you bear towards us, than done us any great harm; when in all these practices you have missed the mark, now you do take another aim: Now having no hope by extremity of Arms, you endeavour to execute your malice, by giving dangerous advice: Now you go about to entangle us with Titles, which is the greatest misery that can fall upon a State. You pretend fair shews of Liberty and of Power, Sed timeo Danaos & dona ferentes: We cannot but suspect the Courtesies of our Enemies: The Power which you give us, will pull us down; the Liberty whereof you speak, will fetter us in Bondage. When Themistocles came to the Persian Court, Artabanus Captain of the Guard, knowing that he would use no Ceremony to their King, kept him out of pre∣sence, and said unto him, You Grecians esteem us barbarous for honouring our Kings, but we Persians esteem it the greatest honour to us that can be. The like Answer will we frame unto you; You Iesuits account it a bondage to be o∣bedient unto Kings, but we Christians account it the greatest means for our continuance both free and safe.
An Answer to the third Chapter, which is intituled, Of the great Reverence and respect due to Kings, and yet how divers of them have been lawfully chastised by their Common∣wealths for their misgovernment; and of the good and prosperous success that God commonly hath given to the same, and much more to the putting back of an unworthy Pretender. THat Princes may be chastised by their Subjects, your proofs are two: One is drawn from certain Examples; the other from the good success and Successors which usually have followed. Surely it cannot be but that you stand in a strong conceit either of the authority of your Word, or simplicity of our Judgment; otherwise you could not be perswaded by these slender Threads to draw any man to your Opinion. Of the force of Examples I have spoken before; there is no Villany so vile which wanteth example: and yet most of the Examples which you do bring, are either false, or else impertinent▪ For there have been divers States, wherein one hath born the name and title of King, without power of Majesty. As the Romans in the time of their Consular Estate had al∣ways
a Priest, whom they entitled King, whose office consisted in certain Ceremonies and Sa∣crifices, which in former times could not be performed but by their Kings. Likewise the Lacedemonians, after Lycurgus had formed their Government, retained two Kings, who had no greater stroke in matters of State, than a single Voice as other Senators. Such were in Caesars time many petty Kings of Gaul, who (as Ambiorix King of Leige confessed) were subject to their Nobility, and questionable by them. Such are now the Emperours of Al∣main, because the Puissance and Majesty of the Empire pertaineth to the States, who are sworn to the Empire it self, and not to the person of the Emperour. Such are also the Dukes of Venice, the Soveraignty of which State is setled in the Gentlemen. In these and such-like Governments, the Prince is not Soverain, but subject to that part of the Com∣monwealth which retaineth the Royalty and Majesty of State, whether it be the Nobi∣lity or Common People: and therefore your Examples drawn from them, is nothing to our purpose. Concerning success, it cannot be strange unto you, that by the secret, yet just Judge∣ment of God, divers evil actions are carried with appearance of good success. The Pro∣phet David said, Psal. 73. that his treadings had almost slip't, by seeing the wicked to flourish in prosperity: The Prophet Ieremiah Ca. 12.1. seem∣ed also to stagger upon this point; and it hath always been a dangerous stone in the
way of the Godly, whereat many have stum∣bled, and some fallen. Besides, it ordinarily happeneth that good Princes succeed Tyrants; partly because they are so indeed, as being instructed to a better manage of Government, both by the misera∣ble life of their Predecessors, and by the ugly infamy which remaineth after their death: partly because by means of the Comparison they both seem and are reported to be far bet∣ter than they are. Hereupon Lampridius saith of Alexander Severus, In Ale∣xand. I may also say, that Alexander was a good Prince by fear, for that He∣liogabalus his Predecessor was both an evil Prince, and also massacred and slain. Seeing therefore the reason is so manifest, wherefore good Prin∣ces should succeed Tyrants, is it not rashness? is it not impudence? is it not impiety for us to wade with unclean feet into God's secret Counsels, unknown to the Angels, and to justi∣fie upon this event the Parricide of any Prince? For my part, I know not whether you shew your self more presumptuous in entering into this observation, or in pursuing it more idle and impure. I will pass over your protestation of Respect and Obedience due unto Princes: Protest what you please, we will take you for no other than a vile kind of vermine, which, if it be per∣mitted to creep into the bowels of any State, will gnaw the Heart-strings thereof in sunder. This you manifest by the coarse comparison which presently you annex, that as a natural Body hath authority to cure the Head if it be
out of tune, and reason to cut it off oftentimes, if it were able to take another; so a body Politick hath power to cure or cut off the Head, if it be unsound. But what either Will or Power hath any part of the Body in it self? What either Sense for the one, or Mo∣tion for the other, which proceedeth not al∣together from the Head? Where is the Rea∣son seated which you attribute to the Body, both in judging and curing the infirmities of the Head? Certain it is, that in your cut∣ting-cure you deal like a foolish Physician, who finding a Body half taken and benumb'd with a Palsie, cutteth off that part to cure the o∣ther, and so make sure to destroy both. You suppose, belike, that to enter into greater pe∣rils, is the onely remedy of present Dangers. I omit to press many points of this Compa∣rison against you, because Comparisons do serve rather to illustrate than enforce: and I know not what assertion you might not easily make good, if such senceless prating might go for proof. I come now to your particular Examples, whereof the first is of King Saul; whom you affirm to be deprived and put to death for his disobedience. Saul deprived and put to death? I never heard that any of his Subjects did e∣ver lift up one thought against him. Drea∣mer, you will say, he was slain by the Phili∣stines: Good, but who deprived him? It was God (you say) who did deprive him. You must pardon us, if upon the suddain we do not conceive the mystery of your meaning:
Your words of deprivation and putting to death, do rather import a judicial proceeding against him, than that God delivered him to be vanquished by his Enemies in the Field. But what is this to dispossessing by Subjects? Yes, you say, because whatsoever God hath put in ure in his Commonwealth, may be practised by others. Why, but then also good Princes may be deposed by their Sub∣jects, because God delivered Iosiah to be slain by the Egyptians. You Firebrands of Strife, you Trumpets of Sedition, you Red Horses whose sitters have taken peace from the Earth Apoc. 6.4., how impudently do you abuse the Scriptures? how do you defile them with your filthy Fingers? It is most certain, that David knew, both be∣cause Samuel told him, and because he had the Spirit of Prophesie, that God had reje∣cted Saul, and designed him to be King in his place: yet his Doctrine was always, not to touch the Lords Anointed, Ps. 105. 1. reg. 24. whereto his Actions were also answerable: For when Saul did most violently persecute him, he defen∣ded himself no otherwise than by Flight. Du∣ring this pursuit, Saul fell twice into his pow∣er; once he did not onely spare, but protect him, and rebuke the Pretorian Soldiers for their negligent watch: The other time his Heart did smite him, for that he had cut a∣way the lap of his garment. Lastly, he cau∣sed the Messenger to be slain, who upon re∣quest, and for pity, had furthered (as he said) the death of that sacred King. We have a
Precept of Obedience, which is the mould wherein we ought to fashion our actions. God onely is superiour to Princes, who useth many instruments in the execution of his ju∣stice, but his authority he hath committed un∣to none. Your second Example is of King Amon, who was slain (as you write) by his own people, because he walked not in the ways of the Lord. This is somewhat indeed, if it be true; let us turn to the Text: 4 reg. 21. Amon was twenty two years old when be began to reign, &c. and he did evil in the sight of the Lord, &c. and his servants conspired against him, and slew him in his house; and the people smote all those who conspired against King Amon, and made Jo∣siah his son King in his stead. But this is very different from that which you report. Amon was slain by his Servants, and not by the peo∣ple; who were so far from working, that they severely revenged his death. And although Amon was evil, yet the Scripture layeth not his evil for the motive whereupon his Ser∣vants slew him. The Devil himself in allead∣ging the Scripture, used more honesty and sin∣cerity (if I may so term it) than you: For he cited the very words, wresting them onely to a crooked sence; but you change the words of the Scripture: you counterfeit God's coyn; you corrupt the Records which he hath left us. I will now shake off all respect of civility to∣wards you, and tell you in flat and open terms, that as one part of your Assertion is true, that good Kings succeeded Saul and Amon; so
the other part, that either they were, or in right could have been deprived and put to death by their Subjects, it is a sacrilegious, a loggerheaded lye. Of your Example of Romulus I have spo∣ken before. I have declared also how the Ro∣mans, presently after the expelling of their Kings, and for that cause, were almost over∣whelmed with the weight of War, being bea∣ten home to the very Gates of their City. And had not Chocles by a miracle of Man∣hood sustained the shock of the Enemies, whilst a Bridg was broken behind him, the Town had been entred, and their State ruined. And whereas you attribute the inlargement of the Empire, which hapned many Ages after, to this expelling of their Kings, you might as well have said, that the rebellion against King Iohn was the cause of the Victories which we have since had in France. I have before de∣clared, that the state of the Romans under their Consuls, was popular rather in shew, than in deed: This shew began also to end, when by the Law Valeria, L. Sylla was esta∣blished Dictator for four and twenty years. After this, the Empire did mightily increase, until the reign of Trajane; at which time all Authors agree that it was most large; and yet far short of your wandring Survey, not half Fifteen thousand miles in compass. In your Example of Caesar, I never saw more untruths crowded together in fewer words: you say he broke all Laws both Hu∣mane and Divine: that is one; his greatest
Enemies did give of him a most honourable testimony. You say he took all Government into his hands alone: that is two; the peo∣ple by the Law Servia elected him perpetual Dictator. You make his death to be an act of the State: that is three; for they who slew him, were both declared and pursued by Decree of the State for publick Enemies; of whom, not any one, either died a natural death, or lived three years after: it was fur∣ther decreed, that the Court where he was slain should be stopped up, that the Ides of March should be called parricidium, and that the Senate should never be assembled upon that day. You say that Augustus was preferred in his place: that is four; and all within the compass of six Lines. Augustus was never chosen Dictator; Suetonius writeth In Au∣gusto. ge∣nu nixus dictaturam deprecatus est. that he entreated the people upon his knee, not to charge him with that Office. But Augustus, Antonius, and Lepidus did first knit in Arms by the name of Triumviri, to revenge the death of Iulius Caesar; whereupon a long cruel and doubtful War was set up, which continued the space of twenty years: first, be∣tween these three and the Murtherers of Cae∣sar; then between Lepidus and the other two: lastly between Augustus and Antonius: and this was the sweet success of the murther of Caesar. Augustus, after his Victory was made per∣petual Tribune, as Suetonius hath written. Dio saith, In Aug. . lib. 53. that he was freed from the power of the Laws, as Pompey also had been before
him. Tacitus addeth, In pro∣am. that the people ha∣ving their hearts broken with broils, permit∣ted him to rise into rule, and to draw by de∣grees the whole Authority of the State into his hands.Lex re∣gia. And so it seemeth that the Royal Law was not yet established, by which the people gave over their power in Government: Whereupon some make good the Sentence which the Senate gave against Nero, because the Soveraignty was not then by any express Act setled in the Emperour. But where you bring the Succession of Ves∣pasian as a good success of this Sentence a∣gainst Nero, it is a wild and witless untruth. Galba succeeded next after Nero, who was slain in a sedition raised by Otho. Otho again was overcome in field by Vitellius; whereup∣on he slew himself. Lastly, Vitellius was over∣thrown and slain by the Captains of Vespa∣sian, who was the fourth Emperour after Ne∣ro. These Intestine Wars, these open Battles fought to the full, this slaughter of Empe∣rours, which you term Interludes, were the immediate success after the death of Nero. You Fiends of Hell, whose Voices are Light∣ning and Thunder, whose breathing is nothing but Sword, Fire, Rages, and Rebellions: the encountring of Armies, the butchery of mil∣lions of men, the Massacre of Princes, you ac∣count Interludes: These are your pleasures; these your recreations. I hope all Christian-Commonwealths will bear an eye over your inclination, and keep out both your persons and perswasions, from turning their State
into an open Stage for the acting of these In∣terludes. You continue your base boldness in affir∣ing, that the Senate procured the death of Domitian; that they requested the Souldiers to kill Heliogabalus; that they invited Con∣stantine to come and do justice upon Ma∣xentius: this broken kind of disguising is fa∣miliar unto you, to make such violences as have often prevailed against excellent Princes, to seem to be the act of the whole State. And whereas you bring the succession of Ale∣xander Severus for a good success of the mur∣ther of Heliogabalus, being the rarest Prince (you say) that ever the Romans had, you might have alleadged any Author in proof thereof better than Herodian, who writeth of him in this manner. lib. 6 Alexander did bea the name and Ensigns of the Empire; but the administration of Affairs and government of the State did rest upon women. And further he writeth, that by his slackness and cowardise, the Roman Army was defeated by the Persians: and finally, that for his want of courage he was slain by his own Souldiers. By this we may see that you go blindfold, being so far from caring, that many times you scarce know what you write. Your markable Example (as you term it) of the change of the Empire, from the West to the East; from Constantine the sixth, to Charles King of France, doth mark out no∣thing more unto us than your soundred judg∣ment. The question is not what one forrain
Prince may do against another, but what Subjects may do against their Soveraign? This is the point of controversie; here you must close, and not traverse about in discourses impertinent. The change of the Kingdom of France from Childeric to Pepin, your own Author Girard lib. 1. de l'state de France. affirmeth to be both an ambitious and fraudulent usurpation, wherein Pepin u∣sed the reverence of Religion as a Mantle to cover his Impiety and Rebellion. The mat∣ters which he objected against Childerick were two: First, his insufficiency, the ordinary pretence of most Rebellions; but Girard saith Ibidem. that the ancient custom of the French was, to love and honour their Kings, whe∣ther sufficient or unable, worthy or weak; and that the name of King was esteemed sa∣cred by whomsoever it was born. Second∣ly, he objected, that his Subjects were condi∣tionally sworn unto him: and this also Girard writeth to be a forced and cautelous interpre∣tation, violently streining the words of their Oath to his advantage; and indeed, if the Oath of the people had been conditional, what needed they to procure a Dispensation for the same? This was the first act (saith he) whereby the Popes took occasion to set in their foot of Authority for transporting of Kingdoms from one Race to another: which growing to strength, hath filled all Christian Countries with confusion and tumult. Likewise, the change of that Kingdom from the Line of Pepin to the Line of Capet,
was a meer violence and intrusion, and so it was acknowledged by Endes Earl of Paris, the first of that Family who did usurp Girard fo. 52.: and for that cause he was constrained after two years reign to quit the Crown, and to give place unto Charles the lawful Heir. And when Robert, brother unto Endes, did enter into arm to recover that which his Brother once held he was beaten down and slain by the faithful Subjects of King Charles. Hugh, the son of Robert nourished this ambition; but Hugh Capet his son, with better both opportunity and success, but no better right, did accom∣plish the Enterprise. For Girard Fo. 58. de l'state. calleth him an Usurper, and Charles Duke of L∣rain the true Heir to the Crown. Betwee these two (as in all usurpations it is usual) War was raised; but by the unsearchable Judgment of God the Duke of Orleans was cast to the ground. And there is little doubt but, if he had prevailed, Orleans had bee at this day a Member of the Crown of France. The like answer may be given to your Ex∣ample of Suintilla: and this beside, that the Kingdom of the Goths in Spain was not the setled in succession, and chiefly during the Reign of Victeric, Gundemir, Sisebuth, Suintilla, Sicenand, Cinthilla, and Tulca. The History of Alphonso, another of your Examples, standeth thus. Alphonso had a son call'd Ferdinand, who died during the life of his father, and left two young sons behind him. Af∣ter the death of Ferdinand, his younger Bro∣ther
Sancho practised with D. Lope Diaz de Haro Lord of Biscay, to procure him to be advanced to the succession of the Kingdom, before his Nephews. D. Lope undertook the devise; and drawing some other of the No∣bility to the party, they so wrought with the King, that in an Assembly of the States at Segovia, Sancho was declared Successor, and the Children of Ferdinand appointed to be kept in Prison. But Sancho, either impa∣tient to linger in expectation, or suspitious that his Father grew inclinable towards his Nephews, made a League with Mahomed Mir King of Granado, a Moor; by whose aid, and by the Nobility of his Faction, he caused himself to be declared King. Hereupon Al∣phonso was enforced to crave assistance of Ia∣cob Aben Ioseph King of Morocco, who before had been an Enemy to Alphonso: but upon detestation of his unnatural Rebellion, he sent Forces to him, protesting notwithstanding, that so soon as the War should be ended, he would become his Enemy again. So Alphon∣so by help, partly of the Morocco Moors, and partly of his Subjects which remained loyal, maintained against his son both his Title and State during his life; but not without extre∣mity of bloodshed, and opportunity for the Moors, being assistant to both parties, to make themselves more strong within the Countries of Spain. For this cause Alphonso disinheri∣ted his son by his Testament, and cast a cruel curse upon him and his Posterity: and after∣ward it was ordained in an Assembly of the
States holden at Tero, that the Children of the elder Brother deceased, should be preferred be∣fore their Uncle. How then will you verifie your two points by this History? First, that Alphonso was de∣prived by a publick Act of Parliament: Se∣condly, that it turned to the great Commo∣dity of the State. It is not a million of Mas∣ses that are sufficient to satisfie for all your de∣ceitful and malicious untruths. I marvel how the Rebellion of Absolon against King David his Father escaped you: Oh, it wanted suc∣cess; and you could not easily disguise the Report. You write, that the Commonwealth of Spain resolving to depose Don Pedro the cruel, sent for his Brother Henry out of France, and required him to bring a strength of Frenchmen with him: But hereby you make it plain, that the Commonwealth was not fully agreed. The truth is, that this was a dangerous divi∣sion of the State between two Concurrents; some holding for Henry, and some for Pedro▪ Henry obtained forraign Assistance by the French; Pedro by the English. In the mean time, whilst Peter was thrown out of State by the Forces of France, and after that Henry by the Arms of England; and again Peter deje∣cted both from dignity and life; the poor Country became a Spectacle for one of your Enterludes. Your Example of Don Sancho Capello King of Portugal, containeth many intollerable un∣truths: for neither was he deprived of his
dignity, neither did the Pope and Council of Lions give either authority or consent that he should be deprived; neither was he driven out of his Realm into Castilla; neither died he in banishment; neither was Alphonso his Brother King during his lie. These five un∣truths you huddle into one heap. The Coun∣cil of Lions wholly opposed against the depo∣sing of Don Sancho, notwithstanding many dis∣abilities were objected against him: in regard whereof they gave direction, that Alphonso his Brother should be Regent of the Realm; as in that case it is both usual and fit. But Sancho taking this to dislike, did seek Aid of the King of Castile, and in that pursuit ended his life without Issue: whereby the right of Succession devolved to Alphonso. To your Examples of Greek Emperours c. 5. p. 84. I will answer by your words, which are, That for the most part they came not orderly to the Crown, but many times the means thereof were tribulent and seditious. The deposing of Henry King of Polonia, I acknowledge to be both true and just; I have nothing to except against it▪ When the Crown of France did descend unto him, he forsook Polonia, and refused to return again to that swaggering Government; whereupon they did depose him. Give us the like case, and you shall be allowed the like proceeding; but you esteem your Examples by tale, and not by touch: being not much unlike a cer∣tain mad Fellow in Athens, who imagined e∣very Ship which was brought into the Haven
to be his: For whatsoever you find of a King deposed, you lay claim unto it, as both lawful∣ly done, and pertaining to your purpose; whereas one of these doth always fail. Concerning your two Examples, one of Sweden, and the other of Denmark, I shall have occasion to speak hereafter. The Nobility of those Countries pretend that their Kings are not Soveraign, but that the power in highest matters of State pertaineth unto them. If it be thus, the Examples are not appliable to the Question; if it be otherwise, then the Princes had wrong. We are now come to our domestical Ex∣amples; the first whereof is that of King Iohn, who was deposed by the Pope, you say at the suit of his own people. All this people was the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of London, and the Bishop of Ely; at whose complaint, the Pope did write to Philip King of France, that he should expel King Iohn out of his Realm. If not Conscience, if not or∣dinary Honesty, pure Shame should have drawn you to another form of writing. He was al∣so deprived (you say) afterwards by his Ba∣rons. Havy Beast, call you this a Depriva∣tion? The Commons were never called to consent; the Clergy were so opposite to those that stood in Arms against King Iohn, that they procured Excommunication against them; first, cally; then by name▪ lastly, Lewes the French Kings son was also included: Of the Nblity, which is onely the third State of the Realm, I make no doubt but some reser∣ved
themselves to be guided by success; o∣thers, and namely the Earls of Warren, Arun∣del, Chester, Pembrooke, Ferrers, Salisbury, and divers Barons did openly adhere unto King Iohn: You may as well call any other Re∣bellion a Deprivation, as affirm that the rest either did or might deprive him. And where∣as you bring in King Henry the Third as a most worthy Successor after this Deprivation, I will derogate nothing from his worthiness; but there was never King in England, who without concurrent in the Title of the Crown, did draw more bloud out of the sides of his Subjects. Your second Example is of King Edward the Second, whom many of our Histories re∣port to be of a good and courteous nature, and not unlearned; imputing his defects rather to Fortune, than either to counsel or carriage of his Affairs. His Deposition was a violent fury, led by a Wife both cruel and unchast; and can with no better countenance of right be justified, than may his lamentable both in∣dignities and death which thereupon did en∣sue. And although the Nobility, by submit∣ting themselves to the government of his Son, did break those occasions of Wars which do usually rise upon such Disorders, yet did not the hand of God forget to pursue revenge: For albeit King Edward his Son enjoyed both a long and prosperous Reign, yet his next Successor King Richard the second, was in the like violent manner imprisoned, deprived, and put to death. I will prosecute the successive
revenge which hereof also ensued, being a strange matter, and worthy to be rung into the ears of all Ages. King Henry the Fourth, by whom King Richard was deposed, did ex∣ercise the chiefest Acts of his Reign in execu∣ting those who conspired with him against King Richard. His Son had his Vertue well seconded by Felicity; during whose Reign, by means of the Wars in France, the humour against him was otherwise employed and spent: but his next Successor King Henry the Sixth, was in the very like manner deprived, and together with his young Son Edward, imprisoned and put to death by King Edward the Fourth. This Edward died not without suspicion of poyson; and after his death his two Sons were in like manner disinherited, imprisoned, and murthered by their cruel Un∣kle the Duke of Gloucester; who being both a Tyrant and Usurper, was justly encountred and slain by King Henry the Seventh in the field. So infallible is the Law of Justice in revenging Cruelties and Wrongs, not always observing the presence of times wherein they are done, but often calling them into reckon∣ing, when the Offenders retain least memory of them. Likewise the deposition of King Richard the Second was a tempestuous Rage, neither led nor restrained by any Rules of Reason or of State; not suddenly raised and at once, but by very cunning and artificial degrees. But examine his actions without distempred judgment, and you will not condemn him to
be exceeding either insufficient or evil: weigh the Imputations that were objected against him, and you shall find nothing either of any truth or of great moment. Hollingshead writeth In Ri∣chard 2., that he was most unthankfully used by his Subjects; for al∣though, through the frailty of his youth, he demeaned himself more dissolutely than was agreeable to the Royalty of his estate, yet in no Kings days the Commons were in greater wealth, the Nobility more honoured, and the Clergy less wronged: who notwithstanding in the evil-guided strength of their Will took head against him, to their own headlong-de∣struction afterward: partly during the Reign of King Henry, his next Successor, whose grea∣test Atchievements were against his own peo∣ple; but more especially in succeeding times, when upon occasion of this disorder more En∣glish bloud was spent than was in all the for∣raign Wars which had been since the Conquest. Three causes are commonly insinuated by you, for which a King may be deposed; Tyranny, Insufficiency, and Impiety: But what Prince could hold his State, what People their Quiet assured, if this your Doctrine should take place? How many good Princes doth Envy brand with one of these marks? What action of State can be so ordered, that either blind Ignorance or set Malice will not easily strain to one of these heads? Every execution of Ju∣stice, every demand of Tribute or Supply, shall be claimed Tyranny: every infortunate Event shall be exclaimed Insufficiency: every
kind of Religion shall by them of another Sect be proclaimed Impiety. So dangerous it is to permit this high power to a heedless and headless Multitude, who measure things not by Reason and Justice, but either by Opi∣nion, which commonly is partial, or else by Report, which usually is full of uncertainties and errours: the most part doing because o∣thers do; all easie to become slavish to any mans ambitious attempt. So dangerous it is to open our ears to every foolish Phaeton, who undertaking to guide the Chariot of the Sun, will soon cast the whole Earth into combu∣stion. You proceed, that King Henry the Sixth was also deposed for defects in Government. Let us yield a little to you, that you may be deceived; a little that you may be carried by your affections: How can you excuse these open untruths, wherein it cannot be but the Devil hath a finger? You cannot be ignorant that the onely cause which drew the Family of York into Arms against King Henry, was the Title which they had unto the Crown: by vertue whereof it was first enacted, That Rich. Duke of York should succeed King Henry, after his death: but for that he made unseasonable attempts, he was declared by Parliament in∣capable of succession, and afterwards slain at the Battel of Wakefield. Then Edward his Son, prosecuting the en∣terprize, and having vanquished King Henry at the Battle of St. Albans, obtained possessi∣on of the State, caused King Henry to be de∣posed,
and himself to be proclaimed and Crow∣ned King. Afterward he was chased out of the Realm, and by Act of Parliament both de∣prived and disabled from the Crown. Lastly, he returned again, and deprived King Henry both from Government and from Life. It is true, that some defects were objected against King Henry; but this was to estrange the hearts of the people from him. The main cause of the War did proceed from the right of the one party, and possession of the other: The contrariety of the Acts of Parliament was caused, by the alternative Victories of them both. Your last example is of King Richard the Third, of whom you write: First, that al∣though he sinned in murthering his Nephews, yet after their death he was lawful King. Se∣condly, that he was deposed by the Common∣wealth, who called out of France Henry Earl of Richmond, to put him down. Philosophers say, that dreams do commonly arise, by a re∣flection of the phansie upon some subject, whereof we have meditated the day before. It may be that your drowsie conceit was here cast into a dream, of that whereon it had do∣zed in all this Chapter: Or at the best, that you are like unto those, who have so often told a lie, that they perswade themselves it is ture. King Edward the fourth left other children besides those that were murthered; the Duke of Clarence also, who was elder Bro∣ther to King Richard, left Issue in life, all which had precedence of right before him. And as
for the second point, tell me, I pray you, by what Parliament was King Richard deposed? where did the States assemble? when did they send for the Earl of Richmond to put him down? by what Decree? by what Messen∣gers? There is no answer to be made, but one; and that is, to confess ingenuously, that you say untrue; and that it is your usual man∣ner of deceiving, to impute the act of a few unto all; and to make every event of Arms, to be a judicial proceeding of the Common∣wealth. For it is manifest, that the Earl of Richmond had his first strength from the King of France; and that after his descent into En∣gland, more by half, both of the Nobility and common people did stand for King Richard, than stir against him. You adjoyn for a spe∣cial consideration, that most excellent Princes succeeded these whom you affirm to be depo∣sed. I will not extenuate the excellency of any Prince; but I hold it more worthy to be con∣sidered, that these disorders spent England a sea of bloud. In the end you conclude, that all these de∣privations of Princes were lawful. Nay; by your favour, if you sweat out your brains, you shall never evince, that a fact is lawful because it is done. Yes (you say) for otherwise two great inconveniences would follow: One, that the acts of those that were put in their place, should be void and unjust. The other, that none who now pretend to these Crowns, could have any Title, for that they descended from them, who succeeded those that were depri∣ved.
You deserve now to be basted with words well steeped in Vinegar and Salt; but I will be more charitable unto you, and leave bad speeches to black mouths. For the first, the possession of the Crown purgeth all defects, and maketh good the acts of him that is in Authority, although he wanteth both capa∣city and right. And this doth Vlpian expres∣ly determine In l. Barbarius. D. de offic. praesid. upon respect (as he saith) to the common good. For the other point, the Successors of an Usurper, by course and com∣pass of time, may prescribe a right; if they who have received wrong, discontinue both pursuit and claim. Panormitane saith In c. cura pasto∣ralis de ju∣re patron., Successor in Dignitate potest praescribere, non ab∣stante vitio sui Praedecessoris. A Successor in Dig∣nity may prescribe, notwithstanding the fault of his Predecessor; Otherwise, causes of War should be immortal, and Titles perpetually re∣main uncertain. Now then for summary collection of all that you have said: your Protestations are good; your Proofs light and loose; your Conclusions both dangerous and false. The first doth savour of God, the second of Man, the third of the Devil.
An Answer to the fourth Chapter, which beareth title, Wherein consisteth principally the lawful∣ness of proceeding against Princes, which in the former Chapter is mentioned. What interest Princes have in their Subjects goods or lives. How Oaths do bind or may be broken, of Subjects to∣wards their Princes; and finally, the difference between a good King and a Tyrant. HEre you close with Bellaie upon two points: First, whether a King is subject to any Law. Secondly, whether all Tempo∣ralities are in propriety the King's: But be∣cause these questions do little pertain to our principal Controversie, I will not make any stay upon them; it sufficeth that we may say with Seneca De be∣nefic. lib. 7. c. 5.: Omnia Rex imperio possidel, singuli domino. The King hath Empire, every man his particular propriety in all things. After this, you proceed further to make ood, that the Princes before-mentioned were lawfully deposed; and that by all Law, both Divine and Humane, Natural, National, and Positive. Your cause is so bad, that you have need to set a bold countenance upon it. But what Divine Laws do you alleadge? You
have largely before declared (you say) that God doth approve the form of Government which every Commonwealth doth choose, as also the Conditions and Statutes which it doth appoint unto her Prince. I must now take you for a natural lyar, when you will not forbear to belye your self: you never proved any such matter; and the contrary is evident, that sometimes entire Governments, often, Cu∣stoms and Statutes of State, and very com∣monly accidental actions are so unnatural and unjust, that (otherwise than for a punishment and curse) we cannot say that God doth ap∣prove them. We have often heard that the Church cannot erre in matters of Faith; but that in matter of Government a Common∣wealth cannot erre, it was never (I assure my self) published before. But let us suppose (supposal is free) that God alloweth that form of Government which every Commonwealth doth choose: Doth it therefore follow, that by all Divine Laws Princes may be deposed by their Sub∣jects? These broken pieces will never be squa∣red to form strong argument. But where∣fore do not you produce the Divine Canons of Scripture? Surely, they abhor to speak one word in your behalf: yea, they do give ex∣press sentence against you, as I have shewed before. Well, let this pass among your least escapes; in making God either the Author or Aider of Rebellion, you alleadge no other Humane Law, but that Princes are subject to Law and Or∣der.
I will not deny but there is a duty for Princes to perform: But how prove you that their Subjects have power to depose them if they fail? In this manner: As the Common∣wealth gave them their Authority for the common good, so it may also take the same a∣way, if they abuse it. But I have manifested before Cap. 2., both that the people may so grant away their Authority that they cannot resu∣me it; and also that few Princes in the world hold their State by grant of the people. I will never hereafter esteem a mans valour by his voice: Your brave boast of all Laws, Divine, Humane, Natural, National and Positive, is dissolved into smoak: You busie your self as the Poets write of Morpheus, in presenting shadows to men asleep. But the chiefest reason (you say) the very ground & foundation of all. Soft; What reason? what ground? if you have already made proof by all Laws, Humane and Divine, Natural, National and Positive, what better reason; what surer ground will you bring? Tush; these interruptions? The chiefest reason (you say) the very ground and foundation of all is, that the Commonwealth is superiour to the Prince; and that the Authority which the Prince hath, is not absolute, but by the way of mandate and commission from the Common∣wealth. This is that which I expected all this time: you have hitherto approached by stealing steps, you are now come close to the wall; do but mount into credit, and the fort is your
own. You affirmed at the first, that Princs might be deposed for disability; then, for misgovernment; now, upon pleasure and at will. For they who have given authority by commission, do always retain more than they grant C. du∣dum de praeb. lib. 6.; and are not excluded either from Commanding or Judging, by way of prevention, concurrence, or evocation; even in those cases which they have given in charge l. judi∣cium sol∣vitur. D. de judic.: The reason is declared by Vlpian, l. solet. de jurisd. Because he to whom Iurisdiction is committed representeth his person who gave commission, and not his own. Hereupon Alexander In l. ult. de ju∣risd., Panor∣mitane In c. pa∣storalis de off. ord., Innocentius, and Felinus In c. cum eccle∣siarum. eo., do af∣firm, that they may cast their Commissioners out of power when they please, because, as Paulus saith In d. l. judicium. a man can judge no longer, when he forbiddeth who gave authority. Further, all States take denomination from that part wherein the supreme power is setled; as if it be in one Prince, it is called a Monar∣chy; if in many of highest rank, then it is an Aristocracy; if in the people, then a Demo∣cracy. Whereupon it followeth; if the peo∣ple are superiour to the Prince, if the Prince hath no power but by commission from them, that then all Estates are popular: for we are not so much to respect who doth execute this high Power of State, as from whom immedi∣ately it is derived. Hereto let us add that which you have said in another place Cap▪ 2.; that in popular Governmens there is nothing but sedition, trouble, tumults, outrages, and injustices upon every light occasion; and then
we shall perceive, first, that you want the art of a wise deceiver, not to be entangled in your tale. Secondly, that this is mere poyson, which the Devil hath dropt out of your Pen, to infect Christian Countries with disobedi∣ence and disorder. In a word, to the contra∣ry of this your impudent untruth, our Laws do acknowledge supreme authority in the Prince within the Realm and Dominions of England, 1 El. 1. neither can Subjects bear themselves ei∣ther superiour or equal to their Soveraign; or attempt violence either against his person or estate, but as well the Civil Law L. 1. d. ad. l. Jul. majest., as the particular Laws and Customs of all Coun∣tries, do adjudge it high and hainous Treason. I will speak now without passion: What rea∣son have we, to accept your idle talk for a kind of authority, against the Judgment and Laws of most Nations in the world? You proceed, that the power of a Prince is given to him by the Commonwealth, with such conditions and exceptions, as if the same be not kept, the people stand free. That the Prince receiveth his power under plain con∣ditions, you go about to prove afterward: now you hold on, that in all mutual contracts, if one side recede from promise, the other re∣maineth not obliged: And this you prove by two Rules of the Law. The first is Frustra fidem sibi quis postu∣lat servari ab eo, cui fidem a se praestitam servare re∣cusat., He doth in vain require promise to be kept of another man, to whom he refuseth to perform that which he promised. The other is Non ob∣stringitur quis ad im∣plendum quod jura∣vit si ab  parte  imple∣tur, cujus respetu praebuit ju∣ramentum. A man is not bound to perform his Oath, if on the other part, that be not performed, in respect whereof he did swear.
Poor fellow, had you been as conversant in the light of Law, and clear course of Justice, as you are in the smoak and dust of some cor∣ner of a Colledge, you would never have con∣cluded so generally so confidently upon any of the Rules of Law, which are subject for the most part unto many exceptions. Alexander In l. cum pro∣ponas c. de pact. & Felinus In c. pervenit 2. de jurejur. do assign five fallencies unto these Rules: Socinus In tract. fallen reg. 199. giveth the contrary Rule: To him that breaketh his faith or oath, faith ought to be kept; and then restraineth it with seven li∣mitations. But all affirm, that in those offices which are mutual between any persons, by the Law of Nature or of God; as between the Father and the Child, the Husband and the Wife, the Master and Servant, the Prince and the Subject; although the same be further assured by Promise or by Oath, the breach of duty in the one, is no discharge unto the other. And therefore if the Father performeth not his duty towards his Children, they are not thereby acquitted both of the obedience and care, which God and Nature exacteth of them; howsoever Solon in his Laws discharged Chil∣dren from nourishing their Parents, if they did not train them in some Trade, whereby they might acquire their living. Much less are Subjects exempted from Obedience, if the Prince either erre or be defective in Govern∣ment; because the like respect is not due un∣to Parents as unto Princes (as I have some∣what touched before) insomuch as a Son that beareth authority, hath right both to com∣mand and compel the Father I. ille a quo & l. sq..
This was declared among the Romans, by that which Plutarch In apo∣pht., Livie Lib. 24., ValeriusLib. 2. c. 1., and Gellius Lib. 2. c. 2., do report of Q. Fabius: to whom, being Consul, when Fabius Maximus his Father, who had been Consul the year be∣fore, did approach sitting upon his Horse, the Son commanded him by a Sergeant to alight: the Father not onely obeyed, but highly com∣mended both the Courage and Judgment of his Son, in maintaining the Majesty which he did bear, and in preferring a publick both Du∣ty and Authority before private. Upon those examples Paulus the Lawyer did write L. post∣liminium., that publick discipline was in higher estimati∣on among the Roman Parents,filius D. de capit. & postlim. than the love of Children. After an impertinent discourse, that upon divers considerations an Oath ought not to be performed; you annex another cause where∣fore Subjects may withdraw their Allegeance; and that is, when it should turn to the notable damage of the Commonwealth: And both these you affirm to be touched, in the depri∣vation of Childerick King of France. But I regard not what was touched in the depri∣vation of Childeric; I have answered to that in the Chapter next before; I require either Arguments or Authority of more tough tem∣per. Well then, let us turn back the leaf, and there we shall find a Rule of the Law (be∣cause by Rules only you will only beat down Rule) c. In malis de reg. jur. in 6. In evil promises it is not expedient to keep faith: Which is also confirmed by a sentence of Isidrus 22. q. 4.4. c. 5.: In evil promises,
break your word; in a dishonest oath change your purpose. Well fare your wits, good soul; Do you account the promise of obedience evil? not so (I suppose you will say) but it turneth to be evil when it turneth to the notable detri∣ment of the Commonwealth. It is one of your peculiar gifts, the further you go, the more impious you declare your self. For if you take the word evil in no higher sence than for detriment and dammage, it would follow upon your rule, that a man were no further tied to his promise, than the perfor∣mance thereof were advantageable unto him. You would enforce also, that if the Father doth dissipate his patrimonial Estate, and run a course to ruine his Family, the Children and the Wife may thereupon disavow their duties. But if we take a true touch of this point, we shall find that the vices of any Prince are not sufficient of themselves to overthrow a State, except thereupon Rebellions be raised, which will draw all things into confusion. For there is no Prince, which either hath li∣ved, or can almost be imagined to live, in so little sence of humanity, but generally he both favoureth and maintaineth some order of Justice; only against particular persons, some of them have violently been carried by the tempest of their passion, whereby notwith∣standing the inordinate desires of one man, cannot possibly reach to the ruine of all. So saith Suetonius, In Do∣mit. that under Domitian
the provinces were well governed, only cer∣tain private men at Rome, felt the evil of his cruelty and other vices. But when the peo∣ple do break into tumult, then all course of Justice is stopped; then is either assistance made, or resistance weakned for forain Inva∣sion; then is every one raised into hope who cannot fly but with other mens Feathers; then, as when a fierce Horse hath cast his Ri∣der, the Reins are loosed to those insolencies, which a dissolute people, nothing restrained either by honesty or ar do usually commit. For as it is the nature of men, when they come ou of one extremity wherein they have been holden by force, to run with a swift course into another, without staying in the midst; so the people breaking out of Tyranny, if they be not hold back, will run headlong into un∣bridled liberty; and the harder they were kept under before, the more insolently will they then insult. I observe that Saint Paul▪ alleadgeth two reasons wherefore we should be obedient even to wicked and cruel Princes: one is for con∣science sake, Because they are the ministers of God Ro. 13.▪ and in their Royalty do bear his Image: Another, for the safety and tranquilli∣ty of our selves; that we may lead under them a quiet and peaceable life 1 Tim. 2 2.. Whereupon the Prophet Ieremiah . c. 2.7. also exhorted the Jews to seek the peace of the City whither they should be transported, because in the pace thereof their quiet should consist: For by obedience, a few particulars remain in dan∣ger;
by Rebellion, all; by Obedience, we can be under the Tyranny but of one; by Rebellion we are exposed to the Rapine and Cruelty of many; by the one nothing, by the other all things are permitted. Upon this ground Saint Augustine said; Gene∣rale quippe pactum est humanae societatis, regibus o∣bedire. confess. lib. 2. It is a gene∣ral covenant of humane Society to obey Kings: And likewise St. Ambrose Mag∣num est & speciale documen∣tum, &c. ad Auxentium It is a great and special point of doctrine whereby Christians are taught to be subject unto higher powers. Three ways a cruel Prince may work vio∣lence against his Subjects; upon their Goods; upon their Persons; and upon their Consci∣ences, by commanding them to commit that which is evil. Of the first, St. Ambrose saith: Ad Au∣xentium. If the Emperour demandeth tribute, we do not deny him: If he desireth Fields, let him take them if he please: I do not give them to the Em∣perour; but therewith also I do not deny them. Of the second, Tertullian writeth Apol. as I have alleadged him before: For what War are we unserviceable or unfit, although une∣qual in number, who do so willingly suffer death? Yea, he was so far from judging it lawful to resist, that he thought it scarce al∣lowable to fly. In the third case, not your rule of Law, but the rule of the Apostles ta∣keth place: It is better to obey GOD than man Act. 4:: whereby the Subject is not bound to yield obedience. But how? he is not bound to obey by do∣ing, but by suffering he is: He is not bound to obey in doing that onely which is evil; but he is not thereby freed from doing any o∣ther
thing which is lawfully commanded. St. Augustine saith, In Psal. Iulian was an Infi∣del Emperour, an Apostata, an Idolater; Chri∣stian Souldiers did serve this Infidel Emperour; when he would have them worship Idols, and offer Frankincense unto them, they preferred God before him: but when he said, Bring forth the Army, march against such a Nation, they did presently obey. All this seemeth to be confir∣med by God himself, who after he had fore∣warned the people of Israel by the mouth of Samuel, 1 Sam. 8. what heavie, what open injustice they should endure under some of their Kings, he concludeth in these words: And ye shall cry out in that day because of your King, and the Lord will not hear you. As if he had said: you shall grudge at this burthen, you shall groan under it; but you shall not have power, either to shrink from it, or to shake it off. Surely, if you had been advisied, you would privily have blown your Blasphemies into the ears of those Ideots, who adore you for the great Penitentiaries of the See of Rome, and esteem your idle imaginations as the Articles of their Faith: and not so publickly have poured forth your self into these Paradoxes, both impious and absurd; not so boisterously have stepped, like Hercules Furens, upon the open stage of the world, to denounce depri∣vation against all Princes. You would not thus confidently have opposed your hot-hea∣ded assertion against all the ancient Fathers of the Church. You would not thus igno∣rantly have troubled the Waters of true hu∣mane
Wisdom, by corrupting the sence of the Civil Laws: you would not thus profane∣ly have abused the Scriptures in maintaining Rebellion, as Conjurers do in invocating the Devil. For first, you are thereby discovered to be neither religious, modest, nor wise: Se∣condly, you have run your self into the com∣pass of a Canon, in the Council of Chalcedon. C. con∣juratio∣num xj q j. Wherein it is thus decreed against you: If Clerks shall be found to be contrivers of Conspi∣racies, or raisers of Factions, let them be degra∣ded. After this you declare who is a Tyrant; and that is a King, (you say) if once he doth decline from his duty: which is a large de∣scription, and fit to set all Christian Coun∣tries on float with Bloud. Comines saith, that he is to be esteemed a good King, whose ver∣tues are not overballanced by vice. I omit your thick errour in putting no dif∣ference between a Magistrate and a King, with many other of like quality; and do come now to a principal point of your strength: That Christian Princes at this day are admitted upon conditions, and likewise with protesta∣tions, that if they do not perform the same, their Subjects are free from all alleageance. This you will prove by the particular Oaths of all Princes, if the over-running of your tongue may have the full course without en∣counter.
An Answer to the fifth Chapter, which is intituled, Of the Coronation of Princes, and manner of admitting to their Authority; and the Oaths which they do make in the same unto the Commonwealth for their good Government. FIrst I will preface, that no Prince is sove∣raign, who acknowledgeth himself ei∣ther subject or accountable to any but to God; even as Marcus Aurelius said, That Magi∣strates were Judges of private men, and the Prince of Magistrates, and God of the Prince. In regard of this immediate subjection, Prin∣ces are most especially obliged to the Laws of God and of Nature: for In l. 2. D. de ser∣vi. 8· aqua. Baldus, ons. 2.. Ale∣xander, De le∣gi Speculator, In  c. . conjus. all Interpreters, c. sunt  25.  the Law it self, do affirm, that Princes are more strictly bound to these Laws, than any of their Subjects. Whereof  Dionysius the Tyrant had some sence, when he said unto his Mother,Nunc. That he was able to dispence with the Laws of Syracusa, but against the Laws of Nature he had no power. If therefore a Prince doth profess that he will bear himself rgardful of the accomplishment of these Laws, he doth not condition or restrain himself, but  honourable promise of endeavour  discharge his Duty, being tyed thereby to
no scanter scope than he was before. The reason hereof is, L. 3. D. de leg. 1. Dec. in reg. 77. n. 10. Quia expressio ejus quod tacitè inest, nihil operatur: The expressing of that which is secretly understood, worketh nothing. Again, when the Promise is not annexed to the Authority, but voluntarily and freely made by the Prince, his Estate is not thereby made conditional. For the Interpreters of the Civil Law do consent in this Rule In l. ju∣risgentium, Pa∣cta conventa quae contractibus non insunt,Quinimo non for∣mant actionem: Covenants which are not inhe∣rent in Contracts, do not form an Action. And therefore although by all Laws, both of Con∣science and State, a Prince is bound to per∣form his Promise; because (as the Master of Sentences saith) God himself will stand o∣bliged to his word: yet is not the authority, but the person of the Prince hereby affected; the person is both tyed and touched in ho∣nour, the authority ceaseth not, if performan∣ces do fail. Of this sort was that which you report of Trajan, who in delivering the Sword to his Governors, would say, If I reign justly, then use it for me; if otherwise, then use it against me: But where you adde, that these are the very same words in effect which Princes do use at their Coronations, (pardon me, for it is fit I should be moved) you will find it to be a very base lye. Of this nature was that al∣so which the same Trajan did (to encourage his Subjects to do the like) in taking an Oath to observe the Laws: which Pliny the younger did account so strange, as the like be∣fore
had not been seen. But afterward Theo∣doric did follow that fact; whereupon Cassio∣dorus saith, Ecce, Trajani nostri clarum seculis reparamus exemplum; jurat vobis per quem jura∣tis: We repair the famous example of Trajan; he sweareth to you by whom you swear. So when King Henry the Fifth was accepted for Succes∣sor to the Crown of France, he made promise to maintain the Parliament in the liberties thereof. And likewise divers Princes do give their faith to maintain the priviledges of the Church, and not to change the Laws of the Realm: which Oath is interpreted by In l. claris l. de fideis. Bal∣dus, In c. pro illo∣rum de prebend. Panormitane, and Cons. 220. lib. 6. & cons. 122 & 125. l. 4. Alexander, to extend no further than when the Laws shall be both profitable and just; because Justice and the common benefit of Subjects, is the principal point both of the Oath and Duty of a Prince, whereto all other clauses must be re∣ferred. And now to your Examples. First, because in all the rank of the Hebrew Kings you cannot find either Condition or Oath; not in the ancient Empires and King∣doms of the world; not usually in the flou∣rishing time of the Roman State, both under Heathen and Christian Emperours; because these times are too pure for your purpose, you fumble forth a dull Conjecture: That for∣somuch as the first Kings were elected by the People, it is like that they did it upon condi∣tions and assurances for themselves. That the first Kings received not their Authority from the people, I have manifested before In c. 1.: and yet your inference hereupon is no other, than
if you should sue in some Court for a Legacy, alleadging nothing for your intent, but that it is like the Testator should leave you some∣thing; in which case it is like (I suppose) that your Plea would be answered with a si∣lent scorn. After a few loose Speeches, which no man would stoop to gather together, you bring in the example of Anastasius the first Emperour of Constantinople; of whom the Patriarch Eu∣phemius required before his Coronation, a Confession of the Faith in writing, wherein he should promise to innovate nothing. And further, he promised to take away certain Op∣pressions, and to give Offices without money. Let us take things as they are, and not speak upon idle imagination, but agreeable to sence. What either Condition or Restraint do you find in these words? Condition they do not form, because in case of failance they do not make the Authority void: neither do they make Restraint, because they contain no point whereunto the Law of God did not restrain him. All this he was bound to perform with∣out an Oath; and if he were a thousand times sworn, he was no more but bound to perform it: even as if a Father should give his word to cloath and feed his Child; or the Husband to love his Wife; or any man to dis∣charge that duty which God and Nature doth require. It is true, that Anastasius was both a wicked man, and justly punished by God for the breach of his Faith; but his Subjects did never challenge to be free therefore from their Allegiance.
The same Answer may be given to the Promise, which Michael the first gave to Nice∣phorus the Patriarch, That he would not violate the Ordinances of the Church, nor embrue his hands with innocent bloud; especially if you take the word Ordinances for matters necessa∣ry to be believed: but if you take it in a lar∣ger sence, then have I also declared in the be∣ginning of this Chapter, how far the Promise doth extend. Your next Example is of the Empire of Almain; from whence all that you object doth fall within this circle. After the death of Charles the Great, the Empire was held by Right of Succession, until his Line was deter∣mined in Conrade the First: After whose death it became Elective: first, in Henry Duke of Saxony; then in Otho his son; and afterwards in the rest: from whom notwithstanding no other promise was wrested, but the discharge of that duty, which they were informed, or rather threatned, that God would severely ex∣act at their hands. But (as in all Elective States it usually happeneth) at every new change and choice, the Emperour was deplu∣med of some of his Feathers, until in the end he was made naked of Authority, the Princes having drawn all power to themselves. So by degrees the Empire was changed from a Monarchy to a pure Aristocracy; the Emperour bearing the Title thereof, but the Majesty and Puissance remaining in the States. During which weakness of the Emperour, some points were added to his Oath, which
seemed to derogate from the soveraignty of his estate. But what is this to those Princes who have retained their dignity, without a∣ny diminution either of Authority or of Ho∣nour? The like may be said of Polonia, which not many hundred years since was erected into a Kingdom; and although the States did chal∣lenge therein a right of Election, yet did it always pass according to propinquity of bloud, and was esteemed a soveraign Monar∣chy; until after the death of Casimire the Great, when Lodovicus his Nephew King of Hungary, rather greedy than desirous to be King also of Polonia, did much abase the Ma∣jesty thereof. Yet falling afterward into the Line of Iagello, who married one of the daugh∣ters of Lodowiek, it recovered the ancient both dignity and strength. But when that Line also failed in Sigismond Augustus, the last Male of that Family, the States elected Henry Duke of Anjou for their King, with this clause irritant; That if he did violate any point of his Oath, the people should owe him no Allegiance. But whereas you report this as the usual Oath of the Kings of Polonia, you deserve to hear the plainest term of untruth. In the Kingdom of Spain you distinguish two times: one, before the Conquest thereof by the Moors; the other, after it was reco∣vered again by the Christians. I acknow∣ledge a difference in these two times; for that in the one, the Right of the Kingdom was Elective; in the other, it hath always remai∣ned
Successive: insomuch as In spec. it 14. Peter Belluga, a diligent Writer of the Rights of Arragon, doth affirm,Venia∣mus, n. 10. that the people have no power in electon of the King, except in case the Line should fail. Concerning the matter in controversie, you affirm, that the Kings did swear the same points in effect, which before have been men∣tioned. This we must take upon your forfei∣ted Faith, for you alleadge no form of Oath, onely you write, that the fourth National Council of An. 623. cap. 74. Toledo, with all humility con∣venient did require, that the present King and all other that should follow, would be meek and moderate towards their Subjects, and govern them with Justice, and not give sentence in Causes capital without assistance: declaring further, that if any of them should exercise cruel and proud Authority, that they were condemned by Christ with the sentence of Excommunication, and separated to ever∣lasting Judgment. But what pang hath possessed your dream∣ing brains, to term this by a marginal Note, Conditions of reigning in Spain? being no other than a reverent and grave admonition of the duty of a King, with a fearful declaration of the Judgment of God against wicked Princes. And that which was afterward decreed in the sixth Council of Toledo, That the King should swear, not to suffer any man to break the Catholick Faith, because it is a principal point of his duty, his Estate was not thereby made conditional.
The rest of this passage you fill up with froath of the antiquated Law of Don Pelayo, prescribing a form of inaugurating the Kings of Spain; whereof there is not one point ei∣ther now in use, or pertaining to the purpose. So miserable is your case, that you can write nothing therein, but that which is either im∣pertinent or untrue. For France, your first Example is taken from the Coronation of Philip the First: wherein you note, that King Henry his Father requested the people to swear Obedience to his son; inferring thereby, that a Coronation requireth a new Consent, which includeth a certain Election of the Subjects. But this is so light, that the least breath is sufficient to disperse it. Philip was crowned King during the life of his Father: which action, as it was not ordinary, so was it of such both difficulty and weight, that it could not be effected with∣out assembly and consent of the States. The Oath which he made, is in this form extant in the Library of Rheimes: I do promise before God and his Saints, that I will conserve to every one committed unto me, Canonical Priviledge, and due Law and Iustice, and will defend them, by the help of God, so much as shall lie in my power, as a King by right ought to do within his Realm, to every Bishop, and to the Church committed to him: and further, to the People committed to my charge, I will grant by my authority the dispensa∣tion of Laws according to right. Adde to this a more ancient form of the Oath of those Kings, which it seemeth you have not seen: I
swear in the Name of God Almighty, and promise to govern well and duly the Subjects committed to my charge, and to do with all my Power, Iudge∣ment, Iustice, and Mercy. Adde also the Oath which you alleadge of Philip the Second, sur∣named Augustus: To maintain all Canonical Priviledges, Law and Iustice due to every man, to the uttermost of his power; to defend his Subjects as a good King is bound to do; to pro∣cure that they be kept in the union of the Church▪ to defend them from all Excess, Rapine, Extortion, and Iniquity, to take order that Iustice be kept with equity and mercy; and to endeavour to expel Here∣ticks. What doth all this rise unto, but a Prince∣ly promise to discharge honourably and truly those points of duty which the Laws of God did lay upon them? What other Conditions or Restraints are imposed? What other Con∣tract is hereby made? Where are the Prote∣stations which in the end of the last Chapter you promised to shew, that if the Prince do fail in his Promise, the Subjects are free from their Allegiance? What Clause do you find sounding to that sence? But you little regard any thing that you say; you easily remember to forget your word. Well then, we must put these your vain Speeches into the reckon∣ing of Money accounted, but not received: and seeing you cannot shew us that the Kings of France and of Spain are tyed to any Con∣dition, whereto the Law of God doth not bind them, I will not vary from the judgment of Ordradus Con. 69. in affirming them to be absolute Kings.
I have pressed this point the rather in this place, because you write, that most Neighbour-Nations have taken the form of anointing and crowning their Kings, from the ancient cu∣stom of France; although the substance be de∣duced from the first Kings of the Hebrews, as appeareth by the anointing of King Saul: whereof David (you say) made great ac∣count, notwithstanding that Saul had been rejected by God, and that himself had lawfully born Arms against him. Out, Atheist; you would be dawbed with Dung, and have the most vile filth of your Stews cast in your face. Did David bear Arms against his anointed King? did he ever lift up his eye-lids against him? did he ever so much as defend himself otherwise than by flight? It is certain that Shemei did not half so cruel∣ly either curse or revile this holy man, who did so much both by speech and action detest this fact, that he would rather have endured ten thousand deaths, than to have defiled his Soul with so damnable a thought. What then shall we say unto you, who to set up Se∣dition and Tumult, abuse all divine and hu∣mane Writings, in whatsoever you believe will advance your purpose? who spend some speech of respect unto Kings for allure∣ment onely, to draw us more deep into your deceit? Shall we give any further ear to your Doctrine, both blasphemous and bloudy? We will hear you to the end; and I deceive my self, but your own tale shall, in any moderate judgment, condemn the authority of your opi∣nions for ever.
Let us come then to your last Example, (which is neither the last nor the least where∣at you level;) and that is of England, which of all other Kingdoms (you say) hath most particularly taken this Ceremony of Sacring and Anointing from France. Well, let the Ceremony be taken from whence you please; if the Oath be no other than you do specifie, To observe peace, honour, and Reverence unto Al∣mighty God, to his Church, and to the Ministers of the same; to administer Law and Iustice e∣qualy to all; to abrogate evil Laws and Customs, and maintain good; (which was the Oath of King Richard the First; the like whereto was that of King Iohn, altered onely in the first branch, To love and defend the Catholick Church.) If the Oath be no other, I say, I do not see what other Answer you need to expect, but that it is onely a free Royal Promise, to dis∣charge that duty which God doth impose. And this is plainly declared by the Speech which you alleadge of Thomas Arundel Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, to King Henry the Fourth: Remember (saith he) the Oath which volun∣tarily you made: Voluntarily he said, and not necessarily; it was voluntaly in Oath, but ne∣cessary in Duty. That which you report al∣so, that▪ Thomas Becket did write unto King Henry the Second, importeth nothing else but an acknowledgment of Duty: Remember (said he) the Confession which you made. I cannot omit your description of the man∣ner of the Coronation in England. First (you say) the King is sworn; then the Archbishop
declareth to the people what he hath sworn, and demandeth if they be content to submit themselves unto him under those conditions: whereunto they consenting, he putteth on the Royal Ornaments; and then addeth the words of commission: Stand and hold thy place, and keep thy Oath. And thus you have hammered out a formal Election, supposing that you draw together the pieces of falshood so close, that no man can perceive the sam. The truth is, that King Henry the Fourth be∣ing not the nearest in Bloud to the inheritance of the Crown, did countenance his violence with the election of the people; not at his Coronation, but in a Parliament that was holden before. And therefore you do impu∣dently abuse us; first, in joyning them toge∣ther as one Act; secondly, by falsifying di∣vers points in both; lastly, by insinuating that the same order was observed by other Kings. The points which you falsifie, are these: The interrogation of the Archbishop to the people; the absurd straining of these words, Stand, hold thy place, to be a Commission; the alleadging also out of Stow, 1. That the Archbishop did read unto the people what the King was bound unto by Oath. 2. That the Earl of Northumberland did shew a Ring unto the people, that they might thereby see the Band whereby the King was bound unto them. 3. That the King did pray that he might observe his promise. In whih com∣position of Conceits you shew how active you are in counterfeiting any thing that may make
to your purpose; perswading your self, that it is no fraud unto God, to deceive the World in a lye for advantage. King Edward the Fourth also (because his Right was litigious, and another was in pos∣session of the Crown) strengthened, or ra∣ther countenanced his Title with the approba∣tion of the People. But where you write, that at the Coronation of King Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, the consent and acceptation of the people was de∣manded: First, we have no cause to credit any thing that you say; then, although it be true, yet not being done in Parliament, it ad∣deth no right unto the Prince; but is onely a formality, a circumstance onely of Ceremony and Order. Hereupon you conclude, that a King hath his authority by agreement and contract be∣tween him and the people: insinuating there∣by, that he loseth the same, if he either violate or neglect his word. The contrary opinion, that onely succession of Bloud maketh a King, and that the consent of the people is nothing necessary, you affirm to be absurd, base, and impious, an unlearned, fond, and wicked as∣sertion; in flattery of Princes, to the manifest ruine of Commonwealths, and perverting of all Law, Order, and Reason. I did always foresee that your impostumed stomach would belch forth some loathsome matter. But whosoever shall compare this confident conclusion with the proofs that you have made, he will rather judge you mad than
unwise. This bold blast, upon grounds that are both foolish and false, bewrayeth rather want than weakness of wits. I am ashamed I should offer any further speech in so evident a truth: but since I have undertaken to com∣bate an Heresie, since the matter is of so great consequence and import, I purpose once again to give you a Gorge. Learn then, heavy-headed Cloisterer, una∣ble to manage these mysteries of State; learn of me, I say, for I owe this duty to all Chri∣stians: the Prophets, the Apostles, Christ him∣self hath taught us to be obedient to Princes, though both Tyrants and Infidels. This ought to stand with us for a thousand reasons to submit our selves to such Kings as it plea∣seth God to send unto us; without either judging or examining their qualities. Their hearts are in Gods hand; they do his service, sometimes in preserving, sometimes in puni∣shing us: they execute his judgment both ways, in the same measure which he doth pre∣scribe. If they abuse any part of their power, we do not excuse, we do not extenuate it; we do not exempt them from their punish∣ment: let them look unto it, let them assu∣redly expect that God will dart his venge∣ance against them with a most stiff and dread∣ful arm. In the mean season, we must not oppose our selves otherwise than by humble suits and prayers; acknowledging that those evils are always just for us to suffer, which are many times unjust for them to do. If we do otherwise, if we break into tumult and dis∣order,
we resemble those Giants of whom the Poets write, who making offer to scale the Skies, and to pull Iupiter out of his Throne, were overwhelmed in a moment with the Mountains which they had heaped together. Believe it, Cloisterer, or ask any man who is both honest and wise, and he will tell you: It is a Rule in Reason, a Tryal in Experience, an Authority confirmed by the best, That▪ Re∣bellion produceth more horrible effects, than either the tyranny or insufficiency of any Prince. An Answer to the sixth Chapter, whereof the title is, What is due to onely Succession by Birth; and what interest or right an Heir apparent hath to the Crown, before he is crowned or admitted by the Com∣monwealth: and how justly he may be put back, if he hath not the parts requi∣site. YOu begin (after your manner) with a carreer against Billay; but because both I have not seen what he hath written, and dare not credit what you report, I will not set in foot between you. In breaking from this, you prefer Succes∣sion of Princes before free Election, as well
for other respects, as for the pre-eminence of Ancestry in birth, which is so much privi∣ledged in the Scripture: and yet not made so inviolable, (you say) but upon just causes it might be inverted, as it appeareth by the ex∣amples of Iacob, Iudah, and Solomon. And this liberty you hold to be the principal re∣medy for such inconveniencies as do ensue of the course of Succession; as if the next in birth be unable or pernicious to govern: in which cases, if he be not capable of directions and counsels, you affirm that the remedy is to remove him. And so you make Succession and Election, the one to be a preservative to the other; supposing, that the difficulties of both are taken away, First, if ordinarily Succession taketh place; then, if upon occa∣sion, we give allowance to Election. For the Prerogative of Birth, as also for the special choice which God hath often made of the youngest, I will remit my self to that which I have written before Cap. 1.. At once; in those particular actions which God hath ei∣ther done, or by express Oracle commanded, contrary to the general Laws which he hath given us; as in the Robbery of the Egyptians, the extirpation of the Amalekites, the insurre∣ction of Iehu, and such like; we are bound to the Law, and not to the Example. God hath given us a natural Law to prefer the first-born; he hath often made choice of the youngest, be∣cause he commonly worketh greatest effects, by means not onely weak, but extraordinary; as it appeareth by the birth of Isaak. But that
these special Elections of God are not proposed for imitation to us, hereby it is evident; because they have been for the most part without de∣fect in the one, or demerit in the other. And especially in this example of Iacob and Esau, St. Paul saith Ro. 9.13 that it was not grounded upon their works, but upon the will and plea∣sure of God; for before they had done good or evil, before they were born, God said: Gen. 25.23. The eldest shall serve the youngest. Which if we might imitate, the priviledge of birth were given in vain. For your device in joyning Election to Suc∣cession, whereby one of them should remedy the difficulties of the other, it is a meer Uto∣pical conceit: What else shall I term it? an imposture of State, a Dream, an Illusion, fit only to surprise the judgement of the weak and ignorant multitude. These toys are al∣ways hatched by the discoursive sort of men rather than the active; being matters more in imagination than in use: and herein two respects do principally oppose against you. The first is, for that in most Nations of the world, the people have lost all power of Election; and Succession is firmly setled in one discent, as before I have declared Cap. 1.. The second is, for that more fiery factions are hereby kindled, than where Succession or Election are meer without mixture. For where one claimeth the Crown by Succession, and another possesseth it by Title of Election; there, not a disunion only of the people, not a division in arms, but a cruel throat-cutting, a
most immortal and mercyless butchery doth u∣sually ensue. It is somewhat inconvenient (I grant) to be governed by a Prince either im∣potent or evil; but it is a greater inconve∣nience, by making a breach into this high point of State, to open a way to all manner of ambitions, perjuries, cruelties and spoil: whereto the nature of the common-people would give a great furtherance, who being weak in Wisdom, violent in Will; soon wea∣ry of quiet, always desirous of change, and most especially in matters of State, are easily made serviceable to any mans aspiring desires. This I have manifested before Cap. 3., by the ex∣amples of King Edward and King Richard, both surnamed the Second: who were not insupportable either in nature or in rule; and yet the people, more upon wantonness than for any want, did take an unbridled course a∣gainst them. And thus is your high Policy nothing else but a deep deceipt; thus whilst you strive with the wings of your wit to mount above the Clouds of other mens con∣ceit▪ you sink into a sea of absurdities and errours. After this, you determine two questions: The first is, What respect is to be attributed to propinquity of bloud only. Whereto you answer, that it is the principal circumstance which leadeth us to the next Succession of the Crown, if other circumstances and conditions do oncur, which were appointed at the same time, when the Law of Succession was establi∣shed. Assuredly, you can never shew either
when, or by whom, this Law of Succession was first instituted, except perhaps by some Nim∣rod, when he had brought the neck of a peo∣ple under his sword: at which time, what conditions he would set down to be required from his Successour, any ordinary judgment may conjecture at ease. Well, since you set us to seek for proof of this, to that which you have written before, I will also send you back to the same place Cap. 1. for your answer. The second question is, What interest a Prince hath to his Kingdom, before he be Crowned? This you resolve by certain com∣parisons; and first you write, that it is the same which the German Emperour hath be∣fore his Coronation. But that is so large, that some Emperours have never been Crowned; others have deferred it for many years; a∣mong which Metrop. l. 3. cap. 20. Crantzius writeth, that Otho the First received the Crown of the Empire, in the eight and twentieth year of his Reign. And yet is not this comparison full to the question propounded; because in elective States there is not held one perpetual continuance of Roy∣alty, as is in those that are successive. And In Pro∣oem. de∣cret. Panormitane saith, That an argument a si∣milibus is not good, if any difference can be assigned. Much more unfitly do you affirm, that it is no greater than a Mayor of London hath in his Office, before he hath taken his Oath: For it is odiously absurd, to compare the Authority of an absolute Prince by succes∣sion, to the Authority of an Officer, both e∣lective and also subject.
But it is the example of marriage (you say) whereby this matter is made more plain: for as in this contract there is an espousal, by promise of a future act, and a perfect marriage by yielding a present consent; the first is, when both parties do mutually promise that they will. The second, that they do take one the other for Husband and Wife: So an Heir apparent, by propinquity of blood is espoused only to the Commonwealth, and married af∣terward at his Coronation, by Oaths of either party, and by putting on the Ring, and other Wedding-garments. But how were Kings married in former ages? how are they now married in those Countrys, where they have neither Ring, nor Wedding-garment, nor also any Oath? What? is every Office and De∣gree which is taken with Ceremony, to be e∣steemed likewise a Marriage? Or if you will have Coronation onely to be a Marriage, what else can it resemble, but the publick ce∣lebration of Matrimony between man and wo∣man? which addeth nothing to the substance of contract, but onely manifesteth it to the world. These pitiful proofs naked of authority, empty of sence, deserve rather to be excused than answered: I will help therefore in some sort to excuse them. They are the best that your both starved cause and conceit can possibly af∣ford: and you have also some fellows in your folly. Heliogabalus did solemnly joyn the statues of the Sun and of the Moon in mar∣riage together. Nero was married to a man,
and took also a man to his Wife. The Ve∣netians do yearly upon Ascention-day, by a Ring and other ceremonies, contract marriage with the Sea. But now in earnest; men do die whenso∣ever it pleaseth God to call them: but it is a Maxime in the Common-Law of England: Rex nunquam moritur; The King is always a∣ctually in life. In France also the same custom hath been observed; and for more assurance, it was expresly enacted under About the year 1375. Charles the fifth, That after the death of any King, his eldest Son should incontinently succeed. For which cause the Parliament-Court of Paris doth accompany the funeral-obsequies of those that have been their Kings, not in mour∣ning attire, but in Scarlet; the true en∣sign of the never-dying Majesty of the Crown. In regard of this certain and incontinent succession, the In c. ult. 24. q. 1. Glossographer upon the De∣crees, noteth, That the Son of a King, may be called King during the life of his Father, as wanting nothing but administration: wherein he is followed with great applause by In l. quaesitum. D. de leg. 1. Bal∣dus, In c. tanta qui fil. sunt le∣git. Paenormitane, Cons. 192. l. 2. Iason, Cons. 19. l. 1. Carol. Rui∣nus, In c. 1. tit. quis dicat. dux. Andreas Iserna, Martinus, Card. Ale∣xander, In l. particum. c. de rei vind. Albericus, In rep. rub. de ca. po & prop. Fed. Barbatius, Cons. 262. & in tract. de po. & excel. reg. q. 25. Philip Decius, and Ant. Corsetta, In tract. de privil. fis. par. 1. ca. 109. Fra. Luca, In tract. . Matthe, Afflict. And the same also doth Servius note out of Aeneid. 9. Virgil, where he saith of Ascanius: Regem{que} requirunt, his Father Aeneas being yet alive. But so soon as the King departeth out of
life, the Royalty is presently transferred to the next Successour, according to the Laws and Customs of our Realm. All Writs go forth in his Name; all course of Justice is exerci∣sed, all Offices are held by his Authority; all States, all Persons, are bound to bear to him Allegeance: not under supposal of appro∣bation when he shall be Crowned, according to your dull and drousie conjecture, but as being the true Soveraign King of the Realm. He that knoweth not this, may (in regard of the affairs of our State) joyn himself to St. Anthony, in glorying in his ignorance, and professing that he knoweth nothing. Queen Mary Reigned three months before she was Crowned, in which space the Duke of Nor∣thumberland and others were condemned and executed for Treason: for Treason, I say, which they had committed, before she was proclaimed Queen. King Edward the first was in Palestina, when his Father died; in which his absence, the Nobility and Prelates of the Realm assem∣bled at London, and did acknowledge him for their King. In his return homeward he did ho∣mage to the French King, for the lands which he held of him in France. He also repressed certain Rebels of Gascoine; amongst whom, Gasco of Bierne appealed to the Court of the King of France: where King Edward. had Judgment, that Gasco had committed Trea∣son Wal∣sing. in E. 1▪; and thereupon he was delivered to the pleasure of King Edward. And this
hapned before his Coronation, which was a year and nine months after he began to reign. King Henry the sixth was crowned in the eighth year of his Reign; and in the mean space, not only his Subjects did both profess and bear Allegeance, but the King of Scots also did swear Homage unto him. What need I give any more either instance or argument, in that which is the clear Law, the uncontrouled custom of the Realm? A∣gainst which notwithstanding your weather-beaten forehead doth not blush to oppose a blind Opinion, that Heirs apparent are not true Kings, although their Titles be just, and their predecessors dead. This you labour to prove by a few dry conjectures, but espe∣cially and above all others (you say) because the Realm is asked three times at every Coro∣nation, whether they will have such a man to be their King or no. First, we have good rea∣son to require better proof of this question than your bare word. Secondly, although we admit it to be true, yet seeing the answer is not made by the Estates of the Realm as∣sembled in Parliament, but by a confused con∣course (necessary Officers excepted) of all sorts both of Age and Sex, it is for Ceremony only, and not of force, either to give or to increase any right. Another of your Arguments is, for that the Prince doth first swear to Govern well and justly, before the Subjects take their Oath of Allegeance; which argueth, that before they▪
were not bound. And further you affirm, that it hapned onely to King Henry the fifth, among his predecessors, to have fealty done unto him, before he was crowned, and had ta∣ken his Oath. I confess indeed, that Polydore and Stow have written so; but you might easily have found that they write not true; the one of them being a meer stranger in our State; the other a man more to be commended for endeavour than for art. King Iohn being in Normandy when his Brother died, sent into England Hubert Arch-bishop of Canterbury, William Marshal Earl of Strig∣vile, and Geoffry Fitzpeter Lord Chief Justice, who assembled the States of the Realm at Northampton, and took of them an Oath of obedience to the new King. Also King Anno reg. 23. Henry the Third caused the Citizens of Lon∣don, the Guardians of the Cinque-ports, and divers others, to swear fealty to Prince Ed∣ward his son; who being in Palestina when his Father died, the Nobility and Prelates of the Realm assembled in the new Temple at London, and did acknowledge him for their King. And in like manner, King Edward the Third took an Oath of all the Nobility of the Realm, of faith after his death to Richard Prince of Wales; and so did King Henry the first, for his Daughter Mawde, and her young son Henry. After the death of King Henry the Fifth, that Subjects did often swear allegeance before the Coronation and Oath of the King, you had neither Countenance nor Conscience to
deny: but it was neither of these two which did restrain you; it proceeded onely from the force of truth, which will manifest it self whatsoever art we use to disguise it. For o∣therwise, what Countenance, what Consci∣ence had you to affirm, that it is expresly no∣ted by our English Historiographers, That no Allegeance is due unto Kings before they be crowned? Who are these Historiogra∣phers? Where do they so write? You that search every dusty corner of your Brains for a few ragged reasons to uphold your Heresie, should not either have mentioned, or omitted such pregnant proofs: For in that you affirm and do not express them, you condemn your self by your own silence. If you mean that which you alleadge out of Polydore and Stowe: That an Oath of feal∣ty was never made before Coronation, until the time of King Henry the Fifth; it is nei∣ther true, nor to any such sence. If you mean that of Polydore in terming Henry the Fifth Prince and not King, before he was crowned; in writing also, that the States did consult in Parliament, De no∣o rege creando more ma∣jorum. Of creating a new King after the custom of their Ancestors: It is a sleepie jeast, to strain every word in such an Author to propriety of speech. You might better have cited, what certain Cities in France, not long since, alleadged for themselves: That because they had not reputed Henry the Fourth for their King, because they had not professed Alleageance unto him, they were not to be adjudged Rebels: Where∣upon
notwithstanding the chiefest Law∣yers of our age did resolve, that foras∣much as they were original Subjects, even Subjects by birth; they were Rebels in bear∣ing Arms against their King, although they had never professed alleageance. And this is so evidently the Law of the Realm, that it is presumption in us both: in you, to assay by your shallow Sophistry to obscure or impugn; in me, to endeavour by authorities and argu∣ments to manifest or defend the same. But the admission of the people (you say) hath often prevailed against right of Succes∣sion. So have Pyrates against Merchants; so have Murtherers and Thieves against true meaning Travellers. And this disloyalty of the peo∣ple hath moved divers Kings to cause their Sons to be crowned during their own lives; because the unsetled state of succeeding Kings doth give opportunity to boldest attempts; and not as you dream, because admission is of more importance than succession. I will examine your Examples in the Cha∣pters following. In the mean time, where you write, that King Henry and King Edward, both called the Fourth, had no better way to appease their minds at the time of their death, but by founding their Title upon con∣sent of the people; the Authors Sir Tho. Moor, and Stow. which you cite do plainly charge you with unexcu∣sable untruth. King Edward never made question of his right: King Henry did, as some other Authors report Holing∣shed; but applied no such deceitful comfort: this false skin would not then serve to cover his wound.
An Answer to the Seventh Chapter, which beareth title, How the next in Succession by propinquity of Blood, have oftentimes been put back by the Commonwealth, and others fur∣ther off admitted in their places, even in those Kingdoms where Succession pre∣vaileth; with many Examples of the Kingdom of Israel and Spain. HEre you present your self very pensive to your audience, as though you had so o∣ver-strained your wits with store of Exam∣ples of the next in Succession not admitted to the State, that you had cracked the credit of them for ever. But you are worthy of blame, either for endangering or trou∣bling your self in matters of so small ad∣vantage. I have shewed before, that Exam∣ples suffice not to make any proof; and yet herein doth consist the greatest shew of your strength. It is dangerous for men to be go∣verned by Examples though good, except they can assure themselves of the same concur∣rence of reasons, not onely in general, but in particularities; of the same direction also and carriage in Counsel; and lastly, of the same favourable fortune: but in actions which are evil, the imitation is commonly worse than
the example. Your puffie discourse then is a heap of words without any weight; you make mountains, not for Mole-hills, but of Moats; long harvest of a small deal, not of Corn, but of Cockle: and (as one said at the shearing of Hogs) great cry for a lit∣tle, and that not very fine Wool. Yea, but of necessity something you must say: yea, but this something is no more than nothing. You suppose, that either your o∣pinion will be accepted, more for authority of your Person, than weight of your Proofs; or else that any words will slide easily into the minds of those who are lulled in the humour of the same inclination; because partiality will not suffer men to discern truth, being ea∣sily beguiled in things they desire. Besides, whatsoever countenance you carry, that all your Examples are free from exception, yet if you had cast out those which are impertinent, or unjust, or else untrue, you could not have been overcharged with the rest. Your first example, that none of the Chil∣dren of Saul did succeed him in the Crown, is altogether impertinent: because by parti∣cular and express appointment of God 2 Reg. 15, & 16. 2 Reg. 2 & 5, the Kingdom was broken from his posterity. We acknowledge that God is the onely supe∣riour Judge of Supream Kings, having abso∣lute both Right and Power, to dispose and transpose their Estates as he please. Neither must we examine his actions by any course of Law, because his Will is above all Law. He hath enjoyned the people to be obedient to
their Kings, he hath not made them equal in authority to himself. And whereas out of this example you deduce, that the fault of the father may prejudicate the sons right, although he had no part in the fault; to speak moderately of you, your judgement is either deceitful or weak. God in his high Justice, doth punish indeed the sins of Parents upon their Posteri∣ty Exod. 20..: but for the ordinary course of Humane Justice, he hath given a Law, that the Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father ec. .20. Jer. 31.29. Deut. 24.16. 2 Chron. 25.2.: The equity whereof is regularly follow∣ed, both by the Civil L. si∣quis suo. §. Legis C. de in off. test. l. ge∣nerali. D. de it. nup. l. siliam. D. de sena∣tor. l. a∣doptivum. D. de in jus voc. and Canon Dist. 56. per tot. Law; and by the Interpreters of them both gl & D. ib. & in c. vel n est de temp ord.. Your second example is of King Solomon, who succeeded in the State of David his Fa∣ther, notwithstanding he was his youngest Son. But this example in many respects fal∣leth not within the compass of your case. First, because he was not appointed Successour by the people, and we speak what the people may do to direct Succession. Secondly, for that the Kingdom was not then stablished in Succession. Lastly, for that the action was led by two Prophets, David and Nathan, ac∣cording to the express choise and direction of God 1 Chro. 22.8, 9.: whereby it is no rule for ordina∣ry right. Here many points do challenge you of in∣discretion  the least. You write that David made a promise to Bathsheba in his youth, That Solomon should succeed in his estate: but if you had considered at what years Solo∣mon
began to Reign, you should have found that David could not make any such promise, but he must be a youth about threescore years of age. You write also, that David adored his Son Solomon from his bed: but the words wherewith David worshipped were these 3. Reg. 2.48.: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who hath made▪ one to sit on my Throne this day, even in my sight: whereby it is evident, that David adored God and not his Son. This I note rather for ob∣servation of the loosness of your Judgment, than for any thing it maketh to the purpose. You are so accustomed to untruths, that you fall into them, without either advantage or end. The like answer may be given to your ex∣ample of Rehoboam; because God declared his sentence therein by two Prophets, Ahijah 3. Reg. 11.31. & Shemaiah 3. Reg. 12.24.. But for that the ten Tribes revolted from Rehoboam upon discontentment at his rough answer, and with dispite against David and his House, and not in obedience to Gods Decree, we cannot excuse them from offence, for which it turned to their destructi∣on. For hereupon, first they were separated both from the place and manner of the true Worship of God; then, there arose unap∣peasable War, between them and the Tribe of Iudah; then, insolencies following disorders, they were never long time free from Conspi∣racies, Divisions, and Tumults: by which means being drained both of Wealth and In∣habitants, and reduced to a naked weakness,
they were lastly carried captive into divers far Countries, and strangers were sent to in∣habit their Cities. I must here also observe a few of your inter∣pretations, wherein your boldness is not limi∣ted with any bounds. It is to be noted (you say) that before Rehoboam went to Shechem to be admitted by the people, he was not accoun∣ted true King. I desire therefore that you would satisfie us in these places following. Before Rehoboam went to Shechem, the Scripture saith, that Solomon died, & was buried, and Rehobo∣am his Son reigned in his stead 3. Reg. 11.43.. Again, after the defection of the ten Tribes it is said, that in the Cities of Iudah Rehoboam did Reign still 3. Reg. 12.17.; implying thereby, that in the other Cities he reigned before. Again, they are said to have rebelled against the house of Da∣vid 3. Reg. 12.19.. And lastly, Rehoboam raised all the strength of Iudah and Benjamin, to bring the Kingdom again unto him 3. Reg. 12.21.. Further you write, that ten Tribes refused to admit Rehoboam; but the Scripture saith, that they rebelled 3. Reg. 12.19.. What? did God on∣ly allow hereof after it was done? did he only permit the people to do it? The Scrip∣ture testifieth, that it was his Decree, that it was his Deed, and that he declared his Will by Ahijah the Prophet 3. Reg. 11.31., during the life of Solomon, and for his sins. But these special Warrants do not constitute a Law; they serve onely to make good the particular actions for which they are directed, and not to justifie a∣nother
the like. Lastly, St. Paul saith, that all things hapned to the Jews in figure; up∣on which place divers Expositors have noted, that the State of the Jews was a figure of the Church of Christ: but that it was an example and patern of all other States that should ensue, it shall be ranged among your cast conceits. I refer me now to the judgment of any man, who taketh not pleasure to beguile him∣self, whether you do not by art and trumpery manifestly abuse us; partly by incapacity, and partly by deceit, either corrupting or con∣founding whatsoever you take in hand. Your humour both discontented and unquiet, hath armed your mind with bloudy desires; which have edged you on to put fewel to those flames, which you should endeavour to quench, though it were with your bloud. I will not stand upon the particular Ex∣amples of Spain, as well for that the matter is both tedious and to little purpose; as also for that we have small conformity with the Customs of that Nation. Onely thus much in general: We acknowledge that in ancient times the Kingdom of Spain was Elective, and therefore your Examples drawn from thence are nothing pertinent. The Examples of latter times are both few and unjust, car∣ried onely by Faction and by Force; as Ga∣rabay Pag. 414. testifieth of your Example of Aurelio; and as by the Example of D. Sancho el Bravo I have declared before Cap. 3.. But you account
Faction to be the Commonwealth, and Vio∣lence Justice, when it may make to the fur∣therance of your affairs. The History of D. Berenguela I will briefly report, rather for the respect which guided the Castilians, than that I allow it for Right which they did. Henry had two Sisters: Donna Blanch the eldest, married to Lewes the eighth King of France; and Berenguela the youngest, married to Alphonso King of Leon. Henry dying without Issue, the Castilians fear∣ed if they should submit themselves unto Blanch, that their State being less than the State of France, would be made a Member thereof, and governed as a Province, and not as a Kingdom. And therefore they did rather chuse to profess Allegiance to the Lady Beren∣guela; by which means the Kingdom of Leon was afterwards annexed unto Castile, to the great increase both of dignity and assurance to them both. I have followed herein your own Authors, not being ignorant that others of better name do write, that Berenguela was the eldest Sister, as I shall have occasion here∣after to declare: but for the present, let it be as you please; and let us weigh our own wis∣doms, not onely in straining, but in forging Titles, to incur those mischiefs which the Ca∣stilians rejected a lawful Title to avoid. And this was also one of the Motives of the Revolt of Portugal, which is your last Exam∣ple; although it had also (as Garabay Lib. 34. Pag. 833. writeth) a concurrence of Right. For Fer∣dinand
King of Portugal, by his Procurators the Bishop of Ebora and others, did both con∣tract and solemnize espousals with Elianor, Daughter of Peter King of Aragon. But being entred into War with Henry King of Castile, and finding himself at some disadvantage, he forsook the King of Aragons Daughter, and contracted himself to Elianor, Daughter to the King of Castile, upon very beneficial Con∣ditions for his State. Afterward, falling into fancy with one of his Subjects, named Elianor Telles de Meneses, Wife to a Nobleman called Lorenzo Vasques de Aounna, he took her as his Wife, and enforced her Husband to avoid the Realm; and had by her one onely Daughter named Beatrix, who was joyned in marriage to Iohn King of Castile. After the death of the King of Portugal her Father, the King of Castile in the right of his Wife, laid claim to that Realm, and was accordingly acknowled∣ged by the chief of the Nobility and Prelates; and in particular, by D. Iohn Master of Avis, her Fathers base Brother, who was then the most forward man in her favour. But after∣wards falling into quarrel, and having slain the Count de Oren, he stirred the people against the Queen, and compelled her to quit the City. And after divers Outrages and Murthers committed upon the Bishop of Lis∣bon, an Abbess, and many others, he was first made Governour of Portugal; and then pro∣ceeding further, in an Assembly of his Party gathered at Coimbra, he was made King. Ga∣rabay
writeth Pa. 845. that the chiefest objection a∣gainst Beatrix was, because her Mother was not King Ferdinand's lawful Wife. And I believe you also, that they had a reflex not to lose the dignity of their Kingdom (as now they have done) and be made subject to the cruel both Avarice and Ambition of a more potent State.
An Answer to the eighth Chapter, which is entituled, Of divers other examples out of the States of France and England, for proof, that the next in Blood are sometimes put back from Succession, and how God hath approved the same with good Success. YOur Examples of France (to which Na∣tion we are more near both in situa∣tion and Laws) I will run over with a swift course. Of the Change which twice hath hapned in the whole Race of the Kings of France, I have spoken before: Cap. 3. You seem also either to threaten or presage the third Change, from the King who now reigneth, and other Princes of the House of Bourbon. It was your desire, you applyed your endea∣vour, with all the power and perswasions you could make. You knit divers of the Nobility in a treacherous League against him; you incensed the People; you drew in Forreign Forces to their assistance: by which means, the Realm fell daily into change of distresse, the men of Arms ma∣king all things lawful to their Lust. The Good did fear, the Evil expect; no place was free, either from the rage or suspition of Tumult; few to be trusted, none assur∣ed, all things in commixtion; the Wisest too weak, the Strongest too simple, to avoid the Storm which brake upon them:
the People Joyning to their miserable Con∣dition many Complaints, That they had been abused by you, in whose Directions they found nothing but Obstinacie and Rashness, two dangerous Humours to lead a great Enterprise. At the last, when la∣mentable Experience had made that known unto them, which they had no Capacity by reason to foresee, they expelled as well your Company as Counsel out of the Realm; and so the Firebrands which you had kindled, were broken upon your own Heads; ha∣ving opportunity by your just banishment to take into Consideration both the Weakness and Wrong of your Advice. The partition of the Realm of France betwen Charles the Great and Charloman his younger Brother, and also the uniting there∣of again in Charles, after the death of Char∣loman, depended upon the disposition of Pe∣pin their Father, and not upon the Election of the People. Girard saith, that Lib. 1 de l' estate. fol, 45. Pepin having disposed all things in his new Realm which he thought necessary for the surety thereof, he disposed his Estate; leaving the Realm of Noion to his Son Charles; and to Charloman his other Son, that of Soisons, & that by the death of Carloman, both his Place and his Power did accrue unto Charles. In this manner, the first of a family, who hath attained a Kingdom, hath ordinarily directed the Succession thereof. The Contention between Lewis le De∣bonaire and his sonnes, according to your own Author Girard, De l'estate. proceeded and suc∣ceeded
after this manner. Certain Lords of France taking discontentment at the im∣moderate favours, which the king shewed to∣ward Berard his great Chamberlain, con∣spired against him; and for their greater both countenance and strength, drew his owne sonnes to be of their faction. But Lewis brake this broile, more by foresight than by force; and doing execution upon the principal offenders, pardoned his Sons. Yet they, interpreting this lenity to slackness of courage, rebelled again, gathered a greater strength, & drew Pope Gregory the fourth to be accomplice of their unnatural impietie: whereby it appeareth (saith Gi∣rard) that they are either foolish or mis∣chievous, who will affirm, that every thing is good which the Popes have done. Afterward they took their Father, under colour of good faith, and sent him prisoner to Tor∣tone, and then at Compeigne assembled a Par∣liament, composed of their own confede∣rates, wherein they made him a Monk, and brought his estate into division and share. It is easie to conjecture (saith the same Girard) what miserable conditions the Realm then endured; all Laws were subverted, all things exposed to the rage of the Sword, the whole Realm in combustion, and the people extreamely discontented at this bar∣barous impiety. In the end Lewes, by the aid of his faithful servants was taken out of prison, and restored to his Kingdom; and his Sons acknowledging their fault,
were received by him both to pardon and favour. His son Pepin being dead, he divi∣ded his Realm among his other three Sons, Charles, Lewes, and Lothaire; but Lewes rebelled again, and was again received to mercie: lastly, he stirred a great part of Germanie to revolt, with grief whereof the good old man his Father died. After his death, Lewes and Lothaire, upon disdain at the great portion which their Father had assigned to their brother Charles, raised war against him. The Battel was given, wherein Charles ramained victorious, re∣ducing them both under such conditions, as he thought convenient to impose. Lo here one of your plain and evident exam∣ples, which is so free from all exception. But mindes corruptly inclined, hold no∣thing unlawful, nothing unreasonable, which agreeth with their passion. Loys le Begue, succeded after Charles, not as you affirm, by authoritie of the states, but (as in France at that time it was not unusuall) by appointment of his Father. And wheras you write, that Loys at his first entrance had like to have bin deprived by the states, but that calling a Parlament, he made them many fair promises to have their good will; it is a very idle untruth, as appeareth by the Author whom you avouch. At his death, he left his wife great with child, who afterward was called Charles the simple. But before he had accom∣plished the age of 12 years, there stept up
in his place, first Loys and Carloman his ba∣stard brothers; then Charles surnamed le Gros; and after him Odo Earle of Paris. Then Charles the right heir attained the Crown; and then again were raised a∣gainst him, first Robert, Earle of Angiers; and afterward Ralph king of Burgundie. But where you attribute these mutations to the authoritie of the states, Girard saith, that they where by faction and usurpation of such, who from the weakness of their Prince, did make advantage to their own ambi∣tion; affirming plainly, that between the death of Loys le Begue, and Charles the sim∣ple, not one of them who held the crown of the Realm was lawfull king Di l'estae lib. 1. p. 55, noting further, that the first two races of Kings, were full of cruel parricides & murthers; and that in those times the Realm was often travelled with tempests of sedition. Of the usurpation of Hugh Capet I have spoken before: Girard writeth, l. 8. f. 60, b that al∣though he sought many shadows of right, yet his best title was by force, which is the common right of first usurpers. And where∣as you write, that Henry the first was pre∣ferred to the crown of France before Robert his helder brother: First, it was not by ap∣pointment of the states, but of their father; Secondly, Girard maketh the matter doubt∣full, affirming, that some said he was the younger brother; Lastly,Fol, 63 it set up a dan∣gerous and doubtfull war between them. Further, where you write, that William
being a bastard, succeded Robert his Father in the Duchie of Normandie, notwith∣standing the said Robert left two brothers in life, it was at that time a custom in France, that bastards did succeed, even as law∣full children. Thierry bastard of Clovis, had for his partage the kingdome of Austrasie, now called Lorraine. Sigisbert bastard of King Dagobert the first, parted with Clovis the twelfth, his lawfull brother. Loys and Carloman bastards of King Loys le Begue, reigned after their Father. But in the third race of the kings of France, a law was made, that bastards should not succed in the Crown; and yet other bastards of great houses were still advowed, the French being then of the same opinion with Peleus in Eu∣ripides. In Andro∣mache. . Oftentimes many Bastards excell those that are lawfully Born: which is verified by Her∣cules, Alexander the Great, Romulus, Timo∣theus, Themistocles, Homer, Demosthenes, Bru∣tus, Bion, Bartolus, Gratian, Peter Lombard, Peter Comestor, Io. Andreas, and divers o∣ther of most Flourishing name. Your examples of Lewes the 6. and Lewes the 11. are not worth a word in answer. In the beginning of their reign, you affirm that they had like to have been dis-inheri∣ted
by the State, for the offences of their Father. You bear a minde charged with thoughts Vain, Busie, and Bold, without any restraint either of Honesty or of Dis∣cretion. For how else could you here also affirm, that King Henry the third of Eng∣land, was condemned by his Barons to be disinherited, for the fault of his Father? It is usual with you in all your reports, either plainly to break beyond the bounds of all truth, or grossely, (for I cannot now say artificially) to disguise it, with many false and deceiveable terms. But to conclude for the state of France, which is also to exclude whatsoever you have said; under the Reign of Charles the fift, 1375. for the better establish∣ment, of this right, and for cutting off those calamities which accompany usurpation, there was a Law made, that after the death of any King, the eldest Son should incon∣tinently succeed. We are now come to our English exam∣ples, of which you might have omitted those of the Saxon Kings; as well for that there could be no setled form of Government in those Tumultuous times, as also for that our Histories of that Age are very imper∣fect, not leading us in the Circumstances, either of the manner or occasion of parti∣cular actions: they declare in Gross what things were done, without further opening, either how or wherefore. But both these do make for your advantage: for who seeth not, that your examples are chiefly bred in
Tempestuous times; and the obscuritie of Histories will serve for a shadow to darken your deceit. Well, let us take both the Times and Histories as they are. How will you main∣tain that Egbert was not next Successor to Briticus by propinquitie of Blood? Briticus left no Children, and Egbert was descended of the Blood Royal, as Polydore affirmeth; Lib. 4. circa sin. William Malmesbury De gest. Ang. lib. 1. ca. 2. saith, that he was he only Man alive of the Royal Blood, be∣ng descended of Inegild, the Brother of King Ina. How then is it true which you say, that Briticus was the last of the royal Descent; and if it had been so indeed, the right of Election should then have been in the State. And thus you Stumble at every step, you entangle your self without Truth or End. You snatch at the words of Polydore, where he saith; He is created King by consent of all: which do imply no other sense, but that which a little after he saith; That he was sa∣luted King by all. So we finde also, that the like Improper speech was used at the Coro∣nation of Philip the Second, King of France, whereby the Archbishop of Reimes did Challenge power in the right of his See, to make Election of the King. That Adelstane was illegitimate, you follow Polydore, a Man of no great either Industry or Judgement. William Malmesbu∣ry Lib. 2▪ c. 5. accounted Egwina the Mother of Adel∣stane, to be the first Wife of King Edward his Father: he termeth her also a noble Wo∣man, contrary to that which Polydore fableth.
Henry Huntington, Roger Hoveden and others, write no otherwise of him, but as of one that was lawfully Born. And in that you english these words of Polydore, Rex dicitur; Rex a populo salutatur; He was made King by the People: In that you affirm also, that for the opinion of his valour he was prefer∣red before his Brethren which were lawfully born, whom you acknowledge to be Men of most Excellent both Expectation and proof; you do plainly shew, that use hath made you too open in straining of truth. Eldred did first take upon him but as Pro∣tector, because of the minoritie of the sonnes of Edmund his elder brother; and afterward entred into full possession of the Crown. But that his Nephewes were put back by the Realm, it is your own idle invention; it was no more the act of the realme, than was the usurpation of King Richard the third. That Edwin was deposed from his estate, it is inexcusably untrue. Polydore Lib. 6. writeth, that the Northumbrians and Mercians not fully setled in subjection, made a revolt. Malmesburie Lib. 2▪ c. . saith, that he was maimed of a great part of his kingdome, by the stroke of which injurie he ended his life. And whereas you write in commendation of Kind Edgar his next successor, that he kept a Navie of 6600 shippes for defence of the Realme, you discover your defective judge∣ment in embracing such reports for true. In that you say, that many good men of the Realm were of opinion, not to admit
the succession of Etheldred after the death of his brother, I dare confidently affirm, that you do not only tell, but make an untruth; having no author either to excuse or coun∣tenance the same. In that you write also, that between the death of Edmund Ironside, and the reigne of William Conquerour, it did plainly appear what interest the Com∣mon-wealth hath to alter titles of succession; it doth plainly appear, that both you rea∣son and your conscience is become slavish to your violent desire. For what either liber∣tie or power had the Common-wealth under the barbarous rage and oppression of the Danes? when Canutus had spread the wings of his fortune over the whole Realm, none having either heart or power to oppose against him, what choice was then left unto the people? what room for right? what man not banished from sobrietie of sense would ever have said, that he was admit∣ted king by the whole Parliament and con∣sent of the Realme? It is true, that after he had both violently and unjustly obtained full possession of the Realme, slain the brother of Edmund Ironside, and conveyed his Chil∣dren into Sueden, he assembled the Nobilitie, and caused himself to be crowned king: but neither the form nor name of a Parliament was then known in England; and if co∣ronation were sufficient to make a title, no king should be accounted to usurp. Of Harold the first, the natural Son of Canutus, our Histories doe verie differently
repor. Saxo Grammaticus writeth, that he was never king, but that he died before his Father. Henry of Huntington reporteth that he was appointed but as Regent for his brother Hardicanutus. Others write, that apprehending the opportunitie of his Brothers absence, he invaded Northum∣berland and Mercia, by force of the Danes who were in England, whereupon the Realm was divided, one partholding for Harold, and another for Hardicanutus, who was in Denmark. But because he delayed to come into England, they all fell, rather not to deny then to acknowledge Harold for their king. Take now which of these reports you please, for all do serve to your pur∣pose alike. Hardicanutus after the death of Harold, came out of Denmark into England: and the people having their courages broken with bondage, were easie to entertain the stron∣gest pretender. But after his death, divers of the Nobility, especially Godwin Earl of Kent, rising into hope to shake off their shoulders the importable yoke of the Danes, advanced Edward the Son of Etheldred to the Crown, as being the next of the Race of the Saxon Kings, though not in blood, yet at hand; for Edward the Outlaw his elder Brother, was then in Hungary: and fear being the only knot that had fastened the people to the Danish Kings, that once united, they all scattered from them, like so many birds whose Cage had been bro∣ken.
Edward being dead, Harold the Son of Godwine usurped the Kingdom: for as Malmesbury saith; Extorta a principibus fide arripuit diadema. By extorted faith from the nobility he fastned upon the Crown a for∣ceable gripe: Henry Huntington also, and out of him Polydore do write, that upon con∣fidence of his power he invaded the Crown Viribu & gener fretus regni Diade∣ma invasit. which usurpation gave both encourage∣ment and successe to the Enterprise of the Normans. This short passage of History you do defile with so many untruths, that it seemeth you have as natural a gift to falsifie, as to eat, drink, or sleep. But where you write that William the Conqueror formed any title by consent of the Realm, you grow into the degree of ridiculous. We find that he pretended the Institution of King Edward, which had neither probability nor force; and that he was nearer to him in blood, than Ha∣rold the Usurper: but that he ever pre∣tended the Election of the People, it is your own clouted conceit. For when he had routed the English Army in the field, when he had sacked their Towns, harrassed their Villages, slain much people, and bent his Sword against the breasts of the rest, what free Election could they then make? Your self acknowledge also in another place, In part. 2. ca. 2. pa 12. that he came to the Crown by dint of Sword; and at his death his own conscience constrained him to confesse, that he took it without right Lib. vit. .. And in that the Pope and the French King favoured his
enterprise, it is not material, this is not the first injustice which they have assisted. Nei∣ther was it the Popes hallowed Banner (as you affirm) but the Bow and the Arrow, the on∣ly weapon of advantage long time after to this Nation, whereby he did obtain the Victory. One help he had also within the Realm, for that King Edward had advanced divers Normans, to high place both of Dig∣nity and Charge; who gave unto him much secret both incouragement and assistance in his Attempt. And thus in all these turbulent times, you are so far from finding five or six, that you are short of any one, who was made King by free Authority of the People. King William Rufus made no other Title to the Crown, but the Testament of his Fa∣ther: For often use hath confirmed it for Law, that a Victor may freely dispose of the Succession of that State, which he hath obtained by the purchase of his Sword. Cin. & B∣tol. in l. imperialis.  nupt▪ The Conqueror disinherited his Eldest Son, Robert, for that joining with Philip King of France, he invaded, wasted and spoiled Normandy, and joyned in open battel against his Father, wherein the Father was unhor∣sed and wounded, and brought to a despe∣rate distress of his Life. Hereupon he cast forth a cruel Curse against his Son, which he could never be intreated to revoke: in so much that upon his death-bed he said of him Lib. Vit. Will. conq▪, that it was a miserable Countrey which should be subject to his Dominion, for
that he was a proud and foolish Knave, and to be long scourged with cruel Fortune. And whereas you write that at the time of his Fathers death he was absent in the war of Ierusalem, it is a very negligent untruth. But it is an idle untruth that you write, that Henry the first had no other Title to the Crown, but the Election of the People. He never was Elected by the People; he ne∣ver pretended any such Title. Nubrigensis, Lib. 1. cap. . and after him Polydore In Henr. 1. fol. 181. do report, that he laid his Title, because he was born after his Father was King. Malmesbury In Henr. 1. lib. 5. saith; Henry, the youngest Sons of William the Great, being an Infant, according to the desires and wishes of all men was excellently brought up Quod solus omnium filio∣rum Williel∣mi natus est regie, & ei regnum vide∣retur compe∣tere. because he alone, of all the Sons of William, was Princely born, and the Kingdom seemed to appertain unto him. He was born in England in the third year after his Father entred into it. And this was the like Controversie to that which Herodotus In polyhimn. reporteth, to have happened between the Sons of Darius, the Son of Hystaspis, King of Persia, when he prepared an expedition against the Grecians and Aegyptians: because by the Laws of Per∣sia, the King might not enter into enter∣prise of Arms, before he had declared his Successor. Darius had three Children be∣fore he was King, by his first Wife, the Daughter of Gobris; and after he at∣tained the Kingdom, he had other four by Anrosa, the Daughter of Cyrus. Ar∣tabazanes was eldest of the first sort, Xerxes of the second. Artabazanes
alledged, that he was eldest of all the Kings children; and that it was the Custom amongst all men, that the eldest should en∣joy the Principality. Xerxes alledged, that he was begotten of Atossa, the daughter of that King, by whose puissance the Persians had gained, not onely Liberty, but also Power. Before Darius had given sentence, Demaratus the son of Aristo, cast out of his Kingdom of Sparta, came unto Xerxes, and advised him to alledge further, that he was the eldest son of Darius after he was king: and that it was the Custom of Sparta, that if any man had Children in private estate, and afterward another son when he was King, this last son should be his Successor: upon which ground Darius pronounced in the bealf of Xerxes. The same History is re∣ported by Iustine Lib. 2., and touched also by Plutarch Lib. de fra∣terna bene∣volentia., although they differ, both from Herodotus, and one from the other in some points of circumstances. Hereto also agreeth that which Iosephus writeth Antiq. li. 16. cap. 3., in reprehen∣ding King Herod, for excluding Alexander and Aristobulus his Sons, and appointing An∣tipater, born to him in private estate, to suc∣ceed in his Kingdom. Many great Lawyers have subscribed their opinions to this kind of title; and namely Pet. Cynus, Baldus, Albericus, Raph. Fulgosius In l. impe∣rialis. sect, illud. C. de nupt., Rebuffus In l. si se∣natus C. de dignit. li. 12.; and Anto. Corsetta▪ In tract. de pot. & excell. reg sect. 16. deli∣vereth it for a common opinion. But with this exception, if the kingdom be acquired by any other title then by succession, accor∣ding
to proximity in blood: for in this case, because the dignity is inherent in the stock, the eldest Son shall succeed, although he were born before his father was King Pet. Iac. in arb. success. reg. Franc. Io. Rai. in cap. praeterea. tit. de prohi feud ali & intract: nobil. . 10. Iac. a S. Georg. intract. feud. D. Benedic. in rep. c. Rai∣nutius.  00 de testam.. And therefore Plutarch writeth In Artax∣erxe. that after the kingdom of Persia was setled in suc∣cession, when Darius the King had four Sons, Artaxerxes the Eldest, Cyrus the next, and two other; Parysatis his wife having a desire that Cyrus should succeed in the kingdom, pressed in his behalf the same rea∣son wherewith Xerxes had prevailed before: affirming, that she had brought forth Ar∣taxerxes to Darius, when he was a pri∣vate man; but Cyrus, when he was a king. Yet Plutarch writeth, that the reason which she used was nothing probable; and that the eldest was designed to be King. Howsoever the right stood between Ro∣bert Duke of Normandie, and his younger brothers, the fact did not stand either with the quiet or safetie of the Realm. For, during the reigne of William Rufus, it was often infested upon this quarrel, both with foreign arms and civil seditions; which pos∣sessed all places with disorder, and many also with fire, rapine and bloud, the prin∣cipal effects of a licentious war. These mischiefs not onely continued but encreased in the reigne of King Henry, untill Robert the eldest brother was taken prisoner in the field, which put a period to all his attempts. So dangerous it is upon any pretence to put by the next in Succession to the Crown.
This Henry the first left but one Daugh∣ter, and by her a young Son named Hen∣ry, to whom he appointed the Succession of the Realm: and took an Oath of all the Bishops, and likewise of the Nobility, to remain faithful unto them after his decease. Yet you write, that because Ste∣phen, Son of Adela, Sister to King Henry, was thought by the States more fit to go∣vern, he was by them admitted to the Crown In which assertion, you cannot be deceived, you do not err; but your passion doth pull you from your own Know∣ledge and Judgement. Polydore Lib. 12. in prin. writeth, that he possessed the Kingdom contrary to his Oath, for which cause the minds of all men were exceedingly moved: some did abhor and detest the impiety; others, and those very few, unmindfull of Perju∣ry, did more boldly then honestly allow it, and followed his part. Further he saith, Ibidem. that he was crowned at Westmin∣ster, in an assembly of those Noble Men who were his Friends. Nubrigensis affir∣meth, that Sacra∣menti prae∣varicator regnum in∣vasit. violating his Oath he inva∣ded the Kingdom. William Malmesbury, who lived in King Stephen's time, saith In hist. novel l. 1. fol. 101 .; that he was the first of all Lay-men, next the King of Scots, who had made Oath to the Em∣presse Maud; and that he was Crowned, Tribus e∣piscopis pre∣sentibus, nullis abba∣ibus, paucis∣simis opti∣matibus. three Bishops being present (of whom one was his Brother) no Abbot, and a ve∣ry few of the Nobility. Henry Huntington,
who lived also in the same time, saith Lib. 8. p. 221. Vigo∣re & impu∣dentia fre∣tus.; that by force and impudence, tempting God, he invaded the Crown. Afterward he re∣porteth Pa. 221., that being desirous to have his Son Eustace Crowned King with him, the Bishops withstood it, upon Commandement from the Pope, because he took upon him the Kingdom against his Oath Quia reg∣num contra jussuran∣dum praeri∣puisse vide∣batur.. Roger Hoveden writeth Pa. 275. quasi tempe∣stas invasit., that he invaded the Crown in manner of a tempest. This is the report of those Writers who came nearest, both to the time and truth of this action: whom other Authors do like∣wise follow. Polydore In princ. l. 12., and after him Hol∣lingshead In Steph., do write, that he took upon him the Crown, partly upon confidence in the power of Theobald his Brother, Earl of Blois; and partly by the aid of Henry his other Bro∣ther, Bishop of Winchester. Walsingham ad∣addeth Hypodig. pa. 38., that Hugh Bigot, who had been King Henries Steward, took an Oath before the Archbishop of Canterbury, that King Henry at his death appointed Stephen to be his Successour. Whereupon the Archbi∣shop and a few others were over-lightly led, like men blinded with security, and of little foresight: never considering of dangers, until the means of remedy were past. You write, that they thought they might have done this with a good conscience, for the good of the Realm. But what
good conscience could they have, in defi∣ling their faith? Such consciences you en∣deavour to frame in all men, to break an oath with as great facility, as a Squir∣rell can crack a Nut. What good also did ensue unto the Realm? The Nobi∣lity were set into factions; the common people into division and disorder: and as in Wars, where discipline is at large, there in∣solencies are infinite; so in this confusion of the State, there was no action which tended not to the ruin thereof; the Lives and Goods of Men remaining in continual pillage. Polydore saith: l. 12.  Matrons were vio∣lated, Virgins ravished, Churches spoiled, Towns and Villages rased, much Cattle destroy∣ed, innumerable Men slain. Into this mise∣rable face of extremities the Realm did fall; and into the same again you strive to reduce it. But you say, that for the ending of these Mischiefs, the States in a Parliament at Wal∣lingford made an Agreement, that Stephen should be King during his life, and that Henry and his Off-spring should succeed after his death. A man would think you had a mint of Fables; there is no History which you handle, but you defile it with apish un∣truths. All our Histories agree, that King Stephen, unable to range things into better form, did adopt Henry to be his Successor. The second Huntington saith,  that this agreement was mediated, by the Archbishop
of Canterbury, and the Bishop of Winchester, who repented him of the furtherance he gave to the advancement of King Stephen, when he saw what Miseries did thereupon ensue. The like doth Hoveden report Fol. 281. .: and Holingshead p. 62. setteth down the form of the Charter of agreement between them; whereby it is evident, that it was a transa∣ction between them two, and no compulsory act or authority of the State. I deny not but some Authors affirm, that the King assembled the Nobility, but neither were they the States of the Realm, neither were they assembled to any other end, but to swear Fealty unto Henry, sa∣ving the King's Honour so long as he should live. After the death of King Richard the first, you affirm that the Succession was again broken; for that Iohn, Brother to King Richard, was admitted by the States, and Arthur Duke of Britain, Son to Geoffry, Elder brother unto Iohn, was against the ordinary course of Succession excluded. Well, Sir, I arrest your word; remember this I pray you, for I will put you in mind thereof in another place. That which here you affirm to be against the ordinary course of Succession, you bring in another place for proof, that the Uncle hath right before the Nephew. You do wildy waver in va∣riety of Opinion, speaking flat contrary, ac∣cording as the Ague of your passion is either in fit or intermission.
The History of King Iohn standeth thus. King Richard the first dying without issue, left behind him a Brother named Iohn, and a Nepew called Arthur, Son of Geoffry, who was Elder Brother unto Iohn. This Arthur was appointed by King Richard to succeed in his Estate, as Polydore writeth ib. 5 in prin.. Nubri∣gensis saith, that he should have been esta∣blished by consent of the Nobility, if the Britains had not been so foolishly either suspicious or fond, that when King Richard sent for him, they refused to commit him into his Uncles hands. But after the death of King Richard, his Brother Iohn seized upon his Treasure in Normandy, came over into England, and in an Assembly only of the Nobility, was crowned King. Of these, many he won, with such liberal Protestations and Promises, as men careless of their word are wont to bestow; others were abused by the persua∣sions of Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, and a few others (saith Polydore Lib. 15. p. 262.) not well advised. Nic. Trivet saith In prolo∣go., that Iohn pretended for his Title, not the election of the People, but propinquity of Blood Iure pro∣pinquitatis., and the testa∣ment of King Richard. The same also is affirmed by Walsingham Hypodig. p. 59.. And this is the Question between the Uncle and the Ne∣phew, of which I shall have occasion to
speak hereafter. But Polydore saith Lib. 15. p.  63., That divers Noble-men did account this to be a fraudulent Injustice, and thereupon did ominate those Evils which afterward did ensue. And when the Archbishop was char∣ged, That under colour of Reason, partly subborned, and partly weak, he had beene the occasion of all those Mischiefs, Polydore pa. 269. saith, That he was both grieved and ashamed at nothing more; Rog. Wenden affirmeth, That he excused himselfe, that he did it upon Oracles, and by the gift of Prophesie. King Iohn having locked himself into the Saddle of state, made one wrong which he had done, to be the cause of a greater wrong; by murthering his Nephew, Arthur, Duke of Britan, whose inheritance he did unjustly usurp. For this fact the French King depri∣ved him of all the Lands which he held in Fee of the Crown of France, and prosecuted the Sentence to effect. After this, as men are easily imboldened against an Usurper, when once he declineth either in Reputation or in State, divers of the Nobili∣ty, especially they of the North, confede∣rated against him: but being neither able to endure his war, nor willing to repose trust in his peace, they contracted with Lewes the French Kings son, to take upon him to be their King. And so it often happeneth in civil contentions, that they who are wea∣kest, do run with a naturall rashnesse to call in a third.
Lewes being arrived upon the coast of Kent, the Nobilitie of that faction Walsing. hypodigm. pa, 56,, came and sware allegiance unto him. The Lon∣doners also, many upon an ordinary desire to have new Kings, others for fear, and some for company, joyned to the revolt. Hereof a lamentable presence of all miseries did arise, whereby as well the Liberty as the Dignity of the Realm, were brought to a near and narrow jump. The poor peo∣ple, naked both of help and hope, stood at the curtesie and pleasure of the men of arms; the liberty of war making all things lawfull to the fury of the strongest. The Nobility, feeling much, and fearing more the insolency of the French Nation, who (as Vicount Melin a Nobleman of France confessed at his death) had sworn the extir∣pation of all the Noble Bloud in the Realm, began to devise how they might returne into the allegiance of King Iohn: in so much as a little before his death, Letters were brought unto him from certain of his Ba∣rons, to the number of forty, who desire to be received again into his peace. But after his death, which happily did happen within five moneths after the arrivall of the French, both their hatred and their feare being at an end, they were all as ready to cast out Lewes, as they had been rash to call him in. This History you corrupt with verie ma∣ny
odious untruths, which are more harsh to a well-tuned ear, then the crashing of teeth, or the grating of copper. As namely, in affirming, that Arthur was excluded, and Iohn crowned King by the States of the Realm; that God did more defend this act of the Common-wealth, then the just Title of Arthur; that by the same States King Iohn was rejected, Prince Henry his son deprived, and Lewes of France chosen to be King; that the same States recalled their sentence against Prince Henry, disannulling their Oath and Allegiance made unto Lewes. A shameless tongue, governed by a deceitful mind, can easily call Faction, the Common∣wealth; Rebellion, a just and judicial Pro∣ceeding; open and often Perjury, an orderly revoking of a Sentence; Gods secret Judg∣ment in permitting Injustice to prevail, a plain defence and allowance thereof. Of the division of the Houses of Lancaster and York, it is but little that you write, whereto I have fully answered before: you do wisely to give a light touch to this Example, it is so hot that it will scald your throat. King Henry the fourth, more car∣ried by cursed ambition, then either by ne∣cessity or right, laid an unjust gripe upon the Realm, which afterward he did beautifie with the counterfeit Titles of Conquest and Election. So violent are the desires of Prin∣ces to imbrace streined Titles, by which they may disturb the States of other; not
remembring, that Right may be trodden down, but not trodden out; having her se∣cret both means to support, and seasons to revive her. For although the lawful Succes∣sor did warily strike sail to the Tempest, because neither the time running, nor the Op∣portunity present (which are the Guiders of Actions) did consent as then to enter into enterprise; yet so soon as one hair of occasion was offered, his progeny did set up a most doubtful war, wherein thirteen Battels were executed by English-men only, and above fourescore Princes of the Royal Blood slain. Lo now the smiling success of these usur∣pations; lo what a dear purchase of repen∣tance they did cause! Were it not that pas∣sion doth blind men, not only in desire but in hope, they might suffice to make us ad∣vised, to keep rather the known and beaten way with safety, then upon every giddy and brainless warrant to engulph our selves in those Passages wherein so many have pe∣risted before us. It belongeth to wise men to avoid mischiefs; and it is the reward of fools to lament them. Go too then; conclude if you please, that the people are not bound to admit him to the Crown, who is the next Successor by propinquity of blood; but rather to weigh, whether it is like that he will perform his charge, or no. Conclude this (I say) to be
your Opinion; and that it seemeth to you to be conform to all Reason, Law, Reli∣gion, Piety, Wisdom, and Policy, and to the Custom of all Common-wealths in the World: and I will assuredly conclude against you, that you prate without either warrant or weight. An Answer to the Ninth Chapter, which beareth this Title: What are the Principal Points which a Com∣monwealth ought to respect, in Admitting or Excluding any Prince; wherein is handled largely also, of the Diversity of Religions, and other such Causes. IN this Passage you handle what Cause is sufficient either to keep in, or to cast out of State the next in Blood. In which Question you determine, That God doth allow for a just and sufficient Cause, the Will and Judgment of the People. Your Reason is, For that they are Judge of the Thing it self, and therefore they are the Judge also of the Cause. Your Antece∣dent you prove, first, For that it is in their own Affair: secondly, For that it is in a Matter that hath its whole Beginning, Con∣tinuance, and Substance from them alone. Your Consequence you prove by a whole
lump of Law, in alledging the entire Body of the Civil and Canon Law, assisted also with great Reason. Diogenes said of a certain Tumbler, That he never saw Man take more pains to break his Neck. In like sort we may say of you, It is hard to find a Man that hath more bu∣sied his Wits to overthrow the Opinion of his Wisdom. For, the first Proof of your Antecedent is not onely of no force for you, but strong against you; because no Man is a competent Judge in his own Cause; no Man can be both Party and Judge: Whereto I will add, That no Inferiour hath Jurisdiction over the Superiour, much less the Subject against the Sovereign. Your second Proof, That all the Power of a King hath dependency upon the Peo∣ple, I have sufficiently encountred before Cap. 1.. And if your Consequence were true, That whosoever is Judge of a thing, is Judge al∣so without controllment of the Cause; if this were as agreeable to all Laws as you seem to believe, then were all Judgments arbitrary; then could no Appeal be inter∣posed, for giving Sentence without just Cause; then were it false which Panormitan writeth In c. per tuas. Qui fil. sunt le∣git., that a false Cause expressed in a Sentence maketh it void. What shall I say? What do you think? Do you think that these fat Drops of a greasie Brain can bring the Tenure of a
Crown to the Will of the People? What are you, who endeavour thus boldly to abuse both our Judgment and Conscience? Are you Religious? Are you of Civil either Nature or Education, who under the name of Civilian do open the way to all manner of Deceits, Perjuries, Tumults, and Trea∣sons? What are you? For you shew your self more prophane than Infidels; more barbarous than Canibals, Tartarians, Moors, and Mammelucks; who though they please themselves in nothing more than Hatred and Contempt, yet do they both love and honour their Kings. I see what you are, the very true Follower of the Anabaptists in Germany, who openly professed, That they must ruinate the State of Kings. And who can assure us (for your corrupt Dealings make all Suspicions credible) that you do not also follow them both in Desire and Hope, to embrace the Monarchy of the whole World? The difference between you is this: They pretended Revelation for then War∣rant; you work by deceitful shew of Rea∣son by falsly either alledging, or wresting, or corrupting both Humane and Divine Au∣thority. In what miserable condition should Prin∣ces live, if their State depended upon the Pleasure of the People, in whom Company taketh away Shame, and every Man may lay the Fault on his Fellow? How could they command? Who would obey? What
could they safely either do or omit? Who knows a People, that knoweth not, that sud∣den Opinion maketh them hope; which if it be not presently answered, they fall into Hate, chusing and refusing, erecting and overthrowing, as every Wind of Passion doth puff? What steddiness in their Will or Desire, which having so many Circles of Imagination, can never be enclosed in one Point? And whereas you write, That God al∣ways approveth the Will and Judgment of the People, as being properly the Judge of the whole Business; and that every particu∣lar Man must simply submit himself there∣unto, without further inquisition, although at divers times they determine Contraries, (as they did between the Houses of Lanca∣ster and York) because we must presume they were led by different Respects. You seem not obscurely to erect thereby another pri∣vileged Power upon Earth, which cannot err, which doth not deceive. But it may be some honest-minded Man will say, That howsoever you write, your meaning was otherwise: You write also afterward, That in two Cases every Private Man is bound to resist the Judgment of the whole People, to the uttermost extent of his Ability. Well then, let us take you for a Man whose Sayings disagree, both from your Meaning, and between themselves▪
let us consider what are your two Excepti∣ons. The first is, when the Matter is carried not by way of orderly Judgment, but by particular Faction of Private Men, who will make offer to determine the Cause, without Authority of the Realm commit∣ted unto them. But this Exception is so large, that it devoureth the whole Rule: for in Actions of this quality, the Original is always by Faction; the Accomplishment by Force, or at least by Fear, howsoever they are sometimes countenanced with Au∣thority of the State. So Sylla, having brought his Legions within the Walls of Rome, obtained the Law Valeria to be pub∣lished, whereby he was created Dictator for twenty four Years; by means of which Force, Cicero affirmeth Lib. de Lgibus. that it was no Law. Likewise Lawrence Medices, having an Army within Florence, caused, or rather constrain∣ed the Citizens to elect him Duke. When Henry the Fourth was chosen King, he held Forty thousand Men in Arms. And this is most evident by your own Example, of four contrary Acts of Parliament, which at di∣vers times were made, during the Contenti∣on between the Families of Lancaster and York, not upon different Reasons, as with little reason you affirm, but upon different Success of either Side. In Matters of this moment, the orderly
Course of Proceeding is onely by Parlia∣ment. The Parliament must be summoned by the King's Writ, and no Act thereof hath Life but by express Consent of the King. If this Form had always been obser∣ved, neither our Kings should have been de∣posed, nor the next Successors excluded, nor the Title of the Crown entangled, to the inestimable both weakning and waste of all the Realm. Your second Exception is, When such a Man is preferred to the Crown, by whom God is manifestly offended, and the Realm prejudiced or endangered: In which Case (you say) every Man, with a free and un∣controlled Conscience, may resist what he can. It was even here I looked for you. Your broyling Spirits do nothing else but fling Firebrands, and heap on Wood, to set King∣doms in Combustion. What Rebellion, what Revolt hath ever been made, but un∣der some of these Pretences? What Prin∣ces Actions, either by malicious or igno∣rant Interpretation, may not easily be drawn to one of these Heads? You are a Nursery of War in the Commonwealth, a Seminary of Schism and Division in the Church: In sum, All your Actions, all your Thoughts are barbarous and bloody. You write much of Right and Justice;
but you measure the Right and Justice of a Cause, by the Advantage of your own Af∣fairs. You speak as having a tender sense of the Glory of God; but you stretch out your Throat with high Words of Contra∣diction against him. You make shew of Care to preserve the State; but you are like the Ivy, which seemeth outwardly both to embrace and adorn the Wall, wherein∣to inwardly it doth both eat and under∣mine. For, what Means, either more rea∣dy or forcible, to overthrow a State, than Faction and intestine Quarrels? And what other Milk do you yield? What are your Opinions, what your Exhortations, but ei∣ther to set or to hold up Sedition and Blood∣shed? St. Paul teacheth us not to resist high∣er Powers Rom. 13., although both cruel and pro∣phane; you teach us to resist them what we can. The Apostle is followed of all the Ancient Fathers of the Church; you are followed of those onely who follow the Anabaptists. For my part, I had rather err with the Apostle in this Opposition, than hold Truth with you. But I will speak more moderately in a Subject of such a na∣ture: I will not say then, That I had rather err; but, That I shall less fear to err, in not resisting, with the Apostle, than in re∣sisting, with you. New Counsels are always more plausible than safe. After you have plaid the Suffenus with your self, in setting the Garland upon your
own Head, and making your imaginary Audience to applaud your Opinion, as wor∣shipfully wise, you proceed to declare what ought chiefly to be regarded, in furthering or hindering any Prince towards the Crown. Three Points (you say) are to be required in every Prince; Religion, Chivalry, and Justice: And putting aside the two last, as both handled by others, and of least im∣portance, you assume onely to treat of Reli∣gion; wherein either Errour or Want doth bring inestimable Damage to any State. You draw a long Discourse, That the highest End of every Commonwealth is the Service and Worship of God; and conse∣quently, That the Care of Religion is the principal Charge which pertaineth to a King. And therefore you conclude, That whatsoever Prince doth not assist his Subjects to attain this End, omitteth the chief part of his Charge, and committeth High Trea∣son against his Lord, and is not fit to hold that Dignity, though he perform the other two Parts never so well: And that no Cause can so justly clear the Conscience, whether of the People, or of particular Men, in re∣sisting the Entrance of any Prince, as if they judge him faulty in Religion. This is neither nothing, nor all which you say. In Elective States, the People ought not to admit any Man for King, who is ei∣ther cold or corrupt in Religion; but if
they have invested such a one with Sove∣reign Authority, they have no Power at pleasure to remove him. In Successive King∣doms, wherein the People have no Right of Election, it is not lawful for Private Men, upon this cause, to offer to impeach eithr the Entrance or Continuance of that King, which the Laws of the State do present un∣to them; not onely because it is forbidden of God, (for that is the least part of your regard) but because disorderly Disturbance of a setled Form in Government, traineth after it more both Impieties and Dangers, than hath ever ensued the Imperfections of a King. I will come more close to the Point in con∣troversie, and dispel those foggy Reasons which stand between your Eye and the Truth. There are two Principal Parts of the Law of God; the one Moral, or Na∣tural, which containeth three Points, Sobri∣ety in our selves, Justice towards others, and generally also Reverence and Piety towards God: The other is Supernatural, which containeth the true Faith of the Mysteries of our Salvation, and the special kind of Worship that God doth require. The first God hath delivered by the Ministry of Na∣ture to all Men; the second he doth partly reveal, and partly inspire to whom he plea∣ses: and therefore although most Nations have in some sort observed the one, yet have they not onely erred, but failed in the other.
During the time of the Law, this peculi∣ar Worship of God was appropriate onely to the People of Israel, in a corner Kingdom of the World: The flourishing Empires of the Assyrians, Medes, Persians, Aegyptians, Graecians, Syrians, and Romans, either knew it not, or held it in contempt. The Israelits were almost always in subjection under these both Heathen and Tyrannical Governments, and yet God by his Prophets enjoyned them Obedience, affirming, That the Hearts of Kings were in his Hands, and that they were the Officers of his Justice, the Execu∣tioners of his Decrees. In the time of Grace, the true Mysteries both of Worship and Belief were impart∣ed also to other Nations; but the ordinary Means to propagate the same, was neither by Policy, nor by Power. When St. Peter offered provident Counsel (as he thought) unto Christ, advising him to have care of himself, and not to go to Hierusalem, where the Iews sought to put him to death, Christ did sharply reprove him for it Mat. .25.: When he did draw his Sword, and therewith also drew Blood in defence of Christ, he heard this Sentence, Mt. 2.52. They that take the sword shall perish with the sword. Christ armed his Apo∣stles onely with Fiery Tongues Act. 2.3▪, by force whereof they maintained the Field, against all the Stratagems and Strength in the World: And when Princes did not onely
reject but Persecute their Doctrine; they taught their Subjects obedience unto them Rom. 13. 1. Pet. ., they did both encounter and overcome them, not by resisting, but by persisting and enduring. This course seemeth strange to the discourse of Reason, to plant Religion under the O∣bedience of Kings, not only careless there∣of, but cruel against it: but when we con∣sider that the Jews did commonly forsake God in prosperity, and seek him in distress; that the Church of Christ was more pure, more zealous, more entire, I might also say more populous, when she travelled with the Storme in her Face, then when the wind was either prosperous or calme Contra , that as S. Agustine saiths, Want or weakness of faith is usually Chastised with the Scourges of tribulati∣ons; We may learn thereby no further to examin, but to admire and embrace the unsearchable wisdom and will of God. Seeing therefore that this is appointed the odinary means, both to establish and en∣crease Religion, may we adventure to ex∣change it with humane devices? Is it the Servants duty either to contradict or dis∣pute the Masters commandement? is there any more ready way to prove an Heretick, then in being a curious questionist with God? is he bound to yield to any man a rea∣son of his will? It is more then presumpti∣on, it is plain Rebellion to oppose our rea∣son
against his order, against his decree. It standeth also upon common Rules: That which is contrary to the nature of a thing doth not help to strengthen, but destroy it: It is foolish to add external stay, to that which is sufficient to support it self. It is senceless to at∣tempt that by force, which no force is able to ef∣fect: That which hath a proper Rule, must not be directed by any other. And this was both the Profession and practice of the antient Fathers of the Church, as I have declared before Ca. 2.; whereto I will here add that which S. Ambrose saith Epist 54▪: Let every man bear it patiently, if it be not extorted from the Emperor, which he would be loath the Emperor should extort from him. And lest they might be interpreted not to mean obedience, as well to succession as to present Power, they alledge that which the Captive Jews of Ba∣bylon did write, to the tributary Jews which were at Ierusalem Hierom. 29. Baruch. 1; to pray for the life not only of Nebuchodonosor, the King of Ba∣bylon, but also of Baltasar his Son, the next Successor to his Estate. But in latter times, Innocentius hath taught, and is also seconded by Castrensis in rep. l.  de just., that love is a just cause to move armes for matters of Religion; Under which pretence, divers men have pursued their own private purpo∣ses and ends. Guicciardine writeth lib. 2., that Firdinand who was called the catholick, did cover all his covetous and ambitious desires, with the honest and holy vail of religion▪
the like doth Iovius report lib. 30· of Charles V. Em∣perour. Paulus Emilius Paul. Aem. 6.7.8. writeth thus of all: every man professeth his war to be holy; every man termeth his enemies impious, sanctity and piety is every mans mouth, but in advise; and in action nothing less. The contention is for worldly right, take away that, and you shall find no cause of war. Now they pretend piety to every mischief: the name of holy warfare, (most miserable) is applied unto arms. Hereupon such cruel calamities have en∣sued in most parts of Europe, and especially in Germany and France, with so little furthe∣rance to that cause, for whose suppor∣tance force was offered, that all the chief Writers of our Age are now reduced to the former opinion; affirming with Arnobius Adv. g. 3 4., that Religion is of power sufficient for it self: with Tertulian also Apollo, Lactantius  2.1., Cassi∣odorus. Var. . et. lib. 10. ep. ., Iosephus . Vt. su, S. Barnard ant. ser., and o∣thers, that it must be perswaded and not en∣forced. They of your Society, as they took their original from a Souldier, so they are the only Atheologians whose heads enter∣tain no other Object but the Tumult of Realms; whose Doctrine is nothing but confusion and blood-shed; whose Perswa∣sions were never followed, but they have made way for all miseries and mischiefs to range in, to come forward, to thrive, to prevail. You have always bin like a winter Sun, strong enough to raise Vapours, but unable to dispel them. For most cowardly
Companions may set up strife; but it is main∣tained with the hazzard, and ended with the ruine, always of the worthiest, and some∣times of all. The sum is this. So long as we express pure piety, both in our Doctrine and in our doings, all will go well: but when we make a mixture of divine and humane both Wise∣dom and Power; when we preach policy; when we make a common trade of Treason; when we put no difference between Consci∣ence and Conceit; we must needs over∣throw either Religion or our selves. Now I will answer the Reasons of your Assertion. First you say, That if Princes do not assist their Subjects in the honour and service of God in this life, God should draw no other fruit or commodity from humane Societies, then of an Assembly of brutish Creatures. But this Reason is not only weak, as it may appear by that which hath been said, but also brutish, and (which is worse) prophane. For what fruit, what commodity doth God draw from Societies of men? is not his Glory perfect in it self? can we add any thing to the excellency thereof? hath he any need of our broken worship? God is an absolute Being, both comprehending, and exceeding all Perfections: an Infinite Being, therefore his sufficiencies neither can be encreased, nor depend upon any, but only of himself. He was from Eternity without any
world, and a thousand worlds more cannot at all encrease his felicity and glory: he did create the world, not to participate any thing thereof, but to communicate from himself unto it. Hereupon Iob saith 22.3., What profit is it to God if thou be just? What advan∣tage is it to him if thy wayes be clean? Surely we must be better enformed of the soundness of your judgment, before we dare depend upon the authority of your word. You put us in mind that you compared an Heir apparant to a Spouse, betroathed one∣ly and not married to the common wealth. I remember it well; but I did not take you for such a widower of wit, that you could think it worthy to be repeated. And ye that which hereupon you deduce out of S. Paul maketh altogether against you. S. Paul saith 1▪ Cor. 7., that if a brother hath an infidel to wife, if she consent to abide with him, he may not put her away: and likewise if a woman hath an infidel husband: but if the infidel doth depart, then the Christian is free. Now if you will needs make a marriage between a King and his Subjects, you might hereupon conclude, that if an infidel King will hold his state, the people may not dispossess him. And wheras you affirme, That all they who differ in any point of Religion, and stand wilfully in the same, are Infidels the one to the other, you shew both a violence and weakness of mind. For obstinate Error in certain Articles of Faith, and not in the
whole state and substance thereof, doth make an Heretick, but not an Infidel. And al∣though the Canon Law doth in some case dissolve marriage between a Christian and an Infidel c. juda. 28. q. 1. c. quanto d di∣ver.; yet doth it not permit the like between a true Christian and an Heretick d. . uanto c. gaudemus de divert.. And Panormitane In c. ex parte. . d conver. conjug. in his doubing manner denyeth, that the Church hath power to au∣thorise diviorce in case of herisie. So that allowing your comparison for good, yet in case of infidelity, S. Paul; in case of He∣resie, the Cannon Law is altogether against you. You add, that albeit the Religion which a man professeth be never so true, yet who∣soever hath a contrary perswasion thereof, he shall sin damnably in the sight of God, to prefer that man to a charge, where he may draw others to his Opinion. But I will omit this strain, and yet rather as imper∣tinent than true. For there are few Nations in the world, wherein the people have right to prefer any man to be King: and that which you alledge out of S. Paul Rom. 14▪ 1. Cor. . for your proof is very different from the case which you do form. The Apostle speaketh when an action is of it self indifferent, but a weak Conscience judgeth it evil, being also evil by circumstance, in offending o∣thers: you speak where an action is good in it self, but an erronious conscience judg∣eth it evil. I allow, that a good action contrary to conscience is unprofitable; but
that it is always a damnable sin I dare not affirm. I dare not affirm that the Roman ar∣my did damnably sin, in deferring the Em∣pire to Iovinian; who excusing himself, (as Zonaras writeth) because being a Chri∣stian he could not command a Pagan army, they did notwithstanding confirme him Em∣perour, by which means they did afterward embrace the Christian faith. The like doth Orosius, report, that Valentinian, being dis∣charged by Iulian from being Tribune, be∣cause he was a Christian, by consent of the Souldiers was created Augustus. I rather take it to be a damnable sin, which Zonaras  writeth of the Bulgarians, in taking arms against their King, because he was converted to Christian Religion, albeit they did ac∣cording to their Conscience. It were wasting time to dive into the depth of this question; because it appertaineth to Elective States, and not unto us. But where you write with∣out either authority or proof, that to assist, or not to resist the advancement or govern∣ment of any King, whom we judge faulty in Religion, is a most damnable sin, of what side soever the truth be; you breath out most filthy and unsavory smoke; you lift up your voice into high blasts of blasphemy a∣gainst the most High. God hath taught by the Apostle S. Paul Rom 1▪, that whosoever resist the higher Powers (which at that time were Infidels) receive unto themselves damnation; you teach, that
whosoever doth not in the like case resist, doth damnably offend. Were not the spirit of division, otherwise called the Devil, sea∣ted in your soul, you would not thus open∣ly oppose the setlings of your rotten brain, against the express and direct sentence of God. What? is it a damnable sin to do eve∣ry man right? is it damnable to give Caesar that which is his due Math. 2▪ 17. Mar. 12.17. Luc. 20.25:? to give tribute, ho∣nour, fear, to whom they appertain Rom. 13.7? The Apostle saith, that Christians by re∣sisting the power of Infidel Rulers, do ac∣quire unto themselves damnation Rom. 13.2.▪ and shall we yield credit unto you, that Turks, Moors, Infidels, should damnably sin, ei∣ther in admitting or enduring the authority of a Christian Prince? How cheap do you value the judgments of men? at how low rate do you prize both your conscience and credit? I could rise into riot of words upon you, were it not that I respect what is seemly, rather for me to speak, then for you to hear. Certainly if we had received no such com∣mandement from God, the regard of the qui∣et of humane societies is sufficient to over∣whelm your Heritical Assertion: for see∣ing there are many different professions of Religion, not only in the World, but al∣most in every Nation of the World: seeing also, Cas Philo saith De legat.) every man, either by use or instruction, judgeth his own Religion best: what surety could any Prince, what safety could any people enjoy, if your fiery opinion should take place? what assurance
can there be of Life or of State, where the Sword beareth sway upon such occasions, and that guided by hands both Tumultuous and fierce. And seeing among many Religi∣ons there can be but one Truth, if all Men should be obstinately bent against the Go∣vernment of any, who in their Judgment is Faulty in Religion; what likelihood can we either conceive or conjecture, but that many Errors would soon prevail against the only Truth. And therefore 'tis far more moderate and safe, to use the ordinary means both of maintaining and propagating the truth, and to commit the success there∣of unto God; and (as Iosephus adviseth) not to offer either conumelie or violence against any Religion, lest we provoke thereby the Professors thereof to do the like against ours. Your last Reason is drawn from Policy and consideration of State; because a King will neither trust nor favour, much less ad∣vance him, that is not of the same Religion with himself: but to the contrary, he shall be Subject to all molestations, injuries and other aversions, which are incident to those who are not current with the present course of affairs. Oh Sir; this is the Helene for which you contend; you concur in opinion with those Athenians of whom Alexander deman∣ded divine honours; not so obstinately to
defend Heaven, as to lose the benefit of the Earth. This is the mark whereat you aime, this is the Compass whereby you sail; as divers flowers do open and close, accor∣ding to the Motion of the Sun; so accor∣ding to the variation hereof, you extend or restrain your plyant Conscience as you please. But the Appostle teacheth us to be obedi∣ent to higher Powers, for Conscience sake Rom. 3.5, and not for any private respect. Besides, all Princes are not of that dispo∣sition whereof you speak. Suidas writeth of one, who changeing Religion to please his King, was therefore adjudged to lose his head; one being appointed to cry at the time of his Execution; He that keepeth not Faith with God, what sound Conscience can he bear towards Men? The Protestants in France are not alltogether cast either out of Fa∣vour or out of Charge: and many Roman Catholicks in England, do enjoy their full part, of all the plenty and pleasures that the Realme can afford. Lastly, what have you to do with Reasons of State? This is the Eagles Feather which consumeth your devotion. Your Office is to meditate, to pray, to instruct men in pure Devotion, to settle their Souls in Piety and in Peace. But do you contain your selves within these limits? nothing less. You take
upon you the Policy of State▪ you rend and deface the reputation of Kings; you make your selves both judges and moderators of all their actions, allowing them to fly no further then you give them wings. You dis∣pose not only their Affairs, but their Crowns at your pleasure; you hunt them not to Covert but to Death. You contrive ways to compass your designs; you train up your Followers in the high mistery of Treason; you cast into every Realm the Apple of Strife: your Doctrine is to no other use but as Drumms, Fifes, and Trumpets, to Incense Fury. To these ends you wrest Scriptures, you corrupt Histories, you counterfeit Reasons, you corrupt all Truth (pardon my plain∣ness I pray you, I have not attended to your dexterity in disguising matters with smooth terms) you are obstinate to hazard rather all dangers, then to be cut off from one point of your purpose. You acknowledge no Re∣ligion but your Will, no Law, but your Power: all Lies, Treacheries, and Frauds do change their Nature, and become both law∣full and laudable actions, when they bear for the advantage of your affairs. But this is directed to devotion, (you will say) and as you terme it, ordine ad de∣um, for a holy and Religious end. Away then with your devotion, and so we shall be rid of your dangerous deceit. Away I say with
your devotion; or else we will conclude of you as Livie did of Anniball: Nihil▪ veri, nihil sancti, nullus deum metus nullum jusjurandum, nulla religio. . FINIS.
