H2327 11833516 49746
Great Britain's Groans: OR, AN ACCOUNT OF THE Oppression, Ruin, and Destruction of the Loyal Seamen of ENGLAND, IN THE Fatal Loss of their Pay, Health and Lives, and Dreadful Ruin of their Families. Eccles. V. 8. If thou seest the Oppression of the Poor, and Violent Pervert∣ing of Judgment and Justice in a Province, marvel not at the matter, for he that is higher than the highest re∣gardeth, and there be higher than they. Printed in the Year 1695.
TO The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament Assembled. I Have, for these two Years, been laying before the most Honour∣able Houses of Lords and Commons, the dreadful Groans of His Majesties Loyal Seamen, and shall now, by God's Assist∣ance, continue to lay open their most miserable, deplorable Miseries, in the fatal loss of their Lives, Health, and Pay, since their new way of being manag'd, and costly and chargable way of being Ruin'd and Destroy'd, such as these Nations never knew in so few years, and the poor Seamen, and their Families never groan'd under; all which will be found by the King's Pay-Books, and Muster-Books, wherein it will appear, that about a hundred Thousand of them have lost their Health, and about 40000 of them lost their Lives, and about 60000 of them run out of their Pay, to so great an increase of Fatherless Children and Widows, and so great Ruin to their Families and Relations, as they have never groan'd under, and was never known to befall them, in so few years in this Nation in any Age of the World, since Noah built his Ark; all which I humbly Dedicate and Recommend to the serious Consideration of the two most Hon∣ourable Houses of Lords and Commons in Parliament, to be con∣sider'd of, before that Judgment come upon us, Malac. 3.5. That God himself do come, and be a swift Witness in Judgment against those that oppress the Hireling in his Wages, the Wi∣dow
and the Fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from his Right, and fear not God. For if these dreadful Evils are not Remedied, and those Enemies of God, and these Nations that Cause them, are not Punish'd, it may justly be fear'd that Innotent Blood will be brought upon this Kingdom; and the Numerous Cries and Groans of the Valiant, Loyal, Miserable Seamon, and their Pe∣rishing Families, will at last pierce the Clouds, and enter into the Ears of the Lord of Sabbath, who may then justly say to  as he did to the People of the Jews, Isa. 1.15. When ye spread th your Hands, I will hide mine Eyes from you, yea, when ye make many Prayers I will not hear, your Hands are full of Blood. Humbly Represented by a Loyal, Faithful Subject of his most Graci∣ous Majesty King WILLIAM, and a faithful Servant to the Seamen of England. Written in the sight and presence of the Eternal and Ever Blessed God, to whom he must give an Account who Remains, Hermitage-Bridge Decemb. 26. 1695. William Hodges.
Great Britain's Groans, &c. INTRODƲCTION. I May say of the Seamens Miseries as Queen Esther said of the Jews, that were contriv'd to be Ruin'd by wicked, cursed Haman; that if they and their Families had been sold for Bondmen and Bond∣women, I might have held my peace, although the Adversary and Enemy could not have Recompenc'd our Gracious King William's and the Nation's Damage; but to be destroyed, die and perish, in such dreadful Numbers, more than the World ever saw, without sighting; and so many of their Families Ruined in their Pay also, are two de∣plorable miseries, and I fear doth cry aloud in the Ears of the Lord of Host, who hath sent such dreadful Loss of Shipping and Merchandize this last Year, since I represented their Groans before in part, that I be∣lieve England never groaned under the like; and I am afraid, in plain English, that God will not always let the poor and Miserable be mock∣ed, without either helping of them, or considering their Case; And if there be an Hundred Thousand Pound or more wickedly gotten out of Ruined, Sick and Dead Seamens Pay, I fear the Publick hath lost above Three Hundred Thousand Pound Custom, and the Nation above Three Millions of Riches this year; and Ruining, alias Running the Seamen out of their Pay, with the two fatal Letters, Q. R. will never make us amends, especially when so many have those Letters set on their Pay, when they have first lost their Healths in the Service, and then set a-shore sick, and there die. But this is but one part of their miseries, among some Millions; which I will leave to your Honours to consider of, and of what fatal consequence, and what prodigious Charge their Ruin cost these Nations, besides the Loss of their Lives and Pay.
And indeed their miseries to me seem to be not only great miseries, and new miseries, and fatal miseries, but big-bellied miseries; miseries that beget more miseries, breed more miseries, and bring forth more miseries in a plentiful manner; and if not remedied, are, in my Opi∣nion, like to increase more and more; and if God  to scourge our Sea-Affairs, or do arise to hear the Cry of the Poor, the Oppressed, the Fatherless and the Widow; then we must expect to be more and more scourged: But how God will order it, is best known only to himself: The Task his Providence layeth on me, and which hath cost me the breaking of more Rest in my bed, by my thoughtful∣ness of it, within these three months, than all my own con∣cerns in the World ever did break my Rest, these thirty years. And I propose not any advantage to my self in the world, by what I write, except it be, that if the Seamen of England be not Ru∣ined, I shall escape, among the rest, from being made a Prey to our E∣nemies, who are advantaged in a great deal of our Seamens Ruins, too plainly to be hid. And now therefore I will represent some of them. 1. The first misery I shall begin with, is that which I think first be∣gan with them, This War; and I think, never began before, either in these Nations, or any Nation, and that is, their being paid most times on board Ship this War; and this hath been so very dread∣ful a Loss to them and their Families, I cannot easily Represent it; they have not thereby had the Liberty God and Nature alloweth the rest of Mankind, of spending their mony upon the Earth, of laying it out, at the best hand, of sending it to their Families, and of Paying their Debts honestly, and getting Credit for time to come; and I suppose if the had been Paid but half so much on Shore, once in two years and had a Months Liberty on Shore, it might have been better for Themselves, Families, and Relations, many of whose Wives, Aged , or Poor nd Miserable Masters and Dames, have lost a great  of their Hubands, Children or Servants Money, this War, to their very great Ruin and Misery; and in the Payment of two Hun∣dred Thousand Payments on board of Ships, this War, I do look on it to be Two Hundred Thousand Miseries to their Families. Many have spent near half the money Receiv'd, in going Sixty or an Hun∣dred miles to the place where their Hubands were paid.
And Secondly, The turning from Ship to Ship, as near as I can calcu∣late, in my Understanding of the Seamens Affairs, having this War had Acquaintance in every Man of War almost in the Fleet, and do Judge one Man with another, that stayed any long time in the Fleet, hath been turn'd over Ten times; and that in Forty Thousand men is Four Hundred Thousand miseries to themselves, and Four Hundred Thousand miseries to their Families, or Relations, But it may be that will be wondred at. But I look upon it to be much more. For, Thirdly, This and the other foregoing misery have been, in my Opinion, both fatal and fruitful Miseries, for. Fourthly, That fatal Misery of above an Hundred Thousand Seamen sick, this War, may owe its Birth, half of it unto the two first men∣tioned Parents. And Fifthly, That deadly misery, and loss to the King and Nation, and Seamens Families; of above Forty Thousand Seamen dead this War, as I will undertake to prove by the King's Pay-Books and Muster-Books. God knows, If the two first miseries were not the Parents of above half these poor souls death, few of them, in comparison having been kill'd by sighting. And Sixthly, Again, the Sixty or Seventy Thousands Run out of their Pay, as there have been this War; as I will undertake to prove by the King's Pay-books and Muster-books, and I will so order it, that any Ship's Book may be examined by a Committee of Lords or Commons, to know the Truth of it; and it shall not cost His Maje∣sty Two Pence for my pains; for I do not this for my own Advan∣tage, but the King's and the Nation's; that the Seamen may not be Ruined, and we Ruined in their Fall; For I look upon the Seamen of England, tho they are many times despised worse than Dirt, yet to be as good a sort of Dirt as the Walls of Rnny Marsh, that if they are broken down, the Sea will overflow the whole Marsh∣es, and it will be then no matter how fine the Houses are therein, or how great Estates any in that Marsh have gotten by helping the French this War to Intelligence, and do them Service. I say, the Water would overflow all the Marsh, if the Walls were ruined. God grant the Loss of Forty Thousand Seamens Lives, this War, and the Ruining,  Running of Sixty or Seventy Thou∣sands
of their Pay, to the Ruin of many of themselves, and multi∣des of their Families, may not provoke God in Judgment to send us such another Year's Loss as this last hath been. The Nation, I fear, will groan under it, if God should scourge us so again; and then it may be, it will be thought worth while to consider what should be the Reason that the French, with six or eight Ships, should be so wise as to meet our East India Ships in three or Four several places, so exactly, to take them home to France, as if they had been the Con∣voy, and waited carefully for them; and many of our Ships, only to receive double Pay, and keep the Seamen on Board Ship all the War, until we have lost more men than would Man all our Fleet together, if alive; And we having about 160 Ships in Pay this Year, it is a little strange, and they not Ten Ships in a Body, and yet they know where to meet our East India Ships, and our West India Ships, and our Gninea Ships; and this is fatal to England, that seems to be under the Judgment of Israel of Old, Isaiah 59.10. We grope for the Wall, like the Blind; we grope as if we had no Eyes; we stumble at Noou Doy as in the Night; we are in desolate places, as dead men. And God de∣liver these Nations from what is mentioned in the Four Verses follow∣ing. But Seventhly, Another dreadful Misery attending the Two First, is, many Ships having had their Number of Men buried two or three times over before they are paid; and some have had their Number of Men, Eight or Ten times over, before they are paid, as I can prove by several Ship's Books, if occasion be; for if I know my own Heart, I dare not assert any thing but such as my Conscience will witness, to the best of my Understanding, to be Truth, and what may, the most material part, be proved by the King's Books, and the others by the dreadful Experience of multitudes of miserable people. And, Eighthly, Another Misery is, that there is ten or twenty Thousand knows not where to find their Relations, (dead, or gone out of several Ships, as by the Ships Books will appaar.) Who are now looking after their Money, except it may be some times those Cursed Plagues of the Seamen, the Cheats, and Ticket-buyers, and Pursers, and Knaves that a∣gree together, to have Two or Three Hundred Pounds Raised in a Ship, as hath been made appear. But how sad is it for the poor Widows, or Relations, of those that carned their Money, to have them prest from one Ship to another, until they do not know where to find them, or when they died.
And it is to be feared there is Ten Thousand Seamen more dead this War in the King's Service than can be proved by the King'e Books; some receiving their money by Letters of Attorney, after they are dead, to save Administring; and as I said, many being never enquired after at all, looks as If they were dead. 9. There is another misery, by being turned from Ship to Ship, and not paid; and so the Captain of the Last Ship commands their Tickets from them for the other Ship, and carrieth them away to the Straits, or where he pleases, that the poor miserablk Seamen have not liberty to have a Penny of money for their Tickets, to buy themselves Cloaths, or their Families Bread; And it may be the other Ships they came out of are paid in the mean time, and their Wives or Friends lose their Payment at Broadstreet, because the Captains are at Sea, and have their Tickets; and whether ever the Seamen groaned under these miseries before, I know not. 10. When the poor miserable Wretches come from the Straits, as many did lately, and the Captains give them their Tickets again, they have not one Days liberty and freedom from the Press, to come up and look after any money for them; and some men are paid off in the last Ship, and yet have money due in 2 or 3 other Ships, and not one days liberty to shew their Heads to get a Penny for the same. But if any Cursed Ticket-Buyer meets them, it may be they must sell them their Pay due in a Ship or Two before, at near half loss: And this War hath been the greatest Encouragement to Extortioners and Vil∣lains to Cheat the King, and to Ruin the Seamen, that ever was in the World, if my Understanding fail me not. And again, 11. This Ruining so many Thousands of Seamen, hath been a pre∣tended Necessity to help Ruin the rest, either in their Pay, as afore∣said, or by their totally losing all their Pay, that are made Run, and have no Friends to look after it; For I can shew under the Hands and Seals of near Thirty in one Ship, that are made Run in other Ships, or in their own where they are still; and they did desire to have the Books searched, why, or when they were made Run: But that would not be admitted without Petitioning; and the Men cannot have leave to come up to Petition; and so their Pay may be lost until Dooms Day. But whether the Nation will thrive the better, God knows. Indeed we thrived better when we beat the French: But after that the Seamens miseries came  thick and Threefold, as may be seen in the last part of my Book: And how we have thrived since, let the Smir∣na Fleet, and the East India Ruines, and West India and Guinea Losses
speak; For I believe God would have the Nation consider what he speaks by them. And, 12. Another misery to the Nation is, That as Capt. St. Lo hath published to the Parliament, and to all the World in Print, that it cost the Nation above Five Hundred Thousand Pound a Year, the not paving off our great Ships every Year, and yet he faith we might have a Winter Squadron besides, of fifteen Third Rates, and fourteen Fourth Rases, besides all our Fifth and Sixth Rates, and that would be Money saved. And 13. The said Capt. St. Lo, one of the Commissioners of the Navy, hath published, as aforesaid, That it cost the Eing, besides about sixty thousand Pound the Year pressing men; and if there be prest Ten Thousand Men in a Year, it cost the King, by that Rule, fix pound a Man for pressing of the said Ten Thousand Men. 14. He saith, That the Colliers give 7 or 8 l. a man for Seamen, by Reason of the Press; which before they did use to have for 30 s, and likewise do sometimes give 30 or 40 s, a man for men to bring them up the River; and if so, then I suppose I may modestly Judge, that the Collier-Trade, and Coasting Trade of England, is at much more than an Hundred Thousand Pound the Year extraordinary Charge, be∣cause of the Press. And, 15. It may be modestly supposed, That if there be Forty Thousand Seamen more imployed in the Merchants service for other Voyages, and they have about 30 l. the Year a peice, which is 50 s. per month; and they use to fail for 30; then there is 20 l. a Year extraordinary charge for every man in the Merchants service; and that is Four Hun∣dred and Eighty Thousand Pound the Year extraordinary charges, be∣cause of the Ruin and scarcity of Seamen, and because of the Press. And also the Merchant Ships are forced still, for to supply the Ruin, Destruction, Death and Loss of the Seamen in the King's Ships. 16. Whereas had the Seamen in the King's Ships been preserved, incouraged and increased, as it could not have been modestly comput∣ed, but they should have increased 30 or 40000 Men this War, if they had been paid off every Year, as the French and Dutch do, and their Lives saved on shoar; and this Million of Money saved every Year, would have been an help to England, towards our Losses. But, 17. If the French save Five Millions of Money this War (that we wast) and have got (as it may be feared) Ten Millions of Shipping and Riches from us, this must at Seven Years end be a sad difference; but in the end of my Book, I have shewed, how Purser Maidman
Published in Print, That a French Marquess had told the French King, he might make the English ruin themselves. But I hope that our Gra∣cious King William, and the Two most Honourable Houses, will prove that Marquess a yar for time to come. But indeed our Seamen's Miseries and Ruin hath been too great, and too fruitful. And that, 18. Another Misery to the Seamen is, when coming home of long and hard Voyages, try are Prest away before they come to Land, and have not liberty treesh themselves, with fresh Air and fresh Pro∣vision, neither to receive their Pay; but it may be sent away of long Voyages again, to the langering of the ruin of their Health, Lives, and Pay, and ventures cominng home. Many Masters paying them al∣most what they please, or liarsed Villains make their Friends go to Law for their Wages, and all because of the Press. 19. This way of management hath been also very fatal to many Tradesmen and Inhabitants in this City and Suburbs, concerned with Seamen; for the Seamen are not safe one Day from the Press to shew their Heads, after they are Paid, if it were to save their Health, and Lives, and Money. And thus in Fifty Thousand Merchant Sea∣men kept from coming to London, and about Forty Thousand im∣ploy'd in Men of War, and Tenders, and paid most part on Board, it may be modestly computed the Tradesmen and Inhabitants of Lon∣don, have lost several Years the taking of near a Million of Money a Year, at Ten Pound a Man, for Cloaths and Victuals, and all Con∣veniences for to sit them again to Sea, to serve his Majesty freely; and many of them from laying out all their Money in Goods, to re∣turn home to Scotland to their Friends. For it may be modestly judged, a Fourth, if not a Third part of our Seamen, are Scotch. 20. And what a Misery it is to have our Seamen so dwindled away as the Government, to be forced at seven Years end, to press, and hawl, and tear Seamen from all Merchant Ships coming home, and all over the City of London and Suburbs, and very many Watermen, and the Collier-Trade to boot; and that with more violence now, when they have not Eight of their Enemies in a Body this Year, and yet to be at more trouble to get Men for to fit out half a dozen Ships now, then was to sit out the whole Fleet, when they were well paid, before they beat the French; and yet, though this work of Pressing hath been almost all this Year, yet the scarcity of Searen hath been such, that we have had Four or Five of our biggest Ships lain several Months not Mann'd enough to go out to Sea. And,
21. By this dreadful Press from Year to Year, the Seamen of En∣gland are hindred from seeing their Families; so that it may be sadly laid to Heart, how at this rate of turning them from Ship to Ship, until they die; or if by the King paid off lovingly, they shall be catched in a Day or two. How then it can ever be expected, by any think∣ing Men, that the Seamen's Wives, Friends, Parents, or Relations, can ever see their Husbands, or Friends again, either in London, or any Sea-Port-Town of gland or Scotland, while this War lasteth. 22. Except the Seamen fly away (as if they were afraid and asham∣ed to appear) by Hundreds or Thousands, as they have been forced to do of late; and as Joah said to David steal away as Men that flee in Battel; which  old David,  be of a sad consequence to him; as they that prease may read  beginning of the 19 Chap. of the 2d. Book of amuel: and therefore he advised David to speak comsortably to them. But by the present management of our Seamen, they have been ma∣ny of them, forced to fare miserable card, as it seems they did in se∣veral hips, on small Beans, called by them Horse-beans, two Days in the Week, and pinched for  Ale, called Water, until they have six or seven Pound a Man due for Victuals and Water-money, as by the King's Books will appear, yet they are never like to come to see if His Majesty will pity any of their Miseries, provided there be but so much care taken, to set two or three Ships Companies to Press di∣ligently in London, it scares them away from the City, worse than their Enemy's Guns ever did scare them from Fighting. But as some of them said, when they had hid a Day or two, to be kept as if they were in a Goal, they could not indure; and so, as they came private∣ly to London, they stole away with speed and secresie. And they that can think they will ever come chearfully again into the Service, must have a stronger Belief than mine; whereas many of them said, had they had but one Month's liberty to have spent their Money free∣ly, they would have as freely gone into the Service again. But not to have one Fourteen Days liberty, now at 7 Years end, for those poor Souls that escape with their Lives, seems to me to be miserable miser∣able, deplorably miserable: And whereas, had they been paid off yearly, and had liberty on Shoar, and their Lives preserved, multi∣tudes of Seamen we might in reason have expected to have had to spare, and save many hundred thousand Pound per Year, as afore∣said. But,
23. If our Seamen be so scarce, and so destroy'd, when our Ene∣my's Fleet is all laid up, it may be inquired what we shall want when their Fleet is all out. And if all our Ship's Books be examin'd, what we have now, and what number will be needful to fill them up with Men, it will be found to be near fifteen Thousand Men, notwithstand∣ing all the extraordinary charge of some Millions of Money for time past: And if those in the Service now, be never suffered to see their Families or Relations, it may be considered by all thinking Men, how those who do grow up for time to come, will ever be incourag'd to come into the Service of the Nation, so freely as others have done formerly; seeing those that come into the publick Service, must resolve to renounce Wife and Family. 24. It may be inquired, if Men are turn'd from Ship to Ship, un∣til they are Sick, and then set on Shoar for cure, and there dye, and be then Qd. or Rd. out of their Pay; how in this case it can be safe, to be in the Service of the Nation, for time to come, or for any Tradesmen to trust them that are therein, if there be not care taken to secure the Pay of those who are so miserably turned over from Ship to Ship, until fallen sick, and so sent on Shoar, and so dye, and Runn'd out of their Pay. 25. And if there be sixty odd Thousand Quaeried and Runn'd out of their Pay; if there be a Sitting to pretend to relieve them twice in a Week, and there be twenty Petitions in a Week heard, that is one Thousand in a Year, and so at that rate, if all Petition for Relief, their Petitions will be sixty Years in hearing, pro rato. And, 27. If some are kept a Year, or more, before they are Relieved, whose case is just, then it may be considered, how very unjust and cruel it must be to delay Justice to them. And to prove the many Cruelties and Injustices put on Ruined Seamen, those Certificates and Affidavits (laid up in the Navy-Office) of those who are Relieved, will be sufficient witness; besides the many Thousands whose dreadful case is such, that can get no Relief. 27. And if Sixty Thousand of the miserable Seamen are Run out of their Pay, as by the several Ships Books will appear, this may admit of a double serious Consideration: one of which God in Justice will require of the Nation; let it be passed over as slightly as it will, by those who have all along helped to ruin our Loyal Seamen and their Families; and that is, How many are unjustly, and cruelly, and shamefully, and unmercifully Run out of their Pay? And if but a
sixth part are made Run wrongfully, their Groans and Cries will cry louder to Heaven for Justice or Vengeance against the Nation, than all the other five parts will do us good. And indeed, the wise Man fuith, Ecolus. 34.22, 23. The bread of the needful is the life of the Poor; he that defraudeth him thereof, is a Murderer. He that taketh away his Neighbours living, slayeth him; and be that defraudeth the Labourer of his hire, is a blood-shedder. And when one prayeth, and another curseth, whose Voice will the Lord hear? Now this is Printed with our Church-Bibles, and will witness to the World, That it is a killing, a bloody, and blood-sucking thing, to take away the Hire of the Labourer, and not such a slight thing as some (that have risen almost from the dung∣hill, on the ruins of others) may suppose, and therefore worthy to be the more ly inquired after, and the more especially since there is a more pro Number of Ten Thousands of Men Run out of their Pay, than ever the World saw in so few Years, and such fatal Losses or Ships and Merchandize followed the same. But 2dly, Suppose the other Fifty Thousand be made Run Justly, then it may be supposed greatly useful for the Information of the Ho∣nourable Houses (that would encourage the Seamen) to known and be informed what dreadful usage, or Fatal Management, or miserable dis∣couragement the Seamen of England and Scotland have met with this War, that should make them Run away so many times Ten Thousand out of the Service of so gracious a King, and so good a Country, where God, Angels and Men will bear them Witness; they will lay down their Lives at any time for the Seruice of both; and that they have always been Lovers of King William, and Couragious for their Coun∣trey, and will, if led on, go up to the Muzzels of their Enemies Guns, in defence of their Couetrey; and have never lost one Ship, by their default, this War; and have never run away for fear of sigh∣ting, or being kill'd: By which it appears there has been so great a number of miseries thrown on some of them this War, which they e∣steem worse than Death; and yet there is a further misery of their conversing with ten times more Death by sickness, in some Voyages, than by their fighting: For when there hath but about thirty or forty men come home alive, that went out in a Ship, and the Ship, it may be buried Three, Five, or Seven Hundred Men in a Voyage; and they that escaped with Life to come home, have not had so much mercy shewn them, as to be paid off on shoar, to get a little  and Strength, and to let the Wives, or Relations of about Forty in Se∣ven Hundred, see that there was some escaped, and come home again.
And to be plain, this kind of stewing to death in Ships, tho it have been, it may be ten times more fatal to the Seamen than fighting; yet it is not such a Death as the Seamen expect or love; and it is a death of no profit to the Nation; it weakens, and is the way to Ruin our Seamen, but kills not one Enemy. If Forty Thousand of our Seamen be turn'd from Ship to Ship, until they die, this killeth not one Ene∣my; but if they lose their Lives in sight, they do usually kill a greater Number of their Enemies, and that is something of Comfort; and their Wives, or Aged Parents, use to get Bounty-money, and not be basely run out of their Pay, after they are dead: And I must faithfully declare my Opinion, that they that would hide the dreadful Ruin and Destruction of the Ten Times Ten Thousand Seamen Ruined in their Health, Lives and Pay, and would not let his Majesty, and the Two most Honourable Houses of Parliament know the Truth of their Misery and Destruction, are Enemies to God, to the King, to the Nation, to common Justice and Equity; yea, to common Moral Honesty and prudent Policy; For the Seamen of England must be made use of as long as England is an Island, both in Peace and War; and there is not one Soul in England safe, in Life and Estate, if our Seamen were de∣stroyed: And if by our Blessed Saviour himself, it was declared to be a damnable thing of those who should be bid to depart at the Last Day, as accursed, that did not give meat to the Hungry, and drink to the Thirsty, and Clothes to the Naked and Strangers, and Visits to the Sick; then I would appeal to all Mankind, how much more a damna∣ble thing it must be, instead of giving, to take away the Bread from the Hungry, or be so unmerciful to the Strangers and Widows, to run them out of their Pay wrongfully, and then make them wait a Year or Eighteen Months for Justice, and pawn some of those Clothes that should help to cover their Nakedness, to help them while they petiti∣on, and give 5 s. a peice to a Fellow or two set to take in their Petiti∣ons, and get them answered, as many have done; I do really declare I have sometimes thought that Dives's Dogs might be several Degrees kinder to poor Lazarus than such Fellows are to poor Ruined Seamens Wives; for they Kindly licked his Sores; and did not snap and snarl at him, and tear his Clothes off his back; and besides, Lazarus came to beg mercy, these come to ask but Justice; and that which the Na∣tion will smart for, I fear, by some severer strokes, if they have it not; and in plain honest love to our gracious King William, and good Old English Interest; and to Honesty and Policy, I will declare my O∣pinion faithfully, That if there be not wiser, or honester Tools to be
found in England, than those who on the one hand help to Ruin, or have helped to Ruin so many Scores of Thousands of Seamen in their Lives or Pay; and on the other hand, have not either Wit enough or Honesty enough to have our extraordinary Rich Merchant Ships wait∣ed for as carefully, with all our many Scores of Men of War, to se∣cure them home to England, as the French can do with Eight or Ten Ships to secure them home to France. I say, in short, if there be not better Tools, God Almighty knows when there will be better work; For our Case is like to be sad, and I would say as Christ did to the Pha∣risees, concerning St. John Baptist's Ministry (tho in another Case), If our Losses be from Heaven, they are dreadful; and if from en, they are shameful and scandalous, and ruining and miserable: And if, as St. Paul saith, a little Leaven will leaven the whole Lump; then the Almighty God knoweth in what places or Nations a man or two in half a Score, may poyson, mislead and befool all the rest. And now I think of this, there is a place of Scripture comes into my mind, concerning Israel of old, that God did threaten them to do a marvellous work, and a won∣der, Isa. 29.14, 25. For the wisdom of the wise men shall perish, and the Ʋnderstanding of the Prudent shall be hid: and woe to them that seek deep to hide their Counsel from the Lord: and their works are in the dark; and they say, who seeth us, and who knoweth us. And indeed, to make no Application (wanting parts) I must leave it to the Wise and Learn∣ed to Judge of the meaning of this place, and that before mentioned, of groping as the blind that have no eyes. And indeed in England we have a kind of a Proverb, That there is none so blind as they that will not see. And if that be a true saying, there's certainly much more dan∣ger of the King's being cheated, when they that should see to have it punished, do all they can to have it smuggled up, as some in Offices of the Navy Concerns have been publickly accused to do in the business of stealing the King's Stores at Portsmouth; and if our Ships that are in the King's Service, cannot see the French in a great while, when in the mean time a Merchant Ship is not safe to go 40 Leagues on our own Coast, but is in danger to see a French Ship, and be taken, which hath been a great Riddle to me all this War; and I have wondred at it, and have consulted how another Nation might be so served; and my Reason tells me, they might be so served several ways, as one is by giving Men of War Command to lye in such and such a place, and not to Cruise all over the Channel; and in the mean time, if people had a continual Correspondence with their Enemy from a Sea-Port Town, as Deip may be in France, to Rye in England; then if the one Nation
did know the station of the Ships of the other Nation, they might ply up and down in other parts free and safe; and if a Ship or two come almost into the Harbours, and takes away a Prize, and there be a Man of War or two, there ready to go out after them, yetif the Commanders of the Men of War will not go out after them, as a Captain or Two would not lately, either for want of Will or want of Orders, at Margate in Kent; then the Enemies Ships may be safe e∣nough. And indeed, I have many times thought, That when Thieves come so near the House, it is very dangerous to have any of their Friends within doors: And it may be sometimes they have too many, the more the pity. But I wondred at one thing, which is, of all the Intelligence that is carried to and again from Rye to France, I knew but one Commander that was set to catch them, that took any, and that was Capt. Grantham, and he took the Owler that carried over that Mournful News to England, and Joyful News to France, last Year, of her most gracious Majesty's Death, before it was publickly known in England, and Capt. Grantham was presently turned ont of his Imploy∣ment; and, as he said, The Lords of our Admiralty never sent him word what it was for. And indeed, if it were to please the people of Rye, or those Sea-Port Towns, they ought in Gratitude and Thankfulness to acknowledge their Lordships Kindness, and endeavour to make them amends. But it seems Capt. Grantham never was sent for, nei∣ther ever went to enquire the Cause; and he is not a beggarly Fellow to cry Peccavi, for taking the Owler, or examining her Men separate∣ly (if that were his Crime:) and whether there were another Owler taken before, all this War, I know not, or whether there were Men set to watch, that would not, or could not see them. But for the people of Rye, or any other Town or place, if they do correspond with France, and do help to betray us, in my mind, they are worse than Beasts, to betray their Native Countrey; for, as the Scripture faith, The Ox knoweth his Owner, and the Ass his Master's Cribb; so none but worse than Beasts would betray such a brave Coun∣try as ours is, into the hands of the worst of mankind, that hath Re∣ally plagued the Christian World, and destroyed more Hundreds of Thousands of Men, and more Hundreds of Towns and Cities, and more of the Protestant Religion, in Twenty Five Years, than the Turks have done this Hundred Years. And this may be plainly known by those who are conversant in the History of this last hundred years, and the Weekly Villany of the French for this Twenty Five Years: And I
cannot with my Eyes and Spectacles, see how the biggest Traytor and Villain in England can secure to himself Two pence of what he hath, if our Seamen were Ruined, and the French prevail over us; For if an Irish, or a Popish, or French Rogue, or Jesuit comes, he may disposses those that were their greatest Friends; and the French King cannot be expected to be kinder to the English than he was to his own Loving Protestant Subjects, who did help to keep him in the Throne when his Uncle would have put him by, for being a Bastard; and yet, like an ungrateful Wretch, he hath Ruined them, in their Religion and E∣states more effectually than all the bloody butchering Persecutors ever did; and his Dragoons hath out-done all the Heathen Tyrants in the World, for Rooting out Religion effectually: And therefore I do look on his Friends in England to be void of Grace and Reason, and Honesty and Policy, and common Sense. And so much for that. But I had almost forgot the Remainder of our Seamens Groans; for I think I may in the next place, 28. Represent in part the dreadful misery, in their being turn'd o∣ver so many Hundred times, to the Loss of their Pay, in their dreadful waiting, till they meet with those fatal plagues of the Seamen, the Ticket Extortioners, who have swallowed up a great deal of their pay at half Loss, to the shame of the very Name of Common Moral Heathen Honesty, and which will certainly cry for Vengeance, if those oppressed be not relieved; for by this turning men over, as I said, so many Hundred Thousand times, it causeth many Hundred Thousand of Extraordinary Troubles in their waiting; and many poor and wretched Seamen have been removed into three or four Ships in six or eight months time; and it often falls out, that one of those payments due, if it be but for thirty or forty shillings, is paid part one year, and part another; so that if their poor Wives, or Relations, wait a year or two, as they oft times do, for the first payment, then they are liable to wait another year for the second part of the said thirty or forty shil∣lings due at the same time to the Seamen in the said Ship, as the King's Books will make appear; only it may be Twenty Shillings before A∣pril, and Ten Shillings after; or it may be Fifteen Shillings before Mi∣chaelmas, and Sixteen Shillings after; and it is so managed, that the Ships having not any set days appointed to pay such a Ship, (as some∣times it falls out) they expect a Ship will be paid next week, and per∣haps it is a month; or next day, and it is a Week or Fortnight, and all these help to plague and torment the poor Ruined Seamens Fami∣lies,
who in Five Hundred Thousand Turnings over, may be forced to wait, suppose but Ten Days for each payment, is Five Millions of Trouble; which would be saved, if the Seamen were, as formerly, kept to their Ships a Year or two, and then paid. But now another dreadful misery is, by this turning over: It is common to protend to pay a Ship, and it may be there is left Nine Months in hand; and perhaps not fifty men in that Ship hath money due so long: But they that have a year, or two years, or more pay due, are turn'd into other Ships; and when I think of the Seamens miseries this War, if I were to represent them at large, I might write a Volume as big as a Church Bible; therefore what I have written, or can write, is like a painted Fire on a Wall, they and their Families feel the Heat of the devouring Flames, in their Lives and pay; and it may be some will, to paliate the business, say, That it is subject to all men to die. Now to that I will an∣swer, it is true; and I have suppos'd the dying of people in the Bills of Mortality; wherein suppose there dieth Twenty Five Thousand in a year, which is the most; and there be a Million of people in all, it is but one in Forty; and many Count the City more sickly than the Countrey; and if so, it is but the whole Number of people dead in Forty Years, which is about a sixth part every Seven Years. But our Sea-Affairs, by the Ships Books, will prove, that there hath been more buried in Seven Years than the Honourable House of Commons hath reckoned will man the whole Fleet the next Year; and yet I sup∣pose not above one in twenty, with sighting against their Enemies: And except those two or three thousand poor Seamen dead in France; the rest are all dead among those that should be their Friends, and by their Death have not hurt one of their Enemies. And now I speak of those who die in France, I will mention one mi∣sery, and deplorable misery more. 29. Of the most dreadful Number of Seamen taken into France in men of War and Merchant Ships, lost this War, those who escaped with their Lives, and were brought back to Plymouth again, those poor Souls had not one penny of money, nor a Rag of Cloaths, but such Lousie ones as the French gave them, were forced to beg or starve to London; and if they perish on the Road, as the Lord knoweth who hath, and who hath not: But beg or starve is generally the Word; and when they come to London, here they must have no money, nor
cloaths, but wait Orders what Ship to go into next, naked as they came. And if the Citizens of London will trust them for cloaths, they may; but if they do, they must expect to be threatned to be shot, or have their Boats staved at the Ships sides at Pay-Day, if they go for their money, or come to bring Cloaths to sell the Seamen, which is a common practice of late. So that the dreadful misery of the Seamen, as I said before, begets more miseries; For if they have not money nor Cloaths before, nor cannot be supplied at Pay-Day, this is adding misery to misery: And another thing I would observe by the way, That before the giving about Sixty Thousand pound a Year to the Double-pay Officers, under whose management (it seems) the Nation hath lost near an Hundred Ships: I say, before that, the Seamen ta∣ken into France, had the Forty shillings a peice his most gracious Ma∣jesty used to allow them, when taken in the men of War, which is now denied, and taken away from them; which makes me wonder what is the real meaning of that saying of the Wise King Solomon, Prov. 22.16. He that oppresseth the Poor to increase his Riches, and he that giveth to the Rich, shall surely come to want. Now this Text is fit for the Learned to consider of, whether the Ruining, and Running our Seamen out of their pay, after they have been turn'd from Ship to Ship, until they fall sick, and then sent on shore, and there die, with several other miseries thrown upon them, be the way to increase our Riches any more than giving double Pay to many that it may be ne∣ver saw a Gun fired in Anger this whole War. And another Misery on some poor Seamen, or small Officers is, If a Man be a small Officer, though it be but 30 or 40 Shillings per Month, and have several Lodgers that he hath Fed and Clothed, when they had no Money, if they leave a power for the Friend or Land∣lord, to receive their Pay, it shall not be paid, because he is a small Officer; though by the way, those small Officers that never had an opportunity to Cheat the King, and the Seamen, in their Tickets and Pay; these have no double Pay, neither a Penny more than former∣ly: And yet, if any poor Widow in Scotland desires one of these Of∣ficers of 30 or 40 Shillings a Month, to receive her dead Husband's Money, it shall not be paid, which to me seems to be a punishing the Righteous with the wicked, which Abraham did believe God himself would not serve the Sodomites. And,
30. Another way of depriving poor, miserable, ruined Seamen of their Pay is, though they are discharged fairly, by reason of Sickness or Distraction, and stand fair in the Ships Book, and have Tickets given them, regularly Signed by all the Officers, to receive their Money, yet if the Commissioner will please but to ask they that have these powers and Tickets, where such a Man is, or in what Ship, and they do not know? As who can tell where a Man is a Year or two after he is discharged, (when it may be he has been in several Ships,) then the Commissioner will not pay one Penny of the poor Man's Pay; so that if the management of the Seamens Pay be examined, I am afraid it will be found to be all Will and Pleasure, alias all Arbitrary: And, indeed, many Thousands have found it so; and that makes me think of the Thousands of Prentices in the Navy, if they be poor Watermens, or Widows Prentices, &c. if the Commissioner pleaseth, he will pay the Prentice, notwithstanding the Indenture. But if it be such as the Commissioner pleaseth to stop the Money on board of Ship, by In∣denture, the Prentice shall have not a Penny, though it may be his Master hath not been at Twelve Pence Charge in a Year, for the Pren∣tice, so that there is no certain Rule, but all left to will and pleasure, whoever is ruined. Now it may be some will think, I have met with Difficulties in the Pay of the Fleet my self. Now as to that, I never used to complain in my own Cause; neither did I ever petition the Navy-Board for but one Run, of all that ever I was concerned with, and that was for a poor Widow at Lynn; and had it answered, but it was 2 or 3 Years past. And indeed, I have received a Thousand, or Fifteen Hundred Pay∣ments, of Seamens Pay, my self, as the King's Books will make appear, and I bless God, I never had any Complaint against me, to be called before them: For I bought most part of what I bought, at Two Shil∣lings, or half a Crown profit, and some at Three Shillings profit in the Pound; and I do not know of one above that profit; for I bless God, I always hated Extortion and Oppression; and had I gotten half in half, as some cursed Extortioners did, I had, as I received at first 2 or 3 Thousand Pound per Year, doubled it, and doubled it, to have made it up above Twenty Thousand Pound by this time, and so have had a cursed great Estate, as it may be some others have, out of the ruines of the Poor, and the Cheating of their Country: For there
be some who have grown up like Pumpkins, from a Dunghill, to a pro∣digious bigness, and are like Maggots in the poor Sheeps backs, that the bigger the Maggots grow, the more the poor Sheep is eaten up. But I pray the God of Heaven and Earth, to stir up some publick Spi∣rited Persons, to consider how dreadful a thing it is, that our Mari∣time Sheep should be thus eaten up, and devoured, for want of looking after. And now I will return to the poor Seamen. I found by sad Ex∣perience, That so soon as the Seamen had beaten the French, their Mi∣series began to be multiplied, as I might shew more largely; and I was not easie to buy their Pay at dearer Rates, than I would sell, If I had been to sell and lose to another: For that is the Rule that Christ himself saith is the Substance of the Law and the Prophets, To do as we would be done unto, and that is in the Church-Catechism; and which Rule, I believe, is planted by God himself, in the Law of Nature, and by which all Mankind shall be Judged at the great Day: And if these Nations will not learn their Catechisms, I believe God will whip them: I said so last Year of the East-India-Company's Concerns, that God did Command all Mankind, To do as they would be done unto. And what they learned, God knows; they have, I am sure, been so whipped this Year, that they, nor their Fathers, never knew the like. And God will, I believe, plead the Cause of the Poor. It were well now, under this searching Rod, since it appears God is risen up in Judgment against our Sea-Affairs, that we would oblige our selves, as Christians, to seek and enquire after all the Causes of it, if possible, both of Sin, the procuring Cause, and Men's Knavery, Fool∣ery, or Negligence on the other hand. But this, by the way, I say, I bless God, instead of taking advantage of the misery of ruined Sea∣men's Pay, to buy it at half loss, I have left off buying any at all, for near three Years, neither ever will buy any in this World; and for the next, as Job saith, there the weary are at rest, and there the wicked cease from troubling. There Mankind will not cheat and ru∣ine, and plague and oppress one the other. And now I have said this, it may be some will say, I am mad in∣deed, to lose the getting of so many Thousands of Pounds, and now to trouble my self with the misery, the knavery, and ruins of Man∣kind, and get nothing by it, but rather run the hazard (if any will be my Enemies) for telling the truth, to be ruined my self. And in
answer to that, it is true, I do in the presence of the Eternal Blessed Jehovah declare, in whose prosence I write, That I do not know of one Falshood or Lye, in whatever I have written, as represented by me; and I know that God will bring every work to Judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be Good or Evil; and so I would write every Line, as that which may be brought to be known to these Nations, for to be considered of, and as that which I would have it, all found Truth in the great Day. And now, having said this, and considered of what I have repre∣sented, of the dreadful Ruins and Destruction of our English and Scotch Seamen, and there is not one Soul of them knoweth what I write for them: And indeed, it is a mercy they do not know their miseries to∣gether; and while they know it apart, they groan under it apart. And for those who are dead, they cannot complain; and those who have been so far provoked to go away, and serve other Nations, they will not come again, I suppose quickly, to complain: and indeed, as Job said, 6. & 5. Doth the wild Ass bray, when he hath Grass, or loweth the Ox over his Fother. If the poor miserable ruined Creatures, lose the Grass and Fother at home, with Q's and R's, it may be they will bray; and since they beat the French, and are so dreadfully ruined in their Pay and Liberty, some have Sworn by their Damnation, They would serve the French, or any Nation, rather than be ruined at home. Who can help their Swearing: Solomon saith, Oppression maketh wise Men mad. And if so, who can expect any other from them, that are not over-wise. And when I have represented a few of their miseries, if the Lords of the Admiralty were ordered to lay before the Parlia∣ment, the method of some Commanders abusing the Seamen, or cheat∣ing them, or their Families, or the Nation, in the Seamens Tickets and Pay, which some have been accused of publickly: and also, the Commissioners of the Navy, were to represent what number of Pe∣titions the poor, and distressed, and miserable Seamens Wives, Wi∣dows, or Relations, have laid before them, for Tickets kept from the Seamen for their Pay; and let the Account-Books, and Ship-Books, be also searched, to see how many hundreds of Pounds worth of Sea∣mens Tickets have been received publickly, by, or for the Com∣manders of some Ships, while they had liberty to receive them with∣out so much trouble as to forge Powers, with all that other cursed Vil∣lains have forged; and how this misery hath helped to make the Sea∣men
miserable in the loss of their Pay: and to make their Families more miserable, by pretending to hinder the poor ruined Seamens Wives from getting a Clerk to search the Ship's Books their Husbands belonged to, or dyed in, to see whether they be standing fast, or run out of their Pay. This, I say, would be a means for the Parliament and Nation to see something of Cheating the King, and the Seamen publickly. And as I said the Seamens miseries are fruitful, so is their being Cheated of their Pay made a help to their misery. For though there be perhaps Forty or Fifty Clerks and Clerks Boys can see the Books, and though the Captains Clerks of every Ship, and the Purser of every Ship, hath Books of all the Seamens Names, and can give out Copies of what Names they please to those that can forge powers to receive Seamens pay, to the value of Two or Three Hundred pound in a Ship, and the Captains and Pursers make out Tickets for the same, to offer to Sale, without pow∣ers, and to keep men open upon the Ship's Book a whole West India Voyage after they are gone: Yet these Things, though proved, are not minded to be represented to the Parliament. But if a poor Seaman's Wife, or a poor Seaman in the Hos∣pital, would see whether he be run out of his pay, or whether it be received by one or another, they may petition the Navy-board, and give the Clerk of the Petitions a shilling for the petition, and his Boy six pence, to remember his Worship, that he may put his Master in mind, that such a man in such an Hospital desires to Know whether he be not Run out of his Money in such and such a Ship's Book, where he was sick, or turn'd over. And, it may be, in this time of extraordinary need of Seamen, the poor Seaman is prest away again, with the Hospital-Certificate in his Pocket, and that taken from him, and he sent on Board of the Ketch, to be carried away before he get the Book searched. But if he be Old and Crasie, and have not money to buy himself off, it may be Shame, or Fear, will make them clear him again; and then he may look after his petition again; and that is a better misery than ordinary, to be miserable enough, to be sent to the Hospital in London, and have liberty to look after his money due in two other Ships.
whereas, had he not, it may be he would, if Living, and like to come again, have been Run out of it, if gone away, they expecting he would not come again, they then set down in the Book, paid the Party. And how many of these paying the parties there hath been this War, that the party never had a Groat of I know not; neither what a fatal misery it hath been to poor Seamen's Wives, the not having liberty to be rightly informed how their Husbands stood in the Book, without petitioning the Navy-Board; as if the Wives being truly inform'd by one of the Clerks, (tho she never look into the Books) would be the blow∣ing up of the whole Book: But if I am not mistaken, if I had not left off Ticket-buying above three years ago, but had taken all the Advantages of Sea-mens miseries, this Trick it self might have helped me (with a good Friend) to get the Books searched privatly and so have bought Seamens miserable pay at the same cursed price, as some others have bought it at: But blessed be God that my Mother taught me the Catechism to defy the Devil and all his Works, the vain pomps and vanities of this wicked World. And now I think of the Church Catechism, of de∣fying the Devil and all his Works, and teaching us to do to all men as we would they should do to us, makes me think also how honest men may Buy the Seamens pay, at two or three Shillings in the pound profit, as I did; and so long as they do, as they would be done unto, may serve the King the Nation, and the Seamen therein: But those that buy at ten or twelve shillings in the pound loss to the poor Seamen, (as many have done since the Seamen beat the French;) those I do take to be such as the ministers and people, and whole Church of England are bound to curse every Year; for I find in the Book of Common-prayer, that in the Comination there are these several Curses.
Cursed is he that removeth his Neighbours Land-mark. Cursed is he that maketh the Blind to go out of his way. Cursed is he that perverteth the Judgment of the Stranger, the Fatherless and the Widow. Cursed is he that smiteth his Neighbour secretly. Cursed are the unmerciful and extortioners. Now there is not a Minister in England allowed to take upon him the Cure of Souls in the Church of England, but is bound to declare his assent and consent to this by Act of Parliament; and these Curses are to be read once every year, and all the people are bound to say, Amen. Now the proving that the generality of seamen have been ex∣torted out of half their pay, by Ticket-buyers, and been very unmercifully dealt with, will prove to all mankind, that they that have been unmerciful to them, and they that have been Extortioners to them and their Families, are a cursed Generation by the Doctrine of the whole Church, and by the Assent and Consent of near ten Thousand Mini∣sters; and then again, if this so solemn a Curse be dreadful as being the work of the whole Church; and if one Accursed Act of Achan did trouble the whole Host of Israel, and made them flee before their Enemies until it was Discovered, and the Author punished; then who can tell how dangerous it may be to these Nations, to let such unmercifulness, cursed unmercifulness and cruelty go unpunished; for if God Requires the Authors of such horrid miseries to be found out and punished, he expects it should be done, or this Na∣tion, must surely expect to be Corrected, for St. Paul saith, God is not mocked, for whatsoever a Man sows, that shall he also reap.
And I am sure, since the running and ruining of the Sea∣men and their Families, our poors Book is risen to be twenty Seaven months to the Year, and we are also in Debt, so that I doubt our poors books next year, must be about twenty eight, or Thirty months in the Year to get us out of Debt for our poors Tax and since we have had so miserable a number of poor ruined seamens. Widows or Children, our poors Taxes are so exceeding high, and our Trade in the mean time is so way-laid, that when his Majesty ordered the payment of several Ships, it hath been so managed, that tho the men are discharged and paid off, the King is put to the charge to pay them off near thirty miles from London, and the City and Country way-laid to catch them if they come to London; and those poor souls who escaped with their Lives, where an Hundred or two in a ship died, and several scores sent on shore sick, when they came in to be paid, yet not a sonl of them safe from the Press one day for their poor Wives to take care of them, or they to bring their mo∣ny to their Wives, or to eat fresh provision, and get a little strength to Recruit again before they go out, or to lay out their mony at best hand in London, or to return it home to Scotland; but when the King pays them, they are, many of them, prest away in a day or two very miserably, and the City of London and Subarbs, (who must supply them with Bread and Cloaths when they come from Captivity, or they may starve,) are disappointed in taking any of their mony; and I think if we have lost above a Thousand merchant ships, and near an Hundred men of War, it may be modestly com∣puted, that there hath been near twenty Thousand carried Captives to France this War; and yet let the City supply them what they will in their distress, they shall be sure to be paid far enough off from their taking any of their mony, so that tho the City of London hath been always Loyal and Faith∣ful to K. William, and ready to assist him with their purses and persons, and the seamen of England always Loyal and Ready to lay down their Lives at any time for His Majesty and the Nation, if led on to the muzels of their Enemies Guns; and
yet I will challenge all mankind to shew such Examples of the Cities being deprived of the seamens Trade, and the sea∣mens being so Ruined in their pay in their Liberty, and in their Lives with such fatal Ruin, and for so long continuance, since England was a Nation. And indeed, however it comes to pass, the providence of God, by my extraordinary Zeal to assist all Seamen to serve his Majesty, and these Nations, hath enabled me to know more of their Cases than, it may be any private man in England; For as I have assisted Thousands, and that as cheap as for ready money, to encourage them chearfully in the Service: so among their Deaths, and being turn∣ed over, or prest from Ship to Ship, I shall lose about a Thousand pound, and that by about Four Hundred men; and of all those Four Hundred men, there are near Three Hundred and Forty Dead, or gone I know not where; and I, bless God, that I buy my Experience of the Seamens miseries, thus dear, for instead of Repining a∣gainst his holy providence, I find he fitteth me with Content, and with an Heart to compassionate the mise∣ries of those that I have lost so much by, and all the rest of their Ruined Companions. And I may almost admire how some that have been Raised up in the Ruines of the poor and miserable Sea∣men, can have their Hearts so hard and obdurate; yea I say, Case-hardened: as to help Ruine them more and more, and, in the mean time, smother up what they can of his Majesties and the Nations Loss in our Sea∣men; and the King and Nations being cheated of a multi∣tude of money or Stores. I had written much more largely, of the miserableness of the Seamen, and the method of the King's being cheated, and the Seamen being cheated, but that I was afraid it was too large to trouble the Two most Honourable Houses with, and so haue, in these I ast Four Days, drawn up this short Breviate of what part of their miseries came readily to my mind, having not time nor patience to look over my other
book, considering that every misery that is Represented, the Cause being found out, the Cure will be quickly under∣stood. It doth seem strange to me, that the Nation, which doth all in general agree, such as are men of Sense, Honesty and Love to their Countrey, and the true Protestant Religion, that they have Cause to bless and admire at the good, mira∣culous and gracious providence of God, in Raising up our most gracious King William, to be a means of a Deliver∣ance for us, and a Defence for these Nations, and oppres∣sed Christendom. I say it is strange that we should see Cause to bless God for this, and even enjoy our selves under our own Vines and Fig-Trees, and yet at the same time let the Seamen of Eng∣land be Ruined and dwindled away so many Ten Thou∣sands of them, and not mind them, and yet call them the Walls of the Nation, as if it could be safe and secure to dwell in any House in the World after the Walls are thrown down: For my part, I do faithfully declare my O∣pinion before God and man, That if these abide not in the Ships (as St. Paul said of the Mariners that were with him in the storm), there is none can be safe; and I am sure our Scamen cannot abide in the Ships, if they are kept until they are stifled to Death for want of fresh Air and fresh provisions, and so thrown half of them over Board. Neither will they, I fear, abide in the Ships, many of them, if they see their ships are prisons for seven years, without Fourteen Days Release, and especially if they see many of their Prison-Keepers beat and abuse some of them like Dogs, and it may be call them Dogs, and eternal damn'd Dogs, into the Bargain; and if, as Purser Maidman says, in his book called, Naval Speculations, printed by Mr. Gilliflow∣er, That in some ships the Officers must live like slaves in Al∣gier, if they cannot, like Spaniels, fawn enough on the Cap∣tains. I say, if the Officers live so, what must the poor sea∣men do, that are liable to be beaten by Captains and inferi∣our Officers also.
But however, we have some worthy Admirals and Com∣manders, that will not abuse the seamen, neither suffer the Officers to abuse them; and this I speak to their praise. And now coming to a Conclusion, I bless God, who hath put it into the King's Heart to speak for the seamen, and that for their encouragement. And thus I have plainly laid down some of their miseries. And I might begin again; for more of their miseries crowd in upon me. But these before-mentioned, if well redressed, will remedy most of the rest. But when all is done, if any of the Tools, who have helped to Ruine them already, be left to Ruine them again, I cannot help it; my book is done, and the Lord Jehovah bless our Gracious King William, the Loyal Lords and Commons, and these Nations: so prays W. Hodges. Hermitage-Bridge, Decemb. 25. 1695 FINIS.
ERRATA. PAge 4. line 35. for [who are nw] read None. Ibid. l. 36. for [rais'd] read received. p. 6. l. 25. for 20 l. read 12 l. p. 1. l. 2. for one r. many.
