I5A 16138185 104799
AN HEROICK ELEGIE Upon the most lamentable Death of the Incomparable Heroina, Madame ISABELLA BUGGS, The much Loved WIFE of Col. WILLIAM BUGGS, Formerly Widow to that Worthy Gentleman HENRY LLOYD Of CHEAM, in Com. Surrey, Esquire; And DAUGHTER to that Honourable Person Sir GEORGE PARKINS of BƲNNY in Com. Nottinghamshire, Knight. ASsist me all ye Saints, whilst I aspire, Not like Prometheus, to steal Heavenly fire; But like Elias, in a Chair of Flame, To wait upon the Herse, of this great Dame. I beg such flames, shall give a heat Divine, Which burn not to consume, but to refine; Or if consume, they shall such heat afford, As leaves the Scabbard whole, yet melts the Sword. Those Lambent fiers, inwards do controul, Not touch the Body, but embrace the Soul. That's Beauties seat, whilst Limbs, and Colours pass, As faint reflections from a brittle glass. She was within all glory, her Soul set, Life to a flaming Chrysolyt, in Jet; Or Saphires, Rubies, Diamonds were met, I'th' compass of her Chrystal Cabinet; Through which her Soul transpeer'd, and we did find, I'th' clouds of Earth, the mirrour of her mind. She liv'd a Christian, and did others teach If they'd be taught, and great Example preach, More than a Sermon; nay, I'le boldly say, That Heav'n was made more holy, by her way Of serving it, her whole life being plac'd On Jacobs Ladder, and so interlac'd 'Twixt Action and Devotion, clearly we Did in th'Ascent, and Descent Angels see. She born upon the wings of Love, doth fly Now in the bosom of Eternity. Just like a Faulcon, that soars always true, Though newly drawn from Earth, her Mother Mue; And neerer mounts to that Eternal Light, Doth more, and more, still lessen to our fight: So though she's fled from us, yet she is seen By Angels tow'ring towards th'high Heavens Queen; Who riseth to receive her in her Arms, And prays her Son to guard her from all harms. She study'd to encrease two Husbands joys, And made one, Father of most gallant Boys; Whose noble care, will always be to bring Honour to th'Kingdom, Safety to the King. But left so many Daughters here behind, Enough to teach the Sex of Woman-kind. She always shew'd of graces rich enacrease, And such a num'rous Issue, ne'r can cease. She made the world more happy still by Births, Yet brought her Fruits to Heav'n, so well as Earth. Her Soul was sure Celestial, and did run Over all Creatures, like the powerful Sun; Which though it keeps its Orb, yet does bestow Essence, and comfort on all things below. So all good Christians found her Soul to be A source of inexhausted Charity. She was of Parkins good, and glorious Blood, Yet never strove to be so great as good. Nor did th'addition of two Noble Names, Adde to her more than Christian humble flames. And so she did submit her Loyal Fate To the Kings fortune, and his then troubled State. I'le say no more, for that I truly fear, The world will call her so, a Cavaleer. Her Bones St. Giles now holds, but Name shall have In all true Christian Hearts a living grave. Whilst Churches do resound her Funeral knell, Angels their Trumps, her own Name Is-a-Bell; A true Saints Bell, to call both us, and them To rest, i'th' Heavenly Hierusalem. FINIS. These Verses to the Number of the Years that this good Lady lived, were wept over her much-lamented Herse, by an old Admirer of her still living Vertues, and most humble Honourer of her Eternal Memory, H. I. LONDON: Printed in the Year 1681.
