i74 13065033 97036
An Impartial Account of the present State of the HUD∣SON-BAY Company, as they stand Incorpora∣ted in a CHARTER granted them by King CHARLES the Second. THE whole Number of Adventurers are about Thirty Persons in all: Their Original Subscriptions but Ten thousand Pounds, and that doth not appear by their Books to be half paid in. THE Mechandize they Export are Trifles, viz. Beads, Hawks∣Bells, Brass-rings, Combs, Jack-knives, Coblers-Awls, Hatchets, Guns, Gun-Powder, Shott, Powder-horns, Tobacco, Kettles, and a very small quantity of Duftels, and Course Red and Blue Cloth. The Value of their whole Cargo of Merchandize (Provisions, and Victuals, for Seamen and Servants, ex∣cepted) not exceeding Six hundred Pounds per Annum, Communibus Annis. FOR this inconsiderable Trade, they have a boundless Charter, not only for the Sole-Trade of all Seas, Bays, Creeks, Rivers, Lakes &c. from the Entrance of Hudson-Straits, with all the Lands and Territories, upon the Countries, Coasts and Confines of the same: The Royalty of the Sea, and Propriety of the Land, with all Mines, Royal and otherwise, but also the Sole Trade of all Havens, Rivers, &c. into which they can find Entrance, or Passage by Land or Water, out of these Territories afore-said whether discovered or not discovered, and the Natives and People Inhabiting in those Places, together with all other Nation. Inhabiting the Coasts adjacent to those Places; Exclusive to all Others. AS they are Boundless in their Dominion, so Sovereign in Power, having a Grant to make Peace and War on all People, that contrary to their Charter shall interrupt them in their Trade; to Judge and Execute Judgement on all Persons in all Causes, whether Civil or Criminal, within any of the Countreys where th  have Places of Trade: which Power they actually Executed,  Charles Boon Esquire deceased (and late a Member  ¦mons) destroying or converting to their  the Men in her Prisoners for several Months, beca  Hudson's Straits, on pretence of having infringed  when in truth they had not traded One Penny, nor et then favouring their Abuses, did also maliciously prosecute the a Boon and o∣thers concerned in the Ship, in the Crown Office, where that Vexatious Suite is now depending. NOTWITHSTANDING these their great immunities and Priviledges enjoyed more than Twenty Years, they have made no Discoveries beynd what they found set down in Fox his Journals, nor any considerable Improvemen n Trade, ei∣their to the Advantage of the Nation, or themselves; but hinder al others so to do. THERE is no need of a Joint Stock to carry on this Trade, nor Forts and Ca∣stles to secure it, the Native Indians being a People timerous and more likely to be affrighted from Trading with us, by our appearing formidable, than to assault us, if defence-less; and the Truth is, the Nakedness of the Countrey, is the greatest Se∣curity to the Trade of that Place. THOSE Forts pretended to be built by the Hudson-Bay Company, are no bet∣ter than Pig-Sties, in England, nor of greater Strength; being a few Pine-Trees, squa∣red and laid one upon another, and ramm'd only with Moss, to keep out the Wind. THE Sum of all is this, The Hudson's Bay Company's Charter is boundless, and so void by Law; it gives Sovereign Power, which as we humbly conceive, is not con∣sistent with the Wisdom of this Nation to grant. It was obtained upon a specious pre∣tence of discovering the North-West Passage into the South Seas, which was never dis∣covered. It ingrosses the greatest part of the Trade of New-York, and New-England, the most advantageous Trades to this Nation of any not Incorporated. It cramps In∣dustry, and discourageth Ingenuity, and is in it self of no moment to the Nation. THAT this diminutive Company (not regarded these Twenty Years, by reason of the little Figure it made in Trade) should now presume to Address self to the High Court of Parliament, to be Established in a boundless Charter, when  Record doth afford any president of any Joint-Stock in this Nation, ever Establish by Law (how specious soever their Pretences have been) is without Parallel.
