L1308B 11342852 47513
SOME QUERIES Concerning the Election of Members For the Ensuing PARLIAMENT. LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXC.
Some Queries concerning the Election of Members of the Ensuing Parliament. 1. WHether the King hath not lately by Actions, as well as Promises, declar'd himself for the Interest of the Church of England; and whether those Republicans, who have al∣ways made it their business to libel Kings, can more ef∣fectually abuse his Present Majesty, than in traducing him as their Friend, and in using, as heretofore, a Kings Name against his Design and Interest? 2. Whether those are true to the Interest of that Church, who endeavour'd in the last Session to incapaci∣tate some of the best Members of it; and who were so far from granting that Amnesty which the King de∣sir'd and propos'd, that they carried their Fury back to more than one preceeding Reign, and set aside all Acts of Indemnity, but that, which most of them need, in the Year 1660? 3. Whether since the Dissenters do not now desire a Toleration for themselves, which we have already gran∣ted, but openly threaten and pursue their Revenge on us, it is not necessary that these apparent dangers, at least, should awaken us out of our Lethargy; and whether the Negligence of the Church of England, which on like occasions heretofore, was thought the result of Pity and Good Nature, would not now be esteem'd the Effect of Cowardize and Stupidity? 4. Whether those Gentlemen of the Sword, who have Offices in Ireland, would not be better imploy'd in a Council of War than a Senate-House? Whether, if they think it convenient, it would not be proper for them to make one Visit to the Remains of their Regiments there, and to contribute by some other means to the Reducing that Kingdom, than by giving Taxes?
5. Whether those restless Phanaticks, who have been bred up in Rebellion, and have always since been active Promoters of Sedition, ought not in conscience to desist now, and to be contented with the single glory of having once ruin'd this Kingdom? 6. Whether those Worthy Gentlemen have been just∣ly expos'd, in a late impudent Pamphlet, that were more hasty for sending a speedy Relief into Ireland,See a List of those that were for the Re∣gency 1690. Lond. than for changing the Right of Succession in an Hereditary Kingdom; and whether they may not possibly deserve a place again in the House, though they thought it more Expedient for this Nation to beat K. Iames out of that One Kingdom, than to Vote his Daughter out of Three? 7. Whether the King be not now sensible, that most of those hasty Abdicators did not change the Succession out of kindness to him, but out of a farther Design of bringing in a Commonwealth, or, in other words, of making this an Elective, and precarious Monarchy? 8. Whether the Temper of those Excellent Members deserves Censure, who have promoted a General Pardon, and in that an Universal Quiet and Satisfaction; and who were not very active in suspending the Bishops, unwhip∣ping Oats, and in Excepting every body out of the no-Act of Indemnity? 9. Whether any Man can justly stand Recommended to your Choice by no other Advantages than those of an old Treason, and a long Exile for it? and whether one may reasonably be thought to have improv'd his Crime into Vertue, and to become a Patriot of his Coun∣try, by being outlaw'd into Holland? 10. Whether such men as these may not possibly be Factors for Geneva and Amsterdam, and more mindful of their late Fellow-Burgers than their old Countrymen; and whether their frequent protestation, That they are true Englishmen, would not convince the greatest Sceptick, (if
he understands their veracity,) That they are not so. 11. Whether our good Brethren the Dutch, according to their usual kindness, would not, in all probability, have forborn to arrest us for their Debt, till the Conquest of Ireland had put us in a capacity of repaying them; and whether those Men, who in the absence of most of the Members, gave 600000 l. to the Dutch, did not more consider their own good will to the Creditors, than our ability. 12. Whether it was not a strange instance of Justice, in a Knight of the Shire,I do not mean Sir R. Nudi∣gate, nor Sir R. Cot∣ton of Che∣shire. to move for a new assessment of his own County; and whether if the County do not choose him again. They will not demonstratively shew, that they have more kindness for their Money than their Representative? 13. Whether there ever was a better Parliament in General, than that of K. Iames the Second, and whether any body would approve the Re-election of those worthy Members, who do not wish for a new Monmouth, and ano∣ther Argyle? 14. Whether many honest Gentlemen, of Nice Prin∣ciples, did not desist from standing at the last Election, as having raised more Scruples to themselves than they could easily answer; and therefore not hoping to untie the Gordian Knot, put it for once into the hands of those men who could effectually cut it. And whether now these Gentlemen will not be concern'd to redeem their neglect, and the more diligently to avert the blow, by how much the less careful they were to prevent the stroke. 15. Whether the Clergy of the C. of E. are not con∣cern'd to be as diligent against Phanaticism now, as of late against Popery; at least, such of them as have a greater Respect for Pulpits and Chappels, than for Tubs and Barns?
16. Whether if those men who were incapacitated for procuring or consenting to Surrenders, shall again Vote for their Judges, they will not give a signal Instance of their forgiving humour, and shew to the World, that they have a great share of good Nature, though perhaps not an equal portion of Sense? 17. Whether it would not be Heroick for all those Publick-Spirited Gentlemen,Qu. Whe∣ther Mr. Sacheve∣rell. to take up Mr. S—'s Reso∣lution of never standing again till they can be chosen by honest Regulators only? 18. Whether the incapacitating Clause was not brought into the House by Mr. Sach—and whether the fol∣lowing List be not a true account of those that seconded him in it? Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Mayor, Recorder, Alderman, Steward, Sheriff, Common-Council-man, Town-Clerk, Magistrate, or Officer; who did take upon him to consent to, or joyn in, any such Surrender, or Instrument purporting such Surrender as aforesaid. Or did solicit, procure, prosecute, or did pay or contribute to the charge of prosecuting any Scire facias, Quo Warranto, or Information in the nature of Quo Warrauto, by this Act de∣clared void, shall be, and is declared, adjudged, and Enacted to be for the space of seven years uncapable, and disabled to all Intents and Purposes, to bear, or execute any Office, Imployment, or Place of Trust, as a Member of such respective Body Corporate, or in or for such respective City, Town, Burg or Cinque-port, whereof, or wherein he was a Member, at, or be∣fore the time of making such Surrender, or Instrument purpor∣ting such Surrender, or the suing out, or prosecuting such Scire facias, Quo Warranto, or Information in nature of Quo Warranto, any thing in this Act contained, or any other Case, Statute, or any Ordinance, Charter, Custom, or any thing to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.
The Honourable Edward Russel, Esq. William Duncombe, Esq. Sir Henry Winchcombe, Baronet. Henry Powle, Esq. Sir Algernoon May, Knight. Sir William Rich, Baronet. Sir Henry Fane, Knight of the Bath. Thomas Tipping, Esq. The Hon. Thomas Wharton, Esq. Sir Thomas Lee, Baronet. Thomas Lewes, Esq. William Iephson, Esq. Sir William Drake, Knight. Richard Hampden, Esq. Iohn Hampden, Esq. Isaac Newton, Magist. Art. Sir Robert Cotton, Knight and Bar. Iohn Maynwaring, Esq. Roger Whitley, Esq. Hugh Boscawen, Esq. William Harbord, Esq. Edward Russel, Esq. Sir Henry Ashurst, Knight. Anthony Rowe, Esq. Hugh Fortescue, Esq. Robert Harly, Esq. Sir Peter Colleton, Bar. Ionathan Prideaux, Esq. Sir Iohn Lowther of Whitehaven, Bar. Sir Henry Capell, Knight. Sir Philip Gell, Bar. The Honourable Anchitell Gray, Esq. Sir George Treby, Knight. The Honourable Robert Russel, Esq. Sir Francis Drake, Bar. Sir Walter Younge, Bar. Thomas Reynell, Esq. Iohn Elwell, Esq. Samuel Foote, Esq. Henry Trenchard, Esq. Thomas Trenchard, Esq. Iohn Burridge, Esq. Sir Iohn Morton, Bar. Iohn Manly, Senior, Esq. Sir Matthew Andrews, Knight. Henry Mildmay, Esq. Isaac Rebow, Esq. Sir Thomas Middleton, Knight. Sir Iohn Guise, Bar. Sir Ralph Dutton, Bar. Sir Duncombe Colechester, Knight. Thomas Master, Esq. Iohn How, Esq. Richard Dowdeswell, Esq. Sir Edward Harly, Knight of the B. Paul Foley, Esq. Iohn Dutton Colt, Esq. Iohn Birch, Esq. Sir Thomas Pope Blount, Bar. Sir Charles Caesar, Knight. Sir William Cowper, Bar. Sir Thomas Byde, Knight. The Honourable Sidney Wortley, alias Mountague, Esq. The Hon. Sir Vere Fane, Kt of the Bath. Sir Iohn Knatchbull, Bar. Sir William Honywood, Bar. Henry Lee, Esq. Sir Tho. Taylor, Bar. Charles Lord Brandon Gerrard. The Hon. Richard Lord Colchester. Bennet Lord Sharard. Thomas Babington, Esq. Sir Edward Hussey, Knight. Sir William Yorke, Knight. Sir Iohn Brownlowe, Bar. Sir William Ellis, Bar. The Hon. Philip Howard, Esq. Sir Patience Ward, Knight. Sir Robert Clayton, Knight.
Sir Thomas Pilkington, Knight. Sir William Ashurst, Knight. Sir Henry Hobart, Knight. George England, Esq. Iohn Trenchard, Esq. Serjeant at Law. The Hon. Sir Robert Howard, Knight. Sir Thomas Samuel, Knight. Sir William Langham, Knight. Sir Francis Blake, Knight. Sir Scroop How, Knight. Sir Iohn Cope, Bar. Sir Thomas Lytleton, Bar. Edward Gorges, Esq. The R. Hon. Charles Marq. of Winton. The Hon. William Lord Pawlett. Francis Morley, Esq. Fitton Gerrard, Esq. Henry Wallap, Esq. The Honourable Iames Russel, Esq. Sir Michael Biddulph, Bar. Philip Foley, Esq. Henry Boyle, Esq. Sir Philip Skippon, Knight. Sir Robert Rich, Knight and Bar. Sir Iohn Duke, Bar. Sir Richard Ounslow, Bar. George Evelyn, Esq. Iohn Arnold, Esq. Thomas Howard, Esq. Foot Onslow, Merchant. Sir Iohn Thompson, Bar. Denzill Onslow, Esq. Sir Iohn Pelham, Bar. Iohn Machell, Esq. Iohn Lewkener, Esq. Sir Iohn Fagge, Bar. William Garway, Esq. Sir Richard New digate, Bar. Sir Thomas Mompession, Knight: Thomas Pitts, Esq. Sir Charles Rawleigh, Knight. Morice Bocland, Esq. Sir William Pinsent, Bar. Charles Godfry, Esq. Thomas Freke, Esq. Iohn Wildman, senior, Esq. —Hawles, Esq. Iohn Wildman, junior, Esq. Sir Iames Rushout, Bar. Thomas Foley, Esq. William Bremley, Esq. Iohn Somers, Esq. Richard Lord Coote. Henry Herbert, Esq. Edward Tompson, Alderman. William Stockdale, Esq. Sir William Strickland, Bar. William Palmes, Esq. Sir Michael Wharton, Knight. Barons of the Cinque-Ports. Richard Austen, Esq. Iames Chadwick, Esq. Iulius Deeds, Esq. Tho. Pappillon, Esq. Sir Iames Oxinden, Knight and Bar. WALES. Sir William Williams, Knight and Bar. Bussy Mansell, Esq. Sir Rowland Gwynn, Knight. FINIS.
