O196 15745955 104598
Old AESOP AT. VVHITE-HALL, GIVING Advice to the Young AESOPS AT Tunbridge and Bath: OR, SOME FABLES Relating to Government. By a Person of what Quality you please. LONDON, Printed; and Sold by J. Nutt, near Stationers-Hall. 1698.
THE PREFACE. IT is now the Mode, it seems, for Brutes to turn Politicians; and if we may give Credit to some late Authors, their Hou∣ses of Parliament assemble at Tunbridge and Bath. The Lion who by Prescription hath been own'd for King, Nemine Contradicente, pleads it as his Priviledge to summon them to his Banquetting-House at White-hall; whence all the Three States may by a short and easie Walk arrive together at Westminster, and there consult for the Common Good. He car∣ries a Bundle of Arrows in his Hand, with this Motto over them, Concordia res parvae crescunt, discordia maxima dilabuntur.
If there be no Mysteries in Christianity, it seems there are some in Policy; when Ja∣cobites and Commonwealths-Men, who have mutually branded one another with the harshest Names that Malice and Rancour could invent, should now unite in a Design against the present Government, as a Common Center. If it be so, (which Old AESOP is very unwilling to believe,) he hath given Commis∣sion to his Beasts, in the following Fables, to declare the first to be (what they always were) Knaves, and the latter (which he is sure they will be loth to be accounted) Fools If the Reflections seem too Satyrical, they may consi∣der that it comes from Beasts like themselves. And so Aesop bids them Farewel, but to take Care not to divide the Prey till it is caught. White-hall, Sep∣temb. 22. 1698. AESOP.
The SUMMONS. THE Jackall did the King of Brutes inform That some design'd to mine, and some to storm His Royal Fort. At which, with generous Rage The Kingly Beast, their Malice to asswage, Sends forth his Summons, That they should appear At Brutes White-hall, from Quarters far and near, There to consult; and if they found that any Better deserv'd the Sway among the Many Than Leo did, he wou'd the Crown forswear And never henceforth any Scepter bear: But at the same time gives't as his Advice, 'It's better to fill Bag one time than thrice, 'Or three times three. It's better under one, 'Than many Masters, to lament and groan.
Old AESOP AT VVHITE-HALL, GIVING Advice to the Young AESOPS AT Tunbridge and Bath. FAB. I. The Tortoise and Frogs. A Heavy Tortose seeing Frogs Nimbly leap in Pools and Poggs, Bless'd their limber Hams, that they Could so bravely frisk and play;
Curs'd the hard and heavy Pack That Nature laid on his own Back: He could neither skip nor dance, Nor caper A-la-mode de France. But as soon's he saw the Stork Could the Fregs from Puddle fork, And that for all their nimble Heels They became a Prey to Eels; Then he quickly chang'd his Note, And for's own Coat of Mail gave Vote; Thank'd his Stars that he was free From Storks and such-like Tyranny, By being armed Cap-a-pee.
MORAL. Did we but se through Gallick Sway How feeble Subjects are a Prey To th' Sovereign's arbitrary Will, Who can at's Pleasure save and kill; Did we but feel th' Effects of's Sword and Flames, Saw Virgins ravish'd, hard the Cries of Dames, When Soldiers sack their Towns, destroy their Men, Cut off their Children, scarc spare One in Ten; Could we but see Rome's Priests converting France With Arguments from Gun, Sword, Spear and Lance, And then reflect that this hd been our Doom, Could James the Just have paid his Vows to Rome, We would not grumble at the Tax we pay To kep such Monstrous Tyranny away, But should, That William might live ever, pray.
FAB. II. Of the other Members conspiring against the Belly. ONce on a Time the Hands and Feet With Back, and Loins, and Bum, did meet In a Rebellious Consult, where The B—ch as Speaker took the Chair, And with an uncouth hollow sound The following Treason did propound: Brethren, quoth he, you know the Head Makes us to toil and sweat for Bread, Yet nothing to our Lot doth fall, But idle Gut consumes it all.
My Friends, if you'll be rul'd by me, We will shake off this Tyranny. If Head and Belly will have Meat, Let them toil for't with Hands and Feet. Agreed, says Back, I vow and swear, For them I'll no more Burthens bear. Content, says Bum, if't be your Will; For I love dearly to sit still. Says Feet, I'll no more Errands run. The Loins say, Brethren, it is done. The Hands vow they would work no more, And wish they'd been as wise before. The Members thus in Holy League Did bless themselves for this Intrigue. But suddenly the Hands grew weak, The Feet grew numb, the Loins did shake,
The Back was feeble, the Bum grew poor, And Breech the Chair-man loud did roar, Pray cram the Gut, and we'll rebel no more. MORAL. It's hop'd this will not be forgot By those who form'd the Tunbridge Plot. Old Aesop was a Man of Sense, Such Doctrines never did dispense, That People should refuse Support, And pine themselves to starve the Court.
FAB III. The Hermit and the Soldier. A Pious Hermit seeing a Man of Blood Come strutting thro' his solitary Wood, Accosts him thus: Dear Brother, why do you In Humane Blood and Gore your Hands imbrue? Leave off that Trade, be 'Partner in my Cell, Read, pray, and think, and save your Soul from Hell. The Soldier look'd stern, But at last did reply, I am willing to learn, And G—zds I'll comply. We Men of the Sword Are not worth a T—d,
But are basely kept under, Nor have Pay nor have Plunder. A plague on the Peace Which makes our Gain cease: And seeing it is so, With the Hermit I'll go, Till the Drums beat again, and the Trumpets do blow. MORAL. Just so the Jacks their desperate Cause forsake, And to the side o'th' Commonwealth betake; Since their own King has play'd the Fool, and's gone, Ours to molest they turn up every Stone. The Church, the Church, is ready to take fire, Is all their Out-cry: Brethren, save the Quire,
Take care o'th Steeple, Chancel, Surplice, Crape, The Church of England Dove's in danger of a Rape, No thanks to them she did from Father Peters scape: Yet when their Prince, and's Priests shall venture over, They'll swear she is no Chast nor Turtle Lover, But did to others her fair Breasts discover; Then they will be for Commonwealth no more, But screw Prerogative high as before, Huff like N—S—r, cackle like B—S—wer.
FAB. IV. The Ass in the Lion's Skin. A Certain Ass being struck with Shame Of's native Slavery, and his Name, Made shift to steal a Lion's Skin, And boldly stalk'd about therein; Shook off his innate sluggish Pace, And did assume an awful Face, As if h' had been of Lybian Breed, And from the Bastinado freed. But's curs'd Ears, and Cathedral Note, To his great Grief, reveal'd the Plot; For when he did attempt to roar, He could not do't, but bray'd just as before.
MORAL. Thus Nonresistance thinks't no Sin To put on a true Patriot's Skin, And plead for Liberty and Laws, And easie Tax. But mark the Cause: He would the Government disable, And lose the Ship for want of Cable. And by this means it comes to pass, We know the old Passive Obedience Ass.
FAB. V. The Wolf and Hedgehog. A Greedy Wolf that ravag'd Hills and Plains, Devour'd the Flocks, and beggar'd all the Swains, Triumph'd and skipp'd. But Plenty causing wast, At length he knew not where to break his Fast; But in his Range meets with a Porcupine, A curious Bit to make Lycaon dine: His eager Chaps would fain been at the Prey, But the arm'd Hedgehog held him at a Bay. Hungry Lycaon seeing this, cries out, My little Brother, how comes this about?
Have you forgot the late-concluded Peace, That you do still your Armour w ear, As if there were new Cause of Fear? Lay by your Darts, and let War cease. You cannot think that I will break the League, And Brother-Brutes surprize by false Intrigue. Nay, Nay, says Hedgehog, Brother, I don't say That you will me or other Brutes betray; But ne'ertheless it doth appear, While you have Tusks, there's Cause of Fear: Let me first draw your Teeth, and Sans Delay I'll throw my Quiver and my Darts away.
MORAL. Thus crafty Jacks do plead our Cause, Arm'd Troops in Time of Peace subvert our Laws: Lay down your Arms, and then we swear, That our brave Prince will soon appear; La Hogue you know is very near. But since Van Trump, and bold De Rutter, With Ball and Powder made such splutter, He's as much 'fraid of Sword and Bomb, As was his Grandsire in his Grandame's Womb. Disband your Troops therefore, we pray, The Nation cannot bear your Pay. Then come the Wolves o'er from Campeigne, And carry all the Sheep away;
Then will our Prince, like Mars, in Warlike Guise, Encamp at Hounslow to shoot Butterflies. No Man can say that he will break the Law, Or us by Standing-Armies over-awe; Since it is clear, as e'er was Light of Sun, His Army never stood, but always run. Let no foul Tongue our Valorous Prince disgrace, For he in Person always won the Race: The Boyn's fair Flood, and Sarum's spacious Plain, Will this great Truth for evermore maintain.
FAB. VI. The Fox caught in a Trap. ACertain Fox being caught in Trap, Did lose his Tail by the Mishap, And cried, Alas! For his Disgrace, He could not shew Face, Nor follow the Chase: But yet, says he, tho' Reynards do beguile The other Brutes by some sly Trick and Wile; I do not know that Foxes are exempted From being fool'd too, if they're fitly tempted.
Then let me go try, And briskly apply My Wits, to deceive, And make Foxes believe, That the Burden of their Tail, In Rain, Snow or Hail, Is intolerably grievous, And in Hunting mischievous. f by this Means I can but prevail, To have every Fox cut off his own Tail, Then none of 'em at me will mock, scoff or rail. Away Reynard goes, His design to propose, Says Fathers and Mothers, Dear Sisters and Brothers, Don't flout, jeer and mock, At my mangled Dock:
You know that your Tails, But little avails, When you leap over Pales, To catch Sheep and Fowls; Then do not like Owls, Thus burden your Back, By a thing you might lack. How brisk and how fine Am I without mine? The rest perceiving what his Motive was; Told him good Brother this will never pass. When we're hunted by Dogs, O'er Hills, and through Bogs, On our Tails we do piss, And their Chops do not miss. And this was the cause made the Proverb preva He hath got a slap with the Foxes Tail.
Then cease Brother Fox, If we mangle our Docks, As you do propose, We're expos'd to our Foes. Moral. Thus the curs'd Crew who have themselves undone, And from their Reason, Sense, and Interest run, Would gladly have us caught in that same Trap; Ill Men would fain have Brethren in mishap.
FAB. VII. The Fox preaching to the Sheep. ARavening Wolf the Sheep-Cotes did invade, And there set up his Butchers Shambles; Where without trouble of Preambles, He kill'd whatever came to hand. A sturdy Mastiff by the Farmer laid In the same Fold, preserv'd the Sheep, So that in Safety they could sleep, And feed with quiet in their Masters Land, The Fox who us'd with Wolf to diet, And on the tender Lambs to riot; Perceiving this.
Says Monsieur Wolf, I am not able To live at such an ill-spread Table. Were it amiss, That I should go and tell the Sheep, The Mastiff Dog that doth them keep Lives on their Blood; That he and's Master every Day, With joint consent divide the Prey, And make the Sheep their Food. Wolf answers, Reynard, that is good, Go tell the Sheep that they should cease To cloth their Master with their Fleece; Except he will his Dog remove, For such a Guard they do not love In time of Peace. The Fox gets in amongst the Flock, And with sly Oratry thus spoke.
Good Men of Mutton, What do ye with this Mastiff Dog, He is a mercenary Rogue Not worth a Button? For on pretence of keeping guard, Your Flesh and Bones are his Reward: Get him cashier'd. The Wolf and I have sworn the Peace, And our Hostilities must cease, Noughts to be fear'd By him, his Master in disguise Means'ore the Flocks to tyrannize On my Salvation. As I'm a true Son of the Church, I would not leave you in the Lurch, Of such Damnation. The bleating Herd began to grumble, For Raynard's Logick, made them stumble,
And thus they said: In Faith the Wolf and Fox we see Are Enemies to Tyranny; Their council ought to be obey'd. Since Ned the Wolf, and Batt the Fox, Are our good Friends than what a Pox Should we be plagu'd with Curs. We will no more our Fleeces yield, Nor have our Lambs tore from the Field, Let's to our Zeal add Spurs: And for our Spokesman chuse a Ram, Or sturdy Goat to swear and damn, And curse Dissenters. Our greatest Dangers from the Whigs, And cause they will not pay Tithe Pigs, The Wolf and Fox on them shall have Debentures. Content says Fox and there's my Hand, I'll publish this in Woolfish-land;
Farewell dear Sheep. The Woolf and I will guard your Cotes, And pull out the Dissenters Throats; But unto you our promise keep. The Flock by Reynard thus perswaded, That Dog and Farmer them invaded, Straight left the Fold. Did thro' the Hills and Valleys stray, And from their Guard did run away; Left him to starve for want of pay: But mark the end. The Woolf and Fox, having prevail'd The scatter'd Flocks straight they assail'd, And did them all in pieces rend.
Moral. It's hop'd the Sheep of North and West, Who to the Parliament make haste, The Moral will reach; Which is no more Then the Proverb of Yore, Let the Geese look to't when the Fox doth preach. FAB. VIII. The Fable of the Spunge. A Certain Brewer whose Liquor of Life, Did frequently amongst his Servants raise strife, Resolv'd to abridge them, giving each Man his share, Enough to suffice but nothing to spare:
But the Servants resolving they would not be stinted, Put their Wits on the Rack, and this Device minted. They got Gloves of Spunge which they thrust in the Liquor, And squeezing them often spent their Masters Stock quicker: Which the Brewer understanding, he seiz'd on the Spunges; Made his Servants repay him, and with Actions them swinges; Till he squeez'd back his own, and taught them to be true, To leave off their slie Cheats, and be content with their Due.
Moral. Those that misapply the Treasure of the Nation, Ought thus to be squeez'd till they make reparation: We may Tax, and pay on, and the King still be poor, If the Hands of his Servants be pitch'd as before. It's the Interest of the Nation, our Senate understands, That those who touch Cash should have clean washen hands. FAB. XI. The Crumpeter. A Trumpeter who by his fatal Sounds, Provok'd Mankind to mutual Blood and Wounds; Being ta'ne in Field did for his Life implore: I sound the Charge said he, but do no more.
The Conquerour grew enrag'd at this Defence; Replies, base Villan, I'll dispatch thee hence, Down to the Stygian Shades; dost thou not know, That he who counsels Murder, gives the blow. Moral. The Fable hits those who in former Reigns, For love of Faction, or for love of Gains, Did teach our Monarchs a Despotick Sway, And damn'd the People that would not obey: These were the Firebrands of the Church and State, And did more Mischief than Jack Straw or Kett: They caus'd the War and that brought on the Tax, Then let the weight of't fall on their own Backs; Why should the Peoples Blood and Treasure pay To rescue that which Priestcraft did betray.
The Priests advanc'd the Popeling to the Throne; The Priests again did force him to be gone; And now the Priests, like Turn-coats, as before, Chuse Jacks for Senate with Canonick Roar: And Churches danger slily would infer, From our great King who bravely rescued her. FAB. X. The Lion and the Ass. IT once came to pass, That the Lion and Ass, Did meet in a great Consultation; When the King of the Brutes, To the dullest of Mutes, Did seriously make Application.
True Roger, quoth he, Do but hearken to me, And I swear I will highten thy Fortune. Thou'rt now a dull Beast, But I'll make thee High Priest, And the rest shall no more dare thee sport on. Good Soveraign say on, Quoth Roger anon, For I am quite weary of Slavery: I swear by St. Peter If you'l give me a Mitre I'll serve you, be't Roguery or Knavery. I thank you says Lion, Thy word I'll rely on; The Service that I then command thee, Is to teach that I must govern, Like an Absolute Soveraign, And that those will be damn'd that withstand me.
Agreed says the Ass, I will bring it to pass, And have Passive Obedience in fashion; They shall all be call'd Traitors, And Monarchy-haters, From the Pulpits, and Desks of the Nation. But it happen'd that the King, Harp'd on another String, And invaded the Rights of the Asses. Then Roger turn'd tale, 'Gainst his Soveraign did rail, In his Preachments, his Prayers, and Glasses. Moral. Thus Tyrant Princes did make use of Priests, Their Subjects to transform from Men to Beasts. The Time's well known, you need not ask me when, But e're from Beasts they turn to Men again, The Priests must be reform'd; such Reformation Is th' only Remedy can save the Nation. FINIS.
