O466 12990789 96333
AN Exact Relation OF THE Persecutions, Robberies, and Losses, sustained by the Protestants of Killmare, in Ireland.
AN Exact Relation OF THE Persecutions, Robberies, and Losses, sustained by the Protestants of Killmare, in Ireland. WITH An Account of their Erecting a Fortress to Defend themselves against the Bloody Insolencies of the Papists. ALSO, The way and manner of their Happy Escape into England: Together with the Reasons why the Protestants there did not Regiment themselves, and take the Field, or make their Flight sooner. As likewise, Some Natural Conclusions that Plague and Famine will arise forthwith in that Kingdom. By a Principal Manager in that Action. By Authority. London, Printed for Tho. Bennet, at the Half-Moon, in St. Paul's Church-yard; and are to be Sold by Randal Taylor, near Stationers-Hall. 1689:
AN Exact Relation OF THE Persecutions, Robberies, and Losses, sustained by the Protestants of Killmare, in Ireland. FInding that most People do admire why so many of the Protestants have left the Kingdom of Ireland, and why they did not rather choose to get together into some strong Hold, (like those of London-Derry) and there Defend themselves, until such time as they could receive Relief out of England, now I have writ the following Narrative to satisfie all People, that, such of the Prote∣stants there as were concerned, did what was
possible for them to do; which, I hope, will plainly appear by the following Account. In the Parish of Killmare, in the County of Kerry, in the Province of Munster, and King∣dom of Ireland, scituate in some of the West, and worst part of that Kingdom, for Natural Barrenness, environed with Rocky, Boggy, and Woody fastnesses, ten, twenty, and in some places thirty Miles round; there was a Colony of Protestants planted by Sir William Petty, in part of his Estate, which were usually imploy'd upon an Iron-works, and Fishings of Herring, Pilchard, Mackarel and Salmon, set up there about the year 1670, at his Expence of above 10000 l. where it appeared by the right numbering of the People, that there were living about them, upwards of 500 Papists for one of these Protestants. They very much improved the unfertile Country where they Inhabited, and lived plentifully (under care of one T—P—, their Minister, one of the Justices of the Peace for that County, sometime Judge of the Ecclesiastical Court, and of the High Court of Admiralty, for some those Western Parts; and under one
R—O—, Gentleman, Agent for the Lady Petty (now Baronness of Shelborne) her Son the Lord Baron of Shelborne, and James Waller, Esquire, until the year 1685, when the gene∣ral Calamity by taking the Sword, the Law, and in a manner, all kind of Power and Ma∣gistracy whatever, out of the Hands of the Protestants, began throughout that Kingdom; or in such places, where it was not wholly taken from them, they were so heavily pressed up∣on by Popish Judges, Sheriffs, Mayors, Sove∣raigns, Provosts, Coroners, and an over-mix∣ture of Aldermen, Lawyers, and Justices of the Peace, that they signified very little in Court or Country. Since which time the Protestant Inhabitants of the Parish of Killmare (a place where the Natives were very Rebel∣lious, even in the most peaceable times) have been great sufferers through the many Incur∣sions and Insolencies of the Neighbouring Papists, and the Evil Administration of the Laws; the Judges, and all those in Seats of Judicature, and Places of Authority, not on∣ly denying them Justice, but incouraging the Natives in their Out-rages, and wicked beha∣viour
towards them, insomuch, that it grew almost impossible for a Protestant in that Parish, to recover any Debt or Right from a Papist. These Miseries and Wrongs they underwent patiently, which ever since Novem∣ber last, were poured forth with more cruelty upon them: The Officers of the new raised Levies being Persons of broken and desperate Fortunes, not able to maintain themselves or their Souldiers, were forced to filch and steal black Cattle and Sheep, all over the Kingdom, for their Subsistence; and more especially, in the County of Kerry, where the Natives were more Indigent, the Thieves appeared pub∣lickly in great numbers, thirty, forty, and oftentimes seventy in a Company, well armed with Pikes, Swords, Guns, Pistols, &c. march∣ing openly through the Glins and Moun∣tains, with Droves of six or seven score Cows and Bullocks at a time, in such terror to the Protestants, that when they saw their Cattle hurried away, before their faces, by the Rogues, they durst not pursue nor enquire for them: But of all the County, the Prote∣stants in Killmare have endured the greatest
Persecution, upon whom the Malice and Inveteracy of the Papists was exercised with so much severity, that by the beginning of January following, they were bereft of all their Cattle and Haggards of Corn; their Barns and Granaries stript and robbed, and all the substance they had without Doors forced from them, and nothing left them to live upon but what little Provision they had in their Houses. Whereupon, T—P—, and R—O—, in behalf of themselves, and the rest of their Parishoners, made a Draught of their com∣plaints, setting forth at large the many wrongs and loses they sustained by their Circumjacent Neighbours: And sent the same to Lieute∣nant General Justine mac Carthy, Governour of that Province; and another to Sir Valentine Browne, Governour (under him) of the County of Kerry; and Petitioned them both for remedy against the Robbers. The Go∣vernours received their Complaints and Peti∣tions very kindly, and Inveighing vehement∣ly at the behaviour of the Villains, that had despoiled them in that manner, seemed much troubled for the injuries which was done un∣to
the Petitioners; and at length in six days after, returned upon the backs of their Peti∣tioners Warrants, impowering the Petitioners to apprehend and bring in the Malefactors; (remedies, which at such a juncture did not lie well in the power of the Petitioners to apply;) While the Petitioners were waiting for a return from the Governours upon their Petitions, behold six of the Petitioners Houses were in one Night Riffled and Plundred of all that was in them; so that these poor Pro∣testants were in much Distraction and Con∣sternation, not knowing how to dispose of them∣selves for their safety, and fearing that those Rogues who began to Rob their Houses, would not be content without their Lives also: And being struck with Reflections up∣on the Numerousness of the Natives that lived surroundingly about them, and the direful and dismal Massacre acted upon most part of the Protestants of that Kingdom in the year 1641. They consulted T. P. and R. O. what course to take for their preservation; who sent an Express forthwith to Newmarket to their Friend (Sir R. Ald. near
Forty Miles distant from Killmare) to know from him, how things look't out of England, and to give them his best advice how to manage themselves for their safety; where∣unto Sir R. A. sent them his answer in these words. That an Army was expected every day, to Land out of England, that in the mean time the Protestants about Newmarket, and all over the rest of the County of Corke, sent in their Provisions to the next Garisons, and themselves came in after with their Horses and Arms, and that he thought well to follow their Example. The Protestants of Killmare upon this, con∣sidering that all their Horses (except about a dousin, which R. O. had preserved by keeping a Watch over them in his Stable) were Stolen from them; that they had not Money to Hire Horses from the Natives, to carry their Pro∣visions and Children out of that place; that they had about Forty Miles, the greatest part of it the worst way for Boggs, Rocks, and Precipices, and the most Savage People in the Kingdom, to go through, to Bandon; being the nearest place to them, where they
could expect to joyn with a Protestant Body; the difficulties and Barbarities that might hap∣pen to themselves, their Wives and small Children, from the inaccessableness of the Road at that time of the Year, and from their Popish Neighbours: Finding them∣selves in the condition of the Persecuted Hugonots of France, that had no safety at home, and must not (or could not) leave their Houses, to be succoured elsewhere, con∣cluded to stick to each other in a Body, and wait as long as they could for relief, resol∣ving to stand and die together like men, ra∣ther than a part to be Murdered in their Beds like Dogs, by their Blood-thirsty Neighbours. Upon the River of Killmare (from whence the Parish has its name) is a House built by Sir W. P. for his Chief Agent: It's 44 Foot in length, 22 in breadth 2 Stories and a half high, in it are only four large Rooms and a Garret; It stands upon a Rock at a place called Killowen, where the Tyde flow∣eth almost round, making an Istmus or Pe∣ninsula, naturally capable of Fortification. In∣to this House they resolve to croud them∣selves
and their Families. In order whereto they hastned in their provisions; whil'st they were about that, T. P. and R. O. to render it more Defensive and Formidable, caused Car∣penters to put forth two Bulconia's of Tim∣ber and Plank, on two of the opposite cor∣ners of the House, with passages into them from the Garret, for Men to Watch in, and where they might upon occasion make use of their Fire-arms: They soon follow'd in after their Provisions; the number of their Families were 42, amounting in all to 180 Men, Wo∣men and Children, whereof about 75 Fight∣ing Men; their Arms and Ammunition were Blunder-busses 4, Musquets, Carbines and Fouling-pieces 40, Cases of Pistols 20, Swords 36, Pikes 12, and Sythes 6, of Powder 170 l.; with Ball proportionable: They presently found themselves too much Throng'd, and began think of adding to their Garrison more Room and Strength; and on the 16th of January, they went unanimously to work, with Spades, Shovells, Pickaxes, Hand-barrows, &c. 150 of the Natives (who always here∣tofore had Earned their Bread from us, and
250 of their Labouring-Horses, were now Hyred by him to hasten this Work; and be∣fore the 24th of that Month they finished the same, and encompassed half an Acre of Land about the House, with a Clodd-wall of 14 Foot in heighth, and 12 in thickness; with Flankers, &c. in the manner of an Ir∣regular Pentagon; within the Wall they Built slender Livings, and small Hutts, of half Inch Planck, for Lodges for some of their Families, such as they could quickly pull down again; that they might be no hindrance to them, when action should be required. And for further confirmation of their unity, they entred into the following Association.
ASSOCIATION. WE the undernamed, do hereby in Defence of our Lives and Religion, Associate our selves in a Body, within the Fort of Killowen; against the Enemies of the Protestant Church: And will from time to time, to the ut∣most of our Power behave our selves according to all such Directions as shall be given us, by T. P. and R O. for our management and Safety; until we are received into Command of His Highness the Prince of Orange. In Testi∣mony whereof, We have taken our Oaths upon the Holy Changelists, and put our Hands and Seals, the last day of January 1688/9. Their Popish Neighbours were much dis∣gusted hereat, finding that by this contri∣vance they were stopt from committing fur¦ther Robberies upon these Protestants: Besides, hereby they conceived themselves frustrated in their base private designs, which they in∣tended about that time to Execute upon the body of R. O. For they were much bent against him, because that in the very heighth of Popery in that Kingdom, he
stood up vigorously for the Protestants, and their Religion. And because he had brought to Condign Punishment several of the Papists, for wrongs done to the Protestants of that place; particularly Daniel Mac Tiege Carthy, one of those that Murdered Edward Gilks a Smelter, for en∣deavouring to defend himself, from being Robbed at Noon day, of 40 s. which they knew he had about him, in the Year 1680. Owen Sulwan, (a loose Gentle∣man) for coming unawares behind R. O. in a Dark Night, and running him through the Body with a Sword, for offering to recover a Debt due to him from Sulwan's Friend in the Year 1680. Teague a Glanna and others that Murdered the Pursivant, for daring to come into that part of the Country, to arrest a Papist at the suit of Sir William Petty, or of any Protestant whatever, in the Year 1685. Daniel mac Dermot, and half a Score others, for Robbing a parcel of French Protestants, that having escaped out of France, were by Stress of Weather forced into the River of Killmare,
in the Year 1686. Daniel Cruoly, and 7 more Tories, that in the Year 1687, at∣tempted to Murder and Rob R. O. and his Brother, but without success, their Cap∣tain having received a Shot in the Head, and two more of the chief of them in the Shoulder and Thigh; being made Pri∣soners they Lived till they were Hanged at the Assizes following: The greatest part of all these Malefactors were severely Prosecuted by R. O. some of them were Hang'd, some Burnt in the Hand, some remained in Gaol, and the rest disperst and fled out of the Country. Within this Fort the small handful of Pro∣testants of Killmare reckoned themselves safe, from their injurious Neighbours; knowing that no ordinary Force could hurt them, and that it was not very possible for an Army to March into that Coun∣try with any Train of Artillery, by reason of the many Steep, and Craggy Hills that are round about it, and no way to harm them but by Water. Moreover, when an Army should Land out of England, the
Papists Garrisons could have but little op∣portunity to spare their Cannon in sending of it against this place. And not only in this, but in all Protestant holds within our knowledg, the English were much heart∣ned to proceed in this manner: For 'twas verily believed by them, and daily expected, that an Army would Land out of England in some part of Munster: And therefore put themselves into such prepara∣tions to receive and join with them: And these of Killmare, accounted themselves in their own Station no less Serviceable than o∣thers: For when the Prince should please to send his Forces, to quiet that unruly King∣dom, it's not to be doubted that great com∣panys of Robbers, Tories, and Free Booters would flee into these Western parts for shelter, as many did, in the last Rebellion, where they were never perfectly subdued, nor the Laws of England duly Executed: None could be more active in pursuing them in these de∣serts, than the Protestants of Killmare, that were well acquainted with every Nook and Corner in all the Glinns and Mountains for
20, and in some places 30 Miles round them. Having as they thought secured themselves within this their new Fortification, they ac∣quainted Lieutenant General Mac Carthy, and Sir Valentine Brown, his Deputy Governour therewith, who approved thereof, and ex∣pressed themselves much grieved at the several Robberies, and Villanies of the Natives, which urged them to this way of safety; a∣gainst whom they desir'd the Governours again to proceed to have them brought in, and punisht, which they faithfully promised should be forthwith done: But the Gover∣nours neglecting to suppress the Robbers, R. O. resolved to put the Warrants in Execu∣tion, which they formerly obtained upon their Petitions, that these Governours might not have to say another day, that they were not only complained unto, but that their Warrants were also Executed upon the Ma∣lefactors; and in the night he went out with a Party of the Garrisoners into the Glinns and Mountains, where they took six of the known Robbers, and found with them several of
the Goods which were lately before Robbed and Stolen from some of the Garrisoners; these together with the Goods were brought into the Garrison, and afterwards the Prisoners were delivered to some Officers, appointed by the Governours to take charge of them, but were soon set at liberty again upon in∣solvent Bail. By this time the 25th of February was come, being the day appointed for disarming all the Protestants in that Kingdom: At one of the Clock in the Morning, the Irish Soul∣diers to the number of 3000 commanded by Captain Phelin Mac Carthy, and several other Captains came up to the Gates of the Garrison, with intent to have surprized the Garrisoners in their Beds; but by a shot made by one of the Watch, they were Alarmed, and the Souldiers stood off; when 'twas light the Garrisoners sent forth to know what they were, and their business, and admitted one of the Irish Captains into the Garrison; who told them plainly that his Errand was to have from them their Horses, Arms and Ammuniti∣on, and delivered a Letter from Sir Valentine
Browne, to T. P. and R. O. importing the same, and promising (that if they would sur∣render,) to make good what ever conditions they should make with the Officers; and produced an Authority under the Hand and Seal of the Governours, impowering the Irish Captains, in case of resistance to compel submission by Fire and Sword. The Garrisoners refused to submit, and put themselves in readiness to receive the onset of the Besiegers, who still lay before the Garrison; a spy was also sent abroad into the County of Corke, who in 4 Days time returned with an ac∣count that the Protestants in Corke were Disarmed: That Castlemarter was Surrender∣ed, and that Bandon was but in little better condition. Now the Garrisoners of Killmare began to see their misery approaching towards them, all their hopes of speedy relief from England being blasted, of which till then they were very confident; for the Pro∣testants were not only sure of it, as they thought, but even the Lord Deputy, Lieu¦tenant General Mac Carthy, and all other
Governours throughout the Kingdom, seemed to be very fearful of of the Prince's Invading Ireland. The Dublin News Letter about Christmas last, gave an accompt that an En∣glish Army was Shipt off designed for Ireland, which was confirm'd by other News, giving a farther accompt, that meeting with con∣trary Winds they put back again; other Shams were likewise dispersed in all Places, as, that, though they were daily raising new Forces in Ireland, nevertheless the Lord Deputy had sent Proposals to the Prince for laying down the Sword, &c. Whilst indeed, they were mannaging the grand design for Rooting out the Protestants, and Establishing Popery in that Kingdom; which delusions of the one party, and credulity of the o∣ther, proved afterwards to be of sad conse∣quence to most of the Protestants of that disorded Nation. For, through the ex∣pectation of an Army out of England, they made little or no manner of Pro∣vision for their Flight; neither could they form themselves into Regiments, partly be∣cause there were no Commissions sent to
any of them from the Prince, and part∣ly that they were not too prone to make themselves the first Instruments of a War, which perhaps was about being composed without drawing the Sword on either side; and so by over-acting might have brought upon themselves the frowns, rather than the countenace of their Prince. Nevertheless they put themselves into some defensive posture, to the end that they might be found together upon the Armies Landing; and seeing they mist Surprizing the City of Corke, which was once in agitation, and had probably taken effect, had not the design been discovered by one of their Bosome Friends. It was to no purpose, to endeavour what was aimed at, in making Bandon a place to sit down in against so powerful an Enemy, as appeared to the Solid and Wise Earl of Inchiqueen; who, though he concluded to Reinforce that Town with his party of Horse, yet foreseeing the ill success that would follow the defending a Garrison of no Strength, declined his Resolution, and sent Advice to the Bandonian Gentlemen to
surrender upon making good Terms, lest they might Perish by their perseverance; and though they blamed him abundantly for this Admonition, 'tis manifestly the best Counsel that ever they received, for if he had assisted them with the Horse aforesaid, they would have proved most ignorantly resolute (though for Courage they were fit to serve the bravest of Princes) and expired by their own fool-hardiness. It's also to be doubted, that had they succeeded in their de∣sign of seizing the City of Corke, they could have kept it but a short time (with a par∣cel of people so unexperienced in Martial Affairs, and among whom there was no Order or Government) against the whole Army of the Kingdom, of which great part were modell'd and exercis'd for some years before: For if London-Derry, whose Walls, Water, and whose People are Nume∣rous, and scituation are extraordinary, hath been so closely beset with the French and Irish, how could poor Corke, (whose Walls and Water are but ordinary, and liable in several places for battery against it, parti∣cularly
Blarny Hill, from whence the whole City, in defiance of Shandon Castle, could be laid to Ashes) with Undisciplin'd people, defend it self in the very heart of a Papist Country. Another Question is also very common: Why did not the Protestants in Munster, and thereabouts, repair to London-Derry? To which it's Answer'd, That soon after the Prince's Landing in England, and the Prote∣stants rising in the North of Ireland, all the Passes to the North, from the rest of the Kingdom, were secured by the Papists, and several (sometimes thirty together) of the Protestants were taken Prisoners, as they were going from Dublin, and other places towards the North; and so carefully were these Passes kept, that they would not suffer 3 men to travel together through the Kingdom; and moreover, who would flee from the West of Ireland to the North for refuge, while the English Army was daily expect∣ed to Land in Munster. Thus a distract∣ed people for want of Head or Commissions to lead them, or instructions out of
England to direct them, were brought to ruine, and a prey to Ravenous and Merci∣less Papists. Hereupon these Garrisons of Killmare finding themselves not able to make a long defence when the Cannon (being not other∣wise diverted) could be brought against them by water, concluded it to be more agreea∣ble with honour and good conscience to yeild with safety of their lives, in hopes another day to serve their Prince, rather than rashly, or obstinately to perish in de∣fence of a Garrison which they could not maintain, and therefore entered into the following Articles with the chief of the Besiegers. I. That they were not to plunder, nor suffer the Rabble to take away any goods belonging to the Garrisoners.
II. That the Garrisoners were to have their Swords left with them, according to the Governours promise, by his Letter concerning that particular. III. That they were to have their Liberties to remain in their Garrison, or their own Houses, and to depart the Kingdom when they please. Upon these Terms the Garrisoners de∣livered up their Horses, Arms and Am∣munition, which was no sooner done, but they found the Old Proverb of not keep∣ing Faith with an Heretick, preferred be∣fore strong promises and perfected Articles of Agreement; for immediately after they had given up their Arms, the Officers filled the Garrison with Souldiers, and brought as many as could stand by one another, into
every Room of the House; and having Plun∣der'd the Garrisoners of all their Provision and Goods, did afterwards turn them out of their Garrison in a most miserable and star∣ving condition. It happened, that a little before the Dis∣arming of these Protestants, the before-men∣tioned J.—W—, Esquire, (who was then in London, having regard to the condition that the English of that Country were in) left behind him two small Barques (of near 30 Tun both,) to carry off the En∣glish of that place, in case they found them∣selves not able to keep together, until such time of as an Army should come to their Relief. Into these two Vessels (to which un∣der God these Protestants owe their de∣liverance) they put themselves, Men, Women and Children, except 8 Families which the Officers compelled to stay behind (as Slaves) to work for them at their Iron-works,
which none of the Natives were Skilful in. Being thus got on Board, the Irish Cap∣tains (to leave not one Article unbroken) ordered that the Sails should be taken away from both Ships, to disable them from going to Sea. Home again, they could not return, for their Garrison and Dwelling Houses were possessed by the Natives; and to Sea they were not suffered. Here the Passengers were kept on Board for the space of 8 days, in a very loathsome con∣dition, pack't like Fish one upon another, the violence of the sharp weather forcing them to keep close under the Hatches; and this Inhumane usage they received from these Barbarous Officers, without shewing any sort of Reason why they should not proceed on their Voyage. At last one Maurice Hussey, (Captain Lieu∣tenant to Governour Browne,) a Man some∣what more compassionate than the rest, told them, that notwithstanding their Articles, they were stopt for fear they would go for
England: Whereupon, R. O. was forced to pass a Bond of 5000 l. Conditioned that they would Sail to Corke, and that all the Passengers of these two Ships must deliver themselves up, under the care of the Governour of that City. The losses of R. O. are his Estate worth 170 l. per. Ann. and Iron-works, furnished with Mine, Coals, and a stock of Bar, and Sow-Iron, worth 1500 l. Sterling: In black Cattle, Horses, and Book Debts 1200 l. In Bonds for Money at Interest: The losses of T. P. are his Livings, worth 200 l. per Ann. in Cattle Goods and Debts 550 l. The rest of these Protestants lost among them in Black Cattle, Horses, Debts, &c. 1100 l. Sterling. Notwithstanding the Robberies of Corn, Cows, Bullocks, Sheep Swine and other provisions, forced away by the Papists from the Protestants all over the Kingdom of Ireland: It's to be feared that God Al∣mighty, will in his good time, punish that
Nation with Hunger if not great Famine and that very soon; unless it can be sup∣plied from Foreign parts. For the gene∣rality of the Robbers, Filchers and Stealers, especially abroad in the Country, are most of them such as always fared very meanly, perhaps not above 4 good Meals of Flesh in the Year; and now abounding with plenty of the Ruines of the Protestants, are in competition, who shall spend most and make greatest havock: The Pro∣testants being (among the rest) Robbed of their Ploughing-Horses and Oxen, and the Papists wholly imployed in taking their substance from them, at the time when all should look to the Ploughing of their Ground: It appears that little Provision is made for Corn against the ensuing Sea∣son; so that 'tis expected, that there will be great scarcity of Grain, and all other Food. It may not be irrationally conjectured, to have a Plague likewise to break forth among the Natives of that Kingdom, be∣fore
the end of this Summer 1689, by reason of the corruptions that may grow in their Bodies, and in the Air of their Villages and Cottages, that are still reak∣ing with the slaughter of so much Meat, handled and drest with too much nastiness of a people, that from low Penury start∣ed into Pride and Plenty, Glorying in their Beastiliness of greedy devouring and over-gorging themselves with Flesh, half-raw-half-roasted, sometimes half-boiled half-rotten and Stinking for want of Salt; some, times moving towards the Boyler, by the as∣sistance of the wriggling Crawlers, that lately before received their Birth from the same piece of Flesh. The afore-mentioned Bond of 5000 l. be∣ing perfected, the Sails were restored, and the Passengers slipping no opportunity, Sailed thence on the 10th of March; all the Pro∣vision which was allowed them for the Voy∣age and their Subsistence when they should come to Corke, was only five Barrels of Beef, Forty Gallons of Oatmeal and some un∣baked
Dough (as is in the days of Old with the Israelites fleeing out of Aegypt) but of Water they had enough; and being got to Sea out of the reach of their Ene∣mies, they concluded to Sail for Bristol, resolving without respect to an Extorted, Bond to beg their Bread in England, rather than come again under the Hands of the Papists, whose Mercies are very Cruelties. The Masters of these two Ships were not Expert in Navigation, but were Skilful only in Coasting about those Western parts: So that T. P. and R. O. having some insight therein took upon them to shape the Course; and after the delays of some Calms and contrary Winds, which met them at Sea, both these Ships with Gods assistance arrived at Bristol on the 25th of March aforesaid, where these Passengers were put on Shore in a very needy Condition, and most of them great objects of Charity; whereof the Mayor of that City was pleas∣ed to take notice, and order'd Collections to be made for their Relief. Soon after they Landed three of them
Dyed, through the Injury they receiv'd on Board for Twenty Days, in Colds and Hats, Soaking in their Cloaths and Stowed one upon another, and through extream Thirst, Drinking over much Water, so distempered and infected their Blood, that most of them were afflicted with violent Feavours, Flux, and a more than ordinary sort of Meazles. The greatest part of them being come up to London, are many of them Relieved and En∣tertained, by the Right Honourable the Lady Baroness of Shelborne; some are wait∣ing before the Commissioners for distribut∣ing Relief to the Distressed Protestants of that Kingdom; and the rest according to their several Capacities, have disposed of themselves in the Army, designed for redu∣cing of Ireland. FINIS.
Advertisement of Books lately Print∣ed for Tho. Bennet, at the Half-Moon, in St. Paul's Church-yard. POpish Treachery, or a Short and New Account of the Horrid Cruelties Exercised on the Protestants in France; being a true Prospect of what is to be Ex∣pected from the most Solemn Promises of Roman Ca∣tholick Princes: In a Letter from a Gentleman of that Nation, to one in England. A Critical History of the Text of the New Testament, where is firmly Establisht the Truths of those Acts, in which the Foundation of Christian Religion is laid; by Father Simon. A Justification of the Proceedings, of their Majesties King William and Queen Mary; of their Royal High∣nesses Prince George, and Princess Ann; of the Con∣vention Army, Ministers of State, and others, in this great Revolution. By Authority. A True Narrative of all the Proceedings against the Lord Bishop of London, in the Council-Chamber at White-Hall, by the Lords Commissioners appointed by His Majesty, for Ecclesiastical Affairs. FINIS.
