P1097 12755743 93420
A SERMON Preached on The 30th. of January, 1684. The Day of MARTYRDOM OF King Charles Of Blessed Memory. BY EDWARD PELLING, Chaplain to His Grace the Duke of Somerset. LONDON, Printed for T. M. and are to be sold by Randal Taylor near Stationers-Hall. 1685.
PSAL. 137. 1. By the Rivers of Babylon there we sat down, yea we wept, when we remembred Zion. THese Words do manifestly relate to the Captive-condition of the Jews, after that Remarkable Overthrow of Jerusalem, when that Cruel and Barbarous Enemy the Assyrian (called expresly, the Rod of God's Anger, Isa. 10.) had now taken the City, burnt the Temple, consumed and dismantled the whole Me∣tropolis, slain the Nobles, and seized the Person of their King Zedekiah, and so carried Him and his Sub∣jects away Captives to Babylon, (that is, into a Land of Confusion, so called from the Confusion of Languages in those Parts) there to smart a long time for their In∣corrigibleness and Wantonness at home; that they might Reflect upon their Folly, and learn to value their Former Felicities by the Loss of them: the onely Disci∣pline, that can effectually teach those Obstinate and Ungrateful Wretches, that will not learn to be Wise at the Cost of their Ancestors Experience. By the Rivers of Babylon, there they sat down; re∣mote
from any Towns, or Cities, (saith S. Chrysostom) to spend part of their time (as some conceive) in drain∣ing of the Marshes, and to keep away the Rest; and so between Labour and Sorrow, to wear out that mi∣serable Life, for which they had made such a woful Exchange. There they wept (when 'twas too late) at the sad remembrance of Zion; that is, at the thoughts of that Prosperous and Flourishing Condition, which once they Enjoyed, but were now Deprived of, both in Church and State. For Mount Sion was the Principal Place both for the Exercises of Religion, and for the Admi∣nistration of Justice. There stood the Temple of God, and thither the Tribes went up, the Tribes of the Lord, unto the Testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the Name of the Lord, saith the Psalmist, Psal. 122. 4. And (that God and his Anointed might dwell together) there also were set the Thrones of Judgment, the Thrones of the House of David, as it is ver. 5. Admirable was the Constitution of the Jews State; and they the Happiest of all Nations, as well in Sacred as in Civil respects, till they Surfeited themselves with Abundance of Prosperity, and were so Intoxicated with it under their own Vines and Figtrees, that they forgat both the Author, and Instruments of their Happiness. The Story, is of Them: the Application of it, is for Ʋs; and at the very first view we may easily accom∣modate this sad Text to this sadder Day. For, do but Date the Captivity, Stylo Novo: instead of, By the Rivers of Babylon, read, In a Land of Confusion, (a Ba∣bel in our own Countrey:) Shift you Pious Thoughts from the Monarch of Jerusalem, to the Memory of our Own Soveraign, a Greater, a Better than Zedekiah,
(the Mirrour of Princes, the Noblest of Martyrs, the Wonder of Ages, and the Honour of Men:) Lay be∣fore your Eyes (if yet ye can Endure to behold) the Scaffold, the Ax, the Block, and all that Pageantry of Oppression, which the Sun never before beheld provi∣ded in that Manner, and with those Circumstances, for a Crowned Head? Consider with what Pomp of Inhu∣manity that Mighty Prince fell, how Three King∣doms fell with Him, how He was buried in the Ru∣ines both of Church and State, as in the Ruines of a Shattered World: Remember those manifold Miseries that were throughout; some, the Praeface; others, the Epilogue to the dismal Tragoedy of this Day; and then tell me, wherein Our Captivity differ'd from that in the Text, unless it did in This, that 'twas more Infa∣mous and Reproachful, because at Home; and 'twas not (God be Blessed) for Seventy years; 'twas not so Lasting as Our Sins; the Deliverance out of it was too Quick and Hasty for the Repentance of those Miscre∣ants who made us Captives. I shall not therefore take much notice of the Mise∣rable Condition of the Jews, it being a matter of Fo∣reign consideration; but apply my self wholly to the Business of the Day. And in the prosecution of it, 1. I shall first give you some account of those Miseries which were the Attendants of Our Captivity; and then, 2. Shall, in the second place, try if it be possible for me to persuade Men, not to be so Improvident again, as to suffer themselves to be made Captives the Second time; but to Beware in Time, and to bethink themselves before it be too Late, before they groan again under such another State of Bondage. 1. First then; That which was the principal Cause,
or at least the greatest Ingredient of all the Miseries of the Jews, was the Captive-condition of their King. This they particularly lamented, that such as had been brought up in Scarlet, did now embrace Dunghills; that their King and their Princes were in the hands of the Gentiles; that the Crown was fallen from their Head; that the Breath of their Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord, was taken in the Pits, as you find in several pla∣ces of the Lamentations of Jeremiah. And what else was the Undermining and Subverting of Our King's Throne, but an effectual Stratagem to overthrow the Prosperity of the whole Kingdom, and to let in that huge Army of Miseries, which for many years made us not onely the most Calamitous, but al∣so the most Contemptible and Infamous Nation under Heaven? He that carefully reads the Shameful Histo∣ry of those Times, will find, that all those Evils which were heaped up upon the Head of our Prince, fell down upon our own Pates. Though He Felt the Bur∣den, yet we Sunk and Perish'd under the weight of it. Every Wound which Majesty received, did help to let out the Blood and Spirits of the Subject too; nor was it possible to Preserve the Welfare of the Body Poli∣tick, by Weakning and Impairing Him, who was the Common Life of the Three Kingdoms. Those Arti∣ficial and Long-studied Methods which were used to Lessen His Authority, to Profane His Honour, to Spoil Him of His Peace, (of all but the Peace of His Con∣science, and almost of That too) to Strip Him of His Prerogatives, and at last to Destroy His Sacred Life; these Methods, I say, were the Instruments not more of His, than of our own Ruine; and as He fell and died by degrees, so did the whole Nation gradually
Languish, and fall into the Pangs of Death with Him. Happy had this Land been for many Ages under the Successive Government of Kings, especially of such as were Good; and none could be ever Better than This. Under the Shadow of His Wings we did Rejoice, till His Feathers were clipp'd: Peace and Plenty was our Portion; and every Man was Easie in his Cottage, as long as He sat Easie in the Throne: Our Liberties were Secure; our Laws had Life; and Religion, which Ex∣alteth a Nation, never flourish'd more in This, as long as he enjoyed the Prerogatives which are justly due to the Head of the Church. No sooner was His Honour touched, but our Faelicity was invaded too; especially when Wickedness was so Impudent as to draw the Sword upon Him, and to thrust at Him with the Point. Our Happiness Declined as His Peace did: it kept even pace with our Prince His Fortune; the more still That tended to Ruine, the Faster He was Hunted to the Scaffold; and then it Expired (though in hope of a Resurrection) when He laid down His Sacred Neck, and died a Martyr for Religion, and a Victim for His People. Great were the Miseries that attended that Unnatural and Devilish Rebellion; but as long as the King was Safe, the Calamities were the less felt, be∣cause there was a Prospect of Reparation; at least, of a speedy End of them. Though that Rebellious Faction in Parliament pursued Him like a Partridge upon the Mountains, yet we did not give all for lost, because they Declared, Promised, Protested, and Swore by all that is Great and Sacred, that they intended not to Hurt His Person, nor to Invade His Just Rights. Throughout that Bloody War, there was something still to allay our Pains, because we hoped that the Wounds in our Sides
were not Mortal. Nay, though trusting to Mens Com∣passions, He threw himself into the Hands of those Per∣sidious Villains who afterwards set a Price upon His Blood, as Judas did upon our Saviour's, yet the King Himself did not yet Despair, because those Men had vowed in a Solemn League and Covenant of their own, and with Hands lifted up to the most High God, That they would Preserve His Person, Crown, and Dignity. Nay, when those Iscariots at Westminster had bought Him for 200000 Pounds, and Cromwell, and the rest of those True-Protestant Janizaries, had gotten Him in their Clutches, though there was reason enough for our Hearts to Sink and Fail us, the King Himself be∣ing now actually a Captive, and Loyalty and Religion in Captivity with Him; yet such were the Solemn Professions and Protestations of those Men, of Further Addresses to His Majesty, and of Personal Treaties with Him, that we were still willing to hope, that yet we should not sit down by the Rivers of Babel, to weep there. Once more; When the Conspirators carried Him away, first to Holmeby, thence to Hampton-Court, and thence conveyed Him to the Isle of Wight, though we fear'd, that all their Treaties were nothing but Pretence and Hypocrisie, to blind Mens Eyes; though they used Majesty with such Indignities as none, but that Prince, could have born; though some of the Faction did now say openly, That the King was no more than a Dead Dog; though every discerning Man apprehended that the King's Life was now upon the very brink of Destruction; yet even then were we wil∣ling to hope that all our Happiness was not yet come to a full Period; because the Majority of the Parlia∣ment, enraged at last to see how they had been cheated,
and out of a just Abhorrence of the intended Wicked∣ness, voted, That the King's Concessions were Satisfacto∣ry, and Sufficient Grounds for Peace. But when once we saw those Men barred out of the House suddenly after; when once we saw that Cursed Vote of the Remaining Faction, That the King had taken Arms against the Parliament, and was guilty of all the Blood which had been shed in the War, and therefore ought to expiate the Crime with His own Blood; when once we saw a Pha∣natick Army, that had been used to Blood, so Thirsty for more, that nothing would satisfie them, but Blood Royal; when once we saw a Tribunal Erected, and some of the Legion of Hell Sitting on it, and a Judge appointed, whose most Honourable Character is, that he was Pontius Pilate the Second; when once we saw Majesty treated there with such Barbarousness and Contempt, and thence carried through Smoke, Spit∣tle, and Flouts, (some of them such as were used at the Condemnation of the Holy Jesus;) when we saw Him led like a Lamb to be Slaughter'd on a Scaffold at His Palace Door; when we saw, that as the Pres∣byterian had clipp'd off His Locks, so the Indepen∣dent had now cut off His Head; when the one Faction had Destroyed the King, and the other had now mur∣der'd the Man; Then, then our Hopes were gone, and we could not but conclude our selves a Lost, a Capti∣vated, an Ʋndone People: And while Some were so Barbarous, as even to wash their Hands in that Blessed Martyr's Blood, the whole Nation was taught to make This Use of the Shedding of it, That if ever it should please God, after the Death of the Father, to Restore the Son, it would be our Best Policy to be most Tender not of His Life onely, but of His Honour and Peace
too; it being Impossible so to sever His Interest from our Own, but that of necessity we must Stand or Fall with Him: Every Man's Welfare is so wrapped up in His, that we must take some Share in His Fortune, whether it be a Crown of Gold, or of Thorns, that He wears upon His Head. 2. The King being destroyed, the Miseries which en∣sued both in Church and State are not to be written fully, but in another Book of Martyrs. In the Church, our Calamities were such, that who∣soever had a respect for Conscience, for Religion, for a God, could not but be deeply afflicted, to see what Contu∣melies were thrown upon every thing that was Sacred. Indeed the Churches Sufferings began, when the Kings Troubles Commenced, and so Increased, as They did; because Traitors saw, that the Doctrine, Discipline, and Government of the Church were such Pillars of State too, that 'twas Impossible for them to Pull down or Reach the Crown, but by stepping first upon the Ru∣ines of Prelacy, and all Order in Religion. And if we may have leave to make some little Observations, 'tis somewhat Remarkable, That first the Primate, and four years after, the King of England, were both Murder'd in the same Month; the one on the Tenth, the other on the Thirtieth of January; that Great Prelate shew∣ing his Prince the way that even He was to go too, (somewhat like John the Baptist, that was the Fore∣runner of Christ in his Sufferings, as well as Birth, and prepared the way for the Prince of Peace, not onely into the World, but to the Cross also.) Monarchy fol∣lowed Episcopacy to the Grave; and Religion, that was the Mourner, dropp'd in at last. Good God! What Variety of Sects had we, that Martyr'd the very Creed;
so that some even of the Faction did confess, that upon the dissolution of Episcopacy, more Sects and Haeresies presently started up, than ever were heard of among us before, under that Government which was Decried as Antichristian? And all these Sects were either In∣gendred, or Encourag'd by those Rebels, who by Divi∣ding the Nation into a great many weak Parties, strengthned their own Ʋsurpations, and made each Party both Unable to Rise, and Afraid to Mutter un∣der the Common Oppressions. We had the Indepen∣dent, the Anabaptist, the Fifth-Monarchist, the Brownist, the Quaker, the Seeker, the Ranter, the Adamite, nay the very Atheist himself for Company; and all these the Natural Spawn of the Presbyterian, that Prolifick and Unruly Leviathan, that not content to have taken his Pastime in the Lemain Lake, hath troubled the Waters in all Parts of the Christian World. So many Sects as there were, so many Plagues there were in this little Island; and what could we expect would be the Issue of this Complication of Unhappinesses, but that the Interest of Religion would be weakned, and its Reputation rendred Contemptible; so many Bare∣fac'd Enemies being Allowed and Encouraged to fall Foul upon the Church, pursuant to that Base Example which was given them by a most Unconscionable Par∣liament? Bishops were ready to be torn in pieces, as the Limbs of Antichrist. Multitudes of the Inferiour Clergy had no other Rewards for all their Labours and Fidelity in the Service of Christ, but Sequestrations, Imprisonment, and all manner of Cruelties, beyond the Tyranny even of a True-Protestant Grand Seignior. The Ʋniversities were corrupted with Haeresie and Hypocrisie, the Instru∣ments of the Devil having taken his Work out of his
Hands, by sowing themselves such Tares and Cockle in the Seminaries of Religion, as in a little time would have destroyed the very Life and Being of Christia∣nity, had not God himself been the Husbandman. The Liturgy, which they solemnly Protested that they would onely Reform, was soon thrown out of doors, to make room for Blasphemies, and Enthusiasm, which made the Worship of God an Abomination. Pulpits, that were erected for the Sons of the Prophets, were made the Trading places of Mechanicks and the Basest of the People, who were onely skilful in Cheating Men of their Money; and such another Famine was in the Church, as was once in Samaria, when every Asses Head was sold for Fourscore pieces of Silver. Sacraments were neglected, and almost given over, and the People were so Frighted and Discouraged from their Duty, that in some Places of the Kingdom the Holy Communion was not used for almost Twenty years together: A Glorious and Blessed Reformation! Those Lands which the Piety of our Ancestors had so solemnly set apart for the Encouragement of Learning, and for the Edification of Souls, were made the Price of Rebellion and Blood, and a Booty for the most Faith∣less and Perjur'd Villains upon the Earth. Truth, Ho∣nesty, Justice, Obedience, Love, and other the Essential Parts of Religion, were all Trampled under foot: and when God and his Worship were thus Scandalously Dishonoured, I do not wonder that some of God's Houses were Filthily Polluted too: When the Creed was Contaminated, when the Lords Prayer was De∣spised, when the Decalogue in all its Parts was Broken, when the Orthodox Ministry was Cashier'd, when Fonts and Altars were Defiled, and when the Church was
Plunder'd and Stripp'd within and without, it is no marvel that many Oratories were so Profaned too, as to be Turn'd at last into Stables for Horses, by those Beasts of the People, that before had made them Sanctu∣aries for Traytors, Nurseries of Rebels and Regicides, and Dens of Thieves. 3. Well might we Weep, when we remembred Sion, whose ways did now mourn, because her Children could not come to her Solemn Feast her Gates were desolate, her Priests sighed, her Virgins were afflicted, her Beau∣ty was departed, her Princes were pursued like Harts, her Persecutors overtook her, her Enemies Prosper'd, and she her self was in Bitterness▪ as the Prophet spake, Lam. 1. But yet the Church did not suffer alone, nor was Religion the Onely bleeding Sacrifice, though the Wounding of That, was infinitely Reproachful to those who sold their very Consciences, pretending a Design to Redeem and Rescue it. The State went Partnership with the Church in its Losses; and we soon saw what it was to want a King, whose Loins were not half so heavy as the Little Finger of that Tyrant who Ʋsurp'd His Throne, and was such an Hardned Reprobate, as first to Kill, and then to take Possession. Liberty, the Darling of the Nation, the Blessing of Kings, but the Engine of Traytors; Liberty, that Fools never think Secure, till they sue for it in the Field, though they have it in Possession, and no Man questions their Title: Liberty, that was used to Destroy and Pursue Preroga∣tive, was at last Confined within the narrow Compass of a Goal and a Dungeon. Nor did it fare better with Property neither; for no Man enjoyed so much of That, as the Beggar and the Bankrupt, that had little to be robb'd of, but the Latchet of his Shoe. Seque∣strations,
Decimations, Plunders, Forfeitures, Contributi∣ons, Taxes, Loans, and vast Offerings to the Publick Faith, some or all of these devoured all that was ei∣ther Inheritance or Purchase; and we could call no∣thing our Own, but those Sins and Follies that had made us Miserable; at least, no man could promise himself any long Enjoyment of what he had; Violence and Rapine being all over the Nation the great Trade of those Times, so that what a Mercenary Souldier Left, a Rapacious Committee-man would be Sure to Take, unless a man would Barter away his Honour, and a Blessed Eternity, by giving up his Conscience as a Composition and Ransom for his Estate. And the Rea∣son of all this was, because the whole Kingdom was Plunder'd of its Birth-right; I mean, the Law, which while it was in the Hands of the King, was every ones Security, from the Peer to the very Meanest Subject: and of this the King was so Tender to the last, that just before His Martyrdom, when He was offer'd His Life if he would Yield to some Conditions which were Inconsistent with His Conscience and the Laws, He an∣swered, That He would chuse to die a Thousand Deaths, before He would Prostitute His Honour, or Betray the Liberties and Rights of His People. Every man was Sure of his Right, as long as that Religious Prince had His just Authority. But when once Ʋsurpation was the Regent, first in the Parliament-House, and then in the King's Palace, we had no Law but the Pleasure and Lust of Tyrants, whose Oppressions were Ʋnsupporta∣ble, because their Power was Arbitrary, and their Ty∣ranny Boundless. What was Magna Charta worth, when it hung at the Hilt of the Sword? And what did you talk of Laws, when Votes were too Hard for
Statutes? when Tryals were Removed from Westminster-Hall to the Camp? and Sentence was given at the Mouth of the Cannon? Not that this was the Fate onely of the Honest Royalist. Though His Miseries were beyond measure intolerable, (and he knew not (Poor Wretch!) what to do more, but to shed his Tears, when his Dread Soveraign, the Master of his Dearest Affections, had now shed a whole Stream of Blood;) yet the Genera∣lity of the whole Nation began now to be Sensible, what a Miserable Bargain was made by the Unhap∣py Change of the Times, God shewing at once his own Justice, and Mens Follies, by letting them see, to their great Cost, that even Armed Rebels rarely get any thing but Wo, by a Sad Victory over their Rightful Soveraign. The Traitors pretended to fight for the Safety of the King's Person, for the Protestant Religion, for the Liberty of the Subject, for the Privileges of Par∣liament, and for the Laws and Rights of the whole King∣dom. In every of these respects All were Losers but the King: He indeed got Two Crowns for One, a Crown of Martyrdom, and a Crown of Glory, for a Di∣adem of Thorns: But what his Enemies gained, be∣sides Infamy, and a Curse, and a sear'd Conscience, with a little Plunder, they themselves will find at the day of Final Retribution; and what the Nation lost, we may reckon a little now. We lost a Prince, too Good for Us to Keep, and (Good God!) too Sacred to be Destroy'd. We lost a Church, Beautiful in her Structure, Glorious in her Members, Militant for her Head; and when that was struck off, 'twas her Necessary, but yet Honourable Fate, to take her share in the Martyrdom. We lost our Laws too; (That indeed was the first Loss,
when Irreligion Levied that War against Majesty, which, in point of Conscience, and Law both, was downright Rebellion.) And when our Monarchy, our Religion, our Liberties and Properties were all gone, Vengeance went at last out of the Field to the very Parliament-house, where all our Miseries had been formed, to In∣vade Privileges too, and to let those Butchers of the World see, how little even They should get by first Beheading the whole Parliament, that others might be enabled to Behead the King too. The Fall of the two Hothams, Father and Son, who were the first that bad Open Desiance to Majesty, and gave Him the first Blow; but in a little time were Executed themselves▪ by the very Masters that Employed them; their Fall, I say, was an early Praesage of what would afterwards befal the Rest, that were the Instruments of the King's Ruine. These Two Men denied the King admittance in to Hull, though He went thither in Person to De∣mand it. Soon after, upon Remorse of Conscience, they would have opened the Gates to Him: but the Parliament now Hating their own Servants more than they Feared their Soveraign, Rewarded them at last with a Scaffold and an Ax; and by those their own Proceedings, they gave an Unpitied Example to Others (a Faction that yet stood behind the Curtain) to make even Them and their Accomplices the worst Returns, for their Best Services. And so indeed it fell out, not in the Country and City onely, but in Both Houses of Parliament also. In the Beginning of the Troubles, Petitioning was encouraged (under Pretence of being the Subjects Right) as a most probable Means to bring the King Low, and to lay His Honour in the Dust. But though this Popular Method was for some time fiercely
cried up, as being of dangerous Consequence to Maje∣sty; yet when the Faction had served their own Turn by it, it was as violently Opposed, as being of as dan∣gerous Consequence to the Parliament: So that when the County of Surry (in May, 1648.) carried a Peti∣tion to the House, that tended unto Peace, all of them were Abused, multitudes of them Beaten, many of them Stripp'd of their very Clothes, and several of them actually Killed upon the Spot. Thus, that which one day was the Subjects Duty, another day was their Sin; and poor People were taught to use Artifices, which in the end became their Snares; Toyls, to catch the People themselves, after They had used them to catch their poor Prince. This was one (but the very Least) part of the Countries Reward. Did it fare better with the City, after all its Friend∣ship, Services, Zeal, Charge, Tumults, and unparallell'd Wickednesses, for a Damned Cause? We know indeed how it fared, when Vengeance from Heaven struck it down into the Dust, to Expiate (if it were possible) its Sins by Fire. But how, I pray, did Matters go here about the Period and Close of the War? Do not ma∣ny now alive Remember, how Miserably (I cannot say, Ʋnjustly) this City was used in 1647; how it was Over-awed and Harassed even by those very Men, whose Hands the City had Arm'd and Strengthned against its Prince? Upon the Apprentices Insurrecti∣on, did not Cromwell Threaten (nay, Command his Forces) to Kill Man, Woman, and Child, and to Fire the City? Were not Speeches made in the Commons House to Confiscate the Estates of many the most Eminent and Wealthy Citizens, and to take off their Heads? Were not the Aldermen and others commit∣ted
to the Gaol, the Posts and Chains pulled up, and the whole City left to visible Dangers of a Massacre? Was not the Tower seiz'd, the Fortifications about the Town demolished, the Militia voted out of the City∣hands, and every House exposed to the Mercies of an Outragious Enemy, that was clothed with Plunder, and fed with Blood? Did not an Insolent General ride with his Army through the Streets, for no other Rea∣son, but to Treat Fools at last with Scorn, Contumely, and Reproach, and to Triumph over those who had As∣sisted so effectually to Beat and Conquer their King? These, and I know not how many such like Usages more, were the Cities Reward; not to speak of a Con∣stant (and then in a manner the Onely) Trade that was here driven, of Impositions and Loans, and a Thousand Prefidious Tricks, to Cheat men at last of those vast Sums wherewith Zeal and Impiety had liberally en∣trusted the Publick Faith: All which Disgraceful and Contumelious Treatments, Men, though they might be then very sensible of their past Follies, were Forced to yield and submit to Tamely, a Powerful and Vete∣rane Army lying near the Town, to keep People in awe, and to hold them by the Throats, while their Friends at Westminster pick'd their Purses, and carried away their Money. These were thy Gods, O Israel; These were London's Patriots, London's Tutelar Saints, the Deities and Idols that London Worshipp'd and Bowed down to, when she Forswore her Allegiance, and Raised such Formidable Mutinies, first against the Earl of Straf∣ford, and then against the King. These were Strange Returns (one would think) for a Confiding City to Receive, after all her Perjuries, after all those Forces of Men and Money which she had
Employed to bring her distressed Prince to the Scaf∣fold, (for that was the Event and Natural Consequence, whatever the Intentions of some were, who did not look so far at the First.) But if we go on now, and enquire further into the Story, we shall find, that the Parliament themselves that Blew the Trumpet, and Sent out the Drum, gained nothing neither, but had reason to weep too, and Infinitely more than others, consider∣ing that their utmost Acquest was Guilt and Reproach, and a Perpetual Curse upon their Names For even They were paid in their own Coin, and were served Them∣selves as they had served the Government, having soon Lost that which they called the King's Politick Capacity, when they had Ruin'd His Person. When Cornet Joyce had Surprised His Majesty at Holmeby, bragging of his Exploit, he told Cromwell, That now he had the King in his Power: Well, (said Cromwell) and then I doubt not but I shall have the Parliament in my Pocket. And the truth is, He never had Money so much at his Command, as now he had those who had hitherto been his Masters, and kept him in Pay. Such was his Diabolical Craft, his Monstrous and Su∣perlative Hypocrisie, and his Inseparable Interest with a Potent Faction, that were linked with him in the Communion of the Highest Crimes, that the Traitors which were of a Meaner Size, were Manag'd at his Pleasure; and 'tis observable, that by the same Me∣thods and Artifices he Bafled and Outed Them, where∣by They had Lessened and Destroyed their Soveraign. The Parliament was now divided into Presbyterian and Independent: and each House strove against the other; yet Both clashed within Themselves, till the Army-Officers, grown now too Hard for their Masters,
turned their own Arts upon them, and got a Victory over them All, as they had over their Calamitous, but Anointed Lord. Those Lords that Consented to the Exclusion of the Bishops, to the taking away of the King's Negative Voice, and to the Vote against all fur∣ther Addresses to His Majesty, were in a short space deprived of their own Negative Votes, were Despised in all Proceedings, (the Commons acting as they pleas'd without them) and in the End were turn'd out of Doors, leaving nothing behind them in the House, but the Memory of having Violated their Honour there, by being Unfortunate Instruments of Undoing Him, who was the Nobility's Defence against the Rude∣nesses of the Rabble. The Commons could not agree in Peace, though they had Confederated in the Guilt of an Unjust War; but fell Foul upon one another, as they had done upon their Prince; till they were by many Purgations Weakned, by many Restraints Bafled, by many Menaces Overawed, and by many Armed Fel∣low-Traytors first Vanquish'd, and then Expelled: So that their Reward too was onely a Miserable Life, to see Privileges destroyed after Prerogative, and the Pow∣er of the Nation Shifted, out of the Hands of a Mo∣narch, into the Claws of a Monster, whose Early Vices had made him a Beggar, whose Contempt of God had made him an Hypocrite, whose Ambition had encoura∣ged him to be an Ʋsurper, and whose Sanguinary Spi∣rit made him a Tyrant, a Parricide, and the Plague of Mankind, till God in his Mercy to us put an Unexpe∣cted Period to his Life, and the Devil, whom he had long served, carried him away to his Proper Place. It is not to be wondred at, that an Host of Cocka∣trices should thus pick out the Eyes of those our Re∣praesentatives,
and render their House Desolate and In∣hospitable: for That was the Cockatrices Nest; and when They had warmed the Eggs, and Hatched the Creatures, there was reason enough to Fear, that being once grown up, they would infest not the Nation one∣ly, but Them too; because Rebellion and Treason sel∣dom last long; and, such is the Justice of God, that Villanies, though Prosperous for a Time, turn at last to a Sad Account, both to the Projectors and Instruments of them; and so we found the Course of things to go, as well in the Management, as at the End of that Un∣happy War. For, not the Parliament onely, but their Forces and Stipendiaries Suffer'd too; the Just God de∣creeing to Plague the very Ministers and Executioners of Treason, though he was pleas'd to Behold their In∣solencies a while, and then took away his Anointed, to let Mad-men see, how Happy they might have been, had they not been their Own Enemies, as well as His. The Armed Independent soon tripp'd up the Presbyte∣rian's Heels: though the One marched out in the Front, and did cut out the Way, yet the Other fol∣lowed in the Rear, and first Cashier'd him, and then went away with the Spoil. The Reformation of Re∣ligion began the Quarrel, and the Disciplinarian fought with Zeal for a Wretched Covenant, for which he had pawned his Conscience and Soul, as well as Plighted his Troth. But the Other Sectaries aimed at the total Subversion of the Government in Church and State too; and to compass this End the better, they Disarm'd the Hands of him, whom they knew to be an Hairy, but Persidious Brother: and so, you know, the whole Mi∣litia was Purged over and over, the Army was new-Officer'd, Confinding Brethren were put in the room of
those Puny Saints, that were afraid to go above half way on the Errand, and Protested they would Preserve the King and His Dignities, though they Destroyed the Establishments of the Church. Therefore when the Covenanter had been sufficiently used as a Toel and Property to do a considerable Part of the great Work of Darkness, then Others thought it time for Them to slep in, to go through with it; and so the Silly Kirk∣men were for the most part Laugh'd at and Discarded, and cheated of their Ends, and their Dear Convenant was Cried down, as Episcopacy had been before, the most Powerful Faction having now Supplanted the Presbyterian, as the Presbyterian had Supplanted the Honest Cavalier; by which means the Power of the Sword fell into the Hands of a Juncto, that hitherto had not been Discovered, nor perhaps Suspected; and then in stead of a Full Parliament by Westminster-hall, you had a Committee of Grandees at Derby-house, that Voted, Manag'd, Destroyed, and Ruin'd all; neither Sparing, nor Reverencing the very Crowned Head. Nay, to add  and Disgrace to our Miseries, this Faction was molded and made up of those who were Notorious for Debauch'd Principles, for Atheisti∣cal Spirits, for Proffigate Lives, for Impure Conscien∣ees, for Savage Minds, and mostly too for such a Base and Abject Condition, that they were not onely the Plague, but the very Vermine of the Nation; a Pack of Fornicators, Bankrupts, Blasphemers of the Holy Tri∣nity, Beggars, and Mechanicks of all sorts, Labourers at Furnaces and Stalls, and the like; these were the Honourable, the Right Honourable, His Excellence, His Highness, and such Filth of False Heraldry, that they were a Reproach and Blemish to Christianity, to
Honesty, to the Kingdom, shall I say? nay, a Dishonour to the Hangman, a Stain and Disgrace to the very Gallows. Yet had not these very Regicides neither more Rea∣son to Insalt over the Miseries of Others, than to La∣ment their Own. For want of that vigorous Life and Soul, which is Infused into all Just Authority that hath Law for its Parent, their Power was in a manner Stran∣gled in the Birth: and they themselves that Survived it a little, were soon made Signal Instances of the Di∣vine Justice, which upon a Miraculous Revolution just∣ly overtook them; so that an Hateful and Unpitied Death was all the Advantage they gained at the Close of their Unparallell'd Villanies. And as for their Po∣sterity and Families they lest behind them, such as have made curious Enquiries into the thing, have Observed, That they bear to this day the Characters and Marks of Divine Vengeance, and have little but a Curse en∣tailed upon them for their Inheritance; as if the Hand of God had Stigmatiz'd Them, as he did Cain; and Cursed them with such a Portion as he left the Jews, for Crucisying our Saviour. Thus I have in some measure represented the Ʋni∣versal Miseries which attended our Late Captivity both in Church and State, nay in the very Camp too: and I have the Longer and the more Particularly in∣sisted upon this Theme, for the Information of those, who through their Ignorance of the Condition of those Times, are in danger of being mis-led into Practices which naturally tend to draw on a Second Captivity. For Treason did not die with those Regicides; neither was the Art of King-killing the Sin of this Day onely. The Drinking of Blood once, leaves (it seems) an
Appetite and Thirst after More, in stead of Troubling Rebels Bowels, and working a True Repentance for that which hath been shed already. Though His Pre∣sent Majesty hath been ready to Forgive many wicked Men their Treasons, yet we do not find that They have been as ready to Forgive Him His Mercies: no; that they might be Revenged rather upon Him for His Act of Oblivion to many that were Accessories to His Father's Blood, they have Studied and Plotted how to embrue their Hands in His Blood too: the thing is so Plain, by so many Unquestionable and Concurring Proofs, and even by the Joint Confession of Criminals, that whosoever shall go about to Deny or Mince the Late (I wish I could not say, the Present) Conspiracy, ought not (I think) to be look'd upon as a By-stander, but an Accomplice and Confederate in the Treason. The Truth is, these Demonstrative Evidences have abun∣dantly Satisfied the Law: but there were Arguments enough before, to confirm the Opinion of every Sagaci∣ous and Honest Man, that a total Destruction of Prince and Government was intended, and carrying on again. For, what, I pray, was the late Association, but a Tran∣script of the Solemn League and Covenant? onely the Copy exceeded, and was worse than the Original; and yet That did cost the whole Kingdom its Peace, and the King his Head. Those numerous Riots and terrible Confluences of Disaffected and Factious Men, which were seen a while ago, what was it but a Numbring of the People, a Casting up of their Strength and For∣ces, till the Demagogues should think it fit to Adjourn from the City into the Field? The Forcing of that Petitioning-Trade, which of late was so General over the whole Nation, what was it Designed for by Po∣pular
Hucksters of Mischief, but to render the King and His Government a Grievance, and to Dispose Men for another Rebellion? that is, to Sell the Nations Peace, and to Purchase a Crown. Those Base Reflexi∣ons which have been (nay, which are still) publickly made upon His Majesty, and His Ministers of State, what is the meaning of them, but to make Him Odi∣ous, and to Destroy Him Effectually, by Murdering Him first in the Affections of His Subjects; it being Impos∣sible for the most Active and Malicious Villains to strike Him with an Ax, till they have slain His Credit, and laid His Honour in the Dust? The Reprinting of Doleman, and the Dispersing of a Thousand Other Li∣bels, full of Seditious and Jesuitical Principles, is the very same thing that was Practised in the Former Times; and there could be no other Reason for it, but to Justifie Rebellion and Regicide again; it being Unconceivable why the very same Methods should be used again, unless the same Designs were at the End of all. Those Popular but Absurd Fears, that all our Throats would be Cut in a Night, is a Stale and Known Instrument of Rebellion: for a great Noise of such Dangers was thrown about in the beginning of the Late Troubles, so that it was Reported, and Credited too, That the very Thames was to be blown up with Gunpowder, to Stifle every one with Water in their Beds. The Inordinate Apprehension of the Dangers of Arbitrary Power, every man knows that 'twas an Old Device that served to bring it in. There are Twenty things more I might take notice of, were it needful, to shew how Industrious Some pretending Patriots and Reformers have been to act over again those Seven years Sins, which caused that Havock,
and Bloodshed, and Ruine both of Prince and People, from 41, to 48. All the Kings Miseries, and our own Calamities, were brought about by Confederacies, by Tumults, by Mutinous Complaints of Grievances, by Seditious Pamphlets, by Defamations of the Govern∣ment, by years of Tyranny, by all manner of Jesui∣tical Practices, by Insolent and Impious Votes, by bringing the King into Straits, by answering His Ne∣cessities with Remonstrances in stead of Supplies, by crying out against Evil Counsellors, by pulling and tugging at Favourites, by declaiming against Bishops and Ceremonies, by Schismatical Assemblies, and by a great many Stratagems more, which have been late∣ly set on work again so visibly and plainly, that we had reason enough to suspect the Blackest Designs, be∣fore ever we heard of or Mistrusted the Villany intend∣ed at the Rye-house. For these Several years last past, I think there hath been nothing New, but Ignoramus Ju∣ries, and a gainful Trade of Swearing and Ferswearing at the Bar: all the other Practices were a Repetiti∣on of Old, Tried Artifices, which some Experienced Achitophels made use of again, because they had once a Pratum est, and became Successful. O for the Love of God let us learn to be Wise, and to beware in Time, and not venture the Sad Reckon∣ings of a Late Repentance; especially since God has been so Merciful unto us, that, in spite of all the Stri∣vings of our Enemies, he hath Kept us Safe, even when we were in the Dark, and hath now laid open the Dangers we were in to every mans view. This was the Aggravation of the Folly and Misery of Jerusalem, that she Considered not well of things till she was quite a Captive. She remembred in the days of her
Affliction, and of her Miseries, all her pleasant things that she had in the days of old, saith the Prophet, Lam. 1. 7. By the Rivers of Babylon, there the Jews sat down, and wept: but then it was too late; they should have bethought themselves Before, while it was yet in their power to have Prevented their Captivity. I can∣not imagine what is likely to work upon People, if nei∣ther Other mens Experience, nor their Own, will teach them to beware. Yet this is one thing that maketh the English Ridiculous Abroad, and Unfortunate at Home, that generally they are apt to Try Conclusions, and to make Fresh Experiments still, though they have smart∣ed severely for their Silly Attempts, and have so often tried things to Evil and Miserable Purposes. One would think, our Condition and Case the other day was such, that we should not Forget it, much less de∣sire to make it our Option and Lot once more. Me∣thinks it should be sufficient Warning to us, not to flatter our selves with Fancies, and Probabilities, and Praesumptions of our own, because we have found, to our great Cost, that in all Considerable, especially Vio∣lent Alterations, there is nothing Certain, but Misery. For, as it is Impossible for this Kingdom to be Happy, but upon those Foundations whereon it Stands now both in Sacred and Civil Matters; so it is impossible for men to Tear up those Foundations, but they must fall themselves under the Ruines of the Building. Nor is it enough to say, Thus far onely we intend to go, we would take away this Rafter, and remove that Beam, that is such an Eye-sore unto us; but will not meddle with, or disturb the Ground-work: for when men begin to Mend a whole Kingdom, by taking it into pieces, God alone Knoweth how far Some may
be Tempted, others may be Constrained to proceed at last. Read but the History of the Late Times, and you will find how far the Event ran out beyond the first Intentions, nay, beyond the Expectations and Suspicions of Many, who were very Active and Zea∣lous in Beginning the War against His Majesty. But having once drawn the Sword, they thought it Un∣advisable to Sheath it again; because, being Consci∣ous of their Guilt, they were Afraid of Justice which they had Deserved, and Doubtful of Mercy which was Precarious; and therefore never thought themselves Safe, but by Accumulating Crimes to a great Bulk; and so one Mischief brought on another, till all ter∣minated in the Destruction of the King, which was the Capital Mischief. 'Tis likely this was not the Primary Design; nay, perhaps it was not Designed at all by many of them, (though it be hard to af∣firm, that they did not intend the End, who used the Means.) But whatever Their meaning might be, Others that stood Undiscern'd in a Dark Corner of the House, made an Improvement of that Treason which the rest had Begun, so that it was out of the Power of the Honester sort to Save the Life of that Prince, whose Honour and Interest they had Be∣tray'd. For the Power shifted with the Sword, out of one Hand into another, as every one could catch it. The Parliament Snatch'd it from the King, and put it into the Hands of an Army: the Army was Divided, and though the Presbyterians managed it First, yet the Independents soon wrested it out of their Clutches, and held it till it fell to the Share of a Fanatick Committee, that were Resolved to Embrue it in the King's Blood; which the First Actors could
no more hinder then, than they could command a Tempest, or govern an Inundation with their Breath: And by these Means All of them were more or less guilty of Murdering His Majesty; because One Fa∣ction Hunted Him till they drove Him to the Scaf∣fold, and the Other presently provided a Block and Ax for Him, and so Both were Murderers; because 'tis the same thing in effect, whether a Man be Kil∣led by the Slow Methods of a War, or by a Hasty Blow, and a Speedy Stab. Now this should be enough to Warn and Terrifie every well-meaning Person among Us, from having any the least Fellowship with, nay from lending so much as an Ear to those Malecontents of Our days, who are given to Change, and onely wait for an Opportunity. For it is Impossible to be Innocent long in the midst of Such Temptations; because a little Communion in Evil, and the very Course of things, will of Necessity drive all Unwary Men so far by degrees, as to bring them under the Guilt of the Highest Crimes at last, though as yet they be not Disaffected to the Government. One saith, I am for our Mo∣narchy; another, I am for Episcopacy too; a Third, I am for the whole Frame of the Government as it is now Establish'd by Law; and All these say, God for∣bid that we should have any hand in Killing or De∣posing the King, or in setting up another Common∣wealth: No, we would onely Keep out Popery, and secure our selves against Arbitrary Power; and then we will give over. Now all this is Justifiable and Good, as long as the Means are Honest, and Men are Sincere. But then, Consider, I pray, what those Methods be which are Proposed by Popular Preten∣ders
for the Accomplishing of these Ends. Are they not the very Methods of the Old Conspiracy, Revi∣sed, and Set out in a New Edition, and with Augmen∣tations too? Is not another Rebellion formed? Do not the Ring-leaders (most of whom have no Religion at all) go to work again by Spreading of Lies and Ca∣lumnies, by raising many groundless Jealousies, by increasing Fears beyond a due measure, by Consult∣ing and Trucking with all sorts of Sects and Tray∣tors, by Usurping a Power over Crowns, and by such manifest Endeavours to spoil the King of His Rega∣lities, that had not the wonderful Providence of God interpos'd, they had long ago made a Spoil of His very Life too? These Practices are Open and Ma∣nifest, and as Visible as the Sun: and we ought with all manner of Diligence and Shyness to Beware of Men that deal in Arts of this Horrid Nature, lest we be led like Fools into Captivity again, and be forced to Lose not our Tears onely, but our Blood too, when 'twill be too Late to say, We did not think that Mat∣ters would have come to this Miserable pass. When Men think to go so far, but no farther, they should consider how much farther Others may go by their Example and Encouragement; they should have a Care that they lend them not neither an Helping Hand, nor so much as a Finger; for fear that the Least As∣sistance may be Fatal. In the Former Times, though some did from the Beginning design (as many of Late have done) the killing of their Prince; and though endeavours were used by a Base Faction, first in the Northern Camp, then at Hampton-Court, and at last in the Isle of Wight, to make him away Privately, either by Pistol, or Poison, or some other means of As∣sassination,
yet the generality of People did not dream of it, much less did they believe that any could be so Diabolically Impudent and Wicked, as to Murder him Publickly under Colour of Justice: but yet Mur∣der'd he was after that manner; and our Nation since hath lain under such Guilt by it, as God alone know∣eth when it will be Expiated. I am sure, the shed∣ding more Blood is not the way to Atone for the shed∣ding of that; but a ready way rather to provoke a Just God to cut us down Root and Branch, that we be no more a People. Every the least drop of our Princes Blood is Sacred, and more to be valued by us than the Blood of our Parents; and that none of that Blood may hereafter be upon Ʋs, or upon our Children, for God's sake let us be very careful of these two things; and so we will Conclude. 1. That we stifle all Conceptions of Disloyalty in our very Thoughts, that we choke even the Beginnings of it, and that we abstain not onely from all Appea∣rance of Wickedness of this kind, but from all Possibi∣lities of Guilt. He that hateth his Brother is a Mur∣derer; and so he that entertaineth any Undutiful and Unworthy Apprehensions of his Prince, is in a ready way to be a Regicide. Out of the Heart proceed evil Surmises, Jealousies, Fears, Hatreds; thence Men go on to Blasphemies, and Reproaches of a Princes Actions, and Government, and the basest Misconstructions that can be made of his Counsels and Administrations, though they be for the most part Honourable, and in all points Innocent and Just: And when the Heart, and the Tongue both are set on Fire, the whole Kingdom will be presently set on Fire too; and 'tis twenty to one but the King himself is made at last a Flaming Sacrifice.
These were the Original sins in the late times: From Idle Jealousies, which Undutiful Spirits were very Re∣ceptive of, they went to Hard Words, from Words to Blows, and at last the War ended in the Barbarous Parricide that was acted upon  Great Father of our Countrey; though to still (if it were possible) the Madness of the People, he was willing to part with any thing, but his whole Crown and his Conscience. And yet, to see what a sad Fate commonly attends an Im∣patient and Heady Generation, when his dangers of being destroy'd were now Open and Manifest, all consi∣dering Persons that had any regard for Humanity and Religion, were presently in a Rage. And, not onely many Honourable Persons, who had ever been Faithful and True to Him, and particularly those truly Loyal and Noble Lords, Hertford, Richmond, Southampton, Lindsey, and some more, freely offered themselves to Die, and be Sacrificed for him; but also very many of those who had been the Unfortunate Instruments of his Ruine, Relented when they saw the Ax coming, and would have hindred the intended Barbarity, being brought at last to a Sense, whether of their Sin, or of their Mi∣sery, I cannot tell. The Scots Protested against it; but, alas! it was too Late; and their strength was now gone, before their Prince, the Glory of their Nation fell. Considerable Insurrections were in several parts of this Kingdom for the Liberty of their Soveraign. The London Apprentices took Arms, to Atone (if they could) for their Masters Crimes, and to Deliver their Cap∣tive Prince. The Parliament, that now saw the sad issues of their Disobedience, voted an Agreement with His Majesty. Onely from the Army, and the Veteran Faction of the City, Petitions came for Justice against
Him. All other Faces gathered Blackness through Horror and Amazement at the intended Villany; nay, many of those very Ministers, who had thrown Fire∣brands from the Pulpit, would now have Quenched them with their Tears; they Repented, as Judas did; but were at last Despised and Hated by the Faction that had hitherto Abetted them, but now could have been well pleased, if, as they Repented, so they would have Hanged themselves too, as Judas (their Elder∣brother) did, after he had Betrayed the Innocent Blood. This is enough to shew, what a Dangerous Mat∣ter it is for People but to Affect Innovation, and to be Dispos'd for it; and how Necessary it is for Us, that would live Quietly in the Land, to Stifle all manner of Disloyalty in the very Beginnings, lest by giving way to those things which already have Caused the Subversion of our Government and Laws, and the Death of the King, we should fall again into Distractions and Outrages, till by the Wiles and Artifi∣ces of Evil Men, we be led like Fools to the Correcti∣on of the Stocks, and make our selves Captives once more, beyond all Hopes or Possibilities of Redemption. 2. And in order thereunto, let us all be very care∣ful, in the next place, to keep our Brains from being Infected with those Vicious Principles, which the Ene∣mies of our Peace are wont to use as Tools and In∣struments to bring all their Bloody and Execrable Con∣spiracies to Effect: I mean, such Principles as These; That the King's Power is not derived immediately from God, but from the People; That by their own Voluntary Act the People do make Princes their Commissioners and Trustees; That they may call Him to account, if they judge him to have failed in the Execution of His Office;
That if He will not come to Trial with Tameness and Submission, the People may use any Force or Violence against Him; That upon Proof and Conviction touching His Breach of Trust, they may Condemn, Depose, and Kill Him if they please, and Dispose of the Crown according as they shall think best for the Peoples Good. They that thus make Court to the People, as if all Soveraign∣ty were in Them, and would make them believe that They have Really that Power which the Devil pre∣tended to, of Bestowing Kingdoms, can design nothing else but to Debauch Men out of their Allegiance, and to fit them for the perpetrating of any the most Hor∣rid Villanies: and whosoever he be that is strongly persuaded of the Truth of those Principles, wants no∣thing but Opportunity and an Ax to make him a Regi∣cide. The Faction of the Late Times, to Justifie (if they could) their Proceedings against the King, Re∣printed a Treasonable Book, which had been written by a most violent Jesuit, under the Counterfeit Name of Doleman, with some few Alterations to Disguise it; which very Libel was Lately Printed again entire by the Faction now, though it was Condemned by Act of Parliament in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. NowHst. of Indep. p. 113. the Fundamental Principle in that Book is this, That every Commonwealth hath Power within it self to Dispose of the Governours, and either to Alter or Abolish any Form of Government, according to the Pleasure of the People. A little before the King's Tryal, the Pestilent Remnant of the House of Commons, that were now at the Armies Devotion, to Prepare the Kings way first to the Court, and so to the Scaffold, agreed upon this Vote, (as if they had been a Conclave of Jesuites) That the People under God are the Original of all Just
Power. And upon this Fundamental Principle they raised these other Positions, which were the Natural Consequents of it; 1. That the Commons of England Assembled in Parliament, have the Supreme Authority of the Nation. 2. That whatsoever is declared for Law by the Commons, hath the force of a Law. 3. That all the People of the Nation are concluded thereby, although the Consent of the King and the Peers be not had there∣unto. 4. That to raise Arms against the Peoples Re∣presentatives, is High-Treason. Thus were these Po∣pular Principles Previous and Preparative for that Hor∣rid Murder, which, to the Dishonour of Nature, to the Reproach of Religion, to the Shame of this King∣dom, and to the Scandal of all Nations, was so bar∣barously committed on this Day. The Charge against that Incomparable Prince ran in the Name of the People; He had violated that Trust which the People had reposed in Him. Which thing when an Honou∣rable Lady that was present Heard, she cried out open∣ly before the whole Court, It was a Lie, for not the Tenth part of the People would be guilty of such a Crime. When the King demanded, by what Autho∣rity they brought Him to Tryal, that most Impudent and Ʋnjust Judge, the Blasphemer of God and His Anointed, answered, That 'twas by the Authority of the People. When the King had Solidly and Elo∣quently refuted that Pretence, that Monster of Man∣kind persisted in it, That the People of England were the Supreme Authority of the Nation, over King and Laws too; that he was an Officer in Trust, and that having broken his Compact with the People, they might justly proceed against Him, even unto Death: And this he endeavoured to prove by Arguments and Ex∣amples,
all taken one by one out of the Counterfeit Doleman, which I mentioned before. Thus did these Treasonable Principles cost that ex∣cellent Monarch, first his Peace, and at last his Life, to the Eternal warning as well of every Upright Ma∣gistrate, that he presume not to Suffer, as of every Faithful Subject that he presume not to Listen to those Cursed Principles and Doctrines, which were never Formed and Designed but for Blood, were never Coun∣tenanced and Cherish'd but for Blood, were never Obey∣ed and Followed but by Men, that Longed and Thirst for Blood Royal. I have no more to add, but my Humble and Hearty Prayers to the God of Order and Power, That he would Pardon that Great Sin which this day was act∣ed against Himself and his Anointed, and Bless his Present Majesty, and the whole Royal Family, with a long continuance of Life, Health, Peace, and Ho∣nour; and that the course of this World may be so peaceably ordered by his Governance, that his Church may joyfully serve him in all Godly Quietness, through Jesus Christ the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all Honour and Glory World without end, Amen. FINIS.
