P2000A 12610871 64379
POEMS. BY THOMAS PHILIPOTT, Master of Arts, (Somtimes) Of Clare-Hall in Cambridge. LONDON, Printed by R. A. for Henry Shepheard, and Wil∣liam Ley, and are to be sold at the Bible in Tower-street, and at PAULS Chain, neer Doctors Commons. M.DC.XLVI.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE, As well by the merit of vertue, as desert of birth, MILDMAY, Earle of Westmerland, Baron Despenser, and Bergherst. MY LORD, BEE pleased to shed one beame on these tender sprigs of Lawrell, which will raise them up to that growth, that their shadow will be able to skreen me from the heat of sensure, I have (through a throng of other businesse) pressed so farre as to present them to your view; my zeale to be knowne to your Lordship (who is knowne to be the publike Assertor of Letters) oblig'd me to offer them up to your name, and if you think the sacrifice not wor∣thy of the Altar, let it be burnt, and the flame of it will be so happie as to give me light to see my errour hat durst presume to consecrate things of so low an
estimate, without either sap or verdure, to the shelter of so high a Patron; so shall I (by my humility) entitle my selfe to your pity, that could not (by my Poesie) endeare my selfe to your praise; for I know (my Lord) that your mercy and justice are so equally wound up together, that you can at once both judge and forgive, him who shall aspire to no further happinesse then to be acknowledged The humblest of your Servants, Thomas Philipott.
To the Reader. REader, thou mayst without affrightment look Within the pages of this guiltlesse Book; For here no Satyr, masquing in disguise, Amongst these leaves in Ambuscado lies: No Snake does lurk amongst these flowers, to cast Her poyson forth, and mens faire honours blast; And though some staine the paper, when they write, And so defile, and fully its chaste white With lines of lust, that to wipe out that sin, It even wants white to do its penance in; Yet I no Goats bloud in my ink will spill, To make loose lines flow from my tainted Quill; No soot or gall I'll mingle, to possesse My words with an invective bitternesse, Although (perchance) to make them seeme more tart, I may some salt to season them impart: No, no, the wooll o'th' Lamb I'll only take, And that my principall'st Ingredient make: So that what ere my teeming Pen shall vent, Shall, though not wittie, yet be innocent. T. P.
To the Authour. ENCOMIASTICON. 'TIs Poetrie thou writ'st, Latines call't Verse, Because it turnes off Active, smooth and Terse, Greeks call'em Rithme, and Metre, when in sweet Numbers, and measure they do fitly meet; These rise, and bravely flie, Height'ned by Phantasie, And make true Poesie, Which many misse, that trie. A Poet as thou art,Poeta nasci∣tur, non fit. (I may be sworne) Was not so made, but rather so was borne. And I may say, when I read many a line, Grac'd with high influence, thou art divine; The various style endeares it to us more, Embroyd'red with Conceptions amplest store, Wits curious Tapestrie, Hymnes, Past'ralls, Elegies, Observatives, Divinitie, Philosophick Scrutinies; It may be call'd a FLORILEGE for all, That have not time for studies generall. Philomusus. T. C.
POEMS On the beholding his face in a Glasse. SVre if this Mirrour has limn'd out to me My faces true and faithfull imagerie, My cheeks do yet lye fallow, and my brow Is not yet furrow'd with Times rugged plow; No haire, as yet, has cloath'd my naked chin, Nor wrinckle rumpell'd, or purl'd up my skin; Nor has my head one haire, by Cares expence, White with the powder of Experience: But when more yeares shall fit on me, and age Shall dresse me with his liverie, and engage This structure of my flesh to droop, and cares Shall into reverend gray have did my haires, And I agen (perhaps) expose my face To the impartiall censure of my glasse, My shadow will enforme me, that it beares (Like me) th'impressions too of many yeares, When shivering agues do congeale the bloud, And feavers melt again that purple floud: When I lye floating in a sea of rheume, Being tost with everie melancholy fume: This by its wither'd aspect will declare It symptomes does of the same sicknesse weare: Nay, when sterne death with a rude hand does seek To pluck the Roses out from either cheek, To plant his Lillies there, and does dispense To everie languishing, and vanquish'd sense,
A chill benumning damp: could I then view The sad resemblance of that ashie hue, That blasts my cheeks, that shadow would put on The same appearance of complexion. How brittle and how transitorie then Are all those props that Nature leanes on, when I from this faithfull Mirrour can descry, My shadow is as permanent as I? On the sight of a Clock. HOw fruitlesse our designes would prove, if we Should be possest with so much vanitie, As with our fraile endeavours, to assay To stop the winged houres in their way? Or fondly seek to chaine up Time, and try To make him with our wild desires comply, Since leaden plummets hung upon his feet, Not clog we see, but make his pace more fleet. On a Gentlewoman dying in Child-bed of an abortive Daughter. WHat neare alliance was between the grave Of this dead infant, and the place that gave First life to't? Here was a sad mysterie Work'd up it selfe, both Life and Death, we see, Were Inmates in one house, making the womb, At once become a Birth-place and a Tomb? The mother too, as if she meant t'improve, In everie fatall circumstance her love, When this unpollisht infant di'd, her breath Resign'd, that she might wait on it in death: And in one Monument might sleep by her, To whom before she was a Sepulcher.
On a Gentlewoman much deformed with the small pox. WHat hath this prettie Faire misdone, That angrie Heaven so soone Mistook the fatall place, And buried all her beautie in her face? Each hole may be a Sepulcher, Now fitly to inter Those, whom her coy disdaine, And nice contempt, has immaturely slaine. Yet lest so great a losse should lack, Its ceremonious black, She weares it in her eyes, To mourne at her owne Beauties Obsequies. She needs no glosse to veile those scars, And those Hebrew Characters, Which (like letters) do display The storie of her Beauties sad decay. That moysture shall embalme 'hem, I Will powre from either eye, So that those scars she weares, Shall need no other Ceruse, but my teares. On Julia, throwing snow-balls at him. WHilst Iulia did her snow-balls at me hit, She did into my bosome too transmit A sudden flame; 'tis strange that hea should flow From such a frostie principle, as snow:
Sure those successive glances which did rise From the bright Orbs of her refulgent eyes, Made some impression on those balls, and so Subverted the cold property of snow: Yet as that flame which in my heart did reigne And darted fire from thence on every veine, Was caus'd by snow, so when I did but rest My hand upon the Alps of her white brest, The snow that lay dispers'd o're that chast seat, Straight curb'd the uproare of my former heat. Strange miracle, my Iulia has the art At once with snow to heat and coole my heart. To Sir Henry New, upon his re-edifying the Church of Charleton in Kent. SIR; YOu need no Parian or Egyptian stone To build a Tomb for you, your name alone Shall stand, your monument which shall out vie Those fading Trophies in stabilitie, You have the basis of no structures fixt On widdowes ruins, or the mortar mixt With Orphans tears▪ you wish the melting skies May wet your fields, and not your tenants eyes, Moysten it with their deaw, you build no shrine To lavish riot, where sin's made divine, And Idoliz'd, you sacrifice no wealth At Bacchus Altar, nor give up your health An offering to't, or to evacuate rheume Do you exhale whole mannors into fume; No Sir, you have imploid your coyne so well, That God himselfe will be accountable For what y'ave spent, y'ave laid your treasure in So inaccessible a Magazin; No sacrilegious robber shall purloine Or rust embase the value of your coine:
Y'ave built a house where God himselfe will dwell, And stand himselfe there his own Centinell; Let others sit and brood upon that Ore Which they've collected from the Indian shore, And put themselves to the expence of care, For a wild unthrift, you make God your heire. On the sight of a Rivelet, that eight foot off from its Fountain dis-embogues it selfe into the Medway. NO sooner did' this pregnant spring distill Out of her watry womb this purling rill, But see how eagerly it rushes downe It selfe, in Medwayes neighbouring streame to drowne; And even at its first birth falls upon A ruinous precipiation; Like some unwarie heire, who being of age To act an unthrifts part, upon the stage O'th world, and newly wean'd from the imbrace Of his deceased Parent, does deface His heritage with ot, and makes hast To let himself loose into lavish wast, Powring out his Revenues, to advance Vice in each gay and pompous circumstance, With such profusenesse, that he straight is found Plung'd in the Vserers books, and there he's drown'd: And as the river when it has inlarg'd Its channell with that rill the spring discharg'd Into its liquid womb, gliding away With thanklesse speed, its vassalage to pay To the blw Sea-god, does no more reflect, But steales th' spring that fed, it with neglect; Ev'n so the userer when his bags swell high And grow affected with a plurisie,
Which was with this loose unthrifts ruines fed, And (like some flies) from his corruptions bred, Calls in each wandring glance, and passing by He ne're looks back, lest it be with an eye Of scorne, not pity, nor will deigne to know Him from whose spring his streames of wealth did flow. On M. Jo. Joscelin, dying of a Feaver. VVHat heat was this wch scorch'd my Joscelins heart? And lick'd that oyle up which each vitall part Is daily moist'ned with? what heaps of flames Checquer'd the azure front' spice of his veines With crimson spots? how did their fervour purle His sinewes? and his skins faire margent curle Into a shrivell'd lump? as if that he Was even growne Aetna's epitome, And might be licens'd to be canoniz'd Now for a Saint, since he was sacrific'd To death in fire, and had even undergone By frying, with a Feaver, martyrdome, Which did each part with such continuance burne, His bed it selfe was ev'n become his urne? Yet could my teares this priviledge have gain'd, To have appeas'd that ravenous flame which raign'd Within him, he had not been yet possest With the cold sleep, nor gone so soone to rest: But this accrues yet to his future glorie, When time shall read the annals of his storie, 'Twill find, it was no abject maladie That forc'd his active spirit hence, to fly Into th' Elysian shades, no trembling fit Of a blood-shaking Ague made him quit, And render up his tenement of clay, No slow consumption melted him away,
Making him seem to his spectators so, As if h'ad been a corps a yeare agoe: But that he fell by coaping in a duell With a more noble feaver, and was fuell Only for that disease, with which they say, The world it selfe shall labour i'th last day. To a Gentlewoman singing. SVre Philomel's transform'd to humane shape, For who but she could practice such a rape On our insnared sense, with the calme noise That ecchoes forth from her seraphick voice? Each Angell that is guardian to a Sphere, Desists from whirling round his Orb, to heare Her warble her tun'd layes, the sullen North, Who in distemper'd murmurs, bellowes forth A rude defiance to the swelling deep, Is by her voices musick rock'd asleep. When all the winds do sally foh t'ingage The elements in mutinie, and wage A conflict 'mongst themselves, they straight take truce To listen to her voice, which does infuse, Such charmes into them, that they straight comply In gentle whispers with her harmonie: Swans hearing her but sing, do straight concurre In a melodious simphonie with her: Yet (oh sad fate) straining a note too high To equall hers, do straight expire and die. Copernicus's Pupills may go on Now to protect his wild assertion, And say the earth doth circularlie move, Whilst the dull Planets in their Sphere above Stand still like idle gazers on, since she Has by the miracle of her harmonie,
Accomplish'd this, for at her charming call Thrill'd forth in an inchanting madrigall, The earth appeares to move, the knotite rock And aged oak, as if they meant to mock Natures decrees, assemble in loose rings And shake their active feet when shee but sings, Whilst my joy'd spirits too, with nimble streine Make hast to dance Lavalto's in each veine. On the death of M. Francis Thornhill, slain in a single Duell VVHat stratagems inexorable death Does muster up to rob us of our breath? Somtimes he sends a Feaver to take in Our forts of earth, somtimes the gout, to win Our ruinous tenements, which being repell'd And their assauls by strength of nature quell'd, He straight imploys the sword, petar and gun, With all the Engines of destruction; To raze our Citadells of clay, which we Accomplish'd in the fate of Thornhill see, Who though his heart and vitals bore about Vigour enough to keep diseases out: Yet see how soon the sword had found the art To cut the cordage that made fast his heart. And soule, which thence flew heaven-wards, there to be Indenison'd into eternitie. For though it swam in a red stream from hence I'me confident 'twas white with innocence: But shall his blood, exhale to aire, the earth Was moistened with, no 'twill produce a birth, Of od'rous flowers, to whom there shall accrew (As if they wept for him) a constant dew; Which on the ruines of his earth shall flow; And when the wind from the cold North does blow,
Congeale into a pearly masse, so he Invested with a shroud of pearle shall be. On a Farmer, who having buried five of his children of the Plague, planted on each of their graves an Apple-tree. YOu whose bold thoughts do prompt you on to glorie I'th number of your issue, view the storie Of this afflicted Villager, since he Was by th'increase of a faire Progenie Made happy, till just God, for mans offence, Imploy'd th'infection of a Pestilence T'annoy the world, which five of's children gave Vp toth' possession of the lavish grave. But see what glorious pietie can dwell I'th' narrow circuit of an humble Cell, To preserve life in their remembrance, hee Establishes on each grave an apple-tree, By that quaint Hierglyphick to declare He was their tree, and they his apples were, Which in his estimate did farre out vie In tendernesse the apple of his eye; And though sterne death had been so much unkind, To pluck the fruit and leave the tree behind, Yet in that action, he did but show, That they untimely to their graves did go: To shew in time, what we must likewise do, Branches, Trunk, Root, and all must follow too. An Epitaph on Mrs. E. VV. REader, if thy indulgent eyes can spare But so much brine as will make up a teare, Let pietie ingage thee here to lave That moisture out upon this beauties grave,
That so the turfe bedew'd with it, may teeme Roses and od'rous Violets, to redeeme (By pow'ring forth a balmy dew) her dust From putrid vapours, and her tomb from rust: For modesty, truth, zeale, and meeknesse have A sad interment too, within her grave, Nay even all the vertues are become Her Inmates, and do lodge within her tombe; So that she forc'd us, when she liv'd, to say, She was an Angell cloth'd in weeds of clay, Which to approve when her faire soule was cloy'd With the worlds tumults (which yet still injoy'd A calme of peace, 'mongst all the noise of men) She threw off earth, and fled to heaven agen. On the approach of night. WHy comes forth night array'd in black, when day Does (like an exhalation) melt away? Why hang so many lights i'th vault o'th skie? As if night furnish'd out some obsequie? Why are her tears in dewes so often shed? The reason is, she mourns 'cause day is dead. Considerations upon Eternitie. IMmense Eternitie! of thee what part Shall I define, since thou a circle art? And when in thee (like the reviving sun) I look for end, I find thee but begun. When I thy first beginning would survey, I find thou nere hadst none: when I assay To sound thy depth, thy depth I find to be A vast and bottomlesse Profunditie. Could we pluck backe those wasted years which are Inrol'd in times moath-eaten Register,
And that collected masse of ages lay Within a scale, we soon should find they'd weigh, Ballanc'd with thee, no more when all is done, Then if we poisd an atome with the sun. Who then would dote on life which only shrouds The soule in slime and earth, which death unclouds, But not annihilates; or fan that fire Which will but breath'd upon by wind expire, Whose flame though't be by nature blowne about The heart and braine, the collick can put out: Who would piece up his tenement of clay With so much art, when rheums may wash't away, And dropsies drowne it? or one sudden gust Of a chil Ague shake it into dust, When with a Feaver it so long may burne It may be both the ashes and the urne: When its whole frame at once may be shook downe With th'earth-quake of a wild convulsion; Why should I in a heap of painted dust Or guilded rubbish then put any trust? Whose chiefe ingredients are our shivering fears, And thrilling sighs, whose cement is our tears, Which kneaded it to shape, on which has been Gods impresse stamp'd till 'twas raz'd out by sin. Nor shall this sullyed medall be refin'd Till it be in the generall fire calcin'd; On which, when 'tis new moulded, God will daigne To covne the image of his face againe: Whose impresse time shall then no more deface, Nor sin its value anie more embase: When thus both soule and bodie are combin'd In one strict union, and so close intwin'd They nev'r shall be divorc'd, they both shall be Admitted into immortalitie: Vpon whose wings, wing'd too with their own love, And innocence, they both shall soare above
The pitch of humane thoughts, and with an eye Purg'd from blind vapours and dull mists, descry Those various Essences, whose formes will be Limn'd out i'th Mirrour of the Trinitie; And all the old Idaes range about By which at first they both were copied out. Next gaze on the Apostles, who do make (In heaven) a new and second Zodiack, For they were the 12 Signes, through which the Sun Of Righteousnesse, his course on earth did run. Then view the Martyrs, from the sacred Reake Of whose pure flames, the light of truth did breake; Who though they waded through a crimson flood, Which had no spring to feed it but their blood, And all besmear'd with purple, soar'd from hence, Sit cloath'd in the white Rabes of innocence; Whilst thus the eye is charm'd, the eare shall be Intranc'd with such melodious Harmonie, That if the soule were not so closely tied, And to the body glorified, allied In such a loving mixture, we might feare That 'twould again be stolne out at the eare. Thus some eternally shall gaze upon That Orb of Light, the blessed Vision, And so to ever-living joyes aspire, Whilst others melt in never-dying fire, Which powres forth flames, but yet displayes no light, Which will both burn, and freeze the damned wight: Where outward tortures shall corrode each sence, And inward fret into the conscience, Where all Arithmeticke will be agast To calculate the yeares of torture past; And bind them up in numbers, but to tell The years to come, will be a second Hell; For when ten thousand, thousands years are told, And all those thousand thousands years are rold
About their Sphere, and Myriads more are done, And yet alas, all is but now begun; The wretched and captived soule will cry, Oh that I once might live or once might dy: Lord teare the Mountains up, and throw them all Vpon my wretched head, that I may fall Into a heap of Atomes, and may be Seen not of any, lest it be of thee; Vnlock the Caverns of the earth, and find Amongst those dusky Cells some angry wind, Whose wild impetuous Gusts so long may blow Vpon my house of earth, until it throw The rubbish in some wildernesse, or thrust The thin remains of my disbanded dust Into some gloomy Vault, where none shall tell, To gleane them up, so thou forgive me hell. A divine Hymne. O Thou who art all light, from whose pure beames The infant day-light streames, And to whose Lustre all the throng of stars Those mystick Characters, Writ in the dusky volumne of the Night, Do owe their stocke of Light; Who when the Sun, i'th nonage of the yeare, Like a Bridegroom does appeare, Sweet with the Balmy Perfumes of the East, With Lights Embroidery drest, And spangled o're with brightnesse, does array That Planet with each Ray He glitters with, a powerfull spark inspire Of thy Celestiall fire Into my frozen heart, that there may be A flame blowne up in me,
Whose light may shine like the meridian sun In the dark horison Of my benighted soul, and thence distill Into a pious rill Of contrite tears, those clouds which do controule The prospect of my soule, That so the beams of faith may clearly shine Amidst its Christalline, That I may by th'infusion of their light Learn to spell Christs Crosse aright. And as one touch from Moses did unlock The casquet of the rock, And thaw'd its liquid treasures to repell The thirst of Israel; So let this flame dissolve that masse of sin That lies wrapt up within The chambers of my heart, that there may rise Two fountaines in my eyes, Which may put out those scorching flames, which were First fed and kindled there, By that same hot Artillery which lust Into my eye-balls thrust; And as when Feavers blaze within the blood, And parch that purple flood, The sparks and embers of them, are by heat Still'd from the pores in sweat; So when sin flames within me and does roule Its heat about my soule, And sparkles in each facultie, my eyes Being lusts Incendiaries. Oh let this inward sicknesse by that fire Devotion does inspire, Be still'd out, at those pores o'th soule, my eies, In a liquid sacrifice, Which gathering into one heap, may swell Into a holy well,
Wherein when the old Dragon wounds me, I May bath incessantly, And having wash'd my festred wounds, may be Sure both at once of cure and victorie. On the death of a Prince, a Meditation. IN what a silence Princes passe away, When they're enfranchis'd from their shells of clay? No thunder-clap rung out this Heroes knell, And in loud accents to the world did tell, He was deceas'd; no trembling earth-quake shook The frame o'th world, as if 'twere Palsie-strook. There was no bearded Comet did arise, To light a torch up at his Obsequies; And though so many men should have deceas'd When his great soule was from the flsh releas'd, That Charons Vessell should have ceas'd to float, And he have cried, give me another boat; Not anie yet resign'd their vitall breath, Obsequiously to wait on him, in death; Thus we may see, Fates unrelenting knife Will even cut a Princes thred of life; Nor can his spreading power inforce its strength, Or his Dominions extend its length, If from the urne his name first issue forth, Not his tall titles or unfathom'd worth, Can this Prerogative, or Charter give, That he his cheap dull vassall shall out-live; And though the eyes o'th multitude before Follow'd his presence, and did ev'n adore The earth that propp'd his feet, yet when the rust, Of's monument shall mingle with his dust, Contracted to a span, and the rude wind Shall his abbreviated ashes find,
They cannot from his blast be so exempt, But that he will disperse them to contempt; So many graves his dust shall (he being dead) Obtaine, yet he be no where buried: Who then in Titles, Crownes, or Wealth would trust, Since he can scarce assure himselfe his dust? Even in the grave shall so protected be, It shall be freed from forraign injurie. To a Lady viewing her self in her Glasse. LADY; WHen Sicknesse, Death's pale Herald does display His Ensignes in your face, and does array Your drooping Beautie with an ashie hue, You straight take counsell of your Glasse, to view How much those roses, that their blushes shed O're either cheek, are shrunk, or withered: When any spot that lustre does imbase, Which does improve the beauty of your face, You have recourse unto your Glasse, to see What part dares shelter that enormitie; VVhen you with any fashion would comply, You to your Mirrour straight imploy your eye, To be inform'd, what correspondence there Your shadow does with your faire substance beare: If in your painting there some errour be, Or in your dresse an incongruitie, You from your glasse a certaine patterne take, By which your selfe you ev'n a shadow make. Since then in all things you your selfe apply Still to this Christall Index, to discry Each blemish in your dresse, and each defect That clouds your beautie, and by that correct All trespasses, you may instructed be, By this, to know too your Mortalitie;
Since that fraile Tenement you so perfume With clouds of Mitrhe, and Cassia, and consume So much to piece it up, it may repell Th' assaults of Age, and be defensible 'Gainst Times rude Onsets, will scon fade away, And languish to a ruinous decay; And by its transitorinesse declare, That you your selfe, your shadowes Embleme are. On the death of Sir Simon Harcourt, slain at the ta∣king in of Carigs-Main Castle in Ireland. MAy that pure flame which heated Harcourts brest, Break from the gloomy confines of that Chest VVhich circumscribes his hallow'd dust, and sink Like a spent Meteor downe into my ink; That that dull juice its heat may so refine, Each drop of it may prove like that, divine, With which each verse of mine embalm'd shall be, And like his fame last to Eternitie; At common Funeralls each vulgar quill Into some broken rapture can distill, And with the watry tribute of the eye Dissolve into some easie Elegie: Should we not then pay to this honour'd Herse Our griefs drest up in more refined Verse, And mix with it such a large streame of brine, It might these precious Reliques even enshrine? The gratefull wind would from his ashes sweep Such clouds of dust, that if we could not weep, 'Twould throw them thence into our barren eyes, And (though unwilling) force some tears to rise: I am no Laureat, nor does any Bay Surround my Temples, if it did, Il'd lay That wreath (brave Harcourt) on thy Tomb, that wee At once might crowne thy victorie, and thee.
But though I weare no Bayes, in either eye Is worne a teare, sorrowes best Liverie; In which I'le steep each verse, that so their brine May distribute some salt to everie line: And when my barren and exhausted eyes Grow bankrupt in their watry Obsequies, And spend their stock too soon, those stars which shin'd To light thee into th' world, and did unwind The Fate of thy great actions, sure will turne To tears, and drop in gelly on thy Vrne: Though thus two fountaines flow from either eye, T'embalme thy dust, my Phancy yet is dry: But pardon me, that on thy hallow'd tomb I've stuck no Epitaph, which might become An Index to past ages, and display To times to come, how (through that purple sea Which from thy wounds in such a deluge ran) Thy soule passed o're to th' Land of Canaan, White with her innocence, alas no stone Would serve to beare the sad Inscription; For even that Marble that is put in trust, To be the wardrobe for thy weeds of dust, Will to deplore so great a losse (my fears Tell me) be instinct too melt into tears. On a Gentlewoman struct blind with the small Pox. WHat have we poor unhappie Mortalls done, Such an Eclipse is cast o're beauties sun? What? was this cloud let loose to veile its light, 'Cause it too much astonish'd our dull sight? Or did some goddesse, fearing we might pay A Superstitious homage to each ray, This beauties eyes powr'd forth, become unkind, And to prevent this tribute strike her blind?
Or are her eyes preserv'd? and cannot wee, Blinded by too much light their lustre see? Or has Iove fixt them in the starrie Sphere, To shine by night, as they by day shone here? If so; no more let lovers from afarre Court the loose aspect of the Cyprian starre; Nor let the erring Mariner no more Worship the Laedan starres, nor yet implore With volleyes of loud sighs, they would dispence From their kind Orb propitious influence: For her refulgent sparkling eyes, that were On earth, the brightest stars in beauties Sphere, And shone with such a clear and constant light, That Our Horizon was by them made bright, Shine forth in heaven, a Constellation, now, And will, from their auspitious Orb, endow Lovers with such mild influxe, at their birth, That heaven they've found above, they'l find on earth; And to the Saylor that has lost his way 'Mongst the wild Alpes and Deserts of the Sea, Dart such cleare beams that they shall steer him right, So that hee'l need no Pilot, but their light. On the death of M. George Sandys. WHen that Arabian bird, the Phoenix dies, Who on her pile of spices bedrid lies, And does t'herselfe a sacrifice become, Making her grave an Altar, and a Wombe, T'inclose her pregnant dust, she can redeem Those ruines she her selfe has made, and teem With a new Phoenix: but now Sandys is gone, And melted to a dissolution, I'th Furnace of a Feaver, can his Vrne An equall fine, or interest returne
For those remains it keeps? Alas, we here Are wholly beggar'd; for his Sepulcher Is like some thrifty Steward, put in trust To take account of every grain of dust That moulders from the fabrick of his clay, But when the generall fire which the last day Shall sparkle with, shall a new flame inspire Into his Vrne, and that Poetick fire Which was so long an Inmate to his brest, Shall be call'd forth from out that Marble Chest, Where it now lies rak'd up amongst the dust, And embers of his clay; and when that rust That choakes it up, shall be dispers'd, the light Of this enfranchis'd flame shall shine so bright Amidst our Horison, 'twill seem to be The Constellation of all Poetrie. Tell me not then, that Piramids disband, And drop to dust; that times ungentle hand Has crush'd into an indigested Masse, And heap of Ruines, Obelisques of Brasse, That our perfidious tombs (as loath to say We once had life and being too) decay; And that those Flowers of Beauty which do grow In Ladies cheeks, amidst a bed of snow, Are wither'd on their stalk; or that one Gust Of a bleake Ague can resolve to dust Those hands which did a Globe and Scepter hold, Or that that head which wore a Crowne of Gold, May be wrap'd up within a shroud of Lead, Neglected, and forgot, since Sandys is dead; Within whose Brest Wits Empire seem'd to be, And in whose Braine a Mine of Poetrie: For who'l not now confesse, that Time's that Moth Which frets into all Art, and Nature both, Since he who seem'd within his active Brain So much of salt and verdure to contain,
He might have ever been preserv'd, is gone, And shrunk away into corruption: But these excursions their Conception owe To passion, or from our wild Phansies flow; All that we now can do is to returne Some Flowers of Poesie unto his Vrne, Which being burnt in his owne Funerall flame, Wee'l offer up, as Incense, to his name, Which yet by sent and colour will be known T'have sprung from him, and t'have been first his own. And if these Flowers cannot so persume His name, but that 'twill (mauger these) consume, Our tears strew'd on it, will repeale that Fate, And in his wither'd fame, new life create; As when the treasures of the Spring are crop'd And by untimely Martyrdom unlop'd, From off their stalke, we can their death reprieve, And a new life by water to them give: So now when Sandys like the Springs flowry birth, By deaths rude sithe is mowed from off the earth, And throwne into a grave, to wither there Into a heap of ashes, though no teare Can piece his dust together, we may weep A Bath of tears, in which we yet may steep His memorie, which will (like Aeson) when 'Tis thus manur'd, grow fresh and young agen; And being thus embalm'd, a Relique lie To be ador'd by all posteritie. On the sight of some rare Pieces and Monuments of Antiquitie, in an Antiquaries Studie. LEt Aesons Storie wast away, and be No more transcrib'd unto posteritie: It must now wither, and dispight of all His powerfull baths, and moistening juices, shall
Grow wrinkled o're with age, decease, and have (Being dead) t'entombe it in, no other grave, But dark Forgetfulnesse; where it shall lie For ever, buried in Obscuritie. For, now Antiquity it selfe, with yeares Grown white and hoarie, with long age, appears Here fresh and vigorous; things which Ages past Crumbled away, and did decay so fast, They were ev'n thought in a Consumption then, Do here rise up in a full Youth agen: Times Aesculapius has done this; for He 'Gainst the disease of Time, a remedie Prescribes, beyond all Druggs: He has the Art T'embalme the fame of things; yet, not impart, To keep them so that they shall ne're consume, Whole clouds of Myrrhe, Spice, Cassia, and Perfume: And, as the Loadstone Iron can call out, When 'tis beleaguer'd, and ev'n wall'd about With other wild confused heaps of dust; So, when mens names grow fretted with the rust Age strewes upon them, and they seem to be Lost in the ruines of mortalitie; He, from that rude and blended Masse, can bring Their dead remembrance out, and can new wing Those thus rais'd up to life, and make them flie 'Bove Times wide reach, up to Eternitie: He can peece up mens scatter'd dust, his hands Mannage a powerfull Scepter, that commands Ev'n Fate it selfe, with which he can make blunt The Teeth of Time, which, Estrich-like, were wont To feed on iron, piles of brasse devoure, And Natures beauty, like a Moath, defloure. In fine, this study is the publike Ark In which the memories of men embark; Which, being here repriev'd from death, do shun The being drown'd in deep Oblivion.
An Epithalamium. THe Bride is up: Go, bid the Negro creep Into the watrie bowells of the Deep, To gather up those orient Pearles, which dwell In the contracted casquet of a shell: Command him to examine every rock, To pluck off Diamonds from that craggie stock, And hang them all on her, that so the light That breaks from her cleare eys, may make them bright. Behold, the active Bridegroom does appeare Fresh as the Sun, i'th nonage of the yeare, Whilst ev'rie flower unclasps its leaves, as he Walks by, as if they did delight to be Enlivened with those odours, which his breath Does (like rich perfumes) to the ayre bequeath. And now he meets his Bride, whilst from their eyes A numerous constellation seems to rise: So that each one which viewes them from afarre, Thinks that each glance of theirs darts forth a starre. And now the Priest has (with his Nuptiall Bands) At once united both their hearts and hands. And, though the Essence of their chast delight Must be prorogu'd, till Day be mask'd with Night: Yet see, their soules prevent their bodies blisse, Both making hast to couple in a kisse; Whilst on those twisted beams their eye-balls shed, They even seem each others hearts to thred: So that, their eyes the bodies office do, In mingling thus; and beget Babies too.
On a Nymph pourtrayed in stone, that powred forth two spouts of water from her eyes into a Garden. THink that this Statue which now courts your view, VVas once a virgin of that glorious hue, Set out and furnish'd with such charming grace, Each durst affirme she had an Angells face; But as those Mineralls, which the teeming Earth, Combining with the Sun, improves with birth, Do through the womb o'th' Mine their veines diffuse, That Metalls like themselves they may produce: Ev'n so that rockie hardnesse, which was bred Within the caverns of her heart, did spred A drowsie numnesse thorow everie sense, Whose chilnesse all those Organs did condense, That gave attendance on the Braine, (the Throne Where Life and Motion sit install'd) to stone: But 'cause before those sparkling rayes, her eyes Powr'd forth, did make each heart love sacrifice; Thy spouts of teares, though turn'd to stone, distill, As if they wept for those their scome did kill. On one dead of a Dropsie. VVE need not here be lavish, and let fall Our teares, as tribute, to this Funerall, Since here we see the Body did resent, And ev'n, by private instinct, so lament The Soules departure, that it did appeare, Transform'd by griefe, to one continued teare.
To a Gentlewoman viewing her selfe in her glasse. CRuell faire one, think this Glasse, Wherein you now behold your face, Was compos'd of one who dyed For love of you, since he applyed His liquid and dissolving eyes, So long with teares to sacrifice To your disdaine, that to relieve His Bankrupt and impoverish'd griefe With a fresh stock of moysture, hee Melted to a spring, which see The cold, but charitable North, (Lest a fountaine of such worth Should, by vulgar lips, be tasted, Or profanely be exhausted) Congeal'd into a Chrystall Masse, Of which was form'd this Looking-glasse: And as your Figure faire did rest, Within this Lovers living brest, So still you see it doth appeare, Though turn'd to Chrystall, harbour'd here An Elegie offered up to the memorie of Anna Countesse of Caernarvon An Introduction to the Elegie. THose Flowers of Beautie, Lilly, Violet, And blushing Rose, which were by Nature set In faire Caernarvons cheek, and seem'd to grow, (Strange wonder I) there amidst a bed of Snow, By deaths rude hand now from their stalk are rent, And throwne (alas) into a Monument,
Where they will wither into dust, and be The types of humane mutabilitie. If then these short-liv'd flowers could not give But so much verdure, as would make her live, Even in her worser part, her earth, what spice, Or Balmie duggs, shall we then sacrifice, T'embalme her name, since there can nothing be That will do this, but flowers of Poesie, Which I have strew'd upon't; and, though they faile, Such Aromatick odours to exhale, As may this memorie of hers perfume: They'l so preserve it, it shall nere consume. The Elegie. FOr all those various streames which do entombe Themselves within the Oceans liquid wombe, The Sea payes Impost, and an interest brings Back to the Earth, when it refines to Springs The brackish billowes, and those waters straines To Brooks, and weaves them into all her veines. If the kind waves refund their tribute thus, What fine, or use, wilt thou pay back to us, Vnhappie Earth, for these deplor'd Remaines Which now manure thy shrunk and wither'd veines? Canst thou unsluce thy thriftie pores, and powre From those Alembicks such a swelling shower Of unctious deaw? it may her dust o're-run, And rescue it from putrefaction: So that no Colonie of wormes shall dare To plant themselves within her Sepulcher: And, canst thou then, from thy cold wombe dispense Such vapours, and chill damps, they may condense That heap of deaw to sheets of ice, that She Enshrin'd within a Christall cloud may be: So that the sacred ruines of her dust May not disband to Atomes, by the gust
Of any sawcy wind, or be exempt From their cold Vrne, and scatter'd to contempt: Canst thou for that rich blood thy lavish Brest Hath swallowed up, repay thy Interest In purple Flowers? which being thaw'd with heat; May from their pores such fragrant Odors sweat, They may perfume those Vapours, which her tomb Throwes out in mists from its corrupted womb; And more refine the aire, then if the spring Did to her Vrne, its verdant treasures bring; But if the needy barren earth repine To pay backe any Interest; or Fine, Vnto her Grave; my sighs shall be perfume, To aire her Dust, and such a flood of Rheume Shall from mine eyes break loose, that in few years, Her tomb it selfe shall be embalm'd with tears; Which being thus manur'd and softned, shall Teem with the Rose, and Violet, and all The fragrant Issue of the Spring, whose Flowers Shall alwaies be distilling pious Showers Of Balmy dew, as if they meant to shew, That since their first Originall they drew From out her Vrne, they gratefully let fall Those tears as Rights due to her Funerall; But why do I appeale to stones and flowers, And from their melting pores expect new showers, To stock my tears, since Nature too should bee Her selfe (in griefe) Competitrix with me? For sure her casquets broak, and falne to dust. To which (as her Exchequer) she did trust: The Balmy Perfumes of the Phoenix nest, And all the treasurers of the rifled East; Wherein she circumscrib'd the wealthy toiles, The drudging silkeworme spins, and all the spoiles Of ransack'd Elements, for in this Faire Both Indies with their wealth contracted were:
This piece of winnow'd earth, which she did strew With Roses, and pale Lillies, where they grew In kind, and reconciled mixtures, is Now crumbled to a heap of Atomis. This Star which shone with such refulgent light, Our Orb of State was by its Rayes made bright, Is stolne (alas) out of our Horizon, And drop'd to slime and putrefaction; But stay bold Pen, bespatter not her dust, Can her remaines shrink into slime or rust, When everie weed that growes about her Vrne Shall by my tears to Nard and Balsome turne? But where does Zeale transport me? 'tis a fault, (Sure) to disturb the silence of her vault, And breake that slumber, which like Opium Resolv'd to vapour, hangs about her Tomb: What though deaths impious hand move a disguise Of putrid scales, and threw it o're her eyes, Lest being blinded by their Light, his Dart Might have groap'd out its way, t'have found her heart. The last dayes flame shall burn these Scales away, And in her eyes kindle a second day; What though amidst our Orb, a star she shone, In Heaven she shines a Constellation: What though those liquid Saphires which each veine Of hers, within her Azure Channells did containe, And those two blushing Rubies Nature thrust Into her lips, be sullied with the dust Of her owne Ruines, when the generall Fire Againe refines them, they shall sparkle higher Then al the Easterne Jemmes: for sure the Tomb Is of a neer Alliance, to the womb, For as before the Infant can put on Symptomes of figure or proportion, It must first lye a shuffeld Embrio Pack'd up within the Cell o'th womb; even so
When she has layne a Masse of Ruines, till The Trump at Gods great Audit, with its shrill And awfull voice shall summon, and injoyne Each Tomb its drousie Reliques to resigne, Who sleep in dust, that so the Grave may be Both Womb, and Mid-wife to Eternitie: Those Rubies, Saphirs, Diamonds, which are Now lost i'th Rubbish of her Sepulchre, Shall be redeem'd, and purg'd from every staine That does benight their lustre, and again Be knit into one Frame, within which Cell Eternitie shall as an Inmate dwell. Then leave we thee unto thy selfe, faire soule, Exalted farre above the rude controule Of Fate, or the assault of Time, and see From thy bright Orb how everie Entitie The Womb of Nature teems with, comes forth lame, And full of dis-proportion in the Frame, And Structure of its parts, since thou art one, Who wert the Patterne for Prefection; The world lies gasping too: for, 'tis no doubt, But at that wound its life-blood bubbled out, VVhich death defac'd thee with, and if there be Things yet whose parts display some harmonie, Tis but thy dole of beautie they ingrosse, Those that want that, are crippled in thy losse. Her Epitaph. REader, this Tomb preserves in trust Beautie it selfe resolv'd to dust, or this Marble does inclose he Lilly, Violet and Rose, Beauties Ingredients; which within his shell do lie to be agin atch'd into flowers, and adorn hat naked earth which clothes her urn,
When thou knowest this, unsluce thy eyes, To mourn at Beauties Obsequies, And weep so long, till there appeares About her tomb a Sea of Tears; That she may, when the world expires, Gasping in its Funerall Fires, And to purge those sinnes away, Which it contracted every day, Does to it selfe a sacrifice become, Rise, like a second Venus, from her Tombe. An Elegie on Robert Earle of Caernarvon, slain at the battell of Newberie. WHoever will unsluce his eyes, and lave A streame of pious teares out on this Grave, Sure, cannot think those Obsequies mis-spent, He shall lay out upon this Monument: For, from the stone thus softened by his Eyes, So many springs of Lawrell shall arise, That Passengers shall think this tomb the Cell, Where unplum'd victorie did ever dwell. For even she her selfe, when Dormer died, Wounded through him, lay bleeding by his side; But he is dead without a sigh or groane, Vented by the worlds Genius, to bemoane His sad decease? for sure, his losse should be Sigh'd out to us, in no lesse Elegie. Do not the gratefull Elements conspire To pay some tribute back for that brave fire Which warm'd his bosome? and does now enshrine It selfe in theirs, which sure will so refine Their dull and sluggish matter, that 'twill be Improv'd agen to its first puritie; It from that foame each wrinkled billow strowes On the embroider'd shore a Venus rose,
No lesse, sure, then a Mars or Hermes must Rise from each graine of his unblemisht dust, If every Roman Victor could allow Each act of his a Statue, and endow His name with Trophies, that it nere might rust, Or be obscurely buried in his dust: We must impoverish each Corinthian Mine, And rob the Parian Quarries, to enshrine His name in Marble, for his actions will Each Page in times successive Annalls fill. What Cataracts of shot, what stormes of lead Were oft let loose on his unshaken head? That those which view'd him from a farre, began Much to suspect they saw a Leaden man: But when they saw him with such speed invade And breake the bodie of a Troop, it made Them change that Faith, and think that he had been Converted to some winged Cherubin; Or else so briefe and sudden was his Flight, Transform'd into a nimble beame of Light. But shall that flame which did so clearly burn Within his Brest, lye rak'd up in his Vrn, Vntill the last dayes generall Fire transmit A second light to re-enkindle it? No sure, his tomb cannot so check that Flame, But 'twill breake forth to shine about his name, Or in some bright and shaggie Comet rise, To light a toarch at his owne Obsequies. A Pastorall Court-ship. FAire Iulia let the heat of Love Which within thy Heart does move, And there is lodg'd as in its Sphere, Still from thine eyes each brinie teare,
In which dull sorrow thou dost steep, And never teach thy eyes to weep, But when some transcendent joy Does thy glutted senses cloy. Thou art Natures Magazine, Or her casket rather, in Whose narrow precincts she hath pent The treasure that both Indies sent: I'th closets of thy lips she locks The blushing Rubies of the Rocks: In the store-house of each eye Her refulgent Diamonds lie: In thy teeth her pearle she puts, And in each veine a Saphire shuts: Thy haire containes the gold o'th West: Thy breath the spices of the East: And o're thy skins faire Margent's drawn A curtaine of the finest Lawn: So that those Lillies sweet, which dare With thee in whitenesse to compare, To expiate so black a sin, Want white to do their penance in, And their vanquish'd heads do bow, In veneration of thy brow. See how the flowers and plants combine, And their od'rous leaves untwine, That in those sweet Exchecquers they May that stock of spices lay, Which (like Easterne winds) thy breath Does to'th perfum'd ayre bequeath. Canst thou these drooping flowers faire With thy powerfull beames repaire, And animate? and shall not I Light a flame up at thine eye? See how those Diamonds are dismaid, With which thy bosome is arraid,
Because the splendor that does rise From the Chrysolites of thy eyes, Does transcend their feeble light, And look as drowsie, as if night Lay hid in them, and will, I feare, Each melt into an envious teare: Canst thou thaw these, and shall not I With those teares that either eye From their brinie Springs impart, Melt the hardnesse of thy heart? If thou art barren in desire, And canst not burne in equall fire, Those sighs which from my bosome flow, A flame throughout my brest shall blow; And those frequent tears Ile shed From the cisternes of my head, Shall so manure thy heart, thou'lt be Fruitfull straight in love like me. On a sparke of fire fixing on a Gentlewomans brest. FAire Julia sitting by the fire, An amorous spark, with hot desire, Flew to her brest, but could not melt The chast snow there, which when it felt, And that resistance it did bide, For griefe it blush'd, and so it di'd. Yet lest it should prove ought unkind, It contrite ashes left behind. On a spark fastening on a Gentlewomans cheek. IF this small spark which bore so thin a blaze, Could in each part so much resentment raise,
And to your cheek so much of anguish waft, And on your skins unblemisht margent graft Such signalls of its rigour; oh then deeme What torments of a far more high esteeme, My martyr'd heart must struggle with, which fries In flames of Love, first kindled by your eyes. Ad Joannem Harmarum, Libellum De Lue Venereâ exarantem. QVas tibi praetendam grates, quae dona rependam, Harmare, aut meritò ingenti quae serta refundam? Qui gravidam morbis primo conamine Lernam, Praegnantem malis foecundam discutis Hydram; Vt faceres tantas prima Incrementaruinas, Crudi & nascentis tituli, tu coeca recludis Arcana herbarum, & Naturae scrinia pandis, Tu clausae exerces latebrosa cubilia terrae; Pugacem abstrusis Mineram quibus eruis antris, Exriae quae cruda luis cunabula damnet, Et restag nantem morbi transfundet humorem, Tuque poros reseras, cutisque suburbia solvis, Vt tomes excussi laxata per ostia morbi Effluat, & tenues sefe detrudat in auras; Tu blando Aetnaeas subducis clystere flammas, Et jecur immiti castigas putre Güaco, Atque abster sivis terges polluta Diaetis Viscera, tranquillo demulces pectora succo; Qui rheuma effu sum torpenti compede sistat: Herculeos tua jam manus est enixa labores, Herculeos tua jam manus est partura triumphos: Nam faustè à pigro faecum detersit acervo Augiae staulum vappasque excussit inertes: Suspecta Herculcae tandem est ac aemula clavae, Quae foecunda tuae famulatur gloria pennae, Nam Luis indomitae Lernam, & nova monstra subegit.
On the death of the much admired and much lamented, Mr. Francis Quarles. AMongst that solemne Traine of Friends, which sing Thy Dirge (great Soule) and to thy Name do bing, As to some shrine, the sacrifice of praise, Daigne to accept these course and home-spun Layes: Alas, what can the world expect from me, As tribute to thy Hearse, since if there be Within me any flame, or heat divine, That warms my brest, 'twas kindled first by thine; And from that pure and active Fire did come, Which is lockt up i'th Casquet of thy Tomb, Whose heat (perchance) may thaw my barren eyes, And make them shed some watrie Obsequies, But cannot make my drowsie Fancie flame, In sad and pious raptures to thy Name; Or light some Poem up, whose glimmering rayes, About thy Name in time to come might blaze; Or if it could, that sickly Flame would be, But a dim Index to thy memorie, And only here remaine like those few bright Streaks in the aire, when the expiring light Is blind with darknesse, and the day is done, To tell the world that there has been a Sun. As he that would disband the Diamond, must Encounter it with its owne proper dust: So he that would enshrine thy Name in Verse, Or strew some Epitaph upon thy Hearse, Can never any pure, or noble fire, Into his dull unactive thoughts inspire, Vnlesse that Fire his Fancie burnes with, bee First lighted by a spark that flew from thee; And as when he that frames a watch, would see What loose distemper, or infirmitie,
Is in the Fabrick, how the wheels are set, Or with what pace the sickly pulse does beat, Straight to the Sun applies his eye, and can Cure the disease by his Meridian: So he that would write well, and write of thee, And regularly winde up an Elegie, And in such equall poise his phansie set, The pulse might with well-paced numbers beat, Must all his lines proportion, and make fit To goe by the Meridian of thy wit. Thus from the duskie confines of thy urne, Thou shalt again to th'bankrupt world return: And after death (Fame shall thee so preferre) Be to thy selfe thy own Executer, That all our summes of wit may seem to be But onely Legacies paid in by thee. His Epitaph. REader, this Tombe is put in trust, To keep a heap of learned dust, Which, we dare presume, will shun The Fate of putrefaction. For, that salt which did remaine Cloyster'd up within his braine, Will so preserve his Reliques, they Shall never languish, or decay: However, let our eyes returne Streams of teares unto his urne: For, those his Reliques sure will free From all corruptibilitie: Or els, contracting into one, Will grow another Helicon. Nor have we any cause to feare, That we shall want the Muses there: For, when he died, they did become Themselves the Inmates to his tombe.
A thankfull acknowledgement to those Benefactours that contributed to the re-edifying of Clare-Hall in Cambridge. SHould we entomb your benefits within Vnthankfull silence, so deform'd a sin No teares would expiate, we might seeme to be Astonisht by some drow sie Lethargie, Or blasted with some Apoplectique Fit, VVhich had at once congeal'd both braine and wit; VVe therefore to your Names devoutly pay The tribute of our thanks, and would defray Our debt in nobler coyne, could we but vie In words, with our big thoughts, or amplifie Our hands, as wide as we can do our soules; But this in us our thriftie Fate controules: For you have snatcht us from the Eearth, where we Lay wrapt up in our owne deformitie, And have reduc'd a House that was become, Both to it selfe and Founders name, a tomb, And like th'Idaea of the Chaos, lay Deform'd, and indigested by decay, To shape and beauite, and do so prolong Its fading lustre, it againe growes young, Like wither'd Aeson, so that now we trust, Twill Phoenix-like revive from out its dust, And grow into one Fabrick (though 'twas shrunk Before into a scatter'd heap, and sunk Almost beneath its ruines) to upbraid The coldnesse of these times, which does invade Each hand, and so benums it, that we see It cannot open unto Charitie; But to improve, and widen out each Name Of yours, to such a pacious length of Fame,
They may survive, till time and they become Both Tenants, and both Inmates to one tombe: So that when Mauselaeum's shrink to dust, And Obelisques of Brasse disband with rust, When Pyramids themselves dissolve, and lie (Mauger their height) low in obscuritie; And all those swelling piles preceding time Establisht, onely to blanch o're their crimes; Or fortifie some name, against the rage Of Fate, and the rude batteries of age Shall be dispers'd to ashes, and be spent, Clare-Hill shall be your lasting Monument. And, though in other tombes youl'd shrink away, And melt into corruption, and decay, Your Fame this Charter to it selfe can give, Within this Monument you'l ever live. Vpon the sight of a Tombe. WElcome thou common Wardrobe, where we lay (When we throw off the luggage of our clay) Our weeds of earth, here the dull Peasant shall (Biting the pomp only o'th Funerall) Sleep even as warm under his turfe alone, As Kings beneath their coverlets of stone. Here slave, and tyrant, in this Marble Cell, Shall calmly meet, and both together dwell, Mingled into one heap of dust: here those That to improve their interest, do pose, And tire their wearied thoughts out, to display Some Engine, by whose powerfull succour, they May clasp their wide and vast designe, will finde, When they have stretcht endeavour, to unwinde Their wild attempts, this Earth is but a ball, Which when they struggle for to grasp, will fall
To dust between their hands, and never suffice Their spatious thoughts, till't stop both mouth and eyes. Here those refulgent eyes, that from their bright, And radient stock of glances, shed such light Through every part of our dark Orb, they shone A Constellation in our Horizon, Like two inanimate blind cinders, must Lie rak'd up in a shuffled heap of dust: Nay and that fire, which did so often dart Flame into Lovers brests, till either heart Glow'd with a mutuall fervour, must be here Drown'd in the deluge of a Funerall teare, And in this cabinet of ruines lie, A tribute paid unto mortalitie: Onely those nobler and eternall Fires Devotion in our melting soules inspires, Shall (when this frame sinks into dust, and all The heat that warmes this masse of earth, shall fall Into some gloomy vault) soare upwards, hence, Borne on the wings of peace, and innocence. On my selfe being sicke of a Feaver. LOrd, I confesse, I do not know Whether my dust shall yet, or no, I'th furnace of this Feaver, be Calcin'd into Eternitie: Whether through this red Sea of blood, Which in such a swelling flood From the unsluced channell ran, I shall passe o're to Canaan: Or that these sweats shall wash away From off my soule that heap of clay, In which, as in some narrow shell, She, like some lazie snaile, did dwell:
If it be now thy fatall doome, That I must melt into a Tomb, There by the last dayes fire once more To be made refined Ore, And so receive thy stamp agin, No more to be raz'd out by sin; And that this Flame I glow with, shall Into my hollow Marble fall, Then warme my soule with heavenly fire, That as these smokie heats expire, I being wing'd with that may flie Vp to Immortalitie. On the noyse of Thunder. BY Nature w'are inform'd, that when a Cloud Vapours endow'd with heat and cold do shroud The active hot, the sluggish cold assaile So long, till both dissolve their watrie Jaile, And break their watrie chaines, when through the aire, The glittring lightning spreads its fluent haire; So from those factious strugglings, and those throwes This clouds ore-laden womb is torne with, growes; That dismall clashing, and the noyse we heare, Which so amazes the astonisht Eare: But these are but conjectures, it may bring Its rise and growth from a far higher spring; For some malignant Exhalations, Drawne from a Mine of Sulphur, by the Suns Reflex may be inflam'd, or else that Fire The upper Region darts, may Flame inspire: Nay more, some sullen Vapour, which like Hay, Being long bound up in liquid fetters, may Give fire unto it selfe, or there may be Some other dark and gloomie cause, which we
Cannot, whilst dust hangs in our eyes descrie, Which may become its first Incendiarie: God has lockt up the Meteors in a mist, Which skreenes them from our sight, could we untwist The second causes, and divide that Line That Nature ties, yet could we not untwine The threds they're woven out of, or unwind The Mint, where their first Principles were coin'd. Lord, when thou speak'st in thunder from thy Throne, The Eccho of thy Voyce shall be a grone; When thou unclasp'st the windowes of the Skies, Supreme Divinitie, unsluce mine eyes, That when the spangled Aire its lightning weares, Those Flames may be put out with contrite teares. On one cured of the Stone. OVr first Originall from stones we drew, Ere since Deucalion and old Pyrrha threw Stones into men, and since by a defect In Nature, and the sins we daily act, We hatch that in us, which declares to all, We something of our first Originall Still treasure up, which is preserv'd within The caverns of the Lungs, or Reins, and in The circuit of the Bladder, which we try To crush, by each approved remedy, Which perad venture scatters it, yet still We leave untoucht the root that fed this ill, We may the stone i'th Bladder cure, its true, And that that grates upon the Reins subdue; But yet no Oyle, no Antidote, or Art, But only Grace, can cure the stone i'th Heart.
A Parley between an Epicure and a Christian. Ep VVHy dost thou thus deface thy self with tears, Before th'art tenanted by years? Call in those briny showers of dew, thine eyes Contribute as sad Obsequies, To the untinely Funerall of that grace, Which did before adorne thy face. Ch. Fond man, those teares are by mine eyes allow'd, To serve me for a Chrystall shroud, In whose thin folds, I my old man may hide, By contrition mortifide; And with these drops wipe off those spots of sin, Which have so stain'd my soule within. Ep. But why with throngs of gones do you enlarge The Theame of sorrow, and discharge Volleyes of sighs, that breath were better spent, In tricking up a complement, By which you might a Ladies heart surprize, And yet her brest ne're prejudice. Ch. Vaine man, these sighs, I like my Proxie send To Heaven, that there they may attend My scaling that bight Mansion, and be My Advocates to plead for me, When all by Gods citation summon'd are, To be arraigned at his Bar. Ep. But I adjure you to informe me, why You to such hash austeritie Farme out each houre, and to such strictnesse wed Your life? as if y'had long been dead, And your soule only mov'd a corps, your frame Such rigid fasts, to curb and tame Your carnall tumults banishing delight, The Confines of your Appetite:
Desist this rigour on your selfe to act; Since y'are not able to detect, Whether or no, when you your breath resigne; Any part of you shall decline Th'arrest of Death, since Fate sayes all must go, But whither, who can living know? Ch. Foole, therefore do I thus attempt to curb Those passions, that would disturb My purer thoughts, my flesh with fasts empaire, And employ my tongue in prayer, Checking the wild rebellions of my earth, And strangling of them in their birth; That being devested of that earthy weight, Which did oppresse, and clog my Faith, I might on wings of Contemplation flie, And soare beyond the vaulted skie; And by the scrutinie of Faith, Opticks see, What place in Heaven's design'd for mee, Ep. What is that Faith you vaunt of? I have read Natures large Book, contemplated Philosophies myst'ries, but ne're could know The cause from whence Faith first did flow. Ch. You may in quest of Natures secrets end Myriads of years, and ages spend, Till you all knowledge to your selfe ingrosse, Yet ne're know Faith, till you can spell Christs Crosse. A Collation between Death and Sleep. DEath, and his drowsie kinsman, Sleep, agree In all the symptomes of Conformitie; leep's caus'd by eating, for the naturall heat Entices exhalations from the meat, Transfus'd to Chylus, which the Braine possesse With an intoxicating drowsinesse;
Death too by fatall eating first came in, When our first Parents willfully did sin, And offer'd violence to Gods Decree, Tasting the fruit of the forbidden tree: And as when sootie night her darknesse sheds Through the vast Concave of the aire, and spreads A Vaile o're bright Hyperion, we devest Our bodies, to compose our selves to rest: So our enfranchis'd soules shall like wise be Disroab'd o'th weeds of their Mortalitie, VVhen death shall an eternall night disperse Through all those Functions that with life commerce. And as when the great eye o'th day displayes, In the illuminated aire, his Rayes, The Light dispers'd in glimpses does inspire Our hands againe our bodies to attire; So when the Trump at the last day shall all By its shrll Summons to Gods Audit call, And Christs the Sun of Righteousnesse shall come, To distribute to th' world a publike Doom, Our moulder'd and disbanded bodies must Quit the close confines of their beds of dust, To cloath again our widdow'd Soules, and be Enstated both with Immortalitie. In seipsum Febre iterum correptum, & pene confectum HEn me, Qualis edax liquefactis Ossibus Ignis, Incubat? attritas quae lassat Flamma Medullas, Quis Calor in Cineres redigit sinuosa Cerebri Tegmina? quae tortos laxant Incendia nervos? Quae{que} fatiscentes obstipant Nubila sensus, Et caecos volvunt adinertia Lumina Fumos? Vt plane Aetnaei sum maesta Figura Camini; Nam veluti Ignivemi serpunt è vertice Clivi,
Vndantes flammae fumis, & sulphure anhelat Moestus Apex montis, coctoque bitumine fervet: Dum glacie obstrictus torpèt pes montis inerti Qua Boreae afflatus torpentes evomit aeuras, Quae macra effusis obstipant arva pruinis: Frigora Plumatae sic dum nivis aemula, pigros Invasere pedes, caelefacta per Ilia serpunt Foecundi flammis ignes, qui naribus balant Perque Apicem capitis, fumo sa incendia volvunt. In me congestas fundat puer Hydrius undas Huc glomerent Plëades nimbisque impactus Orion Implicit as nubes, & densa volumina aquarum Hic reserunt, calidas quae sic effusa Favillas Ignitae febris deleant, quâ totus aduror, Et quâ marcentes populantur sanguinis artus Flamma potest febris tantos vibrare dolores? O Deus aeterrae est qualis tunc flamma Gehennae? On himselfe being stung by a Wasp. When first this busie testie Wasp did fix His sting in me, and did his venome mix With my untainted bloud, my skin begun To swell to an Imposthumation. How did each part by sympathie complaine, Stretch'd and distorted on the rack of paine? What flames did this Incendiarie fling From out the narrow quiver of his sting, Into each part? which through my veins were thrown, And through each Nerve and Arterie were blown. If then a Wasp can so afflict each sense, How great must be the sting of conscience?
On the Nativitie of our Saviour. VVHo can forget that ne're forgotten night, That sparkled with such unaccustom'd Light? Wherein when darknesse had shut in the day, A Sun at midnight did his beams display; And God who mans fraile house of earth compos'd Himselfe in a fraile house of earth enclos'd, Who did controule the Fire, Aire, Sea, and Earth, Was clad with all these foure, and had a birth In time, who was begotten before time, Received a birth, or th' early Sun did climb Th' ascent o'th East, whom the vast Aire, and Main, And Precincts of the earth could not confain, Is circumscrib'd now in so briefe a roome, Hee's lodg'd i'th circuit of a Virgins womb; Who light to him, that was all Light, did give, And made him, who was life it selfe, to live: Who in her arms bore him, whose hand controules The massie Globe, and bears up both the poles: And what improv'd the Miracle begun, He was at once her Father, Spouse and son: VVho then his Mother was by farre more old Yet equall age, did with his Father hold, VVho was a child, yet with his word did make The world, and with his voice this world can shake: Now Truths great Oracle it selfe was come, The Faithlesse Oracles were strucken dumb. No marvell if the Shepherds ran to see Him, that should everie Shepherds Shepherd bee: VVho was the Door, through whom a certain way To find out life, for all lost sheep there lay: And though this Sun of Righteousnesse did lie VVrapt up in (louds of darke Obscurity, Yet he could such a stock of light allow, As did the Heavens with a new Starendow,
Which with its beames did gratefully attend Him, who at first those streams of light did lend, And by the Conduct of its Rayes did bring The Easterne Kings to see their heavenly King. And though all Stars, by Natures Lawes, does run A course contrariant to the course o'th Sun; Yet loe, her Statutes violated were, For here the Sun was followed by a Starre. On Christs Passion, a Descant DArknesse had now clos'd up the worlds bright eye, And drawne a Maske of vapours o're the skie; And all the beamy tapers of the night In sable clouds had muffled up their light. Twas Pietie called in their beames, th'ad been Found Accessarie else to such a sin, They ne're could have assoill'd, though from their sphears They should themselves have drop'd i'th shape of tears: They had lent light and influence to betray Him, from whose light they borrow'd every ray. When with her pitchy Exhalation Night had thus vail'd the lustre of the sun, A Cataract of armed men did powre Themselves into that Garden, where each flowre By th' Incense of those Prayers that Christ expir'd A balmy stocke of fresh Perfumes acquir'd: And being now broake in, did forthwith run With glimmering torches, to find out the Sun; Yet could not this thick cloud of men benight This glorious Lamp, the Fountaine of all light, Till th' interposing of false Iudas lips Obscur'd his beams, and caus'd a black Eclipse: Yet when he snatcht his treacherous lips away, He straight shot forth such a refulgent Ray,
The Souldiers by their darkned eyes did find, Th' Excellencie o'th Object struck them blind: But as a dying Tapour, when it streames Its fainting light forth in contracted beams, Musters together all its sickly rayes, VVith those to stock and furnish out one blaze; Our Saviour, so to intimate, that He Still held a League with his Divinitie, Cited together such a stock of Light, That He astonisht the dull gazers sight, And by a sudden damp ev'n struck them blind That were made so before i'th eye o'th mind, Scattering them all to th' Earth, when they were even About to captivate the King of Heaven; But when he summon'd in his beames to be Again wrapt up in his humanitie, And he appear'd to them in's old array, Cloath'd in a garment woven out of clay, Not spangled o're with those Majestick Rayes, Which did at once enlighten and amaze, They straight invade him; and his guiltlesse hands Twisted in one with wreaths of cords, (whosebands Loos'd them) then guard him to the Judgement-hall, Who had for guard the Quire Angelicall. And now th' high Priest is brought to be accus'd Before the high Priest, who scoft at, and traduc'd Him, unto whom he his own Priesthood ow'd, And from which Spring all other Priesthood flow'd: And then transmitted him, (who once shall come To doom all Mankind) to receive his doom From Pilates mouth, who though there did arise Thick Exhalation from those Calumnies The black-mouth Jewes belch'd forth, could clearly see, Through those dark vapours Christs Integritie; And did his Innocence so much resent, That he decreed to wave his punishment,
And leave Barrahas, to be offer'd on Their Altar, for his expiation: But they to their first purposes did cleave VVith so much malice, they their King did leave, And chose an abject Thiefe, unhappy they, To let Barabbas steale their hearts away: Which when he saw, and that they still went on T'exact of him Christs Crucifixion, He left them to their rage, and from his blood VVasht his pale hands, who with a crimson flood VVasht off our sins, so that for this black deed VVater it selfe did expiation need. VVhen thus the Jewes their Saviour had surpris'd (VVho for their sins was to be sacrific'd) They to a feeble Pillar straight did chaine The Pillar that did Natures Frame sustaine, And with rude stripes to plough his back begin, Whose stripes doe heale' the wounds impos'd by sin: The souldiers next with supple knees do bring A faigued Haile unto their teall King, And with a Crowne of thornes his head empound, VVho with a Crowne of Glorie could surround Their wretched heads, then spit at, and dispise Him, that with spittle gave the blind man eyes: (Strange Prodigie, the King of Kings has none But spittle for his holy Vnction) And with those hands he gave them does embase VVith scarres the sacred impresse of his face: His bodie with a scarlet Robe they dresse, VVho clothes the naked with his Righteousnesse; And for an awfull Scepter in his hand, They place a Reed, whose Scepter does command The spacious Bulk of Nature, and controules That massiie Globe that hangs between the Poles. VVhen they had thus a cloud of hatred shed In showers of scoffs upon his guiltlesse head,
They lead him to mount Calvarie, where he Was to wind up his direfull Tragedie; And by the way enforc'd himselfe to beare His Crosse, which was reciprocally there To beare up him, where being arriv'd, he's laid Vpon the Crosse, his Altar to be made, The publike Sacrifice, and expiate The guilt of Sin, and crush the power of Fate: And now made ragged with his wounds, and rent With inward torture, being embost, and spent With this last agonie, he did addresse Himselfe t'impiore some julip, to suppresse The flames of thirst; the Jewes did straight prefer A punge, which was bedew'd with vinegar, To calme his scorching thirst, who did unlock The stony Casquet of the barren Rock, And thaw'd its liquid treasures, to redresse That thirst, which Israel scorcht i'th wildernesse: Yet though he cleft that Rock, he could not part The rock contracted in each Jewish heart. When Christ had tasted this sowre Opiate, And saw the Prophesies had spun their Fate, His breath exhaled to purge the aire, and he Resign'd his tir'd and wearied Soule, to be Transported, on the downy wings of Blisse, Vp to the spangled vault of Paradise; And with it flew the good Theefes soule, who even Stole life at death, and made a theft of Heaven: But lest that Christ, with such neglect should fall, He might want Rites to grace his Funerall, The Sun call'd in his light, to specifie, That men dust do that which he durst not see; Day put on Night, lest she should seeme to lack, For so great losse, her Ceremonious Black; The palsied Earth so shook, as if her womb, She meant to open, and become his Tomb;
The Dead deserted their cold Vrnes, to see Him, that o're Death could claime a victorie: So that it seemes, ev'n Nature here did turne A Mourner too, t'attend him to his Vrne: And now, being dead, a Speare was through his side, By a rude hand dismist, which wound may hide Our numerous sins, or if there be not roome, We may inter them all within his Tomb: The Souldiers too, in lots their fortunes drew, To see to whom Christs garments would accrue, As a just Prize, they dreaded to dissect His seamelesse Coat, yet that we daily act, Which by these barbarous Souldiers ne're was done, We part his Coat by our division. Whilst thus Christs vestments were in Lotterie, Expos'd a prey to Fortune, Joseph, he Pilate (with eyes thaw'd into teares) implor'd Christs body torne with wounds might be restor'd: Thrice happie man, the Body he obtaines, And his owne soule too by that purchase gaines; And having now his lawfull Boon fulfill'd, He gather'd all those Balmes that were distill'd From weeping Trees, and took those unctious teares, That Myrrha in a Tree imprison'd weares, And made this confluence of Balsoms meet All in Christs wounds, that they might make it sweet; Then in white Linnen did his Corps enshrine, Whose innocence did cloath his sins as sine: And next, this sacred Relique did inter In the dark climate of a Sepulcher, Hewen in a Rock: Oh! who'ld not breathe a grone? The Rock it selfe is laid beneath a Stone.
A divine Aspiration. O Thou who art the good Samaritan, Whose hand, when sin both strips and woundeth, can Shed such a balme upon us, 'twill ensure Those wounds from rankling, and improve their cure. Be, as thou art, the Embleme of the Vine, And in my wounds powre in thy oyle, and wine. And, as thou heretofore the rock didst part, So with thy grace, Lord, cleave my stonie heart. Naile to thy Crosse my sins, and let them have A room to burie them within thy grave. Thy stripes can heale my stripes, thy righteousnesse My Scarlet sins with its white robe can dresse. The water lav'd out at thy wounded side, Will wash my guilt off, and that supple tide Which from that fluce in such full streams did bleed. My soule, even hunger-starv'd with sin, shall feed. Thy wounds shall be my wounds, thy teares shall be My teares; for, thy whole passion was for me. Let thy all-saving merits but ent wine My tottering faith; thy heaven too shall be mine. On the future burning of the World. NO more shall the o're-laden clouds dissolve In spouts of raine, and so the world involve In a wild deluge, which shall swell so high, Its to wring height shall tempt the vaulted skie; And even invite the sullen starres, to weare Vpon each glittring beame a mourning teare; Which they againe shall mutually let fall, As a Rite due to the worlds Funerall. No more shall warie mankinde, to beguile The rage o'th Flood, lurk in a wooden Ile:
But when the tainted world is so defil'd With her pollutions, and so deeply soil'd With the dark spots of sin, that 'twere but vaine To think, that water should wipe off each staine That sullies it; God will display his ire In cataracts of all-consuming fire, With which this Globe of Earth so long shall burn, Till it into repentant ashes turn: And, til, at last, it but one Torch become, To light expiring Nature to her Tombe. On a Gentleman buried in one grave with his daughter, before deceased. REader, those sleep beneath this stone, Whom life made two first out of one; But having now resign'd their breath, They will grow one againe by death. For, should we on his grave intrude, To view how much vicissitude Attends on Nature, and how she Masks her selfe in varietie Of numerous shapes, and after dare To paddle in his sepulcher, Amongst his dust, we might inferre, He was shuffled into her. For, time determines, that both must Resolve into one heap of dust: But when the world it selfe expires, Panting with heat, and God requires Each gloomy vault, and hollow tombe, To open its corrupted wombe, And give their ashes, which were pent, And Cas'd up there, enfranchisement, That being re-edified, they may No more be obvious to decay,
Or Natures Tumults, this last birth Will disunite their mingled Earth: And, as their first life did divide them, so This second life again will make them two. On thought of our Resurrection. VVHo can be of so cow'd a Soule, hee'ld feare To be regenerate i'th sepulcher, Since who exactly looks into the tombe, Shall finde 'tis but the embleme of the wombe, To which wee're not confin'd, but trusted, so, As if we lay there in deposito: For, when our dust is gather'd into th'urne, It lies but hostage till the soules returne. And, as the Phoenix, when she gasping lies Vpon her tragick pile of Spiceries, And glowes with heat, her fleshie cinders must, By the Suns rayes, be martyr'd first to dust, Before her pregnant ashes can redeem Themselves from ruine, or again can teem With a new Phoenix: so, before this earth We beare about us, can improve its birth To immortality, its whole compact Must first be so disjoynted, and so slackt, It fall to dust; and then 'twill moulded be To such a body, that Eternitie It selfe shall farme that Tenement, which shall No more be obvious to a Funerall. And, as before men can compile, or frame Their glasses, they their ashes first i'th flame Transfuse to Chrystall; so, before our dust Can be assoil'd from excrements, or rust, Ravel'd amongst it by our tombes, and be Improv'd to such a cleare transparencie,
It shall no more incumber, or controule The eye from taking a survey o'th soule, It must be by the generall fire refin'd, And be to a translucent Masse calcin'd: So shall each tombe become Gods Mint, where He (Our earth being purg'd from all impuritie) Will on it coyne the Image of his Face, Which Time no more, nor death shall ne're deface. FINIS.
The Table. ON the beholding his face in a Glasse. pag. 1 On the sight of a Clock. p. 2 On a Gentlewoman dying in Child-bed of an abortive Daughter. ibid. On a Gentlewoman much deformed with the small Pox. p. 3 OnJulia, throwing Snow-balls at him. ibid. To Sir Henry New, upon his re-edifying the Church ofCharleton in Kent. p. 4 On the sight of a Rivelet, that eight foot off from its foun∣taine dis-embogues it selfe into the Medway. p. 5 On Mr.Jo. Joscelin, dying of a Feaver. p. 6 To a Gentlewoman singing. p. 7 Vpon the death of Mr. Francis Thornhill. p. 8 Vpon a Farmer, who having buried five of his children of the Plague, planted on each of their graves an Apple∣tree. p. 9 An Epitaph on Mris. E. W.Z ibid. Vpon the approach of night. p. 10 Considerations upon Eternitie. ibid. A divine Hymne. pag. 13 On the death of a Prince. p. 15 To a Lady viewing her selfe in her Glasse. p. 16 On the death of Sir Simon Harcourt. p. 17 On a Gentlewoman struck blind with the small Pox. p. 18 On the death of Mr.George Sandys. p. 19 On the sight of some rare Pieces and Monuments of An∣tiquitie, in an Antiquaries Study. p. 21 An Epithalamium. p. 23 On a Nymph pourtrayed in stone, that powred forth two
spouts of water from her eyes into a Garden. p. 24 On one dead of a Dropsie. ibid. To a Gentlewoman viewing her selfe in her Glasse. p. 25 An Elegie offered up to the memorie of Anne Countesse of Caernarvon. ibid. Her Epitaph. p. 29 An Elegie onRobert Earle of Caernarvon. p. 30 A Pastorall Court-ship. p. 31 On a spark of fire fixing on a Gentlewomans brest. p. 33 On a spark fastening on a Gentlewomans cheek. ibid. Ad Joannem Harmarum, Libellum de Lue Venereâ ex∣arantem. p. 34 On the death of Mr. Francis Quarles. p. 35 His Epitaph. p. 36 A thankfull acknowledgement to those Benefactours that contributed to the re-edifying of Clare-Hall in Cam∣bridge. p. 37 Vpon the sight of a Tomb. p. 38 On the Author being sick of a Feaver. p. 39 On the noyse of Thunder. p. 41 On one cured of the Stone. p. 41 A Parley between an Epicure and a Christian. p. 42 A Collation betwèen Death and Sleep. p. 43 In seipsum Febre iterùm correptum, & penè confectum. p. 44 On himselfe being stung by a Wasp. p. 45 On the Nativitie of our Saviour. pag. 46 On Christs Passion, a Descant. p. 47 A Divine Aspiration. p. 52 On the future burning of the World. ibid. On a Gentleman buried in one grave with his Daughter before deceased. p. 53 On thought of our Resurrection. p. 54 FINIS.
