P2530 99832803 37277
The KING AND THE COBLER, Printed for C. Dennisson, at the Stationers-Arms within Aldgate.
THE Pleasant and Delightful HISTORY OF King Henry 8th. AND A COBLER, RELATING How he came acquainted with the Cobler, and the Plea∣sant Humours that happened thereupon, &c. To which is added, The Cobler's Song in the Kings Celler. Printed for C. Dennisson, at the Stationers-Arms, within Aldgate. Price Two-pence.
A PLEASANT and Delightful Story OF King HENRY the VIII. AND A COBLER: CHAP. I. How King Henry the 8th. used to visit the Watches in the City, and how he came acquainted with a merry and a Jovial Cobler. IT was the Custome of King Henry the Eigth, to Walk late in the Night into the City Disguised, to take no∣tice how the Consta∣stables and Watch performed their
full Guarding the City Gate, but also in diligent Watching the inward parts of the said City, that so they might prevent those Disturbances and Casualties which often happens in great, and Populous Cities in the Night. This he did oftentimes, without the least discovery who he was, returning home to White-Hall early in the morning. Now in his return home through the Strand, he took notice of a certain Cobler, who was constantly up and at Work, Whistling and Singing every mor∣ning; he therefore resolved to see him, and be acquainted with him; in order to which he immediately knocks off the Heel of his Shooe, by hitting it against the Stones: Having so done, he bounced at the Coblers Stall; who's there, cries the Cobler? Here is one▪ said the King. With that the Cobler opened his Stall door, and the King asked him, if he could set on his Heel again? Yes that I can, says the Cobler. Come in honest Fellow, and  thee down by me, and I
will do it for you strait; the Cob∣ler scraping his Awls and Old Shooes to one side, to make room for the King to sit by him. The King being hardly able to forbear Laugh∣ing at the kindness of the Cobler, asked him if there was not a House hard by which sold a Cup of Ale, where the People were up? Yea, (said the Cobler) there is an Inn o∣ver the way, where I believe the folk of the house are up; for the Carriers go from thence very early in a Mor∣ning. With that the King borrowed an old Shooe of the Cobler, and went over to the Inn, desiring the Cobler to bring his Shooe to him thither, so soon as he had put the Heel on again; the Cobler promised he would. So making what haste he could to put the Heel on, he carried it over to the King, saying; Honest Blade, here is thy Shooe again; I'le warrant it will not come oft in haste. Very well, said the King, What must you have for your pains? A Couple of Pence (answered the Cobler.) Well, said the King, be∣cause
merry Fellow, here is a Tester for thee. Come sit thee down by me, I will drink to thee a whole Pot, here's a good Health to the King: with all my heart, said the Cobler, I will pledge thee were it Water. So the Cobler sat himself down by the King, and was very merry, and drank oft his Liquor very freely. He also sung some of his merry Songs and Cat∣ches, whereat the King Laughed heartily, and was very Pleasant and Iocuno with the Cobler; telling him withal, that his Name was Harry Tudor, and that he belonged to the Court, and if he would come and see him there, he would make him very welcome, because he was such pleasant merry Company, and char∣ged him to be there, and not to for∣get his Name, but to ask any one for him about the Court, and they will bring you to him: For (said the King) I am very well known at the Court. Now the Cobler little dream'd that it was the King which spoke to him, much less that the Kings Name was Harry Tudor: Therefore
with a great deal of Confidence, he stands up and pulls off his Hat, and makes two or three fine scrapes with his Legs, gives the King many thanks, withal telling him, that he was one of the honestest Fellows he ever met with∣al in his Life-time. And though (he had never been at Court) yet it should not be long before he would make a Holiday to come and see him. Here∣upon the King discharging the House for what he had drank, would have taken his leave of the Cobler. But the Cobler taking him by the hand, said, By my faith, you must not go yet, you shall first go and see my poor Habitation; I have there a Tub of good Nappy Ale was never Tapt yet, you must needs go and taste of it; for you are the honestest Merriest Blade that I ever met withal, and I love an honest merry Companion with all my heart.
CHAP. II. How the Cobler Entertained the King in his Celler, and of the Disturbance they had by the Coblers Wife Ioan. SO the Cobler took the King with him over the way, where he had a Celler adjoyning to his Stall, which was handsomely and neatly Furnished for a poor Man of his pro∣fession: Into this Celler he had the King, there, saith he, sit down, you are Welcome: But I must desire you to speak softly, for fear of wake∣ing my Wife Joan, who lies here hard by (shewing the King a close Bed, made neatly up at one corner of the Celler, much like unto a Closet) and if she awake, she will up with a Iuniper Lecture, will make your Ears ding again. At which Speech of the Coblers, the King Laugh'd, and told him, He would be mindful to observe his Di∣rections. With that the Cobler kindled a Fire, and fetch'd out his Brown Loaf, from which he cut a
lusty Toast, which he set a Baking at the Fire; then he brought out his Cheshire Cheese; Come (saith the Cobler) will you eat some Cheshire-Cheese? there is as good Fellow∣ship in Eating, as there is in Drink∣ing; which made the King admire the Honest Freedom of the Cobler. So having eat a bit, the Cobler be∣gan a Health to all true hearts and merry Companions: at which the King smiled, saying, God-a-mercy, Friend, I will pledge you. In this manner they eat together, until it was almost break of Day: the Cob∣ler being very free of his Liquor, and delighting the King with seve∣ral of his Old Stories, insomuch that the King was highly pleased with the manner of the Coblers entertainment. When on a sud∣den, the Coblers Wife Joan began to awake: E'faith (says the Cob∣ler) you must be gone now my Wife Joan begins to Grumble, she will wake presently, and I would not for half the Shooes in my Shop, she should find you here. So taking
by the Hand, he led him up Stairs, saying, Farewel honest Blade, it shall not be long before I will make a Ho∣lidy, and come see thee at Court: You shall be welcome, replyed the King: So they both parted, the King on his way to White-Hall, and the Cobler to his Celler, putting all things to rights again before his Wife Joan arose, went to work again, Whistling and Singing, as merrily as he used to do: Being much satisfied that he had happened on so good a Com∣panion, and much pleasing himself in his thoughts how Merry he should be when he came to Court. CHAP. III. How the Cobler prepared himself to go to the Court, and how he was set out after the best manner, by his Wife Ioan. NOw as soon as the King came home, he sent out Orders a∣bout the Court, That if any en∣quired
for him by the Name of Harry Tudor, they should immedi∣ately bring the Person before him what ever he was, without any further Examination of him. Now the Cobler thought every Day a Month till he had been at Court to see his new acquaintance, and was much troubled how he should get leave of his Wife Joan, for he could not go without her knowledge, by reason he did resolve to make him∣self as Fine as he could; for his Wife always kept the Keys of his Holiday Cloaths. Whereupon one Evening as they sat at Supper, find∣ing her in a very good humour, he began to lay open his mind to her, telling her the whole Story of his new acquaintance, repeating it over and over again, that he was the ho∣nestest Fellow that ever he met with∣al. Husband (quoth she) because you have been so ingenious to tell me the whole truth, I will give you leave to make a Holiday for this once; you shall go to the Court, and I will make you as Fine as I can: So it
was agreed that he should go the next day. Whereupon Joan arose betimes the next morning, to Brush up her Husbands Holiday Cloaths, and to make him look as smug as she could: She Washt and Iron'd his Lace Band, and made his Shooes shine that he might see his Face in 'em. Having done this, she made her Hus∣band to rise and pull off his Shirt, then she washt him with warm Water, from Head to foot, putting him on a clean Shirt, afterwards she dressed him in his Holiday Cloaths, pinning on his Lace-Band in Pimlico. CHAP. IV. The Coblers Reception at Court, with the manner of his Behaviour before the King. THe Cobler being thus set forth, strutted through the Street like a Crow in a Gutter, thinking him∣self as fine as the best of them all. In this manner he came to Court, staring
on this body, and that body, as he walkt up and down, and not know∣ing who to ask for Harry Tudor, at last he espyed one as he thought, in the Habit of a Serving-Man, to him he makes his Address, saying, Dost thou hear honest Fellow, do you know one Harry Tudor, which belongs to the Court? Yes, said the Man, follow me and I will bring you to him: with that he had him presently up into the Guard-Chamber, telling one of the Yeomen of the Guard there was one that enquired for Harry Tudor. Replyed the Yeoman, I know him very well, if you will please to go along with me, I will bring you to him imme∣diately. So the Cobler followed the Yeoman, much admiring the Finery of the Rooms he went through, he thought within himself, that the Yeoman was mistaken in the person whom he enquired after: he there∣fore pulled him back by the Coat, and told him, that he did believe he was mistaken in the Person whom he enquired after. For (said he) him
who I look for, is a plain merry ho∣nest Fellow, his Name is Harry Tu∣dor: We drank two Pots together, not long since, I suppose he may be∣long to some Lord or other about the Court. I tell you Friend, replyed the Yeoman, I know him very well, do but follow me, and I shall bring you to him straight. So going forward, he came at last to the Room where the King was, accompanied with se∣veral of his Nobles who attended him. As soon as the Yeoman had put by the Arras, he spoke aloud, say∣ing; May it please your Majesty, here is one that enquires for Har∣ry Tudor. The Cobler hearing this, thought he had committed no less than Treason, therefore he up with his Heels and run for it. But not being acquainted with the several turnings and Rooms through which he came, he was soon overtaken, and brought before the King, whom the Cobler little thought to be the Per∣son he enquired after: Therefore in a trembling condition, he fell down
upon his knees, saying; May it please your Grace, may it please your High∣ness, I am a poor Cobler, and enqui∣red for one Harry Tudor, who is a very honest Fellow, I mended the Heel of his Shooe not long since, for which he paid me nobly, and gave me two or three Pots to boot: And I had him over afterwards to my Celler▪ where we drank part of a Tub of nappy Ale, and was very Merry, until my Wife Joan began to Grumble, which put an end to our Merriment for that time. But I told him, I would come to the Court and see him as soon as conveni∣ently I could. Well, said the King, be not troubled; do you know this ho∣nest Fellow again if you see him? Yea, that I do from a thousand (replyed the Cobler.) Then said the King, stand up and be not afraid, but look well a∣bout you, peradventure you may find this honest Fellow amongst this Com∣pany. Whereupon the Cobler arose and looked wishfully upon the King, and the rest of his Nobles, but to lit∣tle or no purpose. For though he saw something in the Kings face which he
thought he had seen before, yet he could not imagine him to be Harry Tudor, whose Heel of his Shooe he had mend∣ed, and who had been so merry with him, both at the Inn and at his own Celler. He therefore told the King, he did not expect to find Harry Tudor among such fine Folks as he saw there; but that the person that he looked for, was a plain honest true-hearted fellow. Adding withal, that he was sure, that did Harry Tudor but know that he was come to Court, he would make him welcome. At which Speech of the Coblers, the King had much ado to forbear laughing out-right: But keep∣ing his Countenance as steady as he could, he spoke to the Yeomen of the Guard, here (saith he) take down this honest Cobler into my Celler, and let him drink my Health, I will take order that Harry Tudor shall come to him presently; so away went the Cob∣ler ready to leap out of his skin for joy, not only that he had come off so well, but also that he should find his Friend Harry Tudor.
CHAP. V. The Coblers Entertainment in the King's Celler; and how he met with his new Friend Harry Tudor, and how he come to know him to be the King. THe Cobler had not been long in the King's Celler, before the King came to him in the same Habit which he had on when the Cobler mended his Shooe; whereupon the Cobler knew him, and run and embraced him, say∣ing, Honest Harry, I have made a Ho∣liday on purpose to come and see you; but I had much ado to get leave of my Wife Joan, who was loath I should loose so much time from my work; but I was resolved to see you, I therefore made my self as fine as I could. But (i'le tell you Harry) when I came to the Court I was in a peck of troubles how to find you out; but at last I met with a Man who told me he knew you very well, and that he would bring me to you; but instead of doing so, he brought me before the King, which had almost frightned me out of my seven
senses. But in good faith (added the Cobler) I am resolved to be Merry with you, since I have the good for∣tune to meet with you at last. I that you shall, replyed the King, we will be as merry as Princes. With that he call'd for a large Glass of Wine, and drank to the Cobler the King's good Health. God-a-mercy, said the Cob∣ler, honest Harry, I will pledge thee with all my heart. Now after the Cobler had drank about four or five good Healths, he began to be Merry, and fell a singing his old Songs and Catches, which pleased the King very much, and made him laugh heartily. When of a sudden several of the No∣bles came into the Celler, extraordi∣nary rich in Apparel, who all stood bare to Harry Tudor, which put the Cobler into a great amazement at first, but recovering himself, he lookt more wishfully upon Harry Tudor: when presently he knew him to be the King, which he saw in the Presence-Chamber, tho' in other Habit, he im∣mediately fell down upon his knees, saying, May it please your Grace, may
it please your Highness, I am an honest poor Cobler, and mean no harm: No, no, said the King, nor shall receive none here. He commanded him there∣fore to rise up, and be as merry as he was before: and though he knew him now to be the King, yet he should use the same freedom with him, as he did when he mended the Heel of his Shooe. This kind Speech of the Kings, and three or four Glasses of Wine more, made the Cobler to be in as good hu∣mour as he was before, telling the King several of his pritty Stories, and singing some of his best Songs; very much to the satisfaction of the King and his Nobles. The COBLERS Song in the KING'S Celler. To the Tune of, Ienny Gin. COme let us drink the t'other Pot, our sorrows to confound, We'l laugh and sing before the King, so let this Health go round: For I am bold as bold can be,
no Cobler e're was Ruder, Then here good fellow, here's to thee, remembring Harry Tudor. When I am at work within my Stall, upon him I shall think, His kindness I to mind will call, where e're I eat or drink: His kindness was to me so great, the like was never known, His kindness I will still repeat, and so shall my Wife Ioan. I'le laugh when I sit in my Stall, and merrily i'le Sing, That I with my poor Last and Awl, am fellow with the King: But it is more I must confess, then I at first did know, But Harry Tudor ne'rtheless, resolves it shall be so. And now farewel unto White-Hall, I homewards must retire, To Sing and Whistle in my Stall, my Ioan will me desire: I do but think how she will laugh, when she hears of this thing, How he that drank her Nut-brown Ale, was Englands Royal King.
CHAP. VI. How the Cobler became a Courtier. NOw the King considering the plea∣sant humour of the Cobler, how innocently merry he was, and free from any Designs, and that he was a person that laboured very hard, and took a great deal of pains for a small Liveli∣hood, was pleased out of his Princely Grace and favour, to allow him a libe∣ral Annuity of forty Mark a year, for the better support of his jolly humour, and the maintenance of himself and his Wife Joan; and that he should be ad∣mitted one of his Court, and that he might have the freedom of his Celler when ever he pleased, which being so much beyond the Coblers expectation, did highly extenuate the Coblers hu∣mour, much to the satisfaction of the King. So after a great many Legs and Scrapes, he returned home to his Wife Joan, with the joyful News of his kind Reception at Court, which so well pleased her, that she did not think much at the great pains she took in Tricking him up for that Iourney. FINIS.
Charles Dennisson, Bookseller, printer's or publisher's device At the Sign of the Stationers-Arms within Aldgate, Furnisheth any Coun∣try Chapmen or others, with all sorts of BOOKS and BALLADS at Rea∣sonables Rates.
