P3184 13739565 101656
THE REGULATING Silver Coin, Made Practicable and Easie, TO THE GOVERNMENT AND SUBJECT. Humbly submitted to the Consideration of both Houses of Parliament. By a Lover of his Country. LONDON, Printed for Henry Bonwick, at the Red-Lion in St. Paul's Church-Yard. 1696.
THE REGULATING Silver Coin, &c. VVRiting on so curious, and intricate a Subject, I have great Reason to bespeak the Candour of the Reader. A Book of this Nature cannot but expect to meet with great Opposition, and 'tis very probable from Two sorts of Men especially, viz. Those that know little of the Subject-Matter, and those that know much.
They that know little are Jealous, and they that know much Opiniatre, and whilst one will not take Pains to comprehend a thing, another taketh too much to overthrow it. But as I hope I shall say nothing here, to be pity'd; so I am on the o∣ther side pretty secure from Envy, be∣cause, the greatest Credit that can be gotten, by a thing of this Nature, Mr. Lowndes. doth already seem to be engross'd by a late learned and industrious Writer upon this Subject. It was, I must needs say, a prudent piece of Service the Lords of the Trea∣sury did the Nation, and more parti∣cularly the Parliament, under whose Judgment this matter justly falls, by imploying so able a Pen to clear the way, in giving a true, and entertain∣ing Account of Matter of Fact.
But I must do my self that little piece of Justice too, as to acknowledge the main Design of these Papers was laid before I could have a sight of that Book: And now I am ready enough to confess my own Weakness, and Insuffi∣ciency, for so great an Undertaking; nor do I pretend to write a Stile equal to that experienc'd Minister, but am contented to be understood without shining, and to offer Mathematical Reasoning, without polishing and Or∣nament. When I at first form'd the whole Scheme, I had more Leisure, by much, than when I put it in Writing, and I can better answer for my Design, than for my way of expressing it; and there∣fore all the Favour I expect or ask, is, that the Theorem, which is the main of the Work, may not suffer for the Inar∣tificialness of the Problems that lead to it.
I affect Truth and Plainness, and a sincere Love to my Country. Whatsoever I have read or heard on this Subject, hath brought the Matters to this Dilemma, that either Coin must want of its intrinsic Value, so as to disatisfie most of the King's loving Subjects, and endanger a fatal stop to Trade; or if it is to be made of near an intrinsic Value, according to the Rate Silver shall go at in the time of Coining, then upon every little Rise of Silver higher than that Price, we are in danger of having it ex∣ported and melted down; and so e∣very Parliament may meet with the same Difficulties we at present labour under in the badness and scarcity of Sil∣ver Coin.
That which I pretend to, is, to ob∣viate both these Dangers, or otherwise I confess I might have spar'd my Pains; for he who hath provided for one and not the other, hath at the best but done half the Work. There are three Terms of Value, up∣on the right Understanding of which, much depends, viz. Extrinsic, Intrinsic, Real.
DEFINITIONS. EXtrinsic Value of Money is the Denomination and Power, that is given it by Authority. Intrinsic Value is the necessary and Natural Value, always and every where inherent in the Species. Real Value is a Certain Value more or less than Extrinsic, or Intrinsic, ad∣herent to the Species, with respect to time and place. TWO things are now under Con∣sideration. 1. The Badness of our Sil∣ver Coin. 2. The Scarcity of it.
CHAP. I. Of the present badness of our Coin BY Current Coin, I mean not that which is Current by Law, but by Custom; that which People are forc'd to take for want of better, to the great Grievance of the Subject, Dishonour of the Kingdom, and Ob∣struction of Trade. For every Man now is destitute of a sufficient Pledge and Security for his Personal Estate, unless he will take Personal Security, or find out a Mort∣gage, or rely upon a Bank. Personal Security is now less than e∣ver, the publick Banks have so drain'd
or so engag'd at least the Traders in Money. Mortgages are very hard to be found, for small Summs, and much har∣der for great ones, since the establish∣ment of the new Banks. And as for a sole reliance on the Cre∣dit of the new Banks I leave that for other Hoads to discuss; I am of the Opinion it was never intended that they should be the only Security for Personal Estates, and that People should carry in their Money to 'em out of ne∣cessity, and not choice. And how dishonourable it is to the King and Kingdom that our Money should be so suddenly debased to such a shameful Degree, foreign States will soon determine: Now that it doth not become so by publick Authority but by Conni∣vence of the Sovereignty, or Necessities
of the Nation, is not stating the thing at all less Dishonourably. For Connivence at a Fault discovers either an Ignorance of it, or Inability to correct it, or design in making use of it. 'Tis plain enough the Government is not Ignorant of it. His Majesty in His Speech to both Houses of Parliament, shews He hath no design in making use of it, because He recommends the redressing of it to their Consideration, and therefore the not redressing it, can be only imputa∣ble to the Weakness and Poverty of the State: And what Inferences, not only the French, but all other Politicians may draw from thence are very obvious. The finest Clothes that our Soldiers can put on, in the Field, would not
at all dazzle the Eyes of the Confede∣rate. Princes, nor strike any desponden∣cies into the Minds of our Enemies, if they shall all come to know that the whole Power of England is at this time held up by the imaginary Value of Birmingham half Crowns and Shillings. It will hearten our Enemies, and discourage our Friends, very much, when they shall come to know that the Nummary Wealth of England is al∣most vanish'd, the Silver Coin gone, and the Royal Mint at a stand. No Body will believe that we can long subsist at this rate; and indeed 'tis impossible we should, for if 'tis now much harder to redress than it was a year ago, and that means can∣not be yet found out to do it, what Hopes shall we have of ever doing it 'till the War is ended? and what Hopes shall we have of bringing our Enemies to Terms, whilst they are sen∣sible of our great Poverty.
The only way, sure, to bring the French King to Reason, will be by shewing him we are Able to continue the War as long as he can possibly be Willing, which he can never be∣lieve, so long as he sees our Money, by which he judges our Wealth to be imaginary only, and not real Silver. Besides all this, we are in apparent Danger hereby of being more effe∣ctually and suddenly ruin'd by our Friends. For if this Sessions of Parliament should break up without regulating the Coin, what Consequences may pos∣sibly ensue? It is not impossible that Foreigners in all parts of Christendom should ime∣diately set themselves to counterfeit our base Money.
There are beyond Seas as good Chymists, and Black Smiths as at Lon∣don, or Birmingham, and 'tis not impos∣sible that they should secretly Import as much base Money, resembling that which goes current among us, and which hath not the intrinsic Value of One Shilling in Three, as if they please may not only buy up and Ex∣port Two or Three Millions Worth of our Staple Commodities, affording 'em Cheaper abroad than we can at home; but as much Worth of our imported Commodities, even Gold it self, if they like that Trade better. Such an Importation of Money would I fear, be of worse Consequence than all our Exportation of Silver and Gold can prove. If what cost our Merchants a Shil∣ling, they should sell for a Groat, or if they shall buy of us an Ounce of Gold for Three or Four Ounces of Silver, or supposing 'em to buy it at
6 s. 6 d. per Ounce, they shall buy an Ounce for as much Counterfeit Mo∣ney as shall not have 7 Peny-Weight of true Bullion in it, this would give our Balance of Trade, such a Terri∣ble Swing, as no true Hearted English-Man would be willing to see. This is a Danger which the easiness and small Charge of counterfeiting old Clipp'd Money threatens very much, unless it be speedily cry'd down. And in the mean time, let us consider the Condition of the other Coin a∣mong us, not counterfeited, but Clip'd, fil'd, or otherwise diminish'd. 'Tis plainly demonstrable by the Receipts of Money in His Majesty's Exchequer, that one half of the Silver is already Clipp'd away, and there is no Security why half what remains wo'n't be taken off too.
The Laws are severe enough made, and put in Execution, and yet New-Gate is perhaps now as full of Clippers as it was Three or Four Years ago. Nothing but a Sense of Religion doth restrain Men from profitable Sins, and the Ordinary of New-Gate can inform us, how little the Guilt of Clipping affects the Criminal's Conscience. Nor will preaching do much Good, upon those that never come to Church. Clipping is the gainfulest Sin that ever was invented, and sits the easiest upon the Sinner's Mind, and 'tis ne∣ver to be remedied but by making it impracticable, which Mill'd Money only (and no other to be currant) can do. And what a perpetual Discontent and Confusion must it end in, if People shall come at last to proffer a Groat for a Shilling?
This must increase still vastly the Value of Guineas; this must raise the Price of all Commodities, this must make it impossible to expect any Mo∣ney at all, either for the King's Use, or Balance of Trade; and this will not only force us to recall our Troops from Flanders, and by a natural Con∣sequence let in the War upon us, but it would put a sudden and universal stop to all Foreign Trade. And what fatal Consequences may it have in the mean time at home let us consider. It may very well be suppos'd that a Dragooner may proffer to a Corn-Chandler 2 s. for a Bushel of Oats, and that the Corn-Chandler seeing that there is not Three Peny wt. or 9 Peny worth of Silver in both the Shillings, should not like the Bargain, what's now to be done?
Should There be a Law with Pe∣nalty for refusing clipp'd Coin, as there is for crack'd Six pences, this would encourage Clippers to leave no∣thing remaining in a Shilling but the Figure XII. Should the Law prohibit the passing of all Silver clipp'd within the Ring, than two Thirds of the present Money of England would be immediately cry'd down: Then the Loss of clipp'd as well as counterfeit Money would be very hard upon the Proprietors, and we should have two Thirds less Money for carrying on our Trade: And now we have two Thirds less than we should have, and if that two Thirds, which is cry'd down at the Owner's Loss, should be carry'd to the Mint, and new coin'd, it would scarce yield a twelfth Part of what we should then want.
If the Law should put down all Sil∣ver Money but of such a Weight, then cer∣tainly all Money above that Weight would be clipp'd down to it, and every Man must carry a pair of Scales in his Pocket, and we are still subject to the Consequence of the former Paragraph, as that former Paragraph would be to the first Conclusion of this, viz. That all Money would be soon clip'd down to the pub∣lick Standard. Let the matter be canvas'd never so much, it must at last come to this Con∣clusion. We cannot subsist either in War or Peace if the Coin of England be not speedily regula∣ted.
CHAP. II. Of the present Scarcity of Silver Coin in England. NOw let us consider, that if all the current Silver Coin of England were passable and unalterable, yet we have vastly too little in Tale for carry∣ing on the Trade of the Nation. And this will appear several Ways, but chiefly by the high Price of Guineas and the Causes thereof. Guineas have risen from 21 s. 6 d. to 30 s. either because the intrinsic Value of Gold hath risen near in Proportion to the Diminution of the intrinsic Va∣lue of Silver Coin, or by reason of the Scarcity of the Silver Coin, or the Uncer∣tainty of it, or partly by Reason of one, and partly t'other, which I believe is the Truth, that the Badness and Scarcity of
Silver Coin hath occasioned an extrava∣gant Rise of Gold. Now if so much as concerns the Scar∣city of Silver be granted me, then I have nothing to do upon this Article, but shew that the present high Price of Gold is dan∣gerous to the Nation, and more dange∣rous will a farther Advance of the Price thereof be. And to them who think the Badness of our Coin the greatest Reason of the present high Valuation of Gold, I shall in the mean time say, that if the Price of Gold hath risen, suppose 4 s. or 5 s, in a Guinea, upon the Account only of the Baseness of our Silver Coin; then in hand∣ling that Notion we must look upon Gold not so much a Coin as a Com∣modity, and so indeed it is at this Pre∣sent; because the Price of Gold in the Oar or Ingott hath risen almost propor∣tionably to that which is coin'd; so that a Man doth not take a Guinea rather than 29 clipp'd Shillings, because the
King's Impress is upon it; for so 'tis upon the Shillings; or because Authori∣ty has made it pass so, for that Autho∣rity is wanting; but because it is of a greater intrinsic Value than is in 29 Shil∣lings of clipp'd or counterfeit Money, which is now most current: So that the Valuation of the Commodity Gold hath encreased as the intrinsic Value of our Silver Coin hath decreased. And if so, then it is to be suspected that the Price of all staple Commodities have encreased in equal Proportion, or that they are in such a Proportion now higher than they wou'd have been; for Gold and Silver being reciprocally the Standards and Measures of Proportion of one another, are so of every thing else; and if I can now buy as many Ounces and Peny - Weights of Silver for a Guinea, as I could have done former∣ly, then is not Silver Risen more then Gold? and if I can buy as many Grains of Gold now with an Ounce of Silver as I could formerly, then is not
Gold risen more than Silver. And this is, perhaps more than a Supposition: For when Silver was 5 s. an Ounce, I cou'd buy 4 Ounces 6 Peny-wt. with a Guinea, and so I can now, that Silver is 6 s. 6 d. per Ounce. Again when Gold was about 3l.. 14s. an Ounce, I cou'd buy an Ounce of Gold with 15 Ounces of Silver, and so I can now, or near the Matter: So that the Commodities of Gold and Silver an∣swer one another as they did, or near thereabout, abating only for the Portable∣ness of Gold and its Coinage; whereas no Coinage is now allowable for those Pieces of Silver wherein the Coinage is defaced and spoiled; and if those two Commodities are so much higher than they would have been: For they are the Measure and Rule of Proportion of all. Then when the Value of Gold and Silver rises, the intrinsic Value of all Commodities rise with 'em: For supposean Eastland or Hamburgh Mer∣chant brings over a Barrel of Mum, which he (when our Money was old Standard)
sold for 3 l. he disliking our Money now, sells his Mum, not according to the ex∣trinsic Valuation of our Money, which is risen since he was here last; because the Intrinsic is diminished, but according to the common Value of Gold and Silver in the World; and therefore requires now 4 l. because he judges our Silver to be a fourth Part worse than it was, or if at 5 l. he judges it to be 2 Parts in 5 worse. Again, suppose he sells his Mum for Gold, or is to exchange his Silver for Gold, that which he was wont to sell for 3 Guineas, he expects 3 Guineas for still; or if you are to pay him in Silver, he ex∣pects as much as he can change for 3 Guineas, he wo'nt be fobb'd off with less: So the Merchant sells as cheap as ever; but we pay more, because what we pay, is dearer than it was. You'll object against this way of rea∣soning, and say tis the Risques of the Sea, and Obstructions of Trade now in Time of War, makes all foreign Com∣modities dearer.
But I hope I don't err in saying, that the Merchant notwithstanding the War wou'd take less of our Silver Coin for the same Commodities if it were bet∣ter, and less Gold of us if it wou'd buy as much Silver in his own Coun∣try. And there are Reasons which may ballance the Dangers of the Seas in Times of War in Reference to our Commerce with the Subjects of Neu∣tral Princes. On our side Taxes are great, and the Subject cannot afford to buy so many foreign Commodities as at other times: And on their side they have not so good a Vent as they had; so their Commodities must stick on hand unless sold so cheap as may make amends for the Hazards of the Sea, and the Cheapness of Commo∣dities wou'd be the natural Effects of Scarcity of Money, if our Money had the same real Value as formerly.
Again a Collier who trades to New∣castle is wont to receive a Guinea for eve∣ry Chaldron of Coals he brought into the River at such a Time of Year, and so he doth still, and no more; and who can say Coals are risen and Mum it risen? No such thing; but Gold and Silver are risen: And when we give the same Gold and Silver for a Com∣modity as we did, we wrongfully say the Commodity is dear, when 'tis not that but the Gold and Silver which costs us more. We give the same Labour, the same Leather, the same Mault, for the same Quantity of Gold and Sil∣ver which we did. And now 'tis the Country Gentle∣men, Artizans and Day-Labourers have the hardest Bargain of all The Farmer sells his own Corn and Cattle according to the Value of Gold and Silver, and the Mercer his Silks, and the Draper his Cloth, and the Tanner his Leather; but the Farmer in the mean time pays his Rent, and Hus∣bandmen,
and Artizans, according to the Value of our present Coin, and when he paid 28 Guineas a Quarter formerly, twenty shall serve turn now; and the Scrivener buys the Country Gentlemen's Lands, according to the Valuation of Coin, and not Metal; and the Land which cost the Father 600 Guineas, is now sold by the Son for 430; and half a Year hence it may be proffered for 300. This is nothing but Ruine and Confusion to the Land∣ed Men of the Kingdom. But if the Buyers of Land, as the Mer∣chants, Bankers and Scriveners are, were Sellers too, we should find Land rise in Proportion to every thing else. And whereas you'll say that Farmers and Grasiers are no Merchants, and wou'd be as well contented with passable Coin as old Standard, 'tis very true, but they keep up to such Prices as their whole-sale Chapmen can afford to give 'em; and when a Factor sells his
Cloth at Blackwell-Hall, he considers the Necessity of the Buyer, as well as Ex∣pence of the Clothier; when a Mer∣chant can make a better Profit, 'tis ex∣pected he should give a bettter Price. But this with some unthinking People is the Effect of War; and be∣cause some things are dearer upon this Account than others, therefore every thing else that is dearer must have the same Cause assigned; but a general Cheapness of things should, methinks, be the Natural Effect of our War, if our Money with which we go to Market were as it should be. The War consumes but little of our Product and Manufacture; it carries a great many Mouthes into Flanders, and that would naturally make Provisions cheap: Many of these Mouths had idle Hands, and so they are not miss'd in the Manufacture; but instead of them, a great many industrious Foreigners come among us who eat little and work much.
The Taxes, as I said, are great In∣ducements to Frugality, and the Advan∣tages People have of late made of Money, have been no less. These and other such like things if the Price of Gold and Silver had not ris∣en, must have occasion'd a Fall of most other Commodities. And now let us consider the Danger of the high Price of Gold as it stands at present. Coin is the most portable Commodi∣ty, and Gold the most portable Coin; but we have run it up high, and therefore do'nt at present fear Exportation; but then, if 'tis considerably higher than a∣mong our Neighbours, there is great Rea∣son to fear too great an Importation may be as dangerous, as a disadvantagious one doth already prove. It seems to me so curious and nice a Commodity that always there may be Danger in it.
If in the great Thirst that's now upon us, we take in too much that will occasion a still more dangerous Rise of Silver: For considering the present Balance of Trade, the more Gold is imported, the less there will be of Silver; and if we import too little, we leave our selves de∣stitute of a Way of Trading. And if the Gold which is our present Support should by the Craft of Foreign∣ers or necessities of the War follow the Silver out of the Nation, we should be left, I doubt in a very bad Condition. And if its Value should rise as it must needs do if the Silver Coin grow worse and worse, then by how much it rises, by so much more all the Inconveniencies and Dangers of its late Rise among us will encrease. What those Dangers are at present is no great Mystery, the English Metchants will make none of it if they may be heard.
The melancholly Letters which their Factors abroad daily send 'em makes the Case plain. That a Guinea in Holland and Flan∣ders is now but 26 s. or to speak more properly and plainly too, so many Ri∣als, or Dolars and Stivers as bear Pro∣portion to 26 s. of our Money At that Rate they there buy our Gui∣neas of Officers, which they can't be hin∣dered carrying over in their Pocket; then the Holland and Flemming Merchants send back to us the same Guineas to buy therewith our Staple Goods and Manu∣factures. Here they are received at 30 s. And their Factors here who buy our Ma∣nufactures as cheap of the Clothier or Stocking-Seller as our own Merchants, send back for 1000 Guineas. (for In∣stance) Received from Holland 1500 Pounds worth of our Goods, which when the Dutch or Flemming Merchant receives,
he finds by his Accompts that these Goods stand him in no more than 1300 l. So that he has received beyond Sea the like Goods for 1300, &c. which hath stood our English Merchant in 1500 l. The English and Flemming Merchants then ship off each their Goods for Spain, Turkey, the East or West Indies, and there they go to Market to sell these Goods, and the Flemming under sells the English 13 per Cent. even in these Commodities which are the Product of England. And now what is the plain Inference? but inevitable Ruine to the whole Trade of the Nation. Here's an End of Mer∣chandise, and (in Time of Peace) all Use of Shipping. This I think is the natural and the present Effect of the Rise of Guineas. But to return to my proper Subject, fare it as it will with Gold, the current Silver Coin of England is, by 3 Parts in 5 too little for our In-Land Trade, and
must ruine in Process of time all those Traders who are wont to make seve∣ral Returns of their Money in a Year; for the Scarcity of Money occasions the giving of longer Credit than is usual, and the giving of Credit hinders the Frequency of Returns. Again, the Want of Silver Coin oc∣casions the taking of Gold at such high Rates; and the Value of Gold Coin being uncertain, which Silver Coin hath not hitherto been, the Re∣ceiver will always allow himself for a probable Loss: (which would be the cer∣tain Effect too of making the Valu∣ation of Silver Coin alterable and un∣certain) that Allowance makes things bought so much the dearer, and that Dearness puts a Damp upon Trade. So that the Scarcity of Silver is not only at present too visible, but so long as the Balance of Trade is lightest on our Side, is like to be more and more felt.
Yet the great Naval Stores we buy from abroad, the great Remittances to be provided for the Subsistence of our Armies and Fleets, are things inevitable, and 'tis impossible to hinder the Expor∣tation of Bullion. But 'tis very easie to hinder the Ex∣portation of Money. And as we shall do well to consider, that altho' our Plate may serve us once at a dead Lift, as the French King show'd us the Way, yet it can't serve us above once, and when that's gone after the rest of our Silver, what are we to do next? We must not only stop a present Gap, but provide for the future, and so I lay it down as a Conclusion. That we are under a very great Want of Silver Coin to carry on the necessary Trade of the Kingdom.
CHAP. III. Of the Importation of Silver. THat which encourages the Im∣portation of any Commodity is the Certainty and Quickness of a Mar∣ket at a good Price. But notwithstanding Silver is dear in England, at present we are but dull Traders for it. For the Mint and the Silver-Smiths being the chief Buyers, these cannot go to Market. The Mint cannot afford to buy and sell to lose; if an Ounce of Silver cost the Warden of the Mint 6 s, 5 d. he can't afford to make a Crown-Piece of it.
And the fear of Plate's being call'd in, to the Disadvantage of the Owner, puts too great a Damp upon the Silver-Smiths Trade. And the actual calling it in, upon such Terms, would very little mend the Matter; People will not be very fond of buying more, for fear at least the same Trick should be serv'd 'em twice. And yet our Coin being altogether insufficient, we must provide for a con∣siderable Quantity more. The Quantity we want must be im∣ported according to our Occasions, or what we have already, be augmented, by altering the Species, or by coining out our Plate. It cannot be soon enough impor∣ted in such great Quantities as we at present want, and yet if we could
immediately buy it from abroad, we could not afford to coin what we buy, without altering our Coin from the old Standard, seeing our Necessity of ha∣ving it, will make its Price rise abroad. Therefore I shall referr what I have more to say, concerning Importation, to the Chapter of Exportation, and first speak of altering our Coin, for 'tis e∣vident we must alter our Coin, as well as coin our Plate, or otherwise our Plate will last us but a little while, and in the mean time we may admit this Conclu∣sion. That England must be as good a Mar∣ket for Silver as other Countries, or we shall have little imported, be it never so plentiful abroad.
CHAP IV. Of Altering our Coin. THere are Three Ways of alter∣ing our Coin. I. First, By not altering the Species of the Money, but the Value. of it, as making a Crown Piece go for 6 or 7 s. II. Secondly, By diminishing the Mat∣ter, but leaving the same Name; and there is no essential Difference between these two Ways. III. Thirdly, by abasing the Fineness with more than ordinary Allay.
This has been judicially and fully stated by Mr. Lownd's, Mr. Lownds's Report. p. 28. and onwards. who hath shown the undeniable Expediency of keeping up always our Silver Coin, to the present Fineness, as that illustrious and solid Writer Sr. Robert Cotton had likewise shew'd, and therefore I will say nothing on this Topic, lest I should seem to build upon other Mens Foundations; and I the rather omit it, because all that hath, or can be said, against the rai∣sing of the extrinsic Valuation of Coin, above the real Value, is applicable to the abasing of it by Allay. And I ful∣ly assent to that Axiom, That the de∣basing our Money, by Allay, and raising the Value of the Standard, is only doing one and the same thing, (to most In∣tents and Purposes) by two several Ways or Means. Suppose then but two Ways of de∣basing it, by Quantity, or by Quality, and still that is all but debasing of it,
that is, giving it a Value in Name, of more than it hath Intrinsically or Real∣ly; for this more than Intrinsic Value, is meerly Extrinsical, supposed, or de∣nominated: in short 'tis a fictitious imaginary Value, and not a real one, above the intrinsic. And this, to say no more of it, is the reviving of that Monster which Q. Elizab. Cotton's Posthu∣ma. p. 287. is of Happy Memory so gloried in the subduing; and I doubt we have Mon∣sters enough to deal with, without re∣viving more This is such a devouring Expedient as will immediately swallow down a Part of every Man's Estate, and at last con∣sume the Nation. The Price of every thing will rise instead of falling.
For if we were willing to submit to this at home, yet there is such a Com∣bination, between our Foreign and Home Trade, and the Relation between 'em is so inseparable, that let the State give it what Name it will, it will pass for no more at home than it doth a∣broad, unless the heavy Balance of Trade was on our side the Water; and it will pass for no more abroad than it is real∣ly, not Extrinsically or Imaginarily, worth at home. An Act of Parliament can as well make a Scotch Pound pass for an En∣glish, as half an Ounce of Silver in England to go for an Ounce in Holland, without some Consideration as may Ba∣lance the Difference. Let us call a six penny-Weight of Sil∣ver a Crown Piece, as loud and as long as we will, yet we shall never buy a Pound of Nutmegs with Four of 'em, unless you'll give the Dutch Mer∣chant
a Yard of broad-Cloth, or some∣thing else into the Bargain. 'Tis a plain case, that when the real Value of Money is lessen'd, the Price of every thing will Rise accordingly, be the Extrinsic Value what it will. Two Crown-Pieces do not buy a Yard of Cloth, because they contain Ten Shillings, but because they contain almost two Ounces of Silver. Gold and Silver are the universal Pledges and Security of all Trade, in every Nation, and what's wanting in their Value must some way or other be made Good, more than in Name or Supposition. 'Tis True, in Holland and elsewhere, they have a base Under-Money, and there is not an Ounce of Silver, perhaps, in as many Stivers or Schillings, as are Equivalent to Ten Shillings in our Mo∣ney.
But if in Holland, you can exchange so many of them, as have not an Ounce of pure Silver in 'em, for as much of their better Coin, as contains two or three Ounces of good Silver, then doubt∣less you can buy as good Commodities for those, as you can proportionably for their better Money; as here you might formerly have bought as much Pack-Thread for 48 Tin Farthings as for a Silver Shilling; the Reason is, be∣cause there was a recourse; and base Money will have a proportionable Va∣lue to Good, in that place where it can be changed into Good; but that's a very different thing, from debasing the whole Species of Money throughout the Nation, so that a Man shall be forc'd always to take Under-Money, without any prospect of remedy. I have nothing to say against an in∣ferior sort of Money; a Verna Nummus,
provided there be a Regina Pecunia too; and it is indeed a dishonouring him, whose Image and Superscription our Money bears, if we shall make use of our Money to cover over a Fraud; it is a respect we owe to the King, not to suffer his Impress upon any thing but what is really Valuable; and it is for the Nation's Honour that the vilest of our Coin hath a real Value; but if the Wisdom of the Parliament shou'd think otherwise, yet there is a vast Difference between having the under. Money, and all the Money of the Na∣tion of an Imaginary Value. The Arguments that may be made use of against such an imaginary Valu∣ation of Money, are perhaps invincible, and almost innumerable; but were there no other but this, I think it might be sufficient without any more; consi∣dering our present Case.
We must have an Army in Flan∣ders or a War in England I would I had nothing to do but to make out that. How must we pay this Army? The Royal Bank of England, 'tis said, have e∣stablished there a Mint for Coining of Money to pay the Army; I desire then to know if they will be contented to re∣ceive here an undervalued Money, and pay there our Army in Money which the Flemmings will take; If they do, the Cap lies between the Flemmings and them, I wo'nt award till I know more. I rather think that the Hollanders and Flemmings will raise their Money pro∣portionably to what we raise ours, and then in all Respects we are just as we were, till we rise higher than they, and then they higher than we; which will beget perpetual Wranglings and Wars in Trade.
I thought now to have done with this Article, but can't omit one thing. Which is that when you raise the Value of Money, you Naturally raise the Value of Silver, which is high e∣nough already; and then indeed Eng∣land will become the Best Market for Silver, because all Countries will sell it to us and get sufficiently by the Bargain: they'll buy good peny-worths of our Commodities, giving us high Valued Silver for it, till we have a glut of Silver and the Price of Silver falls, and then I suppose the Intrinsic Value of the Money falls too: Tho' I confess as bad Consequences may follow too great an Intrinsic Value. I speak nothing of the Confusions and Jealousie which will arise from hence, but there's a long Chain of ill Consequences, and therefore I hope it will be allow'd as a Maxime.
That if our Silver Coin hath less than a real Value, it will not answer the Inten∣tions of the Government. CHAP. V. Of Exportation of Coin'd Silver. 'TIS too well known, that when the Balance of Trade comes to be examined, we fall short of several of our Neighbours very considerably: By this Means the Exchange doth not only fall very low, but will become altogether in∣sufficient for our present Occasions; so that as long as the War continues,
there is an absolute Necessity that we export so much Silver and Gold in Specie as the Balance wants on our Side. But this Exportation would not be at all prejudicial to us, if the Importa∣tion could be made equal to the Exportation, and a Balance in this Particular only would do our Busi∣ness. In vain therefore we labour to find out a Way to force a National Trade above what the State of Europe in general, or our own Nation in par∣ticular will allow; if that were not the Case, where would be the In∣convenience of a War? This is an Evil never to be cured, but in Times of Peace. But our Comfort is, that even in these Times of War
the Nation notwithstanding the balance of Trade, appears as wealthy as ever, excepting only in the Article of Coyn, so that it is not only fruitless but very needless to speak now of the ba∣lance of Trade either in general, or upon any Article but that of Money: Besides if we should be∣gin at that end it would be a round about way, and so long in com∣passing, that we may be at the last gasp before we attain our end. He would be accounted no good Physician who in the case of an Haemorrhage when the danger is very present should talk of Diet Drinks and Alteratives, whereas an actual and immediate application to the part affected, or a sudden revulsion is more to the purpose. But be the balance of Trade in general how it will, 'tis impossible it should be suddenly remedied, ft all du∣ring the War.
But if we can balance a little between that Article of Trade which relates to the Importation of Bullion, it will be soon much better with us than it is at present, 'tis something if we can give pre∣sent ease, and not increase the Danger; and more if we can les∣sen the Danger which the want of ease seems to threaten. Suppose for instance then the whole Trade of England to all parts of the World to be carried on by two Merchants, one at Lon∣don, and the other at Amsterdam, and the only Commodities to be Cloth and Silk. Suppose he at London Exports every year 1000 l. worth of Broad Cloth and no more, and he at Amsterdam Imports hither 1500 l. worth of Silk, that here's an inevitable necessity of the Londiners Exporting every Year 500 l, in Bullion can't be de∣nyed,
and if this continue year by year it, will be, you'll say, of pernici∣ous consequence to England, and it will be a wonderful hard matter at this time to help such a Case. But if we can at present so or∣der it, that instead of importing 1500 l. worth of Silk we shall im∣port 1000 l. worth of Silk, and 500 l. worth of Silver we shall be no losers in the Article I am up∣on, and which is the only thing I have undertaken to look after, viz. That the Nation shall never want Money be the Trade what it will: for if 500 l. in Silver be Exported and as much Imported every Year, we can never have a Peny worth of Bullion less than we have. And if other Nations must get by us, they had better get any thing than our Money; if what they get by us they must be forced
to spend among us, 'twill lessen I hope the Calamity, as will ap∣pear more hereafter. Now this is not to be done by giving our Coyn a Nominal, fictitious or extrinsick value only above its intrinsick: Foreigners are not such Fools to be dealt with at that rate, as to pay you a Rex Dollar of 18 d. weight 18 grains in Amster∣dam or Brussels, for a piece of Money of 15 penny weight in London. Turn the Tables, and suppose the King of Spain should advance his Real of Eight weighing but 17 Penny Weight 12 Grains to double the value it now bears, Sir Robert Cotton's answer of the Committee. Sep∣tember 1626. Pag. 306. and yet needing by reason of the barrenness of his Country more of
Foreign Wares than he can Coun∣tervail by Barter with his own; he must part with his Money and not gain by enhauncing his Coyn. One Real of Eight would not then buy of us as good a Yard of broad Cloth as two doth now, and why should we think to over reach them more than they us. But then again, suppose the Money to be Coyned shall be (as our Mill'd Money and di∣minished hammer'd Money is) pretty near the Intrinsick value of the Silver in each piece, and this will doubtless facilitate Exporta∣tion. If a Foreigner for instance bring to London and sells 40 Bales of raw Silk, or 40 Tun of Wine, and meets not here with such a Market for the buying of other Commodities to be Trans∣ported as he expected, perhaps
those he wants are not of our Growth or Manufacture, or it may be he is in hast, or the Sea∣son calls him home; how easie is it for him to sheer away, and go to another Market, having Money in his Pocket passable every where, at the rate he took it, that inconsi∣derable allowance for Coynage on∣ly excepted! This I think is plain, but as yet there is more in it than so; and suppose it, any other Nations turn to want Silver as much as we now do, and Silver should be there at an higher price than with us, then our Money becomes good Mer∣chandice, and he gets most who carries most over: And the lower the value of our Coyn is the less Foreign Commodities we shall have for it. You'll Prohibit you'll say the ex∣porting
of it, and so you have up∣on pain of Death prohibited the Exportation of our Wooll, yet to the comfort of our Grasiers 'tis still Exported, though it's very bulky Ware. But Money lies in a small Compass, a Sea Captain knows very little of his chief bu∣siness if he knows not where to stow a 1000 l. undiscovered. And if after all we should be very severe in the execution of such prohibitory Laws, it would put such a damp to Foreign Trade as every body is not a ware of. And indeed if Money were not allowed to be a commodity, yet 'tis a Pledge and Surety of every Traders Property, and I am not reconciled to the Justice of that Law which forbids a man to take his Pledge along with him.
Such a Law makes money no∣thing but a Commodity, and then we must pay dear for what we buy of Foreigners, for most men will sell Cheaper than they will Barter. This Article needs I think no more illustration, if it doth the Merchants can tell more of it than I, and I hope they will grant me this Conclusion. That if our English Money will pass in any other Country for as much as it doth here, 'tis impracticable to hinder the Exportation of it.
CHAP. VI. Of melting down the current Coyn of England by our Goldsmiths and other Artificers. ANother great grievance of the Nation in the matters of Coyn may be thought the melting of it down. This hath been a vile and great practice for many Years. The Criminals have been under two temptations: 1. The inequality of the Mint in all the hammered money; some milled Pieces were of more Intrin∣sick
than Extrinsick Value, and some of less, so that in culling out of the bigest, they made an evident advantage. But that sort of money being al∣most all gone and never like to be coyned again, I shall altoge∣ther wave the consideration of it. 2. The other Temptation is the great Intrinsick Value of our mill'd money, most of which was coyn'd when Silver was 5 s. 2 d. 5 s. 4 d. or 5 s. 6 d. per ounce, and the price of Silver rising, a Crown piece has now the intrinsick value of 6 s. or thereabouts, this is a mighty temptation to melt it down. Titius owes Sempronius 10 l. and pays him in mill'd money, Semproni∣us owes a third man as much, but first melts it down and sells it to a Goldsmith for 12 l. and so puts
40 s. in his Pocket. This might have been prevented you'll say be∣fore all the mill'd money was gone; by crying down all other money, for if the Goldsmiths had given 12 l. in mill'd money for an In∣got melted out of ten Pounds, they must at length have been ruined; and therefore the Crying down all other money must have brought down the price of Silver necessari∣ly, or none could have been sold: If 5 s. melted down would not have yielded a Crown Piece, who would have melted 'em; and if they would have yielded more, the money of the Nation how much soever must soon have vanished, for more could not have been coyn'd, till the price of Silver should fall: But how could the price of Silver have fallen so low in England, as not to be worth any mans while to melt down the milled money, if Silver
should at the same time of its melt∣ing bear an higher price in other Countries than it did here at the time of its Coyning: So that the Crying down of base money would at any time have been so far from help∣ing us, that it would have imme∣diately ruined us, it being impos∣sible to Coyn more upon the old Standard, if the price of Silver is higher beyond Sea than it was when that old Standard was Coyn∣ed: And 'twill be impossible for us to Coyn new money after the old Standard (till we can bring down the Foreign Price of Silver) so fast as it will be melted down. To make this plain upon which so much depends, put the Case thus. Suppose you called in by com∣pulsion and Coyned all the Plate of England, and suppose it never so many Millions, and all after
the old Standard, when the Plate is all gone people will have more Plate, and Silversmiths must still have work, and Goldsmiths their Trade, unless by prohibiting the use of silver Plate we proclaim an hypocrital Beggary to all the world, and ruin many thousand Families of Artisans. The Silver then of which you coyn your new Plate must come from abroad, or be pro∣cured out of your money; The Goldsmith will go the cheaper way to work, and rather than he'll give 5 s. 10 d. to a Mer∣chant for an ounce of Plate, he'll fling in a Crown and 6 d. into the melting Pot, and though the Laws against melting down Coyn be ne∣ver so severe yet people will ven∣ture any thing for gain, as you may see Clippers do daily; espe∣cially if their Consciences don't check 'em, and few mens Consci∣ences
will scruple making the most of their own. And as the accurate Mr. Lowndes observes, notwithstanding ever since Ed. 3d's. time prohibitory Laws have been against melting down Coyn, pag. 68. and the profit of melting it sometimes very incon∣siderable, pag. 69. the practice hi∣therto was never prevented. But it may be said money shall be coyn∣ed of an intrinsick value or near thereabouts (Coynage only al∣lowed) in proportion to the pre∣sent value of Silver, be it more or less as it shall alter from time to time, and so the abatement for Coynage shall always keep the Estimate of the Coyn above the Intrinsick value of the Silver, but in∣stead of bringing remedy this will make the Case tentimes worse, for then upon every rise of Silver the Goldsmiths and others will melt
down all that was Coyn'd at a low∣er Price, and if the form of the Coyn don't direct 'em to be dex∣trous, the Prentices shall follow the old Trade of weighing money Night and Day too. So that without going farther upon this Topick, I may lay it down as a Conclusion or Maxim. That if the Intrinsick Value of Coyn be subject to alteration the Coyn is always in danger of being melted down.
CHAP. VII. Of Hoarding up of the Silver Coyn. PEople who have several un∣easinesses upon 'em at one and the same time, are very apt to at∣tribute 'em all to one, which is the most hated, the most invidi∣ous, or at least the most visible cause, though in reality every one may have sprung from a several and very different root. Thus our present War with France is to some few people odi∣ous, to many invidious, and to all visible, and this therefore must be the cause of all National Cala∣mities.
Whereas many things are better with us now than if we had no War; a frequency of Parliaments, an universal vigilance, a care of Shiping; a choice of able Mini∣sters, (and not unskilful Favorites in most places of greatest Trust;) an intire Allyance with the most useful Neighbours; an honest imployment for all dissolute Men; an hononrable provision for younger Sons of Gentlemen; a perfectunderstanding between the King and his People; an almost total desistance from an unreasonable and disadvantageous Commerce with France; a more brotherly Correspondence with the Dissenters (being all equally en∣gaged in the Publick danger) We have great Honour by the Bravery of our Arms, and the most im∣portant assistance we give to all
Christendom against French and Turk Our King is become the Generalissimo of Europe, and his Fleet give Laws in all Seas. These and many more to the better part of the Nation are the advantages of this necessary the expensive War. But there are some that look upon it with an evil eye, and then the badness of money, and the scarcity of it, and the Export∣ing and melting down, and hoard∣ing it, and the rise of Gold, and the dearness of Commodities, and the badness of Trade are all as evident effects of the War as the Taxes are.
Though in truth this is all Humour and Caprice, and none of it more rdiculous than when the hoard∣ing up of Money is imputed to the War, which is the meer ef∣fect of the dearness of Silver, as the dearness of Silver in England is the natural effect of its dear∣ness abroad, and its dearness a∣broad to the obstructions of Trade, which would be if only France and Spain were at War, since Spain is the Silver Market of the whole World. Ever since the extraordinary a∣basement of Coyn by an unparal∣leled Counterfeit and Clipping, people have hoarded up Money a pace, not knowing how far the debasement would run; and fear∣ing
if they put their good Money out they should at the long run be forced to be paid back in they know not what themselves. Nor hath the beauty and rarity of uncorrupted and undiminished Coyn, added a little to the hu∣mour of hoarding it up. Undefaced and weighty pieces are now as so many Medals, people think it a great happiness to have a store of 'em. And as the Coyn degenerates these are more charily preserved, and will be so till the intrinsick value of 'em diminishes. I could give a shrewd guess where this weighty Money is to be found in great quan∣tities, but be it where it will as I said before, I think every man hath a right do what he will with his own, so far as it is his own.
All that I at present aim at is to show. That Coyn which hath an In∣trinsick value above the Extrinsick, and is with-all rare or uncommon will inevitably be boarded up, and continue so to be.
CHAP. VIII. Of Regulating our Silver Coyn. TO give an exact Estimate of what Silver Coyn is ne∣cessary for the carrying on our Trade in its full Vigor, is a task I am not at present willing to undertake, but the least I can guess at is 5000000 l. consider∣ing that great Sums will always remain in the Exchequer, and Banks; for I look upon the Banks not as Chanels only, but as great Receptacles likewise, wherein mo∣ney must rest and wait for op∣portunities of disposing it.
None of Hypothesies depend upon definite or determinate Sums, and I shall beg nothing essentially necessary to the carry∣ing on of my design, but I desire for the present working on∣ly of my Proposition, that a few Postulata be a while granted me. It matters not much whether any of 'em be true for they may easily be varied Mutatis Mu∣tandis.
POSTULATA. 1. THat the Current Silver Coyn of ENGLAND ought to be at least 5.000.000 l. Sterl. 2. That there is not in England at present above 4.000.000 l. Sterl. 3. That there passes not publick∣ly above 3.000.000 l. Sterl. 4. That the hoarded Silver Coyn is about 1.000.000 l. Sterl. 5. That the present Current Coun∣terfeited Coyn is about 1.000.000 l. Sterl.
6. That the present Current Sil∣ver Coyn not counterfeited, but clipt¦ed or otherwise diminshed is about 2000.000 l. Sterl. 7. That the Current Silver Coyn in daily use, not counterfeited but cliped or otherwise diminished is not intrinsically above 1.000.000 l. Sterl.
Now the Axioms I shall build upon are chiefly these. AX. I. THat a way to induce the Subject to a volun∣tary compliance with the necessities of State, is prefer∣able to any manner of Com∣pulsion. And by this I intend to obviate two Projects, viz. 1. That the Clipt Money be all called in without giving full satis∣faction to the Proprietors; and this I take to be a piece of Injustice, because this Money was at first
given out to us by the Go∣vernment, as a sufficient pledge and unalterable Security of our Pro∣perties, and it was at first issu∣ed out of the Mint in such various and undesigned Shapes, in respect of the Peripherie or Cir∣cumference in which it hath been debased, and so various withall in the thickness and weight of each re∣spective piece, that 'twas almost impossible for the Subject to distin∣guish the diminutions, which a first were so Curious, so Subtil, and small as was not to be easily sus∣pected; and it hath been by gradual and sensible approaches that the pre∣sent abasements are so consider∣able. But this cannot be so well ur∣ged in behalf of Counterfeit Mo∣ney, it is not any thing we have received of the State, it never was given to us, as a Plegde and Se∣curity;
and so never was Mo∣ney properly so called, but a False, and Counterfeit sort of Ware which every man Bartered for at his own Peril, and to such Caveat Emptor might properly have been said. But if the wisdom of Parliament things fit to make Compensation for all the Counterfeit Money, I have nothing to say against it: They are the proper Judges. Or if they shall not think fit to give a full Compensation for the Clipt Money, I have nothing to say, it would be great presump∣tion in a private man to dictate. In the method I shall tender, I shall make provision for a full Compensation for all the clipt and diminished money of the Roy∣al Standard; at the small expence
of 250.000 l. which is vastly less than I have heard yet proposed, I reckon three quarters of the mo∣ney may be paid back in good Mil∣led Coyn forthwith, as fast as it can be coyned. The second Project I designed by the former Axiom to obviate is, The compelling of people to supply a present exigence by bringing in their Plate into the Mint: Which would be an attempt I doubt of pernicious Consquence, and instead of that I have made a provision; whereby questionless as much Plate will be crouded into the Mint with all the speed imaginable, as shall make up in tale the two millions of Pounds Sterling of clipt money which when melted down produced but one; and then I pre∣sume
the extraordinariness of the encouragement may, and ought to Cease. AX. II. THat our coyn cannot be secured against Expor∣tation, Melting down, and Hoarding up, unless it have either a real, or extrinsick value above the intrinsick. AX. III. THat a real value to make up the want of intrinsick given to Money, will be re satisfactory to all His Ma∣jesties good Subjects  a
mere extrinsick value above the intrinsick. AX. IV. THat the real value of Mo∣ney ought to be more than the intrinsick, and equal to the extrinsick. AX. V. THat Money cannot have a real value over and a∣bove the intrinsick, unless that over and above value be set∣led by an unquestionable Secu∣rity applicable to every par∣ticular persons Use.
PROPOSITION. Now I humbly propose to the Consideration of better judg∣ments the doing of these things. 1. The speedy calling in all the clipt and diminished Money of the old Standard, and intirely satisfying every Proprietor, by paying them 75 l. per cent. back in Specie, and ascertaining to 'em the remainder by Parliament Se∣curity. 2. The leaving as small an in∣terstice of time as is possible be∣tween the calling in the old Mo∣ney and issuing out of New.
3. That therefore vast Encourage∣ment be given for the speedy bring∣ing in three or four Millions of ounces of Plate to the Mint, to answer the present Necessities of the King and People. 4. That the Exportation of Silver Money beyond the Permission of the King and Parliament, be effectually hinder'd. 5. That a Provision be made as shall leave no Temptation for the melting that down which shall be Coin'd. 6. Nor for hoarding it up. 7. That the Importation of Silver from all parts be encouraged, and the Current Silver Coin of England encrea∣sed to Five millions of Pounds Ster∣ling.
8. That the Standard, in respect of Allay, be kept to its old Purity. 9. That the Denomination of the new Money be equal to the old. 10. That every one of the afore∣said Articles be accomplish'd at no more expence to the Publick than Two hundred and fifty thousand Pounds at present, and a Land-Tax of a Penny in the Pound during the War, or, at the most, Two Pence in the Pound. Theorem. For the effecting all the aforesaid Articles, Let a Competent Authority immediately Call in and Cry down all Clipt Money un∣der such a weight, supposing it to be all
that Money which hath lost full half the original weight. This may conveniently and safely enough be done before any new Mo∣ney be coin'd. When this is new Coin'd, let it be re-deli∣ver'd to the respective Proprietors in pro∣portion, by Tale, to what every one brought into the Mint by Tale. Then let all the rest of the Clipt Money be Called in by such a Day, and Cry'd down. And supposing in all 2000000 l. Postulat. 6, 7. Sterling so melted down, and the Product, after Melting, be half as much, or about 3500000 Ounces of Silver, there may out of this be Coin'd 1250000 l. of New Money, of the same extrinsick value it now hath, and of such an intrinsick va∣lue, as that a Crown Piece shall weigh (now that Silver is 6 s. 6 d. an Ounce, or 3 l. 18 s. the Pound Troy) Twelve-penny
weight, and about three grains, and have in it the intrinsick value of 4 s. So that the Government hath already saved Two hun∣dred and fifty thousand Pound. Then will it be known in how short time 1000000 l. can be Coin∣ed. According to that time, supposing it (many Mints being set up at once) to be Two Months, let a Proclamation be issued out, encouraging the bringing in 4000000 Ounces of Plate into the Mint, at Four respective Days or Weeks. For the first Million, till the end of the first fortnight, shall be paid 7 s. 4 d. per Ounce, which amounts to 366666 l. 13 s. 4 d. till the end of the second fort night, shall be paid 7 s. 2 d. an ounce, which comes to 358333 l. 6 s. 8 d. till the end of the third fortnight, shall be paid 7 s. an ounce, amounting to 350000 l. And for the last Million 6 s. 10 d. an
ounce, amounting to 341666 l. 13 s. 4 d. in all 1416666 l. 13 s. 4 d. So that for one ounce with another, the Government has paid 7 s. 1 d. an ounce. It may be thought, that a great deal of this may be saved, and per∣haps Six-pence in an ounce, which amounts to One hundred thousand Pounds, and that Six shillings and seven pence would be Temptation enough, when the Price of Silver is like to Fall. But I am now providing for the worst Contingences, and the severest Suppositions that may be. Yet the Frugalest way, I presume, would be, to leave the Management of this Article wholly to the Lords of the Treasury, who, by publick no∣tice, may vary pro re natâ, the Praemium for bringing in Plate, and perhaps may think it expedient nevertheless to be∣gin high, and to abate the Praemium
according to the quantity brought in; and after one or two Abatements, People may perhaps bring it in the faster, fearing a greater Fall: Where, as if the Lords of the Treasury should begin low, and afterwards be forced to raise the Praemium higher. Peoples Hopes of their still advancing of it more, would restrain 'em from ma∣king so much haste as the necessities of State require. We suppose then this Silver to be Coining every Day as fast as possible, and that the 250000 l. saved by the Govern∣ment out of the first Million, shall begin to pay for the Plate, as it comes in. Then three ounces of Silver at 6 s. 8 d. an ounce, Coins 20 s. of the new Standard, allowing 2, 3, or 4 d. per ounce for Coinage seeing the setting up so many several Mints more than ordinary must be very charge∣able.
And here must be noted, That let Silver Rise or Fall as much as it will, it Alters very little the process of the Theorem, for it need have no other ef∣fects than making the Money bigger or less, unless the 3d Corolary following be admitted. At this Rate then when 3500000 Oun∣ces of this Plate is Coin'd into MONEY it will produce after the aforesaid rate 1166666 l. 13 s. 4 d. to which add the 250000 l. paid before hand for it, and now there is paid in all for the 4000000 of Ounces of Plate 1416666 l. what it Cost; and the King hath 500000 Ounces of Plate by Him, which at 7 s. 1 d. an Ounce stands the Government in 177088 l. 6 s. 8 d. But because it cust the King dear for his present Necessities, the Lords of the Trea∣sury cannot allow more for it than it will pro∣duce when Coin'd.
And if the necessities of State re∣quire that this Silver should be sent and Coin'd in Flanders, that it may go farther there than it can here for the immediate use of the Souldiers, then the Commissioners of the Accounts will probably account for it, according to its Value beyond Sea; and then the Go∣verment shall still be a greater Loser by it; so the Lords of the Treasury can∣not allow for it more perhaps than 150000 l. what ever it be more or less, the case will stand thus at the least. There is now of New Money Coin'd, 2416666 l. 13 s. 4d. and this last 150000 l. being Advanced to the King for his present Necessities abroad, either to Coin in Flanders, or to send over in Bills, will go towards the payment of the Million of Clipt money. But if it be pro∣bable as Mr. Lounds seems to intimate, That People may Voluntarily bring in a great deal of Plate at 6 s. 6 d. an Ounce; then it is much more probable, that they will be qucker in bringing it in at 6 s. 7 d. an
ounce; and if so, the Government Saves out of my Proposals 6 d. an Ounce, which in 4000000 Ounces comes to 100000 l. And then there will be 250000 l. paid in recom∣pence of the Clipt Money, and there is but 750000 l. Remaining. Or put the case Shorter and Plainer, the Government wants 1000000 l. worth of Silver, and is willing to give 25 per Cent. more for it than the com∣mon price. If that vast Allowance be made for fear of a sudden and fatal stop to all manner of Trade for want of Money, yet the 250000 l. Saved out of the Clipt Money, will make good the Bargain. And then Four parts in Five will Coin a Million of Money, and still there will be another 250000 l. worth left towards the paying of the Clipt Million, and but 750000 l. remains Unpaid.
And upon this Easier supposition we will proceed; because it is likewise cheaper to the Nation than the Buying of full 4000000 ounces of Silver. Then if the Parliament Orders 'em to be paid 250000 l. more, which is all that the Nation is Burdened in the Bargain: The Proprietors of the Clipt Money are Reimbursed 75 l. per Cent. of what they brought to the Mint, which is more by 25 l. per Cent. than the intrinsick value of it was; and the other 25 l. per Cent. is coming towards 'em apace. For now the pre∣sent Necessity and the Dangers of it are ob∣viated, the price of Silver begins to Fall and Settle, as the prospect of a Plenty draws nearer; tho' we can never suppose it will fall lower than in other Countries, or much lower at all, during the War be∣tween France and Spain. And be it at what price it will, the Merchant will from all Parts bring his Silver to the Tower, because the Market is here Quick, and he is sure of Ready-Money for what he Sells; the King can af∣ford
now to Coin, which he could not do of late Years; And therefore a Third and Fourth Million will be soon bought and Coined, and the Government out of every Million bought will save a Fourth part. For the New-Coin'd Money must bear a proportion to the price of Silver, as four to five, and 800000 l. worth of Silver is to be in 1000000 l. of New Coin no more nor less, and out of the four Million-worth of Silver, besides the Million of Plate the King will have Saved a fifth Million, by which gain'd Millions, the Clipt Money will be en∣tirely Satisfied for at no more than 250000 l. present Cost to the Government, q. e. d. For the case will stand thus: There will be 5000000 l. of New Coin. viz. out of the Clipt Money 1250000 l. out of the Plate 1250000 l. (or if the last 250000 l. be not Coin'd, but Exported, then there will be out of the Plate out 1000000 l.) and out of the last Two Million worth of SILVER Coin'd 2500000 l. So that there will be in the
Nation at least Four Millions, Seven Hundred, and Fifty Thousand Pounds New Money. The King, after all this, buys 750000 Ounces of Bullion, and coins it, without Profit, into 250000 l. This makes up 5000000 l. compleat, and then the Royal Mints is to be at a stand (as at present) until the Parliament shall have resolved what more is to be done; our present Necessities are supply'd, and this, which we shall have, will not be diminished. These Five Millions now want a fifth part of the Intrinsick Value of the Coin; and unless a Real Value be gi∣ven it to make amends for the want of the Intrinsick, and to Equal the Ex∣trinsick, I have, after all, I confess, done nothing, according to my Fourth Axiom.
I humbly therefore Propose, That a Land-Tax may make it good, if it do not exceed Two-pence in the Pound. But after what manner it is to be made good, is the great Question. If they, into whose Hands the new∣coin'd Silver shall first come, should be allowed for the Intrinsick Want of it, then, in the paying it out again they must transmit the Allowance the State gives; or else the First Re∣ceivers would be Savers, and the rest Losers: But if the State must imme∣diately give the Full Allowance, then it might as well have Coin'd to the full Intrinsick Value. But the Intrinsick Value is lessen'd, and the Real given, because the Government is better qualified at present to pay Interest than Principal. Therefore an Interest is to be paid equi∣valent to the Extrinsick Value, and fully
satisfactory for the Want of Intrinsick; that so the Subject may be no Loser, and the Government put to no Difficulties. Beside, that Money would return to its Intrinsick Value, if a Shilling were always to be tack'd to a Crown or Four-Shilling Piece; which is One of the chief things we are to avoid. Let this Interest be 5 per Cent. and let it be look'd upon as a sufficient In∣terest, as it better will appear to be, when I come to answer the Objecti∣ons, which may be made to this Me∣thod. The Interest of a Million of Pounds Sterling, which is wanting to make up the Real Value of the New Coin at 5 per Cent. amounts to Fifty thousand Pounds per Annum. But, to Ease the Nation of half this Charge, let it be duly and carefully consi∣dered,
That if the present Possessor of an en∣tire 100 l. be entitled to this Interest, and not of a less Sum, every less Sum will have such a Value Real, as the Possessor of an entire 100 l. can make of it, and will allow for it. And there will be no occasion for the Government to pay Interest for lesser Sums, because the valuation of lesser Sums will always bear that proportion which Mer∣chants, Goldsmiths, and Bankers will re∣ceive 'em at, from the least Sum to the greatest. If I pay in, for instance, to a Goldsmith Fifty pounds to day, and Fifty pounds to morrow, he will no more scruple to give me a Note for One hundred pounds, than if I had paid it in at once: And, if I pay my Brewer Five pounds a week, as he brings in my Drink, for twenty weeks together, he will look upon it as good Pay as if I paid him at the twenty
weeks end One hundred pounds toge∣ther; and if Five pounds will pass from me as the fifth part of an Hundred, why not, by the same Rule of Proportion 20 Shillings for the hundredth part? That which hath the Value of Five pound Lumbard-street, hath the same in Pater-Noster-Row, and the same likewise at Brentford, or elsewhere: And there can be no Instance or Reason given, why Money of the like weight; Intrinsick and Extrinsick Value, should not be as passable in little Sums as in great, since there is an easie Resort, and at hand always; in which, without any distinction, they daily determine. Where an Hundred pound will be Received, there will Ninety nine, and Ninety eight, and so downwards (for, where can you stop?) to the single Penny.
And of the Running Cash of England we may reasonably suppose, that one half is not in Sums exceeding Twenty Pounds, and they who have less Sums than that, will have no great Encouragement to look after Interest. The Fifth Part which Twenty Pound wants of its Intrinsick Value, is but Four Pounds, and that, at 5 per Cent. is but Four Shillings a Year; from which the trouble of Receiving by entering into Combination with others, will for the most part take off, and not make it worth the while. So that the whole Money of England, that is New Coin'd, not amounting to above 5000000 l. and but half that to be paid Interest for, viz. 2500000 l. and there wanting but a Fifth Part of that, viz. 500000 l. the Interest of 500000 l. at 5 per Cent. amounts to just 25000 l. per Annum.
But then, supposing that Interest be de∣manded for 3/5 of the New-coin'd Money, and that by an unexpected Combination eve∣ry Sum of Five Pounds should be brought in, yet then the whole Interest amounts to no more than 30000 l. per Annum. And the Case stands thus: The Parliament hath Borrow'd of the whole People of England a Mil∣lion of Pounds Sterling, and no more, to be repay'd at the end of the War; and in the mean time, till it be repay'd, they give Five Pounds per Cent. Interest upon a Land-Tax. Thus the Clipp'd Money is all Call'd in, and Satisfied for; there hath been lit∣tle time between Calling back of the Old, and Paying back the New, by bring∣ing in 1000000 l. worth of Plate speedi∣ly and voluntarily into the Mint, an effectual Stop is put to the Exportation,
melting down, and hoarding up of Coin'd Money; Importation of Silver from all Parts Encourag'd, the Current Coin of ENGLAND Encreas'd; the Purity and Denomination of the Coin Continued; and all at the present Expence of Two hundred and fifty thousand Pounds, and a Yearly Land-Tax of One Penny in the Pound during the War, q. e. d. The only Difficulty that remains, is, After what manner the Interest shall be paid. But, if there is no more than Difficulty in it, I desire it may be Consider'd, What Great Difficulties the People of ENGLAND at present undergo, in the Want of such a Regulation: What Difficul∣ties are in every Market-Shop, and House of Trade; and what Great Disorders are Daily like to ensue: Let Bankers, Goldsmiths, Merchants, and Cash-keepers, consider the Dif∣ficulties
they lye under at present, and the much greater Disadvantages they must be subject to, if the Coin of England should not have a Real Value. But, to make the Difficulty seem much less than may at First be ima∣gin'd, I humbly propose this follow∣ing Method. Let the Days of its Payment be fix'd by PARLIAMENT, either Quar∣terly, Annually, or Triennially. If the Establish'd Interest be Five Pounds per Cent. then, perhaps, Annually will be thought most expedient, in some Month when the Days are long. If the Wisdom of Parliament shall think fit to give more Interest than Five Pounds per Cent. then there is Visible Reason, why it should be Quarterly. If less than Five Pounds per Cent. a Triennial Payment may suffice. But suppose it Yearly.
Let Three hundred Commissioners be na∣med by Parliament, One hundred of which for London, Westminster, and Southwark, the Two hundred for the Country, to be not above Twenty Miles distant from one another, so that no body can live farther off than Ten Miles from one Commissioner or other. Let these Commissioners be the most Substantial Gentlemen or Citizens in the most Popular Towns and Cities in En∣gland, giving in sufficient Security to the Government for Performance of Their Trust. At the Day appointed let the Money be brought to the Commissioners Houses in Hundred-pound Baggs, and there open'd and weigh'd, and then seal'd up with the Proprietor's Seal, in the presence of the said Commissioner, Entering down in a Register every man's Name in one Co∣lumn, the Weight of the Money in ano∣ther
Column, and the Interest it amounts to in a third. Let none be Receiv'd after Twelve of the Clock at Noon, and none Re-delive∣red till One of the Clock, to prevent Frauds in bringing the same Money twice for the same Interest. Then, in the Afternoon, let every man's proper and individual Money, Seal'd up as aforesaid, and Weighed again in the sight of the Proprietor, be deliver'd, with the Interest due for it. For which One Days Trouble in a Year, I do suppose, the Government may allow the Commissioners Twenty Pound a man; which amounting to Six thousand Pounds per Annum, for all the Commissioners of ENGLAND, and suppose Three of the Five millions, whereas I supposed at first 2500000 l. only to demand Interest, it will amount to but Thirty thousand Pounds per Annum, and this Six thou∣sand Pounds per Annum for the Com∣missioners
added, makes but Six and thirty thousand Pounds per Annum. Now, whereas a Land-Tax of Four Shillings in the Pound amounts to 2000000 l. a Tax of a Penny in the Pound a∣mounts to 41666 l. 13 s. 4 d. so that 5666 l. 13 s. 4 d. per Annum Re∣mains. Allow the Commissioners then Thirty Pounds apiece, and there remains 2666 l. 13 s. 4 d. for a Superintendant, Auditors, Registers, Register-Books, and other in∣cident Charges; and the whole matter is brought within a Tax of a Penny in the Pound, q. e. d. Now, as to the Hoarded Money, the Mill'd and Hammer'd Money of Full Weight, I humbly am of the Opinion, That no Notice at all be taken of it by the Government; and my Reasons are: That it will have an uncertain Value, according to Peo∣ples
Opinion; and, that Uncertainty of Estimation, as well as the Intrin∣sick Value, will cause it, without any any Edict or Precept, to be melted down. For, a great deal of it is now kept up, only to see what things will come to; and what Advantage can be made of it: But when People see the Parliament has Conquer'd the Difficulty, and that there is a great Plenty of Money stirring about again, they will be baulk'd of their Expe∣ctations, and take Advantage of the First of the Market; this will con∣duce to the Cheapness of Bullion, and cause a Plenty: And if any con∣tinue still hoarded, it will be by People only who have an irremedia∣ble Humour that way; and 'tis bet∣ter they should hoard that for which the Government pays no Interest, than to keep Unemploy'd Money by at the expence of the Publick.
And as to the Paying of our Ar∣mies Abroad, I humbly propose, That the Parliament may always give His Majesty such an Allowance for that Use, as His Majesty may be enabled to Export so much Uncoin'd Silver as is necessary to the carrying on of so Glorious a War. Which Uncoin'd Silver will for the most part find its way back again, be∣cause the carrying over so much eve∣ry Year will glut that place to which 'tis carryed; so that Silver will be∣come Cheap there, and they must disgorge at the best Market; which England, in all probability, will be. And the effect of that Over-ballance which Forreigners must, as cases now stand, get by us; cannot be carryed out of the Nation, but in other Com∣modities besides Silver.
For Silver Uncoin'd they Sell, and Silver Coin'd they cannot afford to carry away; So that our own Com∣modities are like to be bartered for Silver, and that conduces to bring the ballance of Trade even. And here I go no farther, but leave the Question to better Understand∣ings. Quest. Whether Silver bear∣ing an higher Price here than else∣where, and coming to a Quicker Market, will not naturally and easily force an Exportation of our own Commodities, when it shall be∣come altogether impracticable to Export our Coin?
Corol. I. Note, That the Price of Silver Bullion being subject to Vary, the difference between the Intrinsick, and the Real Value, ought to be Consi∣derable; Because, if they should be too near one another, the Additional Value would be so Small, that when Silver Rises, the Goldsmiths would be Tempted to Melt down the New Coin, when they can get almost as Much by that Practice, as they can do by receiving Interest, or by pas∣sing it away for Principal. Nor must the Two several Values be too far Different one from the other, lest Foreigners be Tempted to Coun∣terfeit our Coin.
I don't mean by sending Us over such a Counterfeit as shall be of Les intrinsick Value than our Own; bu they can Afford all the Charge of Curious Coinage, and Pure Silver, and Full Weight, and Hazard of Im∣porting it contrary to all Laws that We can Make; If any more consi∣derable Sum, than Twenty per Cent. could be Gain'd by such Importation▪ But no body can afford all the Charge and Hazard, if the Profit be no Greater, and the Punishment Capital. Corol. II. Nevertheless, provision may be Made, that all Counterfeit Money shall be Confiscated by a Summary Process, to be Tryed by a Jury of Moneyers, for every Sum above Five Pounds; and for Less Sums, able and substan∣tial Goldsmiths shall be Commissio∣ned and Authorised to end Disputes,
Cutting it Asunder before the Owners Face; and Charging themselves in a Book kept for that purpose, as Debters to the King for the same individual pieces, which at the General Quarter Sessions they shall deliver for the KING's Use. Some such Method as This, would make people more Cautious in taking Counterfeit Money; whereas now they Take what they themselves Know to be so, which hath given great Encou∣ragement to Counterfeiters. And if I may be Well Heard, I don't at all Question, but to shew a Way; how all Counterfeit Money may be easily Known; let it be Wash'd, Plated; of mixt Metal, or pure Silver; Which is the next piece of Service of this Nature, that I designe my Coun∣try, GOD continuing my Life and Health.
Corol. III. I humbly Propound to the Disqui∣sition of Better Judgments; Whether the New Coin ought not alwayes t be of the same continued Weight, not withstanding any Variations in the Price of Bullion; and that not the Weight of Coin, but the Aforemen∣tioned Interest be Varied from Yea to Year according to the Price o Bullion. The Advantages and Convenience of what I have Proposed, is, I hope by this time, somewhat Evident; bu before I Reckon 'em up, it may per¦haps be Expected that I should Faith∣fully and Candidly set down all tho Objections which have Occurr'd to me whilst I have been Writing these Pa∣pers.
The most Material I will: And they are These. OBJECT. I. Now, if it be Objected, That Five Pounds per Cent. for want of Silver, in an Hundred Pound is too little, seeing an Hundred Pound Bagg-full is entitled to no more than Twen∣ty Shillings a Year: I Answer, THAT if a Man be contented to put in his Money into any of the New Banks, at 3 l. per Cent. 'tis better worth to lend it at 5 per Cent. per Annum, upon as good Security.
If it be reply'd, That a Man may take it out of a Bank when he will, and his Money is always at Com∣mand: I answer, It is much more so when he has it in his own Custody; For, he who shall have Four hundred Crown-pieces by him, can make as much use of it to all Intents and Purposes, but of Melting or Export∣ing, as if it were of an Intrinsick Value; and then sure he who ha∣ving Four hundred Pieces of Money by him of a Real Worth, and ap∣plicable to any Lawful Use, can make Twenty Shillings a Year Ad∣vantage by Keeping 'em; hath much the better of him who hath Four hundred Pieces of other Money by him, of no more Real Value, nor more transferrable, and hath no Pro∣fit by 'em, whilst they are in his Hands.
And whereas it may be said, No Man can be intitled to the Interest of that 20 l. due to him from the Government, un∣less he keeps 80 more dead by him, as a Ve∣hicle to convey the Interest of the 20 l. to him. I answer the Government doth not intend to give Encouragement that Men should keep more Money by 'em than they have, or may have Occasion for. That is a sort of hoarding which we are to prevent. And therefore this 5 l. per Cent. is not given as an Interest for dead and un∣employ'd Money, but to ascertain uni∣versally the real Value of it, and to take off all the Objections that are made against a mere extrinsick Value. But if the Wisdom of the Parliament thinks fit to give 10 l. per Cent Interest, whereby every 100 l. of new Coin'd Money will be entitled to 40 s. per Annum Interest; then the whole Inte∣rest
of 500000 l. which the 2500000 l. half of the 5000000 l wants of intrin∣sick Value, amounts at 10 l. per Cent. but to 50000 l. per Annum. Or suppose by Combination 3/5 of the 5000000 l. demand Interest, then will the whole Interest amount to but 60000 l. per Annum, which with all the incident Charges, will be defrayed for little more than a Three-half-penny in the Pound Land-Tax; and for much less than 2 d. in the Pound. And I am not at all against an Inte∣rest of 10 l. per Cent. because beside the present Advantage it gives, it doth ascertain to the People of England, not only a Promise that the Parliament will; but that there is a reason of good Hus∣bandry likewise, why the Parliament should as soon as possible save the Na∣tion that Annual Charge, by the pay∣ing of the principal Million that is wan∣ting.
Object. II. These Ends may as well be pursued by transferable Notes or Bills with In∣terest. I answer that they cannot in the least, because here is 4 l. in 5 l. better se∣cur'd than any Notes in the World can pretend to: for every Man hath so much of his Money in his Pocket; and that, for which the Security is given, is divisible into the 5th. part of a Six∣pence, which transferable Bills can∣not be. Object. III. That if this Method will hold, the intrinsick Value of Money may be but half as little as I propose, and the Subject will be al∣ways in fear of farther Alterations.
Answ. This I confess would be a very material Objection against Mr. Lound's Method, but hath no force in ours, because the Government saves nothing by lessening the intrinsick Va∣lue; for what it saves at present, it must pay Interest for, and Principal too at the long run; besides, the Go∣vernment aims at nothing but to re∣ctifie the Coin, and keep it from being imbezil'd. Object. IV. The Money of England will be too much for 300 Men to receive in one Day. Answ. It is but 10000 l. a Man one with another; i. e. but 100 hundred Pound-bags, which may ve∣ry well be weighed and seal'd up, and entered in a Book in 5 hours time; viz. 20 in an hour; and as for the great Banks and Cashes of England, such as the Royal Bank, East-India Com∣pany, and the like, they need not re∣move
their Money at all; but Com∣missioners may be sworn and sent to their respective Treasuries, taking suf∣ficient Security of the said Treasurers and Cashiers, that none of the said Money shall be remov'd or touch'd in 24 hours. Object. V. It will be a great Trouble to carry 100 l. 10 Miles for 20 s. Answ. It may not be 100 Men's Case in all the Nation, and no Man is forc'd to carry it; and he who don't carry it, hath lost nothing but what he might have gained. For this is all clear Gains to every Man, who as soon as he has received his 20 s. can keep the 20 s. and pay a Debt with the 100 l.
Object. VI. The want of a less Intrinsick Value, than 20 l. per Cent. will answer all the aforesaid Ends. Answ. Less will not secure it against Exportation. Foreigners have a knack at raising the price of Silver to draw over our Money to 'em; and I hear they can af∣ford what they now daily do, viz. To Export, rather than fail, Clipt Money; and the only way to keep our Money at Home, Is to fix, during the War, one considerable part of its Value to the Kingdom; and when those Foreign∣ers who must deal with us, cannot Export our Money, but with great dis∣advantage, they will be forced to take our Commodities in lieu of it, and be as industrious to make 'em valuable a∣broad as we are. And as to that No∣tion that we must not glut the Markets
abroad with our Commodities, it is a Vulgar Errour unless we make this di∣stinction, That 'tis dangerous when our English Factories glut the Market; for when Foreigners see the Market full, they combine together to keep down the Price, knowing that we must Sell; but then Foreigners who are better ac∣quainted with their own Markets and Fairs than we are, and can spread a Trade much farther than our Factories can do, when they Export our Com∣modities and cannot Trade at all with us without exporting 'em; they can shift from one place to another, and open secret Passages of Commerce, not yet found out. If the Portugueses for instance could not have Money for their Wine, would they (I desire to know) rather leave of Trading with us, than take our Cloth for their Wine. Or if heretofore we had drank no French Wine, but what we had paid for in Tin, would they have found a Vent for our Tin,
or ploughed up their own Vine∣yards? Object. VII. This will be forcing Foreigners then, to Ex∣port our Commodities. Answ. Not at all: For if the Bal∣lance of Trade shall continue after all, to our disadvantage, here's nothing in all this matter that hinders our ex∣porting Bullion. But if 'tis absolutely necessary to ex∣port Bullion to make good the Ballance of Trade, then we should take the more care, not to export more than is absolutely necessary; and whilst we carry on our Trade abroad, not to let this at home be at a stand, but secure Money enough for the Nations In-land Trade, and to pay the Taxes without pretence of impossibility.
Object. VIII. Five Millions will not be half enough for our In-land Trade. Answ. And I am clearly of that Opi∣nion; and that Ten Millions is little enough, or else what need had there been, to have Coin'd Fifteen Millions in three Reigns, as the most industrious Mr. Lounds hath delivered to us? But we are providing for a present necessity and not abundance. And yet should we Coin five Milli∣ons more, in all Ten Millions; less than 2 d. in the Pound Land-Tax, would pay Interest for all, and the Million gained out of it would save 2 s. in the Pound that Year, which is mak∣ing a very good Bargain for the Go∣vernment. But you may vary the Postulata, as I said before, how you please.
Object. IX. The new Coined Money will appear very small to the Eye. Answ. Go which way you will, it must be smaller than it was, or of greater value, because Bullion is dear∣er than when the Mill'd Money was Coin'd, and if the new Coin'd Money were to have an Intrinsick Value, it must necessarily be ⅓ less than it now is, and according to these Proposals it will be but about ⅓. Supposing Silver at this extraordina∣ry Price, I don't see how it can possi∣bly be larger than as 8 to 10, and this Proposition is as 8 to 12.
Object. X. The Mint is the Pulse of the Common-Wealth, Cotton Post. p. 294. and this would discover us to be in a weak Condition. Answ. It will discover us doubtless, to be in a borrowing Condition upon good Interest and Security; but that's the worst of it; whereas if the Mint should only give us an imaginary Va∣luation, then we are discovered to be in an imaginary Habit of Wealth.
CHAP. IX. Advantages and Conveniencies most of which may be expected from this Method. 1. THE Subject will be assured by the giving intire Satisfaction for Clipt Money, that the Coin of Eng∣land Minted by Authority, is an invio∣lable and an unalterable Property which the Parliament will for ever maintain, even in the worst of times; the Consi∣deration of which, will give the real and additional Value of the new Coin'd Money, a Credit throughout the World. And People will be the better able to pay Taxes if they are at no loss by their Clipt Money.
2. The Denomination of the Silver Coin will not hereby be raised above the real value. 3. The Trade and Circulation of Bullion in and out of the Kingdom, will not be at all hinder'd, so that as much Silver and Gold may be yearly transported into Flanders, as the occasions of the War require, without loss of Coinage; and Money which is the Vi∣tal warmth of In-land Trade, by which People are enabled to pay Taxes, al∣ways preserved among us. 4. The frequent Rises and Falls of Money beyond Sea, will be no longer an effectual trick to cheat us, as it hath hitherto been. 5. If it should after all be exported, it will be 20 l. per Cent. more to the Exporters loss, than if it had a full In∣trinsick Value. 6. That 20 l. per Cent. which the Ex∣porters lose, will be gain'd by the Go∣vernment;
because for what is export∣ed, no Interest will be paid, nor no Principal at the end of the War. 7. The Coin'd Silver of the whole Nation, may in times of Peace be re∣duced to the old Standard, and Intrin∣sick Value, without recoining or alter∣ing the Species. 8. Those who hide and hoard up their Money, to defeat the Intents of a Tax upon it, will be disappointed of their Ends, and become greater Losers than by producing it; whereby Mo∣ney may be affected by Taxes, which now cannot so easily be done. 9. All the Benefits and Advantages which can be proposed by a raising of the extrinsick and denominated Value of Money, will be hereby secured, and all the Inconveniencies of that Me∣thod obviated. 10. All the Advantages which can be proposed to the Publick by Coining
after the old Standard, will hereby be effected, at a very inconsiderable pre∣sent Expence, and no more than one Million at the end of the War. 11. Guineas will hereby fall in their Estimation, by an easie, natural, and gradual Abatement. 12. The Plenty of Money will be much greater, the Intrinsick Value more, and the Certainty of what a Man takes clearer than is at present. And the real Value of our Coin, as great as ever, to all Intents and Purposes, but of Exporting, Melting-down, and Hiding FINIS.
