P35 13084441 97288
A Seasonable QUESTION, AND AN Usefull ANSWER, CONTAINED In an Exchange of a LETTER be∣tween a Parliament-Man in Cornwell, and a Bench∣er of the Temple, London. Printed in the Year, 1676.
as vve can, vve shall yeild up to the Kings pleasure all the Lavvs vvhereby the Rights and Inheritances of the King and Subjects, ought to be distinguished and determined. Truly Sir, these are edged Tooles, not to be played with, I would not come 200 miles to put my Neck in a noose. An honest Old Cavalire whispered tother day to me, That he supposed this prorogation came from French Counsels, not only to prevent the Parliament from stoping in time the French Kings increase of povver at Sea and Land, but to lead his Majesty in obscure, undifcerned paths to the mount of absolute povver. The French knovving too vvell, that vvhensoever the English People shall discover their Liberties and Lavvs to be invaded, such fires vvill be kindled as they may run avvay in the smoak, and vveshall not be able to contest vvith them either the povver of the Sea, or the equallity of trade. But whosoever advised the prorogation, Pray Sir, let me know whether it be a Dissolution. You may perhaps save me a scurvy winter Journey, and Mony in my Pocket, and I assure you we are all very poor, and I do not expect to be paid for secret serviec, I know you can resolve this question as well (at least) as my Lord Chancellor. If it be but a doubtful point, I should think I had best stay at home, none but an undoubted parliament being able law∣fully to deside the case, His Majesty out of parliament is no competent Judge for himself in this point; and if we should declare our selves to be a parliament legally continued by the Prorogation, according to the Kings will though not ac∣cording to the Lawes, I should tremble to be assistant in such a sad doom of England, that the meeting of our Parlia∣ment, and the benefit of our laws, are of the kings Grace, and not of right to be injoyed; only when, & as he pleaseth. Nei∣ther should I think such a resolution to be of any authority, because we should be parties, and Judges, and give sentence to continve our selves in power. You must not, Sir, deny me your whole thoughts of this great affair, I have come to parliament twice or thrice, to provide
against the multitude of mischiefs and grievancs that threa∣ten our ruine, but did but verifie the proverb, That I came ninescore miles to suck a Bull, you know we have not been suf∣feerd to do anything of moment for several Sessions; but I shall fool my self more, if I should now come 200 miles to sit gravely, and prepare my self for the Gallowes, when so∣ever the subjects shall demand right against us, or the Crown shall descend to any whose interest shall lead him to call in question what we shall do. You know, Sir, you and I were Confessors of old un∣der his Majesties father, and narroly escaped being Martyred for the Protestant Religion, the Lawes of the land, and the Priviledges of Parliaments, as we belived, we carried as many of those Declarations in our Pockets, as we had shillings of his Coyning, whilst we fought under his Banner, and should not I (Sir,) be an impudent Knave, if I should now come and sit in parliament, to declare, that his majesty may of right take away from his subjects the benefit of their princi∣ple fundamental Laws, about their meeting in Parliament, when and as long as he pleaseth, and if he will never suffer a Parliament to sit to claim one of the priviledges we swore to maintain. I long for your Opinion (Sir) upon the whole matter, I would neither disobey any lawfull command of his Majesty, nor diminish the just English regall Power. I would not crop a leaf of any flower of the Crown, yet I make as much conscience not to betray my Country, or easily yeeld up the Antient lawes and Government of Eng∣land, by parliament, to the kings Will, to make English free∣men tenants at will to the king, of their lawes, their parlia∣ments, their liberties and lives. I am resolved to be an honest man, and thy faithfull friend and hearty servant.
The Benchers ANSWER. SIR, YOu demand my Opinion in a Question of the greatest moment, that ever was moved since England was esta∣blished under civil Goverment; the absolute ruin for our age or the safety of all the ancient English liberties and excellent Laws depend upon the right resolving your Question. Whether this Parliament be actually Dissovled by the last Proro∣gation for 15 months? He that will clearly answer you, ought first to consider whether a prorogation ordered and con∣tinued beyond a year, can be made to agree with our lawes and statutes concerning holding of parliaments (which, by the way are the birth-right of English men) It seemes you have been told of two statutes which enact, That a Parliament shall be holden every year; doutbless they in ended those prin∣ted statutes of the 4. of Ed 3. Cap. 14. and that of the 36. Ed. 3. Cap. 10. where it is enacted, That for maintenance of the statutes, and redress of divers mischiefs and grievances vvhich dayly happen, a parliament shall be holden every year, as an other time vvas ordayned. These are most taken notice of because they are printed, and were re-inforced by that notable Act of the 16 of the late King: which provided effectually for the summoning and electing a parliament every 3 year, without the Kings concurent asent, if he neglected or refused two years together to summon a parliament according to those statutes of Edvv. 3. And although this parliament hath repealed that statute and taken from the people that excelent meanes to secure their right of parliaments yet they have left us to the force of the antient laws in the case, and in the same Act of repeale 16 Car. 2. they have declared and acknowleged those lawes of Ed. 3 to be still the lawes and statutes of this Realm; and they have enacted no clause
or article that derogates from them, or abates their force. Those latter clauses of that Act which seem to be enacting being (as my brethren of the robe speak) nugatory and in∣significant, only praying the King not to intermit the holding of parliaments above 3 years at the most, but to call them as often as there shall be occasion, which in plainer English is an humble motion that he would not neglect his duty, to put the laws in execution longer than two years, but that he would call parliaments as oft as ocasion did require, and that Act was to commence from the end of this parliament, what ever was intended by that Act, it doth neither weaken the force of those two antient printed statutes, nor of any other unprinted for annual parliaments, this Act being only affirm∣ative and consistent with the other. And I ought to tell you that there are 4 more at least to thesame porpose. That of the 1. Ri. 2. number 95. in the Rolls relates to the Jurisdicttive power of parliaments which is often very necessary, as well as the legislative. It enacts, That a Parliament be yearly holden to redress delayes in suites, and to end such cases as the Judges doubt, the 5. of Ed. 2. n. 9 and 13. and the 2. R. 1. 2. n. 73. and in the 50. Ed. 3. n. 177. In the parliament called, the good Parliament, the same thing was enacted and confirmed; and in the opening the parliament, in the 2. Ric. 2. n. 4. the Lord Chancellor in shewing the causes of calling that parliament gives for the second reason of it, That it vvas enasted that a Parliament should be yearly holden. And the message sent from the parliament to the King in the 9. Ric. 2. by the Duke of Gloster, tells that King, That one old statute and laudable cust∣om is approved, vvhich no man can deny, that the King once in a year do summon his high Court of parliament, there to consult vvith the vvise men, and so you may read in Grafton, Page 3. 48. It seems the course of holding yearly parliaments then passed not only for statute law wherein that Kings Ancestors had joyned with his kingdom to ordain it, but as the most undoubted Custom of England, that is the Common law de∣declared
in and by the statutes, they clayming it as their most unquestionable inheritance, being the only Root of all their Liberties and Properties, and the only pollitick meanes of their defence and safeguard, and no doubt our Ancestors had reason sufficient to claime their yearly parliaments as the custom or common law of England, seeing no Antiquary nor record can shew the original of that usuage, having its beginning with the Government it self. Certain times for Parliament meeting are in truth of the essence of the English government: Parliaments were the first appointers or crea∣tors of all other Offices, Jurisdictions, Powers and Prero∣gatives in the Government, Don Wallo writing of the Brittish lawes tells us of Parliaments annuall or oftner amongst them above 400 years before Christ. And the Mirror of Justice tells us that king Alfred ordained it for a perpetu∣all usuage, That tvvice in the year, or oftner, they should assem∣ble at London to treat in Parliament of the Government of the People. So it was in the Saxon's time, and continued in the Normans, being admitted by Duke William, called the Con∣querour, as the Custom of England, as appears by that antient Treatise called, Modus antiquus tenendo Parliamenti, And after great contest between the king of that Race and the people, it was setled by Statutes often renewed, That Parlia∣ments should be yearly, as the Statutes shew. Upon the whole, I think it beyond dispute, that by the Laws and Statutes of our Realm, a Parliament ought to be holden every year: And surely it is as certain, that the last prorogation beyond a year, being persisted in by the king till the year is past over, did prevent and defeat the executi∣on of those Laws, and is in direct opposition to them. The sence of what the Lord Chancellor said to prorogue the parliament, was a plain contradiction to these laws. He tells them It vvas his Majesties Will that there should be no Parliament holden for one vvhole year and some months next fol∣lovving. Then the question will be (if it be any) Whether the
king's Will and Word in the Lavv, or his Word in the Lord Chancelor's mouth is most potent? The whole Kingdom in Parliament, and all the Books of the Law, have alwayes judged the Law to be the kings Superiour, to judge of the validity of all his Grants, Orders, Commissions, Patents un∣der Great and Little Seal, and every Court in Westminster-Hall, have always thought its Authority sufficient to Judge His Grants under Seal, or any thing he hath done, void, if they did not agree with the Law. 'Tis a Civility and ho∣nour that our Laws pay to the king, that they will not sup∣pose him to will any thing otherwise than as the Laws direct or allow him; and thence it was received as a Maxim, That the King can do no vvrong; Indeed all he does contrary to Law, is doing nothing; 'tis to be holden for nothing by Magna Charta it self, therefore if the last Prorogation do not agree with the Laws, it is a meer Nullity. It is worth your remembring, that in the 38 Chap. of the Great Charter it is ordained, That no King should devise or invent any thing to infringe or vveaken the Liberties and Lavvs. And if either King or Subject, should seek out any thing against them, it should be of no value, and holden for nought. If the Prorogation were a device or trick sought out to weaken the Laws for holding Parliaments every year, 'tis judged to be nought, or no Prorogation by 30 or 40 Parliaments, which have confirmed and re-enacted the same Charter. But I ought to acquaint you that there are great endea∣vours to support the Prorogation, some alledging with noise enough, That many Kings have intermitted Parliaments not only for more than a year, but for many years; But these seem not to understand the Question, which is of the validity in Law of what the king hath done to the Parliament. 'Tis not now enquired, what Remedies there are if Kings shall leave undone what the Law and their Trust require in call∣ing parliaments; all the positive exercises, of power by the
king, may and ought to be judicially sentenced, and appro∣ved for good, if agreeable to the Laws, or holden for none if they be contrary to the Law. And this hath been the un-interrupted usuage of England in all Ages; They have sentenced all his Charters, Grants. yea his very Pardons, that seem to come so singly from his Soveraign power or prero∣rogative; and the Prorogation ought upon the same reason to be tried by the Law, and judged void, if so it be by the Rules of the Law. But the kings omission to put the Laws in execution in calling Parliaments at the times limitted by the Statutes, or in appointing sufficient Guards for the Seas, or in issuing out Commissions to the Judges, or any the like, These, I say, cannot be brought into Question Judicially, there being no possible relief for the People in such cases, but by supplimentary laws to be made in Parliament, in case of such Omissions, as was done by the parliament 1641. 'Tis well for the People that the law hath provided, that whatever the king shall do contrary to law, shall go for nought, though they suffer by his neglect, their right and laws remain to them, and such Omissions of the king as are before mentioned, have alwayes been esteemed by Parlia∣ments and People, Failers or breaches of the kings high and sacred trust, and 'tis a pittiful Argument to prove that the kings might of right, or by the laws omit to do what the law hath trusted to their care, because they have sometimes broke their Trust. His late Majesty in his Declaration of the 12 of August, 1642, when the unhappy War began to rage, freely con∣fessed, That it was upon his Prospect the unhappy State of the kingdom, and of the inconveniencies and mischiefs that had grown by the long intermission of Parliaments, and by the parting too much from the known Rule of the law to an arbitrary Power, that induced him to consent freely to that Act in 1641, called vulgarly, The Triennal Act, which was in truth for Annual Parliaments, re-en∣acting
those very Acts of Edvv. 3. before mentioned. He said, he was willing in Justice and Favour to his Sub∣jects, to make them Reparations for their Sufferings they had undergon by him in omitting Parliaments. I remem∣ber this chiefly to shew, that his late Majesty, when his Sub∣jects were in Arms against him, freely acknowledged the wrong he had formerly done them, by failing to summon Parliaments as the Law required: And professed that he had the year before, freely and heartily consented to that Act which re-enacted those Antient laws of Edvv. 3. which are conceived amongst others, to make the Prorogation void. Yet I must tell you there are those that affirm, all the laws for Annual Parliaments, to be Musty absolete Statutes vvhose strength and life are devoured by time; But it is enough to stop their mouthes, that they have been declared by two Parliaments within 40 years last past, to be the laws of our Realm, and indeed they are laws of such a nature, as cannot be weakened by any neglect of their due execution, being declarative of the common law, and a most essential part of the constitution of the English Government, which altoge∣ther lives and subsists in and by the certainty of Parliaments meeting. If it were admitted for Truth, That neither the Common-Law, nor the Statutes did indispensably oblige the Calling of Parliaments, at any certain times, but that their Meetings were only at the Wills of the kings, then the kings did no wrong if they commanded the people, as was once done in a kingdom, by Proclamation, Never to mention par∣liaments more. If these laws be dead of Age, the Antient Famous English-Liberty is dead with them, the English must never more claim the Name of A Free People, if they have no share by right in the Government of themselves, by their certain rightful times of Parliaments. But my Lord Cook, part 1. of Instit. pag. 81. concludes rightly, That no Act of prlaiament can loose its force, or be antiquated by non user. un∣less the Reason of it fail, and the Use of it is impossible, and by
change of time becomes a publick mischief; but not those especi∣ally vvhich are made to bind the Kings themselves for the Com∣mon good, for such are the Lavvs for parliaments. Yet he that observes in our English law books and Histories in the time of king John, Hen. 8. Ed. 1. and Ed. 2. How the Nobles and Free-holders claimed their right by the Common law to meet in Parliament before these Statutes were made, and how often they compelled their kings, (I do not say how lawfull such compulsion was) when need required to call parliaments, and if he observes also how constant these sta∣tutes for Annual parliaments were executed in many whole kings reigns succeeding each other next after their making, and if he considers how slowly and slily this Grand Right of the peoples was invaded and stolen upon in latter Ages, he will have little reason to pretend a non user of those Statutes yet if some neglects and defaults have been committed a∣gainst the laws, it concerns his Majesty in Conscience, and the people in Interest much more, not to permit it hereafter, least patient sufferánce of the wrong, become an argument against the peoples Right. Pray Sir, read the sense of our Ancestors upon the kings neglect of executing a law against the Pope, whom they then adored, 'tis the Statute of Provisors of the 25 of Ed. 3. These are the words, The king seeing the dammages and mischiefs before mentioned, and having regard to the said statute, &c. Which statute holdeth its force, and was never defeated, repealed, nor annull'd; and by so much he is bounden by his Oath to cause the same to be kept as the law of the realm, though that by sufferance and negli∣gence, it hath been sithence attempted to the contrary. Truly Sir, these seem to be honest, plain, old English words, and if the Statutes about parliaments were put in the front or preface, they would sound well from his Majesties mouth in a Nevv Statute. But some there are, Sir, who find softer Cushons in a Parliament Seat than you do, who to avoid
the nullity of the prorogation, assert, That the Statutes for yearly Parliaments, may be dispenced vvith by the kings Sove∣raign povver and prerogative, being (say they) only Coun∣cils and Advices to the king, and not obligatory. This is boldly said, if it could be as soundly proved, it would put all questions between the king and his Subjects to ever∣lasting silence; if he can legally or of right dispence, or ab∣solve himself from all the bonds of the Law, for holding par∣liaments, by whom the Lawes are to be maintained, and the highest transgressors punished, he may dispence with the lawes whereby all other Courts sit, and then he is loose from all lawes, and nothing of right can be claimed of him by the subject. To dispute with statutes of this nature by the king without limitation of time or other rule than his Will, is the same in other words, as to repeale or anull these statutes, and revive them again when he pleaseth; and that is to asume to the Crown, singly, the legislative power which consists as much in anulling as in making lawes. And if that be the kings rightfull power, then all the laws are absolutely de∣pendant upon the Will of the king. I have read that an at∣tempt of the same kind was made by king Rich. 2. in setting up a Phantatick opinion (as the Parliament then called it) saying, that the lawes of the Realm were in his head and in his breast; but it cost the people very dear, both in blood and treasure, to confute it: and the poor king lost his Crown, and life for that fancy. I will not trouble you or my self with the Common (yet dangerous) Doctrine of my Tribe, about the kings Power to dispence with penall lawes, by his non obstante: I am only to inquire in this case, what dispensing power the king hath, over the statutes made and declared only to bind and limit the kings themselves, in the execution of their Trust about the Government, such as are in their prime true intent, sacred Pacts, or Arguments between the king and People, though in honuor to the king, there could not be aded to them the sanction of a penalty upon the king
Judicialy. These statutes that I now discourse of, are the Foundations of our Government, and declarative only, shewing what our Government is, that is, by king and Parli∣ament, and how far the Crown is trusted with the power of caling Parliaments; that is, as often as there should be ocasion within every year, and not otherwise. Our government was never originally founded upon such rediculous folly by our wise Ancestars, as to intend themselves to be a Free People, to make and alter their own lawes, for their Government with their kings, and he to call them to parliament to that in∣tent, and to leave it absolvtely to the kings Will, even law∣fully, or of right by their Fundamental laws, to defeat their meeting in Parliament for ever. If our Government were so founded, and doth so continue, our English Crown is of right, or by law, in no kind restrained, limitted or boun∣ded in the exercise of the Regal power unless it please, and if the kings shall condescend to consult with Parliaments, and agree to some Statutes to limit themselves, there is no more done than was by the men of Gotham, that made a Hedge for the Coockows. These Reasons, Sir, are not urged to shew any defects in our Government, which may or ought to be amended, but to prove, that our Government was founded upon such cer∣tain laws and Customs, that the kings never had absolute power, but that the power of Parliaments, and their certain Meetings, were of right, and as much a part of our Govern∣ment as the kings themselves. And I think it self evident from the nature and manner of the English Government, owned in all Ages, to be quallified by laws, binding both King and People, that the king cannot more dispence with the Laws which limit the times wherein parliaments ought to be holden, than with the laws that preserve our lives and estates from being subject to this Will. Parliaments are of the Essence of our Government, and must have the times of their assembling indispensible; and if it be not of right by
law, that they are to be held within cercain Circles of time, as Custom and law have appointed, then there's no necessi∣ty in law that they should be held at any time if the king please, and by consequence, they are none of the Essentials of our Government, but the Government may be without them. If the kings may of right dispence with the times ap∣pointed for holding Parliaments, they may break all the bonds of other laws, no other power daring to question them, all but parliaments deriving their power from them. Charles the seventh, and Levvis the eleventh of France, first subverted the liberty of the French, and all their antient Customs and laws by usurping that pretended prerogative, of dispensing with the certain times of the meetings of their assembly of Estates, by that means they suffered them to meet very seldom, and their immediate Successors pro∣ceeded to arrogate to themselves more power over those Assemblies, untill they have in fact (perhaps not in right) abolished almost the memory of them, and reduced the peo∣ple to a miserable slavery, the people having no other fence of their liberty. Dear Sir, to deal plainly, I believe the opi∣nion that the King might dispence with Parliaments meet∣ing notwithstanding the statutes, or prorogue them as long as he pleaseth, is built upon that gross vulgar Error, That Parliaments are the Creatures of the kings Will, because they are summoned by his Writs, and dissolved also vvhen he thinks sit. I wish our Government were better understood both by our Lords and Commons, they ought to know that the Writts of Summons for a Parliament once a year, are to be issued by the king in obedience to the laws, and if there be occasion for calling them oftener, the Writts issue in perfor∣mance of the kings Trust and Oath, to remove by Parlia∣ments, the mischiefs that afflict the People. The Statute of Provisors 25 Edvv 3. speakes this plainly, viz. The Commons pray the King, that sith the right of the Crovvn of England, and the Lavv of the said Realm is such that
upon the mischiefs and dammages vvhich happen to his Realm, he ought and is bound by his Oath, vvith the accord of his Peo∣ple in Parliament, thereof to make remedy and Lavv. This king and people agreed, that it was the English Constitution, and Kings Duty to Call Parliaments as the Lawes required; and if any mischiefes happened, he was bound by his Oath then to call them and to joyne in accord with them to re∣move the mischiefs and dammages, before they were dissol∣ved; else by the declaration in this law he saved not his Oath by calling them. And as the law binds the king upon Oath, to send out the summons for parliaments, so it provides the very form of the VVrit which must be sent, the king must summon them in no other form than the law hath ap∣pointed, The law hath not trusted the king to adde to, leave out, or alter one word in the writ of summons; an Act of parliament only can vary one tittle of it. The law hath also prescribed to parliaments their business in general, which are the matters that concern the king, the state, and the defence of the Realm. These are words so large, that there seemes to be nothing that concerns the wellfare of king or people, which doth not fall under their consultations. But, Pray Sir observe, that 'tis not the kings will that impowers your brethren, that's no more than a Command of the law by the king ex Officio, that the people do impower such as they elect they are to authorize them as the writ declares, to do and consent to what shall by the Common Council of the king∣dom be then ordained; Ita quod (saith the VVrit) pro de∣festu potestatis hujusmodi, &c. So that for want of such power, the foresaid business may not remain undone. The Parliament derives not any power from his Majesty, but from the first Root of Government, the Peoples Choyce, according to the laws: For that reason, Indentures are, and ought to be sealed between the People and the Elected, and then they are immediately invested with a share of the legis∣lative power, for that time, which is the greatest and highest
power and therefore in its own nature independent, every estate having share in the legislative power, for the Proporti∣on it hath therein, hath its independency of the other two and of its proper right, as founded in the fabrick and fram of the policy and government, not derived from the grace of the king by grant or Commission. I have said too much I doubt against the power of the king to despense with the statutes for yearly parliaments, and yet I must adde this one thing more, That parliaments are by many statutes as well as by the Common law, our highest Court of Judicature, before whom comes writts of error, And the last appeales in all cases. And that Ancient Mirror of Justice tells us that their Judicature was intended to hear and determine the com∣plaints of the wrongfull Acts of the king, the Queen, and their Children, and of those persons against whom the subjects otherwise could not have common Justice; now if the king can of right dispence with the certain appointed sitting of this Judicature, he can lawfully say the wrongs that I and my great Ministers (too bigg for other Courts,) shall do to the people, shall never be heard or Judged but at my will; their complaints shall not be admitted once in 50. years, nor till domes day, unless I please. If our men of the Robe will maintain such a dispensing Power in the king with the statutes in question, they must say, that the king may by law prevent and defeat the last results of Justice, and null the highest Court of Judicature, founded on the common law, and let them tell me, why he may not, by the same right and reason, despence with the lawes whereby all the inferior Courts of Judicature now fits, or adnull the Courts themselves, and throw all things in∣to a confused Chaos, where the strongest shall injoy every thing, Upon these Premises, I may dare to conclude, That the laws for holding a Parliament every year, stand firm and immutable, untill an undobted parliament shall repeale them by some express words, and that the prorogation can
never be reconciled to those lawes; or be helped by any power of the kings to despence with them, but must be Judged inconsistent with the lawes, that are of the essence of our government; having actually defeated the execution of them, and therefore ought to be holden for nothing, and the day appointed for your meeting to be no day, for that purpose, in the sence of our law. Supposing then, that I having hitherto rightly concluded, the question will be, Whether the kings dismission of the parliament, without any day set for their return and their continuing so beyond the year, be a dissolution? Ill, tell you, Sir, the method of my thoughts upon this Question, that I might not be couzened with words, nor intangled in trifling disputes about them I first consider, whether dissolving a Parliament were a term of art in our law, and ought to have some peculir sence gained by the use of it in the law; But finding it used only in its vuilgar sence. I perceived it signified to break off, or put an end to a Parli∣ament, and all their business and authority; so that a dissolu∣tion may be made, without the king or Lord Chancellors, saying, you are hereby dissolved, The force of the law or cust∣om of England, may put an end to a Parliament. Of old, the finishing the business of the people, for which they were called, did dissolve them. See the ancient Modus tenendi Parliamt. The custom was that when all the petitions for relief against grievances were dispacthed, proclamation was made, demanding if any petition were yet unanswered, and if there was none, the parliament forth with departed, this was the naturall death or dissolution of a parliament, but if the king did command the Lords, and Commons to de∣part before they had suffitiently consulted about the state; and defence of the king and Kingdom, and set up-day for their return, that was the voilent death of a Parliament, and I doubt a violence to the kings conscience.
But it was usuall for the kings to dissolve Parliaments either by leave or command given them to depart, fixing no day for their return; so testify the Antient Rolls of the 37. Ed. 3. n. 38. and 38. Ed. 3. n. 31. 40, Ed. 3. n. 16. 45. Ed. 3. n. 13. 50. tis by force of law that the writ of sumons to Parliament abates or becomes void by the kings naturall death, and the Parliament, is thereby dissolved. Upon the same reason a failer of some circumstance, as the naming such a time as the law allowes, to which it is adjourned, the holding and con∣tinuing a parliament, if Judged necessary by the law, for preserving both the form and substance of the Government, I say such a fayler in time onely, may by Act of law, dissolve a parliament even against the will of the king, and if such a failer happens, if the king should step out of the form of the law to revive a parliament, it would alter the whole Govern∣ment by owning a power in the king to vest in such as he please the legislative power out of the form of the law. In making a parliament, the king hath his power from the law to summons, and the form wherein only he can exert that power: And the Elected have their power from the people by the writ of the law, what to do and consent to on their behalf at the time and place then mentioned (as the writ says, tunc & jbidem) and these powers must by the law be strictly and punctually persued, and nothing less than an Act of parliament can help any defect or failer in persuance of these powers; if the Parliament then meet as the law re∣quires, if they fayl to be continued in the form of the law, then by the Act of law, they are dissolved, not being able to create to them selves a day or time which will not agree with the returnes to the writ of summons, by which their Masters impowred them to consent on their behalf. Neither is this a nicety or quirk in law, but a form essentialy necessary to preserve our liberties. If the representatives, trusted for the people, to do and consent for them at the time and place mentioned, in the lawfull writ, after a fayler of continving
their trust, as the law directs, pceede to Act as a parliament, they must do it without any appointment or power given them from the people, in any form of law, and in the ap∣pearance and Judgment of the law, without any Authoritie, and if they might do it after fayler of a legall continuance one year, they may do it after 20 years; and because they were once commissioned by the people to represent them in one parliament, they should therefore make themselves Lords of the people, and of their Laws Lives and Liberties for ever; and admit whom they please (as some have done heretofore) into their society, and if it should be admitted, that any number of men, might exercise a share of the legisla∣tive power, without evidence in law, upon record, that they were thereunto first sufficiently authorized and therein le∣gally continued, it would give a fatall stroak to the Antient English government and all its lawes and liberties, Sir from these principles I tell you freely my opinion, That the parlia∣ment is dissolved, having been dismissed, or commanded to depart, without a day to return within the time that the Laws require a Parliament to be holden, and that time also lapsed since their dismission; I think it not material in the case, what words the Lord Chancellor said when he dismissed them; If he said, you are prorogued, or you are dismissed, or you are sent home, or you must be gon, 'tis all one; I mind what was really done; you were in substance and sence of the words commanded to dissolve your Assembly, and you were told that all the business before you was at an end, as if it had not been; and that you must not assemble again or hold Par∣liament for above a year then following; and you did sepa∣rate your selves, and never held Parliament within the year, and this by the act and judgment of the Law hath Dissolved you; there hath been a failer of any such act in law as could continue you in the Commission and Authority whereunto the People hath chosen you, in the Form that the laws hath prescribed: The King declaring, under the name of pro∣roguing
you that all the  you had begun should be void, and that you should not meet in parliament the next insuing year (as the law required, I say that declartion of the kings could not in any construction of law, be an Act of con∣tinuance of your power and commission, you had from the people, the execution whereof was thereby wholly defeated; likewise there was no Act of your own, by adjournment of your house, to continue you, and therefore your Authority was wholly superseded, and discontinued. I know nothing that can be pretended to prevent your discontinuance, but the kings will that you should sit again 3 months after the year expired; but his prevention of your sitting for above a year, having contrary to the law and his trust, first discon∣tinved you, his Will cannot give, or renew, those Parliamen∣tary powers, that the people gave you in return of the legall writ; The Lord Cooke sayth 3. Part. Instis. Chap. Parl If you sit again, you are a severall Parliament from vvhat you vvere, (if you be a Parliament) every distinct session, being in lavv a severall Parliament. And your former Authorities being Ceased by a failer of continuance, you can have none but what the kings will vest in you, and I need not tell you, that the king cannot chuse for the people their Representatives. To me it seemes playn, that the king having not continued you, nor you continued your selves, nor having set or held Parliament for above a year, the law hath dissolved you, and Judged you for none. I have not time to write you all the talks of the Town upon this question; some have invented a new fashion proro∣gation, for the king to prorogue without day, and call the Parliament again by proclamation; but their mouths must be stopped, if they be only told, That such a practise or use of prorogation, hath no foundation in any Statute, Custome usage, or Reason of Law, and the king cannot change the lawes and customes or introduce new. I take a prorogation, Sine die, if any such be made, to be as void in law, as a writ of
summons of a Parliament would be, that named no day for their sitting. And there can be no pretence of Antiquity for such pro∣rogations, the words of Adjornment and Prorogation, hav∣ing been used in differently for the same thing about 400. years, if not more They were so taken in the state of 13. E. 4. n. 42. and how long after I cannot find; but it would have been a plain contradiction in termes, to have said, then the Parliament is adjorned, Sine die, that is, it was appointed to meet at another day, without a day. Its a sign that men are sore pinched, when they will assert contradictions rather then submit to truth. I ought to tell you one thing more that is said in this case; they pretend a president, that the king hath prorogued a∣bove a year, they say, that in the great plague, in the 7. of Eli. that Parliament was prorogued for a year and three dayes, what then? say they therefore the king might do it now. Such arguers shew themselves pittifull Logitians, lack-lerning lavv∣yers, and degenerate English men; Is it a logicall arguments to say, that what ever any king of England hath once or of∣tner done, may be lawfully done by any other king. An Eng∣lish king; Rich. 2. by pretence of Royall authority cut many a worthy mans throat, and murdered his Unkle, the Duke of Gloster. An other king, Iohn, sold this kingdom to the Pope May it therefore be lawfully sold? and have any lawyers learned so little, as not to know that there is no President to be alledged against an express Statute? or not to know A Transgression of a statute, even by the king, if silently passed over, and never brought into Judgment, is not in the mean∣ing of the law to be called apresident. Theres no use of presi∣dents, unless it be to shew the usage where there is no statute in the case, or to serve the construction of a statute, where the meaning is doubtfull; but where so many statutes are plaine and express, as in this case, 'tis in vain to alledge what hath been done, and connived at, without Questioning it, as
a president to warrant the present breach of those statutes▪ or rather to anull them forever. And they must also as much degenerate from English men as from Logick and Lavv, who shall assert that the kings of England may acquire a right or power to themselves and their successors for ever, by their Ancestors transgressing any statute, made to bound the Re∣gall power. All true English have alwayes maintained with their blood, that our kings were limmitted by the laws and that they broke their oaths if they did not carefully see to the execution of them. And in dayes of yore, they have been so far from allowing the son and succesor of a king, to break any of the laws, because his father did so before him, they have rejected the father because he kept not within the lim∣mits of the law, and taken the son upon his promise not to walk by his fathers Example. Sir, I have told you my thoughts upon the Question, be∣ing satisfied that the kings will being declared upon record, that you should not hold Parliament within the time limmit∣ed by law, you were thereby dissolved, and the Authorities given you by the people, did thereby cease and return into the People; and the kings will that you should afterwards hold Parliament again, being not agreeable to law, could not revive your power. And in my poor opinion, if you now as∣sume to your selves to exercise Parliamentary powers, becaus the king will have 'it so, you must pass this fatall Judgment against the old English government, That the king may law∣fully prorouge you for 40. years if he please, and may refuse for ever to hold a Parliament; and if such a Judgment, seem∣ingly passed in Parliament against our Fundamentall lawes and liberties, shall ever be left to the interpretation of any successors to our gracious king, who shall intend a Tyranny, he shall claim by that record to be our absolute master, and neither Lords nor Commons, to have any right to provide in Common Counsel for the defence of the Realm, and their
own good government and wellfare, unless be please. In fine, our innocent babes shall hereafter read in that re∣cord, that you Judged your selves and them to be perfect slaves, all prostitute to the will of the king. Doubtless if it be granted that the People have no right to parliaments, but at the kings will, we shall never have any king after this, that will tell us, as king Iames did, in his speech to the parlia∣ment held March. 19. 1603. That he vvas not ashamed to confess it, his principle honnor, to be the great servant of the Common vvealth, and that he knevv himself to be ordained for the people, and not the people for him. I shall not advise you to come or stay I have herein delivered my one soul; as becomes Your Fithfull and Affestionate Friend▪ H. P. FINIS.
