Q180 R20603 12405012 61356
A QVESTION CONCERNING The great and weightie Affairs of the whole Kingdome. SHEWING, How Lawes are to be understood, and Obedience yeelded? Also an Answer to the aforesaid Question, necessary for the present state of things touching the Militia. Published for the good of the Common-weal. Printed for John Goal. 1641.
A QVESTION ANSWERED. Question. NOw in our extreame Distractions, when forraign forces threaten, and propably are invited, and a malignant and Popish party at home offended? The Devil hath cast a hone, and raised a contestation be∣tween the King and Parliament touching the Militia. His Maiesty claims the disposing of at to be in Him by right of Law; The Par∣liament saith rebus sic stantibus, and no∣lenti Rege, the Ordering of it is in them?
Answer. VVHich Question, may receive its solution by this distinction. That there is in Laws an equitable, and a litterall sence. His Majesty (let it be granted) is intrusted by Law with the Militia, but it's for the good and pre∣fervation of the Republique, against Forraign Invasions, or Domestique Re∣bellions. For it cannot be supposed, that the Parliament would ever by Law intrust the King with the Militia against themselves, or the Common-wealth, that intrusts them to provide for their Weal, not for their woe. So that when there is certain appea∣rance grounded suspition, that the Let∣ter of the Law shall be improved a∣gainst
the Equity of it (that is, the publique good, whether of the body reall or representative) then the Com∣mander going against its Equity, gives Liberty to the Commanded to refuse Obedience to the Letter: for the Law taken abstract from its originall reason and end, is made a shell without a ker∣nell, a shadow without a substance, and a body without a soul. It is the Execu∣tion of Laws according to their Equi∣ty and Reason, which (as I may say) is the spirit that gives life to Authority, the Letter kills. Nor need this Equity be expressed in the Law, being so Naturally implyed and supposed in all Laws that are not meerly Imperiall, from that Analogy, which all bodies politique hold with the Naturall; whence all Government and Governors borrow a proportiona∣ble Respect; And therfore when the Militia of an Army is committed to the General, it is not with any expresse
condition, that he shall not turn the mouths of his Canons against his Own Souldiers; for that is so Naturally and necessarily implyed, that its needlesse to be expressed, insomuch as if he did attempt or command such a thing a∣gainst the nature of his trust and place, it did ipso facto estate the Army, in a right of disobedience, except we think that obedience binds Men to, cut their own throats, or their companions. And indeed if this destinction be not allow∣ed, then the Legall and mixt Monarchy is the greatest Tiranny, for if Laws invest the King in an absolute power, and the letter be not contro∣led by the equity, then whereas other Kings that are absolute Monarcks and rule by will and not by Law, are Tyrants perforce. Those that rule by Law and not by will, have hereby a Tirany confer'd upon them legally, and so the very end of Laws, which is to give bounds and limits to the exorbitant wills of Princes, is by the Laws disapointed, for they hereby give corrobaration (and much more Iustification to an arbitrary Tyranny, by making it legall, not assumed; which Laws are ordained to crasse not countenance:
and therefore is the latter (where it seems abso∣lute) alwayes to receive quallification from the Equity, else the for∣said absurdity must follow. Published for the good of the Common-Weale. FINIS.
