R1815 12435814 62026
. Sagrir. OR Doomes-day drawing nigh, With Thunder and Lightening to LAWYERS. In an Alarum For New Laws, and the Peoples Liberties from the Norman and Babylonian Yokes. Making Discoverie Of the present ungodly Laws and Lawyers of the Fourth Monarchy, and of the approach of the FIFTH; with those godly Laws, Officers and Ordinances that belong to the Legislative Power of the Lord Iesus. SHEWING The Glorious Work Incumbent to Civil-Discipline, (once more) set before the Parliament, Lord Generall▪ Army and People of England, in their distinct capities, upon the Account of Christ and his Monarchy. Humbly presented to them by JOHN ROGERS, an unfained Servant of Christ, and this Common-wealth in their best Rights, Laws and Liberties, lost many years. Bread of Deceit is sweet to a man, but afterwards his mouth shall be filled with Gravell.Prov. 20. 17. Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor, he shal cry himself, but shal not be heard.Prov. 21. 13. They are Brasse and Iron, they are all Corrupters, the Bellows are burnt, the Lead is con∣sumed of the fire, the Founder melteth in vain, for the Wicked are not plucked a∣way.Ier. 6. 28. 29. When their Judges (or the greatest Lawyers) are thrown down into stony places, they shall hear my Words, because then they are sweet,Psal. 141. 6. Causidicis, Erebo, Fisco, fas vivere rapto; Militibus, Medico, Tortori, occidere ludo; Meiri Astrologis, Pictoribus, atque Poetis. LONDON, Printed for Tho: Hucklescot, to be sold at the George in Little Brittain. 1654
To the Right Honourable The Lord Gen. CROMVVEL, The Peoples Victorious Champion in England, Ireland, and Scotland. My Lord: HIs EXCELLENCY the Lord Jesus hath sent out his Summons to other Nations also, and the Blade of that Sword (whose handle is held in England) will reach to the very Gates of Rome ore long, but by what Pag. 131. There is a Prediction which sayes, a C. shal sound within the wals of Rome. Instruments we know not, yet for what end we know, Psal. 72. 2. 4. 13. viz. to breake in peeces the oppressor, and to deliver the poore and needy, yea to spoile the weak-hearted, and be more excellent then the (migh∣tiest) mountains of prey, Psal. 76. 4. 5. this shall goe on till all the earth be filled with his glory. Now my Lord, hitherto he hath honoured you in his War, let him also doe so in his Work which the War hath made way for, viz. in throwing down of Tyranny the Oppression, which as you have begun to doe, so this Treatise hath unavoydable reference to your Selfe, to carry on; as our Conquerour upon Christs and the Common-wealths account, and not upon your owne. Therefore are the eyes of thousands upon you, to see what you will doe for their safety and freedome, according to the just Rights and Liberties of the People of this Nation, which they had before the Norman Tyranny and Conquest; for it is far better for us (my Lord) now to hang us, then not to help us against these unsufferable Lawes and Lawyers, which rob us of Justice
and righteousnesse, as it is obvious in the Treatise; whiles not one honest man in England dares justifie them, the mouthes of all are open against them, which like doores without Lock or Key can scarce be shut close againe till there be an alteration. Je∣thro's counsell to Moses (my Lord) concernes you, in Exod. 18, 19. Hearken and I will give thee counsell, and God shall bee with thee, be thou for the People to God-ward, that thou mayst bring their causes to God, &c. we beseech you hearken to the inexorable (yea inexuperable) cryes and calls of the Commu∣nalty for godly Lawes; and for justice upon the usurping proudMirror of Just. p 230. & p. 60. Lawyers, for their lying, perjury, and treachery (which is ac∣cording to the Statute, and good Lawes punishable.) It is without malice to a man of them, and meerly out of Conscience to ingage against sin, and enemies to Christ and this Common-wealth, that I must make such a Character of them as I doe; it may be I speake spiritfully (yet not spightfully) though oppression makes a wise man mad, (sayes Salomon) Eccles. 7. 7. and indeed if it be madnesse to ingage against Sinne, I will be so, for Si na∣tura negat, facit indignatio versum; but here's no need of Passion, seeing Piety preaches, yea the light of Nature presses these lines against that sinfull Society, yea the  calls for it. The Aegyptian Hieroglyphick for Legislative Po∣wer was oculus in sceptro, but ours had need to be oculus in ense, the eye in the conquering Sword of the people; I meane, first☞ a full eye to looke , backward and forward, with an open Prospect into the Peoples Liberties and advantages for their safety and freedome; and then an able quick eye to deliver the People from oppressors, and to defend them in their owne ights. And indeed (my Lord) we would have no Law, Nisi lex oculata, but that Law which sees how, and what, and to whom to administer in aequilibrio, in justice, whilst many of our Lawes are the lawes of this Common-wealth: for as Plutarch sayes, Turpe praeceptum non est lex, sed in quitas. The Chineses would perswade us, that they only see with two eyes, and other Nations but with one. O that we could convince our Neighbour Nations now by our Lawes and Government, that we see with both eyes, for our selves and friends too (if need be!) wherefore let us fall to their , let us worke, and
watch for Christs Monarchy, which is now upon the borders! and be sure to keep in the Kings (Christs) Road, for that is sa∣fest. Israels Omen of going on against his enemies was, 1 Chron. 14. 15. the voyce in the top of the trees; and this is ours also, viz. the voyce of God as in Primitive times, and in the top-ages of the Church; for his Spirit is mighty, and growes great every day: and when the enemy shall be like a Floud, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against them, Isa. 59. 19. and why? see Isa. 31. 3. the Lord Gods greatest worke in these dayes is Spirit∣worke, and none will be found fit to be imployed in it, but such as are spirited for it, by the Holy Spirit; for then our Warres wil be holy Warres, our Lawes holy Lawes, our Parliaments holy Parliaments, &c. and not before. Wherefore my Lord, for Christs sake minde, and finde out what your worke is! you have not done all yet, for now you have won us, you must wall us with the good and wholsome Lawes and Liberties of the People, as we were before the Norman invasion, or rather as Israel of old, Deut. 6. 1. or else Gog will arise, who sayes in his presumption, I will goe to the Land of unwalled Villages, I will goe to them that are at rest. It is dangerous indeed (now) to sit still, seeing the Wheele full of eyes is in his swiftest motions, and may (without heed) run upon us and ruine us. The Devils designe is to make the most able and eminent Instruments uselesse by idlenesse, when the grea∣test worke is to doe, as one sayes of the Crab, that seeing theRobinson, o Gen. 49. Oyster gape, he throwes in a little stone which hinders it from shutting againe; so am I (and hundreds beside) suspicious, least Sathan should deale with them that now sit still, and gape about (as if they had nothing to do) by throwing them some temptations or other, to stay them here behinde, in purchases, preserments, or pleasures, and make them loose their work and opportunity. O it is sad! if it be so; for the best Birds, dum morantur in nidis, doe moult and loose feathers. But (my Lord) hark! the Trumpet sounds! and Christ is coming in great glory! arise, and to your worke!—It is not notions of Philosophy, nor Principles of Po∣licy which will give us to see this; for in Philosophy what is so dark as light? and the Sun which one would thinke most evi∣dent to be seen, is hardest to be looked on; and so is this glorious approach of Christ, and his Fifth Monarchy. But Eagles see bet∣ter
then Owles. The Lord Jehovah (then) make you Eagle∣eyed, and Eagle-winged in this worke which you have to doe for Christ, and this Common-weale. Cicero expected extraordi∣nary knowledge and practise from his Son, because of his con∣versing and living with Cratippus; no lesse doe wise men looke for from you (my Lord) for that you are so conversant with the Occurrences of these times and seasons, and that so eminently too, and live (as we hope) so much with Christ, and for Christ: yet we know a man may have good cards, but loose the game by playing ill. But (my Lord) I leave you to that Spirit which gave Daniel skill, Dan. 9. 22. and Ioshua courage; the same wisdome that tels us, He that understands is of an excellent spirit; tels us also, That the Prince who wants understanding, (i. e.) in the things of God, according to the season of his government) is also a great oppressor. Wherefore my Lord, I beseech you, contemne not the Clock that tels you how the time passes; a meane Herauld may goe on great errands, and on this errand he is contented to be mean & contemptible, who is sent to you, and prays unfainedly for you, that you may never be set aside, but be of singular use (yet) in this Generation, and then, and not till then, rest from all your labours, as David did. Acts 13. 36. The Sword of the Lord and of Gideon together, gets the loud suffrage of your suffering, From my Study the 8th. Month, 20th. day, Tho. Apostles. Yet your (heartily) humble Servant in the service of our Lord Iesus, JOHN ROGERS.
To the Reader of any Faculty whatsoever, in the Commonwealth of ENGLAND. SIR, WHat is your Profession?—Be what thou wilt, I professe that this Treatise concernes thee, and bids thee beware of a fall. Hold fast! especially if thou art any of the Supreame. For he that ventures to fall from above, with hopes to bee catched below, may hap to be dead ere he come to ground; this is sat sapienti, a Word to the wise. Therefore, with humility and love to you. 1. Are you a Parliament man? mind your worke then, and the1. To Parlia∣ment-men. Fifth Monarchy; or else the stone, Dan. 2. and the wheel, Eze. 1. may hap to minde you, and grind you too. Righteous men know their work of the Generation they live in, Gen. 4. 20, 21. 22. Gen. 6. 9. Act. 13. 36. So did Abraham, Noah, Moses, & Aaron, David, Daniel, Nehemiah, and Ezra, and all men whom the Lord annointed and ap∣pointed to govern. And so will you, if you be of God for good to this Generation. Your worke so absolutely incumbent is obvious to every discerning eye, the neglect of which, (if you be guilty) I fear lest it should be more fat all to you then to the last Parliament (if that be true in 1 Sam. 15. 26, 28. and 16. 14.) and may hap to throw you aside as well as your Predecessors, and others in all ages that have (through carnall Reason and Policy) laid aside their worke and duty. Now I doe declare to all that hear or read this Treatise (and will if my life were on it) that your worke is about the Lawes and Tithes, to strip the Whore both of her outward Scarlet-array, and to rend the flesh off of her bones, by thorwing down the standing of Lawyers, and Priests. It is not
enough to change some of these Lawes, and so to reforme them (as is intended by most of you) according to the rule of the Fourth Monarchy, which must all to peices; O no! that wil be to poore purpose, and is not your worke now, which is to provide for the Fifth, as chap. 5. by bringing in the Lawes of God given by Moses for Re-publique Lawes (as well as the Lawes of God given by Christ, which must in for Church Lawes) Isa. 26. 13. Mark 10. 42. so that seeing the Law-booke of God, which hath been lost so long, is now found againe, therefore like Josiah, in 2 King. 22. 12, 13. Command that the Lord be sought to about it, lest the wrath of God be kindled for not hearkening to the words in that Booke, and cause these Lawes of God (as chap. 23. 2, 3. to be restored and read (as he did) in the eares of all the people, that the people may be subject to those Lawes; and then the Lord wil blesse you as he did Israel: But if you doe it not, (I feare) you wil be found to neglect your worke and opportunity for God and Christ. Why are there so many perplexable cares about the Lawes? Hath not God gi∣ven you a Booke of Lawes ready to your hand? and can men make Lawes better then God? then if Moses dare not set up any other Lawes but those given of God for the State, or Poli∣ticke Government, how dare you? Now God hath brought you out of the house of Aegypt, shal the Aegyptian (or Nor∣man) Heathenish Lawes yet rule you? O God forbid! Wherefore seeing you have Gods Law-booke before you, if you lay it aside, and take up mens before it, it wil not be well taken I promise you: therefore the Lord open your eyes both as to the Lawes and Tithes, and that you may looke before you leap, It wil appeare this is your Generation-work. 1 By the variety of Providences, and Dispensations of GodProved, . By the call you have to it. which declare it, and have called you to doe it, Micha 6. 9. The Lords voyce cryeth, the voyce of the Lord from the City (for all that common, or corrupt Counsel-Petition put in for Tithes, August last, which was not the voyce of the Lord, but the voyce of the Lady, the Queen that sits on the Scarlet-coloured Beast full of Blaphemies, Rev. 17. 3. abusing the most precious Saints and Servants of Christ with a subtil insinuation of Jesuis, and the like; but it is wel knowne they were put on to it by the
High Priests of this City, some of whose names I have by me) so that the Lords voyce from the Temple, yea and the voyce of the Lord, that rendreth recompence to his enemies, Isa. 66. 6. cal upon you; yea that extraordinary voyce which cast the o∣thers out of Parliament that neglected this worke, and which hath called you in to doe it, and as David sayes, Psal. 18. 13 the Highest hath given his voyce, or lifted it up, for all to see, that he is against these Lawyers and Priests. 2 The loud and longing expectations of the People tell you,2. The Peo∣ples expecta∣tion. this is your worke, and for this you are entered into the Go∣vernment, as appeareth in chap. 4. & 5. and how grievous it wil be to frustrate the expectations of the wise, holy, and under∣standing people of this Nation, judge ye. 3 This worke is the greatest (and may be the most glorious3. The worth of the work. worke) as yet before you; and therefore to neglect it, is of the most grievous consequence, 1 Sam. 15. 23. Numb. 14. 29. Rom. 11. 20. though it is true, if yee be found faithfull in this little, yee shal have much more glorious things for Christ, and against Antichrist set before you, before you have done, which the Lord wil honour you with, but else not. 4 This worke must be done (in order to Gods designe for4. The neces∣sity of it. Christ, and against Antichrist) either by you or some others, Hest. 4. 14. Now it being so eminent a service for Jesus Christ and the Common-weale, to throw downe the tyranny, usurpation, and oppression of the Norman and Babylonian yokes, viz. Termes and Tithes, Lawyers and Priests; O take heed, how you neg∣lect so noble a worke! to the obstructing (as much as you may) Gods designe, which if you doe, wil light heavie on you one day. But if you be couragious, and constant, andHow the Par∣liament may be glorious before God and men. ☜ quicke, and carefull in your worke now before you, God wil honour you further, and Gabiel shall give you the peculiar Title of, the Parliament GREATLY BELOVED of God, Dan. 9. 21, 22, 23. & 10, 11. 19. then God wil stand by you (if you stick so close to him) and blesse you extraordinarily, both with Publick and Personall deliverances; else remember your Predecessors: where are they? But as to Tithes there be many objections; for so manyTithes. Parliament-men have impropriate Tithes, that it is not likely
to stub up all at once. If so, say I, how did Cyrus get over the deep river with his Army (to besiege Babylon) that seemed impossible, and impassible, but by dividing it, and cutting it out into diverse, and so soaking or draining out the water in∣to many branches made it low, and easily foardable. Thus (if there be no help for it) let them divide this deep thing into the Tithes of the Clergy and Laiety (as they call them) and▪ get over the first branch against Babylon; i. e. to take a∣way Tithes as from the Clergy, and out of the hands of the corrupt people, who as long as they have maintenance in their hands will keep up the Popish, Sottish, Antichristian Clergy, and Service-book Readers about the Nation as they doe. But if that prevaile not, then let them give us a Hearing, and as much liberty to speake what we can against them, as the Clergy, with their Lawyers have had to speake for them; and if we shew not more Reason, and Religion oo to cast them downe, then all the Pack of Preists or Lawyers in England can to keepe them up, let them stand; else fal like a Mil-stone, though they make a great noise. O that the Parliament would goe on apace with this Publique work, that is upon them, i. e. Of Lawes and Tithes, least they be laid aside, or which is worse, as that part of the Fourth Monarchy too, which must be crushed and crumbled by the entrance of the Fifth: else I feare (as well as hundreds more) a Blast, or a Blow ere long, and mark it. Obj. But you being a private man are too bold to correct Parliament-men as you doe. Ans. No, it is my duty thus to doe; which Panormitanus a learned Lawyer (himselfe) sayes▪ That one poore simple Lay∣manExtra de Ap∣pel cap. signi∣ficasti. Fox, vol. 3. p. 122. col. 2. & 24. (ergo, a Minister) that brings Gods Word with him, is more to be regarded then a whole Parliament, or Councell without it. And my most honoured Predecessor Mr. Joh. Rogers Proto-Martyr, in cursed Queen Maries dayes, testified to this with his blood, (who hath led me the way) when this very Objection was made him by the Bishop of Winchester, and so p. 124. Col. 2. he sayes, That with the Word of God be alone was to be heard against the WHOLE PARLIAMENT, and that the Lawes of men might not rule the Word of God, but they are all to be discussed, tried, and ged thereby, and neither (sayes he) my Conscience, nor any mans
must be satisfied with such Lawes of Parliament as disagree from Gods Word. This I witnesse too with that holy Martyr, were my life on it as his was; and though many of the Parliament are offended with me, yet I must not, nor will I budge or shrinke back to bear my testimony to them. But thus farre for such. Secondly, Art thou a Member of the Army that art the☜ 2. To Army∣mn. Reader? let me tell thee, thou wilt not lye quiet long; for God hath a worke to doe yet by thee, or upon thee! and such men must not be idle in this age. Remember Alfreds resolu∣tion: Si modo Victor eras, ad crastina bella pavebas, Si modo Victor eras, ad crastina bella parabas. To the other side the water, away Sirs! and helpe your Brethren beyond Seas, but forget not your work at home, i. e. to make us free; as chap. 3. And then the Lord shall utter his voyce before his Army, for his Camp is very great, Joel 2. 11. or else cursed is he that doth the Lords work by halves. Thirdly, Are you a Merchant? your turne is come too3. To Mer∣chant-men. now, for the Lord hath given out his Commandement against the Merchants and their Ships, Isa. 23. 11. and their time to la∣ment is now come, and your greatest Trade by Sea must be to tell of the Judgement that is coming upon Babylon; they shall weep and waile over her, and as many as Trade by Sea shall see the smoke of herburning, Rev. 18. 11. 17, 18. therefore it is time (now) to leave off buying her Merchandize, ver. II. and to carry newes to all Nations of that worke which is begun in England, to the lifting up of Christ and his Kingdom, against all that stands in the way; and bid them make hast out of Babylon, for her houre is come, and Judgement is begun; let this bee your Newes to all your Friends in forreigne parts, sent in Post☜ out of Christs Royal Exchange. Fourthly, Are you a Minister? I must tell you then, the4. To Clergy∣men. Times will be terrible to your Function and Faction; for the Clouds wil burst out with a Thunder-bolt ere long against the Nationall Ministery and their maintenance. 1 Their Ministery; the foundation of them wil be rent up1. Their Mi∣nistry. Ezek. 3. 14. by the roots in this Fifth Monarchy, which will lay open the
lewdnesse of them; 1. In their Ordination. 2. Dispensa∣tion. 1. In your Ordination, as Antichristian, whiles they make1. Your Ordi∣nation. that Ceremony, or Ferme nihil (as Chrysostom cals it) of im∣position of hands, to give essence to it; and whiles they take it from an usurped Power, whether in Prelates or Classes (that have no more right then the Pope himselfe had to ordaine) and receive it not from the true Church of Christ; and whiles they ▪with the Papists, Bel. de Ordin. in an Antichristian order, (i. e. contrary to Christs order and rule left in the Gospel) re∣ceive it before a Call and choise; this is obvious to every one, how they Ordinationem praeponunt vocationi & electioni, which is disorderly and Popish. See Rutters. chap. 15. pag. 265. as ten∣ding to give them a Jus in re before a Jus ad rem, a right in the thing, before they prove they have right to it, by the or∣derly Call, choise, and acceptation of a Church of Christ; till which (I say) they have not the essentials that belong to Ministers of Christ in Call, but are palpably Popish, and Anti∣christian in their Ordination both for matter and forme, and at best but Priests. 2 In your Dispensation, they are so unfit for the Ministry of2. In your dis∣pensation. the New Testament, that quite contrary to the rule, 2 Cor. 36. (Who hath made us able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter but of the Spirit) they are Ministers, not of the Spi∣rit (which they spit at) but of the meer Letter; and such only are☞ your Orthodox men that are litterall Preachers, though unable in the Scriptures, and ministrations of the Spirit. But the truth is, we finde few of Paul's able or Orthodox Ministers, i. e. of the Spirit in our dayes, that preach the hidden wisdome of God in a mysterie, as the hidden Gospel of Christ; and whiles the Learned Doctors and Rabbins (like the Pharisees) wil be laid aside (for their stumbling at Christ (now) in the Spirit, counting him in the spirit an Impstor too) some poore Babes and Fishermen shall be fitted for his worke in the Spirit; when as it shall be a higher degree to commence the lowest in the Spirit, then the☞ highest Doctor in the Universities; and then shall a Minister of the Spirit say, according to the dispensation of the Spirit given me for you, I am come to preach the Gospel, Col. 1. 25. Ephes. 3. 2, 3▪ this look for ere long, Sirs!
Secondly, Their Maintenance which is now by Tithes, must2. Their main∣tenance by Tithes. tumble (ere long) to purpose. It is true, as yet this corrupt maintenance must stand a little time, to the persecution of ten∣der Consciences, and of divers godly Gospel-Ministers, (whom I could name) some are driven (as it were) out of England into Ireland, or elsewhere, on this Ac∣count already. It is true too, that the Lawyers are so much obliged to them for letting them live so by sinne, in cheating, oppressing, and lying (without reproofe) that in re∣quitall they plead for the Ministers to live by Tithes and Op∣pressions, &c. I confesse I was occasionally the fourteenth day of the seventh Month at the Committee for Tithes in the Checquor Chamber, where was a rude rabble, and amongst them many Lawyers, and Ministers, of the City and Country too, to tugge for Tithes; and finding liberty given to any that would speak, I being desired so to doe by some Parliament-men, I accepted of the Call, for that I could not in Conscience be silent, see∣ing I had such a season to make my blow at Antichrist, and to speake for Christ; but finding that the liberty was limited to what could be said, as to, or against their Propriety by the Law, I only laid a foundation for a future Discourse, which I tooke up the sixteenth day; and because Master Jacob (being of a like complexion and constitution in Principles with the Priests) with the assistance of one of his Brethren, that foule-mouthed, scandalous fellow of Garlick-Hith, censorious∣ly and rashly condemned me, as full of impertinencies therein, al∣thoughThe Authore speech at the Committee. Sept. 16. they were well rebuked for their rough, proud spirits; and the Committee took Mr. Jacob up sharply for his folly, imper∣tinency and impatience, (for he wanted his Note-booke) yet to satisfie some of the precious Servants of God, I shall here in∣sert, what I asserted. Quest. Whether the present Clergy have right by the Laws ofThe present Ministers no right to Tithes▪ by the Law proved. this Land to Tithes &c? Before my answer, I premised that without Fee, Prefermen or By-end, I should offer my judgement, being brought hereto in a good conscience, as perswaded that I appeared for Christ against Antichrist, so that I would not be daunted at the threats of any gi∣ven out against me. Then I digested my discourse into four heads.
Ans. Neg. 1. Ab origine, from the Rise of those Common LawsAnsw. 1. Because Ca∣non Lawes which give the right are down. that they plead to give them this right, i. e. Ecclesiasticall, Can∣non, or Christian Law (so called) If the Cannon or Ecclesiasticall Law is down, and gives them no right, then the Common Laws which arose therefrom, are down and fallen with them. But the Canon Law is downe, &c. ergo, The consequence is clear, for that secunda lex derivatur à virtute primi moventis, the sub∣ordinate Law derives vertue and life from the Supreame: Now that the Common Lawes were but subordinate and assistant, and that the Cannon-Laws were ever since the Conquest accounted the Supreame, there is sufficient proofe. Sir H. Spelman saies, who∣soeverSir H. Speiman▪ De non temeran∣dis Eccles. p. 119 takes the Tithes, or Gifts bestowed on the Church, must doe it by the Laws of the Church (i. e. Canon-Laws; hence we had Bishops Courts.) So Sir Edward Cooke sayes plainly that by the Common Laws of England, it is evident that none but an Ec∣clesiasticallSir Edw. Cooke. man hath Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction, or right to Tithes, and that by the Ecclesiasticall Laws; yea, de jur. reg. p. 5. he denies that Kings can meddle with them, being unor∣dained thereunto (i. e. according to the then Cannons) by the Bi∣shops. And this agrees with the Canons in the Lateran CouncellLateran coun∣cell. 1215. in K. Johns daies; sub Alex. 3. p. 26. c. 8. (which was no o∣ther then the Popes Notary to ingrosse that fair which he writ be∣fore in a foul copy, (which forbids Tithes to any, but to those, whom their Cannons gave a power unto, & qui Decimas Laico in se∣culo manenti concesserit, est deponendus, and he should be de∣posed that granted Tithes to an unordained man. Yea, Cabilo∣nens.Concil. Cabil. Synod. Mog. c. 18. Qui decimas dare neglexerint, excommunicentur: They that neglected to pay Tithes were (by their Cannon Law)Syond. Mog. to be punished by Excommunication; yea in another Synod. Mo∣guntin. c. 7. 5. Statuimus, ut decimae quae jure debentur Divi∣no, aut lege Christiana, solvantur sine fraude. Our Law is, that Tithes which are due by Divine and Christian Law be paid☞ without deceit. By all this it appeares, their Cannon-Law, or Christian Court gave them their (pretended) Right; and RiseSyn. Aug. to the Common Lawes. So in Synod. August, c. 19. Qui just as non solvant decimas, ter moniti, iis neganda communio, ThoseMr. Littleton, for p. 1096. c. 2. & 1001. 2. 45. that after thrice admonition pay not their full Tithes, deny them the communion; so that they had such Lawes to give them
their (pretended) right, and to punish the refusers, which Pre∣lates punctually observed; yea Littleton himselfe sayes, Sect. 5. 28. the Ordinaries give the grant of Tithes; yea Anno 1538 K. H. 8. made this positive Law, That whoever denied to pay his Tithes, should be made to doe it by the Parsons or Vicars, &c. at their Ordinaries. Hence were such cruel Bishops Court;Revel. 17. 2. so that the Kings Lawes were but to help the Whore herein, being besotted with the wine of her fornication, Revel. 17. 2. Thus wee have proved Tithes fallen with the Bishops Ecclesiasticall Courts. Ans. 2. Ex objecto, The Lawes which they plead and pretendAns. . Be∣cause there the Lawes look on men ordained in another manner. for Propriety, look on such only as were ordained according to the Popish Cannons then in force when those Lawes were made; but the present Clergy dis-owne those Cannons and Ordination, ergo the Lawes that referre thereto. That they dis-owne that Ordi∣nation and those Cannons none can deny, the Presbyterians practise an Ordination being openly contrary thereunto (though indeed as Popish and soppish as theirs.) The major is easily pro∣ved. Judge Dier quoted by Sir H. Spelman (Lord chiefe JusticeJudge Dier. of the Common Pleas) H. 8. fol. 58. p. 3. avers it a horrible thing for persons (though religious) to take Tithes, and not or∣dained (i, e. according to the then Cannons) to give the Sacra∣ments, and read Divine Service, &c. he instances in Appropriati∣ons: now as we say, it is an horrible thing to be so ordained; so we say also, to take the Tithes which are given by the Lawes, and to such so ordained; and therefore ought to be abolished. But this☜ sayes Master Lambert, an eminent Lawyer, in his Preamble of Kent, It is one of the monstrous births of Covetousnesse, thatLambert▪ came from the man of Rome in the night of Superstition. So Serjeant Rastal in verbo Appropriation sayes, It is a wickedRastall. and unlawfull thing for any Lay-men, or one un-ordained by the Bishops to hold Tithes, &c. So Sir Edward Cooke before, andLord cooke. the severall Councels say the same; and those very Lawes which the Lawyers brought before the Committee to plead for Parsons right, give right to none else but such so ordained, as their Magna Charta, 28 of Edw. 1. c. 13, the 27 of H. 8. the 31, 32. Stat. and the first of Edw. 6. ch. 13. &c. Thus it appearethMagna Charta. that these Lawes look not on this Clergy▪
Ans. 3. A Fine, from the end of all honest Lawes (which3. The end of the Law is lost by those Lawes which grant them Tithes. must be preferred before the Letter of the Lawes) viz. the pub∣lick good and freedome of the People. Those Lawes lye forfei∣ted to the State that are against the Publick good and freedome of the People; but these Lawes for Tithes are against the Publicke good (for they are a Publick evil) and freedome of (for they are an oppression to) the People; therefore their end being voyd, they must be voyd, and lye forfeited to the State: vide Chap. 4. Ans. 4. From the foundation of the Lawes, which ought to be the eternal Law of God, ch. 4. So far Moralists reach, as4. The foun∣dation of such are sand, and unsound. Tully, Plutarch, Suarez, Plato, &c. So the School-men say, that all Lawes must fetch their radicall force and vertue from Gods, as Prov. 8. 15. By me they decree Justice, &c. Now there is no Law of God that requires to maintaine the Ministers of the Gospel by Tithes, but the contrary; for Hebr. 7. 12. The Priesthood being changed, the Law (of Tithes that kept it up) is changed with it. But Doct. Seaman wil not that they be called New-Testament Ministers, but he hath told the Committee, the Mi∣nisters of the Nation and the State (i. e. for Tithes-sake, and☞ Masterships of Colledges) so that their foundation-lesse Lawes cannot stand to give them a right, no more then a Caligula's Law could, to make his Horse Incitatus a Priest. This businesse of Tithes the Protestants of old ingaged against the Papists in. And we shalSynod. 5 contr. Q. 6 Constantine tooke away Priests Reve∣nues, and gave free gifts to Gospel Mini∣sters. Theodosius pul∣led down their places of Wor∣ship. Ambrose. finde the Civil Power hath pulled downe such groundlesse Lawes (as these they pretend to) of old; as Constantine, Lib. 1. tit. 14. leg. 1. who tooke away the goods of the Priests, as forfeited to the State for their Idolatry. So Theodosius, Leg. 5. he was zealous against their superstitious Publick places of worshipping, he required them to be joyned to his Treasuries. So when Sym∣machus said, O! the Emperours have taken away the Priests re∣venues, Ambrose answers, Sublata sunt praedia, &c. They are aprey to the State, for that they did irreligiously use that, they tooke under pretext of religion; so are Tithes now, which are taken under pretence of Gods Worship and Law, but they keep up Idolatry, Superstition, Service-Booke; hence lyes Drunkennesse, Malignancy and Popery, and what not? (that is Antichristian, o Prophane) among the Nationall Clergy, espe∣cially
in the Countries a hundred or two hundred miles off. There∣fore there is as much (yea more) reason for the down-fall of this Devillish (not Divine, as now it is) maintenance, as was for the fall of Abbies, Monasteries, or the like, which had as good Lawes to keep them up as Tithes now have. In AugustinesAug. in Psal. 146. time there was no compelling to pay Tithes, who was content with the 1000th. part, and to lick up the Peoples crums for their good. The Bohemians have protested against Tithes, in 15 ArtBohemians. and say, The Priests preach that men are bound to pay Tithes, but they say falsly, for there is no proof for it in the New Testa∣ment that Christ commanded it, or the Disciples tooke it, &c. So the Muscovites say, Sacerdotes ex contributione sustentan∣tur,Muscovites: &c. and many others; therefore their present Lawes for Tithes being without foundation (of God) must fall, and lye for∣feited to the State (that stands for God) as unlawfull, reason∣lesse, and religion-lesse Lawes. The 6th. and 16th. Article a∣gainstWickliffe. Wickliffe (Martyr) was his opinion in this, that the Civill Magistrate might alter or take away such maintenance☜ from the Spiritualty (so called) that offended habitualiter; as these doe. Secular Lawes are but the materials, or the hempe of our obedience, Religion twists them strong to last. The worke that lyes before this Parliament is as to the LawesTo the Parlia∣ment. themselves, as well as to the Tithes; the omission of which made their Predecessors (the former Parliament) to be rejected, and these to be called of God; and as soon as they were set to have this Work (of Lawes and Tithes) first presented to them, that they might begin where the other left off, and goe on where the other stumbled and fell; which if these also doe (the Lords work) negligently, deceitfully, and but by halves, their rejection wil be the more to their reproach and shame then the former. There beTwo times to alter Lawes. two times to alter the Lawes; as 1. When the present Law-givers see the defects of the former1. and are inabled with more Reasons; so it is now. 2. When the Times are turned, and States are changed, then2. are the Laws turned, and to be changed into such Lawes as are fit for the season, &c. This is our Case; so that upon the account of Christ, and the Common-wealth (as it now is) it concernes the Parliament to put apace upon this worke of throwing downe
Tithes; not but that there is to be a Maintenance for the Gospel-Ministery)A Gospel∣maintenance for Gospel-Ministers; God forbid the Parliament should settle Tithes to maintaine a National Mi∣nistery, and nothing for a New-Testa∣ment Ministry that cannot take Tithes. which is Moral, and the equity of the Law, but this must be in Gospel-manner. Thus their Propriety to Tithes is proved rotten and invalid by their owne Lawes, as to the princi∣ple, object, end, and foundation of them; and if God do not honour our present Governours with such a stripping off the ornaments, and pulling away the black Patches of the impudent Whore, (as this does,  I fear they wil hardly be the men then that must tearher flesh from her bones, and burne it with fire. But as to that which Doctor Seaman asserts, that they are the Ministery of the Na∣tion, let us grant it, (for they are so) but we are Ministers of the New Testament; yet we say he must prove, That the Nation (or Nationall Church) is Christs Church after Gospel-order. 2. That they (the Nationall Ministery) are the New-Testament Ministery according to Christs order; and then 3. That such a Gospel-Ministery must be maintained by Tithes, or else his words are but wind, and worth nothing but a puffe. CHristian Friends! this is the substance of what I delivered first☞ by word of mouth (which I had a Copy of in writing, whence I have taken this) and afterward in writing by an Honourable Member of Parliament; but that the spirit of Antichrist might appeare for its selfe, there was such uncivill talking, hissing mock∣ing, threatnings, railing, and crouding me, whiles I was speaking to the Committee to interrupt me, that the Chair man with many Members were forced to check them, and to rise up to chide severall times: after we were with▪drawing by order from the Committee, Mr. Jacob exclaimes against me; (with that I tur∣ned back) and heard him say, I offered many impertinencies, and he was glad the Truth had so many weake enemies as I was. Let him and all my enemies know, that I trust I shall be a very weake enemy to Truth as long as I live, I desire to be so, and rather to dye then be any enemy at all to Truth; but yet tell him▪ That☞ Antichrist (against whom I ingaged in this businesse of Tithes, which the blood of Martyrs will witnesse with me; Fox, p. 494. 2. 80. & 537. col. 2▪ &c.) I say tell him, that Antichrist shall finde stronger, and abler, and faithfuller, and more un∣daunted resolute enemies then I am, to this trash and trumpery, and relick of Antichrist, and it is my joy to be one (though a
weake one) that ingages for Christ herein, (though I was grie∣ved to be alone among so many Adversaries of the Clergy, Law∣yers, and rude Rabble at that time.) But my answer to Mr. Ja∣cobs affront was this, that he spoke like himselfe (meaning a Presbyterian, and one that would have been Mr. Love's Successor) and that as Augustine once said, he was content to speake  Latine so he might but win their Souls to Christ: So I said I was wel content to speake foolishly and impertinently, so I might but serve my Master Christ therein, as I trust I had (which since among many others, some Parliament-men, and honest Ministers too, and members of the Army, have with thanks told me, was well.) But after he was reproved by the Committee wee with-drew, where a huge conflux of rigid Clergy, Solicitors, and Rabble fell a rayling and assaulting me (among whom was Crof∣ton the Preacher of Garlick Hithe, threatning and abusing me) but I was (through mercy) rescued by some Friends and Mem∣bers of the Army, and carried away to a Friends house to refresh my spirits, which were much spent with their violencies: but I did not feele the hurt which I had by their croudings, pun∣ches, and pulling about, and getting me (as once they had that day) under their feet, (til I cryed out for help,) &c. I felt it not till the next day, and then what with inward bruises, and outward sorenesse and sicknesse, I fell into a fierce Feaver, when (amongst others) Collonel Rathbone came to visite me, and told me how the rabble (the day before) fell upon him also, upon the same Account of ingaging against that garbidge of Antichrist, and for applauding what I had offered to the Committee they fell upon him, and he was stabbed twice, once in the fore-head, and the o∣ther was in his side, so that he hardly escaped with his life: and as soon as he was dressed by the Chyrurgeons he said he came to give me warning of them, they were so incensed against me, it would be dangerous to stir abroad for some time, seeing my life was threatned. By this it appears what a spirit it is pleads for Tithes, insomuch as I wonder nothing at all at their lying, railing, and abusing me about this City, and in Martins in the Fields▪ Where the Presbyterian Professors follow their old Trade of venting and inventing to the amazement of honest men, whereby they have brought a sufficient reproach upon their Religion before
the Lords Commissioners, Octob. 12. last, when their Sun was in Scorpio (which is their best signe for the boldest designe) whiles by lying and slandering they wounded the godly, non apis sed aculeo Scorpionis; being set on by other Presbyterian Prelates so to do; And seeing they would insinuate my want of Abilities, which I confesse are many, yet I would they would get their Guide Mr. Sangar (if he can) to construe them this peece of Hebrew, And tell me then if such Mendaces & linguae dolosae variis ar∣tibus laedendi non sint instructae, and let such Hipocrites in their crafty cruelties to wound the innocent; examine, Numb. 14. 37. Prov. 6. 16, 17. Psal. 12. 3. and 63. 11. 1 Tim. 4. 2. and se∣riously read this Hebrew: If the Gentleman can read it, I wish he would preach and practise it then better, to the very roots of it, and teach his party so too▪ but to passe by them, the truth is (long ere this) I looked for some Libel or other againe, as the old Libeller Crofton gave out hee would print me; But for all this storme their Tithe must tumble, and the standing too of those Nationalists ere long. 5 But art thou a Lawyer, that art Reader? then read thy5. To the Law∣yers. soule into a repentance, and renounce that trade of sin where∣by you have stretched out, or racked so many Innocents on a be of steele. I know many of you will be starke blind withSim. pride and passion, such as the Devill useth, as Fauloners doe Hawks, to keep them hooded and never suffer them to see un∣lesse it be to the hurt of others. But not to see, is the high∣way to suffer, for as in Pauls voyage, when as neither Sun no Stars appeared, all hope of safety was taken away; and so in∣deed is it to such as see no light to lead them out of this dangerous Sea. But that you may have light, not onely
the light of Nature, ch. 2. stands without in the entry, but the light of Grace, chap. 5. is within, and will be brought out ere long in the Fifth and last Monarchy; and then the Decalogue will be☜ Adams. What Law ere long? the Magna Charta (as Adams on Pet. saies, p. 1112.) to which all our Lawes shall refer, as conclusions to their Principle: in the meane time (bee not mad man! for) it is Gods Law, with the Peoples Libertie, that like a skilfull Anatomist does dissect and open the Body of that condemned (Norman) Law, and searching into every peece and member of it, reads over a sound and seasonable Lecture upon every small Article and Particle thereof, therefore make no disturbance, for if thou doest, thou diest for it by the Law, Heb. 10. 28. Thus to particular Readers: Now to our Free-born Coun∣try-men6. To the Coun∣try in generall. in generall, I must tell them, that it is high time, and more then time to know their Rights, Priviledges and Freedom, and let all that are past Children and Fools now call for them, in humble, orderly Addresses, for which end I commend this Treatise to them. So also it concerns them in all they can to Write, Print, Publish, and Declare against the Norman Tyranny of Laws and Lawyers: let every one make one, and that not in chller but in conscience, not in revenge but in righteousnesse, and so it is that I send out these lines without the least malice that I bear to any one Lawyer in England, (some of them I honor) but meerly in my love and zeal to Christ, and this (his) Common∣wealth. I am ingaged against the Interest or Trade of all alike, whiles I love the persons of many of them, whom I hope the Lord will humble and make honest Zena's. The Locrians had a Law that if any intended to bring in a new Law, he should come and propound it to the people pub∣lickly with a halter about his necke; so that if it were not permitted as profitable for the Commonwealth, he might be strang∣led; I confesse (though the Lawyers wish we had such Laws now, vid. Mir. of Policy p. 58.) this was a cursed and cruell Ty∣ranny amongst them; yet I say it is with as much submission as if a halter were about my necke that I present this Trea∣tise to the publicke; and if the Doome of the (Norman) Lawyers Interest, with the destiny and downfall of many (of mens) Laws, and of Tithes, with much more of the baggage of the Fourth
Monarchy be not for our profit, and the exalting the Laws of God, the Liberties of the godly, the Magna Charta of his Word, with the entrance of the Fifth Monarchy to the deliverance we long for, (mentioned in this Treatise) be not for our prospe∣rity, and the best advantage of this Commonwealth in Christ, then let me suffer; but if they be, then let them accept of my faithfulnesse,—And so I will go in, though it be not according to the Law, and if I perish, I perish. Esth. 4. 16. There be two sorts of men must and wil be my professed Ad∣versaries,Clergy and Lawyers. viz. the Nationall Clergy, and the Norman Lawyers, whiles I am ingaged against the Babylonian and Norman Yoaks, and strike at the block or Body of them (as I have done▪ at the first in a Treatise of Church Discipline, and do at the last in these lines of Civil-Discipline) the fierce chips flye about mine ears (but they must into the fire ere long, with the Beast and false Pro∣phets, Rev. 19. 20.) some Brats of that Brood are veryBack-biters and Presbyters. bitter B—biters, as wel as P—biters, But I am positive with Jo. Hus. That all the (Nationall, corrupt) CLERGY▪ must be quite taken away, ere the CHURCH of CHRIST be trulyHus lib. de vita & reg. Antich. cap. 37. REFORMED, or ANTICHRIST fall: I heare some are pursuing me with the rage of the red Dragon, Rev. 12. and in cheife the fore-named scandalous Libeller (Crofton) of Gar∣lick-Hithe; the fittest man for such a businesse I know of; He is it seems ful of Arts, and Sciences, and Tongues too, for wron∣ging and slanders, and whiles he dialogues with his Nose, his communication is mear smoak: This is he, that cal all Independants devils, and says they are damned that are so: this is he that prea∣ched they were damned that took▪ the Ingagement (as I have it to shew under an honest Ministers hand:) this is he that on pain of damnation and as they wil answer it before him at the Day of Judgement; requires the People to hear him only, and not stir from him to any other man; this is he that is so notoriously known for a scurillous and scandalous Priest in many Counties, & is most grossely Popish both in Doctrine and Practise; as doth appear to many, and may (ere long) to more; This is he that is alwaies slandring and persecuting the people of God, callingDr. Crips. them naucious names, and making lies of them in the Pulpt (yea, of such as are asleep in the grave, whom he inhumanly
slanders,) and what not that is ignoble or unworthy? Far much Worse I might speak, but I shal spare him and the Reader and only mention (among many other informations given me of him) a piece of one Letter sent me by a Stranger, Sept. 2. last. HOnoured Sir,—I could not rest quiet in my minde nor Con∣science, till out of that love I beare the Jehovah that hath brought you from the Antichristian yoke, and by his Spirit made you the Instrument of his great Glory, for the comfort and rejoycing of the poore People of God in a most speciall manner; therefore I cannot rest till I acquaint you with false aspersions Mr. Crofton the Priest of Garlick-Hithe casts upon you and the People of God; he is making a Booke against your last, apprehending something therein that shrewdly concernes him (what is like▪ to a guilty Conscience?) for the better defending himselfe against anything you can lay to his charge touching his Malignancy, which I presume you can enough; If not, I am sure I am able to do it, (I speak it before God with grief of heart) he hath sent to Renbury in Cheshire, to those (like himself) to draw up a Certificate, and, saith he, let it be drawn to this effect; That I was faithful and diligent in preach∣ing, holy and honest in conversation, &c. and get as many hands to it as it is possible, and send it up speedily, for it wil be chiefly necessary in a Book I am putting out against one. By this you may judge of him, I am sure had you but information of him from the pious people of that place, they would soone give you his Character aright, and not so. Sir, I did humbly conceive it requisite to acquaint you that no false aspersions might come upon you unawares. I desire you to pardon my boldnesse, for I am one who from my heart in∣tirely loves those that professe Christ, &c. This Letter was sent me by one once his Hearer, til he and many others (who have their eyes opened) durst not abide his dangerous Ant christian Doctrine, or unhallowed unchristian spirit. Many Ministers of the Gospel have come to me about him, and given me such a Character as it is a shame he should be suffered; besides severall Country-men, Gentlemen, and other Citizens that have notoriously known him up and down doing mischief, to the reproach of religion. But such as these like the Snakes of Syria wil not bite their owne Country-men. Yet let him goe on, for though he may think like the Fish Spia to escape in the muddy thick waters of contention, he may hap to mistake—Thus such as these of Antichrists corrupt Clergy and☜ ayiy (I meane Lawyers) I must expect like Mastives that fly ful-mouth on a stranger. And indeed I am of opinion, that the faithfull Witnesses (those whose bodies must lye three dayes and an halfe in the streets spiritually cal∣led▪
Aegypt and Sodome) I say I am perswaded their slaying, or rather falling (as is meant by  a  Revel. 11. 7.) by the power of Anti∣christ is not past, but hard by; however I beleeve it (as if I saw it with my eyes now) a most terrible tempest of darknesse and confusion is coming, and the smoke of Babylon wil put the Air into dark mourning ereg, yea breaking all to peeces, breaks in apace upon us, i. e. And it is upon the hearts of many in the same manner that it is upon mine, & divers have been with me about it to tel me, that of a truth the time of triall is nigh, and they expect (yea and desire it) to suffer as Witnesses. This motion upon many hearts together makes me think the Refiners fire wil quickly be kindled, and then wo be to the oppressor! whether on Ecclesiastical or Civil account, for Judgement wil come upon the People of his curse, Isa. 34. 5. in this Day of the Lords vengeance on them, and those that know not the Lords Law shall be accursed, Jo. 7. 49. Deut. 27. 19. 25, 26. but in this day deliverance shall arise to the People of his blessing, and as Ier. 23. 7, 8, 9. They shall no more say, the Lord that brought them out of Aegypt, but the Lord that brought them out of the North-countries (and Norman captivities) then shall the Law of the Lord be magnified, Isa. 42. 19, 21. and as the Sun☞ What dayes we look for. obscures all the Starres with his bright light, so shall Gods Law all mens in the next Monarchy, and like Moses Rod, swallow all these Magicians. Lord hasten this day!—School-boyes look after Holy-dayes, Worldly men after Rent-dayes, Chapmen after Market-dayes, Travellours after Faire Dayes, Pro∣fessors after Lords Dayes, and the People of God long for these dayes of Christ, viz. the end of the Foure Monarchies, Dan. 7. that the Fifth may1656. By that yeare, hast! hast! hast! come, wherein Christ and his Saints shall rule the World Mark it; by Ano 1656. the Floud begins; and as in Noah's Arke after the doores were shut up there was no mercy, though they came wading middle deep, so let this be an Alarum to all men to make hast whiles the Doore of the Arke is open, in few yeares they wil finde it shut, and then though they wade thorow, and thorow much danger, whether Parliament-men, Ar∣my-men, Merchant men, Clergy-men, Lawyers, or others, they may hap to finde it too late, and that their delayes have bred dangers, for the doore wil be shut shortly! My aime herein is, to awaken them all up to their worke in the Restoration of Gods Lawes, and Government, the Peoples Liberties and Priviledges, the Common-wealths comfort, and advantages in Christs King∣dome and appearances, which is and shall be the mark of my Arrow, yea the Rain-bow of my Cloud that lookes on the Sun, and that which my soule shal pump out apace in all my prayers to God in Christ for this Common-weale, whose honest, faithfull Servant I am in my heart, without the cunning, Po∣litick, or artificiall composition of complements, though I must and doe suf∣fer for my sincerity and simplicity. London, Tho. Apostle,  19th. day of the 8th. Month. JOHN ROGERS
Doomes-day to LAWYERS, OR, An Alarme for new LAWS. CHAP. I. How the Author comes to ingage in this Work, and why? And how the Lawyers are Antichrists State-Army of Locusts. THE Administrations we are under are either Ec∣clesiasticall,Three sorts of Administrati∣ons. (so called) or Civil, or Spirituall▪ As to the first, I have upon the importunity of Church-Members made up my accounts in an Idea of Church-Discipline, called a Tabernacle for the Sun, &c. Sold at the Greyhound in Pauls Church-yard:1. Church Discipline. Wherein appears how Ecclesiasticall formes and Administrati∣ons must be every day more and more refined and reformed, and be more glorious, till all selfish, sensuall, and carnall, Prelatick Interests be pared away; and till Ecclesiasticall be turned into the spirituall, as the higher and Head of that Administration▪ So shal2. Spirit-Dis∣cipline. all spiritual (which I hope ere long to publish in an Idea of Spirit-Discipline) be swallowed up in Christ the Ocean which all spiri∣tual Administrations but lead us into: But as to the Civill, upon the request of some faithful Commonwealths Members (and of those3. Civil Dis∣cipline. the grave sort, of 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, years of age and more, wherby)
I much incline (could I procure so much time) to give an accou to all the World in an Idea of Civil Discipline; how Civil Forms must be every day too, more and more refined and reformed till we have Gold for Brasse, and Silver for Iron, Isa. 60. 16, 17▪ and violence be no more heard in our Land, which will be in the fifth Monarchy now entring: But all Civil Formes are (as yet) accompanied with a world of corrupt, close-cleaving Interests, which doe deprave the Government, and deprive us of that good which is the end of Civill Policy. Now, as it is Gods Designe in these latter days to pare away and purge Ecclesiasticall Formes, and so to make them serve the Spirit; I say, it is also a glorious De∣signe of his to purge the civil Administration of those detestable corruptions and dregs, which doe attend it, and to pare away aAll are a purg∣ing apace from Tyranny. wicked, personal, humane, selfish Interests, and to make the Civil serve the Ecclesiasticall, and officious to the Saints and Churches, Isa. 60. 3. 10, 11. as the lower principle is to observe☞ the higher and be obedient, Rev. 21. 24. Wherefore as sure as Israels God will throw down the Tyranny of the Ecclesiasticall Administration, so surely will he also crush and throw down the tyranny of the Civill Administrations, that our veriest Ex∣actors shall be righteousnesse, Isa. 60. 14, 17, and the Sons of them that afflicted us, shall come bending to us, &c. Isa. 49. 23, 24. But we shall be far from oppression, Isa. 54. 16. Zach. 9. 8▪ as the Scriptures doe hold out very fully. I shall in this Treatise, and at this time doe no more then instance in that unsupportableThe Tyranny of Lawes and Lawyers. &c. Sim. Tyranny of the Laws and Lawyers as they now are: For as there could not be a Church-Reformation as long as the Antichristian, National Clergy were highly countenanced, and accounted the Pil∣lars of the Church; so is there as little likelihood of State-Re∣formation, as long as the corrupt, cruel, oppressing, cursed Crew of Lawyers (for so they are the accursed Tribe of this Nation, as will appeare by and by) be accounted the Pillars of the State. Now as the downfall of the corrupt Clergy with their Cannons was the fatall blow to all Church Tyrants, and soul oppressors; So will the downfall of the corrupt Lawyers and their Termes, bee de∣structive and irrecoverable to all State-Tyrants, and body-oppres∣sors; till which be, I dare oblige, life, liberty, and all I am, at stake, that the State will never thrive, nor the faithfull people in this
Commonwealth be ever sensible of a good Reformation, or ease, or☜ Liberty; as long as the most lamentable Mil-stone of the Nor∣man yoake yes yet unremoved, and pressing of them to death. It is not the removals of the little burthens, or lesser weights wil help them, as long as they must yet be embondaged by the Lawyers. Or what if Taxes should be abated, and Tythes abolished? the sence of this and all else would be lost, as long as the Lawyers are yet left to squeeze out mens Estates, Liberties, Lives, Blood,The great bur∣thens of the Nation. Hearts, and all. It is true, that Tythes have lived so long that now they are grown (like an old man) uselesse, decrepit, and quite out of account and credit; and they doe but trouble to take up time or roome in this world, they will speedily be thrust aside: And so will Lawyers, with their Termes, for their stinking breath is already offensive. The rich Romish Gluttons are fattened up by Tythes, and crammed up to the mouth, whilst the poor Gos∣pel-Lazarus's cannot have the crumbs for their mouth; where∣fore as Nebuchadnezzars Image had the Head gold, the Arms silver, the Thighs brasse, the Feet clay; so have Tythes and Terms, and the lower they are, the worser in every age. They will be ere long dashed to peeces, Dan. 2. 31, 34. and not endured. In the mean time, Tythes and Taxes are but niblers, but the Laws and Lawyers (as they now are) are the swallowers. Mice may be nib∣lers,Sim. but the Cat that keeps them in awe, is of an eating kind, she devoures more at one bit, then the poor Mouse would at twenty; and eates up them too at last: And so the Lawyers. For theSim. most ravenous fishes have the widest mouths; and I am sure, to hear them plead at a Bar, you would easily think they would find no bones in a Bag of mony. But seeing I am to ingage against them as the greatest Tyrants and Oppressors of this Common∣wealth, and as such as will stunt the growth of this State, unlesse they be cut off from sucking out the blood, and life, and heart, in her veines and vitals: I will be so ingenious as first to give them☜ notice of it; and if I prove not to their faces by plain dint of Scripture and Reason, that they are as wicked a Generation of Cheates and Tyrants as the Earth bears, I will abide their worst, and bid the test and contest with any of them all. But this I shall premise, That my zeale to God; for Christ; andWhat puts the Author upon this Work. his Servants; (who suspire most sadly under the Norman, as wel as
Babylonian Yoak) with my unfained affections to my dear Country∣men, and to the true Liberties, Laws, and Rights of this Common∣wealth, have cast me upon this Campania of discourse, and made my Spirits quick and keen to this combate against the proudest Goliah of them all; for I have a little stone in my hand, that must hit them on the foreheads, &c. before I fetch their Heads. But before I goe further, Methinks they aske what Call IQ. What Call. have hereto? and bid me shew my Warrant. Which I will offer in the first place, as signed by all the powersAnsw. and Lawes in Heaven and earth, which (I think) is then sufficient; and to be clear, I produce my Call hereto, 1. From the Law of Nature. 2. The Law of Nations. And lastly (but not leastly) from the Law of God.. The Law of Nature proves and gives a cal. 1 The Law of Nature, which saies, Ephes. 5, 39. No man e∣ver yet hated himselfe, but loves and cherishes himselfe: This Law teaches us to maintaine and defend our lives and liberties; yea, and fellow-members too, against all injuries and wrongs. The Heathens themselves would tell the Lawyers, that the Law of Nature puts men upon opposing them, at this nick of time for their tyranny and injustice. See but Cicero lib. 1. c. 3. Offic. who says,. Tull. Cicero. That Nature (the common mother of mankind) commands and ordaines that every man endeavor and procure the good of a∣nother whatsoever he be, only because he is a man; other∣wise all bonds of society, and mankind must needs run to ruin. Can the Lawyers deny? (yes, that they can, and durst deny any thing for their own ends, for it is their trade) but can reason deny this Warrant signed me by Nature? The very Roman Law al∣lottedRoman Law. a punishment to that person, or neighbor, that would not do what hee could to rescue and deliver a very slave from the out∣rage and injustice of his Master; And shall not we for the free∣borne people of England? Besides saies Cicero further, in sayingCicero. that thou must only attend on thine own affairs, lest thou shouldst wrong others, and thereby be unjust thy selfe in another kind, thou dost thereby abuse the Law of Nature, and abandon hu∣mane Society, in that thou wilt not afford all thy endeavors, either of mind, body or goods, for the necessary preservation and priviledge of the whole. So that I say this Law hath signed my Warrant with her broadest seale to do all I can in word and deed,
writing and discoursing, against the injustice, cruelty, and unsuf∣fer able, sinful, accursed Practises of the civill and uncivil Law∣yers; and not that I thereby would wrong them in the least, to write of them thus, but that I should wrong my dear Country, and Country-men (at the least) if I doe not (thus endeavour) to right them against the Lawyers; who would, and doe en∣slave them, contrary to the Lawes of God, nature, and Nations:☜ And therefore I must not so mind my own private and personall affairs, as to forget their tears, sighes, moans, and complaintsThe Lawyers complained of. which some of my own Country-men, yea, of fourscore years of age (yea, great Professors of the faith of our Lord Jesus) yea, honorable persons have made to me, and many others of their miseries, slaveries, and importable sufferings under these cursed Lawyers, by tricks and cheats. So that the Law of Nature looks for it at my hands, as long as my hand will hold a pen, to protest☜ against such crying sins (of Scarlet-dye) which the unnaturall Lawyers live by. And to conclude this first Consideration, of the Law of Nature, observe, 1. That the Law of Nature is one and the same to all Na∣tionsObserv. 1. Isidorus in lib. 5. c. 4. Etymolog. Jus naturale est commune omni nationi. (quoad prima principia) inclining all a like (ad agendum secundum rationem) to things according to Reason; now Reason is either speculative or Practick; the first cheifly looks at, and is busied about necessaries, (circa necessaria;) but the second is (circa contingentia) about circumstances; the first proceeds ad propria; the second ad communia. Now this Law of Nature hath among all the same principles, though (it may be) not the same conclusions among all (through some miscarriages.) Yea, furthermore, in irrationall creatures, Nature hath a Law to defend herselfe from Tyranny and oppression; and this is by in∣stinct in Dogs against Wolves; Lambs against Foxes; Buls a∣gainst☜ Lyons; and so between Chickens and Kites, Pigeons and Spar-Hawkes; Partridges against Hawks, &c. So that it is irra∣tionall (yea, worse then so) to question the lawfulnesse of de∣fending our selves, lives, and Estates from these greedy (ungodly) Devourers; seeing that so to doe is to question the imprinted Law of Nature. But to be short. 2 Obs. That this Law of Nature (i. e. quantum ad primaObserv. 2. principia) is unchangeable in all ages, which doth not (yet)
exempt an addition of all good Expedients and things use∣full. 3 Obs. That this Law of Nature (est scripta in cordibusObserv. 3. Aug. in l. 2. confes▪ c, 4. tom. i hominum) is indelible (quem nec ulla delet inquitas) that is, as to common reason; Although it may, as to secondary com∣mands, as in the Law of the Nations, or the like; either propter malas persuasiones, or propter pravas consuetudines. And so in Rom. 1. 26. we read of some that were given up to most vile sins (contra naturam) not only contrary to reason (which is the con∣stitutive difference betwixt man and beasts) but against nature, which is contrary to the very genus of a Creature by nature. And so not onely the corrupt devouring Lawyers, but I beleeve, others that let them alone to goe on in their unnaturall tyrannies and a∣bominable sins, will be found offenders against this Law of Na∣ture. For as Justice is built upon this twofold Basis, 1. ThatJustice. none be wronged. 2. That Good be done to all, as much as may be. So also there is two sorts of Injustice: as 1. In those thatInjustice of two sorts. doe the injury and oppressions; and in this seate the Lawyers sit. But then 2. In them that suffer these oppressions and injuries to be done (under their noses) that might deliver us (it may be.) And I wonder how any one honest man in England can forbear writing, printing, petitioning, protesting against this ungodly Generation of Lawyers, preaching and proclaiming them on the house top for the Egyptian plagues of this Commonwealth, and the vilest Tribe that are. Surely the Lords controversie with them (which is great)☞ will come nigh their Fators and Abettors too, and all that can see and suffer them every day (as they doe) to live by sin, to tell lies in open Courts, and to make a trade of oppression, perjury, lying, false-swearing, forswearing, cheating, devouring fatherlesse and widows, and beggering many honest godly soules by craft and cruelty. It is a shame if any man in England who can write but a line of them upon his own knowledge puts not pen to paper, and gives not out his grievances to the world, that those in Power may know the TRUTH, nothing but the TRUTH, and the whole TRUTH of them. But, 4 Obs. All profitable, good, and vertuous acts (i. e. humaneObserv. 4. as of Justice,) are according to this Law of Nature: for agere secundum virtutem is nothing else (as to us) but agere secundum
rationem, to act according to the principle of reason. But least hereVertuous acti ons considered two ways. be a mistake, we must know, that it is one thing to see vertuous acts, as they are actions in themselves, (for so they are to be considered in propriis speciebus, not of the Law of nature, but according to their vertue, which is given beside nature, as Art; or above nature, as grace, or the like) and it is another thing to see them as they are rationall, vertuous, and morally good, (as just, mer∣cifull, &c.) and so they appertaine to the Law of nature; for e∣very thing naturally inclines to operation according to its forme, as Fire to heat, Sun to shine; and so a rationall principle to doe rationall good, and vertuous (humano more) actions. In this sence saies Damasc. in lib. 3. Orth. fid. c. 14. Actus virtuosi subja∣cent legi naturae. Hence, as I take it, that notable Moralist M. TullyDamasn. tels us in Rhet. lib. 2. de Invent. f. 4. Res a natura profectasM. Tully. (& aconsuetudine probatas) legum metus & religio sanxit: that ordinary Religion hath ordained it, that the matters of the Lawes (human) be fetched from nature: And indeed it is hence that human lawes, or Lawes of nations are derived from the Law of Nature, as the only rule of reason (and therefore of ra∣tionall actions and lawes) left standing and perpetuall. These four Conclusions thus asserted, and assented to, I chal∣lenge☜ all the Lawyers on this side hell, to enervate or deforce the full commission which I own (to write against them under hand and scale) according to the Law of Nature. Secondly, The Law of Nations says, Luk. 6. 31. As you would2. The Law of Nations gives a call. that men should doe unto you, doe you also that unto them; or else as one of Terences golden Sentences (for the Lawyers care little for the Scriptures, which I have tryed of late by bringing out a Bible for the Statute-Book, but they could not abide it) whoTerence. says the same, Ut tibi ieri vis, alteri sic seceris. This Law of Nations is to be brought out of the Law of Nature; and look∣ing so alike the other, I shall say the lesse to it; for that as Con∣clusions are drawne (ex principiis) out of principles in all Arts and Sciences; So humane Lawes, Civill Lawes, or the Lawes of Nations are to be drawn out of the Law of Nature, and the Prin∣ciples of Reason, as so many Axioms or demonstrative Conclusi∣ons. But to the thing, The Law of Nations distinguishes between
meum and tuum, Possessions, Estates; and gives fixed limits,The use of this Law. and makes confines, which every man is bound to defend against all Invaders, Cheates, oppressors whatsoever; now who do invade other mens estates? eate up, and devoure them by incredibleThe Lawyers complained of. Fees? prolonging Suits? crafty Tricks? and Subtleties? depau∣perating millions of men? and devouring millions of mony? till they have got by cheates, fetches, and Fees all mens Lands (almost) into their hands? who doe thus like the Lawyers? Are there any greater Theeves (or may I not say Knaves) in the world thenTheeves. they are? When Diomedes was brought before Alexander for Piracy: Says Alexander, How now Fellow? what a Pirat? Ah I says he, indeed I am a Pirat, for that I robbed a few Fisher∣men in a Cock-boat; but if I had scoured the Seas as thou hast☞ done, and spoiled all the World with an Army and a Navy, I had been no Pirate but an Emperor by this time. So it may be, might a poor silly Fellow that was hanged for fourteen pence have told his Judge; ah! Sir! I must be hanged for such a trifle (contra∣ryWho are the worst Theeves to the Lawes of God, Exod. 22. 3, 4. 2 Sam. 12. 6,) yea, and of Nature,) It is true, I am a Theefe, and must restore it ma∣nifold, or else be sold for my Theft; But my Lord, had I been a Lawyer, and robbed thousands of their Estates every terme, and spoiled many Gentlemen, Yeomen, Widows, Fatherlesse, and al∣most all England of their Estates, then I had been no Theefe, but (may hap) My Lord too, by this time. But I must tell the Lawyers for their learning (however man accounts of them, yet) God accounts them but Theeves and Robbers, Isa. 1. 23. Prov. 22 22. Isa. 10. 2. Job 12. 6. Dan. 11. 13. Ezek 22. 27. and by these and many more Scriptures, I am confident, many whom they have judged for Theeves or Breakers of the Law, shall judge them for the worst of Theeves and Law breakers that are (i. e. breakers of the Law of Nature, the true Law of Nations, and the Laws of God) and that some who have been hanged (at the day of Judgment) shal escape when they shall not; for as Alexander had no more right to rob, then Diomedes; but ('tis true) he had more power to do☞ mischeife, and was not easily brought to account and suffer for it; So the Lawyers have no more true Lawes, or right to rob theTheeves han∣ged at Tyburn les, guilty then some Lawyers. People of this Commonwealth by Cheates, Extortions of Fees; or the like, then those that are hanged at Tyburne have. But 'tis
true, they have more power (and lesse need) to doe mis∣cheife, and to make a spoile of other mens Estates, and as yet though as sure as God is  heaven they shal be called to account) they cannot be brought to a triall and suffer for it. But as to my Warrant I say, it is by the same Law that I would hinder a Theefe from stealing, or a Servant from purloining of his Masters goods and estate; or that I would discover one that hath done so, or warn such as are so wronged, or like to be so robbed. So that☜ the Law of Nature, of Nations, Civil Lawes, Municipial Laws, and all, doe oblige me against these uncivill, unnaturall, and un∣sufferable Lawyers. I know some of them of my KindredThe Authors resolution. and Acquaintance, and those of the Great ones too, will bee angry at the heart with me for this my faithfulnesse to the Nation; But shall I tell them of one honest Lawyer? (which is rare Ile promise you, as black Swans, we use to say: wherefore I must go far enough for him) and that is Papinian, which would reprove Caracalla to his face, though he died for it? And would they have me go behind the door? why it is not for one Paricide, but Ho∣mocides, Oppressions, Thefts, blood, and the Death and Estates of abundance, that I am bound thus to appeare in publick. A Heathen could say, Let Justice be done, though the world perish for it. And should I be negligent of my duty? or be possessed with a pusillanimous, pannick foolish feare of loosing great mens favor? worldly means? liberty? life? or the like? no, I trust inEgyptians. God I shall not; and therefore for good to those Lawyers that re∣pent, I thus write. Amongst the Egyptians if any one man hadDiodor. Sicu. l. . c. 2. seen another distressed by Theeves or Robbers, and did not ac∣cordingSim. to his power presently assist him all he could, at least by discovering the Robbers to the Magistrates, he was adjudged worthy to die; and had for the first offence or mulct divers blows on his body, and was to fast three daies together. And to tell theThe Authour put upon this. truth, above halfe a year agone, (and some a year) I have seen weeping (most sadly distressed by these Nationall Robbers) so as I was put on by many afflicted, yet pious Christians to make disco∣very of them to the Magistrates in the late Parliament; but con∣sulting too much with flesh and blood; and knowing how many Lawyers were amongst them, I did it not; since which I say, I have suffered the Mulct; for I have been well buffetted since, and lash∣ed in my mind, and scourged in my spirit for my remisnesse here∣in,
and fasted too; but now I am almost ready to conclude my self not worthy to live, if I should let them alone longer in their dai∣ly robberies, and not (at least) write against them to discover them to this Parliament in Authority now over us. Whether menTheir Robbe∣ries how? would rob by force or by fraud, 'tis all one, for we must resist them, or we violate this Law of Nations, which hath most strict∣ly obliged us to the preservation and priviledges of the Common∣weale. So that it is to breake the Law, and betray our Country,Pliny Alex. b Alex. to let them thus alone. We find in Pliny lib. 4. and Alexand. ab Alex. lib. 6. c. 4. The Law of Tyrannicides honors the living with rich and memorable recompences., and the dead with high and honorable Epitaphs, and Statues, that have been Defenders of their Countries Liberties and Priviledges, from Tyrannicall Oppressors and Intruders; as Harmodius and Aristogiton at Athens; Brutus and Cassius, in Greece; Aratus of Sicy∣one, &c. and can men meet with more cruell, crafty oppressors and intruders (as we shall prove them all to be by and by) then the Lawyers are? Well then, I hope hundreds and hundreds will sud∣denly arise (besides my selfe) in their capacities and places, to☞ It is against the Law not to discover them. defend their Liberties and Priviledges against these Tyrants and Robbers. For the Law made against Forsakers and Traytors, takes hold with both hands on those who contribute not their best assistance against these wretches: Oh! cowardly Souldiers! will you counterfeit your selves sick when you should fight? or cast off your Armes and run away now? O no! rouze up your selves!A word to ho∣nest men to be up. Is there an honest man in England that dare sit still yet under the judgement of these Locusts? for shame! for shame friends! up! up! petition! print! and all! As in a publick fire every one mustSim. work to bring Hooks, and Buckets, and water, and Engins, and all we can, to quench these consumers! hold! wait not for a ceremony now! as for the Captains of the Watch first to call you; or that the Governors of the Nation must appear first to put out this flame!☞ No! no▪ but every man must up, and about it, draw water, climb to the top, wait not for a word of command, but make hast about the businesse, for it is good for all that the fire be quenched; and if thou waitest for the word, these Consumers (in their flame) may hap to have the mastery, and do more mischiefe of a sudden then we are aware of. Thus our Warrant is signed in the second place by the Law of Nations.
Thirdly, The Law of God saies, Luk. 10. 27. Love the Lord3. The Law of God gives a call to this work thy God, &c. and thy Neighbor as thy selfe. Besides the Law of Nature, and Nations, the Law of God is unavoidably neces∣sary (ad ultimum finem.) Now this Law of God gives me War∣rant as a Minister, and as a Man, to proclaime the injustice, op∣pression, lying, cheating, deceit and villanies of this wicked Tribe;Amos. Expos. as Amos 4. 1. Hear the Law of the Lord, O yee Kine of Ba∣shan! yee which oppresse the poor, and crush the needy; that is, O yee Judges and Lawyers! that are fed with the best and fattest things; abounding in wealth and stores! and they are such Kine whose bellies are filled for a day of slaughter, which is signifiedComplaint of the Lawyers. ☜ by Bashan.—and they say to their Masters, bring wine. By the poor, is meant the borrower; but by the master is meant the creditor; now these wretched Lawyers do not (as they ought to doe) justice for the reliefe of the poor Debters against hard hear∣ted Usurers, but rather they oppresse the poor▪ and fulfill the desires of the rich misers to the wrong of others; and then they say, come your cause will carry it, bring us wine, a quart or pottle of wine to make merry with. But God will confound this their carnality and covetousnesse. Amos 5. 7. Hear, O yee that turne judgement into wormwood! and have made the Laws bitter to the poor and honest people, and have made their remedies worse then their dis∣eases, and have managed the causes of the righteous with so much sin, as have filled them with frequent sorrows and tears; ab∣horring true reason and equity. Vers. 11. For as much therefore, as your treading is on the poor▪ &c. That is, your greatest violence, disdaine, abuses, and base injuries are done to them, to screwze,Expos. and grinde them under your filthy feet. Ver. 12. I know your manifold transgressions, and mighty sins, in afflicting the just, taking Bribes (or Fees) and turning aside the poor in the gate from their right; i. e. when the poor have nothing to give them, they get them into prisons, to lie and rot there. The Germans have a Proverb, that the rich are hanged up by their purses, andGermans Prov. the poor by their necks. Thus by injustice (as the Prophet saies) the Tyrannicall Tribe of Judges and Lawyers grow great, get estates, build stately houses, have pleasant Gardens, and ruffle it out in Angles of luxury and pride, and whilst Angels protect them they behave themselves like Demi-gods; But God will re∣ward
them in their kind. Micah 2. 1. 2. Woe to them that deviseMicah. Expos. iniquity; that is in Hebr.  lye, vanity, &c. who do this like the Lawyers? and when the morning is light they practise it; So away they run to Westminster, and there plead their lies. V. 2.Of the Law∣yers. They covet fields and take them by violence, and houses and take them away; So they oppresse a man and his house, even a man and his heritage. But thus saith the Lord, Vers. 3. Behold against this Family (i. e. of Lawyers) or these Inns of Courts) do I devise an evill, &c. and Vers. 4. In that day shall one take up a parable, and lament with a dlefull lamentation, and say; wee be utterly spoiled. Thus the Lord complaines and threatens them very speedily, and to purpose, as will appear ere I have done with them. Now Gods Word gives me warrant all along to cry aloud and spare not. Should Whoredome be suffered in the open streets without open reproofes? or Drunkennesse, or the like? Why the should oppression? injustice? lying? perjury? violence? cheatingThey trade in sin. and such like Knavery? is not one sin, as much sin in the sight o God as another? I apprehend my Commission to lead me as largely against the Lawyers, who make a daily trade of sin (a lying, swearing, cozening, oppressing and wronging the Fatherlesse☞ and Widows, and all this in open sun too, hereby getting mony) as it does against Drunkards, Swearers, Whoremongers, wh every day live by their sins, making a trade of them, and getting mony by them! O how bitterly God complaines! Heaven1. The pro∣nunciative Law of God. Earth! and Creatures groan at such a company of as vile wretche as the earth bears! that live by sins! and have no other trading and that they should be yet tolerated to have open practise! Je 6. 29. The Founder melteth in vain, for the wicked are nJremy. plucked away. I wish one day it appeare not all one with opeExpos. toleration of Drunkennesse, Whoredomes or the like: But I am bound in conscience to bear testimony against it, and say with th Prophet, behold the end is come, the end is come,  watcheth for thee, behold, it is come. Ezek. 7. 6, 7. their tim is come, their day of trouble is near; these judgements are incul¦cated, because the Lawyers will not beleeve (it may be.) Ver. 8 Now will I shortly poure out my fury upon them. Ver. 10, 11 12. Behold the day! behold tis come! the morning is gone forth the rod hath blossomed! violence is risen up into a rod of wicked∣nesse
None of them shall remain! Nor of their multitudes! Neither shall there be wailing for them! The time is come! The day draweth nigh! Gods Word to me is, to declare against their Injustice and Tyranny, Cheating and Lying, and to warn them, Whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear. Ezek. 2. 7. And if they will hear, Ezek. 33. 12, 15. Say, Son ofEzekiel. ☜ Man, if the wicked will restore the pledge, and give again what they have robbed, and walk in my statutes without committing iniquity, they shall live, and not die. Thus far the Law of God gives me power. So Psal. 82. 2, 3. How long will ye judge un∣justly? and accept the persons of the wicked? But to come to the directive power of Gods Law, see Judg.2. The dire∣ctive Law of God. 5. 23. Curse ye Meroz, curse ye bitterly the inhabitants there∣of. And that it is incumbent upon us by Gods Law to defend our Liberties against all Tyrants and Oppressors (as I said before) is without doubt, Hos. 5. 11. 1 Cor. 7. 23. See what Mattathias Mac 3. 43. said to his Brethren. Come, let us restore the decayed state of our people, and let us fight for our people, and for the Sanctuary. So that it plainly appears, we may do all we can for the decayed estate of this Commonwealth, against the corrupt, cruel, and cursed inno∣vations of the devouring Lawyers, (as well as other Tyrants that were Lords over us;) and for the restoration of our Primitive liberties, and freedom of Justice (as we shall show by and by) at every mans door, That righteousness may run down like aIsaiah. Expos Gods Law is to be obeyed a∣gainst mens. River in every street, Isa. 48. 18. And be as common as the wa∣ters in the High-way: So that herein the Law of God engages us, Et nullus subditur legi inferioris contra superiorem. What then? though some Humane Laws, (through the corrupt, close, and clandestine Interests of men) should not allow this liberty? our consciences are not bound to humane unjust Laws, which run run-counter and justle against Gods? but as 1 Pet. 2. 13. to sub∣mit our selves to mens laws (propter Deum) for God. Nemo astringitur mandato inferioris, cum superiori mandato dirigatur.☜ So that we are bound to mens laws but secundum quid, as we say; but we are absolutely obliged to Gods Laws. And in obedi∣ence to Gods Word, we must not onely endeavor to free our selves, but our neighbors from Tyranny and Oppression. Love thy neigh∣bor as thy self.
Let me a little digress (now) for the Publicks sake in this myA digression. discourse; not onely to acquaint the Governors of our Nation, how much the Message from Burdeaux in France, or any other Nations concerns us; for we are bound by the Law of God to help our neighbors, as well as our selves; and so to aid the SubjectsTo assist our Neighbors. of other Princes, that are either persecuted for true Religion, or oppressed under Tyranny. What mean our Governors to take no more notice of this? How durst our Army to be still, now theFrance, &c. work is to do abroad? Are there no Protestants in France and Germany (even) now under persecution? And do not the Subjects of France that lie under the Iron yoke of Tyranny, send, and seek, and sue to us for assistance? Well, wo be to us, if we help not the Lord, Judg. 5. 23. against the mighty! For it is the Lord hath sent for us thither, and calls for a part of our Army, at least, into France or Holland. Therefore, Cursed be they that do the workHolland. of the Lord negligently, or, but by halves, Jere. 48. 10. Object. O! but some will say, What call have we? Object. Answ. Answ. Can ye have greater? You are called thereto by God, and Men? Object. We have no example for it. Object. Answ. 1. Answ. 1. Suppose it so, yet by faith it is ye must subdue Kingdoms, obtain promises, stop the mouths of lyons, quench the violence of fire, wax valiant in fight, and turn to flight whole armies, Heb. 11. 33, 34, 35. 2. Stay for such ceremony, and your help may come too late.2. Mattathias (I told you of before) fell pell-mell upon the work, as soon as ever necessity called for it, and opportunity seconded it. 3. Your work is not to be after the commandments, or em∣ples3. of men, for that is the way to be broken, Hos. 5. 11. Isai. 29. 13. But by you the work of God is a strange work▪ to confound the wisdom of the wise, &c. But 4. If nothing else will serve, there is ample example for you4. Examples of this. both in Scripture and History; in Scripture, we know Heze∣kiah, though King onely of Judah, 2 Chro. 30. yet looked after them of Israel too, though under the Dominion of the King of Assyria; yet even to those subjects of Assyria that were one inHezekiah. faith, he sent Messengers to invite them to come into Jerusalem,
and he gave aid to them (though against the Laws of the King of Assyria) to destroy their Idols and Idolatry, and to set up the true worship; so may we assist our friends in France, (if we are called to it) and invite them to us, to joyn with us: And we may (yea, and must, if we sin not) send help and aid to them, till their Idols and Idolatries be hewn down, with all their high places; and so go on, till that France (whom I conceive the second of the tenVide Chap. 5. ☜ horns, Rev. 17. 12. Dan. 7. 9, 10.) have her Judicaty Throne set up, Psal. 89. 14. & 9. 4. also; and then the work will run on round about, without much of our help; and all the ten horns will tumble apace; and in few years Babylon will be faln; and Christ reign to the total extirpation of Antichrist. Another example is given us by good Josiah, 2 King. 22. 2 Chro. 34 & 35. who out of true zeal to God, took upon him to expel Idolatry, not onely out of his own Kingdom, but also out of the King of Assy∣riasJosiah. dominions. But now we are, or may be sent for to do it in France or Holland, or the like; wherefore, let me tell our ArmyA word to the Army. and Statesmen, that if they belong to the Lord yet, and if God hath good to do by them yet, that then they shall not be able to sit☜ The work will go on beyond Seas. still long; for if they will not take their work abroad, they shall have it home, as sure as God lives, and is righteous. For where the Kingdom of Christ comes, there is no such thing, as bounds or limits, or Rivers or Seas, that shall cage up or confine the fervent zeal and flaming affections of an Army, Representative, or People spirited for the work of Christ; which is more and☜ more publick, and looks beyond Seas now. O no! no more then the bounds or limits of a Parish shall confine a Minister of the Gospel, to the Spiritual work of Christ. In History we have examples enough. Constantine the Chri∣stianExamples. Constantine the Emperor. makes Wars against Licinius the Emperor, for his persecu∣ting the Christians, in punishing and putting them to death, and depriving them of their Christian liberties; so that after Con∣stantine had warred for the oppressed ones, he compelled the op∣pressor Licinius to give liberty to the Christians in matters of Religion, and then he put him to death in Thesslonica for his Devilishness and Cruelties to his Subjects. And after him we finde that Constans threatned to war upon his own, and elder brotherConstans.▪ Constantius, for banishing Athanasius from Alexandria, be∣cause
he was so hot an Antagonist against the Arrians: and this war would have been a bloody one too, had not Athanasius been restored. And is it possible, that Constans (who adhered to them that were the Orthodox Christians) for the restitution of the Bi∣ship, thought his call to war sufficient? And shall not we upon suitThe call a∣broad. and petition of the oppressed City of Burdeaux? and Subjects of France? or distressed English in Holland? imploring aide a∣gainst Tyranny, and Persecution, think we have call enough, for the restitution of Christ, his Kingdom, Saints? Liberty of the poor oppressed Protestants? and the deliverance of distressed Cities? Citizens and Subjects? For shame away with this ir∣rational, irreligious, and unchristed spirit! and take courage up∣on☞ Gods command, mens call, the spirits motion, and Christs ar∣rand in the world, and call the scarlet whore that sits on that Horn of the Beast, to a strict account for the innocent blood that is to be found there upon the Inquisition. Thus Theodosius madeTheodosius, So∣om. l. 7. c. 18. war on Cosroes, King of Persia, to deliver but a few Subjects (fewer then are in the City of Burdeaux) from tyranny and per∣secution. But upon a more civil account, we know the Roman Common∣wealth,Romans on a civil account. and the Lacedemonians, and Thebans, and Spartans, have ever sent succor and assistance to their Neighbors, when op∣pressions and tyrannies compelled them to implore it, as now the Brdelois do of us; and must we not aid the afflicted and distres∣sed? There is a notable sentence of the Spartan Senate left uponSpartans. Justin. lib. 1. Diodor. lib. 2. c. 3. Record. For the Spartans being Lords of the great City Byzan∣tium, they made Olearchus Governor there, who kept up the corn (in the time of wars) for the Souldiers, and let the Citizens die for hunger; but Anaxilaus, a great Citizen, disdaining such tyranny, enters into treaty with Alcibiades to deliver up the Town, who indeed was received soon after. But Anaxilaus being impeached by Articles, pleads his cause himself, (for Lawyers were not then as now) and his Judges acquitted him, with these words, Wars are to be made with Enemies, not with Nature▪ for it is against the very Law of Nature, that those who should bee their Defenders and Preservers, prove more cruel the enemies. So as it is against the Law of Nature, for the King of France
to be worse then an Enemy to his own Citizens and Subjects; So it is an much against the Law of God (should they supplicate to us for assistance) to be worse the Neighbours, and then such Professors and Pretenders for the Kingdome of Christ, as we make a noise of in the world to be; if we strike not (now) in for the interest of Christ, and take not the opportunity to visit those coasts, and to view the condition of the Protestants and oppres∣sed ones in that Kingdome. So let us come into our own CountryExamples at home. K. H. 2. H. 8. for examples; did not King Hen. 2. war against the Emperor Charls 5. under the colour and command of defending and deli∣vering the Protestant Princes? yea, K. H. 8. made ready to helpe the Germans, if the Emperor should oppresse them▪ And shall we sit still? now the eyes of all oppressed and distressed☜ Protestants and Subjects (in all Nations round us) are upon us? and the rather for that we pretend to do all for the Interest of Christ, and Liberties of people. Nay, in this we have all the advantage that can be; that whereas others waged wars with their own In∣terests,In the name of Jesus Ingage∣ment. ours will be with Christs, who is to rule all Nations; theirs about meum and tuum, ours onely for Christ and his King∣dome. Oh then! that our Powers, and Armies, and Navies, and Churches and all together would joyne in one, to ingage to∣gether as one armed man! And in the name of Jesus now to pro∣claime liberty to the captives and oppressed ones of other Nations,Numb. 32. Josh. 4. 12. Deut. 3. 20. abroad as well as at home; were there but once a Proclamation made in the name of Jesus Christ; O how many would come running under his banner from all parts! beyond expectation: of such too as are not yet known to the world, and then woe be toA Proclamati∣on to be made. Gog and Magog. The Gaddites desired to be at rest, and to go no further, but to stay on the other side Jordan, and to live there; which though Moses assented to, yet it was with this proviso, that they should goe on and assist their other Brethren with their whole worke, and go through-stich with it now they had begun t, until the Israelites had conquered the Land of Canaan; yea, and to goe first out, as the Van (because they would first sit down) and if they refused to doe thus, then they were anathematized (and destined) to destruction, like them that were adjudged Re∣bellsGaddites who now? at Cadesh barnea, and none of them (by the decree of God) were ever to enter into the Land of Canaan. So such of
the Army, Representative, and Commonwealth that have  heart to go further beyond the Seas (Jordan) but would be  rest, on this side, should hear a Moses say, what? what? y brethren go on and fight further for Canaan? and you sit still? a live lazing and idling at home? No! no! away: you that wo first sit down, and lay down Armes, and live in Peace, get you first out beyond Jordan, for you shall not returne to your Cattle and Corne, and fine finical fig-leaves, to be Coached and compli¦mented into effeminacy and fooleries; no, nor yet to dwell When tis time for the Army to rest. home in England with your wives, untill the Lord hath driven  enemies before you, and granted a place to your Brethren beyond Jordan, as well as to you on this side it; and then you shall  turn in peace, and with welcome, and be innocent before the Lo and his people Israel, and abide in quiet, but not till then. There¦fore, Uriah said, 2 Sam. 11. 11. The Ark of the Lord, and IsraelUriah. and Judah abide in Tents, and my Lord Joab, and the Ser¦vants of my Lord are encamped, &c. And shall I goe into  house to eate, to drinke, and to lye with my wife? as thou live and as thy soule liveth, I will not do it! O brave Souldier! come on then! let's be gone abroad, and get on the other side the ri☞ in the name of the Lord Jesus! and those that will not doe it, li the Rebels at Cadesh barnea they must be cursed, and never en into the land of Canaan, which is on the other side the Riv Wherefore to our Neighbors both at home and abroad, let every one discharge his duty aright; and let not Holland or France b forgotten (and it shall be a door of hope to us in the valley of  chor.) For beleeve it, upon perpending the concomitants (wise know what I mean, Hos. 14. 9.) there is a necessity of taking all  opportunities to show our love to Christ and his Kingdome; and our charity to our oppressed, and afflicted, imbondaged neigh¦bours: and let not men dispute so much whether it be lawfull Our Warrant for this. defend or strike in for anothers liberty, and deliverance, if it w lawfull to doe so for our own, seeing we must love our neighb as our selves. Diligit in proxime▪ quod in seipso diligit,  diligit proximum eandem ob causam, propter quam diligit s ipum: if we love Christ then in our Nation, why not in another and if Justice, and Peace, and Piety, and Righteousnesse among our selves, why not among others? O for shame sirs! let's rub
eyes, and look about us! And after the wicked Lawyers have had a bng, let us beat a march, and alarm the whole world. Jer.An alarm. ☜ 50. 2. Declare ye among the Nations, and publish, and set up a standard, publish and conceal not, (till ye) say, Babylon is taken. Who is on my side? (saith the Lord.) Who? Come against her, from the utmost border (even Ireland and Scotland) open her store-houses, cast her up as heaps, destroy her utterly, let no∣thing of her be left: Wo to them, for their day is come, the time of their visitation. The vengeance of the Lord our God, yea, the vengeance of his Temple (or Churches,) Jer. 50. 26, 27, 28, 29. I intended not this length, but the Lord will have it so; and so I come in again to the Lawyers, having proved my warrant by the Law of Nature, of Nations, and of God. Which Law ofVide Chap. 5. God is of all the necessary, seeing that mens judgement (especially in particular contingencies) may be divided, and produce divided and different effects, till the divine law directs them: for Psal. 19. 7. The law of the Lord is perfect, the testimony of the LordLaws of men must breathe by Gods. is sure, the statutes of the Lord are right, rejoycing the heart, &c. From whence ere long all other Laws among men must fetch breath. And then as the Psalmist says, Psal. 147. 19, 20. He☜ sheweth his word to Jacob, his statutes and judgements to Israel; and he hath not dealt so with any other Nations; as for his judgements, they have not known them. This will, I trust, be ful∣filled in a short time, as soon as ever the Lawyers once tumble. In the mean time, says the Lord, Isa. 3. 20. Wo be to them thatWo to Lawyers put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter! Vers. 23. Wo be to them that justifie the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousnesse (or righteous cause) of the righteous from him, &c. And Isa. 1. 21. O! How is the faithful City become an Harlot, &c. Companions of Theeves. Vers 23. Every one loveth gifts, and follows after rewards; they judge not for the fatherless, norwidow, &c. Therefore saith the Lord, Ah! I will ease me of my adversaries! and will restore thy Judges as at first, (how that is, we shall hear hereafter.) But wo be to thesePriests and Lawyers the two Plagues that rose toge∣ther. wicked ones! The two Plagues of this Nation rose up both from the bottom∣less smoke, and are the Priests and Lawyers; both alike they
keep up a corrupt, carnal, Antichristian interest; the Priests would fill the cup of the Whore for the Nation to drink of, and the Lawyers would cloath her with scarlet; but wo be to us! if either be suffered to trade: for, because thou hast let go them that I have appointed to utter destruction, therefore thy life shall go for theirs, and thy people for theirs, 1 Kings 20. 42. They must fall together, seeing ever since Edward the third his time in England, they were advanced together, i. e. as to their height in interest. The Lawyers (who are Tyrants and OppressorsLawyers Lo∣custs. of the Civil state) may as well be compared to the locusts men∣tioned Rev. 8. 3, &c. as the Priests, (the Tyrants and Oppres∣sors of the Ecclesiastical state.) For 1. Out of the smoke, which darkned the Air as well as the Sun,1. Arising out of the bottom∣less pit smoke. (Earth as well as Heaven;) and so out of that Antichristian darkness which arose upon the State civil as well as Ecclesia∣stick, came these locusts, Vers. 2, 3. upon the Earth, and Lawyers into this Kingdom (as we shall shew afterward.) Vide Malms∣bury,Malmsbury. in William the second his time, they proceeded from the Romish Clergy. 2. Locusts are unclean Creatures, many times translated2. Unclean Creatures. Grashoppers; and the Midianites and Amalekites that came against Israel in Gideons days, Judg. 7. 12. were said to be like Grashoppers, which, says Cooper, signifies Bodily oppressors, E∣gyptian plagues, as Exod. 10. 13, 14. Grievous! Such are theCooper. Lawyers all over the Nations, and they never are in such multi∣tudes, but they are most grievous plagues as can befal a Nation▪ we had need to seek in hast to our Moses's and Aarons, by whose means I am perswaded they will be swept away of a sudden into the Red Sea. 3. Locusts have their strength in their multitude. O what3. For multi∣tudes. heaps of this noysome Vermine may you see at a time in the Temple! or Westminster-hal! Nullum unquam fuisse human ordinis institutum, quod magis brevi tempore crevit, &c. These do make up the numerous Army of Antichrist (in this State) a∣gainst Christ, and are to torment men, Rev. 9. 3, 5, 7, &c. and so4. For their variety of or∣ders. Exod. 10. 14. they cover the Earth. 4. Locusts have their variety of orders, and ye may see them
noted in their several colours and marks. Thus have Antichrists☜ Lity (I mean) Lawyers, as well as Antichrists Clergy (I mean) the Priests. It were but lost labor to enter into this number of his name, of to reckon up the variety of orders, and degrees of this brood of the Beast, distinguished by several Forms, Sects, and Habits of divers Fashions. 5. Locusts are of earthly dispositions, greedy devourers, in∣satiable5. For their earthly dispo▪sitions. for covetousness; always desiring, but never delighting to work, sow, labor, nor plough, but to eat up the fruits of other mens labors; and to fall on, cease upon, and take possession of the best Meadows, Valleys, and pleasant places of the Land; now the Lawyers (as well as Priests) are such a plague of Locusts. For☜ what fertile or fruitful Soyl in England, that they have not ceased upon? and eat out▪ and (with ravenous fees) bought out the best estates in the Land? What have these Lawyers (like the Locusts) but a mouth and a helly? a huge mouth (at the Bar) to bite off, and as big a belly to take in: A mouth to gape for it, and a bellyA mouth, and a belly. to get it; a mouth to plead for it, and a belly to feed on it; a mouth to serve, a belly to consume; but all this while no hands to do good, or deal out to the poor and oppressed. 6. Locusts have a leap (like Grashoppers) and so have the6. For their leaping. Lawyers; for like the Leopards they get their prey, Salindo, by leaps, which are sometimes very large; and as to the things of God, or Religious Exercises, we shall finde few of them frequent them, unless by leaps now and then: so by fits and jerks they will seem (may hap) serious, as if they set for Heaven, and may pro∣mise much. But I always except such as were Lawyers, and areException of▪ some. converted, or (it may be) some that are (yet) so accounted, who are godly and conscientious, and cannot close with the common sort or ordinary practise of greedy, griping, selfish, oppressing Lawyers; but such are not very many: And I must needs say, I cannot see how an honest man of a tender conscience, can continue☜ No honest man can live a Lawyer. a Common Lawyer with them, in pleading and practising as they do; for doubtless he will lie under very desperate and daily temp∣tations to trade with sin. But as to the sect of them in general (excepting some particular (rare) ones; such Zeno's as are honestTit. 3. 13. and godly amongst them) these Locusts may leap to a little honesty (it may be) on Sundays; but all the days after, they follow their
old trade of lying, and oppressing, and eating up the greens of☞ Greg. Moral. Job 39. 23. the Land. Subitos dant saltus, sed protinus in terram cadunt. Their ordinary going is but higgle-haggle▪ here and there, this way and that, on this side, and on that too, for any Cause or Client; so they meet but with an Angel in the way. 7. These Locusts (that help to make up the Army of Anti∣christ)7. Like to Scor∣pions. had a power like to Scorpions given them, Revel. 9. 3. and so have the Lawyers. 1. Scorpio est blanda facie, sed caud pungit occulte. The1. Flattering faces, full of craft and cru∣elty. Scorpion hath a flattering face, and so these Locusts, Revel. 9. 7, 8. Their faces were as the faces of men, and they had hair as the hair of women. But Vers. 10. their tails were like to Scor∣pions that had stings to torment men. All this signifies their Hy∣pocrisie and craft, as well as cruelty to hurt us. Exterius boni▪ sed interius mali (sayes one.) For (Scorpio blanditur vultu, sedCarthus. in Ap. percutit cauda) these Scorpions will finely fawn to thy face, but they torment with their tail, when thou thinkest danger is over. This signifies (also) their (varias fraudes) sundry sorts of tricks and frauds (as Cotterius tells us) to deceive and do mischeifCotterius. with; therefore they have womens hair, as well as mens faces. As the Apostle sayes, 2 Pet. 2. 3. Through Covetousness, with fained words they make merchandise of men; for they seem the faces of men that are most discreet, wise, prudent, eloquent, yea, and affable, and courteous; but as Pliny, lib. 11. c. 25. sayes of the Scorpion, Cauda semper in ictu est, nulloque momento medi∣tariPliny. cessat, ne quando occasioni desit: Their tail is continually in motion to torment us, and every moment ready to take occasion to sting us; and as Paul in Rom. 16. 18. sayes, With fair speeches and flattering words, they deceive the simple. 2. As Scorpions ever since they were cursed (in Gen. 3. 14.2. They eat the dust, as it is a curse. Thou art cursed above every beast of the field, upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all thy days) I say ever since with their tails (which torment us) they gather up the dust of the Earth, and feed altogether upon earthly things as their meat. Scorpio cauda lingit, & isti spiritualia temporibus post∣ponunt. So they, like the unclean beasts under the Law, creep  all four upon the Earth, and all this upon their belly too. O bit∣ter curse! they cannot abide the things above. And this make
them ready to receive Petitions, opinions, causes, complaints, many hours together about Bodies and Estates; but cannot abide▪ a Peti∣tionThey cannot abide a plea out of Scripture that concerns Soules, which lately I tryed their patience with before the Lords Commissioners, but upon the naming of a Scrip∣ture or two, they would not hear it; at which drawing my Bible out of my Pocket, and telling them that that was the Statute Book to be used in such cases, and beginning to open some Scrip∣tures, I came to that in Ezek. 22. 27. Her Princes are ravening. Wolves, they seek to destroy souls, to get dishonest gain, &c. but they fell a chasing and fuming, and could not endure it. But 3 Scorpions sting, but not dead at first, but the wound works2. They sting deadly and by degrees. Pliny. by degrees; and Pliny saies plainly, that the venome runs along the veins, by little and little, till it comes to the heart and kils them. The Lawyers like them sting deadly, and it were better they killed us right out, (Rev. 9. 6.) then to consume, perplex, paine, grieve, and afflict us to death by degrees, the plague of them is the worse: Habent venenatam suam potestatem. Thus these Locusts are like Scorpions. 8 These Locusts were Monster-forme, and that multi-forme,8. Monsters. being made up of many sorts of creatures; so the Lawyers are (i. e.) Foxes for subtlety, Vipers for venome, Dogs for mouthing it, but Tygers for tearing it, and cruelty. But 1. In their Body, horses prepared to battle, Rev. 9. 7.1. In their bo∣dies. Horses not common, but kept up, and fed, pampered Jades, that work not, but feed hard, and eate and drink of the best; therefore saies the Apostle 2 Pet. 2. 12. They are as bruite beasts lead withFull of fury for Antichrist. sensuality, and yet like Horses prepared to battle, that is, full of fury, and rage for Antichrists designe, and against the Gospell of the Lord Jesus. Cum fervore & impetu procedentes, sineCarthus. Dei timore, & discretione currentes in conculcationem electo∣rum; & sicut equi (saies Beda in loc.) non sua ratione sedBeda. sessoris impulsu aguntur, ita diabolico spiritu agitati feruntur contra Christum. They must needs go whom the devill drives: and thus like the horses, Job 39. 25. They mock at fear, and go on as bold as blind Bayards (furiously) for Antichrists interest, s his Army for Civill affairs. Besides, it seems they are cruell and given to Blaodshed, and under pretence of Treasons, breach of
Law or the like, they cause the faithfullest to suffer, as Sir Wal∣ter Rawleigh told them to their faces. 2 On their Heads, as it were crowns, &c. So are these Lo∣custs,2. Their Heads or Lawyers, Antichrists Army of crowned men in State∣matters, as well as the Priests and Clergy his Army in Ecclesi∣asticall matters; not only in their wear of Caps like Crowns, but in that they get the legislative Power, and have (more regum) in. Prima Leo, postrema, draco, media ip∣sa chimaera. Par. in loc. the manner of Kings, Lords, and such like persons, imposed laws and ties to consciences, tyrannizing and oppressing all the people of God as their Vassals and Subjects: Thus the Lawyers are An∣tichrists Horses kept up for his battle, being monster-form, magni-forme, and multi-form; But Christ he rides upon his white horse, conquering and to conquer. 3. They had Faces like the faces of men. That is, least me▪3. Their Faces should loath and abhor them for their cruelty and cursed dispositi¦ons, they insinuate into great places, Kings Courts, and Palla¦ces, &c. by simulation, and fine glozing flattering shewes of hu¦manity and humility, having learned the art of dissembling in the Inns of Courts, having it infused as a principle which Kings andWith their art of dissembling. Rulers held (by their authority) that none was fit to Rule, unlesse he can dissemble. These Lawyers never more dissemble, the☞ when they resemble the faces of men; For they put the fairest fa¦ces on the foulest actions. There be no greater Flatterers in the world, and they smile at the most distance: And (methinks) now the Lawyer (is like one nigh drowned,) he fastens upon any ne hand, in hopes to save himselfe: but soft sir! 4. Hair as the hair of women, Rev. 9. 8. That is, as Cotterius4. Their Hair. notes, 1. Varias fraudes, their variety of art to deceive an insinuate. 2. Ornatum illicitum, their unlawfull attire, to makeCotterius. a great show with fine, soft and delicate ornaments. And 3. Ef¦foeminatos mores, their effeminacy and womanish fancies a fashions: and like women, O how they love their long hair! & de¦licate☞ comam alunt, pingunt, mulcent, powdering and painting it! 5 Their Teeth as the teeth of Lyons, Rev. 9. 8. Such an ex¦pression5. Their Teeth Terrible. is in Joel 1. 8. Voraces & truculenti sunt, that is, th are ravenous and cruell; so that in the description of them, there is falsi boni simulàtio, & veri mali dissimulatio, & Aper
Saevitia. A semblance of good in their faces, a dissemblance fevill in their hair, but dentibus, crudelitas significatur, byLyra. their teeth is figured out open cruelty and tyranny, and bee sure these State Locusts, or Lawyers where they cannot get what they would with the first or second, they bring in the third, and show their teeth to the purpose, in tearing away mens Estates, Liberties and Lives too if they can, omnia rapiunt, aeraria exhauriunt,  devorant, agros vastant, crules & saevi sunt in pios, qui  manus eorum incidunt, making themselves rich by others uine. 6 They had Habergions of Iron, Rev. 9. 9. That is their out∣ward6 Habergions of iron. defences, whilst corrupt Laws and Lawyers have been a long time (especially in these five months, that they have so arfully tormented us, I mean for the hundred and fifty years last ast) kept up by secular Powers, so that there was no opposingPareus. them; Quibus munitae ut a nemine facile laedantur, they had power to hurt all that while, but none could hurt them. 7 And the sound of their wings, like the sound of Chariots,7 Their wings and priviledges Rev. 9. 9. This State-Army of Antichrist being (as we heard be∣re) so crafty, cruell, fierce, strong, forcible, and armed with se∣cular Powers, and all means to hurt men with: They have wings, at is, such things, advantages, and Priviledges, with which they ie high in boldnesse and ambition, and are elevated exceedingly, and lifted up, and especially to the terror of honest people. BedaBeda. writing on this place saies Expavescendum magis, quam expo∣rendum. It is rather trembled at, then interpreted how this Ar∣my of these Locusts increase, For with their wings they make such  huge noise, as amazes and amuzes men, and makes them afraid of them. For the noise is first, Confused, like the sound of many Cha∣riots,The Army of Locusts. uttering no distinct noise, terrifying the people with horror t their loud clamorous voices, lamentable lying, pleadings, and disputes, and violent jangleings, and indistinct voyces which others must not rightly understand. Secondly, it is Comfortlesse, for they neither sound glory toNoise of their wings, what  ☜ God, good, nor peace to men; but all vexation, Suits, troubles, and mischeifes that may be. As K. Jabin in Judg. 4, 2, 3. had one hundred Chariots of iron, and for twenty yeares vexed
Israel sore, but these have a hundred and twenty years vexed Eng¦land sore, so that nothing but ruin and undoing is looked for from them; and a man needs no more trouble then to be within the sound of their Chariots and Lawes, Ile warrant him, his hea will ake and quake too. For as Diversi currus diversis vis cumLawyers per∣plex us, and how? impetu urrunt &c. Diverse chariots, run divers waies, and all furiously to battle, so do these Antichristian State Locusts,  Lawyers, divers ways perplex s, and sing us out of one Court in another, with unreasonable restlesnesse, till they have run over  or ruined us with violent contentions and torments, and that which is worst, is, that they are so numerous, and run so many ways that we can by no means escape them. 8. These monsterous Locusts have stings in their Tailes▪ Re8. Stings in their Tails who? 9. 10. not only the Priests and Prelates, and so Antichrists Ec∣clesiastical Army had their tailes, as Officials, Commissaries Proctors, Registers, and such like, that did grievously afflict and torment men; but also the Lawyers, Antichrists State-army have their long tailes too with terrible stings, and such are Soliciters, Clerks, Bayliffs, Serjeants, Goalers, and such like; and it is so much to their advantage in tormenting men to have terrible tailes that they will have none to execute their Warrants, Writs, Orde or the like (as near as they can) but the most cursed gracelessSuch multi∣tudes of Clerks &c. are against Justice, and true Law, Mir. of Just. fol. 246. Villains they can get; and by this means are men in the Country (above all places) abused, by bloody Villains, drunken Sots, who sit night and day drinking and swilling upon an honest mans scor whom they have served with a Warrant, or so, and yet use him ( may be) if hee bee a man fearing God, worse then a Dog in beating, bruising, pulling, threatning and abusing him all manner of ways, if he do not fill their Pouch▪with mony, and their Paun with liquor up to the throat, these torment so with their taile that some men had better be hanged right-out then so used, and vers. 6. Seek death but cannot find it. Mors optanda magis. whilst Clubs and Canes lie thumping upon the backs of poor peop∣ple that once come under the Bum-Bailiffs, being so crue plagued, pulled away from their Wives, haled up and down by head and ears, bereaved of their Relations, and robbed and spoil of their Estates, and comfortable subsistance Judge Arnold was hanged for saving a Bayliff from death, who had rob∣bed the people by distresses, and extorting mony from them. See Mir. of Just. sore, p. 241 and now the Bayliffs do it daily, and no justice.. Oh! how sad this torment of their TAILES? as thousands can testifie to th
oure! So that all the Lawyers Estates cannot make amends for the world of mischeifes they have done, and yet doe daily with their Tailes, which are most violent, virulent, and vene∣mous. Thus they are described in their monster-formity, or monstrous deformity. 9. These Locusts have a limited Power. As 1. To Persons,9 Their limited power. Rev. 9. 4. that they should not hurt the grasse, nor the green things, ior the trees. 2. To time. Ver. 5. 10. they had power to hurt but five months. 1. To Persons, The Saints who are of three sorts, resembled1 To persons. by grasse, , weake yet sappy: And 2.  by green flourishing things. And 3. by trees of the highest and tallest sta∣ture in Christ, viz. Fathers, Young-men and Children, 1 Jo. 2. yet all are to abstain from Lawyers, and the Lawyers are to have no∣thing to doe with them, for as the Apostle says 1 Cor. 6. 1. dareEt electi licet percutiantur, non reputant laesio∣nem Hugo in loc. any of you goe to Law before the unjust? But as it is in 1 Tim. 1. 9. The law is not made for a righteous man; but for the law∣lesse and disobedient, for ungodly, and for sinners, for unholy and prophane &c. So it is in Rev. 9. 5. for them that have not the seale on their foreheads. 2. To Time. But five moneths, Quinque menses brevita∣tem2 To time. Andreas Casa∣ries. temporis exprimere arbitramur. Primasius reads it six months, but the Septuagint says five, yet the obscurity hereof hath puzzled most Expositors as to the time; for taking in Scripture sence a day for a year, Numb. 14. 34. at thirty days to the Month, yet five months is but one hundred and fifty yeares which is a short time; but to this I think Bullinger says well, that the allu∣sionBullinger. is made to the time of the Locusts or Grashoppers coming forth which is about April (as we say) and continues to Septem∣ber, i. e. the five hot months; so these Locusts have a Summer∣time of doing mischeife for about the space of one hundred and fifty or one hundred fifty five years, which will be a hot time for them indeed; they sing, and leap, and devoure. Don Pluto dares not to assay though he be Prince of hell. So much as Lawyets dare, though they their souls to Angels sel. M. Brightman tels us what Troops of millitary Locusts the Sa∣acnsBrightman. 1 The military Locusts. were; beginning Anno 630. to flye and leape about, and
for one hundred and fifty years, i. e. the first five months they did miserably torment. But beside them the Religious western Lo∣custs came in by swarmes in their hot Summer-months, and the2 Religious Lo∣custs. a world of Priests, Jesuites, Monks, Friars, and after them Pre∣lates rose up apace; In the daies of Innocentius (so called) the third they began with abundance of power to torment men as they listed, and this continued to 1360. a hundred and fifty yeares Whereas Wickliffe full of the wind of the Spirit began to blow vehemently, after whom others followed and ceased not, till this Egyptian plague were (as to the greatest torment and terror of it) over. But besides all these; the third sort are the State Locusts, viz3 State Locusts the Lawyers, who arose out of the bottomlesse pit smoak too, as hath and will yet (further) appear: But we must not reckon from the first time of power given these sort of Locusts to hurt, (for that is of long standing,) for we shall find in Edw. Confessors time. An 1043. how the Common Law (so called) arose out of four Nati∣ons,Common Law when it arose. and gave a being to some; but after that William the Con∣querer altered, and disused Edwards, and kept (for his own cor∣rupt ends and interest) more to the Danish and Saxon, appointingLawyers. Termes, and thereby bringing forth an abundance of Lawyers, but as yet they were little, and their interest was a poor puny thing till Edward the thirds time about one thousand three hundred and odde, and all this while it was but as one friend pleaded for ano∣ther; but now the weather began to grow warme upon them in one thousand three hundred sixty nine and so continued to K. He 7: one thousand five hundred and four, or thereabouts. But the as Rastall in his abridgement notes, Acts were made in favor toRastal. And so Stowes Chron. in loe. them; and their Summer-months to do mischeife, and to torment the people came in a pace, and continued hot to them, that they had and did almost what they listed, and had their Lawes, and Liberties, and Priviledges inlarged all along: So that they were to this day in their vigor, thus in Q. Eliz. 8. An. 1566. they were fostered up by her Acts of grace to them, and they have to this day had their flourishing Summer and time to prosp in; and to sing, devour estates, eate up the poor, and torment the people; but now their five months i. e. the one hundred and fifty years are upon expiring, and their power to torment will bo
more by a yeare or two; not but that they may have a being yet, butThe Lawyers end within a year or two. ☜ not as they had before, to doe mischeife; They shall prevaile no longer, for their madnesse shall be evident to all, 2 Tim. 3. 8, 9. their September is hard by, and a West wind will remove them out of those places wherein they have sat, and sung, and plagued us for five months. Concerning the Locusts, Hildegard hath a pro∣phecy, which is, In those days shall arise a sort of blockish Fellows, proud,Hildegard▪ Prophesie. covetous, perfideous, and crafty, eating upon the sins of the people, preferring themselves before other men, of arrogant disposition, and voide of all shame or feare of God, in inventing new mischeifes, strong and stout; but all prudent men and faith∣full Christians shall curse this pestilent order. They will flatter noble men, and lay hold on whatsoever they can get, and howsoe∣ver it be gotten by stealth, robbery or legerdemaine. And a∣las! they will receive any thing, from Rogues, sacrilegious persons, Usurers, Adulterers, Apostates, Whores and Bawds of Noble men, perjured persons, corrupt Judges, Tyrants or any that live contrary to Gods Law. They shall live a delicate life, and get a certaine fulnesse of an abundance of all worldly things, though it be to their own eternall damnation. And they shall every day wax more and more wicked, with minds more and more obdurate. But when once their crafty Conveyances☜ shall be found, then shall their large Gifts (and Bribes and Fees) cease, and they shall goe from house to house hunger-bitten. Then shall the people pursue them with this out-cry: Woe be to you miserable wretches! that are ordained to sorrow! the de∣vill has guided you! your heart is without grace! your mindes unstable! and your eyes blinded with vanity and folly! Re∣member the time when yee were in sight happy, pleasant flatte∣rers, lovers of the World, drunkards, ambitious, Patrons of wicked facts, pollers & pillars of all ruin, unsatiable sowers of dis∣cord. Then the people shall say, out upon you get you packing hence! ye Captains of mischeif! For ye are fallen headlong into ever∣lasting shame and reproach, by God's just judgment. Thus we have done with these Locusts, onely say further Ver. 12. One woe is past! It is past indeed at the downfall of this Antichristian State-Army, as well as at the downfall of Antichrists Eccle∣siasticall
Army of Locusts. And whilst we have offered these considerations of the Locusts, wee doe not exclude a more spi∣rituall and refined meaning of those words in the full sence of them. But to conclude this Chapter; We might well wonder, how the Lawyers yet stood, seeing the Priests and Prelats and such like Locusts were swept away, but that their five months (we finde) began here in England after the Priests and Prelates; yet now the day of their destiny draws nigh. Wherefore gird up thy loins, saith the Lord, and speake unto them all that I command thee;Jer. 1. 17. be not dismaied at their faces, least I confound thee before them. CHAP. II. That there is a CIVIL POLITY and LAWS, and what is the right PRINCIPLE thereof, and how to be obeyed above Laws, or Lawyers. THere is no man so irrational as to deny the due use of Civill Discipline, and (for the well ordering of civil affairs) of sound Lawes; but a religi∣ous man much more knows a necessary use of such a Polity and Government, in subserviency and subordination to Christ, and his Kingdome, though specificallyIn civill Disci∣pline. 1 Reges. 2 Leges. 3 Greges. Lawes. distinct therefrom, even in terminis. In Civill States must bee 1. Reges, 2. Leges. 3. Greges, Magistrates to rule, Laws to rule by, and Subjects to be ruled thereby, and all these ought to be in obedience to Christs Kingdom. Now the Laws are the Nerves and Sinewes of the Commonwealth; or if we will the Axle-tree of our State upon whose firmenesse and fitnesse we move. BeSim. sure they be sound then, and such as do not oppresse the people of the Commonwealth, for if they do, they render our Rulers by them for Oppressors and Tyrants. The reason of it is in Calvin Instit.
lib. 4. c. 20. 14. who says that the Law mutum esse Magistratum,Calvin. & magistratum vivam esse legem, &c. is a close Magistrate, but the Magistate is an open Law; so that if the Law be close tiranny, the Governors thereby must needs bee open Tyrants. ButLaws necessa∣ry. for civil Order and use, good and plain Laws are unavoidably ne∣cessary; this will appeare upon the very definition of the Law, which is quoddam dictamen practicae rationis, a certain dictateLaw defined. of practicall reason. For as in speculative reason, out of inde∣monstrable principles naturally proceed certain conclusions of sci∣ences,And explained the knowledge of which are not naturally brought forth in us, but by art and industry and invention of reason; So Certes, it is requisite that humain reason bring forth some particular orders, and dispositions out of the Law of Nature, and out of that cer∣taine common and indemonstrable principles, which particular dis∣positions and orders are called human Laws, whilst they keepe such conditions as appertain to equity and reason, and so says Tully l. 2. de Invent. f. 4. and gives this reason for it, quod initi∣umTully. juris a naturâ profectum, &c. because the beginning of human right and Law is to arise from Nature, and is confirmed by pra∣ctise, and then we are bound unto obedience; res a natura pro∣fect as & consuetudine probat as legum metus & religio sanxit. Let none think mee then an ex lex, whilst I am with CalvinCalvin Instit. l. 4. de ert. Me∣diis. calling upon all honest men to inquire after the constitution and e∣quity of our Laws. Ut decet, intuemur, legis constitutionem & equitatem, cujus ratione constitutio ipsa fundata est. Now though the constitutions be divers, yet the equity is (or ought to be) one and the same in all Lawes, as is in Exod. 22. 1, 2. Deut. 19. 18, 19. in this sence with Augustin de lib. Arb. lib. 1. c. 6.Austin. tom. 1. I affirme the use and necessity of humane Laws, so they agree and keep to their first principle and ends. Thus Isidorus inIsadorus. lib. 5. Etymolog. c. 20. saies, Laws are made, ut earum metu humana oreretur audacia, tutaque sit inter improbos inno∣centia; to correct and restraine audacity, and to countenance and defend innocency and honesty. As to the necessary use of honest humane Laws: the first consideration (I conceive) incum∣bent is the right and true principle or rise of Civill Lawes. The principle is the clear Light, Reason, Equity, and Understand∣ingThe Principle of the law. of things in themselves in abstracto, as abstracted from all hu∣mane
constituted Forms. This principle is the life and perfection of good Laws. Hence is it needful that all Humane Laws be derived, and fetched from the Law of Nature, which is prima regulaThe Law of nature. rationis, and according to this rule is a man, or thing, said to be honest, true, and just. This is by the Wiseman, Prov. 20. 27. cal∣led☞ The candle of the Lord in man,  or the light, . Sept. or Lamp of the Lord, , Aqu. Symm. Thod. , men have reasonable souls, which serve to enlighten them in inferior matters, which is im∣plyed by  a rational breath, Spiraculum vitae. For as the Hebrew Doctors do affirm the word  points out the upper or supream region of reason, yea, the very top and flower (as one sayes) of a reasonable soul, ;Culverwel. or else as it is  a soul sparkling and glittering with intellectuals, and shining bright with the light of reason, this is the Candle. But to give light, one word, first, of Nature; secondly, an∣other of the Law of Nature; and a third, of the Light of Na∣ture, as the principle of the Law that I here handle. 1. Nature, I mean not that which the Schoolmen call Natura1. What Na∣ture is? Durand. Culverwel. naturans, as Durand, and others; but as it is scattered and dif∣fused into divers particular Beings, it is the very same with Essence▪ and it fingers forth; First, Originem entis, which as Culverwel calls it, is the very genius, and I may say, genus of entity; yea, entity or being its self; for a thing cannot be without its nature: And secondly, Operationem entis, for all essence boils and bubbles out into several and serviceable operations, and acts; and hence it is, that customs of long standing, are accounted Natural, and Law oftentimes, as Galen sayes, ▪Galen. But, 2. The Law of Nature, is that Law which is seated intrin∣secally,2. What the Law of Nature is? and indeed, esential to a rational Creature, insomuch, as such a Law is as necessary to have being, as such a Creature; and indeed one is connatural with the other. But the greedy Lawyers long f a further latitude, and say, Jus naturala est quod natura omnia animalia docit, &c. And in this their sence, the sensitive Creatures they would have their Clients, as under this Law but the Schoolmen school them, till they cool them for it, and in∣form
them of their folly in it: For surely, they are so used to Fees that the Birds, Beasts, and Fishes, by their good-will, should do their homage to their great god Terminus in their Courts. But☜ this we confess, in the very sensitive creatures there are some si∣mulachra, apish imitations, or shadows of morality amongst them; some , as the Philosopher sayes: But this is far from the Law of Nature which we speak of, whilest as Suarez sayes, they are deficient in the duties, yea,Suare. and branches of the Law of Nature, as to acknowledge and adore  Deity. Inter brutsilent leges: Therefore the learned GrotiusGrotius. does thus describe the Law of Nature, Jus naturalo est dicta∣tum rect a rationis &c. And Chrysostom calls it too, ;Chrysostom. A radical knowledge, which is also fundamental in mans being, which blos∣soms and burgeons out into the best fruits of morality: For this too, we finde Philo our friend, .Phile. Right Reason is that fixed, sure, and unshaken Law,  not written with hand upon a peice of Paper, or like a dead  Letter engraven upon a Pillar, but penned with the point of a  Diamond, yea, the finger of God himself in an immortal minde. So Plutarch sayes also, ,Plutarch. &c. The Law was never limited to Paper or Writings, but to Reason; it is situated in the centre of a Rational Being. Plato too tells us plainly forPl▪ this, that other Laws were but a Comment upon it, yea, and in∣firmiorum hominum Commenta too; but this was the , Brightness and orient ustice of Nature. And in this sence Cicero sayes it is, Non scripta, sed ataCicero. . Sim. lex. Thus for the Law of Nature, which is like Gold in the lump, out must be beaten out into the leaf: Hence the Natural Con∣science is, centrum notitiarum communium. 3. The Light of Nature is Reason, or the Intellectual Lamp3 The light of nature. set up in the soul. This is the Cannon Law in the essences of men, without which, all Laws are erroneous; for let this Lamp of Rea∣son but once out, and we are left in the dark to court shadows,
and complement, cloudy forms, Idea's and Idols of mens make; so that reason it is which promulgates the Law of Nature, and makes the difference between  and . Now though the formality of humane laws flowes from men who ha☞ their own Interests, yet the sinews and life of all true Law have their sperma and spirit in the Law of nature. But besides, there is a Law of Nations which lies between the Law of Na∣ture,Law of Na∣tions. and Civil Law; and this is either per conomitantiam, th is, when several Nations in their several conditions and capacities, yet have some of the same positive Laws, or else per communi∣cationem (which is indeed the most duly ) by com∣pacts and leagues together reciprocally. But now as to humaHumane Laws. The principle of them. Laws, which Tully calls Leges populares, and the Hebrew  or , they have their rise from Reason, which is therefore to be first considered, for that there is a necessary co∣catenation between first principles and conclusions; and as Sua∣rezSuarez. . sayes, Veritas principii continetur in conclusions: The truth of the principle is, or ought to be in the product; so must reason (as the principle) be in the Laws; and he that serves the Form☞ and shifts the Principle, i. e. Reason, is the Traytor; and an Apo∣stateTully. to his own nature, and the God of it. This makes Tully to tell us, that Veralex est rectaratio, naturae congruens, di∣fusa in omnes, constans, sempiterna, &c. Reason is the true Law, which hath a natural congruity, is of a large latitude a diffusion, and never dies. Hence, what have Governors and Legislators to do, b  (as we say) expound upon the Law of Na∣ture? and enlarge her borders? But to make haste, take up the Corollaries. First, That there is nothing more agreeable to Nature, th1. Corol. Law, , seeing it is founded in Nature. Secondly, That all just and honest Laws are 2. Corol. steps of true Reason. Thirdly, Reason and clear understanding (which is the proper3. Corol. principle) is the best Judge of Civil Laws; and it renders  man a Judge, even when the form of the Laws renders him one judged; for that which hath the highest command, is the suprea Judge, but Reason hath the highest command; so also that which
is the most perfect in every kinde, is the rule of the rest; but Reason is so. Fourthly, Some disobedience is more lawful (i. e. according4. Corol. to the rules of God and Nature) then subjection, i. e. When the Dictates of Reason do cross the Injunctions of Form; in such a case he is not the Traytor, who does contrary to the For∣malitis of the Law, but he that denies Reason, and does contrary to the principle of it; for that, the principle is supream to the letter; therefore the greatest Rebellion, Disobedience, and Trea∣son, is against Reason, Equity, and Understanding. Nullus sub∣ditur legi inferioris contra superiorem. Fifthly, Humane Laws must no longer be kept up, then they5. Corol. keep up the principle of them, which is Reason; but in cases of contest betwixt the Letter of the Law and Reason, we must side with the principle: In talibus non secundum literam legis, sed recurrendum ad aequitatem (Jurisperitus in digesto veteri, Lib. 1. tit. 3. leg. 24.) In this sense (sayes the Prophet) Isa. 10. 1, 2. Wo, to them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that grie∣vousness which they have prescribed, to take away the right, &c. This is a sad curse! which hath continued long in England, which certainly the Lord will visit Lawyers for, and corrupt Judges. Sixthly, As Reason is restored to more perfection and clear∣ness,6. Corol. all the Laws and results of such Reason must be amended and corrected: Now like Hezekiahs waters, by degrees true equity and reason is rising apace, higher and higher, out of its Chaos; so that in this light and discovery, according to its degree, must tumble down all corrupt Forms, Letters, and Laws. So that this Resurrection of Reason, or the Principle, will prove the ruine☜ of persons, and personal interests; and that is the reason that the Wisemen are employed by the present Herods of our age, under pretence of worshipping this Infant (so as yet) to tell them, how and where they may destroy it, in its first appearances, least it live and reyn them out of the saddle; and this they hope to do by murthering the children of Reason; but in vain, though as yet true Reason is counted the Traytor to the acted Forms. Seventhly, Reason restored to latitude and liberty, will ride7. Corol. in triumph in the spirits of men, and draw all forms after her,
as her Vassals, Subjects and badges of her conquest and domini∣on: and in trophie of triumph, Reason shall sit in her Majesty on the Throne as Sovereigne, and Lady-Law in command. And then an Aristotle acknowledges .Aristotle. Then the Law rides triumphantly, when its filled with reason; and then reason will call corrupt forms and Interests to account, as guilty of much innocent and precious blood. It is not the principle, but the domineering form which must be brought to the Bar for the greater Persecutor and Tyrant, and☞ engine of destruction, who with a Wolfe-like nature, tears a peeces the Lamb-like appearances of Equity, Truth, and Reason. Now that time will be glorious indeed, when Righteousnesse and Truth shall possesse mens hearts, and when the principle shall be restored in a civill reference, as well as in a spirituall: (says Mr. War) thenWarr. shall be the triumph, and the tumbling of all tyrannical forms and Laws in Church and State. 8 When this principle is restored, the Lord alone will be ex∣alted. Corol. in that day, and wee shall stand on even ground, in a per∣fect level, as to selfish Interests or Forms, and one shall be equalThe right Le∣veller. with another in Justice and Law. Without this principle of rea∣son men are degenerated, dethroned, and Nebuchadnezzar-like turned among the Beasts; which whilst a rationall man, who hath this principle cannot indure, he meets with roaring Buls and Beares ready to tear him in peeces; but God will deliver him out☞ Suarez. of the Den of Lyons, who would have with Suarez, omnia prae∣cepta (both as to principle and conclusions, or Laws thence) a Des auctore naturae, all Laws of God, according to this principle of reason▪ which are then (and not else) binding in foro conscientiae, in conscience. And for explication of this, Hierocles and Pythgo∣ras doe both utter these words. .Hierocles Pythagoras. To obey right Reason, and to bee perswaded by it, is to obey and bee perswaded by God himselfe &c. And Socrates had such like sayings often in his mouth .Socrates. It does not behove a rationall man to be perswaded by any thing but by right Reason, that hath the seale of God upon
it; so that, as this Principle is exalted, the Lord will be exalted with it, and by it in the State. Ninethly, Because Reason is not the perfectest Principle of all,9 Corol. and because ratio humanae non potest participare ad plenum dictamen rationis divinae, sed sue modo & imperfectè, humane reason cannot partake of a perfect plenary measure of divine, there∣fore the Spirit of God is given to some to perfect that principle for the Lords worke and use, as will be abundantly in these last ages;☜ ow the fuller reason is of divinity, the more perfect and absolute it is. Divine Reason is the eternall Law of Government in the supream Law-giver and Governor; therefore all reason of Go∣vernment, and Laws in inferior Law-givers, ought to be de∣rived and received in speciall manner from this eternal Law of God which standeth and abideth for ever. Tenthly, Not Persons, but Principles are to make, determine,10. Corol. define, and refine Lawes; so that we are not to be ruled by the Arbitrary wils of Judges or Law-givers, but by Reasons; Hence it is the Power, or the Principle that we are in subjection unto, and not the person simply; so that the highest Treason and Rebellion is against Reason it selfe: and we may obviously judge then of the Lawyers in this sence, as the veriest Traitrs that are in the☜ 1 Tim. 1. 10. world; and ere long this Principle will recover and become Law to every man; for other Laws are made for the disobedient, saies the Apostle, that is, such as obey not this principle; so that such a Leveller as aimes at the principle, is an honest man; Its mans de∣clining from the principle makes him like the Horse or Mule, that needs to be restrained by curb, bit, or bridle, Laws and Mulcts. Eleventhly, In the absence of this principle, the greater light11. Corol▪ guides the lesse, and men submit to better understandings; and hence humane Interests and Factions prevaile amongst men, and some mens persons are had in admiration, and made Idols of, and worshipped: the nescience of the Principle endungeons us in civill darknesse, and makes Idols of Formes. Tis true, the injunctions of Forme, pretend to be a Kin to Reason, but whilst wild men weild them, or they be bent or bowed to serve some mens designes, humors, lusts, and passions, they become abo∣minably corrupt; and then he is the honest man, that is rationall,
a friend to the state, and desirous of its good indeed, that holds to the first principle; yea, call him what you will, yet he will be found faithful to that God, that will break the Iron yoke, and go forth in great indignation against Tyrant-forms and Laws, which have usurped the throne of Reason, and taken away her honor. For this end hath Reason so great controversie against the Laws and Civil Forms, and God himself is on Reasons side: Yet for orders, or necessities sake, we grant some reverence to be given to the Form, so Reason be not robbed; but the truth is; the Sons of Reason are but few, (as yet) and they are under persecution, by reason that the Forms are many, and backed by many, and give☞ protection to none but their own followers, that brutishly yeeld subjection to them; and the less reason is with them, the more they hurt and tyrannize. Twelfthly and lastly, As the principle arises, the Laws are al∣tered;12. Corol. for manifestum est quod verbo humano potest & mu∣tari lex, & etiam exponi, in quantum manifestat interiorem mo∣tumTho. Aquin. & conceptum rationis humanae, Tho. Aq. 1. 2ae. 97. 3. 0. But to be clear, Laws are of two sorts. 1. Such as are the results of humors, designs, corrupt passions,1. Laws Lusts. and lusts of men, tending to establish them and their greatness: Law in this sence is nothing else but will, custom, lust, and power of men; and is as corrupt as those that made it: What are Oaths? Advouchons? Fealties? Homages? &c. and many other badges of slavery? but the bare issue of their own great∣nesses and lordlinesses, and to establish them therein? yea, and other Laws that seem fuller of reason, yet they are, according to the Interpreter or Judge, made corrupt presently. Thus Form hath got up in the room of principle, and lust, and will, and hu∣mors of great men, in the room of Reason; insomuch, that many times Reason is made the offender, and criminal thing, yea, and☞ oftentimes condemned by form, lust, will, or passions, and designs of great men, yea, and sometimes too charged with Disobedi∣ence and Rebellion against the State; and so will be, till innocency appears and triumphs, and then the light of reason will shew the error, and lay the very same faults at the door of form, and of mens humors, and lusts, which oppose Reason and Right; and then it will be obvious, that the Judges, Lords, and Lawyers,
that sit and condemn, do condemn the just, when they do most deserve to stand at the Bar, and to be condemned for judging and censuring Reason to suffer; being it is they, that do contrary to that rule, Rom. 13. Let every soul be subject to the higher☜ powers. Now Reason is highest, though corrupt Laws and Law∣yers, and lusts of men would make her lowest and least. But secondly, other Laws that be in appearance more rational,When Laws are, and are not to be obey∣ed. and for common good and safety, yet when the observation of them (Fit damnosa communi saluti, non est observada) is made obnoxious to common good, we are then to obey the Law and Light of Nature. To instance, a City is besieged by a potent enemy, wherefore allSim. the Ports and Gates are by the Law required to be kept shut, and not one to be opened, and this is for the publick good; but the siege being raised, the enemy gone, and danger over, this Law must be altered, because it is no longer for publick good; but it is ob∣noxious☜ to the publick, not to open the Ports and Gates to trade in and out: Now, and in such a case, if the Law be not changed, why then contrary to the Letter of the Law, the Publick Liber∣ty and Priviledges must be preserved. Some men know what I mean by this instance. But one instance more. After the conquest of William, were Courts and Terms established at Westminster, and to the disad∣vantage of the Publick, the Law was taken from their own doors, and in their several Counties, where they might have had justiceTerms down, and why? for a little matter, and in a few days controversies determined; but all this was altered to advantage the Darling of Prerogative and Royalty, which they preferred before the common good, and therefore forced men to their great charges and expences, to Post to London, and to take long journeys, and attend many years (it may be) in Suits of Law, and lose all at last: But now the case is altered, seeing Prerogative that was so nursed up, is now down; for the publick good it ought to be then, that Law and Justice should be in all Counties again, and at every mans door, as was before; and these ungodly Terms and Westminster Courts beJustice is a Leveller. down, and equal Justice be done to all alike with a level hand to rich and poor; otherwise there is a Darling yet, which is more preferred then the publick. But I will say no more as yet to that;
onely this, That all the Demetriusses of this Diana begin (al∣ready) to cry out for fear, at the change of their long established forms, (whereby the publick hath been inslaved) and whereby they have made gain, by great fees and extortions; so that the day of the Principle, and Equity is terrible to them, and a Lil∣burn is as bad as a Tiburn to them. These twelve Corollaries drop out from the light and law of nature; so that, Nos legem bonam â mala nullâ alia nisi natu∣ralinormâ dividere possumus, &c. By that Law we discern andM. Antoninus. divide betwixt good and bad; and because as the Emperor M. Antoninus said,  are e∣quivalent; the Law of Nature, the Law of Nations, and the Law of God, require reason, i. e. The principle to have the preheminence of all humane Laws whatsoever, and that for these Reasons too. 1. Because this Light of Nature, i. e. Reason and clear un∣derstandingReas. 1. Light of na∣ture is a certain light. of things rational, is a lumen certum, such a light as makes a clear and certain discovery of things within its sphere. There were a sort of Academicks and Scepticks, who had this Motto, , I cannot comprehend or reach; and indeed onely God himself can perfectly,  an object; their radical principle was but , to hold every proposition in aequilibrio, in equal ballance, and that there was an , an equilibrity of reason for the affirmation or negation of any opinion or perswasion. But this is a black error, yea, a heresie of an irreconciliable antipahy against Reason, and the light of nature; which gives a certainty of knowledge in things rational, which first peeps out in sence, but shines in the understanding as bright as noon-day. And yet I assert, that God the eternal entity, that  must needs be the Fountain of certainty. But reason (though her colour goes and comes in motu & fluxu, sayes Culverwel,) yet in her sphere sees certainly, and deals faithfully with men; therefore mens Laws must be made by this, and this Reason be a Law above all humane Laws. 2. It is a lumen tranquillum, a quiet light, and the want ofReas. 2. A calm peace∣able light. this causes much contention and quarrelsomness; were this light
but followed, or reasons voice regarded, it would stop many a suit, compose many a difference, sheath many a sword, quench many a flame, cure many a wound, comfort many a soul, and stay much blood, dispel much jealousie, sullenness, and suspition, and what not? In the dark men are foes with friends, and friends with foes, and they fall out, and cannot tell for what; but when Reason comes, Passion is rebuked, breaches are soon made up, and all verboyling lusts of men scummed away, which are (as the Orator sayes) averse, a rectâ ratione, and contra natu∣ram. 3. It is a lumen jucundum, a sweet, pleasing, and chearful3. A sweet plea∣sant light. light, . Reason is the smiling light of nature, and her crown of Roses; the very frowns and supercilious threat∣ning brows of nature, in many cruel, and (almost) unnatural Laws, are hereby paved, levelled, and pared away, and turned into pleasing looks upon the poor as well as rich, without respect of per∣sons: And thus the dark dismal night is chased away into a lovely, ightsome, and welcome day. 4. It is a lumen dirigens, a light for the feet, the ,4. A guide or leading light. the guiding and directing light. Hence Schoolmen call Reason the Principium movens omnium actuum humanorum, the moving principle; therefore this principle is to be preferred: Would not one that is lost in a dark night, be glad of a Candle? 5. It is lumen derivans, or , lumen à lumine, a5. A light de∣rived of di∣vine. derivative light, it is but scintilla divinae lucis, a Beam of the Body, or a borrowed excellency of Divine Reason. So that God himself is the Eternal spring and Head of reason; and hence it is that the light of faith, and light of reason, will both shine in one heart; and Reason uses such a prospective-glass to discover, amplifie, and approximate some amiable objects. Now seeing Reason is derived from the most Divine Principle, it ought to be regarded and preferred, because in time, Isa. 60. 19. shall be made good. 6. It is lumen ascendens, an aspiring, growing light, as Prov.6. An aspiring light. 4. 18. The light of an upright man shineth more and more, to the perfect day. In every age Reason reaches higher, therefore in every age the Laws should be corrected and pared away from all
self-seeking interests, according to the measure of Reason, while☞ ought to be most of all regarded, as the standing rule. But if  be thus, let us make this use. Use. Let no man hide his light under a bushel, but out with A Call to our Countreymen, to let out the light of reason for the reform∣ing of Forms and Laws a∣gainst Reason. for the publick good, and benefit of the whole Civil firmament  it is contrary to the nature of true light to be kept up, and  reason to coop it up▪ Nothing makes man more useful as to  then reason; and to cabbin it up, is the way to coffin it up▪  limit it, is the way to lose it▪ Therefore for shame Friends!  Countreymen! can we be idle? Let us bring out Reason to  form all Forms and Laws that are against Reason; and this  openly in publishing, printing, and discoursing. Obj. This is the way to be hanged for our Reason; what brougtObject. Sir Walter Rawleigh to his untimely end, but his too much rea¦son and understanding? And so others are thereby brought tamper with Laws, and the State, and (it may be) lose their li for it, under pretence of Traytors. Answ. It may be so; but let a man be called what you Answ. Who is the honest man. because he prefers Reason, as the principle of the Law, yet  an honest man. 2. It is Satans design (in civil affairs as well as spiritual)  blur and blemish the most serviceable and faithful men,  naucious and nocuous terms, to render them odious to the wo and then to cut them off whiles there is none to pity them. 3. He is the greatest enemy to common good, and traytor thWho is the greatest enemy and traytor. can be, that betrayes his Reason, and becomes a slave to enforce Forms and Laws of men, that are tyranny and oppression, and  gainst Reason. Object. But Humane Laws do bind the Conscience to obedi¦ence.Object. Answ. It is true, if they be just and honest, they do, as Answ. 8. 15. By me they decree justice; but if they be dishonest, and  just, and inconsistent, with a rational principle, they do not. Laws are said to be unjust two ways: First, When they Laws unjust, how and when? contrary to humane good and welfare; and this is two ways  1. Ex fine, when they be burthens, and hinderers of common1. When contrary to humane good. good and benefit, and rather tend to advance some private goo and selfish interest of great persons, or the like. 2. Ex form
when they are dispensed, dispersed and executed by an uneven and unequal hand, for though they tend to the publick good, yet they may be unjustly executed, and so made yoakes and burthens to some above others; so that then they are flaws not Laws, magis violentiae sunt quam leges, and as Aug. de lib. arbit. l. 1. c. 5, LexAugustin. esse non videtur, quae justa non fuerit, unde tales leges non ob∣ligant in foro conscientiae, &c. Such Lawes are not binding the conscience to obedience, but it is a greater sin to obey them, and dis∣obey Reason; then it is to obey Reason, and disobey them. Secondly, Lawes are unjust when they are contrary to divine2. When contrary to divine good, Use. good, and such especially are to be disobeyed, Act. 4. 19. for God is to be obeyed before men. Lastly, Remember your reasonable service to God, and certainly, honest, just men may upon a civill or rationall, as well as a religious score, be said to suffer for God, and with the wit∣nesse of a good conscience, 1 Pet. 2. 19. And this is thank-wor∣thy if a man for his conscience towards God suffer griefe, wrong∣fully.Martyrs in State-Mattars, and on Civill accounts. This the Lord looks on and owns, and crowns in our suffer∣ings upon a civill account as well as otherwise. So that many that have been by corrupt Antichristian State-Lawes put to death for their opposition and disobedience to such unreasonable Formes will be found faithfull ones, yea, and Martyrs too, in that day of the Lord. For though the Forme promises protection to its own Fol∣lowers, yet the lives of others that prefer Reason must be sacri∣ficed, and their blood poured out to quench the flame and fury of enraged Formes and unreasonable Laws. Object. But we are bid to obey the Higher Powers. Object. Answ. Answ. True, as wee said before, in things honest and just: But,1. 2. 2 Those that despise this Principle, and so highly prize, and prefer the forme, they oppose the higher Powers, and speak evill of dignities. So that by this Law of God, many condemned for Traytors and Rebels by their Judges, may be justified, and their Judges themselves be condemned for Traytors to true Reason, which is the highest Power. Wherefore in a word, will we live like men? make use of the light of Nature among men; and sit not still, till the Laws be re∣gulated☜ by Reason, as the Principle of them.
Quest. Who should do it? Quest. Answ. Answ. They that have power to make them, have power to mend them, Now condere legem to make a Law, or to ordi∣nare aliquid in bonum commune, to ordaine any thing that tendsWho are to make and mend Lawes to the publick good, is either done by the commonalty (as we cal it) or by some that represent them, as appeares in the next Chapter. Hence saies Isidorus in l. 2. c. 1, Etym. Lex est constitutio populi,Isidorus. secundum quam majores natu simul cum plebibus aliquid sanx∣erunt. Therefore let all the free-borne English look out for rea∣son, and prefer the principle above all formes, yea, above all per∣sons, but to that at last. Thus to conclude, the Laws which we call for, are such as firstWhat Laws we would have. flow from the Law and Light of Nature. Secondly, for the publick and common good. Thirdly, made by such as represent the publick Commonalty. 4▪ As directive and Rules to humane actions. Hence saies Suarez, Lex est mensura quaedam actuum morali∣um,Suarez. ita ut per conformitatem ad illam, rectitudinem moralem habeant, & si ab illa discordent, obliqui sunt. And Plato inPlato. plaining of his politicall Idea's makes a graduall description of a Law by four steps. 1 He cals the Laws  things fitting, but for that this is too general. He cals a Law 2. , but lest anLaw of Sub∣jects defined. evill Law should be established by the multitude, he cals it 3. , where  is taken sometimes for  and at other times for . But 4. Laws he calls : Aquinas cals the Law an Ordinance of Reason for the promul∣gationAquinas of publick good, taking care of the publick; and such we wish for. And so saies Suarez too, Lex est commune praecep∣tum,Suarez. justum ac stabile, sufficienter promulgatum. the Law is a publick Precept, just and stable, proclaimed openly to all. These definitions we allow of, and such Lawes we account necessary to this Commonweale, 1. Wherein publick good, with olive branches1. to all is cheifly and solely intended. 2. Which flow from a cleare2. understanding and Reason,  &c.3. 3. Which carry life and vigor with them to work. And lastly,4. proclaimed and made known to all in a publick manner, very em∣phatically and sufficiently in their Native Language, and so as that
none may plead ignorance, and with this I conclude this Cha∣pter. CHAP. III. The right RISE and ORIGINAL of all good LAWS, and how the People have been robbed of their RIGHT to this day, with the INCOME of corrupt LAWS and LAWYERS, the true Rise of their Interest, Innes of Court, and Trades by sinne. And in order thereto, what it is the People expect from their Conqueror, the LORD GENERALL, and the Army. I Propose, yea, I purpose brevity in the followingThe People give the rise to their Laws. Chapters, having passed through the most mate∣rial of this discourse; but before we can go further, we must find out the Rise of good Lawes, which appears plainly to be from the People, who being most sensible of their own burthens are most ca∣pable of making Laws for their owne ease and welfare. CiceroM. Tull. Cicero. owns this in his Offices lib. 2. Cum premeretur olim multitudo ab iis qui majores opes habebant, statim confugiebat ad aliquem virtute praestantem, &c. Jus enim semper quaesitum est aequa∣bile, neque enim alitur esset Jus id si ab uno bono & justo viro consequebatur, eo erant contenti, cum id minus contingeret Le∣ges sint inventae, &c. When the poor people were oppressed by the rich ones, they presently made choise of some that excelled others in worth and wisdome to represent them, and when they obtained from some honest, just and good man, redresse of wrongs, they rested satisfied; but that failing they were forced to Lawes, and invented Laws for their liberty, not for their bondage or sla∣very. To this saies Isidorus l. 3. Etym. c. 21. Constituitur enimIsidorus. Communitas Cavitatis ex multis peris, &c. The Commo∣nalty
makes Lawes consisting of many persons that represent the publick, So saies Aug. de Civit. Dei lib. 2. c. 21. and lib. 22. c. 6: Nullus potest condere leges, nisi communitas, vel personae pub∣licae. vices ejus gerentes. So that it appears to any unprejudiced▪ and honest man that those Lawes which have in their bowels free∣dome, and honesty, do owe their homage to the peoples choise; A people rightly principled (as before) with Reason and Under∣standing are the proper originall (in that sence that Origo is a re ad rem,) and rise of rationall Laws which are laid out alto∣gether for the peoples rights, and Liberties, from hence we have these Observations. 1 Obser. Reason and Judgement goes before to create a capa∣city,Observ. 1. Freedome and Honesty follows after to execute and ful∣fill it. 2 Obser. Justice and Equity must be in men, before they comeObserv. 2. to be in the Lawes of men. 3 Observ. The rationall honest people in generall are theObserv. 3. true originall or rise of those Laws which they are Governed by. 4 Obser. The genuine intent of Lawes in their originall is toObserv. 4. curbe and keep in (principally) the Princes, not the People; the rich, not the poor; Oppressors, and Tyrants, not others of the people; To bridle Great ones who are most lawlesse, and to keep Governours within their due Precincts of just and righteous Go∣vernment. 5. Obser. True Laws as they arise from their originall, areObserv. 5. not to burthen, but to ease; to grieve, but to relieve; to hurt, but to helpe; to insnare, but to take care for peoples Liberties and Freedom. 6 Obser. As Laws cannot be made but by the peoples voice;Observ. 6. so a Judgement cannot be (rightly) executed, but by the peo∣ples concurrence: So that Sicut cogens aliquem ad aliquam, le∣gem non publicâ authoritate sancitam servandam injust è facit, ita quis alium judicans non habens authoritatem, vel usurpand sibi judicandi potestatem, graviter peccat; As to compel one to keep such Laws as are against the Liberties of the People, and have not their originall from the people is Tyranny and injustice; So to passe Judgement upon any one of the free-born people by an Usur∣ped
power, and not derived from the people, this is no lesse Ty∣ranny and Injustice. But all this while I speake of a rightly prin∣cipled, people that are in their capacity. Use 1, Where abouts are we then? as to the Laws and Law∣yers?Use 1. or whence had they their original? by what Rules do they proceed? And to the originall of the Lawes, first, we shall findOur Laws and Lawyers their original. (them) since the Norman Conquest, that the Lawes were a Nor∣man bondage, an Iron Yoake and Coller about the necks of the free-borne people to this day. For as Fortescue tels us, c. 17. Reg∣numFortescue: Angliae primo per Britones, deinde per Romanos, iterum{que} per Britones, deinde per Saxones possessum, extunc per Danos, iterum{que} per Saxones, sed finliter per Normanos, &c. This Nation hath been under divers Conquests, so that severall alte∣rations have thereby been made of the Laws, either in part or in the whole upon every Conquest, and if at any time the Conqueror continued any Laws which the people allowed of, it was for his own ends, to ingratiate himselfe into the people thereby, and yet to espouse his own Interest. For as one saies ch. 2. p. 6. of his Survey of English Laws, so some noble, and notable Theeves,Sim. doe (as Hinde the Robber) return back again some part of the moneys they take from the poor Travellers, to be the better thought of, and the lesse pursued. But this is certain the honest hearted Britains lost their Laws and Lands together, though theBrittains lost their Laws and Lands together. Saxons (and so the Normans after them) allowed of some of their Laws (after they were Saxonized) for their own ends. Now the rea∣son of all is, that the Conqueror was evermore carryed on by his own will and lust which he looked upon above the peoples Rights and Liberties, and meere force being partial, would never suffer a Jury of Freedome. Thus Will. the Conqueror altered some, and quite took away others of the Laws that were in Edward theWill. the Con∣queror Confessors time; which Laws were so allowed of, that Kent and other places would never have yeelded to him but on condition they should keep their own Lawes; But notwithstanding his in∣gagement to them, and his oath at his Coronation, he takes away those Lawes that were the peoples Priviledges, and at his ownHis perjury to set up Norman Laws and Law∣yers. pleasure makes Lawes, destructive to the peoples good and publick weale, only to advantage his own Interest, and promote Prero∣gative. By him, and the Saxons before him, our English civill
Laws were so barbarously razed up from their foundation, princi∣ple, and original, that we were made, and have so continued absolute Slaves to Great men; and whereas before, when the people were the rise of the Laws, they were wont to curb and controle the ex∣orbitanciesThe people made slaves. of Great ones, and were therefore principally intended, but now they are changed, and are made principally to enslave and oppresse the poore and commonalty or free-borne English, and to make them Vassals, and doe homage to great mens humors▪ Thus Great men got a latitude ore the free-born people, and could oppresse by law; and by the proudest Principles of self-Interest, and worldly Greatnesse, stand upon the pinnacle of power and ty∣ranny (yea, on tip-toes to be high enough) for men to fall down and worship them, in offering sacrifice to their lusts, and in do∣ing homage to their huge wils: Thus great men were followed as consonants follow Vowels, with obsequious flatteries, and com∣placentAnd Fools. compliances of the simple fellowes and servile spirits that have lived in the world before us, who easily adored these golden Images, and gave up their rights as they were the free-born peo∣ple of England) for a free will Oblation. O these Prodigall! and stupid white-livered people! It is pitty they were Englishmen!And Cowards. that would give that away for a word or good look from a King, Courtier, or Conqueror, which will cost much time and labour to recover. Obsequious and servile spirits are but faint and trea∣cherous Guardians of Englands just Rights and Priviledges:☞ Upon this advantage hath great mens Interests gotten in, and tip∣toed it over the people, when the poor silly people durst not but o∣pen the door at their knock, they could not do lesse then enter in, & shut us all out for Fools. And when once they had got the possessionLaws made to keep in slaves. of the Law, their first work was to secure themselves and their own Greatnesse by a guard of Laws against the Liberties and Freedom of the people; in so much that our Cannon being thus turned upon us, they charge us with thunderings, threatning of us for Tray∣tors and Rebels by the letter of their Lawes, if we but stir a step towards our Freedome; so that the Laws are forced to accuse, kill, and condemn their own Mother, and the best Friends they have in the world. Thus the Law became any thing or nothing at the☞ commands and courtesie of great men, for which I blame not such as were ravished of their Rights against their wils, when all their
ing and crying out for help (in corrupt times) could not save em from being deflowred. But it is folly upon a hill, to lose this r virginity, if it be possible to save it; and never was moreHopes of reco∣very. What William the Conqueror did, that Oliver the Conqueror is to undo, and how? pes of help, then now (the people being Conquerors) to get m under this Norman tyranny, if we cry aloud, and complain God and men; and in our applications to the Lord General, d the Parliament, we declare our wrongs, and call aloud and in∣ssantly for justice upon those villainous Laws that have ravished d robbed us of all our rights; ere-long (then) it may be all the  to question and sentence those Laws: Let us consider, but at William the Conqueror hath robbed us of, and then we all know what Oliver the Conqueror ought to restore us to, d re-invest us with, as our own; as 1. Whereas, the Laws, the free-born people that were rational,1. In the origi∣nal of the Laws. d in a capacity, were the Institutors of, by their Deputies or resentatives; William the Conqueror usurps that power, and eates all Laws in his name, and so ever since they have run in e Kings name, as in an orbe above the people, on purpose to rannize over the people: Hence sayes Philip Honor: Cum àPhil. Hon. ulielmo Conquestore, quod perinde est ac Tyrannus, institu∣ it leges Angliae, admirandum non est, quod solam princi∣is utilitatem respiciant, subditorum vero bonum desertum esse idtur. Seeing the Laws of England have been made by illam the Conqueror (and from thence the Tyrant) it is not to e wondered at, that they onely regard the Interest and Preroga∣ive of the King, and seem to relinquish the right and liberties  the people, and so not at all to favor or be-friend the freedom f the people. But this must be amended, for the interest of great es will byass the Law, till the people be reinfranchised, and ll there be no Laws but such as arise from the peoples voice. 2. Williams Conquest brought in Laws, with ▪the Norman2. The lan∣guage of the Laws. anguage and French Tongue, and least any Law should remain of the people) that would not fetch and carry for him, he com∣ands them all to speak Barbarism to them, in his own barbarous guage of broken French, i. e. not to be so much as understood  the poor people: So that ever since the people have been under aws they understood not, which is a grievous yoke and curse, as ut. 28. 49, 50, 51. appears, The Lord shall bring a nation
against thee, as swift as the eagle that flieth; a nation  tongue thou shalt not understand; a nation of a fierce co∣nance, which shall not regard the old, nor shew favor to the yo he shall eat the fruits of thy cattle, and the fruits of thy land, ∣til thou be destroyed. Thus William the Conqueror gave the Normans the chi possessions of the Lands, and he changed all the temporal Law the Realm, and ever since the Norman Lawyers pleaded causAgainst the Laws of God to be of strange Languages. an unknown tongue; this is contrary to the Laws of God and ∣ture, as appears Deut. 30. 11, 12, 13. This Law which I ∣mand, is not hid from thine eyes, neither is it far off: It  in Heaven that thou shalt say, who shall bring it to us? ne is it beyond the Seas, but it is near thee. Gods Laws to his ∣ple, were to be known, yea, the Politick Laws were to be  their own tongue, that none might say, we have not heard t nor known them, Rom. 1. 20. But they had it at the hand of M Deut. 6. 7. and were to teach it to their children, and talk of t at home and abroad, when they walked by the way, and  they rose up and lay down; yea, the Heathen abhorred such ∣ness and brutishness, as to enslave the people under unknown ∣guages, Esther 8. 9. Then were the Kings Scribes called i third moneth (Sivan) on the twenty third day thereof, and  Law was written to every Province, and to every people  their Language; and to the Jews according to their Wri and their Language. The very Heathen had so much equity reason; therefore in Edward the third his time the Laws Edward the third. commanded to be Englished, and no more Pleas to be in Fr or Latin. And honest Vespasian, as soon as he was Emperor, ∣sentlyVespasian. commanded all the Laws to be written legbly▪ in B that none might plead ignorance in any one of them; but that  people might all understand their Liberties and Laws; and ∣fore it hath been ever the policy of Usurpers and Tyrants, to  people ignorant of their Laws and Freedoms. But are we not What the peo∣ple hope for. delivered? beleeve it, the people cannot do less then expect their Laws to be abbreviated and Englished, and not one  Plea, or Proces, to be but in English; and that, not like CaligCaligula. who upon the peoples out-cry of this tyranny, caused the La be brought openly and set up for all people to know it; but
r his own Interest, to keep the people in ignorance, and to en∣reTyrants would have people ignorant of their Laws. them under tyranny, out of policy he appoints it to be writ in so small a letter, as few could read it, and to be set up so high, as few could reach it. This policy appeared in the late Parlia∣ment ordering of the Law to be Englished, but yet in a mystery too: This policy must be questioned and condemned to death, for the peoples Laws are to be open and known by all; and this right they hope to be restored unto by my Lord Cromwel, as the peo∣ples Conqueror; not as the Norman did, to divide the best Lands, and Mansions, and Mannors of the Nation, to his Na∣tives☜ and Souldiers, which was an undeniable argument of self∣seeking, and of an interest that will be broken apeeces in due time; but to deliver up the peoples Laws and Liberties in their own Lan∣guage. This God and Nature requires, else it will prove destru∣ctiveWhat will be destructive to the Common∣wealth. to the welfare of this Commonwealth. 1. That the Free Commoners be kept blinded and ignorant,  to their own Interests and Priviledges, which are theirs by1. Ignorance of the Laws. free birth-right. 2. To be constrained from all parts round the Nation to come2. Terms at Westminster. to Westminster for justice, or right by Law. 3. To be orced to put out their Causes to corrupt Lawyers, to3. To buy the Law of Law∣yers. plead and censure them, and to make merchandize of them, and of the Law. 4. To wait there for justice four, five, six, eight, or ten years4. Delay of Justice. in Law, till the Norman Lawyers have made themselves rich by removing suits out of one Court into another, and by retarding of justice, to the ruine of the Client. Now certainly God will in due time deliver his people out ofDeliverance is promised and expected. this tyranny and slavery, and proclaim Liberty to the Captives that are kept in darkness and misery, under the ignorance of their own rights and priviledges; which is a grievous curse to us, as appears Deut. 28. 49, 50, 51, 52. Jer. 5. 15, 16, 17. And if the Lord make not the General (as his peoples Conqueror) faithful to them herein, it will light sadly on some of this Generation; but yet his people shall be delivered, as Esther 4. 14. For it is one of our priviledges promised us, that we should be restored unto, in these latter dayes, as Isa. 33. 19. among the most excellent pri∣viledges Gods people must partake off, as freedom from bribes,
oppressions, blood, &c. Vers. 15. is, Thou shalt not see a fierce people, a people of a deeper speech, then thou canst perceive; of a stammering (or ridiculous) language (as such is the Lawyers Latin and Norman) that thou canst not understand. Antichrist☞ in the State, hath kept the poor people in darkness too, under an unknown language, and made this ignorance the mother of their devotion to his Civil Worship and Ordinances. But it is now high-time to tumble, seeing Gods Israelites are to have his LawsPolitick Laws in our own Language, and why? (viz. Political) in their own language, Deut. 30. and that for these ends. First, That they should be in the mouths of all the people,1. whereas now they are onely in the mouths of Judges, Lawyers,☞ Councellors, who are indeed Concealers of the Law, and lock  up till a silverkey come to open. Secondly, That they might teach them to their children, 2. know them; which they cannot do now the Laws are in an un∣known language, unless their children be brought up at Inns of Court, or the like. Thirdly, That the Laws might be all writ upon Posts and3. Gates; for the people generally to know them all; but now they must go to the Records which lie at Westminst, or Inns of Court, or Judges, or Counsellors Chambers, and give a good sum of money too, before they can come at them, so as to know them. All this is tyranny and oppression, diametrically in opposition toTyranny! the Word of God, the promises of these latter days, and the liber∣ties of the Subjects; so that our expectations must not be fru∣strated of our freedom from this Norman bondage. 3. Whereas the people had Justice and Law at their own3. Law and Justice at every door in every County. doors in every County and Hundred in this Nation, and their Law was plain and honest, and Controversies soon decided in few dayes by their honest neighbors of the Hundred, who making☞ the case as their own, administred justice presently; were it for a thousand pounds, it might have been recovered at the charge of a shilling or two; for there were several Courts in every County, but the Supream Court in the County was called Genrale Placitum, being to determine those differences which the Parish or the Hun∣dred Courts could not decide; and also to ordain Sheriffs, and
other County-Officers, &c. But the Conqueror William alters theHow Terms came in at Westminster. Law in this, takes away the peoples liberties herein, and instead of this, he sets up Courts and Terms at Westminster, takes away all Law and Justice out of the Counties, and to keep up his own Darling under his eye, brings all up to him hither by a policy. For he commanded nine men out of every County to be chosen, to make a true report what their Laws were before the Conquest; and after they had so done, he changed the most of them, and brought in the Customs of Normandy in their stead, command∣ing causes to be pleaded, and all Matters of Form to be dis∣patcht in French. He revived again the Danish Custom (he beingHow the Jury of twelve men came in. a Kin to the Danes) in Tryals of Rights by twelve men; so that for his own ends and profits, it appears all his Laws were establish∣ed, and the peoples pulled away from them to this hour. Hence the peoples freedom in their Gemote or Monethly convention for Law and Justice at their own doors, was rent away from them, as appears in the History of three Norman Kings, pag. 98. AndHow Councels of State, Chan∣cery Court, &c. came in. William the Conqueror ordained (says the History) his Councel of State, his Chancery, his Exchequer, his Courts of Justice, &c. These places he furnished with Officers, and assigned four Terms in the year for determining of Controversies among the people; whereas before, all Suits were summarily heard, and determined at home in their own Counties, and in every hun∣dred,Tyranny and slavery, where in. without Formalities or delays. Now it is highly incum∣bent upon this present Power, and his Excellency the Lord Gene∣ral, to redeem the free-born oppressed people from this Tyranny and servitude; and that it is such a tyranny and bondage, will ap∣pear several ways. 1. In that, by this injury done the free Commoners, they are1▪ Their op∣pression and misery, for right and justice. forced to come up to London, from all parts of England, and to wait at Westminster at great charges and expences, during the four Terms, for Right and Justice, or recovery of their own; which attendance on the Lawyers, is well known to be lamentably charg∣able:☜ For though the poor Commoner, that lives threescore or a hundred miles off, could before for a little matter, in a day or two at furthest, have had justice and right at home; Now he must wait long and lamentably, till he make himself poor, and his Lawyer rich, before he can recover his own; and I know them
that have been beggered and undone by it; for they not onely car∣riedTheir long and chargable journeys to London. up to Westminster full purses, and brought home empty, but they have been forced to borrow money at London besides that, to suffice their Lawyers, and to bear their charges home again, with weeping eyes▪ which brought them upon their knees, and made them to work hard night and day with sweat and tears, till their fingers ends aked again; to get up some more money to fee their Lawyers for the next Term, and to finde their long journeys to Westminster again, and yet were compelled for all that, to borrow again and again at London, before they could get home; and if this be not oppression and wrong to the people, what is? 2. The bondage of it is further, for the delaying to do right,2. Delays Whereas be∣fore, all Causes of Controver∣sie were fully and truly deter∣mined in fif∣teen days at farthest, in Mirror of Just. fol. 8. when not a moneth, nor twelve moneths, nor twelve years (some∣times) will be enough for a Lawyer to remove actions out of one Court into another; from one place to another, to enrich himself, and undo his Client; nay, threescore years have some been tor∣mented and hurried out of one Court into another; put to charges, paying fees, preferring Petitions, retaining Counsellors, and yet continue in that bondage and misery. I know many who are in Law, and some have been six, others ten, others twelve, others twenty, others thirty, others forty, others fifty years, and yet as far from help, relief, and right, as at first. O what crying and com∣plaining☞ of this delay of Justice is in our streets! notwithstanding many Statutes to the contrary, as that of Edward the third, An. 2. cap. 8. in these words, That it shall not be commanded, nei∣ther by the Great, nor little Seal, to disturb or delay doing right; and although such commands come, yet the Judges should not cease or delay to do right in any point. So An. 20. of Ed∣ward the third, cap. 1. That all Justices do right to all people, not having regard to rich or poor, without being let and hinder∣ed: Yea, it is accounted a Maxim (sayes Markham) that the Law hates and eschews delays; and see but Magna Charta, Chap. 29. We sell no man, we deny or delay no man justice and right. Many other Statutes command right to be done to all men without delay, as 22. H. 6. 40. a. v. 2. C. 25. Stat. Glocest. c. 2. and they are sworn to it too, 2 Edw. 3. c. 2. 28Vide Captain N. Burts appeal from Chance∣y, pag. 9. Edw. 1. cap. 0. 4 Inst. 109. but to no purpose, for they are as slippery as an Eel (and make nothing of an oath, as will appear
afterward) whiles they think fourteen, eighteen, or twenty years not long enough to delay justice, but still must be new Motions, new Petitions, new Orders, new Reports, new Demurs, new Deceits, and new Delayes, on purpose to vex and weary the Plain∣tiff with new Fees, and to undo the poorer sort of people that cannot follow. If this be not injustice, tyranny, and oppression, wronging and robbing the poor of their Right and Liberties, what is? 3. It is a bondage, for that hereby the price of Justice and3. Justice bought at too high a rate. Law, and of recovering of a mans own, is too high for a poor man, he cannot pay for it, and is thereby oftentimes forced to lose it; for that the mercenary Clerks and Lawyers can, as they list, raise the market of their Fees to a great rate, or else delay their orders, or the like. The poor oppressed pay for all. I know anExample. So Mr. Ch. dealt with one Henshaw, bor∣rowed all his money, then kickt him out of doors, then clapt him up in prison, and by eeing the poor mans Lawyers, kept him there. The late Act of Parliament worth nothing. honest man that lent a Lord his Master (a great Swash) a sum of money upon a sudden, but after some years, seeing his great master refused to pay him, he told him then he must make use of the Law; which the Lord no sooner heard, but sent for a Writ, arrests the poor man, and without Declaration for what, got him into prison, and all to prevent the poor mans suing for his own: by corrupt Lawyers and large Fees, he kept him in Newgate many years, till he was igh starved, rotted, and stunk to death. So that the poor man must lose justice, because he wants purse enough to pay for it; and a Plea upon the late Act for one not worth five pounds, was not worth five farthings. The Lawyers are such Juglers. Thus for these and divers other Reasons, this murthering and bloody tyranny requires quick relief from these delayings, charges, deceits, and fees, turnings, windings, and intricacies of the Law. Wherefore with full eyes are the free-born people of England expecting their return out of captivity in this also, by my Lord Cromwels (their Conqueror) means: So that Justice, and plainJustice desired to be had at home. honest Law may be had (as was before William the Tyrants time) at their own doors, and in their own streets, in every Coun∣ty and Hundred in England, which would much inrich the peo∣ple, and keep the more money in their purses to pay taxes with,☜ and the like; the which doubtless (then) they might do without murmuring. Therefore down with Terms, and such Tradings
of Lawyers at Westminster, and spread Law and Justice allDown with Terms and Westminster Courts. bout the Nation. Object. Thereby many would have but little trading. Answ. 1. Little the less for that, because the successive Re∣presentativesObject. Answ. at Westminster would keep it up, and thereby the City would be frequently full of people from all parts. 2. People, when they come up to London, will have the more1. Trading would not be lost by it. money to buy Commodities, then now they have, seeing the Lawy∣ers are such Money-suckers, and Purse-soakers; but 3. Let not people be deceived, so as to think the promises and2. priviledges which we expect in all the changings and turnings of3. times, tend to set up better trading for the world; for all the earth shall be shaken, and reel like a drunken man; but as the King∣doms of the world become Christs, so tradings will become mostly a trading for Christ and his Truth, and a taking off of the old world, looking for the blessed hope and glorious appearing of the great God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ. 4. Whereas before the Conqueror William (in Edward the4. From Tri∣bute and Taxes. Confessors days) the people lived in much liberty and freedom from taxations, and tribute; yea, Edward the Confessor freed them from Dane-gilt, which the people before payed, being at least forty thousand pounds. But the Greedy Tyrant, William the Conqueror did contrary, and sought to enslave the people with cruel burthens (as we finde in the Summary of English Chroni∣cles, pag. 41.) He made enquiry what riches the people had,Vide The lives of the three Norman Kings, p. 91, 98. how many acres of ground were sufficient for one Plough by the year; how many Beasts to the tilling of one Hide; how many Cities, Castles, Farms, Granges, Towns, Rivers, Marshes, and Woods; and what Rent they paid per annum, &c. All which was put in writing at Westminster, and kept in the Kings Trea∣sury, in a Book called Dooms-day Book. And according to the Roll he imposed heavy Taxations, and squeezed out the at of the Land to himself. So in Acts & Mon. p. 173. he gave his Normans the cheifest possessions of the Land, and stripped the stoutest of the Nobility and Gentry of all. But now the people are high in expectation of ease and deliverance from heavy taxes, which hitherto have been gathered and required of necessity, for the use of the Commonwealth, and benefit of the free-born
people. But now they hope to have the bands of wickednesse loosed, Isa. 58. 6. And that their Conqueror Oliver the Lord Gene tell will set the oppressed free, and undo the heavy burthens, and ose them and deliver them from this bondage, which appears to bee so, for that Governors are limited by Gods word in Ezek. 48. 18. The Princes shall not take of the peoples inheritance by oppression, and thou shalt not steale, is a mortall com∣mand to Kings, Princes, Parliament, Armies &c. Exod. 20. 15. as well as to the poore oppressed people▪ Naboths Vineyard was his own Inheritance and propriety, which the King had nothing to do with by right; for as Bucan says de Magist q. 75, 76. 77. Di∣stinctio dominorum & propriet as possessionum est juris divini, jux∣taBucan. mandatum non furtum facies, &c. Distinction of dominion and propriety of possession is of divine right, according to the command thou shalt not steal: It is not said thou shalt not give or lend, or the like, but thou shalt not steal; for that no man can lawfully take a∣way the goods, or propriety of another. Saies Seneca l. 7. de benef. c. 4, 5, 6. Caesar hath the dominion of all things belonging toSeneca. him, but the propriety belongs to particular persons. As the Civi∣lians say, one may make claim to a House or Ship, but not to all the furniture, or lading in the House or Ship. Therefore it is injustice and tyranny for a William the Conqueror to command mens E∣states and Purses so, as against all. Law, Liberty of the Sub∣jects, and propriety of the Law to lay Taxations upon them a∣bove what they can beare, seeing that Subjects are not to bee dealt with as Slaves and Bondmen. But God himselfe in his Law to Kings, Deutr. 17. 15, 20. calls his people his brethren, and so David did own them for his Brethren, 1 Chron. 20, 2. and so one Bartolus a famous Lawyer in Tract. de regim. Civit. says, Sub∣jectsBartolus are to be held and used by Kings and Governors in the qua∣lity and condition of Brethren and not of Slaves; so that our Go∣vernors, and the General, must use and ease the free-born English∣man as their Brother. Fiftly, Wil. the Conqueror brought in another Iron Yoak which the5 From Fines and homage &c. to Lords of the Mannor. people call for ease from, and that appears in p. 99. of the History of the lives of the three Norman Kings. That in all those Lands Wil∣liam the Conqueror gave to any man (as he did much give away to the Normans, yet this covetous Tyrant) he reserved domini∣on
in cheife to himselfe, for the acknowledgement whereof, a year rent he caused to be paid unto him, and a Fine whensoever th Tenement or Land did aliene or die; these were bound as Cli∣ents to him by oath of fidelity and homae; and if any died who Heir was in his minority the King (Conqueror) received the pro∣fits of the Land; and was his Guardian til the age of one and twenty▪ This bandage of slavery is great, & though it is in part taken aw by the fall of the Court of Wards, yet there remaineth a very gre Tyranny under such as are called Lords of the Mannor, for eve since (says Holinshed) as Lords and Great ones, have held this Holinshed. the King, so also have inferior persons and the poorer sort of peo∣ple held this of their Lords, and in case of disobedience the proprit∣ly does revert. Hence came Lords of the Manor, Landlord, Tena Holds, Tenures &c. which are all slavish ties and badges, orig∣nally grounded upon mer conquest and Power inslaving the people. Now, let us but consider the nature of this bondage; fo when thou that art a free Commoner hast bought a peece of Copy∣hold-land, and paid all to a penny for it of the Owner, and to farthing the full worth of it, yet the Lord of the Mannor (fo sooth) must have his Fine, or else you shall not have a foot of the Land, but hee will ceize on it▪ that never pald a penny for it. Nay more, if you leave it, though it be presently, another Fi fals upon it; or if you die, your poor Widow or Fatherlesse chil that is in need and comfortlesse must pay another Fine for it too, o a Herriot of the best goods left: which the Lord of the Manno must have, or else the Land be forfeited: O these arbitrary tyran∣nous customes! For as Jer. 5. 26, 27. Among my people a found wicked men: they lay waite as one that sets snares, th set a trap to catch men. As a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit, therefore they are become great and waxen rich. These grievous Laws are snares indeed. So that fo Fines and rriots, they covet Fields, Amos 4. 1. and take them by force; and houses and take them away, so they oppresse  man and his house; hear O yee kine of Bashan! which oppresse the poor, and which crush the needy, Amos 8. 4. These as the Prophet Isa 59. Turn Judgment backward, Equity cannot enter; and he that refraineth maketh himselfe a prey. These oppres∣sors takes pledges of the poore, which is forbid Jo 24▪ 9▪ and
they turne aside the needy from righteousnesse, and take away the right of the poor, that widows may be their prey, and that they may rob the Fatherlesse, Isa. 10. 2. Is it not time Fellow-Commoners to call for our freedome from this formality and lust of man? what are these Lawes but the direct issue of Ty∣ranny? and the badges of our slavery? shall rich men thus reign over us? and contrary to all Reason or rule of Righteousnesse thus oppresse the poor? and widows? and fatherlesse? and all with ealtie? Homages? Oaths? Fines, &c. What Law is this but Lust, and Will; Power, and Custome, which is insufferably corrupt and full of that Feminine which Juvinall speaks of▪ Sic vo∣lo, sic ubeo, sic pro ratione voluntas. This absolutenesse in some men over the persons and estates of others, is plaine Tyranny, and without Reason, which the ravenous Conqueror brought in, and will not our Religious and Rational Conqueror take it away then? Shall men (as the Psalmist says) Psal. 94. forge wrong, or frame mischief for a Law? God says plainly, they shall not op∣press the poor, and the widow, &c. Exod. 22. 22. Zach. 7. 10. and will not all the godly say so too? Then surely this Supream Power so called, i. e. the Parliament of England, had need to arise and redeem the people (who expect it) from this arbitrari∣ness and absoluteness of men who oppress the poor, fatherless, and widow, with this iron yoke of fines, rents, and herriots to Lords of Mannors, and the like, which was brought in by the lust, humor, will, pride, and covetousness of a Tyrant. Pure Religion visits the fatherless, and the widow,6, From the Norman Law∣yers. Sixthly and lastly, There is another, and that a most notorious servitude and misery which William the Conqueror brought the free-born people of England into, which by Oliver the Conqueror the people expect deliverance from, or else their lives will be but a burthen to them. This bondage is by Lawyers, for whereas before when the Law was delivered at our own doors, every man was heard to plead his own cause without Sollicitors or Attor∣neys, since▪ that, the Customs of Normandy were advanced by William the Conqueror, the Courts set up at Westminster, and the Laws commanded to be made, and causes pleaded in French,Lawyers their original. the poor Commoners must of necessity retain Norman Lawyers, seeing they themselves understood neither the Law nor Lan∣guage.
Thus the poor people were miserably abused, and forced to buy their Law, and come by their own at a dear rate, whilest Lawyers pleaded their causes, and at one tryal of a suit sucked up more money (may hap▪) then a poor man could get by his work,1. and labor in half a year. So that their rise may be ascribed, first, to the unknownness of the Law, in a strange tongue; secondly, to2. the intricateness and fallacies of it, whereby an honest plain man, was rendred unable to extricate himself; therefore he must have recourse to the shrine of the Lawyer, unless he have learned State-Jesuitism tricks, and quiddities, in some of the Inns of Court;3. and thirdly, the Terms at Westminster, whilest the Lawyer like the Roman, sets up his god Terminus for all the Country round,Terms. to fall down and adore. The common sort of Lawyers carry a head full of Idea's of right or wrong, and so can run on in a round o formulary of words to couzen poor simple people: I trust God will undeceive us. But as yet in King Williams time, the Lawyers interest (which from the first was grounded on corruption) was but a Jelly, a poor little puny thing: For one friend coming up to London to the Term, about his own cause, for a little matter (towards bear∣ing his charges in his journey) would appear, and plead something for his friends, or neighbors cause; so that it soon came to this, that he that was most versed in the tricks of the Law, and these Courts; would be desired by his Countrey neighbors about him, to undertake a journey to London, and to do their businesses too; and so, they would bear his charges, and give him some small re∣ward. Thus honestmen would get sometimes Parents, Friends, Bro∣thers, Neighbors, sometimes others to be (in their absence) A∣gents, Factors, or Sollicitors for them at Westminster, and as yet they had no stately houses or mansions to live in, as they have now (called Inns of Court) but they lodged like Country-menInns of Court, when, and how they began. or strangers in ordinary Inns. But afterwards when the Interest of Lawyers began to look big (as in Edward the third days) they got Mansions or Colledges, which were called Inns, and by the Kings favor had an addition of honor, whence they were called Inns of Court. Thus, those that came to be versed in the nities and forma∣lities
of the Norman Laws, every Term were employed by others of their friends in the Country, and found it sweeter then to follow the Plough; and as Controversies increased, they in∣creased in number, and took up their quarters, and by degrees☜ grew up into an orderly body, and distinct interest, as now they are; and after they were thus formed into a body, they hired the Temple of the Knights-Templers, for their abode together;The Temple. and as Contentions increased their Interest grew great, and by a long series of time, so great as it is now. What grounds the good people of England have to expect the fall of these Norman Law∣yers, and restauration of our Liberties and Freedoms as at first, by Oliver their Conqueror, will appear, first, from their rise and interest, secondly, our bondage, thirdly, their trade and practises (in sin.) To the first. 1. The rise of the Lawyers, was the will of a Tyrant, or an1. The Law∣yers rise and interest. Arbytrar ower, which was, and yet is a plague to the free-born people of England. 2. Their Interest comes from pride, strife, fulness of Broad,2. and prosperity. 3. It was at first but a bare title, and upon the ruines▪ of3. others, and by corruption it grew up to an interest, as it is now. 4. Their interest grows great by sin, as lying, cheating,4. wronging and robbing the poor, and making merchandise of the Law to the free-born people of England. 5. As their interest got up, they would suffer none to plead, or5. be a Lawyer, unless he were brought up in their Courts and Inns, in their trads, tricks, and cheats to sell the Law (at a large rate) to Chapmen (called their Clients,) so that the Law must be bought and sold before it be had. 6. This Interest taught them (ever since) to mize and6. ingross the Law, into their own hands, for their own gain and markets. 7. It is an Interest that regards no other, but its self, yea, and7. is resolved to promote its self, though it be with the ruine of others round about. 8. This corrupt tyrannical Interest for fear of a fall (knowing8. how wickedly it stle in, with robbery and ruine to the people; so
that it is a wonder it is suffered to stand all this while.) I say, for fear of a fatal blow, it doth back and barricado its self with se∣cular powers, and use all wiles to establish its own greatness; so as that the fall of it may be costly and chargable to the poor op∣pressed people. Thus from the rise and interest of the Lawyers, it is obvious to every rational capacity, what a necessity there is for the throwing down this dangerous and destructive order of the Lawyers, be∣fore we can be freed from slavery, tyranny, oppression, arbitrary will and power, and lusts of men; lying and cheating away our estates and liberties, and making merchandize of the Laws of England, and Justice. These must down, I dare ingage my life on it, before the people☞ can be quiet, or the Commonwealth flourish with Equity and Justice; all Objections to the contrary we shall answer by and by. Secondly, Our further grounds are from the peoples slavery2. Peoples sla∣very by them. under this tyrannical order of the Lawyers: For First, Let a man now seek the benefit of the Law, he shall1. lose it, and his right too, without the Lawyer be lustily feed for it, and this was not before the Norman tyranny; so that, as the Jews were (in Christs and the Apostls days) subject to the Romans, and could not have the benefit of their Law, but by the Romans; so the Commoners of England have been miserably abused to this day, by a company of cheating Lawyers, and cannot have the be∣nefit of the Law, but by these Norman Customers or Publicans, that sit at the receipt of custom. Secondly, The free-born Subjects of England, are under sla∣very2. by these Lawyers, in that they will allow o Advocates but of their own coat, (forgetting their own first original) to plead a cause: hich, I the more wonder, for that the Norman and Dane were so near a kin, that the Norman set up several of the Danish Customs; but (I beleeve purposely) he omitted this that King James mentions in his Star-Chamber speech, In some Countries (sayes he) as in Denmark, all their State is governed (onely) by a written Law; there is no Advocate or Proctor admitted to plead, onely the parties themselves plead their own cause, and then a man stands up and pleads the Law, and
there is an end. Surely this Custom had been borrowed of the☜ Danes too, but that for the Lawyers, who would lose their fees then. This made some of the eminentest of them, imagine me of a Lilburnian spirit! for that I would ever speak in my own cause, and in others honest causes too, and would hire no mercenary fel∣low of them all; but I have told their Masters and Lords several times, that I would have my liberty to plead my own cause, which I have done, and carried it too, against four Counsellors in f against me. But this made them most enraged enemies to me ever since; and such are afraid their markets must fall, if a man come once to plead his own or his fiends cause, which is our free∣dom to do: And we finde it was good Statute-Law in 28 Edw. 1. cap. 11. For mens friends, parents, brothers, or neighbors, to plead for them, without the help of a Lawyer. This must be a∣gain, ere the people can be quiet, or sit down under their own free∣dom; and then there will need no Solicitors, Agents, shirking☜ Cheats, and such alike mercenary train too at Committees; but an honest man shall tell his own tale, as Anaxilaus did in the Spar∣tan Senate, Diod. Sic. lib. 2. c. 37.Diodor. Sic. Thirdly, Let but Reason speak, and spight of all the World, it3. Lawyers. will appear, That the free-people cannot (either as rational, or as religious) be much longer able to abide this abominable Anti∣christian, and accursed tribe. 1. As rational; the people cannot spare them for their usur∣pation,1. Robbers. arbitrariness, and ambition, whereby they become (as to a free Commonwealth.) First, Robbers, who forcibly take away our rights, and as Augustine sayes in Lib. 4. c. 4. De Civ. Dei.Augustine. They are but a rapsody of free-booters; unjust possessors of other mens estates, that tear away our goods against our wills. Hence says Dr. Sutton, Lawyers are like the Mlt of a mans body, whichSim. Sutton. Laurentius says, never grows great, till all other parts of the body decay and perish. Thus were these Robbers reared aloft by the ruines of free∣born English-mens Rights and Priviledges; and who would not recover their stoln goods? Now as Antiochus was irnamed Hie∣raxOppressors. the Hawk; for that he had no estate, no patrimony left him, but preyed upon other mens estates and territories, and by rapine and robbing, picked out a Kingdom to himself. So certainly the
Lawyers are such ravenous wretches, that they wrong and rob any to make themselves rich, and like a dog, will try all right by their teeth, till they tear out a peece to themselves from every one they set upon; and as a poor woman, with loud language cryed out to Baldwin the Archbishop, O! O! you eat up my flesh! So mayActs & Mon. p. 230. many cry out against these ungodly Lawyers, Blood-suckers, and Robbers by Law. Secondly, They are Tyrants too, and such as no rational spirit2. Tyrants by practise, how? can long suffer. Ambition was their first Solicitor thereto, and that they are Tyrants, will appear many ways: For 1. They are ruled not by Reason, but Self-will, which prescribes1. no limits to their lawless affections and lusts, but run out into many out-ragious insolencies and tyrannies, which cannot be num∣bred, especially in the Countreys. For as an oblique angle diversifiesSim. its self into sundry species, so certainly their tyranny and injustice, according to the variety of accidents, have variety of actions, which without much difficulty cannot be deciphered; all arising from Lust, rather then Law. 2. These Tyrants hate and suspect wisemen most; and fearno2. opposition more then vertue, being conscious of their own vicious courses; so that those upright ears that grow higher then the rest of the corn, they cannot endure them; but they will keep them under, or behead them, especially where honesty and faithfulness make them more conspicuous then others; so that a rational well-grown☞ upright man, must be calumniated, and under some colourable pre∣text or other cut-off by them. I might instance in Sir Walter Raw∣leigh, the old Earl of Essex, and others since. 3. They like Tyrants cannot abide a conslux of rational3. Machiavil in principe. Counsellors; and they account these days dangerous to them, for that we have such publick Assemblies, Diets, or Parliaments, for fear some notably endued with Reason, should discover their rise, interest, and tricks, and so raze them out root and branch,Arist. l. 5. c. 11. Polit. for a pack of Cheats, Knaves and Tyrants, that will ruine the Commonweal. 4. Tyrants love Factions and Divisions, and so do these Law∣yers;4. for without brawls and bitter contentions, many of our busie Lawyers, (like the lunatick in the Gospel,) might walk with∣out cloaths; therefore as Solon said of their Orators, They wereSolon.
the winds which raised up the waves, so may it be said of our Lawyers; and such winds, like the Merchants of Lapland, they buy of the Devil; or else, if there be a fire kindled, they run to it, and will be medling with it, not to mend it, but to warm their own fingers. Thus are they like those dishonest Surgeons which lengthen out their cures. 5. As Tyrants they love to keep out of danger, and will have5. good guards, and disarm the people, throw down their Forts, and keep a formidable guard of rough strangers to aw the people, and pillage their purses. Thus, I say, the Lawyers have backed and guarded themselves excessive strong with many Laws, dis∣arming the free-born Englishmen of all, or most of their privi∣ledges and liberties, bringing in Norman and Danish Customs to oppress us, and guard them. 6. As Tyrants they leave no design unattempted to torment the6. people by fleecing them, and filling their own coffers: For like Butlers Boxes, they will be sure to gain, who ere loses, and toSim. grow great, as the Souldier said to Pompey, Per nostram miseri∣am. The truth therefore is (and let the Lawyers look to it) they☜ gather up wealth, and lick up riches, like a spunge to be squeezed out again; and as Demosthenes was wont to say, Such men are golden fleeces; their wool is not for themselves, but must be shorn off to cloath the Commonwealth with ere long. 7. As Tyrants they would seem vertuous and honest, the7. more easily to deceive such as trust them; and thus great ones like great Brass Pots, are not withstanding their bigness, carried about by the ears out of one Court into another, as the Lawyer lists, who hath in the Inns of Court been brought up in the art of lying and deceiving. They are crafty theeves, and know they cannot long live in that trade, without putting on some apparel, and exercising some parcel of honesty and justice; but it is at such a time, when the subtlety shall take much, and when like the Panther they allure with the savor of their words, their uglySim. visage is hid, till the poor deluded people come within their reach of being made their prey. Well, yet the Fox will be known by his tail, as in p. 26. of Solicitors, Clerks, Serjeants, Bailiffs,Dr. Featly Ser. p. 495. &c. for all their art. For though they fawn like Spannels, yet by
their snarling, grinning, and tearing, we know they are curs. And Lawyers look to it! For as the wily fox, once catched, hath hisSim. skin quickly plucked over his ears, wherewith every fool will☞ have his cap furred: So will you ere long, whose craft and cruel∣ty Colonel Pride himself abhors, and says, It will never be wellCol. Prides speech. with England, till mercenary Lawyers Gowns be hung up by the Scotish Trophees: And then every fool will have a fling. But 8. As Tyrants they give a breathing time to torment men8. afresh; and such Tyrants are the worst of all, as was Nero, Com∣modus, Tiberius, &c. See how men deal with their bottles, let∣ingSim. them stand under the tap till they be filled, and then they hang them up; and so have these done with the free Commoners of☞ England, and with the faithfullest Subjects; or as spunges are letSim. alone a while to lie a soaking, till they have sucked in some good store of water, and then they are squeezed out again; so do these Lawyers let men alone all their vacation time, till they can gather up more money for them, and then comes the Term to squeeze them dry again. And I am of opinion, meerly out of love to themselves here, that their vacation times (so called) were or∣dered,Vacation times, how or∣dered. as in Michaelmas Term, to end in  November, that the poor Countrey-man may go home again and thrash, and sell out his corn, to provide money for the following Hillary term, which in the eleventh moneth  called January, begins, and ends in the next month  Adr; and then the poor Farmer must home to put off his Cheese and Firkin-butter, and all he can to come to the Lawyer again by Easter Term; and because it is a dead time of the year, the vacation is the longer, until the second moneth following  Ziu, called April, which holds to the next moneth called May or Sivan , and then comes a Vacation time, until the next moneth of June , which is indeed very short, for that the Countreyman must have nothing to do, but to go home and shear his sheep, and make (with what speed may be) money of his wool, and to come Post up again to
supply his Lawyers pocket by Trinity Term, which ends in the same moneth too, to give the poor oppressed people a little breath∣ing, by a long Vacation, as they call it, for they think it too long; onely they know their Clients are plying it hard for them, and are following the Harvest, to have out their hard corn with the first, to make money, and all for a company of Norman Ty∣rants. These Lawyers (methinks) are much like the Beast calledSim. Rosomacha, of the bigness of a Dog, but his face is like a Cat, (the Emblem of Contention) his back and tail like a Fox (so we said before;) who useth, when he hath filled his paunch, as full as it can hold, to get betwixt two Trees standing together, and so by squeezing his belly between them, empties it; and then returns to his carrion again. And thus the greedy Lawyers, betwixt two Terms, squeeze all out to fall a fresh upon the oppressed peoples purses, and devour them by whole sale. Let but Reason speak for the Commonwealth in this case, and if any man that hath Reason, or is a Friend to the free-born Sub∣ject☜ of England, can show better reasons, or more righteousness, for their standing, then we can for their stownding and downfal, I have lost my senses: Thus for their tyranny. Thirdly, Englishmen as rational men, may no longer abide3. For their Bribes. them for the abominable Bribes which they take, to the corrupt∣ing and gangreening of honesty and justice; and they must have them over and above their Fees, and that by their Clients adver∣saries too, if near a Tryal. Philip King of Macedon, said of a strong Castle, That it was impregnable, if he could not drive in an Ass loaden with gold; and so many causes are battered down by golden peeces: For the Lawyer oftentimes like the Hunter, hunts a man at his Form, but leaves his cause at a loss. DoctorNo right in judgement is to be sold for Fees or Bribes. Mirr. of Just. fol. 258. Dr. Featly. Featly tells us of a famous Lawyer, that refused for a while to patronize a bad cause (which is a wonder that a cause can be bad enough for them to refuse;) but when the party cast before him a sum of good Hungarian Gold, on which were stamped the Images of armed Souldiers, he then cryed out, Thou hast taken me captive, for who can resist so many armed men? —Quid now mortalia pectora cogis? Auri sacra fames—Virg.
The injection of a dram many times turns the scales of Justice among those men. For as Lewis the eleventh King of France said,Sim. He often won the victory by fighting with golden and silver spears; so may many a great man say, who should else have been surely cast by the honest causes that have come against them in Law. And as the French answered the Helvetians once, who bragged, That their Countrey was so environed with Rocks and Alps, and high Hills, that it was unconquerable; say the French, We could easily climb those Hills, and overcome those Rocks, if we have but Guns that will send in Golden Bullets among you: So certainly, the best cause may be betrayed; and have been lost by bribes. Such showres of bribes have brought many a dreadful Thunderbolt in the tail of them. Fourthly, Rational men do abhor their rise; and the rise of4 For their in∣couraging con∣tentions. all their riches, being from Quarrels and Contentions. The Law∣yers are but Brethren to the Worms, for both are engendered out of mans corruption: They are then worse, then the worst of our Excrements, or the Dung of this Commonwealth; and do they not stink in our nostrils? Why then, we are not well, and have lost our senses sure. Why else should Englishmen be so mad (.)▪ as to run to these Norman Lawyers Anviles, for sharp Instruments to hurt their own Countrymen with? whilest they use Upper Bench Writs, b as Westminster▪Mastives to bait the☞ Country with? The Lawyers like the Indians strike fire by rubbing two sticks: And some that follow suits in the Law of their managing, are like the Hare in the Epigram, who to save her self from the Hounds, leaped into the Sea, and so was de∣voured of the Sea dog. I have heard many say, they had better lose their right, then lend it them though it be but to recover it, seeing it is so costly. For as two that contend, one hath a blew face,Rgers on Love, p. 24. the other a bloody nose, but both are well beaten before they leave off; and so it is with going to Law. It is not long since two Bro∣thersSir H. R. and Mr J. R. of good quality sell out about their estates, and were hot to go to Law, until a Letter which was intercepted, written from one Concealer, I should say Counsellor of the Law, (o acount∣ed) to another, was read to these Brethren.
SIR, I Am retained for one Brother, and take you the other, and I will warrant you, we will quickly pluck them as bare as two Birds that have not a Feather left to hide their skins, &c. This Letter ended their Law suits; for else as the MouseSim. and Frog were both devoured of the Kite, so would Plaintiff and Defendant have been both devoured and eat up by these Lawyers, who live like Salamanders, best in the hottest fires of contention. Fifthly, Their variety of Frauds and Arts to deceive, do5. For their Frauds. Sim. render them unsufferable to rational men; For as the Fox said to the Lyon, that indeed his tongue was Soveraign, but he had ill neighbors (meaning his Teeth.) So certes we may say of the Lawyers, when their tongue is fairest, their teeth are fearfullest, and they intend to tear away most estate and money then. For whiles a true friend, like a Chesnut, keeps a sweet nutrimental Kernel under a plain rinde, such fainers as these are like Peaches that have harsh rugged stones under a Velvet Coat. There is an Island beyond Arabia (sayes Diodorus Siculus) where the In∣habitantsDiod. Sic: An∣tiq. lib 3. have Cloven tongues; so that therewith they can alter their speech as they list, and imitate Birds in tunes, and speak perfectly to two persons, and two purposes at once, to one with the one part of their tongue, and to the other, with the other part thereof. Now I know none but Lawyers like them in this; for they will speak for a Fee for one, and yet I know them that have given Advice and Councel to the other, and taken the others Fee too.In Henshaws Case, p. 55. They are like the Amphishaena who hath two heads, and moves two contrary ways at once. The Italians put a Proverb upon Caesar Borgia, and his father Pope Alexander, saying▪ The one never thought as he spake, and the other never spake as he thought: So indeed it may be said of many of these Lawyers, who like Hebrew Letters, must be spelt backward, if once we read them aright. And now, O what Parasites they are! as the English Papists in Queen Elizabeths days durst temporize to purpose, so do these
begin apace; but as the Coriander hath a corrupt root, an un∣savorySim. leaf, but a sweet seed; so hath this Faction a filthy root, unsavory actions, but as good words as one would wish, if need be: Yet let them look to it, Gods curse, like a Promoter, must search for all their ill-gotten goods ere long. And as when the crafty Fox that had deceived the Crow of her break-fast, hugged him∣self for joy, to think of his project; till when he had eaten it, he found himself poysoned with it, and then he repented, and wished the Crow her own again. So stoln goods are sweet to these De∣ceivers, and they hug themselves in their cheating tricks and☞ knaveries, till their bowels begin to gripe them for it. For the day of Christ that is coming will be a terrible time of torment to them. And as Christ brought that fish to the Hook that had theSim. money in his mouth, Matth. 17. 27. So will these wide mouthed money▪mongers be hooked for it, fearfully ere long. They have gotten great Estates, and bought Mannors and Lands, and taken exact Surveys of them; but they have not yet taken an exact survey of their Consciences, how they came by this money which purchased these Lands, (says Dr. Don, Ser. fol. p. 818.) Our coynDr. Don. hath the State on one side, and God with us on the other; and surely, if we see not God with us in what riches we have gotten, they are but counterfeit and falsly gotten, and will gripe us grie∣vously, till we have vomited them out. When Vespasians cove∣tous Officers had filled themselves like spunges, by Rapine and Extortion, the Emperor squeezed them out dry again into the common Treasury, till they had nothing left. Now, although many wish for the fall of the tree, that they may gather up the chips, yet the Lord knows this is not in my heart; but beleeve it, the Laws of God and Nature require a restitution▪ and that what they have ill gotten from the people, be brought into the publick bank again; for they have robbed the Nation with a great deal of ravenousness and art. One Cacus a cunning theif,Sim. when he had stoln any Beasts, he would drag them to the Cave by their tails backward, that by the contrary track of their feet, he might be freed from suspition of theevery; such art and subtle∣ty have the Lawyers had in deceiving and robbing us; that they seems to take another track quite contrary to it, and to go under the name of dues and fees. And besides, their decerts are many
in the Law too, which like a Cob-web to Spiders, whilest they make it their dwelling, it is a prison to entangle others in, as flies to feed them. So many Meanders and Intricacies there are in the Law, that like snakes they hide themselves, by folding into many doubles. Wherefore like the Foxes they must have depth of soyl to Earth the wrongs of their poor Clients, and hide their own Crafts; which are too many to live much longer, seeing the honestest cause must miscarry by their cunning tricks and falla∣cies; and a bad cause shall be so beautifully varnished over by their arts and cheats, that the most innocent honest man that is, shall suffer ruine by them. I have a Neighbor by me, who was arrested for two hundredMr. . pounds debt, to a man whose name he never heard, nor face ever saw before, and he was laid in prison thereupon, to his utter ruine, till he proved the Bond forged, the Plaintiff a cheat that lived by such tricks, and yet he escaped scot-free, though there was a knot of them that lived by such cheats. Hence Sir Walter Rawleigh, upon his tryal, hearing the Lawyers for the King plead violently against him, he turns to the Jury, and sayes, Gentlemen, I pray consider, that these sort of men (meaning the Lawyers) do usu∣ally defend very bad causes every day in their own Courts, yea▪ and against men of their own Profession too, as able as them∣selves; what then will they not do against me? &. I know now an honest Gentleman that had a good personal estate, who lies yet in the Fleet, eat up almost with lice, and near starved,Mr. . and all his estate taken from him, by the meer cheat of the Law∣yers, upon a forged Bond too, for another; onely a man whose face he never saw before, pretending his hand to be in that Bond: But to finish this, O, how miserably tyrannical they make the Law to the free-born Englishman! They make it like a Milstone,Sim. which they drive about with a wheel (artificially) full of cogs and spoaks, under which they grinde the innocent and harmless ones to powder: And can we hear their groans? sighs? sad com∣plaints, and fearful cryes? and we sit still like senceless stones? shall we? Sixtly, Lawyers unsufferable Fees fill all mouths with wofull6. For their Fees. exclamations and eyes with willing expectation of their fall. For as no sooner was the Apple in Adams mouth, but the Devill
was in his Maw; So no sooner does one Fee them with anSim. Earth-Angel in their hand, but the Devil doubles fees with Hel angels in their hearts; and they fall to lying, pleading, cheating,☞ wronging and oppressing as fast as they can, without fear of Hea∣ven or Hell. It would make an honest mans heart to ake to hear how fast and confidently they will lye, and like it well too. We laugh at the Indians for casting in such store of Gold, every yeare into the River Ganges, as if the streams would not run currently without it; and others laugh at the English as much, for when the current of Justice is stopped (as 'tis oft) in many Courts, the foolish people can (as yet it seems) find no better way then that theSim. Indians use to open them; and shal we never be wiser? Indeed Pliny reports of Apis the Aegyptian God, that he never gave answers to private men, but è manu consulentium cibum capiendo, by taking meat out of the hands of such as were his Clients, and sought counsell, else he would be dumb. Is it not so with us? Doe not the Norman Lawyers the like? Let the Lawyer be great∣ly retained, or the Law shall be greatly detained. And what will☞ retain them? as much as they can take out of their Clients hand at once? no! For one that is eminent and belongs to the Councell of State, told me he had it from a Gentleman of four thousand pound per annum, that upon a motion to be made to the Lords Com∣missioners, he retained his Counsell for one word to them, and put five peeces into his hands, but the Lords sat not that day: The next morning the Gentleman made a fresh sally, and gave a fresh salute to his great Counsell with gracious Angels, and filled his pawes againe with two golden peeces (for he was as hungry as e∣ver since yesterday) but the Lords sat not that day neither. But the next day the Lords sat for certain, so he comes to his Counsellor (or Concealer) Mr. M. Sir (saies he) be mindfull of my businesse, I pray, it is but one word, to make but one motion to them this morning; Sir (saies the Lawyer) I have nothing to doe with it, no! (says the Gentleman) I hope you will Sir; speake but one word. Sir (says the Laweer) what doe you tell me of your mo∣tion,This is contra∣ry to the Stat. A. 18. of Ed. 3. Ile not meddle with it, for I am not retained to it. (Now it seems the seven peeces had not power enough to hold him three mornings but to make one motion; Mr. M. was as hungry againe as ever, he must have more or else be dumb,) So that the Gen∣tleman
was glad to run and borrow two peeces more, (having notAnd contrary to true Law Mir. of Just. fol. 64. so much about him) to retaine or keep his Counsell close to it, to speake one word to the Lords Commissioners for him. Is not this a most unsufferable cheating of the free-born English-man? and are not these crys of oppression and Norman Tyranny very loud and lamentable? And is not the Law and Justice to be sold at so high a rate, so as causes many an honest heart, and poor man to sit, sigh, and complain, and loose his Right for want of mony? seeing eight or nine pounds can pay and pray but for one word.Tully. Tully tels us, that the mouth of the Lawyer is an Oracle for the whole City; but if in this mouth there be a gilded tongue, it will prove like the Oracle f Delphos, which Demosthenes complainedSim. of in his time, that it would speak nothing but what Phillip would have it say, by giving it a double Fee. So full Fees, finde full mouths, and can create in the Lawyers any likenesse, or mouth∣fuls of Plea's upon any account right or wrong. As Demosthe∣nes who pleaded vehemently against the Milesian Ambassadors the first day, but in the second day appeared in another likenesse, and pretending he was not well, would not plead against them at all; but his neck being wrapped up, and his face muffled about, he pretended hee got the Quinzee, and could not plead against them; but the people perceiving the occasion of it was a secret bribe given him by the aforesaid Ambassadors, they termed his Malady (I was going to say melody, for such tricks are the Lawyers mirth) they termed it Argentangina, not the QUINSIE,☜ but the COINZIE, or silver-mumps; such cheating tricks they have to get Gold their God. I was informed within few dayes by an Honorable Religious Lady, of Rowles cut out for coine, and five hundred pound per annum lost thereby; and of one that offered for twenty peeces to put other Deeds into the Rowles, which may one day be knowne. So that of all men alive it is the worst med∣ling with these men, who mind nothing but to feather their own nests, fill their own purses, and feed their own paunches. Like a Capon that is cold and naked, who in the absence of the HenSim: will run to her nest, not out of any love to the Chickens, but to warme his own sides; they regard neither Cause, nor Client, Justice, nor Law, but how to get (like Pettifoggers) Orphans, Widows, or poor oppressed mens Estates, and to eate men out in
Fees and Extortions. Therefore as a Lacedemonian answered a Physitian once, who asked how he did, the better (said he) forSim. that I meddle not with you, and take none of your physick; So may we say to the Lawyers, for none are well that are tampering with them: And I confesse that I am one of them that had rather loose my right, than run into their hands; and yet I am beholding☞ to one of our new Committees, that would turn out as honest a just Cause as ever came before them, and they confesse it, and (all men know it, that have but heard of it) yet to the amazement of  honest men▪ who had better hopes of them, they would turn it over o these Tyrants, notwithstanding they acknowledged that the remedy would then be worse then the disease. O when shall Justice and  run downe like a mighty streame in our streets! this promise wee wait for, and then Justice will be easier and cheaper to come by, and men be more honest then they are now. We read of one Verconius in the time ofDr. Benson on Hs 7. 7. Alexander Seves, how he abused many in taking mony and Fees for preferring their Suits, and doing them little or no good▪ which cheating in those daies was so detestable, that he was adjudged to be hanged up in a Chimney, and so to be choaked with smoake, for that he sold smoake to the people. And it is not strange that in these daies, this decei. and design of the Lawyers to sell smoake, and cozen the Commonweale should be countenanced? How can the peoples expectation be answered? not only in the continuing and keeping up this accursed Crew, but in Committees throwing out honest Causes into their dishonest hands? Wee are afraid too many of the Norman race, are now in Government, and their love to Tith-mongers and to the Lawyers, and turning ore honest Causes to those Locusts of the Commonwealth, makes our hearts☞ ake for them, as well as for ourselves. I cannot but speake, for a very Dog runs on with a courage, when he is maintained by a more noble nature then his owne; as when a man puts him on  Beleeve it, I say, for I must speake it, to deale so mildly with the corrupt Laws and Lawyers, as only to regulate or better moddel them, is a pretext which will bring us but into new bondage; and they had better tell the honest people they'le hang them all up at their own doores, then not deliver them (now their expectations are so high) from this Norman tyranny, wherein the people are
robbed of their Laws and Liberties; or then not throw downe Termes, to set up Justice at our own doores, and not to throw down this selfish, arbitrary, contentious Interest of the Lawyers, which arose out of the corruptions and contentions of the worst of men, and is the fruit of lying, cheating, oppressing, perjury, deceit, and tyranny. For surely, surely, such a weak purgation (as some men speak of) will but stir the rough and tough humors, and an∣ger them the more. Shall such men as these scape scot-free, and nothing but thunder and lightning upon many honest men and Ministers of this Nation? Some of our new Parliament have alrea∣dy put heart into these vermine, whilst they have caused (to my knowledge) some vertuous souls to sit weeping behind doors, or in corners complaining that they cannot tel where to have Justice, or to whom to petition for right: yea, a Gentlewoman big with child, that did but beg for an order to have her linnen and things fit to lye in (that are detained from her by a Malignant in the Country) and shee (poor heart!) must be turned by (for all her tears) most hard-heartedly, and bid to go to the Law, which was the ready way to ruine her, and like the Flounder to leap out of the dish into the fire. Well, the Lord make them wise! for if they beginSim. thus, I fear they will end worse; and if they be so ready and pro∣digall to cause the godly people to shed their tears, I pray God☜ Cook of Grais∣nn at the lae Kings tryall. Thucydides. they prove not as ready to cause them to shed blood. But in the mean time to shew mercy to the wicked, is cruelty to the good (as one said.) And as Thucydides says lib. 1. They are not only Tyrants which make other men Slaves; but they are much more so, who have power and means to suppresse Tyrants, and to pre∣vent their oppression, and yet doe it not, nor take care about it, but rather continue the oppression upon the poor, &c. O sad! Let☜ The Parlia∣ments great work about Tithes and Laws. ☜ the Magistrate look to it then! Their worke is great, as to the Law and Lawyers, as well as to the Tithes and Priests; and it is not soft wood, or bending lead which is fit matter for a Carpen∣ters Rule, nor are such (flexible dispositions) as wee have met with hitherto fit for the work of this Generation. Salomons Throne had carved Lyons; not Apes, nor Asses, nor yet Foxes are fit for that throne of Judicature in our daies, which is to be for the typified Salomon. Wherefore the Lord (the Counsellor) be with the Par∣liament so, as to execute true Justice upon these Norman Ty∣rants;
and if it fall upon them in a vehement showre or storm (seeing they are ripe in the field) it shall onely be to lay them down that are fittest for the sickle, or the sithe. Lastly, Reason suggests to us, that it is time to be freed from7. For that they are strangers. them, seeing they are strangers, and of the Norman Line, that have usurped this power over us. When the will of their great ma∣ster, William, advanced them upon our Tombs, and Ruines, many an honest Noble Britain was brought to beg their bread, and their possessions taken from them (sayes Holinshed) and given these his greedy followers. And then as the Lord of Oxford said to Queen Elizabeth (as she was playing on the Virginals, and the ledge being taken away for the Jack to be seen) Your Majesty may see (sayes he) how Jacks went up, and Heads went down☞ together. Well, I shall mention no more to this, then what the foresaid Thucydides sayes in his 1. Lib. That amongst others they were the Tyrants and Traytors which assumed the title of Protectors of Greece, and Defenders of the Country, and yet stirred not to deliver the Country from the oppression of stran∣gers. Is he not a Nero that can see the burning and ruine of his City, without reluctancy or trouble? And have we not some Caligula's, that could wish all the honest men in England (espe∣cially the Ministers) had but one head, that they might strike it off▪ at a blow. But to conclude the peoples expectation (as they are ra∣tional) in the downfal of the Lawyers up-start, and ungodly In∣terest, several other things might be said; but this is all now, that Justice calls for it (as to the Commonwealth,) and Charity chal∣lenges it, as to set the oppressed free. Secondly, The people cannot as religious (as well as they are2. Lawyers live by sin, as Rational) longer endure this notoriously wicked interest of un∣godly Lawyers; for that of all the Nation, they are the men that are tolerated to live by sin, and to make a trade of sin openly, and hourly, as (briefly to instance in some.) 1. Lying, which is as the Nerves and Sinews of their Call∣ing;1. By Lying. for they cannot plead a Cause without lying; one or the other must be the lyer in every Cause. Let them not think at the day of the Lord to escape scot-free, for their art▪ in lying, though they call them witty evaion, or pretty homoynies, or at the most but equivocations: At the day of judgement no such Pleas, nor
Fees will be taken, or serve turn to help them; nor can their Fa∣ther, the Jesuite Bercana, be able to save them in that day, nor all the subleties of the Jesuites their Brethren. Wherefore the Lawyer needed not to have been so angry with the poor Scotch∣man,A Lawyer once attainted of false pleading, or maintaining an unjust acti∣on, or cause, is to suffer bodily punishment. Mirror of Just: f. 230. for speaking broad, when he reading his Morning Service out of Joh. 8. with these words, Your Father the Devil was a lyer from the beginning; pronounced it as well as he could, Your Fa∣ther the devil was a Lawyer from the beginning. But the Lawyers I hear were angry with him; and what need they▪ can one be a Law∣yer, and not a lyer? then there may be fire, and not heat; seeing as heat is an unseparable property of fire, so is lying of a Lawyer; and the ablest Lawyer is so accounted, because he is the ablest lyer, and can best plead the worst Causes, and the wickedest untruths. These as the Prophet sayes, Isai. 32. 7. Devise wicked de∣vises to destroy the poor with lying words, even when the needy speaketh right; the words are , for as the vulgar reads it, Fraudulentia instrumenta sunt pessima: And these consult and study tricks and lies to wrong us of our right, as the Man of God tells us. Job calls such, Forgers of lies, Job 13. 4, 5. or Inventors, that have gotten the art and trade of making lies; insomuch, that an honest man may blush but to read over one of their Declarations against another. O the grossest! palpable! known lies that they own in every Declaration. But (sayes Job) O that ye would hold your tongues! which were more wisdom for you! So Isai. 59. 3. 4. Your lips have spoken lies, your tongues have muttered perversness; none calleth for justice, nor any (of you) pleads for the truth, but trust in vanity, and plead lies, conceiving mischief, and bringing forth iniquity; and making it indeed a cause of the Devils, seven times more the Devils, then it was before. And if they get an honest mans cause (though a good cause) into their hands, yet by their lying and sinful management of it, they make it dangerous and devi∣ish,Dangerous to∣deal with them. ☜ Hatching Cocktrices eggs, Vers. 5. and bringing out iniquity, insomuch, that it is very dangerous to put a cause into their hands, or to take one out of their hands, though it goes well (as we say) on our side; yet he that eat their eggs, will be sure to be poyson∣ed. Hence saye the Prophet, Vers. 7, 8, 9▪ 10. Wasting and destruction are in their way, there is no judgment in their go∣ings,
they have made them crooked paths; whosoever goeth therein, shall not know peace. Therefore is judgement far from us, neither doth justice overtake us; we wait for light, but behold obscurity, &c. Vers. 15. Yea, truth faileth, and he that departeth from evil, maketh himself a prey, &c. i. e. By these savage Beasts he shall be ruined and spoiled. Now the righteous hateth lyers, Prov. 13. 5. as well as the lyers (or Law∣yers) hate those that are afflicted by them (says Solomon)▪ Prov. 26. 28. And so sayes he, in Prov. 6. 17, 18, Six things doth the Lord hate, yea, seven are abomination to him: First, A proud look; secondly, A lying tongue; thirdly, Hands that shed in∣nocent blood; fourthly, An heart that deviseth mischief; fift∣ly, Feet swift to it; sixtly, A false witness that will speak lies; seventhly, One that sows discord among Brethren. Now the very children in the streets can easily understand all this in the Lawyers, yea, in their constant practises; and can men of conscience, fear∣ing God, any longer abide them? that live so openly and notori∣ously by sin? If the Governors will suffer this, they have as muchA word to our Governors a∣bout them. reason (and Religion for it too) to set up and suffer drunkenness, whoredom, or other sins, in the sight of God and men, in open Courts, to be bought and sold at Westminster-hall, or the Parlia∣ment door. And I do beleeve it, yea, am sure of it, that the Lord will, by some sudden stroke, declare as much to this Nation, if this living by sin, and these monopolizers of lying, swearing, cheat∣ing, and oppressing, be much longer continued up. Therefore I take no great care concerning this matter; for as a little before the ruine of Nineveh, (so now) saith the Lord, Wo! wo! wo be to you, for you are full of lies and robberies, and your prey de∣parteth not, Nahum 3. 1. Vers. 5, 6, 7, 8. Behold, I am against thee, I will cast filth upon thee, I will make thee vile; and they that see it shall say, Who will pity them? I pray God then give our Governors Grace and Religion enough (before this Decree come forth) to declare and decree down these trades of sin; for if both in the Law of God, and Light of Nature, it be abominable to commit adultery by open day light in Westminster-hall be∣fore all; what is it then to plead a hundred lies in one morning; is not lying a sin, as well as whoring? or what would you say to see a woman lie down to sin, before a beast? and will ye? (O ye
Governors, if ye fear God!) will ye see hundreds of men (every Trm time) to prostitute their souls, and lie down to com∣mit sin with Satan every morning (next their heart too?) to en∣gender and bring forth lies, and many such mis-shapen Monsters (as Robinson sayes in his Essayes, p. 164.) of the Devils own seedRobinsons Es∣sayes. and begetting. Every morning, O how many are in travel to bring forth most monstrous foul sins in the open Courts? and can an honest Parliament sit so igh them, and own them? if any object, O but it is for the peoples good! they speak like fools then; for is sin for the good of the Nation? then see Isai. 59. 2. and Jere. 5. 25. Or was it unlawful to commit fornication with the Moabites, to draw them (thereby) to Religion? or is it unlawful and wicked, to steal from the rich to relieve the poor? and yet not unlawful to trade in lies (grant it were to do good?) This pretence of theirs makes them mock, and merry at sin, and they oftentimes do as beggers, cover one patch with another, and a lesser patch with a bigger. But a servant of them, a little honester then his☜ master, told him, That if he did not couch his lies more close, and make them more cleanly, he should tell them himself, for all him, and a vouch them too, for he did not like the trade. Thus for this; the people as religious, are obliged to look and labor for the fall of this ungodly interest and trade. 2. To heap up the measure of sins, and make us ripe for judg∣ments;2. For Perjury. they cause much false-swearing and for-swearing, by compelling the poor people to useless, sinful, and unnecessary oaths, and making nothing (many of them) of an oath themselves, which is horrible sinful, and unsufferable. For although there is a holy solemn kinde of swearing, which is a part of Gods worship, yet it is by the Name of the Lord, Isa. 65. 16▪ not by Baal, nor Malcham, Zeph. 1. 5. nor by faith and troth, which some are so prodigal of, that swear all away; nor yet by the Bible, or kiss∣ingOaths unlaw∣ful. the Book: Much less lawful is it to force any to an oath, which is done daily by the Ceremonies of kissing the Book, and laying on hands, whereby the sacred Name of the most high God is greatly dishonored, and prostituted to millions of filthy and unclean lips, upon slight, and sleeveless occasions. O crying sin! of taking God, Name in vain! for which I am sure, He will not hold them guilt∣less▪ Oaths ought to be never used but on holy-days; and it were a☜
thousand times better a mans exrements should run from him▪ and he not know it, then such oaths, and he not minde them when he hath made them. Lawyers (many of them) make as light of an oath, as that Hoast did, who told his Guest in Lent, he might eat flesh in another Inn; For Sir, sayes he, we are bound, but they are but sworn. Sometime since, a Gentlewoman, and Sister of mine, was left a Widow to some considerable Estate and Goods, but the Court requiring her to take oath, that the Inventory was true, she re∣fused it, as not onely scrpelling that oath, but any oath; the Court perceiving her (out of Conscience) inflexible, up starts one of the Lawyers (who never saw her before; nor since▪) Ha! sayes he! this Gentlewoman hath a nice conscience truly. Come, sayes he; give me it, give me the oath, I will take it for her; and so (for fear of losing his fees, if no oath had been taken) he takes it at a venture, (though he knew nothing of the Inventory) yet he would take his oath it was true, and made no bones of it. O! what brave desperadoes these Lawyers are! they will make a notable sally for sinful fees then. If Samson will set so on the City gates, what withes can hold him? and if these Lawyers dare venture so lustily upon oaths, what Laws will hold them? He that enters into a Statute, conceives the extent of it to reach his Body, Lands, Goods, Estate and all; now an oath, what is it? but such a kinde of Statute entered into, and acknowledged before God, the Judge of this World. The condition is, To say the truth, nothing but the truth, and the whole truth, &c. which is ex∣tended on Goods, Lands, Peace, Liberty, Estates, Bodies, Souls, and all; and yet in slighting and casting away such oaths, what do they? but to take their own word, slight, and cast away the truth, whole truth, and nothing but the truth. It is no wonder then, they are so unsufferable, being guilty of a world of perjury, (Ah crying sin!) in this sad Nation. And as in Jere▪ 23. 20. Be∣cause of swearing, the Land mourneth; therefore, saith the Lord, I will be a swift witness, Mal. 3. 5. against false swearers, and against those that oppress the widow, the fatherless, &c. Therefore, upon the score of Religion, the people appear against this ungodly tribe, and trade of the Lawyers. The Leapers in Israel were forced to go with their cloaths rent, their heads bare,
their lips covered, and to cry out unclean! unclean that we are! It were well if the Lawyers (at the least the worst of them, that are Blasphemers and perjured) went with a rent on their cloathes, a writing on their Breasts, and a brand in their foreheads▪ that all men might know them for a company of perjured wretches, and beware of them, till other course were taken with them. Thirdly, Religious mens mouths are much open against them,3. For innocent blood and murther. for a great deale of blood which they are guilty of; what Innocent hath suffered, and not by their caft and cruelty? by corrupting of the Jury, construing the Laws as they listed▪ or the like; be∣sides the lives of many thousand Theeves, who ought to have beenTheeves. sold, or have made restitution for their Theft▪ as appears in Gods Law, Exod. 22, 3, 4. which is the best. It is man∣slaughter to put any to death for meer theft and a bloody Law against Gods, of Ty∣rants inventi∣on. Mr. Chdley hath writ very well to this; therefore say only thus, that the Law (in its virginity) did ackowledg it that none▪ ought to bee hanged for thet, Mirror of Ju fol. 102, 257. Pretended Traytors and Enemies, Holinsh▪ Chron. Juries wronged But I say besides their blood, how many thousands by their subtilty have been de∣stroyed, and some or other of the most eminent for Reason and Religion, or of both in all ages, have been murdered by their malice and injustice; Sometimes putting honest men to death for Rebels, Traytors or the like, onely for words; which Tyranny and accursed cruelty of theirs is condemned by bloody Queen Mary her selfe in the first year of her R. Ch. 1. and is absolutely contra∣ry to their own Law, in the Statute of Hen. 4. 2. Yet to colour over cruelty with craft-paint, they would ever pretend they were put to death for matters according to Law; but least the honest Jury of the neighbourhood, or upright consciencious Country∣men should discover their cheats and tricks which they have ever had to take the best, honestest, and faithfullest mens lives away in England; they would make thè fact what they list to have it, and tell the Jury it was grounded upon good Law▪ which they must not question nor inquire further into, but must take it (upon their words) in trust: Wherefore (to keep up this trick to kill men) they made it a maxime amongst them, that the Jury must not meddle with the Law, no (by no means) only with the fact (i. e. as they have stated it, which they pretend to be by Law, and the Jury must have no cognizance of the Law upon which the Fact is groun∣ded, for Fellony, or Treason, or the like) This is so destructive to the true Lawes and Liberties of England, that no man might (then) say his life is safe, but to satisfie some mens lists, the Lawyers could easily take it away. Besides our first Fundamen∣tall
Lawes (before the Norman Tyrant) the Laws of God, and the Law of Nature, all account it incumbent upon the Jury to judge of the Law, according to which▪ the indictment is drawne▪ and Fact stated, as well as of the Fact; and not to take it upon trust from the Lawyers, those Norman Intruders and Tyrants words,Juries right. least thereby they become also guilty of innocent blod. Yea, thisCooks Instit. Littleton. is good Law too of England, that the Jury should take notice of the Law as well as of the Fact, in 1. Part of Cooks Institut. Sect. 366. fol. 226, 227, 228. and in Sect. 368. says, Where the In∣quest may give their verdict at large, if they will take upon them the knowledge of the Law upon the matter, &c. Cook saies▪ The Jury if they will take upon them the knowledge of the Law, may give a generall verdict. This is honest dealing, and EnglishA Lesson for Jury-men. Right, and hereby may an honest, godly▪ consciencious Jury pre∣serve many a Brother English-mans life, which the Norman Ty∣rants would else take away. O that all Jury men would learn this Lesson, whch the Laws of God, and Nature, Conscience, and honesty would teach them! to take knowledge of the Law as well as of Fact, and to trust the Lawyers no longer; who by this a∣buse, and bloody cheat of theirs are guilty of hundreds of inno∣cent, precious blood, and have by their over-awing and befooling our Juries made them guilty of the like blood and murthers, hoping they shall drink of the same cup. But the Lawyers know they are worse then hanged to have this truth known▪ and owned by all Eng∣lish-men, and Jury-men: this made poore Judge Jermin atJudge Jermins speech. Guild-hall to stamp and storme so at the Tryall of JOHN LIL∣BURNE, who though of a haughty spirit, yet pleaded this ho∣nest Doctrine. O, says the Judge, you broach an erroneous opi∣nion, viz. That the Jury are Judges of the Law, which is e∣nough to destroy all the Laws in England (he might have said, all the Lawyers in England, and so all their forced intruded Laws, and I think so too) There was never such a damnable Heresie broached!—oh! oh! poor hearts!—this comes home to them it seems! for by this they will appear, they are as bloody murthe∣rers (so they may make their markets of Mens lives) as any that tread (or ever trode) on English ground? And besides (many a noble, honest, brave man, that have been thus basely slain by these Norman Tyrants and Intruders) sometimes they have slain men▪
upon unknown Laws too, not only upon Laws, which they never knew whom they have murthered; but upon Laws never divul∣ged, nor (orderly) published to Englishmen, that they might know them; beside which, some were in a language they knew not; and then saies Hide (in his Arg. against the North▪ CommissionersHide. of Oyer and Terminer p 411. Miser a servitus est, ubi jus est vagum aut incognitum. O our miserable! insufferable slavery! to be under Laws which are dubious or uncertain! and which we know not. And that eminent Oracle of the Law▪ Sir EdwardCooke. Cooke, in the Proeme to the third part of his Institutes; and also in the fourth part fol. 332. hath the like, and in many other places. Besides all this, some brave men they have murt hered, to please and humour the great ones their masters of the times▪ So to keep up Kingly Prerogative of old, a friend to the publick, or the people, was soon found and judged an enemy to the King; and it was quickly compiled and comprised into Articles of high Treason to be but faithfull and honest to the peoples Interest; I pray God this be not the thing that keeps up the Lawyers amongst☜ us now, viz. to keep up the Interest of the Great ones; and keep down the peoples Right and Liberties. That like Popiclus (ofOto rising. Chn. l. 3. e 7. Polonia) they might by murthers and oppressions over▪ awe the people, so as that they should not dare to demand their Rights, and then make themselves absolute and hereditary. Thus I might go on all day, to show how many ways they are guilty of the most grievous murthers, and of as able men as ever the Earth bare; and to fast from blood▪ hath been Lent-time to some. But I conclude the Catalogue with this trick (to make up their measure) to get (yea, honest) men into prisons, and many times upon meer cheats, as we heard before in Pag. 55. and then to keep them there (purposely) till they be starved to death, and t up with lice, and die worse then dogs Imprison∣ment of any man till he die in prison is manslaughter, by thy law▪ vi Mir. p. 88. of Iustice . 27▪ 28, 30. 274. so to suffer any (though never so poor) to pe∣rish for want, p. 228. Or to delay to re∣leive prisoners till any one dye is manslaugh∣ter. f 30. One Judge Prine was hanged▪ for this.. Let a man but take a view of one place (amongst many others.) i. e. the Upper Bench, how many hundreds have they most miserably (worse then Turks) tormented, and starved to death? O England! Eng∣land! does blood (precious blood) bid thee call for Justice upon these Intruders, or Lawyers, and shall we sit still? Hark! Jere. 4. 31. I have heard a voice of the daughter of Zoin, that bewaileth her self (in anguish) that spreadeth her hands, and
saith, Wo is me now! for my soul is wearied, because of mur∣therers. They murther the innocent, Psal. 10. 8. and the father∣less, Psal. 94 6. and poor; yea, they are polluted with blood, Hos. 6. 8, 9.  as troops of robbers, they wait for men (sayes the Prophet) to murther them (by consent, it is in our Translation, I know not how it was thrust in, but the word is)  Shechem, the shoulder; which signifies either, that they do it with one shoulder, or else (which I like best) they murtherExpos. the shoulder; i. e. such as are most eminent, high, able, and the worthies. So that, thus saith the Lord, Hosea 4. 1, 2. the Lord hath a controversie with the inhabitants of the land (for that) by swearing, lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing a∣dultery, they break out, and blood toucheth blood. This is one ground more of the great complaint the free Commoners have against these Norman Tyrants or Lawyers, which is as hideous to the honest Englishman (that fears God) as Julius Caesars Robe was to the Senate-house, that saw it stabbed through, with so many holes, and bloodied in so many places. Thus are the Laws and Liberties of this poor Nation lost, which makes us groan to God and men.4. For their cheating and stealing. Judge Hall was hanged because he sa∣ved Tustrom the Sheriff from death, who had taken away goods from many men against their wills (though for the Kings use) for that it was robbery. vid. Mirror. of Jus f. 241, 241. And do not the Lawyers rob thus daily? 4. As men are religious, they rally up against these ungodly Lawyers for their open Robberies and Cheats; which (speaking too before) I shall adde little to, having told you, of their tricks, and arts, which their Inns of Court bring them up in to get mony, and abuse the oppressed people, by Fes and Bribes; but Trop donne soyt repele, There will come a day of reckoning for them; and all that they have knit up by their rapine, will be unravelled again with a witness ere long; and these Powder-masters will be blown up with their own provision then. Shall I count them pure, with their bag of deceitful weights (saith the Lord) Mi. 6. 11, 12. For the rich are full of violence; the inhabitants have pleaded lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their mouths. Vers. 16. For (according to their Norman customs) the statutes of Omri are yet kept, that I should make thee a desolation. Trust not in your robberies, nor lies, saith the Lord, Jere. 7. So saith David, Psal. 94. They frame mischeif for a Law, and gather themselves against the soul of the righteous, and con∣demn the Innocent, God will recompence them in their own ma∣lice;
the Lord our God will destroy them. They judge for re∣wards and hire, and build up with blood, Micah 3. 10, 11. They are brass and iron, they are revolters. Jere. 6. 28. Every one loveth gifts (and fees) and judge for rewards; they judge not the fatherless, neither doth the cause of the widow come to them. O! I will ease me of these my adversaries! Isai. 1. 23, 24. What are their Inns of Court, but as Job saith, Chap. 12. 6. Taberna∣cles☜ of robbers which prosper. And as Solomon sayes, Prov. 21. 7. The robbery of the wicked shall destroy them, because they refuse to do judgement. The Searchers (of God) shall be sent out to seek out all their ill-gotten goods; for which they will be arrested with a venge∣ance, as the veriest Fellons that are; though it is true, as yet we have robbery for right, and oppression for judgment. Small theeves are condemned to die for it, whiles great National ones ride rattling in Coaches. I warrant you the poor sneaking Solicitors and Clerks, yea, the Bum-bailiffs, and Serjeants, (that abuse men, and beat women great with childe, as one J. Turvy did a Gentlewoman the other day, and yet not punished,) I say such as these say, it is good gleaning after them that run away with whole sheaves, and whose robberies are accounted rights, because countenanced, connived at, and priviledged forsooth. O sad! are we such slaves yet? As the same River that runs through diversSim. regions, hath divers names, and yet it is the same River; so theft hath divers names; in Souldiers it is called spoil and plunder, in Governors called Cessments, tribute, &c. In Lawyers called Fees, in others Gifts, and Bribes; in Church, they call it Sacri∣ledge and Simony; in State, Oppression and Tyranny; in Law, Corruption and Bribery; and when this one River rises up into a Spring-tide, or swells up to the bank then it is called Usury. But☜ in a poor naked man it is called Theft and Fellony (without any other fine minced words, which were coyned to cover great mens knavery) and such a one must be murthered for it, without mercy or clergy (as they call it) Dalton, fol. 226. Although in truth itDalton. is the same River that runs, and the same thing (though new in name) in all these; but the same Cob-web which some (Spiders) can dwell in, shall hang others. As among the old Lacedemonians, theft amongst them was never punished, where it was carried
cunningly and secretly; but he that was discovered for stealing, and did it not neatly, he was punished not so much for stealing, as for behaving himself no more covertly and cunningly in it. So whiles poor men suffer mulct for a little matter, because it is open plain theft; these rich ravenous Robbers do it with art and cunning, and have coyned a new name for it too, to guild it over, and so scape scot-free, though they rob us daily of a thousand times more then all the Theeves in England besides. But their Dooms day Book will be brought out ere-long, where it is set down to a tittle what they ow to this Commonwealth upon this account, first, for the principle, and then secondly, for restitution; which☞ the people upon the alterable Laws of Religion are raised high to expect. 5. For oppression too; the people as religious are resolved5. For oppres∣sion. 22. Q. 12. a. 2. against them. For as Aquinas sayes, A tyrannical interest, having no proper address for the publick welfare, but onely to satisfie a private will, and to bring in particular profit to those that appertain to that interest, cannot in a reasonable or religious construction, be accounted and continued as lawful; and there∣fore the rising against such an ungodly selfish interest, and the disturbance of it is not unlawful, nor ungodly; neither may men be esteemed Rebellious or Seditious for so doing. He speaks honestly for us, let the Lawyers then look to it, for hitherto have leane kine (as Pharaoh saw it in his dream) eaten up the fat, and they have made gain of oppression, Isa. 33. 15. So that whilst we looked for judgement, behold oppression; and for righteousness, behold a cry, Isai. 5. 7. Some of my honest Countrymen of three∣score, yea, of fourscore years of age, have with weeping, told me of the tyranny, and infinite injustice and oppression of these God∣less (especially if Goldless) Lawyers, and how they have devour∣ed and destroyed them; how long they have been suing for their right, and at last gone without it; how they have been hurried out of one Court into another, and used as the Cat that flings the Mouse out of one claw into another, to make sport, and then at last devours it. Several in a day have suspired out such stories of these wicked intruders, as would make a tender heart to ake and quake.Ministers suffer by their tails. Ministers have been stung with these Scorpions terribly (and
I could name some who have been with me about it) when meerly through malice they were arrested by ill neighbors or enemies, and of all men they have been most abused, beaten, bruised, and uncivilly handled by these Locusts and their tails, i. e. Serjeants, Bailiffs, or the like. Yea, the widow hath come crying and wring∣ingWidows suffer∣ings. her hands to me, for that the Lawyers had inveigled and got∣ten in her son (a Swash) or the like; and so perswaded him (by good words full of hopes) to arrest the poor widow (on purpose) to bring the estate into the Lawyers hands, that neither of them should have it, but spend it out in Fees and Laws. How many hundred of these stories could I tell? but if everyExample. Englishman that hath suffered by them, should but print it to the world, they would appear the most odious Tyrants that ever the Earth bare. As I was taking Boat to Westminster the other day, a Yeomanly man desired to go in the same Boat with me, who sate and sighed, as if his heart would break all the way, having an honest face; and he telling me he was a Lincolnshire man, I asked him the cause, and he told me, how he was undone by the Lawyers, how he had a good estate and mony, but now all was gone, and te up by going to law, and he was put off from one time to a∣nother, and out of one Court into another; and came up every Term with all the mony he could make; and that he had continued in law these twelve years, and yet his businesse was as far off as at first; sighing and weeping and wishing, that he had never seen their faces, and earnestly praying that he might be the last might suffer by them. Thus by chance (sometimes) severall in a day I meet with, that tell such lamentable stories of the Lawyers, as it is a wonder to hear; who are grown so griping, that they touch and take, and will quickly squeeze out the intrals of the fattest purse into their own pawnches, leaving nothing behind but skin.☜ It was but a fained tradition that Brittain bred no Wolves, for there were such store (saies Abbot) that Kings laid it as an im∣positionIn his Discrip∣tion of the World. p. 196. upon the Kings of Wales to bring in certain hundreds year∣ly: So it is a meer fable to fancy all Tyrants and oppressors cut off, with the late Tyrants head! why alas! how many hundreds of them may we meet at Westminster every Term time. But, saith the Lord, I will feed them that oppresse thee with their own lesh; and they shall be drunken with their own blood, and
all shall know that I am the Lord thy Saviour, Isa. 49. 26. This the people look for. 6. Their pride is intollerable, and their Goliah-like looks fright. For Pride. the timorous Israelites, who dare not behold them, but with Cap and Leg: yet let them know (for all their French, or Spanish, or☞ Curtizans Meal-tub powdred upon their hair, I say they may know) that a Silken Halter is but a halter for pride. So their haughtiness shall be laid low, when the Lord shall be exalted, Isa. 2. 17. God shall bring down their pride together, with the spoil of their hands, Isa. 25. II. Their crown of pride shall be troden under foot, chap. 28. 3. with Sodom-suffering for this Sodom sin, Ezek. 16. 49. I beleeve they will look like Caligula upon me, when they meet me now; and as the Bore whets and sharpens his tusks in his own foam; so will these proud Sparks▪ (whose, garbs like the Sicilians, are sinful and luxurious) they will whet and sharpen their hands, heads, hearts, tongues, and all against me in foam and anger for revenge. They are already so in∣raged against me, that it hath been said, Wo to me, if ever I fall into their hands: and I beleeve it; but my God will be too hard for them all within a little while; and he that shall come, will come, (i. e. in his fifth Monarchy, as may appear in the last Chapter,) and then as Jere. 48. 29, 30. We have heard his pride, &c. For these and hundreds more Reasons, all Englishmen, whetherThe peoples eyes on the Lord General, for deliverance from all these Norman Ty∣rants and ty∣rannies. rational or religious, call aloud for deliverance from this Norman yoke; and it is chiefly for this end, the peoples eyes and cryes are directed to the Lord General, as the Instrument by whom they are recovered out of the Norman Tyranny, and have conquered the Norman; and therefore are to return out of captivity, and to be restored to their Laws, Liberties, and Pri∣viledges; that the Lawyers may be reduced and squeezed into their first poor and beggerly principles, that the Temples and Inns☞ of Court be sold, that the Lawyer go home to his calling in the Country, that he was in at first (before he grew up into an interest) that Terms be down, and Justice dispersed into all Counties andVide chap. 5. Hundreds, that men may have justice at home: And if our Conquest produce not this deliverance from the Norman tyranny and injustice, we had better have been hanged up at our own
doors; for Justice is delayed, the Law corrupt and full of intri∣cacy, and unknown to most, and people oppressed, undone, and putAnd why so? to death upon trivial occasions, and many destroyed for want of a Formality, or Punctilio in Law, and all our Freedom and Li∣berty lost. Now to conclude this Chapter, know the poor oppressed peo∣ple and free-born Commoners, are passionately looking upon the Lord General for a restauration of their Rights and Liberties, which they lost by William the Conqueror, for these Reasons. 1. William the Conqueror waed upon his own account, andReason 1. O: the Con∣queror con∣quered not for himself but for the people. for his own Ends, and fought meerly for himselfe, and so robbed the people of all: But our Generall Oliver the Conquerer went out to War, and ingaged against the Normans, and got the Gar∣land (through mercy) upon the Peoples account, and for the people to free them from tyranny and oppression, and this he hath often and often declared to the Nation and Commonalty, and for this (next to the Interest of Christ) he hath had the peoples prayers, and purses, and persons, and hearts, estates, blood and all; and upon this score have so many Battles been fought, Towns taken, and Victories obtained in these Nations. Therefore as AustinAugustine speaking of the History of David and Goliah Serm. de temp. (saith) nemo pugnavit in valle Terebinthi donec David veni∣ret ad praelium, no man ever fought in the valley of Ela or Te∣rebinth,1 Sam. 17. Turpentine trees, till David came: So no man did ever appear so openly, so publickly, so solemnly to act the part of so ex∣cellent chivalry in the peoples cause against the Goliah's (and those that bid defiance to Israel) as this our Generall did, who is the peoples Champion. The cheifest Oath the Athenians ever took was this, Pugnabo pro sacris, & pro patria, cum aliis &☜ solus; I will fight for God and my Country, whether I fight with my fellows or alone for it. Wholesome meat breeds good blood; so a good cause, good courage in men: this good Cause on the side of our Conqueror carryed him out, and brought him off with good Successe: and can it (now) be forgot or abandoned? Tu pia tela feres (saies the Poet.) The Jewes never acquitted themselves so worthily, nor fought so faithfully, as when they fetched their Armour out of the Temple from the Priests hands; nor could our Country men have been such Conquerors, n∣der
the Lord Generall, had not the faithfull godly people of this Nation brought them armour and magazine out of the Tem∣ple of the Lord, insomuch that they fought with consecrated wea∣pons, which were kept in their hands by the faith and prayers of Gods dearest, and the Commonwealths faithfullest Servants▪☞ and shall they now be left in the lurch? God forbid! when the Israelites went to war, they first consulted with God, and the Priests gave answer from God by the Ephod; though in latter times (says Josephus) they guessed at the ovent by the glowingJosephus. or duskishnesse of the Diamonds on the Breast-plate, which if they shined bright shew good successe; but if they looked dim and failed, or changed into a pale Colour it portended ill suc∣cesse; all along these (late) Wars the precious Diamonds (that are on Christs the High Priests Breast-plate) did shine; the most excellent and discerning Saints in England did confidently foreell and foreshew the good successe of these wars, and they glowed to▪ have Israel go: and so they do now (as much, if not more) to have the Army march on, and to remember their work on the other side the water (and not to rest on this side Jordan (as wee said in the first Chapter) although the Diamonds doe looke dim∣ly as to some selfe-seeking Gaddites, who are alwaies (almost) a Worcester-house, or Drury-house to have their portion allotted them here, and to go no further. But ah! alas! is all done?—is all done at home yet? why doe not we follow the victory over the Norman Tyrants? Hnnibal said to his Souldiers, Qui hostem vicerit mihi erit Cart haginensis; so let my Lord General say, come sirs! we fought and have conquered for the people, and upon their account; now let us deliver them up their own Laws and Liberties, and free them fully from these Norman Intruders and Intrusions▪ and whosoever hath conquered shall carry theVide Declara∣tion Aprill 164▪ and Mach 16. 18 tryumph of an Englishman over all these Normans; we will no seek nor set up our own private Interests (though power be in our hands) because we ingaged all along for the Peoples and the pub∣licks; and for that end, God hath given us power in our hands to deliver them, and throw down the Normans. As when TitusSim. had taken the City of Jerusalem, his Army saluted him Em∣peror, and presented him with Crowns and Garlands, by way of congratulations; which he modestly refused, saying, He had
done nothing more then lent his hands, and help to God (and his people) who hath declared here (by our Conquest) his firce wrath against this sinful people. Thus should his Excellency say, I have but lent my help to God, and his poor people that were held in unsufferable slavery, by the tyranny, oppression, and in∣justice, robbery, and wrongs, which William the Conqueror brought upon them; from all which we are to deliver them, and against all which (with all the Norman Lawyers and Oppressors) God hath justly declared (by our conquest of them) in his fierce wrath against them: This is the first Reason, why the peoples eyes are so on his Excellency, being their Conqueror. 2. William the Conquerors Army were strangers, and out∣landishReas. 2. They are ou Countrymen that have con∣quered. cruel Kites, and therefore made all that was the peoples of England their prey, without mercy; but the case is now al∣tered, this Army were our own Countrymen, and Fellow-members (under the Norman tyranny) with us; so that the Law of Na∣ture calls upon the Army of our Brethren for our deliverance, and recovery from these alientions. We finde this in France, Anno 1483, 1522, 1531, 1549, 1560. by divers Decrees of Parliament, the care they had to recover and wring the power out of the hands of strangers, intruders, invaders, and usurpers.Strangers un∣sufferable. So in the Assembly of the Estates at Toures, where King Charls the Eighth was in person, divers alienations made by Lewis the E∣leventh, were repealed and annihilated, and divers great places of power and trust were taken away from strangers, and given to their own Countrymen, as from the Heirs of Tancred, of Casthel, &c. So also they did in their last Assembly at Orleans. What makes so much opposition now in France against their yong King, and the old Queen, about Mazarine, but that he is an intruder, and a stranger? How can we then be content to have Usurpers, Intruders, and Out landish Normans, to eat us up? and possess our Estates? Laws? Liberties? and all. Charlemain (sayesAemilius. Paulus Aemilius, lib. 3.) did once endeavor to subject the King∣dom of France to German strangrs; but the free-born French∣men most stoutly withstood it, to the face of their King, and chose the Prince of Glasconny for their mouth, most couragiously to declare against it, that they would not suffer it, that forrainers should rule over the subects of France; and certainly had Char∣lemain
proceeded in that business, it had come to the tryal of the Sword. So in Anno 1195, 1200, 1269, 1297, 1303, 1325, 1330, and 1360. we shall finde how faithfull the Frenchmen were to their own nation against strangers; yea, at any time when strangers had gotten any portion of their Land, they kept their right, and the command, and the Laws to themselves; so they did when any was in the English hands; and if strangers (as the English) obtained their Rights, Laws, and Liberties by force, and so took away their Soveraignty and Command, as at the Treaty of Bretaigny, &c. yet that Treaty was not kept, neither were they bound (by the Law of Nature) to hold to such an agreement (wherein strangers were greatest, or Governors in their own Land) any longer, then till they could get deliverance out, or recovery of such alienations. And shall we after recove∣ry, lie under the Norman Laws, and their Outlandish tyrannies? Will not all the World then count us fools? But some may object, O but this hath been so long (for time)Object. that now it is too late to recover! Answ. It is true, so great hath been the tyranny all along toAnsw. keep up Kingly, or Lordly Prerogative, that the poor people have been banged and bandied about like Balls; so as that hardly a great man or good man, might be found in an age, that had so much sence of the peoples sufferings, as to lend a helping hand to them that were beaten, abused, imprisoned, starved, banished,☞ stead, or burnt to their very bones, by insolent and insupportable oppressions; but if by chance one dared to venture it, to appear for the poor inslaved peoples rights, he was presently (in post) attached, impeached, and condemned to a most miserable death, or at least banished for a factious, seditious, Rebel or Traitor, or one thing or other; and then it may be such a faithful man for his Country should scarce finde a Brother, a Friend, a Reuben (among all) to say of such a poor afflicted Joseph. O! let us☞ not kill him, for he is our Brother! But by this means, I say, viz. the craft, and cruelty of great ones, and the ignorance and con∣nivence of others in this Nation, have the people been so long a∣bused and imbondaged; but notwithstanding there is no pre∣sumption of time, nor prevarication that can prejudice the peopleOur rights not lost. of their right. No tyrannous intrusion, or continuance of inva∣sion,
can by any length of time (I say) prescribe against our law∣ful Liberties and Rights, which we now lay claim to: The Commonwealth lives and never dies, notwithstanding daily and alternative revolutions or resolutions; no lapse or lask of times, or turn of individuals can deprive the people of their just right, which we hope our Brethren of the Army will help us with (as our own) and free us from strangers. It is no time as yet, to leap after Grashoppers, or slie after Butter-flies, that is work for boyes, and not men; nor should they sit down, as if they had done enough now, because they have gotten Arrears to purchase Lands, and Mannors, (insomuch, as one great man (I could name) a∣mongst them, was taking care (in my hearing) for no less then a☜ whole County to pay him:) But Brethren, do ye forget what ye fought for? why do ye not set the poor people, your Fellow English men, and Country-men free then from the Norman Tyrants, and restore to them their Goods, Laws and Liberties again? What though some great men (may hap) are content as they are? and are in the conspiracy (combined with others) to betray us? and to leave us now in the lunch to sit in the suds? yet I tell you Sirs, this treachery will be rewarded one day; for they cannot make the free Commoners lose their Right nor Liberties; and as sure as God is righteous, these prevaricators and people-cheators will be remembered, and shall have their Right; although now their Hairs are gum-powdered, their Hearts may be gun-powdered☜ one day; for the people are now past children and fools, to be so cheated by the Normans as they have been. And if the people of Rome condemned their Captains and Generals of their Armies, for capitulating with the Enemies, to the disadvantage of the publick and peoples right (though necessitated to it sometimes;) how then shall the free-born people of England, think you, be able to endure this yoke of tyranny, and these Norman intruders to enthral them? and this to be suffered too, by our Brother-Coun∣trymen, that could, and should redeem us? being not compelled, but rather complemented, not forced, but rather flattered into this woful omission of their duty to their Country. Wherefore forA word to the Army. Gods sake, and the good peoples sake, let my Lord General, with the Army, be awakned to the sighs, groans, prayers, tears, and continual cryes of the faithful people for freedom from this Nor∣man
iron-hearted yoke, which crushes hundreds of honest hearts to death: The Lord knows it, it is my conscience makes my com∣passion boil over thus, on their behalf. 3. This Liberty from the Norman tyranny in Laws and Law∣yers,3. This liberty is our birth∣right. &c. we be all born to; it is our own due by birth-right, which appears by variety of Records, Chronicles, and Statutes; besides what was said before, we finde it acknowledged by the Norman corrupt Judges themselves; as in the case of Sir William Herbert reported by Sir Edward Cook. Now a mans House or Land may be let, leased, morgaged, or seised on by Usurpers (that have no right to it) for some time, but he holds his right as his inheritance, in hopes to recover it again one day; so do we our Liberties; and indeed, if we be not now restored unto them, our Brethren will be little better then the Norman Tyrants to us, see∣ing they may deliver us and restore us to our right, but will not. Sirs! you know the Merchants non-payment of his custom due, forfeits all his goods: I say no more— 4. The people are in absolute expectation hereof, from the many4. There be se∣veral and so∣lemn engage∣ments made to do it. solemn engagements and protests, made by my Lord and the Army, in the sight of God, Men, and Angels, to deliver them out of Tyranny, and to restore them to their Rights and Liber∣ties, (I might name New-Market, Triple Heath, Dunbar, Worcester, &c.) It is true, William the Conqueror made many promises and protests to the people too, to defend their Laws and Liberties, and took solemn oaths so to do three several times, (as all the Chronicles tell us) but the difference in the peoples hopes☞ and hearts of these two Conquerors engagements must be this, That whereas William the Tyrant regarded not his Engagements to keep them, but on the contrary most cursedly introduced his own Laws and Lusts, and robbed (like a Beast of prey) the peo∣ple of all their Right, and Liberties, and so set up that bondage of Terms, Judges, and Outlandish Lording practises over the poor bleeding people; yet that now Oliver their Conqueror (a better Christian) will keep (out of conscience to God, and them, being a man fearing God) his several solemn Engagements and Declarations to the people, and contrary to the Norman Tyrant introduce the Laws and Liberties, and Just Rights to the poor, weeping, praying people, as was before the cursed Norman Con∣quest.
Hence it is, that as men reckon their riches not by what money they have, but by what Bonds and Leases they can pro∣duse, so we reckon upon all the promises and protests of his Ex∣cellency and the Army; which Bonds being due to the people,☜ if they pay them not, they are resolved to put them to suite be∣fore a just Judge ere long. 5. They are the more earnest and intent in this their expectati∣on,5. Fast actions best. for that the first actions in any Sacred or Civil Constitution (in respect of those which are to succeed) are like the original to all the other after draughts, or like the Copy to all that write by it: Now as every man hath a Christen-name (as we call it) be∣fore his Sir-name, so is it fit that the Lord Generals (and the Ar∣mies) first Virgin-Act, be for Christ, and for his Churches which bear his Christen name, and then next that to his honor (and sir∣name) the peoples liberties be delivered them from the Norman Free-booters. But it is true, there be some Members of the Ar∣my (whom I have met at Drury House they know,) that are so troubled with the itch (of—getting Lordships) that they are al∣together forgetful of the people, unless it be how to oppress them by fines and fixe-ness (i. e. pride) and are never well, but when they be rubbing upon the poor, and scraping off their scabs upon honest people of this Commonwealth. But I think it is true of some (though God forbid it should of all) that rather then Soul∣diers will lose their game, they will shoot the poor Pigeons out☜ of their Dove-Coats. But 6. And lastly, upon a Scripture account the peoples expecta∣tions6. Scripture promises. are drawn high for deliverance by the General, and the Army; for that the promise is, And your Governors shall be of your selves, Jere. 30. 21. Now hitherto, they have been stran∣gersJer. 30. 21. of other Nations, of the Norman race, and therefore Ty∣rants and Oppressors. I know some open that Scripture as to Christ; but they may know, that it speaks to Gentiles, as well as to Jews; and to the Governors of Nations, as well as the Governor of Judah and Jerusalem; and it agrees with Dan. 7. 18, 22. Where the Saints of the most high must take the Kingdom; which is to be after the Antient of days hath sat, and the judge∣ment be set (as was in 1648.) But sayes one to me (who is now aCap. Ch. great Purchaser too, but to my knowledge before that, he was of
another minde, and made not his Kingdom of this world) what do ye tell us of setting up Christ? why his Kingdom is spiritual, and we have not fought for his Kingdom; but for this Kingdom, viz. a Civil Government, and such matters which Christ med∣dles not with. Answ. But, my Gentleman may know, the stoneRev. 11. 15. cut without hands will meddle with all the Kingdoms of the World, Dan. 2. 34, 35. and then with this, and so it hath; and then wo be to his purchase! For behold, sayes the Lord, I am breaking down, and plucking up all, Jere. 45. 4, 5. And seekest thou great things for thy self? But in that day his servants shall rule, and that in the midst of us. Wherefore, the Lord make ou Army mindful of this fifth Monarchy, and remember the Saints of the most high that groan (yet) under most grievous oppressions by the Government of Strangers. Not but that I am clear of Pythagoras his opinion, who says, That a worthy stranger is toPythagoras. be preferred before an unworthy Citizen and Kinsman; yet withal, that our worthy Fellow Countrymen, and Freeborn Bri∣tains are abundantly to be preferred above unworthy strangers and wicked Normans. For though, it is better a theif feed us, then a Shepherd devour us; and it is better to have a Robber do us justice, then a Justice rob us; and it is more profitable to have our Estates saved by an intruding Guardian, then wasted by one legally appointed; yet these Theives, Robbers, Intruders do devour us, rob us, and destroy us of our Rights and Priviledges: and will not our Army help us? How can they (then) answer it to God and men should they frustrate the incessant expectations of all the honest people in England? and not deliver them from these Tyrannies and Usurpations? but force them with full mouths to cry to Heaven for Justice. But we trust, there is no fear; for it was the Duke of Medina that said, His Sword knew not how to make a difference betwixt a Protestant and a Papist; but as his☞ Excellencies sword, so his word (we hope) will make a large dif∣ference between Britains and Normans; such as love, and such as hate the true Laws and Liberties of the Commonwealth of England; and then he may be stiled not Defender of the Faith, but Defender of the Faithfulness of Gods People, and the Com∣monwealth in all her due Rights. Thus far for this third Chapter.
CHAP. IV. The END, the OBJECT, and FOUNDATION of the LAW: with WORDS to the PARLIA∣MENT, and to the PEOPLE about Norman LAWS and LAWYERS. A Thing is said to be distinguished two waies 1. secundum speciem, according to its specificall na∣ture. 2. Secundum perfectum & imperfe∣ctum in eadem specie, according to the degree of it: now the perfection or imperfection of the Law appeares in the End of it, Object of it, and Foundation of it. For 1 It appertains to the Law, that it be ordained for publicke1 The end of humane Laws what? good and profit (ad commune bonum) as the end and intent of it; and not to particular Interests, or advantages of particular per∣sons or Prerogatives. Common good is taken as it is to the safety and freedome of the people; So that all Laws that are good doe (dirigere humanos actus secundum finem) direct men to this end, which is the end of all honest and just Lawes, viz. the safety and freedome of the Commonalty. First, As to the End in generall, viz. publick good; the Law∣yer1 In generall. himselfe saies, Finis humanae legis est utilitas hominum, which I think is a little too strait, but like the Lawyers end of his Law; because men may have their particular good and advantages by a Law which is dangerous, hurtfull and destructive to the com∣mon good of the people. Therefore a just Law in generall, ordina∣turIsidorus in dig. vet l. 1 tit. 3, lege 2. & 24. Isl. l. 5. c. 211. ad commune bonum, hath the good of all men to its end, And Isidorus sayes three things must be considered in the conditions of humane Laws. As 1. Their congruity to Religion, and the Laws of God; which I shall speake to in the Foundation by and by. And 2. Their proportion and measure to the Law of Nature, which we spake of in Chap. 2. And then 3. Their end as they relate
to the publick utility and advantage' which we are now upon whence observe. 1. Observation, The End that humane Laws tend to, is main∣ly to be eyed by all. 2. Observ. Good Lawes are ever tending to the Publicke good. 3. Obser. Such Laws as swerve from this honest End, are dishonest, and unjust. 4. Obser. Every humane Law imposed upon others, is imposed, per modum regulae & mensurae, according to the rule and measure that is consonant and suitable to such as are so ruled and measu∣red; and this Forma is to be in proportion ad finem. 5. Obs. It is necessary, that every positive humane Law be just, honest, and possible; agreeing with the Lawes of God, the light of nature, the custome of the Country, the conditions of the people, and the times and seasons wherein we live. These things observed, will bring forth Laws well Larded; enlivened and enabled to suit their end and to serve the publicke;2. In specie. But as to the End of them more in specie. 1 The safety of the People, hence such as are Defenders of1. safety. good and wholesom Laws, are called the Conservators of the people; and so Cyrus acknowledged himselfe to be a Conserva∣tor of his Countries Laws, and Liberties, for the safety of the people, and oblieged himselfe to oppose any that would offer to infringe them; and this he did at his Inauguration, notwithstan∣dingZeneph. de Reb. Laced. Flatterers had tickled the ears of his Son Cambyses that all things were lawfull for him. So the Kings of Sparta ingaged to govern according to the Laws, which the people had from Lycur∣gus for their safety: Hereupon, when it was asked Archidamus, the Son of Zeuxidamus, who were the Governours of Sparta, he answered their Lawes. So that to resist or refuse those Lawes which are for the safety of the whole, is not to be suffered in any,☞ no not in Magistrates, but may be mentioned amongst the worst guilt of disobedience and rebellion, Seeing tis far worse then it is for the people to appear for such wholesome Lawes against Magi∣strates; for the Laws which are for publick safety and advan∣tage are to be obeyed before Kings or Rulers, saies Aristotle deAristotle. mundo & lib. 3. Polit. c. 7. But to this by and by; in the interim take these Conclusions.
1. Conclusion, Those Laws which are dangerous, intricate,1. and Insnaring, are not to be allowed of; but the publick cryes out against them. 2. Conclus. Humane Laws have their end, in common, or2. to all alike in Justice; which ought not like a Bowle to run by as∣sed by humor or favor of men; but to be impartiall to all alike, and then it makes harmony: Job compares it to a cloak, or robe, Job 29 14. not hanging loose, or on one shoulder, for so it may soon be blown off; but it must be girt with a girdle; yet with☜ care that the girdle be not over-loaden with the purse, for then as you see in Carriers, it will lag and bend all to one side: But 3 Conclus. Humane Lawes are of an unavoidable necessi∣ty3. for the peace and tranquillity of a Commonwealth. Necessa∣rium fuit ad pacem & virtutem hominum quod leges poneren∣tur:Tho. Aquinas saies Aquinas. A good Commonwealth consisting of Hetro∣genean parts must be like Peters sheet knit up at the four corners Act. 10. to which end humane Laws, must tye up all in one. They must speake to all men in one and the same voice. Sayes Tully.Cicero. 4 Conclus. Civill Precepts, or Laws have their vim coactivam,4. compulsive power and faculty. 5 Conclus. Matters of Fact are the proper object of the5. Laws cognizance; and the Laws take no notice of thoughts, nor words; neither doe they judge of the intentions but of the acti∣ons of men. Cassius was once wished by the Caldean Astrologer, not to fight with his Enemies whilst the sign was in Scorpio; whyCassius. prethee? (saies he) speak to children; for I fear not the signe but the sight (meaning such an Army against him of Archers) and (saies he) I fear Sagittarios (meaning the Actions and Aimes of his Arch-enemies, the Parthians) more then Scorpio. So should☜ Governors and Judges mind more the actions, then the Inten∣tions; the facts, then the thoughts or words of men. 6. Conclus. Honest, humane Laws are the publicks Shield,6. and the peoples Buckler of defence. They are for the security of the poore against the rich oppressors; and to guard the poore lambs from the violence of wolvish natures (and till that time, that the Wolves will lie down quietly with the Lambs, Isa. 11. which will be in the fifth Monarchy, which we are almost at; till
then, I say there is a necessity of such Laws as will restrain their rage and wolvishnesse.) They are made (of right) against the ex∣orbitancie and injustice of Rulers, and great ones, to keep them within bounds of civility, honesty, and righteousnesse, that the Great might not oppresse nor tyrannize it over the small ones. Now, will a man lend mony without security? so it is on good secu∣rity we may venture to deale with Great men: Now the Laws are☞ our Security so to doe, and they save us from their Injuries and teeth, which else would tear us. In the Strand the other day was a Lyon and a Lamb to be seen together, and the Lamb would sit, and lye down by the Lyon so long as the man stood by, and did not fear; So, so long as just Laws stand by us, we need not fear, for they secure us from the fury of others; but if the Laws be (as many of ours are) unjust, partiall, or corrupt, for great mens peculiar Interest, more then for publick good or safety, as in p. 38. & p. 48. then we are in danger indeed. There is a Sea that is called Mare mortuum, which is as smooth and even at the top as can be, but it is very deep and deadly at the bottom; So there be many Laws in England yet, (some of whichSim. I have named) that are very fair, smooth and good in the letter (as to common sence) but alas! they are a little under, deep,☞ subtle, intricate, and twisted up with craft and cruelty, to take a∣way the lives of faithful Commonwealths-men if once they call for their Right and Liberties: and these are not leges mortuae, dead, it were well if they were so; but mortiferae, deadly Laws. The Dove fears the tyranny of the Hawke, and knows not what to do; well, the Birds advise: one wils her to flie aloft, O but says she, the Hawke hath the largest wings to help, and will mount as high! Another advises her to keep low; then, oh! (saies she) it is true, that were better of the two, but the plaguy Hawke will stoop aw too to get his Prey, rather then hee' loose it: Why then saies another, keep the Woods; O but saies she, that is the Hawks Mannor! there is no safety for me there! Why then saies another, keep in the town; alas! saies the Dove, there I am a Prey to every man, and must have my eyes put out, to make my enemy (the Hawk) sport too: Well, what should the doe then? why the best advice was to live in the Coat, or hole of the rock, under the protection of man; the parable is easie, and many are like Aesops living creatures
who must have Morals tyed to their tayles; let this be one then, that the most innocent are the greatest sufferers, and find the rst adversaries, and such sometimes as there is no esca∣ping from but in Christ the Rock; and truly were not the☜ poore under protection of Lawes, there would be no living: wherefore for shame, Sirs! let us see to the Lawes of Eng∣land, that they administer us safety from great Tyrants and Oppressors. Augustine tels us true enough, when he sayes, theAustin, c. 4. & 6. de civit. Dei. Lawes are necessary for this reason, because they are respected by such (as otherwise) contemne vertue and honesty, for that the Law forces her way thorough them, constraines them to obedience, and ministers conduct in warfaring, and gives life, vigor, and luster to Justice and Equity. The Spartan Pausanias tels us, all men (e∣venPausanias. Kings and Princes) must come under the Lawes to be di∣rected; and Agesilaus a King confesseth, that he, and all Commanders must yeeld obedience to the Commandements of the Law. Now as Cicero sayes, Lib. 2. de Offic. When men be∣ganCicero. to doe unjustly, the people to redresse their wrongs done them by great ones, and Oppressors, appointed and invented Lawes to direct the Magistrates for the publick safety and peace of all men, &c. So that the Law of Nature, reason, equity, conscience, all consent to the Peoples Lawes for their owne publick good and safety; for every Creature wil have a shelter, as Snailes their Shels, Bees their Hives, Dogs their Kennels, Birds their Nests, Foxes their Holes, Conies their Burroughs, and whither must wee run for shelter, without honest and just wholsome Lawes? O! honest Country-men! we must looke to our safety! for many of our Lawes are such rotten refuges and shelters, that they wil soon fall upon our heads, and leave us naked to the gripes of Oppressors; and if we seek not remedy from the Supreame Au∣thority,☜ I am sure I shal be sure to say with the Poet (ere long) to purpose, Non expectato vulnus ab hoste tuli; but thus far for the first speciall end of the Lawes. The second speciall end of the Lawes is the Peoples Freedom,2▪ Freedom. to keep the People from slavery, for otherwise there would be no moderation between the Lordlinesse of some, and sla∣vishnesse of others. Thus we shall finde in the Lawes of the Aegyptians, and Romans, and by the constitutions of the Anto∣nines
what notable care was taken for the Peoples liberty, in∣somuch that the poore slaves in those dayes (especially the infranchised ones) might bring their actions for any appa∣rent injury against the Patrons, or Masters. Now seeing there is so much difference between slaves and children, and not∣withstanding the very Heathens would not permit the very slaves to be used cruelly, but they might have open recourse to,Cicero lib 3. Offi. Diod. sic. l. . 2. l. 1. D. and present remedy from the Law, what should we look for then? we, that are the naturall, lawful, free-borne children? and Sons of this Common-wealth? How can we indure to be Slaves? and if Heathens would not suffer their slaves to be wrong'd, but would presently right them by Law, wil then our Christian Governours see us so wrong'd of our liberties as we are? and shall we not finde speedier remedy, and have freer recourse to just and honest Lawes, which aime at our li∣berties then we have? God forbid! It is true hitherto (and the runner may read it) in the Chapter before) the free-borne English have been abominably abused and enslaved, and could finde no remedy after many yeares attendance on a corrupt Law, but we hope this wil be amended, and the Lawes in∣tended (as they ought to be) for the safety and freedom of the people, that Princes may be manacled, and their rages curbed; that private ones may be guarded, and their rights restored by righteous Lawes (not measured by the interest or power of great persons) but wel and evenly weighed in the ballance of freedome. It is true, most Common-wealths are (as yet) in a middle posture, as having their Lawes partly for Great ones interest, and partly for the Peoples liberty; but alas! the Great ones have the greatest influence, and the poore peoples liberties lye as lost, and as loath to speake for themselves, for feare of a foule check, if not of a break-neck, but in due time☞ we doe hope for deliverance, and in the meane time doe groan for our liberties; yet let us observe 1 Obs. So far as Lawes are just and allowable, they advance the peoples interest and freedomes. 2 Obs. Such Lawes looke first and principally upon the peoples, or publick good. 3 Ob. Honest Laws make legible to the people their positive and  ▪
4. Obs. True Laws for the peoples Freedom, have their Rise from the People, and Rule by clear Reason: Till which the people are slaves to others; and it is no marvell then if our Laws (as they now are) are out of tune, and make no good musick in the end; but that instead of Freedome they end in Bondage. But☜ the Nightingales will not long live incaged, whilst your common hedge-Sparrows can indure it very well. When Cyrus was young, Sacas was appointed by his Grand father to be his Law-giver in Diet, Recreations, &c. but when Cyrus grew elder, into tiper years, he became his owne Law-giver, and a Sacas to himselfe;Sim. so surely we are old enough now to be our owne Sacas's, which wil be our happy time. Like as a man that hath been long in prison, so soon as he gets out, oh how he leaps! and dances! so as no ground wil hold him! such a time of deliverance is coming to Eng∣lishmen.☜ But thus far for the End of the Law. Use. Then wee are not too old to learne, that the end of theUse. Lawes is the honor of them, and of the Nation. And no greater dishonour can redound to this Commonwealth then yet to have such Laws and Lawyers, as are neither for the profit, safety, nor freedome of the people. How? how many hundreds? yea, thou∣sands in England that can, and some doe positively assert it to re∣flect with the greatest reproach upon us that can be, viz. the☜ corruption of Laws, Lawyers, Judges, &c. (as in the Chapter before) which to the shame of this Nation is noised and noted beyond the Seas; the particulars I forbear as yet. Secondly, The next thing is the Object of the Law (which I2 The object of the Law, who? or what? shall be short in.) Now the Object is not the materia ex qua, but circa quam, the matter out of which the Law is made, but a∣bout which the Law is conversant and takes most speciall cogni∣zance; that is, wicked men, in their wicked actions, whom the Law is to curb and restraine, which takes in also the formall reason of the Law, with reference to the End that we handled be∣fore, i. e. for the publick good, freedome, and safety; it a habet rationem finis, &c. The Apostle therefore in 1 Tim. 1. 9. sayes, We know the Law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawlesse, and disobedient, for ungodly, and for sinners, for un∣holy, and prophane, for murderers, &c. and whoremongers, for men-stealers, and liars, and perjured persons, &c. that is, for
their punishment, to the muzzling of the mad world, and of wolvish natures, that would tear a peeces the innocent, and de∣stroy the Lambs of equity, truth, and honesty. Such as these are the proper object of the Laws punishment, and none ought to e∣scape that is an oppressor of the poore, and innocent, though he be an Emperor or King. Trajan knew this well enough, when inTrajan. delivering the Sword to the great Provost of the Empire, he said to him; Sir, if I command as I should, use this sword for me; but if I doe not, but oppresse the people, then use and draw it against me: So that the greatest of the Nation are as properly the object of the Law, and of the word of justice for their evill do∣ings, as the poorest. Thus Zenophon lib. 8. Paed. mentions Cy∣rus's solemne Stipulation and Confederation with the Persians.Zenophon. They say, O Cyrus! In the first place, thou shalt promise to the people, that if any make war against the Persians, at home orCyrus. abroad, or seeke to infringe or intrench upon the Liberties and Laws of the Persians, that thou wilt to the utmost of thy power defend and protect this People with their Liberties; and as a faithfull Guardian execute their Laws upon all offenders, and evill-doers. To which Cyrus faithfully and solemnly engages; And then they say: so we Persians do faithfully promise to be aiding & assisting to keep all men (without respect of persons) in obedience to thee; according to our Laws and Liberties, which thou art to defend for the Persians. All this shewes that those Laws of theirs were (without respect to persons) evenly dispensed to all alike, making wicked men in their evill actions their object, whe∣ther great or poor. Use. What have we to say then for those Lawes and LawyersUse. Our English Laws persecute the honest. in England, which make honest, faithfull, innocent men the most object of their torment and punishment? in Rev. 9. 4. the Lo∣custs were commanded to torment, and hurt none but them that had not the seale of God on their fore-heads, and yet contrary to their Commission they must be medling with the green things. O see! how sadly this is lamented and threatned! in Mic. 3. 2. Is it not for you to know judgement? who hate the good, and love the evill, who pluck off their skin from off them, and their flesh from off their bones? &c. O Tyranny! is it not so now with the Lawyers? are not the good the object of their craft and cruelty? do
they not torment the innocent ones most, & tear away their estates?☜ and torment them with injustice and oppression? and who can be worse Tyrants, or viler Malefactors then they that insnare the ho∣nest? afflict the innocent? pillage the people? lay traps for their ves, liberties, and estates? scoffe at oathes? and mock at our iseries? Insomuch that when the poor and oppressed come to the Law for right, the Law is so handled, and handed out by them, that it proves their greatest wrong and grievance▪ Oh! is this to be suffered? Did the Law look aright, the Lawyers would be the object of her punishment to purpose, for Rom. 13. Justice is unicuique reddere suum, for which end is the Law to be a di∣rective line, and Lawyers should make it a terror to evill doers, and not to honest men; in this there is need of a thorough Refor∣mation both of Laws and Lawyers. Thirdly, The Foundation of the Law, is that upon which all3. The founda∣tion of the Law, what? Austin. other Laws are built, as Super-structures in their severall Stories and Lots. This I account the eternal Law, which is (as August.  1. de lib. arbit. cals it) the Supream Reason, that every Law must be brought unto, and regulated by▪ Lex aeterna nihil aliud est quam ratio divinae sapientiae, secundum quod est directiva ium actuum & motionum. Hence the Stoicks and Heathens would have all their Lawes (they say) born ex cerebro Jovis, ofAquinas 12▪ ▪ 93. 3. c. their Gods braine. And the Schoolmen must acknowledge that all humane Laws have their Foundation here, and fetch their vertue radicaliter & remotè, from this Eternall Law. So Tully (that eminent Patriot) tels us the linage of all other Laws. Hanc video sapientisimorum fuisse sententiam, legem neque hominum inge∣isM. Tu▪ Cicero. excogitatam, ne{que} scitum aliquod esse populorum, sed aeter∣um quiddam quod universum mundum regeret imperandi pro∣ibendique sapientiâ. Ita principem illam Legem & ultimam ente dicebant omnia ratione cogentis aut vetantis Dei. It has been the judgement of the wisest men all along, that an honest (just) Law was not a spark struck out of humane Intel∣lectuals (at first) nor blown up, nor kindled by popular puffe or eath, but from an eternall light and wisdome, shining, ruling, and irradiating the whole Universe; and clearing up what wayes were allowable, and what forbidden by God. So that the mind of  himselfe makes the Centre of all honest Laws, from whence
they are taken, and to which they return. Plutarch that florid Mo∣ralistPlutarch. (as one cals him) gives us the like account, and resolves a Lawes and Justice into that primitive eternall Law, even Gods own wisdome. For thus (in his language) saies he, Justice does not onely sit like a Queen (commanding) at the right hand of Jupiter when he sits on his Throne; but she is alwaies in his bosom, and one with himselfe, and he saies that God is . Neither does Plato come much behind himPlato. in his acknowledgement of a Law, which he calls , Gods golden Scepter to rule men. Now this Law is, say others, Aeterna quaedam ratio practica totius dispositionis, & Guber∣nationis universi. The eternall ordinance of God lying in his own wisdome and Councell for the regulating and governing the whole world, minding the publick welfare of all being. Now every one of our Lawes should be a beame of this, and of no other fountain nor foundation: seeing as acute Suarez cals every LawSuarez. jus in communi constitutum, &c. a constitution to common good, according to the command and Law of God: So that this Eter∣nallFundamentall Law what? Law is the onely immutable and necessary fundamental Law; and whilst men make meere notions fundamental Lawes, and cry up such customes as are of eldest date for their fundamen∣tals, they make Idols of their formes, and oberre from the real, unalterable Fundamentall Law for the most part. For that Law is the Fundamentall Law that is first laid for all other Lawes to be fetched and derived from, and this is none but this Eternal Law, as appears Prov. 8. 15. By me (saies the Wisdom of God) Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice, or make Laws. AndAugustin. Augustine tels us plainly in lib. 1. de lib. arbit. c. 5. &c. tom. 1. That no humane Laws are to be allowed of, as honest, just, and lawfull, unlesse they be fetched from this Eternall law of God, and good reason for it too; for as in all motions, in omnibus mo∣ventibus,Reas. virtus secundi moventis derivatur a virtute moven∣tis primi, the second fetches force and vertue from the first, so in omnibus gubernantibus, &c. in all Governors the subordinate hath Commission from the Supream; and the inferior, from the superior; So a Subject-Magistrates commands are according to the commands of his King or Supreame Governour, who hath given him Commission. And thus are all humane Laws accord∣ing
to, and derived, and Commissionated from this Eternall Law of God, or else they are not good; and for as much as they doe partake of right and Orthodox Reason, they are thus derived ab eterna lege: so such Laws as are against Reason, are iniquity, and not fetched from this eternall Fundamentall Law. Let us note then. 1. Rule, This eternall Law, is the only absolute, unchange∣able Fundamentall of all humane Laws. 2. Rule, Of all others this Fundamentall must be knowne. Now a thing is said to be known, either in seipso, as it is in it self, and so God and Saints are said to know this eternall Law; or else in suo effectu; as one that knowes not the Sun in his own substance, knows it in suâ irradiatione, in his irradiation and op∣peration. So we are said to know this Fundamentall Law by its irradiation of Reason in us, more or lesse; so that by its effects, nd our participation of Divine Reason we know it. 3. Rule. Meer humane Reason (secundum se) is not the standing Rule of things, but according to its participation of divine. 4. Rule, Meer Humane Reason doth not partake (ad ple∣num dictamen) to the full of divine Reason, but only reaches to a measure in every age; so that as it increases and grows more di∣vine, so must humane Laws. 5. Rule, Humane Laws are not infallible demonstrations or conclusions. 6. Rule, The more agreeable the Laws are to this Eternall Law, the more unalterable they are; and the more they partake of this Fundamentall Law, the more absolute they are, and to e obeyed; and the more proper, excellent, and profitable are the acts and ends of such Laws. Use. What remains? But the day of reckoning and reforming the Laws and Lawyers of this Commonwealth? seeing they (for the most of them) faile in the End, Object, and Foundation. All are not Fundamentall Laws that are so called; neither is the no∣tion of a Fundamentall Law, such an Idoll as men make it, as ifFundamentall Laws mee notions. a noli me tangere were writ upon it, because it hath been of long continuance, and therefore must not bee altered; but without such respect or fear of such a Scare-crew, have the
Conquerors all along altered even those they called Fundamentall Laws, that stood not with their Interests or Intents; and they have abrogated them without any judiciall processe against them: and so did William the Norman without the least respect to the peoples Rights or Liberties: And what shall Oliver the Peoples☞ Conqueror do nothing? doth the fearful word of the Fundamentall Laws of England (i. e. of the Normans in England, which have robbed and cheated us of our Rights and Freedomes, doe these their Lawes) strike more terror (being secret enemies) then a whole Army in the field of open enemies? have we none to plead, none to intercede (as the Prophet sayes) for us? seeing for so many years the Norman Lawes of England have been such pure Servants to corrupt Interests, as none else (as I know of) have enjoyed the honour of Fundamentall. O fie! for shame! let us looke about us! and see!—We have lost our Fundamentall Laws by William the Conqueror, and other upstart, irrational selfish, un∣worthyWhat Laws are most fun∣damental. Laws have usurped the title and honor from the people, and shal they not be altered? and others be set up upon the Eternal law of God, agreeing more with divine Law, in their stead? for the liberties, peace, profit, safety, and Freedome of the people? and that will not torment honest men (as hitherto Laws have) as the object of their tyranny? It is this that we call for, and nothing☞ else, and we will never cease day nor night, nor give rest to God or Men till it be granted us, for the good of the godly of this Na∣tion? Those Laws are most honorable and fundamental (though they be but of a dayes standing) that agree best with Gods Laws; But O our misery! how many Statutes, Acts and Judgements are there which have subjected the bodies of men and women to arrests and imprisonments? yea, and sometimes to death (dia∣metrically) contrary to the Law of God? Reason? and Charity? yea, to Magna Charta it selfe? such as were named before in the Chap. 3. and yet I might adde many more: as that of HabeasA Writ of Ha∣beas corpus ty∣rannicall. corpus, whereby any Freeman of England may suffer impri∣sonment before his cause is heard or judged by the Law; which imprisoning is the utmost punishment the Law can inflict upon Trespassors and Debtors. This Writ is a wrong to the Liberties of the people, and delivers (many times upon malice) honest men into the hands of devilish minded men; yea, of Foxes, Walves,
Bears, and Tygers; I mean wicked Lawyers, Bailiffs, Serjeants, and Goalors, to raven upon their Bodies and Estates, with un∣satiable, and monstrous cruelty; whilst their poor Wives and Children want bread to eate: O unsufferable Tyranny! and☜ such is the starving men in Prison, and murthering them upon malice; So the imprisoning upon debt, and keeping their bodies in iron cages, whilst by their liberty and industry in their callingsImprisonment for debts ille∣gal, Mir of Just. 102. 257. they might (by degrees) make money to pay their debts off; which would be to the honor and inriching of the Nation. I might also mention the hanging men for meere Theft, and o∣ther Laws beside, which are cruell, absurd, and opposite to the Laws of God. Against whose Lawes no Laws are or ought to be Fundamentall. Wherefore away with that Bug-bear word of Fundamentall Laws, and let us look to the Eternall Law of God☜ as the only Fundamentall that must stand when all is done, which does formaliter obligare, as the Rule of Rationals. Wherefore my word to the Supreame Authority of this Na∣tion1. To the Par∣liament. in Parliament is, 1. As they are the Supream in Rule, so they ought to be1. As the Su∣pream. Supreame in Reason: Now Supream Reason is divine, or the wisdome from above, which is not cruell, bloody, litigious, op∣pressing, &c. But saies the Apostle, James 3. 17. It is pure, peaceable, gentle, easie to be intreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality and without hypocrisie. This ratio divina, is ratio Gubernativa. Of all men it is they, that must have the Reason of the Law: Now these Lawes which they have not a right Reason for, and such a Reason as is derived ab aeterna lege must not stand. None must abide but such as agree with the Law of God, as the Fundamentall of them: Wherefore, seeing they sit not for themselves, but for the people; I pray God they may hear the loud cries and complaints of the poore, oppressed people under the tyranny of such Laws and Lawyers, as are now in being, to the robbing and ruining of our Rights and Freedoms. Oh! we fear! least what victories are continued us according to our faith, and incessant prayer, should produce in some a desire to take up the Dutch Titles of High and Mighty, and to seek☜ more to be adored for a Supremacy in Government, then a Su∣premacy in God or Grace! oh! God forbid! least the Cannon
mouth be turned upon us!—Only this we say, that we see these tryumphs by Land and Sea make some monstrous high, and too high to take notice of the Petitions of the poore and oppressed, fatherlesse, and widows, who are begging, and weeping, and praying, and Petitioning, and to no purpose to men, when they complain, and sigh, and sob before God; who have (some of them) more right to, and have made more faithfull prayers for these mercies and victories, then some of them who usurpe and assume the whole benefit of them, ratling about in their Coaches, and blazing it abroad in their gold and silver; and yet☞ oppresse, or afflict, and reject the prayers and tears of such as have most right (it may be in Gods account) to what they enjoy. But our prayers are to our God, that he will keep our Parliament humble, and to make them wise for the Fifth Monarchy (men∣tioned in the next Chapter) and in the mean time the supreame Rationalists for the good, safety, and freedom of England; whose eyes are full fixed upon them for deliverance out of this Nor∣man tyranny and Tyrants, according to the Eternall Law of God, which is ratio divinae sapientiae moventis omnia ad debi∣tum finem directive, in all actions and Laws that tend to the pub∣lick good. Secondly, As they are Legislators too, our eyes are upon them2. As they have the Legislative power. Isidorus in l. 5. c. 10. Etym. in the earnest expectation of greater matters in restoring us to our Right, and lost Liberties, then hath been hitherto: Lex (sayes Isidorus) est constitutio populi secundum quam majores natu simul cum plebibus aliquid sanxerunt: and it is not the ratio cujuslibet that condere potest legem, but of such Governors as represent the people, whose rights and freedomes they sit for; our prayers herein are, that they be rightly principled and spirited to make the Laws which we must live under in these dayes, as to the people of this Nation. Wherefore 1. The Intents and Wills of the Lawyers must be bent upon the publick good in all their Laws and Statutes; therefore the1. honest people are all purposed to waite with patience upon this Parliament or Legislative Power, for the pulling downe those Laws which are against the publick good, and for setting up of others in their room. Because hitherto the Brambles have made Laws for the trees, and have scratched and tore them, and then
wrote Laws in their blood. Carneades was wont to say utilitasCarneades. justi propè mater & aequi, which in an honest sence is sufferable: Our Lawgivers should send out Lawes with olive branches inThe Parlia¦ment not su∣pream power when? ☜ their mouths, which should drop sweetnesse and fatnesse to the Nation. Look how the Sun is said to shoot out with healings in his wings, and so should our Law givers. It is not for the Par∣liament to be the supreame Power of the Nation in the next Mo∣narchy, but they may (then) bee content to be subservient: wherefore, in the mean time let them like honest men, and good Christians, execute justice with mercy, as well as mercy with justice: For a Plutarch can tell us, that God is angry with a tooPlutarch. hot and hasty spirit in Legislators, , he wil not have them meddle with his Scepter, his Thunder∣bolt and his trident; i. e. he does not love they should Lord it o∣ver their Brethren, as if they were the supreame Power, and had☜ his absolute dominion or Soveraignty; he would not have them too violent or domineering, but rather darting out such warme, amiable, and winning, and cherishing , beams of Ju∣stice, goodnesse, and clemency, so as might inlarge all the hearts of Gods people to praise him: Our Laws should therefore like so many fresh & pleasant green pastures, in which these  Our Parliament are to lead their flocks to feed sweetly and secure∣ly by those refreshing and gliding streames of Justice, that run☜ down like waters, as is promised. But O when! when!—Well, but if all Laws be for the peoples good, a Broom will soon be found to sweep down these Cob-webs, or Laws that are so full of venome and subtle workings against the faithfull ones, for theCobwebs in Westminster to be swept down. peoples interest, and this will sweep down many an Achitophe∣lian, and Machivillian, and Devillian web, which hangs yet in Westminster, and so also many a Hamans and Herods web which intangle honest hearts, so as to take away their lives, and catch them in snares; for many of the Laws are not for the publick good, being by Kings and Courtiers to keep up their own Inte∣rests, and like Domitians Play-fellows, to make royall sport, and pastime in catching the poor Flyes. (for so they accounted the people of this Commonwealth) and insulting over their torments with Tyranny. But let these vile Lawes avaunt, and let us not have reeds to peirce us through, but staves for the weary and
afflicted to leane upon. Let our Lawes be cords of love, and not snares and nets to trap our Brethren with, and to hunt them, as the Prophet sayes in Micah 7. 2. so Jerem. 5. 26. They set snares to catch men. Therefore, our God give this Su∣preame power (here) the supreame priviledge of Reason, as to fetch their Lawes from the eternal and only true fundamental, viz. the Law of God: for those Lawes are most radical and fun∣damental,☞ that come nearest to the Law of God, and are parti∣cipations of that eternal Law which is the spring and original of all other honest inferiour and derivative Lawes, Plato. as Plato sayes, and there is no such publique be∣nefit as that which comes by such Lawes; for they, they are that tend to the conservation of the vitals and essentials of a Common-wealth, in the which all have an alike and equal in∣terest and priviledge. Secondly, Justice is the next aime of the Legislative power,2 Justice cald for from the Legislators. on purpose to keep up the publick good. Thus the great Je∣hovah, and Almighty Legislator hath let us see his method in the Decalogue, and set our Law-givers an example: for in the first Table the intention of the Law-giver is to ordaine for the Pub∣licke good, and safety; and then the second Table containes the order of justice to be observed among men, that every one may have right, according to which the Publique good is preser∣ved; our Parliament is to set up God, godlinesse, &c. in their capacities, as the Publique good, and then according to his Law to set up Justice and Righteousnesse amongst men, be∣cause☞ by good and just Lawes are men secundum quid, & in or∣dine ad tale regimen made good and just. The Braine, Liver, and Heart in the Body doe resemble three principall Members of the Body Politique; the Liver is the beginning of naturall faculties, which segregates the Hu∣mours,Men made good by good Lawes, and bad by bad Lawes. aggregates the Bloud, and so sends it about into the Body, and for this may use be made of the Physician; the Heart is the beginning of vitals, and generates vitall spirits, and then sends them and spends them about in the particular mem∣bers of the body, and this doe some of the faithfull Ministers of the Gospel, who wil spend and be spent for the worke of Christ in this Common-wealth. But then the Braine is the beginning
of Animals (as Doctor Sutton sayes in his Asize Serm. p. 2.)Sutton. Embleme of Phisitians, Mi∣nisters, Magi∣strates. commands in chiefe the Body, sits in the highest roome as in a royal Palace, compassed about with Forts and Guards; hath the five Sences as so many Intelligencers to give notice what is done abroad, &c. and this embleme befits good Magistrates, who must sit highest, and honourablest, and command the body so as to keep it in order and good temper. 3 Although a Law doth necessarily praesuppnere actum in∣tellectus,3 Legislators wils inspired by divine rea∣son. yet it does formally lye in actu voluntatis, but then the will of the Law-giver must be guided by Divine reason, or else his Lawes wil be tyrannical and unjust; for Tyrants are ab∣solute in their owne wils, and stand tiptoe for their owne in∣terest, and like Horses at stake (tyed by a Law yet) they reach out with one legge as farre as they can to grazs, into their owne bellies. But Aristotle tels us excellently, ,Aristotle. that an honest Law is a cleare intellect with∣out the wil, that is, it is impartial to all alike, and cannot be bribed to injustice; it is a pure judgement without selfish∣nesse, or seeking our owne wils; it is such a Law as makes no factions; therefore a Law-giver must follow the ultimum & practicum dictamen legis, i. e. true reason, and his wil like a aeca potentia must follow the novissimum lumen intellectus, the last light of this ; and therefore Justice is painted blinde, though the Law be oculata, and must see, for . 4 Law-givers had need to have a sound judgement of all4 Legislators judgement sound. men, and like Janus his head look both wayes, yea all wayes with Argus's eyes when they make Lawes; Judicium & pru∣dentia Archiectonica ad ferendas leges. The Aegyptian HieroglypbickAegypt. was oculus in sceptro, and it had need with us to be such an eye as can see both  into publick affaires; there∣fore as the Phisician before he sets down his Receipt, or pre∣scribes to his Patient what to doe, he wil feele the pulse of theSim. body, view the urine, observe the temper and changes in the bo∣dy, and be very inquisitive to informe himselfe of the true estate of the body before he can proportion his remedies, &c. So should our Parliament know how the Pulse beats of this Body Politick, and consider what temper and changes attend us, o¦therwise☜ they wil never proportion Justice and Lawes sutable
to the present estate of this body, nor bring forth apt remedies to remove those dangerous Lawes and humours, which areAquinas 1. 2 Q. 100. 9. . Averroes in 2 Rhet. c. 18. the cause of our complaints and sicknesse; Legislator humanae le∣gis judicat de actibus exterioribus. I pray God give our Parlia∣ment such udgement and insight, for certainly as Averroes sayes, Judgement is a Syllogisne in which a Judge can never make a good conclusion that considers not of the premises first. How many Votes and resolves in Parliament (without this) wil☞ prove one after another starke nought and blinde; and if the first concction be not good, the second cannot be so; but then up starts the Siemites, whose counsell is, that fire may goe out of the ramble to burne up all the Cedars of Lebanon. Now seeing we are sure the Lawes▪ flow from a fountaine of wis∣dome, then all our Lawes must be like Candles lighted at his; for those Lawes are most profitable and prevalent which are founded in his light, , O what sweet and soft perswasion wil those Lawes have with them that are stuffed with the excellent fanny-downes of reason. 5. Lastly, the Legislative Power take special care of the due5. All Lawes made known by Legisla∣tors. idr. Proclamation of all the Lawes, that the people be not ignorant of those Lawes which require obedience; hence as Iidors, l. 2. c. 10. Etym. sayes, Lex is a legend as wel as a ligando, and therefore must be made known, as was said in chap. 3. V ubae to all the people; for it is horrible tyranny to punish any free-borne Brittaine, or Englishman upon an unknowne Law; and therefore as all the Lawes of God are published in a most suf∣ficient and emphaticall manner; so according to the Lawes ofVide Master Braine's new arth. God, ought all our Lawes. Thus as they are our Legislators, doe we heartily looke for the ting up of such Lawes as a∣gree with Gods and the peoples nights, and for pulling downe those unjust, usurping, tyrannical topping Lawes, and Law∣yers, who live on the robbing and wronging the people of theirQ. 1. A. just Lawes and Liberties; but the Question is now (we know by whom) when the Lawes may be altered? Ans. Although in the second Chapter I have spoken to it,1. What Laws must be alte∣red. yet I adde this: 1. That the Lawes may be (yea and must be) altered i
unquestionable, seeing they are not infallible conclusions, but better may be brought forth for the publick good, safety, and freedome. And, 2▪ They must be altered, when the present Legislators see the2. defects of the former, and are indued with reason to reforme them; yea though the first aimed at publick good, seeing in∣stituerunt imperfecta (& forte injusta) in multis deficientia, yet their Successors must mutare, & instituere aliqu quae in paucio∣ribus deficere possunt a commun salute & utilitate. 3▪ When the times are turned, and States are changed with them,3. then others must be set up that better suit the times, and seasons wherein we live, and the condition of the Common-wealth upon such a change; this made Augustine to say, in lib. 1. deAugustine. lib. arbit. c. 6. tom. 1. Lex temporalis quamvis justa sit, commu∣tari tamen just per tempora potest, pro hominum ac temporum variis conditionibus; let our Lawes be ever so honest and just, yet they may be lawfully and justly altered, according to the conditions of the Times we live in; And if so, then surely it is without exception, that those unjust and dishonest Lawes that have enslaved us, and kept us Prisoners, should be☜ tore downe by these times, seeing the Norman conquest is now captivated, none of his tyrannou Lawes or Lawyers are to be continued, but the people ought to be set at liberty by these Legislators, as to their owne Lawes and freedome. And for this, the times, turns, Victories, Triumphs▪ God, and the peo∣ple doe expect, and shall all be frustrate? God forbid! there is a Price put into the hands of Governours, and wil they notTo the Par∣liament. have the heart to use it? Had ever any Parliament that liberty to appeare for God's Lawes, and the Peoples Liberties as these now have? were they not called by an extraordinary Provi∣dence upon that account, to see what they wil doe for God and his people? to deliver them from injustice, and oppres∣sion,☜ of cruel (godlesse) irrationall Lawes and Lawyers? Take good heed therefore, and love the Lord your God, and cleave not unto the generation of cruel men, Josh. 23. 8, 9, 10, 11. It is true, they wil latter and fawne upon you for your favour, but Alexander grew not a Tyrant till after he was Baptised
into the Title of a God, unto which I think the Titles of High and Mighty, or the Supream Power equivalent; and without Caution, may bee as dangerous an edge-toole as ere we touched. But let them consider that in Ezek. 1. 18. the wheeles (which☞ run swift now) are full of eyes to over-look them; and will not the wheeles turn upon us; if yet they allow so many hundreds to live, and make a trade of sin (s in chap. 3.) at their very doores, by lying, swearing, cheating, oppressing and injuring the people? without this horrible trading of Lawyers be dashed down and damned to Hell, I doe not see how they will answer the call of God, or the prayers and expectations of the godly people; besides the assiduous, and daily sad cries, and tears of thousands of Widowes and Orphans, and oppressed ones in this Nation, who all together (as with one voice) groan at this grievance (which is as yet unremoved, and unremedied) and that bg, and pray for their just Rights and Freedomes, which they had before the Norman Tyrant made them all Slaves, to advance his preroga∣tive upon their ruine and misery! O sad! and what swarmes of☞ such Vermine were bred in every age out of Englishmens cor∣ruptions, and contentions appears in chap. 3. And is it not time now to crush them? The wicked have walked on every side, while the vilest men were exalted, as the Psalmist saies, Psal. 12. 8. O! is Kingly power pulled down, and yet are the free people made tributary? Is Prerogative cut off, and yet shall Laws of England stand, that were ruled and run by that great by∣asse? Is their head Abaddon gone, and yet these regiments of Locusts and Scorpions remaine to the ruine of poor people? God forbid! for their five months is upon the period, they must down. Quest. How shall we then come by our owne, if Lawyers go downe? Answ. More easily then ever; for whereas justice was of tooHow we come by our owne without Law∣yers. high price in their hands, we shall then have it at our own doors, and at an easie rate shall we then receive our own: And why? Because it is the Law, not Lawyers, which gives us our owne▪ Whereas before a man met with so many delays (for the Lawyers like some unjust Post-masters, when the Law would goe one
mile with them, would compel it to go two) and with so many sub∣tleties, intricacies, turnings, and windings, formalities, and punctilio's and lamentable expences, that they were at last forced to leave the Law, and loose their owne to boot, and all because of the Lawyers; so that the way will then be clearer to recover a mans owne. All other objections that I have met with, are answered; so that the rubs and lets being removed, what remains but to goe a∣bout the worke, the worke, the worke of God, the worke of the people. If any stop me, and say, stay Sir! shew mercy! make not tooObject. much hast!—remember the condition of the Lawyers will be very sad! some of them are sensible of it already! one hanged himselfe in Holburn but yesterday, and we doubt many more will, if you drive on so fast. Sayest thou so? I am sorry for that, but the truth is, theirAnsw. trading will bring them (without a turn) to the worst end of all, and indeed I fear it will be the end of many a Desperado of them, to cry out with Severus, heu! omnia fui, & nihil profui! for you shall seldome find faith among men, that mind more to make gold theirs, then God theirs; yet this should, and does make our hearts ake for them, and pitty them more then they pitty them∣selves, that so live by sin; and that account no Angels good, but☜ A word in charity to warn the Lawyers. them that trouble, and stir the waters. But let not those few, (ah few!) that are honest among them, fall now to the trade of ruining themselves, that have ruined others; but this I tell them, that it is best for them (both as to this world, and the world to come) to leave off their unlawfull callings quickly, to recant their trading, and triumphing in sin, to turn to God, and give themselves up to some other honest imployment for the publick good; and to joyn issue with the servants of God, and faithfull ones of the Commonwealth, for the Right and Liberties of the people, that were took away ever since William the Tyrant wrested them out of the peoples hands. But now the dawning of our deliverance is en∣tred,Prayer for our Governors. and the mouthes of many are already opened, like doores without lock or Key; I pray God make our Governors full of spirit, and like brains of strong constitutions, not to be toxicated (as the other were) with the world of humors, or vicious fumes
and vapours that wil arise from uncleane stomacks; and that they make haste, for God wil not stay for them, and their☞ time (like Sand in the Glasse) if wel shaken together is lesse then it lookes for; therefore the Lord hasten them in this worke, with their eyes in their head (Christ) and kept afore them, for else like Plow-men (indeed) they wil make but balk for right furrowes; God wil goe on with his worke else with∣out them, for his time is come, he hath heard our groanes, and is come downe to deliver us from these Task-masters. And as it is storied of Hercules, that with his Club he came into a Pt∣ters shop, and dashed all a peecet; so wil he that wil come, come with his Iron Club, & make all fly about us, if we be not for∣warder then yet we are; for as one shower that falls on theSim. Dunghil makes it dirty, and in the Kennel makes it stink, and in desolate places brings forth weeds, and in Gardens brings forth flowers; so one dispensation, and day of his coming wil perplex, and make the Lawyers stink in our nostrils, and bringPriests and Lawyers help one another, Priests let them alone to live by sin, and Lawyers in re∣quital pleads for them to live by tythes. forth vanities in some, but righteousnesse, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost to his Saints, and deliverance, and sweet freedome, and blessings to the Common-wealth. In the meane time, it is a shame that Ministers of Christ can see them live so in sinne and say nothing, seeing those Agags that the in∣dulgent eye of Sauls have spared and favoured, must be met with by the (two-edged) Swords of the Samuels of God  but so much to our Authority in the Legislative power, for the advancing the Law of God, as the only fundamentall Law of this Nation. Secondly, My word to the People is as a Remembrancer: for2. To the free∣born people of England. when Cyrus King of Persia proclaimed liberty to the Jewes, only those went out of captivity whose spirits God stirred up, in Ezra 1. 5. This is the case, we are freed from our Norman Captivity. Now! you whose spirits God hath stirred up, why appeare for your Liberties and Rights! returne home unto your owne! it is high time! be not longer Slaves to Nor∣man Lawes, or Lawyers! This your liberty is Naturall, and con∣naturall,Our Liberty what it is. as Paul said, Acts 22. 20. I am a free-borne Roman, which was his Plea, and unsuited his Adversaries, and made
them afraid; which surely had never been, had not this bo∣est☜ man made use of his right and liberty, and let his Judges and Governours know it. Surely this liberty is more worthThe worth of it. then all the Lands in the Nation to us, and if we know it, wee should not slight it so as we doe! therefore honoured Ames, cas. l. 5. c. 22. tells us, that this Libertas proxime accedit  vitam ipsam, Liberty a man counts next his life, and will not loose it (if it be possible) but wil loose his estate, yea theAmes. lothe off his back first; yea further, for the Publick Liberty and common safety, a faithfull man wil loose his very life, and prizes it abundantly above his life, as some honest hearts have done in England in most ages. And if any wonder that I willObj. rive thus against the streame, seeing I cannot turne it, I must tll them, That the Fish which alwayes goes downeAns. Sim. Why we strive against stream. the streame we suspect for dead, whilst the living Fish makes against the streame; but the truth is, as when Tides turne, there is first a secret motion and turning at the bottome before it comes at top; and so there is in the bottome of our hearts, which wil ere long be more openly to all eyes; in the meane time, we must minde the People of the time of dy, and tell them☜ what the Clock strikes, for their liberty and deliverance is hard by; And beleeve it, Brethren, the flaming Sword is in ourGen. 3. sight, turning hither and thither, every way, to drive out these Wretches that have lived so long upon forbidden fruits; and although the bowles of Authority seemes (to many) to run Byass to a bad (I was ready to say Mad) Mistresse, this wil be mended (ere long) when the Mistresse is removed; but we must ballast our Ship before we put to saile, therefore consider Country-men! First of all, No Governours are above the Peoples Lawes and1. Lawes and Liberties of the People are highest. Aristotle de mundo, & lib.  Polit c. 7. Liberties; hence it was that Kings could not (De jure) con∣clude, or determine businesses according to their owne wills; and Aristotle (Alexanders Tutor) tels us, That absolute power in Governours is the next degree to plaine Tyranny, yea had it not been for feare of offending Alexander, I thinke he had called it absolute Tyranny, and said true too. Therefore are Kings and Magistrates the Organs, or Instruments of executing the Peoples Lawes, and must receive their Lawes from the
People. Hence it is that the Emperor, King of France, Kings of Spaine, England, Poland, Hungarie, or Princes of the house of Austria, Dukes of Brabant, Earles of Flanders, or Hol∣land, before their Coronation, or Creation to the Governments, do ingage to keep the Laws of their Country; and their breach of the Laws is, or ought to be as punishable upon them as any others. And to shew how the Laws and Liberties of People are above their Governors, God alwaies gave Laws to such, as should go∣vern the people for the peoples good, Deut. 17. which their Rulers ought not to alter. vid. Brains New Earth. Secondly, All Rulers and Governors are bound to execute2. Rulers are to be for the peoples good. ☞ Caesar l. 5. & 7. de bel. Gal. their Offices and Authorities for the peoples benefit, and publick good; and the greatest Treason is against the peoples Laws, and Liberties. And Caesar himselfe in his Commentaries, tels us, that Amblorix King of the Eburons confessed, that such were the con∣ditions of the Gaulish Empire, that the people lawfully assem∣bled had no lesse power over the King, then the King had over the People, but rather more. So we find there, how Vercingento∣rix gave an account of his actions before the people, how they were for their good and freedom, Thus in England, Ireland and Scot∣land the Representative of the People have the greatest autho∣rity (i. e. as from the People) the like in Spaine, especially in A∣ragon, Valentia, and Catalonia (cum aliis &c.) There is a Ju∣stitia Major who stands for the Peoples Rights and Liberties, hath more power then the King or his Councel, and therefore at his Coronation, the Lords of the Kingdome use these words in their own Language to the King, p. 60. Nos qui valemos tanto como vos, y pdemos mas que vos, vos elegimos Rei con estas è y estas conditiones entra vos y nos un que, mandamus que vos. We who are in as much value as you, and have more power then you, yet have chosen you King upon conditions. &c. and there is between you and us, one that commands both you and us, i. e. the Justitia Major, who is altogether for the peoples Laws, Right, and Liberties; and to see that for this end the Kings, and Princes govern. But in case Governors doe not rule for the pub∣lick good, then Thirdly, The People may orderly declare against the dange∣rous3. Else the people declare against them. Practises of their Rulers, and make an orderly resistance
for their owne Rights and Liberties: Now let me not be mista∣ken,☜ Rulers how? for I fear this Doctrine will not please some selfish Rulers; but this I say, whilst I call upon the people to appear for their own freedome and rights, I mean not by armes, to fight, or wage war against their Governors in a rash disorderly way, O no! not for a world! that we should bee guilty of so ungodly a Rebellion! for really, I would bee one that would spend my blood against them that so doe: but this I say, let them mildly, declare against the mis-governments of such men as seek their owne private more then the publick good, and let them use means to correctNot by open arme. that mis-government, to admonish the offenders; to petition to the Parliament, or to our Conqueror the Lord Generall, with the same importunities the poor Widow used to the unjust Judge, till she was answered; and so continue, untill the godly people haveBy new choice. their rights of a free choise of another Representative in their stead, that will doe better, and more righteous things for the People; and this priviledge the people may freely seeke (by peaceable means) to enjoy and challenge as their right, If these in this Representative should wrong, or yet rob us of our Rights and Priviledges, or act against the publicke good. Seeing the People have the right and originall power (as was declared in the last Parliaments Declaration after the cutting off of the King forWhy? his tyranny) of chusing their own Rulers. Thus the States or Princes of the people met at Mispah to chuse Saul, 1 Sam. 20. 18. so 1 Sam. 11. 14. which was confir∣med to him by the people at Jabesh-Gilead; so was David first in Hebron, and after in Judah by the generall suffrage of the people. In this sence saies Hushai to Absolom, 2 Sam. 16. 18. Nay, but whom the Lord, and this people, and all the men of Israel shall chuse, his will I be, and with him will I abide: Yea, we read how the Heathen people had learned this lesson by the light of nature, to chuse their own Governors. Thus Cicero saies 1. de offic. that Deioces from a Judge of private controver∣sies,Cicera. was for his uprightnesse chosen by the whole people of the Medes for their Supream Governor: and Livy tels us the like,ivius. how their Governors and Senators were chosen by the people, and upon their defaults, how they set up others, and put them out. Hence Tarquinus Superbus was esteemed a Tyrant, being neither
chosen by the people, nor the Senate, but intruding. And thus wee might goe on, to show the people had ever the right of chusing their own Governors; therefore they have the priviledge orderly to declare against their male-administrations; and to use all means that may be to remove them that are retrograde to the publicke good, that others may succeed who are more sensible of our bon∣dage and tyranny. And this I say, that the people have a de∣fensive force of armes to preserve their Rights and Liberties with, from those tyrannies and oppressions of their Rulers, as would wrong them of them, and wring them from them; yea, more∣over, if it be by consent of the publick (and not upon discontent of a few private hot-brain'd spirits) the people (generally con∣curring)☞ may decline obedience to those Governors that have, or hold them in slavery under Laws against the publick good, whe∣ther as in relation to liberty of Conscience, or liberty of the Subject; with reference to Gods Laws or the Peoples. Thus Libna withdrew obedience from Jehoram King of Judah, 1 Chron. 6. 17. 2 Chron. 21. 10. for abandoning the Laws of God and the People. So when Antiochus by his tyrannicall Laws re∣quired the Jews to imbrace his Religion, and thereby robbed them of all the Laws of God, and their own Laws; We finde Mat∣tathias1. Macc. 1. 43. & 2. 22. resolute to resist, and he saies to the King; We will not o∣bey, nor will we doe any thing contrary to our Religion. But, he took up armes, got into the mountains, gathered Troops and waged war against Antiochus for Religion, and Laws, and Li∣berties of the people, the Jewes. Yea, we shall find Debora raise (under the conduct of Barac) an Army for the Laws and Liberties of Israel (yea, when many of the Tribes thought not of Liberty, as Reuben, Dan, Asher, Benjamin, and Ephraim, and were against it too; and adhered to the Tyrant and tyrannies of Jabin) by a few out of Zbulon, Nepthalie, and Issachar, they overthrew Sisera, and restored the people to their just Rights and Priviledges. Now these are so far from being Adversaries to the Publick (that have a publick call thus to do) that they are her faithfull Friends and Servants that seek to defend her Rights and Liberties, though it be a disobedience to usurping or tyran∣nicall☜ powers; but be sure they have a clear call upon the publick account, before they appear so, & then let them be on the defensive side too, as for their own.
Fourthly, Let our Countrymen know, that this conquest hath4 This Con∣quest hath been on the peoples ac∣count. been altogether upon the peoples account, i. e. for their just Rights, Laws, and Liberties; now is it not fit for them to demand their own? will they loose their own for want of humble asking? or honest acting? The children of Sophocles would have impeached and impleaded their Father for an old Dotard; but Sophocles brings forth a book of his own writing, which was ful of Ingenuity, Art, and Reason, and bids his Judges see by that whether he were a Dotard or no: So let other Nations see by something or other that we are past children and fools to loose our Liberties and Rights any longer; therefore for Christs sake and the Countries, let us use all honest and lawfull means to take possession of our owne, and pull them out of the hands of the Norman Tyrants, and Intru∣ders. Where be the faithfull Commonwealths-men that call for their Liberties and Laws (as was before William the Conqueror) are any of them left alive? The Host of Nola in the story being commanded by the Roman Censor, to goe and call the good men of the City to appear before him, went to the Church-yard and there called at the Graves of the dead, Ho! O yee good men of Nola! come away! the Censor calls for your appearance! for I know not where any good men are left alive! I think we may go so to the graves of some faithfull Commonwealths-men, and say, O hasten! out of your graves! for we know not where to finde such faithfull ones for the Peoples Liberties left alive! for where are they that will stand up for their Rights? would we but joyn more magnanimously in a general issue herein, some particular faithful ones would not be so much sufferers under the tyranny and cru∣elty of the Normans, as they are, whiles we sit still and say nothing. O sad! will not after ages blush at our folly? doe we not say, it is pitty but the prisoner should stay there, and lye by it, seeing he will not goe free when he may? when his Irons are off, and doors are open on purpose? although it is true, after a man hath his Re∣prive, the dogged Keeper will make him wait, and beg too, long enough ere he sets him at liberty, and lets his feet out of the Iron☜ bolts: and this (I fear) is our case too much; but then lets com∣plain to the Supream Power of Heaven, and sue them before him for our false imprisonments and bondage; if they doe not deliver us, and give us our Liberties upon our concurrent desires so to
do. Wherefore pluck up courage Countrymen! and let us be no longer cheated with Lawyers, or Oppressors. Lastly, Consider the daies entring in the fifth Chapter, which5▪ Cons. will put a full period to all their Tyrannies and Usurpations. CHAP. V. Of the FIFTH MONARCHY, when? and how? and why? with the alteration of all the LAWS, and OFFICERS of the FOURTH MO∣NARCHY; Improved with use to the PAR∣LIAMENT and the PEOPLE. THe consideration of the Fifth Monarchy (nowThe Fifth Monarchy now hard by. entering) is very pregnant to our purpose. For all the Laws and Ordinances Civill and Ecclesiastick of the Fourth Monarchy, must tumble at the en∣trance of the fifth. That there is such a Kingdom to come is obvious to all intelligent men, by abun∣dance of Scriptures, as Dan. 2. 35, 36, 37. and 7. 17, 23. 25. Rev. 11. 15. Isa. 9 6, 7. Psal. 2. 5, 6. Psal. 72. 8, 9, 11. Luk. 1. 32. 39. Rev. 17. 14. and 16. 11. 19. Jer. 15. 25, 26. cum multis aliis; and it is for this▪ fifth Monarchy (which must remaine for ever, Isa. 9. 7. Dan. 2. 44. Luk. 1. 33. Psa. 72. 8. and 47. 2. Mic. 4. 7. Zach. 9. 10 &c) that all other Kings and Kingdoms; Powers,Which breaks the Laws and Law-givers of the fourth Mo∣narchy apee∣ces. and Policies; Laws, and Lawyers in the fourth Monarchy must be shaken and broken into fitters and shivers like potsheards. That there is such a mighty Monarchy a coming which must be uni∣versall all over the World is without doubt: but to our matter, we must examine, First, When it enters. Secondly, How it enters. Thirdly, Why it enters, to the ruin of the other. First, As to the Time; though men be of divers minds as to1. When? the precise time, yet all concur in the nighnesse and swiftnesse of
its coming upon us, The graduall entrance of it as to us, being just by, although the universall discovery of it all over the world is like to be about forty years hence, as appears in Chap. 3. of my Tabernacle for the Sun, or Idea of Church Discipline. But to clear the time as to us, see Dan. 7. 17, 22, 23, 26, &c. The Prophet tels us there expresly of the foure Monarchies, now the fourth Kingdome (as he cals it▪ ver. 23.) or earthly Monarchy he distinguishes from the three foregoing for its tyranny and extent ver. 7. agreeing with Rev. 13. 2. &c. and tels us that it had ten horns, that is ten Kings, Rev. 17. 12. which are enumerated by Mr. CamMr. Cam. (in his voice from the Temple p. 12.) but after this that Daniel had seen the ten hornes in the head of this fourth Beast or Mo∣narchy, ver. 8. hee looked well, and then saw, what? see v. 8. and behold! there came up among them another little Horne, before whom there were three of the first hornes pluckt up by the roots. Pray note it,  I considered (saies he) with great attention and serious intention, i. e. to something very observable in this Vision, and that is to the rise of this little horne, that ravenously got up in the room of three hornes. Some there be that interpret this of theCalvin. Pope, others of the Turke, others of Julius Caesar (so Calvin) others of Antichrist; So my friend Mr. Canne: others to An∣tiochus Epiphanes, so Polanus. But I must differ from them all,Polanus. for that the Prophecy agrees with none of them all fully; but though I may seem singular, yet with much assurance, and clear sight, I assert it, that William the Conqueror was this littleThe little horn i. e. Wil. the Conqueror. horn; and so all along the Line of William and the Norman Kings on our English Throne; And that for these Reasons. 1. This Little horne was unseen, and none a while; even af∣ter1 Unseen for a while. the ten horns were seen, for he arose after them all, and was at his first rising seen, besides them and another, vers. 8. 20. which the Prophet makes observeable, seeing hee saw him not before: at his first rise he was the least, and the last; this was K. William the Norman, who arose by usurpation over the other horns on the head, and so his Line; therefore. 2. He rose up, or thrust in among the rest, i. e. as Will. theRose up.
Conqueror did, by force and armes, not by choyse and election; not naturally with the rest of the horns, by the suffrage of the people. 3 He was as is in Dan. 11. 21. a vile person, or base borne, as3 A vile person. we have it in p. 37. of the English Chronicles; Robert Duke of Normandy the sixt in descent from Rollo, riding through Fallis a Town in Normandy, he spied certain Damsels dancing near the way, among whom he fixed his eye upon one Arlote, a fair Maid, but of mean Parentage, a Skinners Daughter, whom he procured that night to be brought unto him, of whom he begat a Son, who afterward was named William, &c. So that this Will the Conqueror was the base Son of Robert the sixt Duke of that Dutchy. This is the vile person, who rose up so by usur∣pation of power, whence all the Norman Kings that sat (since) up∣on the English Throne came. 4 After the League made with him, he shall work deceit∣fully,4 By deceit. &c. Chap. 11. 23.  or with fraudes and arts; did not Will. the Conqueror thus? See but the third Chapter how oft he broke his Oaths and Pro∣mises, and contrary to all, set up the Norman Interest, and pul∣led down the peoples with the losse of all their Laws and Liberties to this day. 5 This Little horne was to wax great and famous in time,5 To subdue three King∣doms. and to subdue three Kingdomes, and get up the roome of three Hornes, or Kings, ver. 8. 20. 24. as one more stout then all his other fellowes. This was fulfilled by William the Conque∣rour, and that Norman race in England, and by none else; this Line of William (by degrees) got up all the roome of three Kings in England, Ireland, and Scotland, and took up those three☞ hornes himselfe, who was so little at first as a poor Skin∣ners Girles Bastard. In whom could this be fulfilled else? not in Pope, nor Turke, nor Antichrist, nor Caesar, nor Antiochus, but only in this English Horne, usurping the place of the other three, and plucking them up by the roots . 6 This little Horne shall speake great words against God,6 Speaks great words against God.
ver. 25. and as Chap. 11. shall doe according to his owne will, ver. 36. and exalt himselfe, and magnifie himselfe above God, and prosper untill the indignation be accomplished. After Will. the Conqueror and his Race had made themselves great, and☜ gotten up all the Brittains wealth and riches, their fattest fields and Meddows, &c. as Chap. 11. Ver. 24. he grew great in pride and Tyranny, and Arbitrary power according to the lust of his heart, as the Hebrew hath it  and this got up into such a height at last, in the late Charles, that he not only opposed God, but refused to be accountable, pretending no Mortals must question him; and thus he magnified himselfe, usque ad consummationem irae, till his head was off; which in∣dignation was to begin with him first; for his height of Arbitra∣ry Will, Lust, and Tyranny, in which as Chap. 7. 20. he was more stout then all his fellowes; wherefore this horn must needs be the English, by Will. the Conqueror. 7 This little horne that speaketh these great words against the7 Perplexes the Saints by changing their Laws. most high, shall afflict and perplex the Saints of the most high chap. 7. 25.  and think with himselfe how to change the times and Laws, and that this takes in the Laws of the people (especially) appears by the word  dath, which is not interpreted Legem Dei, vel Evangelium, the Lawes of God, but the institutions, Statutes, and Lawes of men. Now who did ever so palpably rob and wrong the People of their owne rights and liberties, as William the Norman? and his Succes∣sors all along, taking away their Lawes, and setting up his owne, for his owne ends, and ever studying how to guard their own In∣terest, and Prerogative with tyrannicall Laws, to the oppressing of the people and the publick. 8 This little horn was to be a hot, fiery, fierce persecutor8 A fierce per∣secutor of the Saints till the Judgement. of the Saints, Dan. 7. 21, 22, 25, 26. till the Judgement should sit. and so was William and all his Line of Norman Kings to Charls Stuart, ever persecuting and afflicting Gods Servants under the notion of Hereticks, Brownists, Puritans, Roundheads, Ana∣baptists, and the like, till the last Tyrant ran out into armes openly, and continued it untill the Judgemen-Seate was set:
which was Anno one thousand six hundred forty eight, in that High Court of Justice erected for the Kings Tri∣all, the Ancient of dayes came and gave Judgement, first against this little Horne of the Norman Kings, and that was according to the Prophecie, ver. 9, 10, 11. who wil see Master CannsMaster Canne. first voyce from the Temple, p. 14. may be more satisfied as to this. 9 This little Horne was to be (by that Judgement Court or9. Never to be more. Throne erected) so cut off as never to be more, see Ver. 26. This judgement shall sit, and shall take away his Dominion, to con∣sume and to destroy it unto the end; ah dreadfull Tragedy!  which was acted accordingly, and enacted against all Kingly Power in England, never more to arise in these three nations. 10 After this Horn (thus judged,) the worke is to goe on,10. The rest of the Hornes continue for a time. and the Thrones of Justice, or Day of Judgement will reach France, Spaine, Denmarke, Poland, &c. with all the rest of the ten Hornes, but they have some respite after the little Horne is cut off, and therefore, chap. 7. ver. 12. As concerning the rest of the Beasts, their lives were prolonged for a season and time, the Hebraism is, ad tempus & tempus, which is very remarkable and excellent:  the rest of the Kings their Lives are kept for a fit season; i. e. Gods owne time of visiting them, which certainly is upon the wing. 11 Then enters the fifth Monarchy, as is ver. 14. There11. The fifth Monarchy. was given to him dominion, glory, and a Kingdome, that all People, Languages, Nations, should serve him, &c. So in verse 27. And the Kingdome, and Dominion, and the greatnesse of the Kingdome under the whole Heaven shall be given to the people of the Sainst of the most high, whose Kingdome is an everlasting Kingdome, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him. Hitherto is the end of the mat∣ter. This hastens  within this seaven yeares, by one thousand six hundredWhen. and sixty, the worke wil get as farre as Rome, and by one thou∣sand
six hundred sixty six this Monarchy must be visible in all the earth; but in the meane time it must have a gradual entrance asWhen. ☜ to us, very suddenly (as appeares in Daniels Prophecy) after the fall of the little Horne, or the Norman line in the fatall stroke given to Charles Stuart, one thousand six hundred forty eight, and this wil be to the ruine of those Lawes and Law∣yers, which as yet stand to oppresse the people. O terrible DOOMES-DAY to them at the entrance of this fifth Mo∣narchy! And then 12. Lastly, This fifth Monarchy must be the last Monarchy12 The last Monarchy. on earth, ver. 14. & 27. His dominion is an everlasting domi∣nion that shall not passe away, and his Kingdome that shall not be de∣stroyed. So ver. 27. whose kingdome is an everlasting kingdome;  Hence it is that there must be SHAKINGS of all Nations until the DESIRE of all Nations come, Hag. 2. 6. and till that Kingdome come which wil never be shaken, and then Christ shal have the only Supreame Power, the summam potestatem in the Nations, Hebr. 12. 27, 28. Now the time being just by us for the fifth Monarchy, and for the breaking all to fitters of the fourth; let the PRIESTS and LAWYERS looke about☜ them, the ALARUM is given them already: Throw her downe, come against her from the utmost borders, destroy her utterly, let nothing of her be left, Jer. 50. 26. God wil execute the judge∣ment that is written, Psal. 149. 8, 9. For now hath the Angel poured out the fifth vial upon the seate of the Beast here in England, Revel. 16. 10. So that such men must needs gaw their tongues for paine; but very shortly shall the river Euphrates be dried up, for the time drawes nigh. Secondly, How this FIFTH MONARCHY must enter2. The man∣ner how. 1. By degrees. in? a word to that; 1. Gradually, the Stone cut without hands grows by degrees greater and greater till it fill the whole earth,  Dan. 2. The stone is this fifth Monarchy cut out without mens hands, which must breake a peeces all the other Monarchies ne∣ver more to rise. The fourth Monarchy is breaking up apace, and wil suddenly tumble and kick his heeles in the aire.
2 Mysteriously, Being cut without hands, it comes in, and2. In a myste∣ry. men know not how; whilst men act and intend their own designs, in comes Christ with his Kingdom. Was it not mysterious to our States in the late tryall of King Charls? did they think to fulfill the Prophecies and Scriptures thereby? no surely, for they intended to fulfil their own wils & the wil of the people in taking away tyran∣ny and Tyrants; but God intended thereby a fulfilling his will so long fore-told of this little horne. Thus how mysterious was the war with Scotland, and now with Holland? and O how wonderfully mysterious will the following Wars be? and especially the Ca∣tastrope of the Tragedy upon the other Horns. I know most men are in darknesse as to the great change, the Fifth Mo∣narchy will make amongst us? yea, and in all Europe? seeing already they are netled at the verge of it, or the very appearance of☞ Tith-tumbling, and Lawyers-downfall. But it must be so, Rev. 16. 10. When the vial is poured out upon the sea of the Best, his Kingdom is full of darknesse, &c. Yea, grosse darknesse shall co∣ver the earth; when this glory is rising, Psa. 60. 1, 2. it must be my∣sterious, being not by might, but by my Spirit, saith the Lord, Zach. 4. But besides this, the manner of this Fifth Monarchies ente∣rance3. Suddenly and terribly. will be suddenly too, as Lightning, Matth. 24. 27. and Noahs flood, ver. 38. and terrible to the enemies, whose hearts faile them for fear; But glorious to the Saints, Mal. 4. 2, 3. The wicked understand not this, but the wise shall, Dan. 10. 12. Thirdly, Why this Fifth Monarchy hastens so? Amongst other3. The Reasons. things, I pick out two, as First, for the Redemption of the People; Luk. 21. 28. lift up your1 The Re∣demption of the people. heads, for your redemption draweth nigh; and the creature, or the whole Creation groans for this liberty of the Sons of God, Rom. 8. 20, 21, 22. and for this manifestation. Because the crea∣tures will then be freed from that bondage of corruption, inutillty, vanity, and failing of their true end (as Gellius hath it) which theyGellius Redemption. are now subject unto. But our Redemption will be, 1. From Ecclesiastick Bondage, Decrees, Councels, Orders,1. From Ec∣clesiasticall sla¦very of souls and Ordinances, of Pope, Priest, Prelate or the like. The whore shall be striped stark naked, and made desolate, Rev. 17. 16. and
all the Statutes of Omri taken away, Mic. 6. 16. 2 From Civil bondage and slavery, or those bloody, base, un∣just,2. From Civil slavery of bo∣dies. accursed, tyrannicall Laws, and sin-monopolizing Law∣yers, as (now) oppresse and afflict the people; For the sighing of the poor and oppressed, now will I arise saith the Lord. A Hea∣thenPsal. 12. said once, Let Justice be done though the world perish for it; But Jehovah saith now, Justice shall be done though the☜ world perish for it. Then woe be to the Lawyers and Priests! IOf both. meet with many old Prophesies of these daies, as in the Oracles of the Sibyls there is one, in lib. 3. p. 246, 247. mentioned by John Opsopaeus, that in the latter daies of Kings and Emperors, ChristProphesies of the Sibyls. alone shall be the King, and shall deliver his Subjects that have been captives under other Kings and Emperors; and then shall there be good Laws and Religion, together with Justice and Righteousnesse, which shall come down from Heaven to visitOf the restau∣ration of good Laws. men upon the Earth; and the evill Religion (which I thinke they meant the Popish and Antichristian that belongs to Baby∣lon) and Laws (which surely relates to the Civill Laws by what followes) with all envy, hatred, spight, anger, violence, wrongs and deadly slaughter, shall flie away with them from mortall men. Woe be to the Lawyers then! There is another Prediction by one Paracelsus, a German Phy∣sitian, which was long since presented to Ferdinand, K. of theOf Pacelsu. Romans, and since to the Emperor; which is this. About 50 (which I conceive he meant An. 1650,) There will be a terri∣ble Eclipse of the Sun, together with great inundations or over∣flowings of waters, and after that will be diverstumults, sedi∣tions,Of these war with Holland. battels, burnings, and bloodsheddings, to molest the Nor∣therne Nations, viz. Brabant, Flanders, Zealand, and Hol∣land especially; and then will the Rosen Crown (I suppose hee meant the English-Rose) be ripe. The Summer (or hot wea∣ther i. e. the wars in these dayes) that beareth this Rose, is that contentious time, wherein All shall be divided. A sure argu∣ment then, that that thing shall perish, which man hath built upon the sand, and then shall the sandy foundation (i. e. in this Ecclesiasticall and Civill both) be changed into a Rock, where at all men shall wonder. O the wonderfull things that re now to be done in these Nations! he goes on very largely, and
foretels great calamities to France, Flanders, Zealand and Hol∣land,To France. as never were; and that it shall fall fiercely upon Spaine too, insomuch as the Pomeganat (meaning Spain) shall be di∣vided, and the seeds thereof cast forth. And thence he goes for∣wardSpaine. in his twelfth Prediction to the Pope, and saies, Behold,Itly. thou hast placed thy selfe above God, but now he will give thee thy reward; thou soughtest worldly glory, but now as worldly things perish, so dost thou: Those things shall befal thee which thou never lookedst or: And then in his 31 Prediction by the image of four naked children embracing each other, he saies,Laws plain and honest. Magnafutura est mutatio & renovatio; &c. O! then enters the great change, which shall be called the happy Reformation that followes, which is without deceit, arts, subtleties; but in plaine, naked, innocent Laws. And this shall bee when 60.☞ may be numbered (from such a year (I suppose he meant by An. 1660.) And then he goes on in his 32. Prediction, which bears the image of the Sun shining upon a man that is asleep, to shew what glorious daies succeed to Church and State for ever after that. Besides him, we shall find Nostradamus in his 1. Century, andPrediction of Nostradimus. 10. Quadr. tels us, what troubles his poor Country France must be in; and in 3. Cent. 9. 32. 38. 41. and so in 7. 34. he saies there shall be such sudden mutations that their Salique Law shall faile them; and finishes his 38. Quadrin of his fifth Centurie thus, Qu' en fin fauldra la loy Salique:Of France. And that their divisions at home in their own Kingdome by their own Princes and Peers (as it is now) shall occasion the fall of their Crown, the alteration of their State, Lawes, and Religion: The Prediction saies thus, Ie prevoy de grandes guerres & des grandes effusions de sang▪ à l' occasion des premiers duoannes Wolius Royaume, &c. But Wolfius in his 13. Centenarie saies, he had this too, out of an old manuscript in the City of Auspurge, begin∣ning thus, Praelia magnatum video, cum sanguinis undâ, &c. And Nostradamus in Cent. 5. 9. 99. tels how the sword must be∣ginOf Rome de∣stroyed by our Army of Eng∣land. the Reformation of Rom and that it shall be ruled by the Brittains (meaning our English Army) Quand Rome aura le chef vieux Brittanique. Thus one Joachim an Italian hath long since foretold too, (a
man many honorable, and learned men make much mention of, asPredictions of Ioachim. Paulius Aemilius, &c.) in a certaine Book of pictured Pro∣phecies in the second Prediction hee paints out the Pope thirsting for the blood of Christians, and in the eighth Prediction saith of him, Behold here the Husband of the Whore of Babylon! and in 25. Prediction he saies, Vae tibi Civitas Septicollis, quando C. litera comminabitur moenibus tuis, &c. Woe to thee☜ Rome! when the letter C. (perhaps the late Charles) shall be∣ginConcerning CROMWEL it▪ is so be thought to ound within thy wals; or else it may be Cromwel will give them an Alarme. And after that he tels them, that al∣most all Christian Princes and Nations shall unite to afflict them, and become their enemies, and turn out of the City the proud Pre∣lates and Cardinals, and take in, in their roome, the humble, and more worthy. And now proud Rome (saies he ch. 21.) that saith, I sit as a Queen, I am not a widow, neither shall I see sorrow, &c. The time is now come that that whorish SynagogueRomes ruin by the English. of Romish Prelates shall be stripped stark naked, and their iniquities laid open; For the LORD himselfe will arise in Judgement to destroy Babylon root and branch, by the hand of the flying Power (meaning England) Then shall new Preachers be sent to thee, that shall not only rebuke the People, but alsoEnglish Prea∣chers sent thi∣ther. thunder against the Priests, and put to silence the lofty and swelling Masters; and they shall so bruise the forehead of that lewd Whore, that it shall be reputed Righteousnesse to them that rebuke thee. Finally (saies he chap. 30.) the LORD shall not make an end till New things doe arise; and that there come a Generation bringing forth good fruit, and a full Reformation be; Then, Qui in tenebris ambularunt ad lucem redibunt, & quae erant divisa & dispersa consolidabuntur, &c. Besides him, we have anothers Judgment in a Prediction ofPredictions of B. . Finius. long standing, and that is one Cataldus Finius, once Minister of Trent▪ When Rome (saies he) begins to hear the lod bel∣lowingOf Rome. of the fat Cow (I know not who that is, unlesse the Eng∣lish Nation, as seems by what followes.) Woe! woe then be to thee O Flanders full of blood! and Zealand, and Holland full ofOf Holland. ☜ treacheries! (as if this were the way of the war to Rome) Alas! alas! weep thou unhappy Babylon! thou damned pit of Priests! for the dayes of affliction are come upon thee! and like unripe
corne thou shalt suffer a threshing for thine iniquities. Many shall come against thee; yea, from the foure corners of the Earth,☞ the Holy ones of God shall bee gathered together against thee. Over and above all these, one Baptista Nazarus hath transla∣tedPredictions of Baptista Naza∣rus, his Ital. dish. Of Spain, France, Ger∣many, Rome. a prophecy out of Hebrew, how in the sixth thousand years (which is now) shall begin great wars to vex Nations, and they shall come into Spaine, France and Germany, and put the Ro∣mans to the edge of the sword; and that the English shall com∣bine with others, and the Venetians shall enter into a holy league with the English (I conceive that to be meant a league upon theac∣count of Christ against Antichrist, &c.) and they shal go on conquer∣ing; and have the chief hand in vanquishing the Turks. So that itThe Turks by the English seems long since it was foresen what God would do in, and by this Nation, and how fast from them the Fifth Monarchy should goe☞ on and grow up, to the ruine of the fourth Monarchy in all Nati∣ons, which appears to strike terrible strokes at the EcclesiasticallPredictions of the Sibyls. and Civill Interest of Babylon. I could heap up many more Pro∣phesies and Predictions of this nature; But I shall end them in one more of the Sibyls lib. 3. p. 268. 269. which saies that in the last daies, after grievous and intestine wars; shall be set up in∣stead of the cruell Lawes and wils of men, the most venerableOf new Lawes and godly De∣crees. Decrees, Laws, and Ordinances of the Lord; and then shall the, beloved People of God flourish again. So that it seems the Sibyls fore-saw how sadly the poor people would be oppressed and enslaved by cursed and cruel Laws and Lusts of men all along the fourth Monarchy, and what redemption herein the fifth Monarchy would bring them, for as in Psal. 72. 3. 7. (Christ) the King shall reigne (in those dayes) and then the Mountains, (Kings, Princes, Parliaments, Generals) and the Hils (viz. Judges, Justices, &c.) shall bring peace to the people by justice, and thorough righteousnesse, and then  in those daies the righteous shall flou∣rish, and abundance of peace shall be, so long as the Moon endures, and Christ shall reign from Sea to Sea (i. e. by degrees at first, till it come) to the ends of the Earth; but thus for the first Reason,
Secondly, This fifth Monarchy must enter a pace, for that2. Christ hath (of right) the Supream Authority of the Nations, therefore Dan. 7. 27.  And the King∣dome (i. e. the fifth Monarchy) and the summa potestas Regni,2. The Supre∣macy of Christ over all Powers and Nations. the Supreame authority of the Nation is his, or the absolute So∣veraignty is given him (the ) in Heaven and in Earth. Wherefore woe be to those Usurpers, that trade, and triumph with the title due to Christ alone, who is now coming for his own. No wonder Holland hath so hard a tug now to keep the title of (I☜ was going to say Almighty, but) High and Mighty, which Christ has a Commission to take from them with a powder; Doe but observe de Wits Letter to them, dated (11 alias) 1. Aug. 1653. lying before the Texel, who ends it thus, —Which is the account sent to your High, and Mighty, and Noble, Great and Mightinesses. So ending, I re∣maine, Your High and Mighty, and Noble, and Great, and Mightinesses faithfull Servant, Cornelius de Withe Witte. And he deserves the Withe for flat∣tering men so. This must not be endured ere long, and it were well for us if we took not that Title, which Christ alone must and will have ere long to himselfe as his by right. Besides Christ alone must be the Law-giver, and have the Legislative Power in this Monarchy,Who then Law-giver. Isa. 33. 22. Jekovah is our Law-giver, So Gen. 49. 10. Shiloh should be their Lawgiver, so Psa. 60. 7. Judah:  that is, Christ (of the Tribe of Judah) is my Lawgiver;  tis as much as to say, there is no stability in Government or Laws, till Christs Fifth Monarchy, till he come  give it them. He hath the Judicial Power too, John 5. 22. 27. But although he doth delegate a Judiciall Power to his Servants, Isa. 1. 27. 1 King. 6. 12. and subordinate Officers, Isa. 60. 17. Dan. 7. 27. Rev. 19. 14.☜ which must all be Saints too; yet he keeps the Legislative Power to himselfe, and will not part with it (nor can he) to Princes or Parliaments; He alone is to have the absolute Soveraignty, as the word is  Dan. 7. 14. So that his will, his word, or com∣mand is the Law, and the Law ought to be none but his Word
all grounded, and fetched from the Word of God, which isWhat Lawes then? to be the Statute-Booke, Psal. 147. 19. He sheweth HIS Sta∣tutes, and HIS Judgements to Israel. Then the ablest Lawyers wil be such as are most conversant with Christ, his Scriptures and Ordinances. O happy dayes! then the Lawes will beeWho the best Lawyers then? healing as Soveraigne Medicines, and the Magistrates like Py∣sitians must apply them; for these and divers other reasons we looke for the fifth Monarchy, and doe continually cry, Come Lord Jesus! come quickly! Let every one that longs for these new Heavens, and new Earth, wherein dwels righteousnesse, 2 Pet. 3. 13. Pray, Our Father, thy Kingdome come, (that) thyVid. Brain's new earth. will (may) be done in earth as it is in heaven, Matth. 6. 10. that we may have none but Christs Lawes, Statutes, and Govern∣ment, but forget all old Formes of Civil or Ecclesiasticke, for which end Lord hasten this fifth Monarchy. Vse. My first word is full to our Governours in the Honoura∣bleVse. 1. To the Par∣liament, to model all for the fifth Mo∣narchy. 1. To intrust none but ho∣nest men. Court of Parliament, if so be the fifth Monarchy is so nigh us, it concernes them to set upon their Generation-worke then in these dayes, which is, to model and conforme the Civil affaires for Christs coming, I meane more off of the fourth Monarchy, and more on to the fifth; therefore 1 Constitute none but honest faithfull men, such as fol∣low the Lambe, into places of trust, or offices of this Nation, seeing none but the Saints of Christ shall be his Officers here in place and imployment for Christ, and the Common-wealth in the fifth Monarchy that is now entring, Dan. 7. 27. Rev. 17. 14. Psal. 72. 10. Isa. 1. 26. Rev. 19. 14. wherefore the suffering of Lawyers to live so by sin in Westminster Hall, and in☞ all Courts as they doe, will be unexcusable in the day of his coming, 1 King. 20. 42. and give the visible brand of those Governours in Isa. 1. 23. Thy Princes are rebellious, and compa∣nions of Theeves, &c. therefore vers. 24. Ah! I will ease me of these my Adversaries, as Rev. 2. 20. I have an action against thee, for that thou sufferest that wicked woman Jezabel, &c. So may be said to you, if that you suffer this monstrous society of open sinners that trade in it, and live by it to continue. Nehemiah would not give his owne brother Hananiah a Commission, but because he was a man fearing God, chap. 7. 2. and David does professe;
that his eyes should be upon none but the faithfull ones of the land Psal. 101. 6. and they that walke holily (and not the wicked) that he would countenance:  but he even hates their wicked, and wil not suffer them in his sight; and it is noted of this man,☜ that he served his generation herein, Act. 13. 36. certainly our Parliament wil serve their generation (as wel as God) most sin∣gularly, to put downe these men of sinne from their trading in sinne. So Psal. 101. 8.  I wilThrow out men of sin. early in the morning of my Government, the first thing I goe a∣bout (sayes he) shal be to throw downe the wicked; O that our Parliament would eye and own Davia's practise herein be∣times, to begin this worke which wil make them glorious, and as Gods in the eyes of the people; if they wil not, but yet wil spare these Amalekites, they may then remember Saul, how he was rejected for doing the Lords worke negligently, and by halves, or deceitfully, and not rightly, nor uprightly, in that he spared some of those wicked people that God would not have spared; therefore was he, yea and his Houshold cut off with reproach and shame, to scare us in after ages; let him be your Sea-mark herein. Secondly, See that all the Lawes of this Nation are agree∣ing2. That the Lawes agree with Gods Lawes. with the Word of God, and those Lawes which are con∣trary to sound reason or religion, whether in things Civil or Ecclesiastick, that they may be abolished for ever, that so our Governours may be the Ministers of God to us for good, as Rom. 13. 2, 4. so that those unjust, cruel Lawes, that propor∣tion not the punishments to the offence, that put to death in∣nocent ones, that delay Justice, that rob and wrong the people, may be all tried at the High Court of Justice, and receive their sentence. O what brave Bonfires on a Thanks-giving day will the Popish Decrees, and tyrannicall oppressing Lawes that are yet extant make? O how wel they would warme us! And if our Governours would burne the Whores Flesh with fire, Rev. 17. 16. then let them burne all those Acts, Lawes, and Ordi∣nances, Civil or Ecclesiasticall, that keep her warme and livel yet amongst us: For the Statutes of Omri are (yet) kept,
all the workes of Ahab, and yee walk in your Counsels, that I should make yee a desolation, therefore yee shall beare the reproach of my people, Micha 6. 16. Deut. 28. 33. their not throwing downe those sinfull Lawes offended God greatly. Sauls dis∣obedience was his consulting so much with his owne reason, more then with Gods Word, and this hath ruined hundreds, and made them obstruct the worke of Christ in every Genera∣tion;State Policy a great enemy. Jehu by Jeroboams reason of state winked at the Calves in Dan and Bethel, although he bragged how little his Pre∣decessor Ahab had done, 2 King. 10. 18. and how he would ex∣ceed him, saying, Come with me, see my zeale for the Lord; and yet ver. 29. he departed not from Jeroboams Calves. O this☞ State policy, and reasoning hath been ever the Publicke enemy! but away with that, in the worke which is to doe for Christ, by burning the Images, and pulling downe the Groves, wherein so much sinne hath been committed; so by burning those Lawes, and pulling downe those Courts, Termes and Lawyers, yea and Tythes too, which have occasioned such actions, continual complaints, and vexations to the people, and wrongs to God and men, good and bad. Thirdly, Improve your utmost for Jesus Christ, and his3. To doe all for Christ and his Monarchy. Monarchy at home and abroad, your Talents must not be hid in the earth, i. e. minding earthly things; for your worke is to set the oppressed free; and as Mordecai said to Ester, ch. 4. 14. For if thou boldest thy peace at this time, yet there shall enlargement and deliverance arise to the people from another place, but you and your Fathers house shall be destroyed (then) and who knoweth whe∣ther you are come to the Kingdome for such a time as this? There∣fore looke to it now, whiles you have a time to doe it; and let me adde this to urge you, that this Monarchy of Christ wil deliver us from slavery and tyranny, and set up the Lawes of God in the stead of mens. See Isa. 42. 21, 22. The Lord is well pleased, for his righteousnesse sake, he will Magnifie the LAW, andGods Law must be set up. make it HONOVRABLE; but (as yet in the Fourth Mo∣narchy) this is a People robbed and spoyled (as the Jewes were by the Romans; so we by the Normans robbed of all our rights which we hope to be restored into, yea) they are all SNA∣RED in holes, and bid in PRISON-HOVSES, they are for a
PREY, and none DELIVERETH. (O sad! if it be said so☜ of this Parliament too!) and for a SPOILE, and none saith RE¦STORE: my worke and word is to say, RESTORE, which if you that are in Power refuse to doe it, yet deliverance shall come, but woe be to you! as to the taile of the Fourth Monarchy! (which is not as yet out of rule) for God hath tried and trusted you with the HONOVR which else others shall take from you within few yeares; for the Fifth MONARCHY must make worke amongst you, and will make the LAW (ofGods Law. God) Great, Glorious, and Honourable. The Law of God, (which is now slighted, as imperfect, whiles men set up their owne Notions and Formes in the stead, and prefer Gratians, or aExpos. Justinians Law, and so make themselves as Heathens without the Law of God amongst them) this Law lyes in Deut. 6. 1. These are the Commandements (i. e. the Ten in two Tables given Moses on mount Sinai, Exod. 20.) the Statutes (i. e. the se∣verall Cases depending on, and arising out of each Com∣mand, tending to establish and confirme each Command, as Master Braine well observes in his New Earth, pag. 9. and theIn the Fifth Monarchy. ☜ Judgements, (i. e, the sentence upon the breach of every Law, how and what punishment must be.) Now this Law, Statute-Booke, and Judgement-seat of God must be set up, (and not1. mans) in this Fifth Monarchy, and then shall we be resto∣red.2. 1. To Gods Lowes, 2. In our own Language; 3. Read3. and expounded, and made knowne to the people, Deut. 30. 10.4. to 16. Job 7. 49. 4. At free-cost without charge. 5. Justice5. wil be had at home then, and Judges sit in all the Gates of the Cities, Deut. 1. 6. And every man plead his own Cause by the6. Law of God (then no need of Lawyers.) 7. Justice wil not7. then be delayed, Eccles. 8. 11. but speedy. 8. And executed8. without gaine-saying, according to the Law (set) of God, Hebr. 10. 28. Rom. 2. 2. Deut. 1. 7. and without respect of persons, Levit. 24. 22. Deut. 1. 16, 17. 1 Sam. 12. 3. Levit. 19. 15. 9. Then Iudges will be as at first, and Iustice also,9. Isa. 1. 26. in every City, 2 Chron. 19. 5. Deut. 16. 18. and 10. Then the Lord wil be our only Law-giver, Jam. 4. 13. and10 the Law abide for ever without alteration: (as there is now, and ought to be in the formes of men) wherefore if you bee
the Men whom the Lord will own and honor in this worke: up☞ then! and about it! for the Body of Lawes lies ready before you in the Word of God. O that you might bee used of God, for Christ in this work of magnifying his Law in this Commonwealth of England! (I was ready to say of Israel, but it is not so yet) which should be to your Fame for ever! The Lord Jesus awaken you with the noise of his Monarchy! which is swift in motion, and now nigh us! least you be surprized. Fourthly, Avoid making of Parties, and running into factions,4 To avoid factions and parties. (as the former Parliaments have done) to carry on selfish, sin∣full, or private designs; such men as are spirited for the fifth Mo∣narchy will be more unanimous then have been hitherto for Christ against Antichrist. O what hot contests were between the two Parties in generall of Presbyterians and Independants (besides particular factions) in the Parliament before! what waies they had, thereby to advance and advantage themselves and friends, was ob∣viousThe pretty de∣signs of the for∣mer Parlia∣ment. to every eye, and by this pretty Artifice they shared the Commonwealth (almost) amongst them; besides private cheats, what abundance of open ones, by gifts, rich Offices, and Imploy∣ments in Committees and Treasuries they obtained? and in pretence of serving the publick too, they have shuffled the trumps into their own hands. And how artificially have they confounded the Accompts, by laying on numberlesse Taxes and Assessements, whilst the multitude of mony ran through so many muddy chan∣nels, Committees, Officers, and Collecting lick-fingers, as it is impossible to make any publick account thereof. So that notwith∣standing all fair promises to the people, no accounts are, or ever will be given of those many millions of mony which were made by Kings Lands, Bishops, and Deans, and Delinquents Estates, ar∣rears, Excize, Assessements, and the like, which some have licked up so handsomely into unsatiable tubs ( &c. that they have bought great Mannors, and Lordships of many hun∣dreds☞ a yeare, whilst poor Publica fides is but Punica fides. Thus by their Factions they had their several designes for them∣selves, and interests of their owne, and with their Hocus Po∣casses could conjure up and carry their own for the publicke; and in pretence of the publicke (with honour and wealth enough) they did gladly sacrifice the publick peace to their own private inte∣rest;
and when they had set all on fire (as severall times they did in the Nation by troubles and wars) they would with joy warme their own hands at those unhappy and unhallowed flames, which themselves kindled; witnesse Hollis, Stapleton, Massey, Sir John Clotworthy; and many others more lately, whom I forbear. But see thus the issue of Parties and Factions in the Parliament, to theSo now parties about Tythes. ☜ hindrance and hurt of the Publick. And O, how do honest mens hearts ake already to hear what Factions, Schismes, and Parties, are in this Parliament? Yea, about the poor, petty, popish trash, & Trumpery of Tithes, which shal tumble in due time, when self∣interest is more laid aside, & Christ is with more unanimous con∣currence accepted of; for the Whore shal be stripped as stark naked as ever she was born, before it be long; Though Babylon-birds lament it so. But in the interim wee trust our good God will give these Governours a new Clue to lead them out of this Labyrinth. And Fifthly, Follow not Achitophels Counsell, for it will come to5, To avoid A∣chitophel, and Machiavell. nought, nor yet Machiavils Prince, or Principles, which most States men have been Students in, and Practitioners of ad un∣guem: But the Monarchy which is coming will crush them to some tune. Does it not relish like a Paradox, that those States∣men are most Machiavilian, who give him the worst words? But beleeve it, some are amongst us now who study his Politicks andVide Moderne Policies. Tricks apace: and (least I should reflect upon the righteous, so∣ber, honest-hearted States-man) I must show you them to shun them, and their cursed principles. 1 Principle they hold is, To have the shadow of Religion,1. Principle of Policy. though they have none of the substance. This they learned of Machiavel, who notes it from Papirius, how handsomely hee slighted the Pullarii with good words, and was well rewarded; whereas Appius Pulcher doing it bluntly and plainly was punish∣ed. How many imitate Herods politicks, who pretend to wor∣ship,Machiavel. but intend to worry; such dissemble Piety so neatly, when they act against it most strenuously, that in that very art and ar∣ticle of hidden impiety the poore deluded people may Saint them, ipso sceleris molimine Tereus Creditur esse pius; this is that which hallowes the most hellish enterprises, which surprise honesty in an ambush, surdo verbere: But
1. Principle of Piety, is to have the substance of Religion,1. Principle of Piety. though without the shadowes and formet; this is vinum in pectore; and ; And I pray God by this change our Governors change these principles of Policy for honest, and faithfull Principles of Piety; and prefer the sub∣stance above the shell, that God and men may not be mocked so by our State-Politicians as they have been; nor the poor People (who are not able to unriddle them) bee made a prey to such Sphinxes, whiles like foolish Birds they follow the Kite in hope of a prey, till they be made a prey. 2 Principle of Policy is, by the most insinuating applications2. Pr. of Policy. to be popular, looking unto their owne designes in a pretence as for Liberty, Religion, Reformation, or the like. Their motto is, mel in ore, fel in corde; they varnish their vices () and polish their Impostures, so as Pindar saies, ,Pindar. &c. And thus did our former States men even vish and rejoyce the hearts of the people, with promises, and pretences, as of freeing them from taxes, troubles, and oppressions, even whilst they were creating new Acts, and Designs of oppres∣sing them, curling their smooth Complements into rugged Pra∣ctises. 2 Principle of Piety is, to avoid Popularity, which will be2. Pr. of Piety. wisdome when all is done; and indeed our Lord and Lawgiver Jesus Christ went away from them that would have made him King; and evermore he would avoid the multitudes, when once they began to throng after him: Besides Piety accounts Plain-dealing the Jewel; and though it be a maxime in morality, yet it is true in Divinity too: Bonum oritur ex integris. 3 Principle of Policy is to temporize; like the Dutch-man3. Pr. of Policy that sails with all winds, so they turn with the times, and like Cas, will be sure to pitch upon their feet. If the times turn for Religion, who like him? if for Brethren to preach, he will preach too; he can fashion himselfe fit for the times, omnia pro tempore,Origen▪ & nihil pro veritate. 3 Principle of Piety, the true Christian is constant to his3. Pr. of Piety. Principles, and holds fast his profession without wavering, Heb. 10. 24. for all the times; If the ship, wherein Christs Disciples are, miscarry, he had rather re cum Christo, then regnare cum C
4. Principle of Politicians, is to put a necessity upon the most ex∣orbitant4. Pr. of Policy▪ actions, as a Competant apology for them, ! So that be it for wars, acts of oppression, banishment, taxes, or the like, necessity makes the Law. The Andreans answered Themistocles (when he came for tribute, and told them he was ac∣companied with two Goddesses: viz. eloquence and violence, they replyed) they had two Goddesses as strong, viz. necessity, and impos∣sibility. 4. Principle of Piety, is to put an absolute necessity upon no∣thing4. Pr. of Piety. but Christ and his Kingdome, and to hold no necessity to any thing that is sin, but rather a necessity against it, which is the vertue. 5 Principle of Policy, is to calumniate and inculcate the lapses5. Pr. of Policy. and failings of their former Rulers with the greatest advan∣tage. For this doth indear the present Rulers the more. 5 Principle of Piety is to look upon infirmities and failings, as5. Pr. of Piety. such, which the best of us are subject unto, and ingenuously to look upon the good actions to imitate them; as well as the evill actions to avoid them; for what is worse then . 6 Principle of Policy, is to urge good successes as arguments6. Pr. of Policy. to authenticate or canonize their cause, for this is a popular and taking argument; as the Romans were wont to call their Victo∣ries the Arbitresse of their just cause, Event us belli velut aequus Judex, unde jus stat, ei victoriam dabit, &c. 6 Principle of Piety, is first to have our cause clearly authen∣tick6. Pr. of Piety. and good, and then to wait for what successe God will give; knowing prosperous vices are Cardinal ventues in the account of fools and ignorants, Prosperum ac foelix scelus! sayes one,  are not one; wherefore let our cause be canonized in heaven. 7 Principle of Policy, is to oblige some mercenany men that7▪ Pr. of Policy▪ have some influence on others to applaud their actions, and ex∣plode the contraries. The Popish Polititians have imployed the Jesuites to such Offices, and so have other of the States, others that were as greedy of gaine, and as full of garrulity or tongue.☜ Was not this the reason that some Ministers, and others, were ex∣alted into great places? preferments? Colledges? or the like, above
7 Principle of Piety, is to oblige such as have influence on7. Pr of Piety. God and Christ, to call for his spirit to be poured out upon them, and they are content to have the righteous reprove them, Psal. 141. 5. Yea, and find comfort in it; and care not for such Clerical Statists, as would skreen them or others from seeing their errors. 8 Principle of Policy, is to impose Oaths, Covenants, Ingage∣ments8. Pr. of Policy. full of ambiguity, and yet pleasing and plausible in the vul∣gar sence, so as may make for their designe. Thus PlautusPlautus. hath it—Pactum now Pactum est, non Pactum Pactum est, cum illis Lubet. .Plutarch. Plutarch tels us, thus men are couzened with oaths, as boyes with toyes. 8 Principle of Piety, is to be favorable and cautious in mak∣ing8. Pr. of Piety. or taking Oathes, and to be plaine in the sence of them, when they are tendred to the consciences of men, least they should  or ; a promise is derived of the performance, in the Etymol. , it ties a mans hands behind him: in thisAristophanes. let our Governors pursue Piety. 9 Principle, Politicians pursue the most impudent designes9. Pr. of Policy. with the most confident endeavors, and the foulest vice, withCicero de offic. lib. 1, the fullest face, as Cicero saies. Such carry things so cunningly, that when they deceive most, they make appearance of deal∣ing best. 9 Principle of Piety, is to act with moderation and discre∣tion.9. Pr. of Piety. by rule and measure according to the thing intended, Phil. 4. 5. 10. Principle of Policy, is to bribe such men to silence, whose10 Pr. of Policy mouthes would make a great noise, and whose words have in∣fluence upon the people. And this our Statists have usually obser∣ved; yea, by the former Parliament were many mouths stopped up, and filled with gifts, and gratuities, that they could notC. P. speake, and one I could name had five hundred pounds to put him to silence, and say nothing, though he knew much of their corruption and injustice. But I beseech the Lord to lead these our Governors into the Principles of Piety and Honesty. 10. Principle of Piety, is as freely to accept of Articles 10 Pr. of Piety. Impeachment against a corrupt Governor, as against a corru
Subject; seeing the evil of Governors is of as bad, yea, of worse consequence then the evils of Subjects: And seeing the Gover∣nors are no more exempt from Laws then the Subjects; Therefore we shall find Romulus made this agreement with the Senators, thatFulgos. lib. 5. c. 6. the People should make Laws, and he would take them both for himselfe and others to obey them. And Ephron King of the Hit∣titesGen. 34. could not grant Abraham the Sepulchre without the peoples consent: Nor Hemor the Hivite, King of Sichem, contract alli∣ance with Jacob without the people would allow it, and give him eave. So that the publick weale being above the greatest Gover∣nours, it is of the greatest concernment and resentment to receive complaints against them that are evill Governors, without ver∣wing, or over-ruling the Plaintiffs (as has been formerly;) see but how boldly Esther accused Haman, chap. 7, 6. Saying, the ad∣versary, and enemy is this wicked Haman, and then Haman was afraid. O this would terrifie the wicked Grandees indeed! and no bribes would then doe them good, or hide them in their ini∣quity under golden coverings from the keen and quicke eye of Justice. 11. Another Principle of Policy, I perceive much amongst11 Pr. of Policy them is, to show friendship to their enemies, and courtesie to Ma∣lignants, thereby to oblige them and make them their owne; whiles others (it may be) more honest, and heartily their true friends, find not such fair and affable respect from them, because they are sure of them (they think) already, as such whose Prin∣ciples and Consciences make them friends: this was Caesars policyCaesar. too, but this is but policy. 11. Principle of Piety, is to make such a difference betwixt11 Pr. of Piety. friends, and foes; Honest men, and Cavaleirs, that the faithful may be incouraged and countenanced, and the enemies disabled and broken. It is ever deemed most sordid, horrid ingratitude, to gratifie foes with friends rights; and what do they lesse that give their enemies good looks, and their friends frowns? this may up to prove miserable policy. Ingrata Patria! ne ossa qui∣m?Scipio. said Scipio Africanns; O my Countrymen! have I gotten many Victories and Triumphs for you? and must not my bones  much as lye among ou? but must I be banished, and your  bosomed? O ingrata Patria!
12. Principle of Policy, is to put others upon the hazard and12 Pr. of Policy Forelorne-Hope to fetch out their designe (especially if it be dangerous and hot work to have it) and never to give it over (once begun) till it be attained, though they passe through the red Sea of blood to it: Like the Ape that sees a Chsut in the fire, and not knowing how to get it out, snatches up the Sanils foot (that lies by) to fetch it out of the fire, and then he falls to it,☞ and caes not how the Dogs foot is scorched for it. So the thing be had, some care not how men lye wounded, and their Wives be widowed, to fetch it for them. 12. Principle of Piety, is to put none upon a design that is too12 Pr. of Piety. bad for our own bodyes or estates to engage in, and to take heed of eating and drinking the blood of our Brethren; I mean by in∣gaging their Lives, Limbs and Liberties for our Interests or self∣ends. See why David would not drink of the water of the Well of Bethlehem, which he had so longed for, in 1 Chron▪ 11. 19. saying, My God forbid it me, shall I drinke the blood of these men that have put their lives in jeopardy? for with the jeopardy of their lives have they brought it me; no! but in ver. 18. he poured it out to the Lord: So the price of blood is not for us, norThe price of blood for God only. poured out to pitch us in Estates, or Mannors, but must be given to God. Woe be to us! if our money, means, mansions, or the like be the price of blood! God forbid! but let that designe be all Gods for which blood hath been so abundantly shed: And some (blessed be God) in Parliament and Army are actuated by this Principle of Piety, into such a solemn profession for Christ, that they say as Mephibosheth said, 2 Sam. 19. 30. when the King said, thou and Ziba goe divide the Lands amongst you: Nay, saies he, let him take all (and he will) for as much as my Lord the King is come home again in peace; So let who will take and divide the Lands, whiles the Lord Jesus Christ is coming to reign, for God forbid but this blood should be poured out to him. In these and many other Principles of Policy (which I might easily mention) were our former Governing men most unchristianly con∣versant, to the contradiction of the honest and true Principles o Piety; which I beseech the Lord our Jehovah that this Parli∣ment may more abundantly professe, and decline those  villian, and Jesuitick tricks and arts, which will deceie the
of them to the purpose at last. We hear of many Jesuites sent abroad to drive on designs, and doubtlesse they will be tam∣pering with Churches and States as much as may be; and poore England I fear hath been palpably cheated with them under theJesuited who▪ guise of Politicians; for as Rhetoricke is like the hand open, and Logick like the hand shut; so is the Jesuite an open Politi∣cian, and the Machivillian Politician, a close Jesuite: One machi-villanously principled, is subtle and politick in his DivinitySim. and Religion; and one Jesuitickly principled, is divine and reli∣gious in his Subtleties and Policies▪ so that as we say of Simnels,☜ it is but bread upon bread; Such Politicians and Statists are but Jesuites on Jesuites. But thus far for a Word and Warning to them which now sit at Stern, to steere aright for Christ, and the Commonwealth, and to doe much in a little time, least they loose their opportunity and honor together for ever after, and be rejected like Saul for doing the Lords worke negligently, and but by halves, 1 Sam. 15. 26, 28. and 16. 13, 1. Lastly, My  to the People is this; First to be wise in GodsUse . Word to the people to un∣derstand the times. wayes, and in  of this Generation; this the people pra∣ctised in primitiv times, and Issachar is much commended for understanding the times, whereby he knew what Israel had to doe (says the Tt) 1 Chron. 12. 32. There be none that (now) know what England hath to do, but such as understand the times we live in, how near to Christs comming, the fifth Monarchy. What left the poor people in blindnesse? and gave them up to de∣struction, or drowning in Noahs dayes, but want of understand∣ing of the times? And so will be the coming of the Son of Man▪ Matth. 24. 37. What left the Pharisees and Jews in blindnesse, (as to Christ) and gave them up to hardnesse of heart, and the curse, but their ignorance? in all ages ignorance of the times and seasons hath been fatall to the Inhabitants. Obj. But in Deut. 14. 10. 18. God prohibits such a practise,Object. of observing times, and makes it a curse, &c. Answ. True, it is a very great curse, and contrary to the com∣mandAnsw. of God, to observe the times in that sence, i. e. by Planets, and Stars, as Astrologers, and Southsayers, and such kind ofAgainst Astro¦logers. Diiners, for so Mecash-sheph signifies; and so Menachesh
and Kosem, this is positively forbidden, Levit. 19. 26. Exod. 22. 18. and God will not have it in Israel among his People, 2 Chron. 33. 6. Jer. 27. 9. Mal. 3. 5. but threatens judgements upon it, and upon the Nation where it is professed. Wherefore let Lilly, andThe stinking lly. such unwholesome and ominous fellows look to it: For this divi∣nation (a Divis) takes men off of God and his Word, and leads them by an imperfect and lurking light▪ into dangers and depths of misery. This makes that eminent Astrologo-mastix, I meane Mirandula, with indignation to conclude, that this blazing andMirandula. gazing Art of theirs is but vanity of vanities, and vexation of the spirits. Therefore how often doth God gird and upbraid the Heathens and their Idols, with their ignorance of the times and seasons (i. e. as to Christ &c.)  Isa. 41. 23. But to this discovery which we speake, the Candle of Reason, or meer naturall light shines too darkly, and disenergetically. Yet the soule is said to partake of three times. Viz. 1. Tempus praeteritum memoriâ. 2. Praesens intellectu. 3. Futurum voluntate, &c. of times past, in the Memory; of times present, in the Understanding; and of times to come in the Will. Now as to the present times, a cleare understanding is incumbent; I mean, an understanding shining with the light of Gods Word, which is not only cognoscere res▪ but ordinem & modum rerum, whereby we shall obviously under∣stand those causae intermediae, which the Schoolmen say are impe∣dibiles & defectibiles, which are contingents, and would inter∣ruptUnderstanding nlightned. that high and mighty work for Christ and his Kingdom, which is going on in these daies. Such an understanding, inlight∣ned by Gods Word of Truth, we must have, as Daniel had. ForDaniel. first Daniel knew the days and age he lived in, ch. 9. 2. So must we. Secondly, Daniel learned it by Books, cha. 9. 2. of the Prophets, and the Word of God relating to those times: So must we. And then thirdly, He saw and observed the deliverance fore-told to be igh the time of travell, and ready to bee revealed: And so must we.Then we shall fll to praying pell-mel. And then he fell to his work of praying, and beleeving, and expect∣ing; and so shal we! and not till then, that we shall know what to doe; as 1 Chron. 12. 32. or be obedient to Gods will, accordi to his work, which we must do in these daies. Wherefore,
1. Observe all the signs of the Son of Mans coming, and all the appearances of the Fifth Monarchy now in sight. And 2. Hear the voice, that bids come up hither! i. e. out of Baby∣lon,. and make hast! for Judgement is falling upon Babylon. 3. Waite with confidence for the next notorious change in England, And then lift up your Heads, for your Redemption draweth nigh, i. e. both in a spirituall and civill reference. The☜ Times will light terribly upon Priests, and Lawyers; on Tithes▪ and Termes ere long, (for all they find so many Advocates now.) I had intended to have added much for direction and counsell to my Country-men, but I am prevented by a proud Alarm given by some (bold as blind Bayard) of the fiery Clergy, who make a mighty noise in the eares of many, of answering my Book ofA false Alarme▪ given the Au∣thor to take him off of thi. Church Discipline, called. A Tabernacle for the Sun, so that I will conclude this the more imperfectly, that I may stop their Ca∣reer upon their first comming forth; and if they make haste, I will waite for them, as one ready to receive their most resolute Summons or Sallies, being assured of my Armor, and Shield of Truth in my Lord Jesus. Least of all doe I valueCrofton. that very man of words, the Libeller of Garlick-Hith, who hath sent to Renbury to some of his own feather and spirit, for a Certificate of his good behavior (as appears in the Epistle to the Reader) but his Rehoboham-like brazen shield shall never defend him, or dignifie him in the hearts of honest, godly men (whom he cals Devils, and damned Independants:) But empty vessells☜ make the greatest noise; if he be so tedious in his answer as it seems he is, it is likely I shall be so publickly (and at such a di∣stance) imployed in my Lord and Master Christs work ere long, that I shall want idle time▪ to solace my spirits in reading his An∣swer, or returning mine (if it be worth it, and relish of the Spirit of Christ, which I have hardly faith enough to beleeve.) But to con∣clude, The Day of our Deliverance is dawned; Let the Priests and Lawyers, Antichrists Church and State Servants and Solicitors sit and howle; and as many as trade with Babylon, and gain there∣by,1655. let them look and lament by fifty five next, and cast dust on their heads, Rev. 18. 19. for the houre of their torment makes hast; wherefore woe! woe! woe! to them that hear the voice which now them, and yet will not beware! and come out▪!
Infelix, cujus lli sapientia prodest; Infelix quirecta docet, cum vivat inique; Infelix qui pauca sapit, spertque doceri. Let us not mind then so much as we do to purchase  and Estates, seeing the Fifth Monarchy will make such mad worke in the world; therefore as Jer. 45. 4, 5. Behold that which I have built (in the fourth Monarchy) I will pull down, (in the Fifth) and that which I have planted, I will pluck up, saith the Lord, even this whole Land. And seekest thou great things for thy selfe? seek them not. The poor man will be the happiest man then. Haud ullus usquam paupere est beatior, Haud nam{que} pejor metuitur ab eo status. And let my Country-men that long for the Liberties of the Sons of God, exceedingly Rejoyce, as Rev. 18. 20. Rejoyce over her, for God hath avenged you on her. Ver. 6. Reward her, even as she hath rewarded you; fill her double. Then Rustica Gens erit optima flens, & pessima Gaudens. Ungentem pungit, pungentem Rusticus ungit. FINIS.
