R728A R6375 11893737 50510
REFLECTIONS Upon the Late Famous PETITION, AND THE Well Timing of it. &c. Gallicus haec tam culta Novalia Miles habebit? Barbarus has segetes? Heu! quo Discordia Cives Perducit Miseros— LONDON, Printed for J. Johnson, 1691.
REFLECTIONS Upon the Late Famous Petition, &c. THere is all the reason in the World to be assured, that the Grand and most Capital Enemies of this King∣dom are now at work; and that they are labouring to Undermine and Subvert all the Pillars that Support the Peace and Wellfare of the Nation. These Men cannot endure to be∣hold such Persons in Authority, as they well know be Obstructors of their Designs. How these Men laboured formerly Tooth and Nail, by their Diligent and Illegal Canvassing at the Elections for Magistrates of this City, to favour the Arbitrary Courses of the Court at that time, and what the Fatal Effects of their Choices were, is still too Fresh in Memory to be forgot. Nothing would serve their Turns but Lord Mayors, that contrary to the Rules and Maxims of Truth and Honesty,
would yield a Slavish Compliance to the Vio∣lences and Usurpations of the two Preceding Kings upon their Religion and Liberties. Nothing would please 'em, but Sheriffs, to pick and cull out Jury-men by their Partial Verdicts, to Authorize the Murders of Good Men, by Perjury and Subornation: And All this, to Promote the Intreagues, and Prosper the Leud Contrivances of those that sought the Destruction of their Laws, their Liberties and Religion. Now that the same Designs are still carried on, is plainly evident from hence, that the Dormant Plotters of the Nations Ruin, still make choice of the same Tools and Instru∣ments which they made use of before: Some that stand Recorded still in sundry Tryals, for Offering up those Sacrifices to Arbitrary Power, that were so Barbarously innuendo'd to the Axe or Gibbet: Others that so Fawn∣ingly and Ignominiously contributed to the Surrender of the Ancient Rights and Fran∣chises of the City, with no less Treachery to their Posterity, than Infidelity to their Present Trust. Such a Spirit of Jacobitism, not to be exorcized by all the Force or Common Sense and Reason, Demoniacks these People even to
Fury and Frenzy; fascinated withall by the plausible Insinuations of those Non-resistance and Passive Obedience Gentlemen, that act against the very Doctrines which they so loudly Trum∣pet forth themselves; as if it were Unlawful to resist King James, but Lawful to Plot and Conspire against King William. And yet what they can see in their Abdicated King James that should draw their Affection and Obe∣dience toward Him, with such a Magnetick Violence, is that which surpasses the Under∣standing of all Intelligent Men. So that if Justice and Moderation in Rule, if Courage in the Field, and Tenderness toward the People, if Prudence in Conduct, and a sedulous Care of the Publick Wellfare, all which are emi∣nently conspicuous in King William, be the Characters that denote a Good Prince, there is nothing of this, as their own Experience has found, that is to be discern'd in King James, but all quite the contrary. So that most certainly, there never was a more Un∣lucky Act, either of Ignorance, or Folly, or Madness, committed by a Hundred and Eighteen Persons, pretending to be Rational Creatures, than to expose themselves under their own Hands, for Fools and Knaves to
all Europe. And that which seems most Ridi∣culous, is their setting their Chief Nicodemus in the Van. For this Design is so laid, as not to be con∣fin'd within the Bounds of Great Britain; it extends its intended Influences upon all the present Emergencies of a Fourth part of the World, in such Critical Conjuncture of Affairs, as History can hardly parallel. For Europe is now either to break the Fetters which are pre∣paring for Her by an Ambitious Monarch, or else to see her self Loaded with the Chains of Gallick Servitude to Perpetuity. And by an Auspicious Act of Providence, to the Astonish∣ment of History, his Present Majesty of Great Britain, united with his Parliament of En∣gland, is, under God, the Chiefest Comfort of her Doubtful Hopes. The Confederate Princes look upon his Miraculous Restoring of Great Britain to her Ancient Liberty, to be a Testi∣mony that Heaven has farther design'd Him to deliver Germany, and derive a most pro∣bable Omen from his Speedy Triumphs in Ireland, that the French will be as unable to withstand him upon the Rhine, as they were at the Boyne.
While All Europe remains in this Suspence, and full of Expectations from England, what may we think of those that Toyl and Moyl to Obstruct a Design so Gloriously Transcendent, upon the Good Success of which, depends not only the Peace and Wellfare of all Europe, but the Eternal Honour and Glory of their own Nation? Can those Short-sighted Common-Council-Men then, that labour to obstruct it, take it ill to be accounted Rapparees? Or can those Passive Obedience, and Non-resistance Gen∣tlemen, that make it their Business to impede it, be offended, if they are not look'd upon to be so much as Christians, while they take part with the French, in League with Infidels, to share the Spoils of Christendom? However this is the Godly Protestant Design a Foot, and the Petitioners are made the Tools and Cullies to drive it on: Unhappy in this, that they who spur 'em forward, get all the Louidores, while they are forced to drudge for nothing; no, not so much as a Treatment at the Tavern. And there is another Misfortune that attends 'em, that it is their Interest to be accounted rather Fools and Madmen, than Persons of Wit and Discretion. For should the World be so uncharitable, as to believe 'em
truly sensible of acting for Lewis XIV. as they do, under the Pretence of being good Subjects to King James, the Scandal would be much more Fatal to their Reputation. And indeed if this Consideration do not retrieve 'em speedily from their Mistake, the Consequence naturally flowing from their Perseverance will be, that like those who set 'em on, they will be con∣cluded Traytors to their Country. The French King was sure of King James; but He being gone, his Hopes are now in the Common-Council of London. His Majesty wants a Supply to answer the Expectations of all Europe; and Lewis XIV. can find no other way to obstruct their Generous Proceedings, than by an un∣seasonable Petition of the Common Council of London, and bringing the Petty Brabbles of Ward-Motes before the Parliament, to inter∣rupt the Grand Affairs of Christendom. Cer∣tainly these Petitioners cannot chuse but know, if they understand any thing, that it is both the Design and Interest of the French King, to restore King James to his Abdicated Throne, if he can, as knowing him to be a sure Card in his Pack. They cannot but apprehend, if they have common Sense, that Lewis XIV. hugs James II. and compassionates his Mis∣fortunes,
not for any Esteem that he has for his Person, but under the Pretence of Assisting the Catholick Religion oppressed in England, and a Catholick Prince that has Forfeited all his Rights of Sovereignty, to foment and cherish Faction and Division in a Country, where he Dreads nothing more than their united Force against him. They cannot be so Ignorant as not to be assur'd, that there can be nothing more to the Advantage of France, considering the present Crisis of her Affairs, than a well contriv'd Confusion in England. Yet these are the Men that pretend to be such Minions of the Church of England, the Cream of Protestantism, the only Men of Honesty and Loyalty: These are the Men that suffer themselves to be led by the Noses, and made the Tools and Instruments in the Hands of Popish Prostitutes, and Mothy Protestants, to carry on the Detestable Designs of those who having once already laid the City in Ashes, as the Great Obstruction of their Blessed Machinations, would now again inflame it with Combustions of another Nature; tending nevertheless with an equal Ardency to Palati∣nate Ravage and Depopulation.
Now then as to the little Engine made use of to unhinge, or at least retard the united Counsels of the King and Parliament, it is called, An Humble Petition of the Members of the Common-Council of the City of London, there∣unto Subscribing. Wherein are to be consi∣dered the Timing of it, The Grounds of the Complaint, the Persons complained against, and the Persons that complain. As to the Timing of it, the Promoters of this Petition no less understand than France is well assured, that if England recover her Pristine Glory, she must Fall; and that her Flower de Luces, that have so long overshaded Europe, must give way to King William's Laurels. France con∣tends for an Unjust Empire, and to wrest from the Hands of many Sovereign Princes in the quiet Enjoyment of their Ancient Inheritances, a Universal Despotick Monarchy, to gratifie her Exorbitant and Boundless Ambition. And to compass this Design, He tramples upon all the Laws of God and Man; omitting nothing that Impiety and Contempt of Heaven can infuse into his Breast. On the other side King William, with a Generosity far surpassing that of the Ancient Hero's, so Famous for Sub∣duing the Tyrants and Destructive Monsters
of those Ages, makes it his sole Business to reduce this Monster of Men to Reason, and thereby to restore Tranquillity and Freedom to all Europe, and he has already done to his own People: An Undertaking altogether Vertuous, altogether God-like. The Parlia∣ment applaud His Majesties Design, and una∣nimously concur to furnish him with Supplies proportionable to so Great and so Expensive an Enterprize. But in the midst of their Important Debates, an Impertinent Petition must be clap'd into the House to give a Check to their Conspicuous Industry for the Good of All Christendom, now making her last Efforts to rescue her self from perpetual Bondage. Was this a Time to trouble the Parliament with City Quarrels and Disputes about Inferior Elections, when the General Wellfare of Europe lyes at Stake? So that had it only been the Distressed Duke of Savoy's single Relief, it had been worth a Hundred of those Petty Controversies. But this was not all, for the Promoters of this Petition seem to be Men that loved to Nick a Business; and therefore believing there would be a Sudden Recess of the Parlia∣ment, in regard of His Majesty's speedily
intended Voyage for Holland, they thought it most proper to interrupt the Sedulous Con∣sultations of the House for the King's Supply, when they conceived 'em to be most severely pinch'd for Time, and that it behoved the Commons to improve every Moment for the King's Business. For by this means they imagined they should find so much Work for the Parliament, that they should not be able to compleat the King's Supply before he went into Holland; and by that Artifice to fru∣strate, or at least retard the King's intended Early Preparations. And this is so agreeable to the Mutinies and Interruptions of the same Persons, when conven'd but the last Summer to Supply Her Majesty with Money to rein∣force the Navy with Ships and Men against the French, then hovering upon our Coasts, that it may readily be concluded to be a Con∣trivance of the same Head-pieces, and for the same Treacherous Ends. King Charles the Second brought a Justice of the Peace upon his Knees in Council, not∣withstanding the Pleas of his Fathers and his own Loyalty, for committing an Excise-man too severe perhaps in the Discharge of his Duty; and his Reason was this, because the
Gentleman obstructed the Gathering of his Revenue: But much more Justly do these Men deserve the King's Displeasure, that go about to stop the very Springs of Speedy and Necessary Supply, at such an Importunate Con∣juncture as this. There is a small Treatise lately published in French, under the Title of The Empire and Emperor Betray'd, wherein the Author makes it plainly appear, what Tricks of Legerdemain the French King practiced to retard and disappoint the Emperor's Prepara∣tions against him. And in the Life of the Duke of Lorrain, now lately Printed, it is but too notoriously remarkable, how that Re∣nowned General lost the Advantages of a whole Campaigne, in regard his Officers re∣fused to give Crequi Battel, which he had always declined till that fair Opportunity, because Supplies of Money, and other Ne∣cessary Provisions, retarded by Artifices and Tricks of the French, were never sent, as they ought to have been, to the Imperial Army; of which the Duke himself made loud Com∣plaints upon his return to Vienna. Now cer∣tainly the French King is still Lewis XIV. But in the mean time 'tis a great Honour to the Sub∣scribers of the Common-Council Petition, that they
have no Motion, but what they derive from the Wheels of France. And indeed were not these things most Obvious to common Sense, and the long Experience of the two late Reigns, our Subscribing Members of the Common-Council might Object and say, they were not Born Poli∣ticians: However tho 'tis believed there are very few will Object against their Objection, yet the very Instinct of Self-preservation com∣mon to Beasts, would instruct 'em better, than to act for the Common Foe of Mankind, because he happens to be a Self-ended Friend to K. James. What further use they would have made of this Nick of Time, may be readily conjectured, for some believe that they hoped for great Alter∣ations in the City upon their Subscribed Petition; and then they would have had the World in a String. They would have had all the Chief Ma∣gistrates of this City of their chusing, and then all things would have gone right for K. James and K. Lewis. For at this time their Interests are not to be separated. K. Lewis is at this time endeavoring to relieve Limerick in Ireland with Arms and Provisions, and therefore it behoves the Subscri∣bers to observe his Motions, and bustle in time to support his Contrivances in England. The Cri∣tical Conjuncture requires it; aut Nunc, aut
Nunquam. Their unnecessary Cavilling and Wrangling to disappoint the Supplies that Q. Mary demanded when the French were at our Doors, and their Invasion every Hour expected (and after such a Disappointment as that of the Cock-pit Match, it was as much as Men could do) was a Nicking Act of Time: And this same Sympathizing Brangle of a Petition to disap∣point His Majesty, and consequently the Expecta∣tions of All Europe, was another Nicking of the true Minute; a seasonable Dragging of Time by the Forelock, with his Sithe to Mow down all the Fair Opportunities of making the Nation both Happy and Glorious. So that if we consider the Time, we shall find these Subscribers so punctual to K. Lewis, that if they had been his Clock-makers, or his Band of Violins, they could not have ob∣served his Measures more exactly. And this Assurance, that they have Instru∣ments so punctual to their Time, is that which makes the Jacobites as confident of K. James's Restauration, as the Turks, with an implicit Faith, believe the Return of Mahomet. They talk of it one among another with so much certainty, as if another Monk were marching to Dover to receive him. And therefore it was, that a Carrier and two Cassock'd Ministers discoursing together in the
Kitchin at Gerards-Hall but t'other day: Well Master, said the Carrier—what—d'ye think we shall have K. James again?—As sure, quo the Minister, as thou art a Living Man—But when, quo the Car∣rier—Before the end of next Summer, I'le hold my Life on't quo the Minister. With a great deal more of this Riffraff, which was over-heard by the Cook-Maid, of whom they were not so cau∣tious, as perhaps they ought to have been. 'Tis true, that one of these Canonical Gentlemen had never taken the Oaths to K. William and Q. Mary, but the other had, yet he was so far from in∣terrupting the Discourse, that he seemed ex∣treamly pleased with the Tidings. Now it is impossible for these Men, unless their Rational Souls have forsaken 'em, to be so Confident without any Grounds of Assurance: Or suppose their Hopes may be Vain, or at least become frustrated in the end, yet it is im∣possible for 'em to tickle their Fancies, without some Straw or other of a Probability, tho never so Airy. Among the rest therefore, it may be justly conjectured, that the Contrivance of the Subscribers Petition was one; a thing well known at that time, to those two Discreet Ministers, and upon which a great part of their Hopes depen∣ded, tho they would not impart all their Know∣ledge to the Carrier.
As to the Grounds of the Complaint, the first is, That several Aldermen of the City, so made by virtue of Commissions from the late King James under his Great Seal, still act as Aldermen by that Authority, under pretence, that they are still continued by some doubtful Ex∣pression in the Act of Parliament for Rever∣sing, &c. That Sir Thomas Pilkington was not duly de∣clared Lord Mayor. That Mr. Robinson was unduly imposed upon the City for Chamberlain of London. That several Members of the Council are ille∣gally Excluded. That the Lord Mayor and Aldermen have assumed the Execution of the Office of Town-Clerk, vacant for above Three Months, into their own Hands, and appointed several Persons to ex∣ecute the same, without the Consent of the Com∣mon-Council, by whom that Officer is only Eligible. That they themselves have not been suffered to Meet and Consult about the necessary Affairs of the City. And lastly, That they having agreed to make their Address to the Parliament for settling their Grievances, the Mayor refused it, and to prevent their Application, dissolved the Court.
All which Complaints are grounded upon the Subscribers Hopes, That the late Act of parlia∣ment for Reversing the Judgment in the Quo War∣ranto, would have restored the City to its Ancient Rights and Priviledges. To these several Allegations, particular An∣swers have already been printed with Allowance of publick Authority positively asseting the Sub∣scribers Assertions to be Untrue; the meer Cla∣mours of Calumny and Vexations Falshood in the Relation of Matter of Fact; the most part already made apparent by the Fair Proof of Per∣sons upon their Oaths. To which Answers, need∣less to be repeated here, the Reader is refer'd. However there is this farther to be remarked; that surely the Subscribers had a very mean Opi∣nion of the Wisdom of the House of Commons, to believe that so Great an Assembly would fall immediately upon the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, without examining the Verity of the Subscribers Allegations. For if they did not believe that, they could not imagine that a Petition Stuffed with Untruths, tho never so plausible, could stand the Test of Parliament-Inquisition. But it seems the Subscribers assum'd the same Liberty in Appealing to the Parliament, as they that first launch into Chancery Suits, who take the Liberty to put into
their Bills, whatever makes for their Advantage, whether True or False. But however such Pro∣ceeding may be allowed in Chancery, the Sub∣scribers could never expect from an Untrue and Litigious Appeal to the Commons of England, any better Success than what they have had. It remains then to be a Rash and Inconside∣rate piece of Insolence, to disturb the Consulta∣tions of so Great an Assembly, busily imployed in the most Important Affairs that perhaps will ever come under their Debate again; since the Parliament of England is now the Parliament of the whole Protestant World. And therefore since the Subscribers could not expect to be relieved from Grievances, where there was only a Great Cry and a little W; it follows of Course, that their Petition was only a Propense Contrivance, to render Abortive the Wistful Expectation of All Europe. Had their Grievances been real, they had been unseasonable, but as they were only Complaints, without any just Grounds, it was an unmannerly Affront, to offer Cavil and Conten∣tion to the Supream Reason of the Nation. For he that offers Impertinent and Groundless Com∣plaints to his Superior, thinks him surely either very Weak, or else obliged by Preingagement, or else that he knows not what to do with his Time;
from all which Incivilities toward the Commons of England, the Subscribers are to acquit them∣selves as well as they can. But they knew that an Explanation of the Act would take up time, and that was the Subscribers chief Aim. Tho 'twas a Rude Request, for the Shallower part of the Com∣mon-Council to desire an Explanation of the Act for themselves, when the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, and the Wiser part of their own Mem∣bers were satisfied already, and desired no such enlightning of their Understanding; as if the House had nothing to do but to gratifie their want of Wit or Pretence of Scruple. Especially when at their own Meeting, they themselves could not agree upon putting the Question about the Address to be ma nor what words of the Act they would have explained. And that tho some of their Number made a Motion for such a Question to be put, yet others opposed it as Senseless and Ridiculous. It is also farther observable, that they who make these loud Complaints of the Infringement of their Ancient Rights and Priviledges, were many of them the very Men that surrender'd them up with such an easie Compliance to the Tyranny of the Court at that time, as if they had so many Shackles that rather gall'd their Heels. So that in
Them, it is only to be look'd upon as a Pretence for Disturbance, to make such a Bustle for Rights and Priviledges which they contemn'd and slighted formerly to that Degree, as to prefer the Barley-Corns of Court-Favour before 'em. How did they formerly quarrel with their Ancient Rights and Priviledges in the Elections of Mayors and Sheriffs? How did they Labour and Toyl, Moyl and Tug to Subvert the Ancient Rights and Priviledges of the City, to further and up∣hold the Tyrannical and Arbitrary Proceedings of the Court? So that indeed, were it not for the sake of others, they may be said to be unworthy of the Priviledges from which they pretend to be debar'd; more especially since that now they enjoy them again they make so ill use of 'em; and challenge only the Breach of their Privi∣ledges to divide the Nation, and restore the profess'd Foe of English Liberty. Which leads yee to consider who they are that make the Com∣plaints. It may be truly said, that for almost Twenty Years together, this Nation was wholly govern'd by the French King, under two as Obedient Pu∣pils as his Heart could have desired; he Pro∣rogu'd and Dissolv'd our Parliaments; told us when we should make War and Peace with the
Dutch; how we should behave our selves at the Negotiation of Nimeghen: He advised the two late Kings to Rule Despotically like himself; and to vear up the Foundations of the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom. And these Subscribers are they that seem to be so in love with his Go∣vernment, that they would fain have the same again. They have such a fond Affection for Sla∣very and Popery, that they are mad to see any Body go about to hurt so dear a Friend to King James, as the French King. 'Tis pity, they cry, that a poor Prince, who has been at so many Years Ex∣pence of Toyl and Mony to enlarge his Territo∣ries, should lose the Benefit of his Treacheries and wastful Usurpations upon his Neighbours, by the Opposition of England; and therefore they'll do what they can to dissipate the Storm that hangs over his Head. Shall he protect our Great and Just K. James, and we not lend a helping hand to impede K. William's Preparations against Him? And if a Petition to the Parliament, as we are cer∣tainly told, will do the Business, 'tis the least thing we can do. These are the Men that care not what becomes of their Country, so K. James comes in again. They long to be at their Old Trade of making work for the Hang-man. You may pick up several of 'em in the Famous Tryals of the
Lord Russel, Rouse, Sir Sam. Bernardiston, Mr. Pa∣pillion, Bateman, and those Barbarous Persecuti∣ons of Dr. Oats for Perjury, under the Ipse Dixit's of that same Tamerlane of the Law, Chief Justice Jefferies. No less than Sixty of these are reckon'd up to be of the Number of those, that strove with such a Slavish Emulation to Sacrifice their Ancient Rights and Priviledges, to the Imperious Moloch, Arbitrary Tyranny, on purpose to make a meer Golgotha of the City; and with a sawn∣ing Officiousness resign'd their own Liberty to Inslave others. So that it is not so much to be ad∣mired, that such Men should be so easily invea∣gled by the Enemies of the Government, as it is to be wondered how such People should be ad∣mitted to the Advantages of being qualified by their Places, to promote the Distractions and Confusion which better Headpieces contrive. For had not the Chief Incendiaries such Tools and Instruments as these, they would be at a great Loss. K. James would suffer none to be Rampant in his Reign, but such as with open Arms em∣braced his Arbitrary Rule. But such is the Gen∣tleness of this Government, in hopes to reclaim these Stubborn and Restless Jacobites, that it ad∣mits 'em into the very Bosom of it; while they are so far from being mollified by such an In∣dulgence,
that they only croud by Head and Shoulders into Place of Action, on purpose to do Mischief. 'Tis true, they shelter themselves under a Pretence of being great Zealots for the Church of England, but whether it be not a Service more Grateful to the Church of Rome than that of England, to assist the recalling of King James, is a question they might easily themselves re∣solve, were they so minded. And as for their Affection to the Present Government, it was a Sign they had very Little, when all the Money that their Loan to His Majesty amounted to, was no more than Seven Thousand Pound; and a great part of that too called in again, up∣on the last altering of the Militia. But they are put in such Hopes of King James's Return by May-day next, as some there are who make no Scruple to give out, and therefore that King William's Voyage into Holland is but an Honourable Flight, that upon the Cautions of Prudence, these Men are tender of doing too much for King William, lest they should Forfeit their Reputation to their Wish'd-for Idolater. They are all Flash and Self-conceit, Passionate and Violent, where the Fondness of their Dotage Hurries them. Three dangerous Compositions to Mis-guide such Persons that
believe they know more than they do; and never consider the Fatal Inconveniencies of Future Consequences. And from such Men as these, what Good can be expected to∣ward the Settling of a Government, that has been labouring above these Twenty Years, under the Dislocations of Premeditated Ty∣ranny, and rather requires the most Healing and Balsamick Remedies, than the pernicious Drugs of Division and Faction, that only Fester and Corrode. There are some Men that always hate the Present, though never so good; always co∣vet something to come, though never so un∣certain; and always extol and celebrate what is past, though never so Bad: Of this Hu∣mour the Subscribers seem to be. But such a Humour will never suffer the Kingdom to be at rest; such People being Tools still ready at hand for those to work withall, that love to see their Country always in a Flu∣ctuating Condition. And thus they that should bar up all Entrances against Sedition and Division, are called in to be the Chief Persons that set open the Doors for Distraction and Commotion.
But as the Subscribers are not alone, so it is no hard matter to give a shrew'd Guess, who they are that both prompt and incense precipitate Zeal, where-ever they meet with Subjects fit to work upon. And of this Number are many that wear the Habit indeed of the Church of En∣gland, but who make it their chiefest business to promote the Interest of the Church of Rome, who by vertue of their Profession, gaining an Ascen∣dant over the Consciences of many People, make an ill use of the Confidence their Admirers have of their Evangelick Probity. These Interlopers in Affairs of State, being once deluded and well instructed by the Canonical Politicks that sit at the Helm of the Church-Militant, are the most Proper Instruments to cajole the Laity. These are the fittes Men in the World to sow Division and Discord; because that what they say, is thought to be derived from Scripture; and therefore the more Dangerous, because Corruptio Optimi est Pessima. These are for the first Employers, whe∣ther Temporal or Ecclesiastical. So that if either have occasion to make use of their Activity to promote a Faction to disturb the Publick Peace, or to interrupt the Proceeding of the Go∣vernment, presently these young Levites go and touch their Tongues with a Coal from the Altar;
and then like the Syrian Ennus, that Headed the Slaves against their Masters in the Sicilian Ser∣vile War, who by holding a Nutshel in his Mouth stufft with lighted Sulphur, breath'd out Fire at the same time that he spoke, to incense the Resolu∣tions of his Fellow-Captives, they sputter out their Flaming Divinity, to kindle the Combustible Mat∣ter already dry'd and prepar'd to their Hands. The cause of many Conflagrations in State, not so easie to be quenched, when thorowly blown up. These Men love K. James, for the Inquisitions sake, and the French King for the sake of his Dra∣goons; and think no Government easie to them∣selves, but such a one as will permit them, with Scourges and Imprisonment, to Lord it over the Consciences of their Brethren. Not considering that in K. James's Reign, there were four or five Priests busily every day employ'd for several Months together, in the Augmentation Office, to take an exact Accompt of All the Lands and Livings in the Kingdom. And they may be sure those Abby-Lubbers did not take all that pains for Their Advantage, had they the Wit to appre∣hend it. What would then have become of the Enlargement of their Jurisdiction, which now they so zealously, even to Mutiny and Faction, contend for? Unless it be out of an Obstinate
Resolution, to Uphold and Justifie that Ancient Adagy of In nomine Domini incipit Omne Malum. What Fair Promises and Engagements K. James has made these Levitical Sticklers, they best know themselves, but certainly their surest way is, to have a care how they trust him. Most certain it is, that the Clergy of the Church of England ought to be supported in their Lawful Rights, and in all the Power and Dignity that belongs to them. But these Men are so eager to extend their Ec∣clesiastical Jurisdiction, that their Straining it so high, becomes a perfect Mark of Extravagant Ambition, obviously to be objected against, and from which the World draws Inferences no way Serviceable to the Church in General. And there∣fore since they were so passionate in their Trans∣ports for Passive Obedience and Non-resistance, un∣der an Exorbitant and Law-contemning Reign, they would do much better to practise their own Doctrine under a Just and Gentle Prince. In a word, whoever they were that advised, or fram'd, or subscribed this Petition, it appears by the ill Luck it has had, to have been a Mali∣tious, Mutinous, and indeed Ungodly Jacobite Contrivance, to disturb the Proceedings of the Parliament, the Peace of the City, and by delays, and unseasonable Diversions, to disappoint and
frustrate an Enterprize more Glorious than the Expeditions of our Former Monarchs to rescue Jerusalem, which was only a piece of Bigotted and Superstitious Zeal, for the Recovery of a City, which Heaven it self had destin'd to Perpe∣tual Destruction: This, a Design of Royal Cha∣rity and Generosity to rescue all Europe from Threatned Servitude, and propagate the Truest Religion now Extant in the World. For which unwary and inconsiderate Act, if the Subscribers and their Abettors, have deserved Hard Words, and perhaps Severer Thoughts, 'tis no more than what they have brought upon themselves, for not duly weighing his Majesties own Expressi∣ons, in his Speech to the Parliament upon the Second of October last, wherein he thus concludes, My Lords and Gentlemen, I look upon the Future well being of this Kingdom, to depend upon the Results of your Counsels and Determinations at this Time; And the Benefit will be double by the Speed of your Resolutions; insomuch that I hope you will agree with me in this Conclusion: That whoever goes about to obstruct or divert your Appli∣cations to these Matters, preferable to all others, can neither be My Friend nor the Kingdoms. The last thing to be considered is, What Per∣sons they are who are complained against. And here we are to observe, that the Subscribers
chiefest Eye-sore, is the Present Lord Mayor: He is not for their Turn, and therefore they would have him removed. He will not act for K. James's Interest, as they do, and therefore they would have a more Supple Gentleman that will. They knew full well, with what Constancy and Courage He formerly withstood the Torrent of the late Arbitrary Violences offered to the City, till by their Assistance it grew so Impetuous, that it bore down all the Mounds of Law and Justice before it. They knew that for his thus asserting the Ancient Franchises of the City, he became the Object of the Duke of York's Fury, who because he could not fasten any Pretence upon Him to take away his Life, resolved to make it as Miserable as he could, and to have crum∣bled him at length to pieces by the weight of a Scandalum Magnatum, under the Management of a Swaggering Judge, a Pack'd Jury, and Prompted Testimonies; nor could ever any Atonement be made, of his High Displeasure against a Person that had stood up for the Rights and Liberties of the City, as Sheriff Pilkington did, and refused to pack a Jury to take away the Life of the Earl of Shaftsbury. They knew him to be one of those who thus deeply suffer'd at a time, when some∣thing in the Shape of Justice Hector'd, Whip'd, Imprison'd, Hung, Drew and Quarter'd, and Be∣headed
headed all that came near her, that had incurr'd the Popish Successor's Wrath. And therefore, as if they still were of opinion that those things are still Crimes, which were Criminal at that time, the Old Grudges are wak'd from a long Sleep, (nay, whether they were ever asleep or no is the Question) and such an Enemy to the D. of York, and consequently K. James, must be laid aside, and Sacrificed to a second Revenge of Former In∣dignation. For since there is nothing else Alledged against him, but what is only Impertinence and Calumny, it is shrewdly to be innuendo'd, that the Subscribers Hatred against him is of an old Date. His Conformity to the Church of England is so apparent to the World, that the Fort was not to be taken by any Batteries that were to be made on that side. His Loyalty to a Prince that has spared neither his Person nor his Pains, to the Kingdoms Good; that has prefer'd the Satisfaction of his Subjects before the most Solid Advantages of his Crown; his Loyalty to this true English Prince is so unshaken, they could not stir it. Therefore he must be attack'd with specious Pretences, and plausible Insinuations of irregu∣larly Administring the Affairs of the City. And in order to this they raise Quarrels and Diffe∣rences among themselves, de Lana Caprina, Scru∣ple the Legality of the Lord Mayor's Election,
when the Scrutiny was wav'd by the Persons that demanded it, and that they declar'd their Satisfaction in the Choice, challenge to them∣selves Authorities which never appertained to their Jurisdiction, and bring a Charge of In∣fringement of their Priviledges upon False and Slender Allegations, to Pester and Intangle the Justice of the Lord Mayor, and involve the Court of Aldermen in the Broil, on purpose to create an occasion of Undue and Unjust Com∣plaint, while the Irregular Returns of Common-Council-Men in the Wards of Aldersgate and Dowgate are cunningly laid as Foundations for the Mutiny. And then to involve the Parliament in their Litigious and Groundless Contentions, they must be Petition'd to Explain their Act, by Persons out of Common-Council, when it was opposed as Unnecessary and Troublesome in the Assembly it self in a Body together. And all this not much unlike the Hubbubs which some People raise in the Streets, that they may have an Opportunity to Deprive Honest Men of what they carry about them. But as Envy ac∣quir'd by well-doing, begets Esteem and Repu∣tation, so it redounds to the Honour of the Lord Mayor, that none were so great Enemies to the Consul Cicero, as they that were engaged in the Conspiracy of Catiline. FINIS.
