S4097 99831507 35970
THE Trade & Fishing OF GREAT-BRITAIN DISPLAYED: With a Description of the Islands of ORKNEY and SHOTLAND. BY Captain JOHN SMITH. LONDON, Printed by William Godbid, and are to be sold by Nathaniel Webb, at the Sign of the Royal-Oake in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1661.
To His Sacred MAJESTY, CHARLES By the Grace of GOD, Of Great-Britain, France, and Ireland KING, Defender of the Faith, &c. May it please Your Most Excellent Majesty, ENcouraged by the Procla∣mation Your Majesty was graciously pleased to put forth some Months since, concerning the Fishing-Trade, and having gained some little Experience in that Particular, during my stay upon the Coasts of Shotland: I presume humbly to offer to Your Sacred Majesty the following Discourse, being a short Description of That, and the Ad∣joyning
Islands; the Conveniency of the Place, what course the Dutch have con∣tinually taken, in order to their carrying on that great Business; their Infinite Gain thereupon, and by what means the Industry of the English may render all their Trade there inconsiderable. Be∣seeching Your Majesty's Gracious Ac∣ceptance of this small Endeavour, from one of the Meanest, yet amongst the Faithfullest of YOUR MAJESTY'S Subjects, JOHN SMITH.
Captain John Smith, late of London, Merchant, his Ob∣servations of the Islands of Orkney and Shotland, with the manner of the Hollanders Fishing in the North or Narrow Seas, on those Coasts, and the Coast of England and Scotland: Which doth truly and lively set forth the great benefit that the Fishing Employments will produce. IN the year 1633. being then an Apprentice to Mr. Matthew Cradock of London Mer∣chant, one of the Society for the Fishing-Trade of Great Britain, was sent to Sea by the right Honorable, the Earl of Pembrook and Montgomery, and his As∣sociates, for the discovery of the Island of Shotland, the manner and way of Trading, the Profits and Customs thereof, the setling a Staple, building of Store-houses, the viewing the ground on shore for landing and drying of Nets, making and drying of Fish, and the building of Block-houses for the security of Trade; The manner of the Hol∣landers fishing for Herring with Busses, and other Vessels for Ling and Cod, according to the Journal kept thereof, is as followeth. We set sail from Gravesend the 27th. of April, 1633. and having Letters from the Earl of Pembrook to Mr. William Dicks of Edinburgh in Scotland, we directed our course towards Scot∣land; but by reason of foul weather was forced into Harwich, and set sail from thence the 30th. Ditto; the wind not favouring us we came to an Anchor in Yarmouth-road, and there going on shore was informed, that the Hollanders Busses did drive at Sea for Herrings on that Coast, and that from the Holms before Yar∣mouth to Bookness in Scotland, North North-East is 96 Leagues, and from Bookness to the South end of Shotland North and By-East about 53 Leagues. The fifth of May we set sail from Yarmouth, and by stress of wind was forced into Scarbrough, and
there going on shore was informed of the Hollanders Busses fishing on that Coast, and that from Scarbrough Northward towards Catness, in 45 Fathom or thereabouts, in that fair way is usually the first Summer Herrings caught. From Scarbrough we set sail and came to an Anchor before Leith in Scotland the 13th. Ditto, where going on shore, and from thence to Edinburgh, delivered my Letters to Mr. William Dicks, who was at that time Governor of the Island of Shotland, and did receive the Revenue of those Islands. Having received my Instructions and Letters from Mr. William Dicks directed to Mr. James Scot, who lived at that time in the North parts of the Islands of Shotland, and was Agent or Deputy to the said William Dicks. We set sail from Leith, and came to an Anchor at Casten in the Islands of Orkney, the 22 Ditto: And because these Islands are very considerable as to the Fishing Trade, I cannot pass them by without a brief description thereof, which is as followeth. The Islands of Orkney are 31, and lye from the North and North-East Point of Scotland; the first and Southermost Island is called Elhey, but the greatest and chiefest Island of Orkney is called Maland, which lyeth Southermost from the Point of Catness; on the North side of this great Island are the Havens, where the Ships come to that Trade in those parts, and to the Island called Lewis, and the Islands thereabouts. The Lewis Islands are the Islands on the West of Scotland, and those Seas, being also very considerable as to the Fishing Trade, I make bold to give account thereof as followeth. These Islands lying Westward from Scotland, and to the North∣ward of Ireland, are in number 34. There are four great Islands that lie near the main Land, but the greatest and chiefest Island is called Lewis, which lyeth Northward from the foresaid Islands; but the Northermost of all the Islands which lyeth towards the Orkanes, about sixteen Leagues from Lewis, is called Rova; betwixt Rova and Orkney lye some small Islands. The Island Lewis lyeth from Shotland South-West or more Westerly about 58 Leagues; and from the South end of Lewis to the North-West of Ireland is 27 Leagues: In and be∣tween these Islands are many very good Sounds and Havens for Ships. Lewis with the Islands belonging to it lye South and By-West and South South-west about 29 Leagues.
I shall farther add to my boldness, and give You an account of the Islands of Fero. These Islands lie Northward from the Lewis Islands about 4 Leagues, and from Shotland Westerly about 58 Leagues, and are in number 22. The Sounds and Havens are many. The Southermost great Island is called Sugdro: on the North side of this Island are several good Sounds and Havens; but the best and chiefest of all the Havens, and where all the Trade and Mer∣chandise is, is called Tor-Haven, which lyeth on the great Island Strone. But these Islands being out of my Road, I shall return to my former Discourse on the Coast of Orkney and Shotland. The South part of Shotland lyeth about 20 Leagues Northward from the Island called Maland; but between the Islands of Orkney and Shotland lie two Islands, the one called Fair-hill, and the other called Fulo; these two Islands lye about 10 Leagues one from the other, Fulo lyeth North North-East from Fair-hill. The Island Fair-hill lieth from the Noth-East point of Orkney about 9 Leagues, and the Southermost point of Shotland lyeth from Fair-hill North and By-East about 8 Leagues, and from Fulo East and By-South about four Leagues. Being informed of the manner of the Hollanders Fishing for Herring, Ling, and Cod, with Busses and Doger-Boats, in those Seas, and the Inhabitants of the Islands manner and way of Fishing, we set sail from Casten, and came to an Anchor by Sunbrough-head, being the South part of Shotland, the third of June, and go∣ing a shore, spake with the Good-man of Quandale, one of the chief of those parts; the said Gentleman with other of the Inha∣bitants did inform me of their manner of Trading with the Ham∣burgers and others; and of the Hollanders Fishing for Herring on that Coast, also of their Doger-boats that fish onely for Ling and Cod. After I had received Information from the Inhabitants of the several Islands, and the manner of Fishing and Trading there, we set sail from thence and came to an Anchor in Bracey-Sound, other∣wise called Broad-Sound, a very gallant Harbour, where many Ships may lie Land-lockt for all Winds. Having informed my self by the Inhabitants of those parts of the manner of their Trading and Fishing, and the Hollanders fishing for Herrings driving on that Coast, we set sail from thence, and came to an Anchor in Evey-Sound, the Northermost Sound in Shotland on the 12 Ditto, and there going on shore, I continued
about 11 or 12 Months, and in that time travelling the greatest part of the Island by Sea and Land, did thereby better inform my self concerning the manner of Trading and Fishing by the Inhabi∣tants, and the Hollanders at Sea. The Land of Shotland lyeth North and By-East, and South or South and West about 60 Miles. But their many Islands belonging to Shotland, which I shall have occasion to mention hereafter. That which is most considerable are the Sounds and Harbours. On the West side of the Southward Point of Shotland, there is a good Harbour and Sound, called St. Magnus, and on the East side near Sunbrough-head is a fair Sand-Bay, where there is good An∣choring in ten or twelve Fathom; to the Northward of this last Sound there is another Sound called Hambrough-Haven, which is a lade-place for the Hamburgers and Scots. About 9 or 10 Leagues from the Southward point of Shotland there is a Chanel that runneth through the Land, the South part of the Land divided by the Chanel is called Swanberg, the other part so divided, or the North part, is called Laxford; within this Chanel aforesaid are several Sounds or Harbours, but the best and chiefest Sound in Shotland is Brace-Sound, or Broad-Sound, as before mentioned; out of this Sound the afore∣said Channel doth run Northward. On the North part of Swanberg lieth the high hill of Hanglix, from the said Hanglix about 9 Leagues Northward, lie some out-Rocks, called the Stars; to the Northward of the Stars there is a very good Harbour, called Bloom Sound; to the Northward of this last Sound is another good Haven, called Hue-Seund, being the Northernmost or North-East Sound or Haven belonging to the Island, called Ounst. There are other Havens or Sounds which lyeth through the Land, between and about that part of Shotland called Laxford, and the Island called Jello. There are also other Islands and Sounds, which for brevitie sake I forbear to mention. The Merchants which Trade with the Inhabitants of Shotland are Hamburgers, Breamers, Luberghers, Scots and English. The chief Inhabitants of the Islands are Scots, the meaner or in∣ferior sort are a mixed people of Danes and Scots. The Islands of Shotland, as I have been informed, were given to King James of blessed memory, by the King of Denmark, with Queen Ann. being part of her Dowry. The Commodities of Shotland which the Inhabitants do for the
most part Trade withal is Ling and Cod, which they take with Hooks and Lines in small Boats, called Yalls, about the bigness of Gravesend Oars; the Ling they sell for 3d. a piece, being a Ling of the largest size, and is called a Gild Ling; if smaller, then we have two for one, or three for two, and so proportionable. The Cod is sold for 2d. the Gild Cod, and is measured as the Ling. I bought of Fisher-men, the Inhabitants of the Island called Ounst, 11655 Gild Ling, and 834 Gild Cod, at 3d. the Gild Ling, and 2d. the Gild Cod; which Ling and Cod were taken by the said Fishermen at several times in their small Boats, and brought to my Booth, or place of abode every morning as they were caught; the said Ling and Cod being very good and Merchantable, were salted aboard the Ship that landed me, and within seven weeks after my landing, I sent her for London with the said Fish to the Right Ho∣norable the Earl of Pembrook, as by my Books of Account, de∣livered into his hands, and left with him, may appear. There is also other small Fish which the Inhabitants do catch with Angles sitting on the Rocks, and in their small Boats with Hooks and Lines in the Sounds, and between the Islands; and these small fish are very considerable, for although they cannot spend them by reason of the multitude they take, and have not industry to make use of them for Transportation, yet the Livers they pre∣serve, and with the Livers of the Ling and Cod, make Train-Oyle; but if it were improved, as taking them with Nets, the Train Oyle, I say, would amount to a considerable sum. And if this increase of Trade were carried through the whole Islands, it would be a great encouragement to all Merchants Trading into those parts. There were several other Merchants in the Island where I did in∣habit, that bought Ling and Cod of the Fishermen, so that the quantity which I sent for England was not above the fifth part taken in that Island: with which the whole quantity of fish that was bought by other Merchants throughout the whole Islands of Shotland being added together, would amount to a very considerable Sum or Quantity, to the lading of many Vessels, which might be much more improved, and encrease Trading thereby, furnishing the Inhabitants with Mony and Commodities. In the Islands of Shotland there were Beeves and sheep sold at a very reasonable rate; I bought for my own use, and the Victualing the Ship sent to London, three Oxen for 3 l. and at an other time
four Oxen for 5 l. which were fat, and about the bigness of the small fort of Cattel we have in England: There were also fat Sheep sold for 2s. and 2s. 6d. per Sheep; there were also other Creatures for food, as Conies and Fowl. But desiring not to multi∣ply words, I forbear to mention them. The Fuel or Firing in Shotland is Peat and Turf. There may be Salt-Pans set up there, and good Salt made to serve all the Fishing Fleet. There are very good Shores for landing and drying of Nets, and making and drying Fish. There is no Night in the North of Shotland part of two months in the year, as June and July. In an Island North of Ounst, being not inhabited, but stockt with wild Cows and Conies, I did kill with my Birding-piece ten couple of Conies in one night, shooting from a little before Sun-set to Sun-rising, and it was as light as a cloudy Winter-day. I do not remember any Frost or Snow in Shotland; if any, it was not of long continuance; the coldest weather is by reason of great Winds in the Winter-quarter, the wind blowing so violent, that no Ship dare look on the North-Coast; so that the people of those Islands have little commerce with other Nations in that Quarter. I can speak by experience, being blown down flat to the ground by the violence of the wind, was forced to creep on my hands and knees to the next wall, and going by the wall got into an house, or else must have stayed by the wall till the violence of the Wind were over. Sometimes it lasteth half a day, and sometimes more. There are several Towns in Shotland, so called, being about eight or ten houses together, where they plow and sow corn, as Oates, which is their chiefest Bread; and if my memory do not much deceive me, there was good Barley growing in my time. But the Land might be much improved if the inhabitants were in∣dustrious; they are like unto the idle Irish, not improving any thing either by Sea or Land, spending that in the Winter which they get in Summer; although their Winter might be very profitable unto them, if they were laborious and industrious, as the Hollanders are. The Goods and Commodities that are vendible in Shotland are Hooks and Lines for the taking of Ling and Cod, Nets for the taking of Herring, Strong-Beer, Bisket, Wheaten Meal, Salt, Pease, Fruits of all sorts, Strong Water, Monmouth-Caps, and many other particulars, which is not needful at this time to mention. The Inhabitants of the Island of Ounst usually have a Bark that
they Trade with to Norway, where they may buy Timber for Houses ready framed, also Deal-Boards, Tar, Ships, Barks, and Boats of all sorts, and other necessaries for their use. With their small Fishing-Boats, called Yalls, they will Row into the Main about two or three Leagues, more or less, where the Banks are that they lay their Hook and Lines for Ling and Cod; in one of these Boats Rowing with two men, and sometimes four, according to the largeness of the Boat, they do usually bring to Shore every morning that they go to Sea, about fifty or sixty Ling and Cod. There are many Barrels of Herrings taken by the Inhabitants, with their small Boats, in the Sounds, and at Sea not far from Land, which are the gleanings of the Hollanders Busses; for the Busses driving at Sea, break the Skull or Shole of Herrings, and then the Herrings flee near the Shore, and through the Sounds, where these small Boats, with those Nets they have, take them. But if they had better Tackling and Boats, they might take five hundred Barrels for one, which would much enrich the Islands, and by encreasing of Trade would augment his Majesty's Revenue. I was an eye-witness of the Hollanders Busses Fishing for Herring on the coast of Shotland, not far from Ounst, one of the Northermost Islands; demanding the number of them, was in∣formed by several persons of quality, that the Fleet consisted of 1500 Sail, and that there were above 20 Wafters, as they call'd them, which were Ships carrying about 30 Guns a piece, being the Convoys of the Fleet of Busses; which said Busses were of the burden of about 80 Tun. There were also a small Fleet of Dogger-boats, which were of the burden of 60 Tun and upward, which did fish onely with Hooks and Lines for Ling and Cod. Many of these Boats and Busses came into several Havens or Sounds, to fit and trim them∣selves. One thing was observable, that within eight or ten days after the Dogger-Boats went to Sea, they came into the Sound again so full laden as they could swim. The certain number of Dogger-Boats I could not learn, but the general report was about 400. The Composition of the Hollanders, as I was informed after my comming into England, was an Annual Rent of 100000 l. and 100000 l. in hand; and never having been paid or brought into the Exchequer, as I could hear of, there is in Arrearages above 2500000 l. an acceptable sum, and which would come very hap∣pily
for the present occasions of his Majesty. As for the charges in Building, Rigging, and setting forth the Busses to Sea, with Nets and other Materials for the Fishing, as also Dogger-Boats for Ling and Cod, I refer to several Books in Print, as, The Royal Herring-Buss Fishing; and, A Narrative of the Royal Fishing, both set forth by Mr. Simon Smith, who is well experienced in those affairs. If God would please to put it into the heart of our Gracious King and his Subjects to set out such a Fleet of Busses, as before mentioned, for the Fishing-Trade, being in our own Seas, and on our own ground; and that the Hollanders and all Strangers may be discharged from Fishing in those Seas, and the Hamburgers, Breamers, and Lubeckers, and all Strangers, from Trading in the Islands of Orkney and Shotland, and that onely the Subjects of the three Kingdoms may have the Trading and Fishing, it would make our King one of the greatest Monarchs in the world, for Riches and Glory; and the Three Kingdoms the happiest people in Chri∣stendom, and there would not be one wanting Bread; but the hearts of the Subjects would be lifted up with praises to God and our King. For it is well known, that Trading is the life of all the habitable world, and therefore much more of these Three Kingdoms, which are but Islands, and so populous, that we are ready to devour one the other; and if Trading be not encreased and maintained amongst us, we shall in a short time be the most despicable People in the world, and the derision of all Nations. Having in thirty years Experience in Travelling England, Scotland, and Ireland, and other parts, observed, That without Trading no Nation can subsist, which I humbly conceive I shall be able to make good against all opposers thereof, which are enemies to your Sacred Majesty, and these three Kingdoms: And that if there be not an increase of Trade powerfully carried on, we are an undone People, as I shall make more fully appear by my ensuing Discourse. Now it is well known to all, who are not quite ignorant of the course of Trade and Merchandise, that the Traffick of Europe hath been engrossed into the hands, and carried on all along by the Venetians, Genoese, Portugalls, Easterlings, Hollanders, and Eng∣lish; all which I shall briefly run through, and shew how the failer and decay of One, was the original rise to Another, till the
whole at present is divided between the Hollanders and us. I shall begin with Venice, That City therefore and Genoa at first, two pretty equal Common-wealths, by reason of that mu∣tual advantage they had one of another, and community of Trade to the same places, were counter-ballances one to another; in one thing the Venetians than the Genoese, in another the Genoese than the Venetians, being better supplied; for if the Venetians had better Shipping, the Genoese had richer Merchants, and a greater Bank, and so they continued: Till Venice disdaining to be confin'd in so narrow limits, as was the compass of its City, encreased its Dominion, and adding to its Power greater Industry, utterly undid the Genoese, undersold them in their best Commodities, and so wore them out; which they could well do, being better in this continuance of time provided, as to Men, Mony, and all manner of Provisions. Hence they made themselves Lords of all the Trade of the Levant, comprehending in it Turkey, part of Africk, and Italy: and by multitude of Ships of their own, transported the Commo∣dities of those Countries into France, England, and the Nether∣lands. They made their way also into the Indies, and all over Persia by their Caravans, and by Egypt and Aleppo returned thence all kind of Silks and Spices, and sold them at their own Rates, where ever they found the best vent, and so they continued to do at excessive Rates, though not without extraordinary Gains, by reason of the difficulty of conveyance; till the Portingals dis∣covered the passage to the Indies by the Cape of good Hope, re∣ceiving in Exchange for the Commodities so Bartered, the Staple Commodities of all the Countries they Traded to; Here in Eng∣land they had for them Cloth, Tin, Lead, &c. and with which we our selves, by our own Shipping, cheaper, and with greater gain, might have supplyed Italy, Turky, and the greatest part of Africk. Hence also that State, at first confined to a sew scattered Islands, on which by degrees they built their City, whither before they onely fled for security, came to encrease and grow to that heighth in which now it is, nay greater in all probability; for by the decaying of Trade, their Power and Dominion hath sensibly decayed. By the greatness of their Trade they enlarged their Jurisdiction, both upon the Levant Seas, and very high into the Main Land, in Lombardy, Graecia, on the Dukedom of Milan; conquered and purchased many considerable Islands in the Mediterranean, as
Candy, Zant, Cyprus, and other places which lay convenient, both for strength and security of the Trade and Navigation of that Republick. It would be tedious for me to recount how many Colonies they have dispersed over the world, and that fear and jealousie other Kings and Emperors have had of its growing strength; how that City was thought to have a design upon the Soveraignty of Italy, and the many combinations to prevent. And all this to have compassed from so small a beginning, onely by the extent of its Trade, as its neighbour Rome enjoyed it by strength of Arms. After the Venetians and Genoese, the Easterlings or Hance-Towns were Master of the Trade and Commodities transported from Moscovy, Poland, Germany, Sweden, Prussia, Denmark, &c. and with them, by their abundance of Shipping, served England, France, Spain, and the Low-Countries. And that in regard of that continual need we had of the Commodities of those parts or people, as Hemp, all manner of Cordage, Sope-Ashes, Flax, Pitch, Tar, Masts, Corn, &c. They received in return from us our Staple Commodities, which by their own Ships, at their own Rates, they conveyed all over Europe, when we for want of Shipping could not: but did see their excessive gains, and yet were forced to be content. Even here in England they had very great privileges, mighty indulgencies; and out of that necessity we thought we had of them, finding by them the speediest vent for our Commodities, we embraced them into our bosom, so that by degrees they began to be very potent upon the Northern Seas, and upon every oc∣casion were ready to turn our enemies, the most dangerous, because, as it were, within our own bowels: Hence taking advantage, in their Shipping the Saxons, Danes, and Normans invaded England; and the Hance-Towns were grown formidable both to Italy and France. But as their Trading decayed, so did also their Strength, and their Shipping being wasted, they have undergone the same necessity that others, once famous Cities of Mart, have done, and have utterly lost all their power and strength by Sea. The Portingals discovering the way to the Indies by the Cape of good Hope, quickly became Engrossers of the whole Trade thither, and by the same stratagem and device undermined at once the the Venetian and all the Hance-Towns, whereupon encreasing with the strength of Spain, they made themselves the terror of all round about them, and a very rich Nation and People within it self.
This was the first rise of the Portingals, who lying so commo∣diously for Navigation, and a no less industrious than a very cautelous people in the management of their affairs, proceeded so far, that Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory jealous of them, fearing lest Spain should joyn with them, and of their future great∣ness, continually encreasing by reason of its Traffick into the East and West-Indies, for the security of her self, and safety of all her good Subjects, endeavoured to make her self equal in strength, and counterpoise them, if possible, by the enlargement of the Trade of Great-Britain, and this she prosecuted with so much vigour, and so successfully, that in a little space England had as great a Trade and Power by Sea, as either the King of Spain, or any Principality of Europe. But before her time, in the Reign of King Edward the 6th. our own Merchants discovered the Trade into Moscovy by the way of St. Nicholas, ever since which time, in our own Shipping we have thence transported home all the Commodities of that large and vast Country, formerly brought in by the Hanc-Towns, their Agents and Merchants. And whereas a great part of those same Commodities, as Ca∣vear, Tallow, Hydes, &c. are not vendible in England, and being Bought, must be again Sold or Exchanged, Need and Use hath found a better Vent for them in Italy, and other parts of the Le∣vant, whereupon first began our Trade there; a Trade, which though it at first appeared very small and inconsiderable, increased in a few years to that heighth of Improvement, that within 90 or 100 years, we have worn the Venetians out of all that mighty Trade they carried from those parts, or in Turky, and all over Christendom. So that by this you easily see how Trade hath flourished and de∣cayed in Genoa, Venice, the Hance-Towns, and Portingal, the whole being now fallen betwixt Us and the Hollander, either striving who shall use means most effectual for advancing the general Trade of its Country; and though the Hollanders hath by Art and Industry better improved his Interest, yet that wherein his Interest most lis may obviously appear, and wherein, in that very particular, we may, if we please, go before them, I shall thus endea∣vour to demonstrate. The Hollanders have not at present, neither ever had any other means to rise to this greatness of Wealth and Trade, but by be∣taking themselves to Fishing, being a People of constant Labour,
and unwearied Industry; a multitude in a Spot of Land, which doth not afford them any Commodities sufficient to be the ground even of a mean Trade. They first began, and all along have drove this Trade of Fishing, being their Original of all Trade, upon our Coast, and the Coast of Scotland, on which they employ thousands of poor people, be∣sides others of a better Rank, making some Mariners and Fisher-men, others they keep at work about the making and mending of N ets; others they employ as Merchants about the Transportation or Exchanging of their Fish for other Commodities. So that in all Holland you shall scarce see one Beggar, there being so many thousand things, or particular Trades, or Imployments belonging to the Fishing-Trade, out of which they may find a Livelyhood. They employ also hereby great store of Ships, and in the indu∣strious management hereof, make us in England at what rate they please buy our own Fish. The great quantity of Herring every year they take, they tran∣sport to Dantzick, Melvin, Quinbrough, Leghorn, and other parts; and with the Returns they make of them, buy Corn, Hemp, Flax, Pitch, Tar, Clap-boards, and other Commodities; and in Holland store them up into a Magazin, whence they again disperse them into Italy, France, Spain, yea England, and all over Europe. Fish, and the Fishing-Trade being the onely Stock upon which they continually live and spend, putting off most there where they find the best Rates; and this hath encreased their Shipping and Wealth, that now they have lengthned their power all over the World, and in most Countries have a considerable Stock. And this growing and encreasing of theirs hath been within the space of 70 or 80 years, and yet they are not come to their heighth, for every day they glory in some new addition to their Sway. And if care be not taken of this their growth, they will within few years not onely be Master of our Seas but of our Trades too. His Majesty hath been graciously pleased to take this into his Princely consideration, and if it be seconded with the prudent management of those Commissioners he hath already imployed in the carrying it on, I dare be bold to say the Hollanders are at their Meridian. For first of all, England is not inferior to the Netherlands, nay, we are before them in all the Advantages both of Art and Nature.
The scituation of our Country is such, that for the convenience of all kind of Marts the world hath not the like, and being seated between the North and South, so that it is fix'd, as it were, by Art and Nature, the fittest Staple for both Northern and Southern Commodities. Secondly, our Ports and Harbours are fairer and safer, having good Anchoring, and more in number throughout the three King∣doms, than any Country in Christendom can boast of. And then thirdly, which exceedeth, we have valuable Commo∣dities, as to the quantity and quality of them, such as are the in∣riching of all those that trade with them. So that if we are not our own Enemies, and will but be a little industrious, one quarter of that will serve and be enough in Eng∣land, which is but necessary and scarce sufficient in Holland; adding thereto providence for the employing our own Shipping, and not any Forreigners, we shall within few years have the greatest power at Sea, and make our selves Master of all Trades; and the Hollan∣ders a servant to that Wealth and Power, of which at present he is the sole Master. But for the quicker advancement of so great and noble a work, there is necessary to be a Protection and Favour of his Majesty to all manner of Trades, so that they be not carried on by Strangers, and acted by them, as at present it is in and about the City of Lon∣don, there being, thousands of them up and down the Suburbs, French, and Dutch, and others, who live as it were upon the ruines of the poor free-born Citizens, vending any unmerchan∣table ware, and at lower Rates than any other honest Tradesman can. And this I humbly conceive is the reason why Trading hath been so bad and dead in this great City for these late years. But the prudence of his Majesty is such, and under his prospe∣rous Reign all things so readily begin to run in their old Chanel, that we doubt not but in a little time Trading and Merchandize will do so too, and not be any longer the burden of the Land for the lack of it, but of the Sea in bringing it hither. After men comes mony, and without this sure Foundation, we shall never be able to make any Superstructure to stand. There must be a Stock of Shipping, Mony, and Commodities; for Commodities in Traffick will bring in more Mony, and Mony commands all Commodities, and to attempt this without both, or at least one of these two, is like a Soldier going to Battel without
his Offensive and Defensive Weapons; with the one we offend all our Enemies, the Engrossers of our Trade: and with the other we defend our selves against their most powerful assaults. In antient times, Merchants and Tradesmen were very careful to provide and lay up a Stock of Mony for the building of Ships, and buying of Commodities to Trade with. But in these latter years, as within 40 or 50 years, they have disbursed much mony in pur∣chasing Land, and building stately Houses, minding pleasure more then profit, and have neglected Trade, to the undoing of many of them, and that great cause of the decaying of Trade. Therefore to preserve and uphold Trade, I humbly offer unto his Majesty's consideration, and His Honorable Council, that all Merchants and Tradesmen within the Three Kingdoms may be re∣strained from purchasing Land above the yearly value in Rent of pounds. This being effected, and the Fishing-Trade carried on, will with∣in few years make the greatest Bank of Mony, and the greatest Trade in the three Kingdoms, to be equal, if not greater, than any Trade or Bank of Mony in the world. For hereby great and vast sums of mony, which are now con∣sumed in continual Purchases, will be expended onely in and about Trade and Traffick in general; and the best security for this Mony will be a setled Bank, which all will of necessity use. Having not read any of those Books which are in Print concern∣ing the Fishing-Trade, but referring to several Books that I heard of, and not knowing the number of Busses allotted or appointed to be bought or built, neither how they shall be disposed of as to their Ports or Harbours; therefore I make bold to offer my judg∣ment. That a certain number of Busses be bought or built, as also Dogger-Boats; the number of Busses to consist of 1000 or 1500, or thereabouts; for that some years 15000 may as soon catch their Lading as 500, and therefore more considerable as to the charges of the three Kingdoms; for a small number of Busses will not do the work. The Dogger-Boats which Fish onely for Ling and Cod, would consist of 400, or thereabouts. These Busses and Dogger-Boats being fitted for Sea to proceed in their Fishing, that then they be sent or appointed to several Ports or Harbours of the three Kingdoms, that lie most convenient for the Fishing.
And that the Counties or Shires that these Ports do belong to, be enjoyned to keep the same number of Busses and Boats perpe∣tually, well Rigged and Furnished to Sea for the Fishing, as was de∣livered to them. And if by reason that those Counties, which have the most and best Harbours, and that lie most convenient for the Fishing Trade, will bear the greatest burden, by reason the greatest number of Busses will be sent to these Ports. Then thirdly, I humbly offer, that the Undertakers of the said Counties have allowance out of the main Stock or Bank of Mony, proportionable to their Charges. And I do further humbly offer unto consideration, that there be a Corporation made of all the Adventurers for the Fishing-Trade, and that Merchants and Tradesmen be admitted into this Cor∣poration. And that tis Corporation be armed with large Privileges, and ample Immunities, for the Transportation of the said Fish. I might have also told you of the Pilcher-Fishing, and for Ling and Cod on the Wst and North-West of England, and that great Pilcher-Fishing, and Fishing for Cod on the West Coast of Ire∣land, frequented by those of Biscay, Galicia, and Portugal; but they are so well known that I forbear to mention them. The Islands that belong to Scotland, and lie on the North, North-West, and West of Scotland, which are useful for the Fishing-Trade, are in number 94. And whereas it is credibly reported, tht above 220 Fisher-Towns are decayed and reduced to extream poverty, for want of favour, succour, and protection: On the contrary, by diligent en∣deavouring to make use of so great a blessing, as is offered unto us by the Seas, we might in a short time repair those decayed Towns, and add both Honor, Strength, and Riches to our King and Country. The Premises being taken into serious consideration, it maketh much to the ignominy and shame of our Nation, that God and Na∣ture offering us so great a Treasure, even at our own doors, we do notwithstanding neglect the benefit thereof.
THE CONCLUSION: AND to conclude, such is the clear and indubitable right of our Soveraign Lord the King to the Superiority of the British Seas, that no man can produce clearer evidence for any part of his Estate: And as those Seas, under God, are the principal means of our Wealth and Safety; so it doth much concern all his true Sub∣jects, who are bound by the Law of Crace and Nature, with heart and hand, to preserve and maintain the same with the hazard of their Lives, Goods, and Fortunes. FINIS.
