S413 18213175 107173
ANTI-CHRIST in Man: OR A discovery of the Great WHORE that sits upon many Waters, Wherein is declared what that Whore or inward Mystery is; together with the destruction thereof, by the powerfull appearing of Christ in us. By JOSEPH SALMON, a Member of the ARMY. Rev. 18.2.And he cryed mightily with a strong voice saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, and is be∣come the habitation of devils, and a cage of every unclean and hatefull bird. Ver. 20. Rejoyce over her, thou heaven, and yee ho∣ly Apostles, and Prophets, for God hath avenged you on her. LONDON Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the Sign of the Black spread Eagle at the west end of Pauls.
To all those who desire to be acquainted with the Mystery of God∣liness, and especially to those my beloved friends and Brethren in the Lord, with whom I have former∣ly walked in outward formall Communion, both in City and Country. MY dear friends, whose I am in the bowels of unfained love; considering with my selfe, that there is nothing more requisite to be known, then these two great mysteries, the mystery of godliness, and the mystery of iniquity; and likewise pondering how much all flesh is opposite to the discovery of these two mysteries; I have presum∣ed to dictate my thoughts unto you in this small Trea∣tise, wherein I have briefly and infirmely discovered
unto you, what the Lord hath manifested unto me of the spirit of Antichrist, that is in all of us: It may be that I may be supposed, by many of you, in this little volume, to endeavour the subvertion and overture of that forme and discipline that you for the present walk in; but I assure you from the truth of my heart, that I intend no such thing; but shall rather incourage any of you to continue in that dispensation, where the Tord doth manifest himself to you in the same: only this know dear friends, that the Lord hath his movings towards his people, to some he shewes himself more clearly; to seme more obscurely; to some he makes the flesh of Christ comfortable, and joyfull; that is, the discovery of himselfe in flleshly dispensations; to others he cru∣cifies his own flesh (as I may so say) that is, dyes, departs, goes away in the flesh, or fleshly formes and dispensations; and this is my condition for the present; I were a wretch if I should deny the appearances of God to me in that way you now for the present stand in; but now it hath pleased God to move out of these things to me, I now see, that all the knowledge of Christ that they could set out to me, was but o knowledge of him after the flesh; in a word, I see that Christ hath crucisied himselfe to me, in all these things in which before I enjoyed his fleshly presence; insomuch that I now waite with the Disciples, where Jesus hath ap∣pointed me, even at the gates of wisdomes house, and at the posts of wisdomes doors, for the return of the
Spirit; for I believe this departed Jesus will come a∣gain, but it shall he in Spirit; not in flesh; and will make himself to be that substance to me really, which I catched at in the shadow typecally; and this, through mercy, I doe in some measure enjoy, and though in much imperfection, yet so sweetly, that henceforth I desire to know Christ after the flesh no longer. Now as concerning this Treatise it self, I desire you to look upon it as comming from a Child in the understanding of the divine things of God, and if you suppose your selves to have come to more maturity in divinity then my selfe, and that you think that you can speak in more glory then I have done, I hope you will be so muh the more engaged to passe a charitable censure upon the stammerings of my Infancy: If any of you shall notwithstanding testifie any rigednesse of spirit against me in this particutar; herein I joy and rejoyce, that the Lord in his time will bring you to live so in the light of that Sunne, as that you shall see all your now present light, to be darknesse, and your forme to be flesh, and then you will not be bitter a∣gainst any poore Saint, that desires to enjoy God in a more high dispensation then your selves; in the meane time, I desire your prayers to the Lord for me, and I shall for ever commit you into his hands, who I hope ere long will dye to you in all these outward things, as he hath to me, and by his rising and second comming in you, will so manifest himself to you, that you shall see
him to be the spirituall water, bread and wine, with∣out and beyond all these types, and shadowes; which is the dayly prayer of him who still professeth himself to be your brother, by that one Baptisme of that one spirit, into that one body; and for ever remain yours til death. Joseph Salmon.
ANTICHRIST in Man: OR The discovery of the great WHORE that sits upoh many waters. THere hath been much contro∣vercy about the finding out of this great Whore; that spirit of Antichrist, which God shall judge, and whom Christ shall destroy, by the breath of his mouth, and the brightness of his comming: and in this eager persuit of her, to find her out in her scarlet colours, riding upon the Beast; some men have atained to glimmerings, some to a more perfect discovery of her; some there are that affirme this great Whore to be the Pope; some the Presbyter, some the Episcopacy; now these men have seen the Whore but in a fleshly dis∣covery,
they take the fruite for the tree, the streame for the fountain; in a word, they have seen her outside, but not her inside; they know her in the History, but not in the Mistery; for upon her Fore-head is written, MISTERY, BA∣BYLON, THE GREAT, &c. Rev. 17.5. Know therefore O man, whomsoever thou art! that judgest the whore by these carnall conceptions of her, that thou art far deceived by her, in her fleshly appearances to thee: Thus while the sons of men seeke to be∣hold this Strumpet in her proper sphere and center, they deceive themselves, by looking too fleshly and carnally upon her: know first then O man! that this great whore is in thee, whil'st thou seekest to behold her without thee, whil'st thou beholdest her in other men, shee is in the mean time acting in a Mystery in thee: whilest thou despisest the appearance of her in other men, shee hath by guile caught thee, and by her Mysterious workings insnared thee; and hath stolen thy heart from God and good ness, she imbraceth the in her armes; she kis∣seth thee with her mouth; she deceiveth thee by her flatteries, whilest thou thinkest thou hast nothing to doe with her; shee is in thy bosome, whilest thou thinkest shee is far dist∣ant from thee; and this is done in a mistery and thou seest it not.
Now then looking upon this Whore spiritu∣ally, not carnally; in us, and not out of us; in the Mystery, and not in the histery: once more let us make inquisition after her, and endea∣vour to finde her out in all her subtil and close corners. For thy better attaining to the discovery of her consider; First, what this great Whore is. Secondly, how shee works, and what pre∣tences shee deludes the soule by. Thirdly, how a soule comes to attain a sight of her. Fourthly, and lastly, how and when, shee shall bee destroyed: and thus wee may at∣tain to a sight of Babylon, with her Rise, and her down-fall. First what is the Whore? This Whore, this Babylon, this Antichrist, Is thy fleshly wisdome; that spirituall Serpent thou art deceived by, & commitest fornicati∣on with all, is the wisdome of the flesh, the car∣nall Policy of the creature. This was that Antichrist that appeared in, and to our first Parents, and that which they harlotryed with, from the Lord: God He created Adam blind and naked, to this end, that Adam might not see, but God for him; nor Adam might not know, but what God knew in him, and for him; and so this Adam, though
blind and naked, yet cloathed with such di∣vine Robes, as were altogether inconsistant to fleshly Adam; so here was God All, the Creature Nothing. But now comes the Serpent, which is, the subtilest beast in mans worldly heart; name∣ly, Selfe, and Flesh; and that dispences its wis∣dome into the heart of the Creatures, and that bids them eat, for then their eyes should be opened, and they should be as Gods, know∣ing good and evill. Now man desiring (by the report of fleshly-wisdome) to have his eyes opened, and to be as God, and to bee no more a subject, but a King; no longer govern∣ed, but a governour; runs away from God, departs from his first Lover, and commits a∣dultery with his own fleshly wisdom: And as Adam, in the History; so all in the Mistery, commit dayly fornication with the Whore our fleshly wisdime; by cating of the forbidden Tree; for this forbidden Tree, is in us, and we tast of it continually; and howerly suffer death for the same: This Garden of Eden, in the Mistery, O man! is in thee; in whom God hath placed the ma∣nifestation of him self, & hath brought forth the budings of his glory; and any of these thou mayest Eate; but there is a Tree in the midest of this Gardn of which thou mayest
not eate; which is thy heart, O man! this must e reserved wholy to the Lord; this God cals for, Prov. 23.28. my son give mee thy heart: that s, thou must ascribe nothing to thy self; but give over al man in to my hands, and willing to be no more, then I will bee in thee; and to know no more then I shall know for thee; this is, that forbidden Tree that God would not have us eate of: but whole man, with his wis∣dome, Reason, Judgement, Affections, Will nd Understanding, must be given to the Lord: but now comes this Serpent our subtil fleshly wisdome, in us; and that thinks much to let God be all, do all and have the glory of all: ut it would faine see with its own eyes, and ee a God unto its self; so it forsakes all the est of the Trees, which God hath given it to ate of; namely, the manifestation of God in he soul; and takes of its owne fruite, & eats f that feast that flesh hath provided; and so orsakes the fountain, and runs to the broken Ci∣ernes; Jer. 2.13. and thus our eyes comes to ee opened; and wee see no longer light, in Gods light; but with the eye of self and rea∣on, saying to a stock, thou art my Father, and to a one, thou hast brought me forth; Jer. 2.27. that is, tributing nothing to God, but all to fleshly isdome; with which wee have Adulterated nd Harlotrized from the Lord.
Thus O man! thou seest what that grea Whore is, and where shee lyeth; even in the in∣most closets of thy soule. Now that thou mayest bee farther convinced, that this wis∣dome of the flesh, is the Antichrist, the grea Whore: do but first consider the Names, and se∣condly the Nature of her. Eirst, her Names in Scripture are divers, a first, she is called Anti-christ, which is as much as to say, against Christ: Now man as a creature is not against Christ; but the wisdome of th flesh in man, this is against Christ, and so, con∣sequently the great Wore, or Antichrist. Secondly, She is called Babylon, in Scrip∣ture, Rev. 17.5. Rev. 18.2. which is as muc as to say, confusion, now all confusion that  wrought either in Pope, Presbyter, or any othe particular State, is by the wisdome of the flesh therefore this is that great Babylon. Thirdly, She is called that wicked one,  Thes. 3. ver. 8. Now all the actuall wicked∣ness that proceeds from the sons of me flowes from that originall within, even th wisdome of the flesh; therefore the wisdome o the flesh, is that great wicked one, which is t be destroyed. Fourthly, She is called the Mother of Harlo∣nd abominations of the earth, Rev. 17.5. No what's the Mother of Harlots, surely this canno
either the Pope, or any other particular tate; for if the Pope be the Mother of Harlots, en I demand who, or what, is the Mother of is Harlotry? Then what, or who, is the Mo∣er of Harlots? Why she is in us all in a mystery;  is the wisdome of the flesh in man, which  the Mother of all the abomination which is ommitted against the Lord. This is that Aanti-christ; this is Babylon; ere is the wicked one; this is the Matron of all iquity; out of the womb of fleshly wisdome roceeds all that actuall transgression that is ommitted against the Lord: All outward ap∣earances of sins, are but the Bastards of this Whore, the children of this strange Woman, and he Brats of this great Adulteress; and happy, ea, thrice blessed shall that man be called, who shall take and dash these children of the Whore against the stones; This man is Christ, who hall come in power and great glory in a Christian, and destroy, and dash in peeces the conceptions, bringings forth, and appearan∣ces of fleshly wisdome in us: as we shall shew more at large hereafter. Thus we have endeavoured to discover the whore what shee is by her Names given her in Scripture; whereby thou mayest understand, that the Whore doth not consist of any out∣ward State or fleshly appearances to thee: but
upon her Fore-head; which is her most op and palpable workings, there is written My∣stery. 2. That this great Whore may yet mo fully appeare to be the wisdome of the fle in thee, doe but consider the nature of th Whore in brief, and so we shall have done wit the first quaere, Namely, What the Whore is? Now the Nature of this whore is two-fould 1. Opposing; 2. Exalting; both which you may fin attributed to Anti-christ, or the Whore: in tha 2. Thes. 2, 4. she apposeth Christ or God; and therefore called Anti-christ: Now see O man  whether this Whore be not thy fleshly wisdome  look into thy soul, and behold and see, how opposite thy fleshy wisdome, is to any thing that is good or goodness: what meanes those often resistings of the Spirit in thee, O man? Seest thou not how the whore deceives thee? What conception, bringing forth, or appearance of God is there in thee, but the wisdome of the flesh, seeks to devour it, by violent attempts & op∣positions, therefore the text saith ver. 17.6. That the whore was drunk with the bloud of the Saints; and Martyres of Jesus: How hath this mysticall whore the wisdome of the flesh, martyred the appearances of Christ in thee, so that indeed she is drunk with the bloud of many a sancti∣fied motion of the Spirit in thee? The wisdome
f the flesh is, that mysticall Saul, that hunts sf ter the bloud of David; which is, the tender ppearance of God in the soul; this it is that sucifieth the Lamb a fresh, and puts him to o∣n shame; and all this is done by that blou∣ whore that harboureth in thy bosome. The wisdome of the flesh is, that bond-slave, at alwaies presents wisdomes Children and the ildren of the free Woman; which are the bring∣gs forth of Jesus in thee; In a word, this is at great Red Dragon, spoken of in Rev. 12.3,  who stands before the Woman; which is, a ristian, under the panges of the new birth, ady to be delivered of the blessed child Jesus; whose hart, God is begetting himself, in  own forme and Image: this I say, is that agon, even the wisdone of the fiesh, which is dy to devour the sweet Babe, even Jesus, with  forme and feature in the soule, and endea∣rs to make it an obhortive: is is that misticall Heroad, that seekes the ru∣of the appearance of God in our flesh: and s you see what the opposing nature of the ore is; who for her bloudy opposition a∣snst the manifestations of God in his peo∣ shall have blood to drinke, when shee shall ound worthy. . We now proceed to the other qualifica∣n of the Nature of this whore; which is, a
High, Proud, Lofty, asspiring Nature; bein manifested by two things: 1. In that she will get into Gods Templē;  Thes. 2.4. 2. In that she will therein exa her self above all that is called God, and sh will be a god to her self: Behold O man! (a it were in a glass) the true Viseognime an perfect Portrature of thy fleshly wisdome. First then, consider, that thy heart is tha Temple of God, where this great Whore siteth therefore, minde the Apostle 1. Cor. 3.16. Kno yee not that yee are the Temple of God; as also Ch 6.19. Now, thou being this Temple of Go thy fleshly wisdome is that Antichrist; tha Whore, that sits in thine hart; thou art th Beast, that this Whore rides upon, Rev. 17.  for the Psalmist saith, Psal. 49.12. that M being in honour, abideth not; but is like the heast th perisheth: here mayest thou see, O man! the pri of the wisdome of the flesh, that no plac wi serve her, but Gods Temple the hart of ma that God hath set apart for the praise of his glor doth this Whore make her Beast, by bringi it to be subject to her dominion; this Te∣ple of God, tobe that den of the every: whi God hath made for his own honour and di∣nity. Secondly, the exalting Nature of the who is seen, not only by her climing up into Go
Temple, and so becomes that Lucifer, that fell down to hell: but also by her behaviour in Gods Temple; She exalts her self above all that is called God; She sits as God in Gods Temple, in a place where She hath no right to Rule and governe: Behold here, O Christian! another proper Emblem of the wisdome of the flesh in thee: How doth this Whore, this Misticall Babylon ex∣alt her self above every appearance of God in thee; in so much as her Tayle drawes the third part of the Stars of Heaven, and casts them down to the Earth, which is in me? That Reason, Will, Affections and Judgement, which are as the civill powers & lights of the soule, all these are drawn after this beast: so that indeed, Shee now is the Lady of the Kingdomes, Jsa. 47.7. nay, ver. 8. I am, and there is non else besides mee: this wisdome of the flesh is that which will not alow the Child Jesus any room in the Inne of thy heart: but thrusts him into the Manger; which is, under the meanest thoughts, poorest respects, and lowest love of thy soule: but in the mean time, this whore her self takes the largest rooms, and highest chambers; that is, She is most supreame in thy affections; with the greatest love, honour, and respect that may bee: thus doth this whore the wisdome of the flesh, exalt her self as God; yea, and that in Gods Temple; where She hath no right to rule
and govern; for the Apostle tels us that wee ar not our owne: but are bought with a Price; that is, wee are to owne no Lord, but hee that hath bought us: to render no obedience or servi∣tude to any, but to that God who in our flesh hath Redeemed us; according to the Com∣mandement, Thou shalt have none other gods bute: but self, flesh, and creature will bee God in Gods Kingdome; which causeth God to take up a complaint against his people of old; Have I beene a barren wilderness unto thee; or a Land of darkness; whersore then say my people, we are Lords, wee are Lords? and we will come no more after thee? Now the creature running astray from the Lord, commits fornication with the great Whore the wisdome of the flesh; attributing all Power, Glory, Salvation and happinesse, to selfish wisdome: and therefore Babylon saith on this wise, Jsa. 14.13. I will ascend into Hea∣ven; I will exalt my throne above the Stars of God: which is, when the wisdome of the flesh is ex∣alted above the highest sphere of divine light in the soule: nay, ver. 17. I will be like the most High. Behold O man! the aspiring, exalting na∣ture of thy carnall wisdome: The wisdome of the Serpent would needs have Adam to be as God; and to see by his own eyes, and to walk by his own light; which Serpent is nothing in
the Mystery but the wisdome of the flesh, car∣rying the soul above that centre that God hath seated it in; causing thee to walke by her blaze, and not in Gods light to see light; to hate, scorn, and put a meane estimation upon any motion of God or goodnesse; always thinking thy way the best, and thy councell the safest; and thus doth this Whore thy fleshly wisdome, exalt her self above all that is called God in thee; and sits as God in thy soule, which is Gods Temple. So much for answer to the first question; namly, what this great whore is. Now thou, having attained some spirituall discovery of this whore, both by her Names and Nature; it remains, that we proceede in answer to the second question: which is, Namely; How this Whore workes, and what pretences Shee deludes the soule by: Now therefore, know O man! that this whore workes in a mistery; upon her Fore-head is written Mistery, Rev. 17. When Antichrist, or thy fleshly wisdome is most apparant in any sinfull action; yet in that appearance, She is very Misticall: So that sindeede, upon her most open workings in the heart; there is written Mistery: It is a property of a Strumpet to pretend what shee doth not intend to her Lovers: be∣old a Character of the Mother of Harlots, thy
fleshly wisdome; She is very subtill of heart; Prov. 7. She alwaies pretends, what shee never intends: So that here, all is well in the History; but meare deceit and delusion in the Mistery: this whore, Shee will present a glorious shew; but there is nothing but wickednesse and Harlo∣try intended: This is that Spirituall Judas, that will Betray thee with his salutations: you shall find this whore in a religious Dress, many times; that hereby she may deceive the heart of the simple: Observe how the Harlot in Prov. 7. beguiled the yong Man; She caught him, and Kissed him; ver. 13. and with an impudent face, saide unto him; I have peace Offerings with me; this day I have paid my vowes: this whore in the Mistery, is thy fleshly wisdome; and thou art this simple young Man; who art deluded by her. Behold therefore, O man! the impudency, and bouldness of this spi∣rituall Whore; She is not ashamed to shew her Fore-head to thee: But here is a Mistery all this while, that thou seest not. Now therefore know, Oh Christian! that this whore appeares to thee in all thy spirituall performances & Sacrifices to the Lord: if thou doest but observe, thou shalt see her appeare in Prayer, in Humiliation, in Fasting; nay, in all outward Ordinances; thou shalt see thy fleshly wisdome in all these things, steale thy
heart from the Lord, by attributing somthing to form, flesh, and creature: so that wee are apt oft-times to blesse our selves in our spirituall performances, and sing a Requiem to our selves in our fleshly formes; so that hereby, all our duties are but the Sacrifices of the Whore, the vowes of our fleshly wisdome, which She ap∣peared in, to delude us: Now, woe and alas for us! that ever wee should be deceived by this whore, in those things wherein we think is least appearance of her; but here is plainly seen her misticall apparition: This whore meets thee, O man! in all thy religious performances; and there doth She attribute all the goodnesse of all that is done, to her self; and thou also givest consent to it; and to commit Fornication with her: hence it is that the woman is saide, Rev. 17. to have a Golden Cup in her hand, full of abominations, & fil∣thiness of her fornications; a golden Pot, but a bit∣ter potion. This Serpent, our fleshly wisdome, appeares to us with her speckled Skin; but within her, there is deadly Poyson: Beware then of this whore, in all her glorious appearances, and golden manifestations; for all this is but to insnare thy heart with her treachery: the wis∣dome of the flesh will meete thee many times arrayed in Purple, and Scarlet; coloured, and
deck'd with Gold; which in the Mistery, are nothing else but shewes of glory to thee: She will meet thee in good performances; & there shee will salute thee; and tell thee that thy good duties have prevailled with God for thee; and She will tell thee, because thou art under such an outward forme, and carnall dispensa∣tion, that therefore thou art better then other Christians, which injoy God in a more spiritual making out of himself: thus She will endea∣vour to make thee drink of her Fornication, by proposing her golden Cup to thee: and thus poore sduced man, commits folly with him∣self; or his own wisdome in all outward wor∣ship whatsoever, forsakes God, in praying, fast∣ing, mourning, and all outward formes; and is carried away more with the decency, order and trimnesse of the whore, in an outward dispensation; then the Power and life of God∣lyness, that God requires in a Christian: and so∣much shall suffice for the setting forth of the first delusive pretence of the Whore; which is, to array her self in her glory, the better to effect her designe upon the poore creature. 2 The designe of Anti-christ, or thy fleshly wisdome, is alwaies to bring thee out of love with God: O! its death to the whore, when shee seeth that thou desirest to bee constant to thy Husband Jesus; who hath espoused thee to
himself; and therefore, She is still labouring to bring thee out of love with Christ, and God: And this She labours to effect, by causing of thee to think that God doth not love thee; that so hereby, She might estrange thy heart from the Lord. It is the worke of this Serpent, to raise in our hearts hard thoughts of God: all poore afflicted soules, whoever you are that grieve under the pangs of an accusing conscience; harken, behold and consider! how the wis∣dome of the flesh deludes you, by causing you to looke upon God in the glasse of flesh and creature; and so hereby, to apprehend him to be what he is not: Poore soule, thou tellest me there is no mercy in a Christ for thee; and prithee why so? Oh, Alas! God loves me not, hee is offend∣ed at me, and displeased with me; I have beene so vile a sinner against him. Now all this while, the poore soul doth but looke upon God according to the dictates of selfish wisdom; and so it apprehends God to bee like it self: Thou thoughest (saith God) that I had been altogether such a one as thy selfe: Because we are angry with God many times, therefore we are apt to thinke God is froward with us; whereas, God is love, saith the Apostle; Eph. 1. John, 4. and therefore God tells us, that his
thoughts are not our thoughts, nor our waies, his ways; Jsa. 55. The wisdome of the flesh eudeavours to put out, and extinguish the light of God in a Christian; whereby the soul might see God to be purely Love and mercy; and will propose its own glasse to the creature; which renders God to be what he is not, to mans apprehen∣sion: So that when the soul would fain be refresh∣ed, with the comfortable aspect of Gods pre∣sence; then comes fleshly wisdom, & tels the soul it must not behold God according to his Love; but according to its own Iniquity; and so here by, dasheth the soule upon the rock of despe∣ration; in so much that the poore creature now concludes, that God is angry with him, and is resolved not to shew him mercy. Now when the Whore hath thus estranged the heart from the Lord, by perswading the soul, that either, God is not able, or willing to help it in its misery: then She propoundes her own way to the creature; She will per∣swade the creature never to goe to God againe; but rather with the Prodigall, to goe and feede upon the Husks; as namely, upon Prayer, fast∣ing, or some outward and carnall Ordinan∣ces: and here the soule estranged from the sub∣stance, commits Adultery with the Whore, in
subsisting on the Shadow; forsaking the foun∣tain, runing to the broken Cisternes; and so commits a great evill against the Lord: and thus poore naked man runnes from God, as from an enemie, behind the trees of his own creating; and before he will bee beholding to God for a clothing, hee will cover him-self with the Figleaves of his own fleshly wisdome, and so commits Adultery with the Mother of Harlots: and now thou seest another delusive pretence of the whore, by raising hard thoughts of God in thee, by bringing thee out of love with the Lord thy Husband; that so She might the better steale thy heart from God and Rob him of his due and propriety. 3 This Mother of Harlots, thy fleshly wis∣dom wil propose her self to be all to thee, that so She may draw thy affections after her; Shee will tell thee that she can supply all thy wants and relieve al thy necessities, and therfore thou needest not to bee beholden to God for any thing; She will tell thee with Adam, that She can give thee the knowledge of good & evill; and she can open thy eyes, & She it is that gives thee any thing; therefore the text saith, Prov. 9.13. A foolish Woman is Clamorous, She is simple and knowes nothing: this foolish Woman is thy fleshly wisdome, O man! for the Apostle saith The wisdome of the fiesh is foolishness with the Lord:
which although it bee foolish, simple and to knowes nothing, yet She is very clamorous; that is, her voice must chiefly be harkened un if the still, small voice of the spirit utter if self in thy Soul, how doth the clamour of thy foo∣lish fleshly wisdome as it were out-cry, and drown the utterings of God in thee; therfore the Text saith ver. 14. that She sits in the dore of her house, and the highest Places of the City, to call Pas∣sengers who go right in their way; who so is simple let him turn in hither, and as for him that wants under∣standing, She saith; Stollen waters are sweet, & bread eaten in secret is pleasant. Alas! poore self seduced man that reads this History, and seest not that thou thy self art the very person intended; know therefore that thou art this passenger, who whil'st thou art travelling right on thy way to seek after Christ, art deluded by the clamour of this strange Wo∣man; whilest thou art seeking after wisdome, She bids thee turn in hither, she hath wisdome and knowledge for thee; although indeed shee is simple and knowes nothing: Oh Sirs! how wise would self be, when it is nothing but fol∣ly in the abstract. And thus O man! thou art invited to Babylons banquet, & runnest after the stollen waters of the Whore, thy fleshly wisdome; which stollen wa∣ers, in the Mistery, are nothing else but the
depriving of God of his due in all his workes in the soule; when God brings forth his wis∣dome and divine light, in the soul, then flesh and self will tell thee that all proceeds from them; and so steale Gods propriety from him; and thus, Man runs from God and is estranged from the Lord, and eates his bread secretly with the harlot. And this (in my apprehension) is a third de∣lusive pretence of the whore, so to shew her self to the creature as if all fulnesse were treasured in her; in whom indeed is nothing but vacancy and emptinesse: thus doth this whore draw us from the Lord, our lover; who hath ever bin constant to us, and that in the very height of our inconstancy to him. It is the designe of God in us, to bring us to live upon his fulnesse, and to feed upon those divine dainties which hee will carve out to us: and what soul is it, that in the time of his constancy to the Lord ever wanted any thing? nay, what spirituall refreshments and incomes of divine glory have our souls tasted of, while we have kept in our Fathers house? But when once Jeshurem waxeth fat, and kicks; when once we, prodigall like, forsake our Father, and think that there is enough in selfe and creature to subsist upon: when once we be∣gin to loath the Heavenly Manna, Christ Jesus,
and to esteme more of the Flesh-pots, Garlick and Onyons of Aegypt, the raw and ranck dis∣covery of this Whore, of bondage in us; when we prefer the husks of Swinish self, and wisdome, before the dainties of our Fathers Table; truly we shall at last come to know the want of divine joy and comfort: Know therfore, O Man! that in all thy wan∣derings from the Lord thy full fountain, to selfe thy broken cistern; thou in the mean time, art drawne by the whore thy fleshly wisdome, to yeild to her wickednesse, by her flattering lips She forceth thee, Prov. 7.21. and thou goest after her as a silly Oxe to the slaughter, till a Dart strike through thy Liver, which dart is one of the fiery darts which the Apostle speakes of; even the woundings of conscience, the gnawings of the Worme in thee: And this is that spirituall death, which thou hast brought upon thy self, by commiting Adultery with the whore, thy fleshly wisdome; who hath stolen thy heart from the Lord, by atributing all fullness to her selfe in thee; and now She leaves thee, as not being able to help thee in thy woe, distress and mise∣ry: and so much shall suffice for the discovery of a third delusive pretence of the whore; whereby Shee deceiveth the heart of the sim∣ple man. 4 This Whore, the wisdome of the flesh is
very changeable in her appearances; it is the policy of a Harlot to sute her self to the humor and fancy of her Lovers; that so thereby Shee may still retain and keepe them in her fa∣vour: Even so it is with the spirituall Whore, the mo∣ther of Harlots, thy fleshly wisdome; which will still be moving and changing her self in her appearances to thee, that so her designe may be carried on the more subtilly; therefore the Text saith Prov. 5.6. Least thou shouldest ponder the pathes of life, her wayes are moveable, thou can'st not know them: Behold here, as in a Glass, the Na∣ture of this whorish Woman, the wisdome of the flesh! how moveable is She in all the puttings forth of her self to man; if thy heart leads thee to all manner of Palpable prophanness this whore will encourage thee to this course of life; and She will tell thee that there is time enough yet to be sory for thy misdeedes; and if through the motions of goodnesse, thou beginnest to Ponder of thy Wickednesse; and therefore art resolved to mend thy wicked courses, and to be more Morally Vertuous for the time to come: this Whore will move with thee hither also; She will lead thee forth to the presence of many a good Morall action, as to extend Almes, to feed the Hungry, to Cloath the Naked, to Visit the Sick, and to leave of
thy old Vices thou hast formerly lived in; all this She will be well contented with: She will be willing with Saul, to kill part of the spoile, some open Vices and Palpable prophannesse; but Agag and the fattest of the Cattell, the chief lusts of thy heart, She will worke yet under; that in the Mistery must be spared: thus the Whore will conform her self to man; nay, if thou art brought by higher light, to see that Godlyness doth not consist only in refraining from some open Vices, and imbracing their contrary Vertues; but there must be Religion, as wel as Morallity looked after: and therforenow thou art resolved to take upon thee some out∣ward Profession of Christianity: This whore will change her appearances to thee here also; She will come forth to meet thee with her Peace Offering and her Vowes; She will move with thee to Fasting, Prayer, and Humiliation, provided, that all this while thou attribute the glory of all to her self; She will move as high as any outward Ordinance with thee; and all this is lest thou shouldest ponder the Path of life: Lest thou shouldest question this whore in her Wanton gesture and gaudy Attire, She will be∣have her self more Religiously, and Adorn her self more demurely; that so hereby She may the more cunningly draw thy affections after
her: and thus poore seduced Man is Mistically mis-led, by the flatteries of this whoreish Woman: and in the mean time he thinkes he serves God: & this is a 4th pretence of the Mother of Harlots, to move and change in all her appearances to thee, that so by her conformity to thee in e∣very respect, She may yet keep thy affections intire to her self. 5 It is the property of this strange Woman, thy fleshly wisdome, to render Christ to be at a distance from thee, in all her fornications with thee: If Man in all his adulteries from the Lord, did but serioufly consider & really understand, that his first lover Christ Jesus is in him, and seeth him in all his strayings from him; and how he eates his bread secretly, with the wis∣dome of the flesh; surely he would bee asham∣ed of his folly, and would not dare thus to commit Harlotry in the sight of his spirituall lo∣ver, and this the wisdome of the flesh knowes right-well: and therefore labours might and maine to render Christ at a distance from the creature; that so the soul might not be affraid to commit fornication with her. Therefore, it is the Language of the whore, Prov. 7.19.20. The good-man is not at whome, he is gone into a far country; and behold the Language of this Misticall Strumpet, the wisdome of the
flesh! She wil perswade thee that thou mayest take alittle liberty to sin, that thou mayest exalt self alittle, in religious performances; for God seeth thee not, he is in Heaven, and not in thy heart: and thus, Man being deluded by the flatteries of this Whore, becomes that Foole who hath said in his hart there is no God; that so he might Magnifie, Diefie, and Worship self in Gods stead: Self and flesh will not owne the Manifesta∣tion of God in the Soul, when the Lord lets forth the beames of his glory into the heart of man, and doth as it were draw up the soul to a higher Centre, by giving it some tast of the Powers of the World to come: it is the worke of thy fleshly wisdome to extinguish this divine light in the soul, and as it were to corrupt the Stomack, and put the mouth out of tast; that so it might not rellish or digest those di∣vine dainties: And notwithstanding those open appearan∣ces of Christ in thee, yet, the wisdome of the flesh will tell thee, that the good man Christ Jesus is gone abroad, he is at a distance from thee: This Whore will be contented that thouth shouldest know any thing but Christ Jesus and him Crucified in thee; She is willing that thou shouldest know Christ Naturally, but not spi∣ritually; Christ in the History; but not in the
Mystery; Christ for thee, but not Christ in thee: it is possible for a man to know very much of the flesh of Christ, to be acquainted with the History of Godlynesse, to live under carnall Ordinances and fleshly dispensations, to talke and dispute upon high Principles, to be higher in the understanding of the Scriptures then o∣thers, by the Head and shoulders with Saul; and yet for all this, he may in all these things commit Adultery with the whore; all these things may be to him no more, then the Sacri∣fices and the Vowes of this spirituall Whore, the wis∣dome of the flesh: he is not the true Professor, therefore, that can Read, Heare, Fast and Pray, and Worship God in an outward dispensation; but those are the true Circumcision that Wor∣ship God in the Spirit, and rejoyce in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh: He is not a Christian indeed, that doth by the power of nature, believe what is Naturally and Historically reported of Christ in the Scripture, but he that by the power of the spi∣rit, beleeves all this History to be verified in him in the Mystery: for there is a History, and a Mystery of Christ; the History is Christ for us, the Mystery is Christ in us, Col. 1.27. Now that Power of Nature which is im∣planted in man, is sufficient for the giving credit to whatsoever Christ is, or hath been
for us, but not for what Christ is in us; this must be by a power equall with that which raised up Jesus from the dead, Eph. 1, Thy fleshly wisdome will bee contented thou shouldest be acquainted with what Christ hath done for Thee, but She will not endure to let Thee see him in Thee: First, She is willing to let Thee understand that Christ hath been made flesh for Thee, but not that the word is made flesh in Thee; that is, that this God hath by his own power begot∣ten himself, and brought forth himself in his owne likenes in Thee; that thou art this virgin that is over-shaddowed with power from on High; and hast the immortall seed of God in Thee; which Immortall Seed by its owne power; brings forth its owne selfe in thy soul; by the puttings forth of the motions of the spirit in thee: this thy fleshly wisdome will not let Thee be∣hold the wisdome of the flesh in that Serpent, Rev. 12.15. that casts out his flood after the Wo∣man, or a Christian, in whome Christ is by the power of the Spirit borne and brought forth; this flood in the Mysterie is, nothing in me, but the over-flowing of the wisdome of the flesh, the inundations of finfull self and creature, that flow into the heart of man; this Spiritu∣all Serpent, hereby endevouring to drown and destroy, both Christ and a Christian, at once
as it were; both the Passive Mother, and the Ac∣tive Babe on a suddain; such an enemy is the wisdome of the flesh to Christ in us: This flood of iniquity, these over-flowings of the wisdome of the flesh in us, is that great River Euphrates, that must be dried up, that way may bee made for the King of the East, Christ Jesus, to ruinate great Babell in mans heart: and thus you see briefly, how the wisdome of the flesh is an enemy to Christ borne in us. 2. She cannot endure to let us see the dy∣ing of this Christ in us; although wee are the very Persons that Crucifieth the Lambe a fresh, and put him to open shame; yet She will per∣swade us otherwise: and thus poore self-se∣duced man, Crucifies his Saviour every day a∣fresh; and yet is so deluded by him-selfe, that he seeth it not: Consider then O man, that thou art this Spirituall Jerusalem, where Christ is slaine; thou art that Judge, that condemnest Christ in the motions of his Spirit; & lettest Barabhas, or thy base lusts, goe uncontrouled: all the faculties of thy soul, and the powers of the inner-man, mis-led by the wisdome of the flesh, are as it were the voice of the People, Crucifie him, Crucifie him: thy sins are those speares that Pierce Christ in spirit, in thee: and thus O man! thou art the dayly Crosse of
thy Saviour: and how happy shouldest thou bee if thou did'st discerne all this; that so thou mightest looke upon him whom thou now piercest and mourn for thy iniquity: but the de∣signe of this whore, thy fleshly wisdome, is to darken thy eye from beholding of this; She will rather tell thee, that the good man is not at home, Christ is not in thee in his Sufferings: And thus poore man, mis-led by the Whore, becomes that deceitfull Pilate that washeth his hands of the blood of this innocent Spirit, whom it hath dispitefully Crucified. But Secondly, Christ may be said to dye in a Christian another way: which also this whore cannot endure we should see and behold; and that is, when Christ dyes in flesh to us, and in us; for some times Christ lives in fleshly ap∣pearances of him self in a Christian; some Christians, the highest discovery of Christ that they have attained unto, is fleshly formes, and fleshly Ordinances; & thus many a christi∣an enjoyes Christ as really, and as comfor∣tably, as the Disciples did the Naturall flesh of Christ; now Christ he would needs dye, de∣part, goe away from his disciples in the flesh, that so hee might come in a higher, and more glorious dispensation to them; even so, oft∣times Christ doth likewise dye in a christian, to all outward and fleshly dispensations: and
this death the wisdome of the flesh cannot en∣dure that the soul should discerne; how often doth God goe out of all low appearances to a Christian? Insomuch that a poor Christian many times, can finde no Christ in his forms, no comfort in ordinances, no joy in duties and performances; but with Mary, stands weep∣ing at the Sepulchre, or those dead dispensations where Christ is buried; and can see no appear∣ance of Jesus in them; but all this while it seeks the living amongst the dead: & thus Christ dies in a Christian to all fleshly appearances, many times: And truly, looke what sorrow fell up∣on the spirits of the poore disciples, for the de∣parture of their Lord (in the flesh) from them; the like sorrow and griefe, falls upon that Christian, from whom Christ is departed in all outward dispensations: Christ compares that present estate and condition of the disciples, to a Woman in Tra∣vell Joh. 16.21, 22. and yee now therefore have forrow, saith Christ: Behold O Christian, the lively Image of our condition! when Christ crucifies his own flesh to us, in all those out∣ward dispensations, wherein formerly wee have injoyed God. Happily, heretofore we have seen much of God in our outward formall fellowships one with another, in fleshly Ordinances; as Bap∣tisme
of water, and breaking of bread; but now happily Christ is crucified in all these things to us; and wee finde nothing but dead flesh there; nothing that can administer any spi∣rituall comfort in any of these things; see no∣thing but forme & bare Flesh, bare Water, bare Bread, and Wine; in so much that wee now confesse, that our highest attainments of the knowledge of Christ, hath been but a know∣ledge after the flesh; now here lyes Christ cru∣cified to all these things, & the soul dead to its wonted discoveries: Now the designe of thy Fleshly wisdome, is to darken this death of Christ in Thee; Shee cannot endure that the Soul should move out of its fleshly discoveries; for She loves the outward order, and fleshly decency of all these things; and therefore She'l tell Thee, that Christ must be found here, or no where; and thus keep the Soul in bondage to her self; in so much, that the poore creature goes again and againe to his outward worship, and yet findes no living Christ there; nor is possessed with any more comfort in them, then proceeds from the power of the flesh; wheras indeed the Soul should bee willing to waite in this dead condition, for the returne of the Spirit; to lye empty and bare at the gate of mercy, out of all those formall dispensations, from
whence Christ is departed; waiting for the Comforter: and therefore my councell is, to all those who see Christ dead to all such carnall and fleshly dispensations in them: Christian, wait upon the Lord and thou shalt renew thy strength; Christ must have his time to lye in the grave, hidden from thee in all his appea∣rances to thee; but this know, he will see thee againe, in a more Spirituall discovery of him∣self; it is but a while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry; and will take thee up into himselfe, above these Types and Figures; hee will bee thy Water, and Bread and Wine to thee; hee will bring thee to the injoy∣ment of the Substance, and thou shalt no more live upon the Shadow; thou shalt live up∣on the kernell, and not alwaies bee cracking upon the shell; For if wee be dead with Christ, wee shall allso live together with him; but be sure in the meane time, that thou beware of the Whore, least She by her appearances to thee in all out∣ward Worships, make Thee believe that Christ is living in all those things wherein he is dead and buried. And thus in briefe, you see that this Strumpet, the wisdome of the flesh, is an enemy to the discovery of Christ in us. And now me-thinks, by this time wee may see who is the great Anti-Christ that John speaks of, in his first Epist. 4. Chap. 3. ver. That every spirit
that believes not, or denies Christ come in the flesh, is Anti-Christ: and what is it now, that denies Christ come in the flesh? If thou wold'st know Christian, what this Anti-christ is, and where She lyes; thou needest not goe far to discover it; thou needest not go to Rome, Canterbury, or Westminster; but thou mayest finde that Anti∣christ in Thee, denying Jesus to be come in thy flesh: Oh, all ye that would faine shew your selves professed enemies to this Antichrist, that man of sin; who seekes to destroy Roote and Branch, all those in whom you conceive there are the appearances of him; Returne, Returne O man! into thy own Bosome; and there behold him lying secretly, in thy owne soul; there is the Antichrist, that denies every manifestation of God in thy flesh; this is the Whore that Thou daily commit'st Fornication with all; this is the Babilon, whose Down-fall will bee joyous to the Saints; this is the Heretick and the Schisma∣tique; this it is that makes Rents and divisions amongst us: and therfore we ought every one of us, to desire God to subdue the wisdome of the flesh in us; and to waite upon the Lord un∣till he comes to shew us the Judgement of the Spirituall Whore, this Antichrist in us: and not so much desire the down-fall of either Pope, Presbiter, or Independant, or any other
State whatsoever; but to desire the ruin of this Mysticall Babylon; which is the Mother of all our Harlotry from the Lord: And so much shall suffice for Answer to the Second questi∣on, which is, Namly, how the Whore workes, and what Pretences She deludes the soule by? Wee proceed now in order to a third que∣stion, Namly, 3. How the Soul comes to attaine to a sight of her? In which, wee shall first propose the way that God doth usually take to discover this Whore to a Christian. 2 When the Soul seeth her,, How and in what manner it apprehends her? First for the way that a Soule comes to at∣taine a sight of her by: If then, thou would'st know the way how a Christian comes to a spirituall sight of Flesh and Selfe; know, that God must deale with Thee as hee did with John, Rev. 17. When God would shew John the Judgement of the great Whore, and give him a discovery of the whore; hee takes him ver. 3. and carrieth him away in the spirit, into the Wildernesse; and then saith John, I saw a Woman, &c. First then know, that thou canst never be∣hold self aright, till God take thee up, or cat∣ry thee away in the spirit; the spirituall man, saith the Apostle, seeth all things; discovers all
things; and Judgeth all things: so much as the Lord spirituallizeth a Christian, so much he sees into himself, and discernes and beholds this Mysticall whore, the wisdome of the flesh, in himself: and now he judgeth and estemes of her as that whore, that Adultress with whom he hath (in all his waies and Worships) adul∣terated from the Lord: Therefore the Apostle saith, that the spirit search∣eth all things, 2 Epist. Cor. 1. Chap. So long as the soul lyeth under the vaile of the flesh, so long selfe is undiscovered to him; for while the creature lyes wrapt up in the Mantle of na∣ture, it is in a spirituall slumber or sleep; and lyes as one passive, under the workings of the wisdome of the flesh; rock't a sleep in the cra∣dle of fleshly security: But now when God speakes by the small and still voyce, yet powerfull utterance, of the Spirit in a Christian; Come up hither; when God takes a Soul up beyonde self and creature; in so much that now the creature sees all but vanity, below Christ: now I say, the creature comes to some disco∣very of himself; but never before. That man that will view the breadth and length of a City at once, must not alwaies be walking about in the streets; but he must e∣ssay to get up to the top of some mountaine that lyes above it; and so the City shall be dis∣covered
to him, with its breadth and length: even so it is with the spirituall Babell, which is in thee Oh man! even the wisdome of the flesh: thou must bee taken above it ere thou canst truly and really discover it. 2 Thou must be carryed away in the spirit; carried quite away from all Power, Policy, Strength, Motion and Action of the crea∣ture: 3 The place whither thou must bee carried; that is into a Wildernesse; which is, into a lost condition, to sin and self: never doth the soule attain to a reall sight of the flesh, till the Lord by his Spirit doth (as it were) loose the soule to it self: when the creature comes to bee at a loss in it self, in all its fleshly performances; not knowing where to have recourse; but sees that his narrow fleshly heart, is so wide a wildernesse, that he is lost in the many turn∣ings and windings thereof; now the creature comes to behold his Spirituall Adulteryes; now he sees into what a lost condition he is fallen; & how the whore al this while, in all his duties, worships, formes and disciplines, hath stolne his heart from the Lord, his first lover and tender Husband: Paul was carried away by the spirit into this Wildernesse, Colos. 3. ver. 7, 8, 9. he professeth ver. 7. That what things were gaine to him, he counted loss for Christ; yea doubtlesse,
saith he ver. 8. and I count all things but loss, for the excellency of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, & do count them but dung: that I may winne Christ: Paul never knew himself, nor creature excellency aright, till God shewed him the ex∣cellency of the knowledge of Christ; and when hee comes to see the worth of Christ, then he see; himself in a wildernesse; and in this wildernesse, or lost condition, hee spies the vanity of all that was flesh below Christ; so that now when God carryes away a soul in the spirit, and loses it, as it were, to its self; and lets loose the beames of his owne glory upon it; ravisheth the heart with his own beauty, catcheth him up as it were into the third Heavens, and sheweth such divine excellency as it never yet appre∣hended; the soul by the clear aspect of this beati∣ficall vision of God; begins now to see the vanity and deformity of it selfe, and is (as it were) in as great amazement of spirit, as the man doubt∣les was, who was borne blind from the womb, and yet now comes to see the Sun; or as one that hath been shut up in a dark Dungeon, and now comes to walke in the light, even thus it is with poor man in the highest glory and ex∣cellency of the flesh; when God sends forth the beames of that Sun of righteousnesse upon poor Man, how dark he beholds himselfe to be, as he stands in relation to all fleshly excellen∣cy,
when God shewes him the worth, va∣lue and excellency of himselfe in a Christ; what loss dung and drosse doth a Christi∣an esteeme those things to be, though former∣ly never so glorious and excellent; and there∣fore Paul now no longer desires to be found in his own excellency, or in himselfe, but saith he ver. 9. That I may be found in him, not having my owne righteous∣nesse which is by the Law; but that which is by the faith of the Son of God: the sight of Christs excellency it doth so fully discover self and flesh to the Christian, as that now he loaths the scarlet co∣lour, the glorious atire of the Whore, even all its golden performances, her guilded vowes and sacrifices. O all yee poor souls! who are apt to place your glory in any thing below Christ; and to hang your righteousnesse upon your Prayers, fastings, mournings, or any outward Ordinances, alas, how far are you mis-taken! who when the Lord comes to carry you away in the Spirit, to see all your glory in Christ, your righteous∣nesse in him; you will then see the odiousnesse of every thing below Christ, which thou hast wondered after; thou wilt then desire that God might find thee in this Wildernesse, quite out of selfe; that there may not be any hoofe of the Beast in thee; but that thou may'st wholy be in∣corporated
into Christ; in whom thou now seest thy glory to consist: And thus you see, what the way is, that God useth to discover self, or this Whore, the wisdome of the flesh, to the soul. Secondly, Let us consider how and in what manner the Soul beholds this Whore. A poor creature whom the Lord hath carri∣ed away, or taken up into the Spirit; that now lives & walks in the Spirit, he sees and beholds himselfe, not as he was wont to doe formerly; happily thou wast wont to see a glory and ex∣cellency in things that were below God; but now on the contrary how loathsome is every thing, that comes short of the divine excellen∣cy of Christ: happily heretofore thou hast seen some worth in thy prayers, and in thy teares, some esteemablenesse in thy duties and perfor∣mances, some glory in thine own righteousnes; but now thou seest all these things, which be∣fore were counted gaine, to be but losse unto thee; thou beholdest all thy own righteousnes to be but as a Menstrous cloath, and as a filthy ragge: happily heretofore thou boastest of thy pedi∣gree with Paul; of the Tribe of Benjamin, and of the stock of Israel; that thou art descended from such a reformed Church; from such visible dispensati∣ons; so that as touching all legall worships, out∣ward formes and Ordinances, thou may'st be no∣minated
a Pharisee; but now thou seest the lownesse, and weaknesse of these fleshly things, wherein thou hast formerly boasted; now thou rejoycest that thou hast attained to the know∣ledge of that Christ, which is, the end or sub∣stance of all these fleshly things unto thee; so that now thou hast no confidence in the flesh any longer; but art become one of the true circumcision, that worships God in the Spirit, and re∣joyceth in Christ Jesus; in a word, this spiritu∣allized Christian, seeth all below Christ to be but the garment of this spirituall Strumpet, that she useth to appear in to deceive him; he now sees the Whore, and her various pretences, and how she hath formerly deceived him in her se∣verall dresses; he sees her not only in her gau∣dy attire, but in the height of her modesty, even in her religious garment; so that now he seeth how the wisdome of the flesh makes use of all outward worship, formes and Ordinances, to de∣ceive the heart of the simple. Finally this Spirituall Man, hath the same discovery of his whorish wisdome, as John had, Rev. 17, from the 3, to the 7. ver. 1. John he saw the Woman sitting upon a scarlet coloured Beast; truly when God carries thee away in the Spirit, thou wilt behold thy selfe to be the Beast, that this Mysticall whore, the wisdom of the flesh, doth thus vassallize man in
his fallen condition from God; as it were Satans Pack-horse to act all his designs of wickednesse. This Beast had seaven heads and ten hornes; these seven heads and ten hornes, are seven Mountaines and ten Kings the Scripture saith; which in me, are nothing but those powers of man which God hath indued him withall; as Reason, Will, Affection, Ʋuderstanding and the like; and all these ver. 13. doe with one consent give and ascribe their power to the Beast, or poor beastialized man; and this Beast man, imployes all these with their power to make war against the Lamb, Christ Jesus, ver. 14. & so here is a discovery of poor mis-led Man, sighting the battell of the Whore, his fleshly wisdome: all this doth the Chri∣stian apprehend in himself, when the Lord car∣ries him away in the Spirit of his glory. 2. John saw the Woman, ver. 4. arraied in pur∣ple and scarlet colour, deck with Gold Pearles and precious Stones: Truly Christian, when the Lord takes away this falce glassie eye of flesh from thee, and endues thee with Spirituall eye-sight from himself, thou shalt see this whore, thy fleshly wisdome in all this her glory and ex∣cellency in Thee; for all these Golden Pearles and precious Stones, & Scarlet colours, are but the trimmings of the whore, that She usually puts on and cloathes her self with all, when She comes out to meet the Sons of men; that
so hereby, She might with the more facillity dazle the eyes, infatuate and bewitch the sences, of her Spirituall lovers: but now when God takes up a Soul into Spirit, then flesh is as it were unclothed to the creature; and now the Soul lookes not at her glorious shewes, which formerly hath bewitched his heart; but he sees and knowes that under that Golden habit, there walks this subtile Harlot; un∣der this Speckled Skin, there is a Venomous Viperous Serpentine Carkcas: the man whom God hath Spirituallized, when the wisdome of the flesh appeares in him in her glory, clad with excellency, and adorned with all her beautifull Robes; yet all this while he sees her Naked and bare: the spirit teacheth him to looke inwardly, and not altogether outwardly: and this is such a Mystery that the poore carnall heart cannot discerne, because he lookes flesh∣ly and carnally; and hath not yet received this Spirituall eye-sight from above. 3. But then, John saw the Woman having a gol∣den Cup in her hand, full of abominations and filthynes of her Fornications: Now that Soul which God wrapes up in that spirit of glory, he beholds this whore in him; and sees how She hath deluded him by her gol∣den Cup, to tast of the wine of her Fornications; for this Golden Cup in the whores hand, is (in
the Mysterie of it) the Guilded pretences, and Golden appearances of the wisdome of the flesh; in which pretences there is contained, the wickendesse of her abomination, and fil∣thynesse of her fornication. A man catched up, and carried by the spirit, to walke in the light of Christ and to live in the purity of God, sees him-self (as it were) now awakened out of the drunken sleep of the Whore; newly Risen out of the defiled Bed of the flesh; from the spirituall Vomits, Swinish abo∣minations, and Beastly uncleannesse that hee before wallowed in. 4. Againe John saw, ver. 5. what was written upon the Womans Fore-head: Truly, untill such time as the Lord takes a Soul up into spirit, though the wisdome of the flesh appeare openly to him, though She shewes her very Fore-head, yet hee cannot discerne her in her appearances; but now, when God hath caught the Soul into spirit, and carried him a∣way in the spirit; then he sees the whore in her apparitions; he beholds Mysterie in the Fore∣head, or palpable workings of the whore; My∣stery in all her specious pretences: and not∣withstanding all her shewes of Glory; yet he sees, She is indeed & in truth Babylon the great: the great confused Whore, which breeds all that confusion of spirit in a Christian; all that
commotion, disturbance, and out-cryes that are in the heart of man; all those heavie, sad and disconsolate thoughts that man is posses∣ed with all; all that disorder that many a time is in the soul; every hard thought of God; e∣very dispairing Imagination; all the gnaw∣ings of conscience in the Creature: so that (I say) hee now sees her to be that great Babel, or confused Whore, who is the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth. 5. But then lastly, John saw the Woman drunke with the bloud of the Saints, and Martyrs of Jesus: Truly, this is the very phisiognome & Portraiture of the whore, to a Christian that is carriepaway in the Spirit, hee now comes to behold her a drunken bloud-thirsty Whore; he now seeth how the whore hath martyred the bringings forth of Christ, slain and crucified that Man Jesus afresh: he sees how the Whore is drunk with the bloud of the Lamb in him: In a word, the Saint truly spirituallized, beholds self and flesh, to be the most hatefull, detestable, loathsome thing in the world to him; looke how loathsome and injurous a mans vomit is to his stomack, e∣ven so loathsome is self to that Christian; from whose stomack God hath fetched up all the corrupt flesh, by bringing the soule to be love∣sick of Christ, with the operative Pils of his blessed Spirit: O how hatefull now is the gol∣den
Cup & sweet Wine of the whore, to a spiri∣tuallized man; in so much that he now loathes and abhors himself in dust and ashes; nay, in∣deed he begins now to wonder at himselfe, in his own shame and folly; as the Text saith, ver. 5. that when John saw the Whore he wonder∣ed with great admiration; truly, the same is the condition of every Christian, who by the car∣ryings away of the spirit, comes to a spirituall sight of this whore, the wisdome of the flesh; he now wonders that hee should bee drawne to commit folly, by so filthy a Harlot: hee now wonders that such a bulk of filthynesse, such a Mountain of wickednesse, and spring of bit∣ternesse, should be in him, and he never till now able to discerne it: he now wonders that ever the lenity and Mercy of God, should so long beare with him in all his Adulteries with this swinish whore: he now wonders that God at last hath brought him to such a sight and disocvery; he admires to see where he is, and where hee was; that God hath brought him from flesh, to live in spirit; from darknesse, into his marvellous light; from the wayes of sorow, to that high way, the Lord Jesus, And thus you see, briefly, how, and in what manner, the Soul beholdes this Mysticall Whore, the wisdome of the flesh: And so much shall suffice for the third question, Namely, how the creature comes to attaine to the sight of her.
Wee proceed now, in order to the fourth question, which is, Namely, When, and how She shall be destroyed? Now in brief, to Answer to this, and so draw to a conclusion of the matter; I thus reply, Ans. If then O man! thou desirest to know how, and when this spirituall Whore shall be de∣stroyed: It shall be done in the day, and by the coming and appearance of Jesus in Thee; this day is the last day; and this coming, is the second com∣ing of Jesus: Now as concerning this last day, know this O man! that its nothing for thee to reade the History of the last day in Scripture, and there to see what shall be done in that day that God will glorifie himself in the Saints, and bee admired in all them that believe; that then God will through∣ly purge his floore; and the Saints shall be like him, for they shall see him as he is: Now I say, it is no∣thing to know this in the History, except wee know it in the Mysterie of it: Thou art therefore to expect, Jesus to come to Judgment in Thee; and the end of the world to bee in Thee: thou art to waite for the re∣turn of this Jesus in spirit; which shall come to thee as he did to John, and shew Thee the Judge∣ment of the great Whore in Thee; for there is no∣thing that shall happen or fall out to thee, in
relation to the day of Judgement, which shall not bee verified in thee, in this life: though it may bee, not in the same mani∣festative measure or fulness, as it shall be here∣after. As first, One sign of this last day is, that there shall be wars, and rumors of warres, Nation shall rise against Nation, & Kingdome against Kingdome: now here Christian thou mayest behold the last day to be at hand, here is God and Magog at battell with the Lamb; what is it that makes all that envy, variance, strife, sedition, emulation in the world, but the second, or spiritual appearance of Je us in his People; the comming of Christ in his Saints, is not to bring peace, but a sword amongst us; I confidently say, that this last day, this spirituall appearance of Christ in men and women, is the very originall of all these commotions that are amongst us; insomuch that now here is, the Father hating the appearance of Christ in the Son, and the Son likewise in the Father; the Mother in the Daughter, & the Daugh∣ter in the Mother; one Brother sheathing the sword in the bowels of another, because the last Day dawnes, and the Star of glory is risen more in one then in another; her's Cain killing Abel, because his sacrifice is accepted of the Lord, and the other is not: I tell thee Christian, the more the whore will bestir her self: shee will not only
raise outward but inward warre against thee: which inward insurrection and rebellion, is a symptome, that the day of Judgement is at hand in thee. John tells us Revel. 17, 14. That the kings of the earrh, shall make war against the Lambe; which Kings in the mystery, are but the Kingly gover∣ning powers of thy Soul, which are assembled together in thee to this Spirituall battell of Gog and Magog, to gage warre against the innocent Lamb Christ Jesus in Spirit: but the Lamb shall over come them, for he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; all the power and policy of the flesh, shall at last yield their power to Christ, and shall consent to the just Judgement of the whore, thy fleshly wisdome; but till this strong man the flesh be cast out, by that stronger then he, Christ Jesus, there will be nothing but war and confusion in thee; so that indeed now the Serpent is come down with great rage in thee, knowing that he hath but a short time; the more nigh the comming of Christ is, the more this Serpent spits out his venome; this Anti∣christ, this whore will the more earnestly bestirre her selfe, knowing that it is but a short time to her judgement. St. John tells us Revel. 12.7. That when the woman had brought forth her man childe which was to rule all Nations with a rodde of Iron, the woman upon the birth of this man childe fled into the wildernesse, and when the woman
was in the wildernesse, then saies John, I saw war in Heaven, Michael and his angels fought against the Dragon, and the Dragon fought & his angels (and whats all this to me?) truely Christian, me thinks this warre in Heaven is a sure symptom of the day of Judgement, the end of this world in us, when God hath by his owne power brought forth this man Jesus in us, and hath given him power to rule and raigne in this woman, or weake passive Christian, the Soule presently upon the birth or bringing forth of Jesus in it, is imediatly in a wildernesse, or lost in it selfe, and lyes as one amazed at this sud∣den worke of the Lord; and in this bewildred condition of the creature, Sathan he gages warre upon it, shoots his fiery darts at it, pur∣sues the woman with Herod, and seekes to de∣voure both Christ with the christian also, now therefore christian, know that thy Soul is this Heaven, where this great battel is fought; thou being in a lost bewildred estate, as not know∣ing which way to escape the woundings of Sa∣than, and the fiery darts of the wicked, but standest as a sencelesse lifelesse marke for thy spirituall enemies to shoot at: but Michael thy spirituall Prince Christ Jesus, hee fights for thee against that Dragon, that whore, that anti∣christ, that labours to devoure thee; so that thou art that poor passive that lyes stone still
whilest the Serpent stings thee, and the Dragon exercises his cruelty upon thee, till at last this Michael our Prince Christ Jesus, hath by his own power and strength, cast out and so routed this Dragon this old Serpent, vers. 9. That now his place is no more found in Heaven or in thy soul; and thus maiest thou see Christ Judging the Whore, this Serpent in thee, insomuch, that now this loud voyce is uttered from Hea∣ven, or the Soul of a Saint, as in vers. 10. Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdome of our God, and the power of his Christ: whereas before, nothing but the dreadfull voyce of hel, wrath, anger, fury, and judgement, nothing but warrs and rumours of warrs heard in thy soul: yet now the day is come, Christ is come to Judge∣ment in us, and hath condemned the whore in us, now the voyce of salvation is heard in thee, whereas before thou apprehendest God, as Da∣vid did sometimes to have shot the arrowes of his wrath at thee, and to have battered thy soul in peeces, by the thundering Cannon of his wrath; yet now thou seest there is a cessa∣tion of these tumults in thee, and thou now seest that sweet messenger of God the eternall Spirit, drawing neere towards thee with its white Flagge of peace, joy, comfort, and salva∣tion bringing comfort unto thee, by telling thee thy warfare is accomplished, thy iniquity
is pardoned, and thon hast received double at the Lords hands for all thy sins, (and then further) now strength is come also, which is another part of the voyce from Heaven, alas how feeble and how weake, faint, and unable was the Soul before the spiritual resurrection of it? for the birth of this Child Jesus in it, is the regeneration, or new birth of a Christian: the wildernesse the woman fled into, is that mor∣tified dead lost estate of a Christian: the Grave where the Soul is buried to every living acti∣on; and the overcomming or conquering of the Dragon, or the spirituall serpent, the wis∣dome of the flesh; is the resurrection of a Saint, or that spirituall day of Judgement of the whore in us: Now as Jesus raised up himselfe by the power of the Father from out of the bowels of the earth, so by the strength and power of this Jesus, who is the resurrection and the life, a Christian rises out of this dead condition; and so her mortall putting on im∣mortality, and corruption putting on incor∣ruption, here is death swallowed up in victory. The Christian now as he hath formerly been planted with Christ in the likenesse of his death; so likewise now, in the likenesse of his resurrection: it bears now no longer the image of the first dead Adam, but is risen in the like∣nesse of Christ, out of earth and flesh, which
formerly he was involved and buryed in, and by his rising againe, overcomes the Dragon by the blood of the Lamb, kills the great Goliah, the wisdome of the flesh, and this is all by the strength of that Strong man Christ Jesus, who is entred into his temple, or the heart of man, and silences all these earthly rumors and com∣motions in him; and so is the second part of the voyce from Heaven fulfilled, Now is come not only salvation but strength. And then Thirdly, The Kingdome of God that's come also, and the power of his Christ: our Saviour taught his Disciples whil'st hee was in the flesh, and knew him only after the flesh, I say, he taught them to pray, thy Kingdome come; so that the Kingdome of Christ, in that sence, was not yet come to the Disciples; even so it is with every poore Christian that hath attained to no more knowledge, then the flesh of Christ can teach them; that do not know Christ any other waies, then by the beholding of his flesh∣ly substance; as Christians doe in all outward and fleshly ordinances; that see no more, nor know no more of Christ, then Bread, Water, and Wine, and outward formes and order can teach them; the Kingdome of God is not come to them yet: while the Woman was in the Wildernesse, the Kingdome of God was not come in her; but when She, by the strength of
God was Risen, and had overcome by the bloud of the Lambe; then She cryed, now the Kingdome of God is come: the Woman was fed in the wildernesse, ver. 6. in our low and lost estate, God he feeds us with milke; because the Kingdome of God, Christ in the measure of the Spirit is not yet come to inable us to beare stronger meates, in the wil∣dernesse, or weake condition of Saints, God feeds them with manna; but when he brings them into Canaan he then compasseth them about with the flowings of Milke and Honie: this Canaan, is Christ, the true Rest of a Christian; the King∣dome of the Father in the Saints; who drawes up the Soul from these low dispensations, by degrees as it were, till he hath seated it in himself; brings the Soul out of the fleshly knowledge of himself, into spirituall discove∣ryes of his Excellency: so that now the Soule prayes no more in the imbecillity of the flesh, thy Kingdome come: seekes no longer in fleshly Formes and Ordinances for the kingdome; for it is already in them, and they live in the in∣joyment of it: Now is come Salvation, and strength and the Kingdome of God, and the power of his Christ: the Dragon and his Angels, they fought to esta∣blish their Kingdome in the Soul; but the Lambe hath overcome them, and set up his King∣dome in the Christian; And the Kings of the earth, as namely, the powers of the creature bring all
their glory and Honour unto it: thus you see that the whore shall bee destroyed, in the last day, at the Second coming of Christ in us; and like∣wise, I have discovered unto you one Signe of the last day, or day of Spirituall Judgement; which is, those Combates, Warres and Commoti∣ons that are in a Christian: I will but instance two particulars more, and so shall draw to a conclusion. Therefore, Secondly, a second signe or symptome of the last day, is the Desolution of the World; how that the Earth, and all that is therein, shall be burnt up; the Sonne turned into darknesse, the Moone into bloud; the Starres shall fall from Heaven: and thus God will shake the Heavens and the Earth; and mens hearts shall faile them for feare; ex∣pecting the end of such sorrowfull beginings: Even thus it is with, and in a Christian, at the aproaching of the spirit of Christ in him; the World begins to be dissolved: the World is sayd ver. 3. to bee placed in mans heart; which World in mans heart, shall be dissolved by the Fire of the Spirit of Christ; the Heavens and the Earth, are Mystically in man; and the Waters, with their Ebings and Flowings, are to be seene in the Mysterie, in man; her's God deviding the Light from the Darknesse, to be seen in man; the waters below, from the waters above the Firmament: all this is fullfilled Mysteriously in
man; in whom God separates himself, who is pure and light, from the darknesse and nothing∣nesse of the creature: The Fouls of the Ayre, and Fishes of the Sea, are Mystically in man; as name∣ly, those flying Phantasies, and swimming No∣tions of the creature; in a word, her's every thing bringing forth Fruite after its Kind in man; And all Gods creation, good in its own kind, in this first World, which is in mans heart. But now this first World, this first Creation must be dissolved; what ever excellency God hath endued man with all, in this first creation; what ever maturity of Wit and ingenuity, the Lord hath lent man; how high so ever, and how large so ever, the Lord hath Naturallized the creature; yet all this excellency shall vanish away; all this worldly glory, as I so call it, shall be cosumed and burnt up: but alas! how hardly is this believed! how impossible is this to carnall man, that all this goodly creation and worke of God in his nature, should bee anihilated; that Reason, Naturall under∣standing and wisdome; nay, Nature it selfe, should be consumed: but this is the Lords act, his strange act, his work, and wonderous worke, in a Christian: Now therefore, consider Christian, that this is but the old World, or first, or lowest manifestation of God in thee; which old world
must pass away and bee no more: John tels us that he saw a new Heaven and a new Earth, Rev. 21.1. for the first Heaven and the first Earth was passed away, and there was no more Sea; what's all this? Truly Christian, in me its thus much, when this day dawnes, and this day Star, Christ Je∣sus ariseth in our hearts; when the morning Sun, even Jesus breakes forth upon us in his Glory, Warmth and Splendor; then begins this world within us to be dissolved; the Heavens and the Earth in us, begins to melt with the fervent heate of this Sun, and fall away to nothing: and the Lord instead of these frames, a new Heaven and a new Earth: So that, all that was Nature and pure Reason, and Ingenuity, is quite dissolved; and a new worke wrought in the Soul; that takes up the heart above its former excellency and glory; although that were good in its kind, yet God will please, by the more glorious discoveries of himself, to drowne all this former Creation; and to be∣get all things new in the Creature: and then not only the Heaven and the Earth passed a∣way, but also there was no more Sea. This Sea, or these Waters in man, are those great overflowings, and inundations of Na∣ture; the swellings and roarings of proud selfe and creature; this deep silence shall be dried up, by the heat of the Sun of Righteousnesse: These
Waters are the very Throne of the Whore, or the very Seate of the wisdome of the flesh; now when this Sea shall be dried up, then there shall be a place no longer for this Spirituall Whore found in Heaven, nor yet in the Soul of a Saint. Oh, what cause of Joy is here for all the Saints, yea, what eager pantings after the pow∣er and Kingdome of Christ, should this beget and operate in us, to consider, that in the day of Christ the whore shall be destroyed in us, the Sea shall be dryed up, and the Heavens and the earth shall passe away. If any man yet shall aske when this last day shall come, and the end of the world shall be accomplished? I answer then with Christ, That this generation shall not passe away, till all these things be fulfilled, all these things thou must expect to be fulfilled in thee, even in this life, O thou Christian, although happily not in the fulnesse and glory as shall be hereafter. Tell me therefore, O thou experienced Saint! whose conscience can testifie all these things to be true: how hath the appearance of Christ in thee, many a time, confounded as it were all thy naturall vigour and power? how hath it spoyled Principalities and powers, the might and dominion of all naturall excellen∣cy? how hast thou seen thy selfe out of thy selfe
as it were, beyond and above that earth thou hast been in formerly; wrapped up with Paul, in the third Heavens as it were, be∣holding that Glory, that all thy old crea∣ted light could never discerne; living for a time in that peace of God which passeth all understand∣ing! Nay shall I yet further tell you, at the se∣cond comming of Christ in us, our Sun shall be turned into darknesse, and our Moone into blood, our Stars shall fall from their Centre; All that light of reason and nature; all those fleshly meteors; as also fixed Stars, which have appeared at their severall seasons in man, which did discover something of God to him; in a word, all the inferiour, with the superiour discernings of God, that the creature hath had formerly, shal be extinguished, and shall appeare to him to be but darknesse and obscurity: the Sun or the su∣perlative light, shall be turned into darknesse, and the Moone, or that light which guides the more obscure part of man, shall be turned into blood, and confusion; and God will now create a new world in us; old things shall passe away, and all things shall become new in us: when the Apostle had been trea∣ting of the dissolution of the world, in the 2 Pet. 3, chap. he comes to mind the Saints of the mysterie of that history, vers. 13. Neverthelesse (saith he) we, according to his promise, looke for new Heavens and new earth, wherein dwelleth righteous∣nesse, although this old foundation and Fabrick shall
be dissolved, and Christ, that day of the Lord, shall come even as a thiefe in the night, and deprive us of all the excellency of our present station; waste, destroy, and burne up all our Gold, Silver, and precious stones, con∣sume all the Glory of our present being, yet sayes hee here is one comfort, wee looke for a new Heaven and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousnesse, God never confounds the old, but he brings a new, the manner of Gods new creation is, to new modelize the heart, to new mould the creature, to create a new Christian, as it were to spiri∣tuallize the Christian; in a word, it is to swal∣low up the soul in himselfe, to drown, con∣found, and bring to an end, all creature glory, in his own incomprehensive excellency. So that the Saints are said to bee that new Jerusalem that came down from God, deck and adorn'd with the Glory of God only, as  Bride adorned for her husband: They are called new, because Christ in them hath created a new world; this new Jerusalem had no temple in it of it selfe, but the Lord God and the Lamb were the temple of it; truly that soul in whom the Lord God hath mad this desolation of creature excellency, and hath created all things a new; this new Jerusalem or new Christian, hath no temple but Christ. I typicall Jerusalem there was a temple, but Christ prophesied, That there should not be one ston
left upon another, that should not be throwne downe, Matth. 24. Even so when God creates all things new in a Christian, he will demollish all that was in his stead, before he came to establish his new creation; and he will make himselfe the temple of a Christian: what ever the soul sees in any outward things, as Formes, Ordinan∣ces, Worships and the like, yet Christ will de∣stroy and throw downe, and bring to nought these things, and make himselfe all this, and much more to the Christian: and thus you may see the day of Judgement in a Christian: here you may see Christ sending his spirit into the worldly heart of man, convincing it of Judgement, because the prince of this world is judged in him. I proceed now, to the third discovery of the last day, which is, namely, The distruction of Anti∣christ, or the downfall of the whore; which doth yet further manifest to us, that this last day is in us; the comming of this day of Jesus; and the appearance of this Star in us, is the last day of the whore in us: no sooner doth Christ appear, but downe falls the Kingdome of the serpent, our fleshly wisdome; and therefore if thou wouldst know how this Antichrist shall be de∣stroyed, the Apostle tells us, 2 Thes. 2, 8. That the Lord shal consume him with the breath of his mouth, and the brightnesse of his comming; This bright
comming of Christ in us, shall dispell that darkness, & discover that fogge that with-hol∣deth or hinders the revelation of the whore; Christ will then put aside this veile which is before this varlets face, namely, all her specious pretences, and shewes of glory. Christ is that mountaine spoken of in the 25. Isa. In whom God shall destroy the veile of the covering that is cast over all people: but this must be fulfilled, when this mountaine Christ Jesus, shall be establi∣shed upon the top of the mountaines in our souls; or when Christ by his owne power hath seated himself in us, above every high thought, and vaine imagination; when the child Jesus is given to us, and hath gotten the govern∣ment upon his shoulders; this is the time of the whores demolition in us; I say it is the worke of Christ by his comming in a Saint, to discover the Whore to him, to take away that veil of flesh, and those mists of obsurity, which this harlot hath interposed between her selfe and the soul: when the day dawnes, the dark∣nesse vanisheth away; even so, when this day, Christ Jesus dawns in thy heart; when day breaks, as I may so say, in thy soul, then begins the darknesse in thy heart to flee away; and now thou commest to be one of the Children of the day. In a word, now thou canst see, dis∣cerne, and distinguish, and before thou couldes
not: alas sirs! a poore soul that walks in dark∣nesse, and sees by no other light but by the blaze of selfe, and by the sparks of his own fire; he may be compared to a man that sees by can∣dle light, who cannot discerne one colour from another: even so it is with all naturall men, they are not able to see whats good from evill, or whats light from darknesse: O the palpable blindnesse of all poore creatures, in whom this day, Christ does not appeare! this, it is to have eyes and see not, eares and heare not. This sad obscurity of a man that walkes not in the light, may fitly be compared to that darknesse which might be felt; the soul feeles many times, what his blindnesse is, how it de∣prives him of the beatificall vision of God; brings him to wander from the way, Christ Jesus causes him many times to stumble at that stumbling stone; and all this is because the day is not dawned as yet: but now, when the Sun of righteousnesse arises in the Soul, why then, here comes light to them that sit in darknesse and in the shadow of death, and now this light guides the soul into the way of peace: It is said of new Jerusalem, Revel. 21. That it needed not the light of the Sun, or of the Moone, for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb was the light thereof; all which in me is thus much, when God comes
to create a new Heaven and a new earth in a Christian, when he comes by the power of that regenerating spirit, to make his Jerusalem a new Jerusalem; in this new estate, he will give her new light to walke by, so that now the Saints shall have no need of the old Sun, or the old Moone; no need of the old light of reason and nature, but her's new light brought forth now in the soul; the new light is Christ, or the Lamb, who by the radiant beames of his splendor, fills the soul with the glory of the Father, and destroyes, or distinguishes all o∣ther inferiour lights in the soul. We live in a generation, wherein both Presse, and Pulpit, doth cry down new lights; and truely I can∣not much blame them that so doe, because as yet they walke in the light of the old Sun and Moone, and are to be comprehended, under the notion of old Jerusalem; but tell me now? when the Spirit of Glory hath darkned this Sun, and turned this Moone into blood; quite confounded & brought to nothing, the highest sphere of this naturall excellency in them, when this old Jerusalem comes to bee made new? then you shall heare a new voyce, crying up the new light of God manifested in them; O Christian; I tell thee thou art a thrice hap∣py man, whom the Lord hath made the Lamb a light unto thee; this Lamb light, is an inno∣cent
light, a righteous light, a pure light, a discovering light; it is this light that discovers the hidden and obscure whore, unto thee; it is the light of Christ that uncovers, and strips the whore starke naked before thee, of all her glory and excellency; so that now thou behol∣dest her out of her purple and scarlet colour, even in her very nakednesse and shame: And thus you see how Christ in his day, in a Chri∣stian, does first of all discover the whore to him. But Secondly, in this last day or Sun rising of Christ in a Christian, it is the worke of Christ to destroy, as well as to discover this whore in us, as it is the property of light to destroy darknesse; so it is the property of Christ to destroy antichrist in the day of his appearance: it will be the worke of Christ by his comming in thee, to roote out that spirit of antichrist, head and tayle, root and branch; insomuch that there shall not be left one hoof of the beast in thee: when John saw the Angell come downe from heaven endued with great power, Revel. 18.1. Who inlightned the earth with his glory, immediatly he heard this voyce, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of divels, the hould of every foule spirit, and a cage of every un∣cleane and hatefull bird; all which teacheth me thus much, that when that Angell of the ever∣lasting
lasting covenant Christ Jesus, is by the Father sent down into the hearts of his Saints, who comes by the power of his Spirit, and enligh∣tens the earth or earthly man with his glory: when the earth is filled with the knowledge of the Lord; when the glory of this Sun comes to enlighten and beautifie our earthy hearts; then is the time of Babylons downfall; now is the season of the whores destruction; now is the Saints time of Halelujah; now rejoyce over her thou Heaven, and all the holy Apostles and Prophets, for God hath avenged you on her: vers. 20. The Prophet Malachy tells us, chap. 4. That the day comes that shall burne as an Oven; this day is Christ Jesus, who indeed shall so baptize us with the holy Ghost, and Fire, as that he shall consume and burne up, waste, and destroy all the appearances of the Whore, the wisdome of the flesh, and therefore the same prophet tells us, Chap. 3.34. That he shall sit as a Refiners fire, and as Fullers Soape, and he shall purifie the Sons of Levi, that they may offer to the Lord, an offering in righteousnesse; this day must burne in us; this Jesus must be a refiners fire to us, before we shal see the downefall of mysticall Babylon: the worke that Christ hath to doe in us, is to de∣stroy mortallity, and to cloath us with im∣mortality, to destroy this corruption, and to cloath us with the incorruptible righteous∣nesse of himselfe.
After the downfall of the whore, Revel. 19. John tells us, vers. 8. That there was granted to the Lambs wife, that she should be arrayed in fine linnen, cleare and white, &c. In which I observe, first, the love of Christ to the Soul; Christ did first of all by his blood and passion, purchase the Soul to himselfe, to the end that she should be a con∣stant Spouse unto him; but she hath adulterized from her husband; committed harlotry from her first lover; and hath taken part with anti∣christ against him: upon which adultery, the jealousie of the Lord arises in himselfe, and as jealousie is said to be the rage of a man, so the Lord (as I may say) in the rage of this jealou∣sie, comes, and destroyes this antichrist, kils sin in the Christian; sheaths the sword of the spirit in the bowels of this spiritual antichrist; breakes the head of this serpent in us: but yet notwithstanding, entertaines this adulterized creature into his love and favour; does yet once more espouse her to himselfe, by a fresh act and manifestation of love and favour: you may see an embleme of this love in Hos. 3.1 where God commands the Prophet to go with a message of love, to the woman that had play∣ed the harlot with him; Goe, yet love a woman be∣loved of her friend, yet an adultresse: though she an adultresse, yet I am her friend; though she an harlot, yet I send love greetings towards her: though she hath been
unconstant towards me, yet I will owne her to be my wife, my Spouse, my beloved; and therefore the text saies, that it was granted to the Lambs wife, that shee should bee arrayed in linnen, clean & white: which likewise dictates to me, 2. In the Second place, the purity that this day of burning, Christ Jesus in Spirit, works in the heart of his People; he doth not only take from it the garment spotted with the flesh, but like∣wise, Cloathes it with the shinning Robe of righ∣teousnesse; he doth not only empty a Soul of its owne corruption; but likewise fills it with his glory: beautifies it with his own adorn∣ings: O Faire, beautifull, amiable creature! whose beauty and excellency consists in Christ that divine centre of brihtnesse and glory: this will send a Saint to the depth of admira∣tion; behold! what manner of love hath the Father bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God? that God should thus by the power of the Spirit, consume all this dross and coruption in us; and bring us by that divine light to see our vnion with the Father, in the Son; and to see the glory of our Adoption in Jesus; and to be∣hold our selves in the flesh of our elder Brother, at the Right-hand of the Father? this is mercy past discerning, and worth admiration! Thus will God in the power of his Spirit, Judge this spirituall Whore in us; and ease us of
the vassallage, and servitude we were in to our owne selves: thus shall the brats of this spirituall Babylon, the wisdome of the flesh, be destroyed by that happy man, Christ Jesus. God saith, Jsa. 17.12. concerning this de∣struction of Babylon, That hee will make a man more precious then fine Gold, or the Golden wedge of Opher; this man is Christ, who in the day of his power, and in the confounding of this Spiritu∣all Babell in us, shall be made unto us, more precious then the highest creature excellency: never till now, will the Saints come to value and to prize Christ, till they see what he doth in them. Now, how beautifull upon the mountains, are the feete of them that bring glad tidings of good things; that publisheth Salvation; that saith unto Zion, thy God raineth? Thy Messenger upon the Moun∣taines, is Christ Jesus; who comes Leaping over the mountaines, and skiping over the hils of difficul∣ty; that lies in the way, and appeares in glory to his Spouse or beloved Christian, and declares the message of glad tidings to him; Namely, That his warfare is accomplished, that his iniquity is pardoned; the battell between Gog and Magog and the Lamb is finished; and the Lamb or inno∣cent Spirit, hath over-come all by his power and strength; and now likewise he declares to Zion or the soul of a Saint, that his God raineth;
now is come the Kingdome of our God, & the power of his Christ; therfore Halelujah; for Babylon is fallen, the Whore is destroyed; God hath now put into the hearts of the Kings of the Earth (or powers of earthly man) to hate the whore, and reward her as she hath rewarded them; and therefore again, Halelujah, for the Lord God omnipotent raigneth, and the Kingdomes of the whore are become the Kingdomes of the Lord and of his Christ. All that remaines behind therefore, is but one word of application, which shall be but only my exhortation to al poor souls that are groaning under this burdensome task and Ae∣gyptian bondage of the Whore: doubtlesse their are many to whom these my poor endeavours may offer themselves; whose portion it is to groane under this spirituall vassallage, to la∣bour under this bodyof death. Oh Christian! whatever thy condition bee, cast not away thy confidence; but waite upon the Lord, and thou shalt renew thy strength; ex∣pect the returne, or Second coming of Christ in thee; pray dayly, that Christs Kingdome may come in thee; that the Lord would establish his own Throne in thy heart; expect the comming of the Messenger of the Covenant into his Temple, or thy heart; even the Lord Christ; whom thou seekest: Oh! Labour to see that Christ is approach∣ing
neare thee, though the cloudes of sinne and wickednesse hinder the sight of him; know al∣so, that this spirituall Sonne, Christ Jesus will breake away the clouds; will dispell the mists of iniquity in thee; and will breake out upon thee, in his full warmth and splendor; and will bring thee to walke in the light of his glory. It was said of Abraham, that hee saw the day of Christ, and was glad; how gladly then should the Saints expect, and spiritually see this day to bee at hand in them; In which they shall be freed from that burthen which they now undergoe? Shall I tell thee yet farther, for thy comfort O Christian! this Jesus that comes, will come, and will not tarry: The Lord sees thee in thy poore weake condition; he takes notice of those ma∣ny foiles that thy wicked heart gives thee; hee heares thy sighings, cryes, and groanes; hee yearns after thee; he makes haste to come unto thee so quickly, as may conduce to the ad∣vancement of his glory, and thy Souls further peace and comfort. Thus in brief, I have discovered to you, in some measure, the Mysterie of iniquity which workes in all of us; the great Whore; the spiritu∣all Babylon, with her Rise, and her Down-fall. In which poore Treatise, I desire that those to whom it shall come, would thus understand
me; that I doe not in any wise seeke hereby to set up my owne opinion, as Antichrist, a∣bove others; but doe only declare what I con∣ceive from good Reason, to bee the manifest∣tative minde of God unto me: And in all my Mysticall applying of any Scriptures; I would not be thought hereby to endeavour the over∣ture of the History; but only so much of the History, as I see verified in me, in the Mysterie: I have presumed in my present light, to declare to all men: what is of God, in my weake en∣deavours, I desire him to make knowne; by the declarative power of his spirit: what is of self, I desire to have a heart to disclaime it, when the Lord shall manifest it unto me; and so I commit my Labour to him, from whence only, I expect a reward: desiring nothing from any man, but a favourable construction of that which I have declared to all men, in the bowels of love and affection. For my own part, I am one that waiteth for the Kingdome and power of Christ, to bee manifested in me: I desire to see farther the glorious dawnings of Jesus, and risings of his glory in mee; and looking for, and hasting to the comming of the day of Jesus; in which, all old things shall passe away, and all things shall become new and that which I conceive in this condition is the best course for my selfe to take, I shall
likewise fasten the same advice upon all others. Who is amongst you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voyce of his Servant, that walketh in darke∣nesse, and seeth no light, let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay himselfe upon his God. Decemb. 12. 1647. Jos. Salmon. FINIS.
