S4617 11910545 50800
Imprimatur, Edmund Bohun. Novemb. 22. 1692.
SOME SHORT REMARKS Upon the Present State of Affairs; In a LETTER to a MEMBER Of the HONOURABLE House of Commons, LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley in Russel-street, Covent-Garden, 1692.
Some short Remarks upon the present State of Affairs; In a Letter to a Mem∣ber of the Honourable House of Commons. SIR, YOu desire me to repeat to you the Substance of our last Discourse, relating to the present State of the Nation; In which I should find some Difficulty to comply with you, if the Reasons, you give, were not too strong to be contended with. But you may be assur'd, that your Promise to conceal my Name, is not the weakest Argument you have us'd, to make me publish my Thoughts. For, as Truth has her Credentials writ in her Face, and needs not the Support ei∣ther of Persons or Parties, where she meets with sound Under∣standings: So I would not willingly be oblig'd to answer every Fool in his Folly. Our Nation is to be consider'd as a Man that is brought by Distempers into an ill Habit of Body. And, to make a right Judgment of our Disease, we must enquire into the Rise and Progress of it. To which end we must look back as far as the Reign of King Charles the First. The unhappy Occurrences of those Times put the Nation in a Ferment, that has never since been throughly settled, and was the Seed from which our present Misfortunes are grown. All England was divided into Parties, and the Youth of the Nation, that was then springing up, took their first Tinctures from their respective Factions; which bred a certain Hatred and Animosity, that grew up with them, and became Natural. Insomuch that every Man was esteem'd, not according to his real Value, but according to the Opinion that was held of his Party.
When this Tragedy of the State was wrought up to a Crisis, and the Scenes were stain'd with Royal Blood; the young Prin∣ces were transplanted to a Soil wholly improper for 'em. For they fell into the Hands of Ministers, that wanted neither Wit nor Malice, to make use of such a Turn. Who imagin'd, being Masters of our Source, easily to pollute our Streams. And in∣deed they did it effectually. For when another Turn of Things happily brought in the King, Experience tells us what Foreign Principles and Maxims he unhappily brought in with him. But being a Prince that valued his Ease and Pleasure above all Considerations whatsoever, he never push'd his Designs farther, than to gratifie his Senses, and keep fair with all the World. Which made his Ministers study Cunning more than Prudence; and all sorts of Juggling grew universally in Fashion. The Mask was taken off. Honour and Trust were publickly bought and sold; and those who had Employ∣ments, study'd more to get Money by 'em, than how to execute 'em well. All this made such a Confusion of Persons and Things, that the Disease of the Body Politick dispers'd it self though every Part; and the Noble Parts were not the least affected. For the Luxury and Supiness of the Court (as is usual in all such Cases) was attended with an Excess of Ill Management. And when the Publick Treasures were drain'd pretty near the Bottom, the most valuable Interests, as well as Secrets, of the Nation were sold to France, to support a lazie and ignoble Gallantry. And at the same Time the Youth of our Nobility and Gentry were sent thi∣ther to be educated, and learn the Fashion in their Principles as well as Dress. For the Ministers of France were in the Bottom of all this, being as active and plotting, as we were idle and unthinking.
And here I cannot but take Notice of one of the blackest Contrivances, that ever perhaps was form'd. A Design was laid to bring in Popery among us; and in order to this, 'twas thought necessary first to remove the Religion we had, that we might afterwards be more capable of receiving a new one. To promote this there wanted neither Precept nor Example, Atheism, Irreligion, and Ill Nature (the Fundamental Prin∣ciples of all Villany) were set up by some of the keenest Wits of the Age (I do not say the soundest) as Principles of Philosophy; and not ill seconded by the Practices of the Court. Don't think I am canting (for you know me to be neither a Bigot, nor a Hypocrite) when I tell you, that no State in the World ever flourish'd, where Religion of some sort or other) was not seriously profess'd and publickly coun∣tenanc'd; nor indeed can Natural Causes, any more than Providence, admit it to be otherwise. But (to return to what I was saying) the Principles and Practices of the Court grew at last so notorious, and the Na∣tion was so tir'd with being often trick'd and deceiv'd, that Men of Sense and Honesty began to have their Eyes open, and to take such Measures as the Occasion made necessary. This reviv'd and fomented the Division between the Court and the Countrey; insomuch that a Man could not be a Friend to the one, without declaring himself an Enemy to the other. When this unhappy Prince concluded his Reign, the rash and unsteady Conduct of his Successor was so far from set∣tling the tottered State, that he quickly drove Things to the last Extremities. And of what immediately ensued the Im∣pressions are still fresh upon all our Minds. But now we have a new Scene of Things, and are arriv'd at another Crisis, that must for ever ruin or confirm the Religion,
Honour, Laws, and Liberties of England; A Crisis, which if not prudently and nicely manag'd, is likely to prove our last. For a small Portion of Experience, and a moderate Knowledge of what has pass'd in the World (with but a competent Measure of Common Sense) will make it clearly and distinctly evident to any Man, that if this Settlement fails, or the French Power breaks in upon us, England (as a free Nation) is for ever lost. Which is clearly demonstrated by reducing the whole Matter to these three Points. First, Either we must submit to the Power of France. Or, Secondly, We must bring back the late King James, which will (in its Consequences) be much the same Thing. Or, Thirdly, We must resolve vigorously to support the present Government against all its Enemies, Domestick and Foreign. Now as to the First of these; No Wise or Honest Man can ever so much as entertain a Thought of submitting to a French Power. If we consider how inhumanly that Prince tyrannizes over his own Native Subjects, and how barbarously he tramples upon his New Conquests. And in all his Cruelties, and Perse∣cutions, has no regard either to Merit, Age, or Sex; We must be blind not to read our own Doom, if ever we shou'd fall under the Weight of his Power. And Secondly, to think of bringing back the late King James, wou'd be so few Degrees from Driveling, (unless in such as are that way inclined from ill Principles and Designs) that we cou'd not take it amiss, if the Favourites that came in with him, should beg us all for Fools, and so enjoy our Estates. If ever we sink into such a stupidity, we need not be Conjurers to tell our own Fortunes. Therefore Thirdly, We must resolve vigorously to support the present Government against all its Enemies Domestick and Foreign.
We must indeed. And we shall certainly do it, if the Cunning of our False Brethren does not impose upon the Ignorance of our Weak ones. For, not to mention all the different Characters of Men, of which we are at this Time unhappily compos'd, there are two sorts, which, though they seem to sail with the same Wind, steer different Courses: And as much as they agree in their Language and Style, yet have opposite Meanings. At the same Time that the Enemies of our Government are studi∣ously improving all Occasions, to interrupt our wisest Debates, and to dash and perplex our maturest Councils, by hollow Rea∣sonings, pretended Difficulties, and frivolous Enquiries; Our mistaken Friends (I speak as an English-man) are unadvisedly led into the same Errors, though with an honester Intention. Now as 'tis impossible to know Men in this general Masquerade, it highly imports a Wise and Honest Man to take his Measures rather from the Nature of Things, than the Countenances of Men; And laying aside all manner of Prejudice or Partiality, diligently to attend the Dictates of Right Reason in so important a Conjuncture. This wou'd lead Men into clear and untroubled Notions of Things, and secure 'em from being foolishly made the Instruments of their own Destruction. For our Foreign (as well as our Do∣mestick) Adversaries look upon our undiscreet Proceedings, as the best Foundation of all their Hopes; and spare neither Cost, nor Pains, to promote our Heats and Differences. They divert themselves with our Folly, and are pleas'd with the Thoughts of our approaching Ruine. And nothing but a faithful Enquiry in∣to the Nature of Things, with a diligent Attention to the Di∣ctates of Right Reason (as I said before) nothing else can save us. That indeed like an alterative Medicine will correct our ill Humours, and restore us insensibly to a state of Health. 'Twill instruct us how to begin all our Reasonings at the right end; and by equally weighing the Consequences of Things, to give every Consideration it's true Weight and Force. As for Instance,
To Reason profitably of the Affairs of England in so perplex'd a Conjuncture as this is, a Man must know and consider well the true Constitution of our Government: He must purge off the corrupt Notions, he suck'd in with his Mother's Milk, and for∣get what he learn't in the Nursery, or at School; not be influenc'd in the least with a fondness of either Persons, or Parties. For a Man to oppose the Court, and make an Interest against it, in the Reign of a Just and Wise Prince (whose Interests are the same with our's) because his Father did it at a time when our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, were visible struck at; is just as if I must needs suffer a dangerous Operation, because my Fa∣ther had a Stone in his Bladder. The Interest of the Court and the Interest of the Country are in Nature the same, and a diffe∣rence between 'em is downright Nonsense, unless either when the One, or the Other, designs an Alteration in the Government; The first with a View of Oppression and Tyranny, the latter of a Republick. As for the first of these; his present Majesty has given us such constant and sensible Marks of his hearty Con∣cern, and unweary'd Care for the Publick Good, that 'twould be very disingenious and ungrateful to suspect him; besides that there is a certain Air of Plainness, and Integrity in all his Words and Actions; which are always a sure Mark of a Generous and Honest Mind. Nor cou'd his Interests lead him amiss, if his Inclinations did. And as for the other Design, I mean of a Re∣publick, I believe the Experiment that was made in the Reign of King Charles the First (tho' attended with a Series of strange Successes) had such dismal and terrible Consequences, that all judicious and skilful Men must needs conclude such Designs to be as unpracticable as they are unjust. The Matter thus stated, why should a Division be kept on foot, by which both Parties will certainly suffer? I do not love to judge rashly in any Case; but I think we may safely conclude here, That whoever promotes or foments any such Design (di∣rectly or indirectly) must needs have something out of order, either in his Head, or in his Heart.
But (as you told me, when I had the Honour to discourse with you last) great Complaints are made of the ill Manage∣ment of the Government: Now (Sir) we must remember, That in all Arts the Instruments are to be consider'd as well as the Work-men. And I am afraid (with all the respect that is due to my Native Country) that we are grown a little rusty with the Luxury and Idleness into which the late Reigns have lull'd us; and our Edges are blunted with an excess of Plea∣sure and Debauchery, The Youth of our Nobility and Gen∣try want the Advantages of Education (to make them useful to their King and Countrey) which those of our Enemy's have, who are early instructed as well in all useful Learning, as well as in the Art of War. And (as I remark'd to you before) the pernicious Councils, that took place in the Two last Reigns, have introduc'd such a total Corruption of Persons and Things, as has thrown the Body Politick into an ill Habit; and 'tis not in Nature to be expected, that a perfect Cure can be wrought without a little Time and Patience. But a great many People suspect an ill Management, only for want of Success; not con∣sidering from whence Success comes, and that 'tis to be courted, not commanded. Whereas if they were truly inform'd of the great and numerous Difficulties that His Majesty meets with; and with what unweary'd Vigour he renews his Appli∣cation; when (thro' the Failures of others) his Designs prove unsuccessful; they wou'd be more inclin'd to Admiration than Censure. If any one says, That the making Use of good Instruments depends upon His Majesty; it may be answered, That no Man ought to blame His Choice, without being ac∣quainted with all the Reasons he had for it. If Solomon him∣self cou'd be suppos'd to come among us, in such a confus'd and distracted a Conjuncture as this is, he wou'd be at a loss (for some time) what Measures to take. Upon the whole Matter, I am fully perswaded (and indeed no Thinking Man can be of any other Opinion) That whatever ill Management there has been, His Majesty has done all that was possible (on his part)
to prevent it. He is in the same Bottom with us, as English-Men, Protestants, and Honest Men; and 'tis a Madness to think that he will not take all possible care of himself and the Nation. And one good Argument (among many others) to convince us of His good Intentions towards us, is, His Asking Advice of the Parliament (in His late Gracious Speech) with so much Heartiness and Sincerity. In Return to which, it wou'd contribute very much to the Honour, and Credit of Parliaments; and be of infinite Advan∣tage to the Publick, if you wou'd enter upon no unseasonable Debates, nor frivolous Inquiries; but observe in all your Pro∣ceedings that Calmness and Solidity that becomes the Dignity of so great a Council. 'Tis good in all Occasions to distinguish between what is Solid, and what is Trivial; but in Affairs of Importance, 'tis of absolute Necessity: For want of distinguish∣ing these Two Things, your Time may be mispent, your best Designs frustrated, and all your Labour lost. In a word, the Fate of England (and of all Europe) is be∣fore you: You are surrounded with active and subtle Enemies, that will omit no Stratagems, by which 'tis possible to mislead you: You have an Opportunity to be the Instruments of Eng∣land's Glory and Happiness; which, if lost, can never be re∣call'd. But if you act Prudently and Sincerely (uninfluenc'd by all sorts of Prejudice) you will lay the Foundation of your own Honour, and your Countrey's Prosperity. FINIS
