S5943 R222090 99833320 37796
An Ague, VVhich hitherto amongst all sorts hath beene accounted the Physitians shame, both for definition and cure, (thus farre hath ignorance prevailed) but that the contrary is manifest, appeareth sufficiently by this following definition: and shall be cured whether Tertian, Quartern, or Quotidian, by me AARON STREATER, Physitian of Arts in Oxford approved by Authority: the Kings Majesties Servant in Ordinary, and dwelling against the Temple, three houses up in Chancerie-Lane, next house to the golden Anchor. printer's or publisher's device At London Printed 1641.
An Ague, IS either interpolate or continuall, in∣gendred of a melancholick humour, or a splenitick effect, whose rigour is in the beginning not vehement: but like the cold, men feele in most vehement Frosts, which in processe of time augmenteth, that the parties are like a stone, or other cold thing, which is the cause of so much inter∣mission, why this day, and that day, and not continually: nature working out this coldnesse, causeth generally a most vehement heat, which being over, the Parties rest in ease, untill such time, be it longer or shorter, the melancholick humor, putrified in the vessels, hath the predominance, and so returneth to his old biace againe. Upon the obstruction of the liver, by an abundant of chol∣ler, proceeding from a salt rhewme that commeth from the braine, converted into a putrified phlegme oppressing the stomack, and putrifying the empty veines adjoyning to the heart; and well may they be so, when as the liver for ob∣struction sake cannot send his vitall and Spring bloud, to nourish and revive the most vitall part, the heart; where∣upon lyeth a fast bak'd putrified matter, some greene, some black, some yellow, as experience shewes: and untill this be dissolved and taken away, help cannot be expected, for if the rhewme be salt, the liver obstructed, the stomack op∣pressed
with phlegme, the adjacent veines to the heart pu∣trified, the spleene decayed, the kidnies by their salt gravell wasted, the stone in the bladder ingendred, the leggs by the salt humour falling downe, swollen; whereby the Dropsie, and Gowt are ingendred, with many more diseases. Say not therefore it is but an Ague, but a Feaver, I shall weare it out: upon some violent Medicine, or three or foure Fits, sme times by the great help of nature it may depart: but if it hath continued longer, and no remedy found, as thou lovest thy health and life dally not with this disease. Wee must much condemne those that stick not to say, an Ague is a spirit; for Agues and Feavers were diseases our Saviour cured, and so no spirit. Here wee condemne all Charmes in this case, with all those that goe to Sorcerers, Witches, Cunning men, or Cun∣ning women, as they are called, with the seaventh sonne: for in thus doing, they leave God in his ordinance, and em∣brace the devill himselfe. For be assured, i you use lawfull meanes in this disease, you may expect as fully and as really cure and health, as in any other sicknes or disease what ever: so farre forth as it shall stand with Gods glory, and your good. One word more by the way, but yet to the purpose, let Italians and French let bloud as they please in thir hot Countries: but for our English that are there, and desire to see home againe, I say let thm beware of losse of bloud, lest they come home by weeping crosse, fall into dead Pal∣sies, whch is a customary thing for our Nation to doe; and to frequent our owne Nation here, by their often let∣ting bloud. Let neither any English Physitian, Italian, French, Dutch, Doctor, or else, perswade you in an Ague or Feaver, to be let bloud, xcpt thre be a most eminent apparance of Death it selfe, which a juditious, and honest Physitian will soone descry. Nor in any other disease but as seldome as may be, if you desire comfort and health in Age.
And what is here written, I take God to record, is not written for vaine glory sake, as to be seene of men; but one∣ly out of a grownded and experienced good successe I have had in the curing of them that have had Feavers of long and short continuance; and as violent a ever were, or I be∣leeve can be; yet did never draw bloud, except it was by Leaches, untill it was so, that the parties were recovered, their bloud well purified, and bodies setled; then a weeke or fortnight after I have opened a veine, that they might stand in their more perfect health. And the reasons of this my good successe, I shall be ever willing and ready to give unto any Doctor, or Patient that shall require of me. Gloria tibi Domine.
BEing carried downe from London to South-hampton by Master Thomas Mason September 1640. word was brought me of a Mayd dead, 16 yeares of age: and being requested to see what Disease shee dyed of, I tooke my Chirurgion with mee, and went, And after section or search, I found as followeth, a gallon and a halfe of greene water in the belly, that stunk worse then carrion; under the lyver an Impostume as bigg as my fist, full of greene black cor∣rupted Matter, and the lyver black and rot: The spleene and kidneyes wholly decayed; and the place as black as soot: the bowells they were fretted, ulcerated, and rotten. In the chesse was two great handfulls of black burnt bloud in dust or powder: the heart was all sound, but not a drop of bloud in it: nor one spoonfull in the whole body. Here was an Annatomy indeed, skinne
and bone: and I verily beleeve, that there was no braine left, but that shee lived while that was moyst: the sent was so ill, and I not well, that I forbore to search it. God that knowes the secrets of all hearts, knowes this is a truth, and nothing else here written. Arthur Fauset, Chirurgion at South-hampton, was the man I imployed to cut her up, as ma∣ny there can witnesse that were present. And what of all this may some say: why this? An eight weeks Ague in the neglect of , breeds all these Diseases, and finally Death. FINIS.
