T1096 13770433 101745
THREE LETTERS Of dangerous Consequence: READ AT A CONFERENCE OF Both Houses of Parliament. The two first from Rotterdam, and dated Iuly 1. & 4. stilo novo. 1642. The other, from M. Wilmot to M. Crofts at the Hague, Dated Iune 22. 1642. In which appeares a desperate designe of the L. Digby, Cap. Hide, Sir Lewis Dives, M. Jermin, M. Percy, and divers Cavileeres, against the Parliament of England. With the names of Ships, number of Men and Amunition now in readinesse to be trans∣ported into the North. With many other observable matters. Ordered by the Commons in Parliament to be printed. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com. LONDON. Printed by E.G. for E. Husbands, and J Francke. 1642.
Worshipfull Sir, SInce my last by the Post, many things of consequence have come to my hand, The Ship Providence of the Kings, with the Lyon, which brought over the Ladies of Ho∣nour to the Queen, bring over for the North parts of England all those Gentlemen mentio∣ned within the inclosed, with three or foure score more, it is thought here they goe for New-castle; some of Prince Roberts men told me they were bound for Yorke: they are all desperate in their way, that whoever they meet with, if they oppose them, to fight it out to the last man. The Lyon hath 42. Guns, the Providence hath 14. and is to take in two more, which we know of, now being within one mile of Rotterdam, they are 12. foot long, and shoot a Bullet of 44. pound weight. Every one here is fearefull of a desperate designe upon the premises: you may please not to harbour any thought of faithful∣nesse in the Officers of the Lyon, for we have certain intelligence of the truth hereof. I my selfe went to the Helleford-sluce, and see Cavi∣leeres
there; and going thither, some whereof told me that they went in the Ship, and named all the inclosed. We cannot yet heare of any further pawning of the Jewels, yet all men think they have gotten much money upon them, for they have provided all sorts of Armes of proof: and othersome that had Pistols to make at the Hague, could not get them done till all their worke was done, which now is finished, and they lie all for a Wind: much of their Baggage being laden at Brill aboard the Providence, and at Hel∣leford-sluce, aboard the Lyon. The Scout of Crauling a small Towne neere Rotterdam, told one of this Town, that Prince Robert hath hired a Boyer to carry Horse for England, the Scout is the onely Master of Horses in these parts. One Isaac Light, a Merchant of the Company, hath bought 15000. waight of Powder, and is now gon to Ʋtrecht to buy Match, all which present∣ly to be Ship'd for England; they give out it is for the Parliament, and by their order. This Merchant, late Factor for M. Christopher Tom∣lings Merchant of London, and Thomas Ashton ser∣vant to M. Laurence Halsted of London, hath ship'd here 38. Cases of Armes, being but the remaine of 700. Cases for which they obtained Licence to ship here: and at Ansterdam, we are informed
that the greatest part of those are ship'd in 3 Flemish Boyers or Hoyes, now lying for a Wind at the Tassell; this information we had of one of the Custome-house in Rotterdam, upon occasion of a Merchants sight of the warrant. Yesterday a Jewell was sent to Rotterdam, from the Hague, valued at 40000. Guilders by a Jeweller here. M. Percy, M. Jermin, M. W. Mountague, and M. Davenant, came into the Hague this day seven-night, at 12. a clocke at night in the Queenes Coach, and with her Foot-men. These are all that for present I shall write, but shall informe you more by word of mouth, if I can get passage one way or other. Of the most materiall of these particulars, by the advice of friends, I have in∣formed the Earle of Warwick by this bearer, the 38. Cases are ship'd aboard one Rich. Lyndall, a Hull man, laden for London. Thus with my hum∣ble service remembred, I take my leave and rest, Yours to command. Of all these we have sufficient proofe. Roterdam 1o. Iulii 1642. Stilo novo. In one White of Dover a Ketch, there are many Fats of Match, with other provision of Warre. I hope to be with you before this Letter.
The Contents of the inclosed note. PRince Robert, Prince Maurice, Lord Denby, L. Digby, Oenele that Traytor, Captaine Hide, Sir Lewis Dives, Collonel Wilson sent for out of Germany, with very many other Gentlemen and Comman∣ders; and is credibly known that they have all sorts of Armes for Horse, & that in great quantity, there being a Hoy or Boyer, a Dutchman hired and paid his freight before hand, to carry the Armes and provision that Prince Robert and the rest from the Hague, have made for their trans∣portation into the North, and is undertaken that these Boyer shall be conveyed as well home as out. Worshipfull Sir, I Wrote to you on Tuseday last by a Mer∣chant, that had a passe to come over∣land, but least that should not come to hand though little hath hapened here since, I cannot omit this post; The ship called the Lion that brought over Ladies of honour, is now fitted to transport into England P. Robert P. Mawrice, Lord Digby, Lord Denby, Collonel Cockram, Cap∣taine Hide, Oneale, Sir Lewis Dives with 80 or 90 Cavaleers more, they have fitted themselves with Armor of proofe and all other accoutrements of war, they have beene very merry, and have drunke many healthes to their good voyage, and in their Cups have made Dividents of the Parliament-mens lands, they are very jocond, and were all aboard yesterday morning, the wind being then fair, but held but a little
space, and now blowes very hard, so that God hath now stayed them; The Providence that lies at Brill is to take in diverse of them, she hath taken in much of their luggage with two great Gunnes, each 12 foote long, and shoote a bullit of 44 pound. Also the Lion at Helleford sluce, hath taken in much luggage: There are three Boyers or Hoyes lying at Tassell, laden with Armes, and 38 cases of Armor shipped in Richard Lindall of Hull bound for London; I heare they be all Muskets, and there are in that Ship 700 Corslets, beside this I was tould by one whose sonne sits in the Customhouse, all these shipped here by a warrant which they had obtained for 700 cases; which as a merchant in this Town saw, & tould, he, besides one of the Customehouse, did confesse it true: They give our diverse reports, of staying of armes, and of their decli∣ning their voyage, but we knowing they indeavour to worke withall deceiveablenesse, thinke thm onely tricks to confound our intelligence, for we see such as are laden heere are not stayed. Indeed, for certaine the States Generall have given out a warrant of stay for Armes, so they did when all the Armes provided a∣gainst the Scots were transported, the Officers are corrupted: there is a Boyer lying within a mile of this towne to be fraughted with Horse, for P. Robert, A Marchant of this Tn saw the Shippers Charter part y them to what part shall
be appointed by him betweene Dower and New-castle, the Prince undertakes his safe convoy out, and home; one Isaac Light a Marchant of the company here, hath bought 600 l. worth of powder with much match, where it is shipped we cannot yet heare, they worke with much privacy; munday last there came a Iewell from the Hage valued at 40000 Guilders, by the Iewellers; they were offered 10000 Guilders up∣on it, but would not, and so it was returned againe: We cannot heareof any further pawning of the Iewels, nor where they bee, Mr. Webster went with Sir William Boswell to the Queen Munday last. Tuesday last was seavenight at 12 a clock in the night Master Percy, M. Jermin, M. Wil. Mountague, and Dane∣nant, came into the Hage with the Queenes Coach, and footemen, This I was tould by one Mr. — The Cavalleers doe boast, that having a Ship of 42 peeces of Ordinance, and another of 16. peeces, that will fight till they sink, if any oppose them: This is the resolution of Captaine Strachin, Captaine of the Providence, Yesterday at Helleford sluce ar∣rived Gustavus Horne, with the happy entrance of the King, I hope the Captaine of her, will not doe as the captaine of the Lion. This being all of any moment that we hear heer, I humbly take my leave and rest. Rotterdam the 4. of June, 1642. Your to comm
For Mr. CROFTS at the Hague. Deare WILL, BY these last Letters to the Queene, you will finde a great altera∣tion of businesse here; the King, that very lately appeared almost abandoned by all His Subjects, is now become the Favorite of the Kingdome; yet I believe His Enemies are not so neglected as not to be able to raise an Army to oppose Him: and indeed here lies the jest, for they will be followed just enough to forfeit their estates, which I have heard you often say, were better bestowed on some of us. Yesterday there came a Messenger from the House, who had Order, (and did raise the power of the County) to entreat Bartley, Ashburnham, and my selfe, to come to speak to the House; but the King gave the Messenger a short An∣swer, and an Officer or two gave him a short Cudgell, so he is returned to London (a fine Gentleman) with his Arme in a Scarfe. Deare Will, preserve me in your good opinion, for I assure you I am, Your most affectionate humble servant, H. WILMOT. Iune 22. York. 1642. Pray if Master Iermin be with you, present my most humble service to him.
