T1650 07915385 40384
TO THE Right Honourable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED. The humble Petition of thousands of the vvell affected Inhabitants of the Cities of London and Westminster, and the Suburbes thereof, with the Borough of Southwarke, and places adjacent, in behalfe of themselves and other well-affected persons in the Kingdome of ENGLAND. Sheweth, THAT Your Petitioners having of long time beene silent observers of the malitious progresse of the Oppressors of this Common∣wealth, encreasing exceedingly both in numbers and strength from meane and low beginnings (being then too much contemned) and withall observing to what an height of villany and impiety they are growne through their dissembled pretences and Protesta∣tions of mainetaining the true reformed Protestant Religion, the Liberty of the Subject and priviledges of Parliament: In the meane time, without any touch of conscience, and in defiance of God, raising an Army of Papists, Outlawes, and Traytors, be∣ing all incited and provoked to the robbing, burning, murthering and destroying of the Religious, honest, and well meaning peo∣ple; And that not by a foraigne enemy, but (to the astonishment of all good men) by him whom the people of this Nation have highly honoured as their King, and used with abundance of love and indulgence, whereof he hath made no better use than to bring them to slavery or destruction, as thousands of our deare Brethren have found by most wofull experience: To effect which (open and pro∣fessed violence being not sufficient) the Irish Rebels are invited, and a most hellish plot contrived, and countenanced by the Kings owne Hand, and the Great Seale. Which (had it taken effect (as blessed be God it did not) it had made one of the most wofull bleeding spectacles that ever the world beheld, sufficient to witnesse unto all men, that the Authours and approvers thereof have sold themselves to worke all manner of wickednesse; which yet is made more evident by a late, most unjust, and scandalous Proclamation, therein defaming, and (as much as in them lay) dissolving the Parliament, against the fundamentall constitution of the Kingdome, and an expresse Act made this very Parliament, putting all wise and consi∣derate men out of doubt, that there remaineth no more hope of reducing such wolvish dispositions by perswasions and right reason (which have beene too long applyed in vaine,) but by powerfull force and constraint. Having also observed (with greatest thankfulnesse,) the manifold endeavours of this Honourable House, for suppressing these Outlawes and Tray∣tors, being aided and assisted therein with Men and Moneyes from all parts of the Kingdome, amounting to a great and numerous Army, and many resolved parties in diverse Counties, and yet all of them not sufficent to dissolve their Forces, or not so suddenly as the necessities of the people doe require, thousands of them being liable to misery through decay of Trade, and ready to perish as much through poverty and want of necessaries, as through violence. And notwithstanding the confidence reposed in the faithfulnesse and courage of his Excellency our Noble Generall, and in the undaunted spirits of those under his Command, that have voluntarily devoted their lives and estates to the service of the Commonwealth: yet con∣sidering the doubtfull hazzards of warre, the miserable consequences of prolonging thereof; the perilous relying of this so populous a Kingdome upon one Army, the manifold miseries and distresses of our Prethren in Ireland, and multitudes of our Brethren in most parts of this Kingdome, and the inevitable ruine which is even ready to seize upon us all, if not very speedily prevented; The cowardize wherewith we shall be branded to all posterity, if (when so many of our Brethren are hazarding their lives, and the rest of the Kingdome would doe the like by our example) we should preferre our present case and sloth before the purchase of a sound and lasting peace, and the quiet injoyment of that Religion, and those Liberties that God hath indowed us withall: We are pierced at our hearts, and our spirits even burne within us, that we can no longer remaine silent, but are con∣strained to addresse our selves in our usuall and lawfull way, and to become most earnest and humble suitors to this most High and Honourable House, that as in your Wisdomes, you have thought meete by diverse and sundry Orders to invite all well-affected men in all parts, to appeare and lay out themselves for restraint of the common enemies, so you would be pleased to make use of some more powerfull meanes (then as yet hath been applyed) to raise the whole people both in the City of London and all other parts of the Kingdome. And for the more speedy effecting thereof. That you would be pleased to ordaine a Committee of such worthy members of this Honourable House as are here expressed, who we hope will be intreated to undertake the Service: Notwithstanding the many great imployments of this house, viz. My Lord Major, Mr. Morley, Mr. Blackston, Mr. Bainton, Mr. Asharst, Mr. Strode, Mr. Bond, Mr. Gourdon Mr. Marten Mr. Hoile, Mr. Rigbie, Sir Henry Heyman, and Sir William Masham. And to give them full and ample Commission, that they, or any seven of them may have power to list and dispose as many of the Petitioners as are willing, and all others of like affection to the Cause in a warlike manner, into Companies and Regiments; to appoint a Com∣mander in chiefe, and all other Commanders and Officers to receive contributions and subscriptions for Mony, Ammunition, Armes, Horses, and any other necessary Provision for strength and maintenance of an Army: And to compell all sorts of men that shall by them be thought fit, (though unwilling) to contribute Monies, Horses, Armes and other necessaries as shall to them seeme just and reasonable: And to engage the publique Faith for satisfaction of whatsoever they shall receive for the publique service. To call unto them for their assistance, and to make Sub-Committees of such persons as themselves shall approve of, and to put in execution whatsoever shall be necessary for this Service. That so the fulnesse of their Commission may encourage the whole Nation as one man (according to the true intent of the late Covenant, with all cheerefulnesse and vigour to joyne themselves with us for the speedy ending this distructive Warre. We most earnestly pray you according to that great power wherewith you are solely intrusted by the people, that you will now at length breake through all opposition, and making use of a resolved and willing people; preserve both your selves and them before the season be over, (which passeth swiftly) and it be too late. That as this present age, so the Ages to come may have reall cause to blesse God for the wisedome, courage, and faithfulnesse of this great Assembly. For whom we shall ever pray, &c. This Petitition was presented to the right Honourable the House of Commons, the 20. of July, 1643. and a Committee was then appointed for the speedy advance of this service. This is licensed and entered into the Hall Booke according to Order: Henry Walley. Printed at London for Peter Cole, and John Sweeting, 1643.
