T27 13766088 101721
The Counter-Rat, OR OATS Sifted and Sack't up in the COUNTER, And since Removed to the KINGS-BENCH, In a Letter to W. C. Esq YOU have heard, since the last Nipping Frost, how the Rate of Corn goes in England; the Wheat being wither'd in the Stalk, and the Barley blasted in the Blade, begins with the warm Sun to peep out again, all sorts of Grain begin to Flourish but Oates, which dare not show his Head above ound. Hearing he was absconded, I made (according to your Request) the arrowe search I could, viz. by Hue and Cry; Bell, Book, and Candle; blication, Proclamation, Narrative, and Remonstrance. I searched the arkets and the Coffee Houses, for fear they shou'd Roast him instead of offee Berries, the Black Box and the Meal Tub, least he should like another hoenix, raise a new Plot out of his own Dust. I search'd the new King of lands, where he us'd to Resort, and his Neighbouring Tavern, the Dog,  Drury-Lane, for fear the Hound Bowman shou'd hang him at his Sign∣st for a Bush, or the Tories keep him for a Bonfire the next general Club: search'd the Cabals & Conventickles, least the Saints shou'd gather him up as Joseph did the Corn in Egypt) for fear of a Famine of the Gospel. I search'd the L. Peter's Magazine, and the L. Powis's Stables, least he should  stored up to feed the Subterranean Troops of Horse that lay invisible un∣ ground, against the next Invasion of Spanish Pilgrims Visible only to himself. For this, Mephistophilus has an Invisible Familiar that renders very thing Visible to him, which no Man besides himself can discern with a ospective. As Black Bills, Blank Commissions, Armies of Pilgrims, &c.  the same Nature where his Baptism and degrees at Salamanca, which no an Living was ever Witness to but himself; for from this so fam'd Sala∣ca, came this so infamous Oats, this seed of the Serpent, to be planted  England, as the Plague from Paris, or the Pox from Naples. But for the better Grace of the matter. As Barley is called Sir John Barleycorn, Wheat, Sir William Whitebread, and green Pease in the Cod, young Hastings, so for Distinction sake, hereafter we will call our Oats, doctor, or Salamanca, which you please. Now after all my search above and under Ground, where the Devil do you Imagine at last I should find my Reverend Doctor but in the Counter, where he was carried on Saturday Night for a Rat.
And now I know you will be ready to ask the Cause why this Darling o the People, this Saviour of the Nation, should be so ill Rewarded for al his Services? This Devil of the People, and Firebrand of the Nation; This Counter-Rat, this Vermin of the Crown and Court, this Poyson of the State, and Pestilence of the Church, is justly Committed for words more Malitious than Colt, the Hereford Member; and Misdemeanors higher than Sir Samuel the Ignoramus Foreman. His Accusations are Numberless, his Crimes of the deepest Scarlet, and his Countenance of Brass. It is as Impossible to tell them, as to find a Punishment answerable to his Desert. Besides, his Murders, Perjuries, Blasphemies, &c. He wou'd pretend to set up for a Mountebank, and instead of Orviotan impose Poyson upon the People, by which many have been betrayed out of their Lives. Nay, by this Means, under pretence of Preservation, be sought to Destro his Na∣tive Soveraign, and had almost purg'd his Royal Brother out of the Kingdom. This not taking Effect, and his Cheats, by which he had Imposed on the Credulous Multitude, being at last Detected, the Insolent Rat begins with Open Mouth to Ruil against the Lyon, King of the Forrest, because he wou'd not Call an Assembly of the Beasts to Rule in his Place, and Divest him of his Regal Authority. He took it very ill, that the Rat did not Reign over the Castled Elephants of the Court; wou'd have all about the Lyon Remov'd, that the Leopards and Panthers might have a Tug for the Sovereignty, and was very Angry, that there was not a Tole∣ration Granted to the Wolves and Tygers, by Lawless Usurpation, to Prey upon the Harmless Sheep, and Glut their Ravenous Jaws with Innocent Blood. The Generous Lyon, Disdaming the Reproaches of this Mean and Infa∣mous Rat, lest him to the Mercy of his Brother Lyon, who Bore a long time with his Insolencies; till being at last Provok'd by his Inveterate Venomous Tongue, and Scandalous Invectives, Clapt him into the Pound for Trespass and Damage of a Thousand Innocent Sheep Worry'd by him, and his Accomplices, for which, its said, he must Pay so many Pounds before he come out Next to the Lyon King of Beasts, and his R. Brother, this Poisonous Rat Spit his Venom against the Jackcall, who was Serviceable to the Lyon upon all Occasions, and Asserted his Rights and Priviledges against all his Enemies. This Jackcall was an old Observer of all the Doctors Insolencies, and had ever an Antipathy against the Counter-Rat, for which Cause, he went ofte to the Court with Venomous Complaints against the Jackcall; and sin that took not Effect, went always Arm'd with a Protestant Flail, and a∣per of Poison, to do his Business at any Rate. But the Old Observator  no other Weapon then an old Goose-Quill, with which he did so Thrash  Oats, Sift and Fan him about, that there was nothing at last but the very Chaff to be seen, which (cause it might not be lost for want of House-Room,) was Gather'd and Sack'd up in the Counter, as you have heard. The next Remove was over the Water, where he will Serve in a Dou∣ble Capacity, Oats to Feed the Furious Colt, while he lies at Rack and Manger; the Doctor, as Chaplain, to Hold Forth to the Brethren in Tribu∣lation, where (unless Jack give 'em the last Remove,) that they may long Continue, is the Hearty Wishes of Your Devoted, Humble Servant, M. . LONDON, Printed for J.S. 1684.
