T621 R10139 13287940 98823
THE HISTORY of the NEGOTIATION BETWEEN THE DUKE of SAVOY, AND THE Protestant Cantons OF SWITZERLAND.
Books Printed for Richard Baldwin. AN Historical Account of the most Remarkable Trans∣actions betwixt the Duke of Savoy and the French King; contained in several Letters past betwixt them be∣fore the Rupture. Translated from the Original French. A True Relation of the Cruelties and Barbarities of the French upon the English Prisoners of War; being a Journal of their Travels from Dinan in Britanny, to Thoulon in Pro∣vence, and back again. With a Description of the Scituation and Fortfiications of all the eminent Towns upon the Road, and their distance. Of their Prisons and Hospitals, and the number of men that died under their Cruelty; with the Names of many of them, and the places of their Deaths and Burials; with an Account of the great Charity and Suffer∣ings of the poor Protestants of France; and other material things that hapned upon the way. A Collection of Poems, Satyrs, and Songs against Popery and Tyranny, in 4. Parts; most of them writ by the late D. of Buckingham, Mr. Andr. Marvel, Mr. John Aylof, and Mr. Stephen College. The Intrigues of the French King at Constantinople to em∣broil Christendom, discover'd in several Dispatches past be∣tween Him and the late Grand Signior, Grand Vizier, and Count Teckely; all of them found in that Count's Papers. With some Reflections upon them. The New Nonconformist; or, Dr. Sherlock's Case in preach∣ing after a Deprivation incurr'd by the express words of a Statute, fairly stated and examined. With some short Re∣flections upon Mr. Cookes Sermon, Feb. 2. 1690. which was Licens'd by the Archbishop's Chaplain. The Fate of France. A Discourse where it is shew'd, That by the happy Revolution in England, all the Designs of the French King for the Universal Monarchy are disappointed, and the rational grounds to believe his Downfal near. In Dialogues between F. Petre, F. la Chaise, and two Protestant Gent. Essex's Innocency and Honour vindicated; or Murther, Sub∣ornation, Perjury, and Oppression, justly charg'd on the Murderers of that Noble Lord, and True Patriot, Arthur (late) Earl of Essex; as proved before the Right Honourable (late) Committee of Lords, or ready to be deposed. By Law∣rence Braddon, Gent. The Folly of Priest-Craft. A Comedy. The Royal Flight, or the Conquest of Ireland. A Comedy.
THE HISTORY OF THE NEGOTIATION OF THE AMBASSADORS SENT TO THE Duke of Savoy, BY THE Protestant Cantons OF SWITZERLAND, CONCERNING THE VAUDOIS. Translated from the Original Copy printed in Switzerland. LICENS'D, October 16. 1690. J. FRASER. LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane. MDCXC.
THE HISTORY of the NEGOTIATION BETWEEN THE DUKE of SAVOY, AND THE Protestant Cantons OF SWITZERLAND. WHereas the Embassy which the Prote∣stant Cantons of Switzerland sent to the Duke of Savoy in the year 1686. to intercede in favour of the Churches of the Valleys, was both important and difficult; and that it may give place to some opposite Reflections: I thought sit to publish the History of it, that all equitable persons being informed of what has pas∣sed in this Negotiation, might be able to make a just and reasonable judgment of it. To this effect, I intend to inform you of the most consi∣derable particulars of this Embassy: and as I do not ground my Work but upon good Memorials, and that my Pen shall not be mis-led either by Interest, Hatred or Af∣fection, I hope that if I do not please my Reader by the eloquence and politeness of my Stile, I shall be able at
least to satisfie him by the sincerity and exactness of my Narrative. 'Tis certain, that amongst all Protestants, the Evange∣lical Cantons have always distinguished themselves by a love they have shewed for their Religion, and by an arden∣cy with which they have embraced the Interest of the Re∣formed Churches: As soon as the first light of the Refor∣mation appeared in France, They contributed to the ut∣most of their power to advance this Divine Work in that Kingdom; and they dispatched several Ambassadors to Francis the First, and the Kings his Successors, to desire them to put a stop to the Cruelties of the Romish Clergy, exercised against those that professed the true Christian Re∣ligion. They have shewed the same Zeal in all the Persecutions the Churches of Piemont have been forced to undergo: In those that happened in the year 1655. and 1663. they sent Ambassadors to the Duke of Savoy to intercede in their favour, and to maintain them in all their Rights they had acquired by the concessions of his Ancestors; and in the year 1686. as soon as they were informed of what was contained in the Edict this Prince had published against their Brethren in Piemont, they shewed they were extreme∣ly concerned for it: And whereas this unfortunate Peo∣ple was attacqued with more Injustice than they ever had been before, and that they were threatned with the most terrible Evils that could be imagined, they resolved to leave no stone unturned to divert it from them. In effect, formerly their Enemies did only propose to themselves to keep them in the narrowest limits, and to deprive them of the right to inhabit the Plains, which they had always enjoyed; but now there was a design laid to deprive them not only of the exercise of their Reli∣gion throughout the whole Country, but also of Liberty of Conscience, which made their condition worthy of compas∣sion. But that we may be able to judge the better of it, it is necessary to let you see a faithful Translation of this Edict.
VICTOR AMIDEE, by the Grace of God, Duke of Savoy and of Piemont, and King of Cyprus. POlitick as well as Christian Prudence advises us very often to neglect in some manner the Ulcers that are not yet in a condition to be healed, and that might be made worse by a precipitate Cure: This Conduct has been observed as well in other Monarchies, as by Our most Serene Predecessors, who in truth had never any other design, than to rescue their Subjects professing the pretended Reformed Religion, out of the darkness of Heresie, which by an unhappy vicissitude, and a fatal cor∣ruption of these times, had passed from the very Centre of the Valleys of Lucerne, into the very heart of Piemont. Never∣theless, by reason of the Succours which the Zealots of that Religion did receive from Foreign Countreys, this Holy Work could not be brought to the End We so much desired; insomuch that not having been able to purge Our Countrey of this Poy∣son, We did reduce them to, and shut them up in the Valleys of Lucerne, of Angrogne, of St. Martyne, of Cernse, of St. Bartholomew, of Roccapiara, and of Parnstin; and by way of Toleration, We did suffer them to exercise there their false Religion, in the limits before prescribed them, according to the juncture of Times, till it should please God Almighty to give Us a favourable opportunity of bringing back those mis∣led Souls into the bosom of the Holy and Only Catholick, Apo∣stolick, and Romish Religion. Yet time has discovered how much it was necessary to cut off the numerous Heads of this Hydra, since the said Hereticks, instead of answering this fa∣vour with a deep submission, and with a sincere acknowledg∣ment of this kind Toleration, have very often made bold to be disobedient, to a scandal, and to rise against their own So∣vereign. And because at present the principal Cause of this said To∣leration is now removed by the Zeal and Piety of the Glorious Monarch of France, who has brought back to the true Faith his neighbouring Hereticks; We think the particular Graces We have received from His Divine Majesty, and which We
enjoy still, would accuse Us of the greatest ingratitude, if by our negligence We should let slip the opportunity of executing this Work, according to the intention of Our Glorious Prede∣cessors. It is for this, and several urgent Reasons, that by vir∣tue of this present Edict, with Our full Knowledge, and by Our absolute Power, as also by the Advice of Our Council, We have Declared and Ordered, and do Declare and Order by these Pre∣sents, to Our Subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion, to desist for the future from all the Exercise of the said Religion. And We do prohibit them further, after the publishing this Edict, to hold no Assemblies or Conventicles in any place or particular House to exercise the said Religion, under what title, pretext, or occasion whatsoever, under pain of their Lives, and Confiscation of their Goods. And We Ordain also, That the past pretended Toleration be of no effect, under what colour or pretence whatsoever. Our Will is also, That all the Churches, Granges and Houses, in which at present the said Religion is ex∣ercised, shall be rased to the ground; as also all other places in which for the future such Assemblies shall be held, to the preju∣dice of what the precedent Articles contains; and this is to be executed, tho the Owners of such places are ignorant thereof. And We Command accordingly all Ecclesiasticks, Ministers and Schoolmasters of the said pretended Reformed Religion, who in one fortnight after the publishing this present Edict, do not effectually embrace the Catholick Religion, shall retreat out of our Territories after the said term be past, under pain of Death, and Confiscation of their Goods; with express Command, and under the same Punishment, not to make, within the said time, or before their departure, any Sermon, Exhortation, or any other Act if the said Religion. And furthermore, We forbid, under the said Punishment, and the forfeiture of Our savour, all those that make Profession of the pretended Reformed Religion, to keep for the future any publick or private School; it being Our intention, That from this very time their Children shall be instructed by Catholick Schoolmasters. And concerning the Ministers who within the said time shall embrace the Catholick Religion, Our Will and Pleasure is, That during their Lives, and after they are dead, their Widows, as long as they shall live unmarried, shall enjoy the said Exemptions and Immuni∣ties which they enjoyed heretofore, during the exercise of their
Charge. And Our Will is over and above, That to the said Ec∣clesiasticks who shall be made Converts in the said manner, there shall be paid during their life a Pension one third part lar∣ger than the Sallary was which they enjoyed in quality of be∣ing Ministers of the said Religion; and that after their death their Widows enjoy one half of the said Pension as long as they shall continue unmarried. And concerning the Children that shall be born by Father and Mother of the said pretended Re∣formed Religion, Our intention is, That after the publishing this present Edict, they shall be baptized by the Priests of the Parish that are already, or that shall be established for the future in the said Valleys: to this purpose, We Command their Fathers and Mothers to send or bring them to the Churches, under pain of being sent five years to the Galleys for their Fathers, and whipping for their Mothers; and moreover, the said Children shall be brought up in the said Catholick, Apostolick, and Roman Religion. And We Command expresly all Judges, Bailiffs, Gaclers, and other Officers, to see these Presents duly executed. And We do confirm also the Edict We have published the 4th of November past, concerning the Subjects of His Most Chri∣stian Majesty that make profession of the pretended Reformed Religion, and that are to be found in Our Territories, and that have left their Merchandises, Money, or other Effects behind them; and concerning the other Foreigners of the said Religi∣on, who, to the prejudice of some of Our Predicessors Edicts, have established themselves in the Valleys, without their con∣sent in writing, comprehending therein their Off-spring that are born there: We Command, That in case, within one fortnight after the publishing this present Edict, they do not declare to be willing to embrace the Catholick, Apostolick, and Roman Re∣ligion, they shall be obliged, if the said term be past, to repeat cut of Our Territories, under pain of Death, and Confiscation of their Goods. And tho lawfully, by virtue of the said Edicts, the Goods which the said Foreigners have acquired in Our Ter∣ritories ought to be confiscated for Our Royal Treasury; never∣theless We are willing in this case to shew Our accustomed Cle∣mency, and to give them leave to sell their said Goods (if they please) within the said term, and to dispose of the same as they think convenient: Yet upon these Conditions, That the selling the unmovable Goods shall only be made in favour of the Ca∣tholicks;
but in case they shall find no Buyer, they shall be look∣ed upon as sold, and united to Our Dominions under a reasona∣ble price. Finally, We Command all the Magistrates established by Us, Ministers of State, Officers, Judges, and all others whom it concerns, to see this present Edict inviolably observed; and so to order the same, that the Council of Piemont may enroll it, and give their full approbation of what is contained therein. Moreover, Our Will is, That the Publishing made hereof in the accustomed places, and in the ordinary man∣ner, shall have the same virtue as if it had been made known to every particular person; and that there be the same obser∣vance paid to the Copy hereof, Printed by Sinibal Our Printer, as to this My Original it self; FOR THIS IS OUR WILL. Given at Turin, January 31. 1686. By His Royal Highness's Command, VICTOR AMIDEO. Dest. Thomas. The Protestant Cantons having been inform'd of this Edict, did also understand some time after, that the Inhabi∣tants of the Valleys had endeavoured, tho without success, to find some remedy against it; for they did present two Petitions to their Prince, that were not answered: In the first, they desired the Edict should be revok'd; and in the second, they asked leave to retreat out of his Territories within such a time as would be necessary to find out an Establishment somewhere else. The Cantons seeing that the ordinary means which were made use of to hinder the execution of this Edict, had no effect, did think that they ought to employ some extraordinary ones. Accordingly they writ a Letter imme∣diately to the Duke of Savoy, desiring him that he might be pleased to maintain his Subjects of the Valleys in the Privileges which were granted them by his Predecessors: and finding that this Prince made no great haste to send them an Answer, but that on the contrary he was in a rea∣diness to execute his Edict by force, they resolved in a Diet at Baden, in the month of February, 1686. to dispatch him two Ambassadors, in order to endeavour to obtain by
their Representations, what they could not obtain by their Letters. The persons that were pitch'd upon, were Caspar de Mu∣ratt, and Bernard de Muratt, Councellors of State, the first of Zurich, and the other of Bern, that had both all the ne∣cessary qualities to acquit themselves worthily in this Em∣ploy, in regard of their Vertue and Piety, as well as their Prudence and Capacity. These Ambassadors were charged to employ their utmost endeavours to oblige the Duke of Savoy to revoke the Edict he had published against the Churches of the Val∣leys; and because there was some reason of fear that His Royal Highness might persist in his design to execute it in all its Points, the Evangelical Cantons, after having well considered the condition of those that composed those Churches, as also the Alliance and Forces of that Prince that was resolved entirely to extirpate them, in case they refused to submit to his Will, thought that in case their Ambassadors could by no means obtain the revoking of that Edict, it would be expedient that they should employ themselves to procure those miserable wretches the liberty to retreat into some other Country, to sell their Goods, and to carry along with them what they should be able to save out of their shattered Fortunes. The Lords that were of this Assembly were too wise and too judicious to think upon other means than these. They saw at one hand, the little number of those that were able to carry Arms in the Valleys; for they were at the most but 2500 Men, for the most part ill Arm'd, that had no Head, that were ill provided with Ammunition and Provisions, that had no hopes of Succours from any place, and that those that were their Commanders in the years 1655, and 1664. were not alive. But on the other hand, when they did consider the Forces of that Prince, who was resolved to abolish their Religion, they found that they far exceeded those of His Subjects, that were of a contrary Persuasion; for the Duke of Savoy had enjoy'd a very long Peace, he had a great number of good Troops, brave Captains, and ex∣perienc'd Generals. He had nothing to fear either from his Neighbours, or any other Prince of Europe.
And so much the more, because the Troops of the Duke of Savoy were joyn'd by the Forces of the French King, so dreadful at that time, that his very Name made most Princes of Europe tremble, instead that formerly the Subjects of this Monarch fought jointly with those of the Vallies, to secure them from the Oppression of their So∣vereign; and that notwithstanding the Succours they had from other hands, they were driven out of their Vallies, and were not able to defend themselves against the only Forces of their Prince. Moreover they considered, that if by an unlook'd-for Success, the Inhabitants of the Vallies should gain some Advantage over their Enemies; that at last, they would be forced to give way to the great Number of their Ene∣mies, whose Losses might be easily redressed by some fresh Troops; but that on the contrary, the Vaudois would have no means to make Recruits instead of those that would be lost in their several Fights, to which they would be exposed. Besides, that having to deal with the French King, who is the proudest Prince in the World, and who at that time was not troubled with any Enemy, he would rather have armed against them all the Inhabitants of his King∣dom, than to have run the hazard of desisting from an Enterprize, which he lookt upon as one of the most Glorious he ever undertook, and which he thought should acquire him an eminent place amongst the greatest Saints in Pa∣radice. And whereas they had before their Eyes those Hugonots of France, that were shelter'd in their Territories, they did compare their Condition with that of their Brethren in Piemont, and they found that considering the great Ex∣tremity these last were reduced to, if they could get Li∣berty to leave their Country, they would be much hap∣pier than the other that were forced not only to leave their Houses, Goods, and Native Country, but that could not buy their Exile, but with the hazard of their Lives and Liberties. In fine, they thought they could do nothing more ad∣vantagious for the Piemontese, than to obtain what they
had themselves desired in the Age past, as well as in this, when they were troubled about the Exercise of their Religion; for in those times they humbly Petition'd their Prince to grant them leave to Retreat into some other Countries. The Ambassadors having received their Instructions, went for Piemont; and presently after their arrival at Turin, be∣ing introduced to His Royal Highness's Audience, they did represent to him, That whereas the Intercession of the Protestant Cantons, their Lords, in favour of His Royal Highness's Subjects of the Valleys, making Profession of the Reformed Religion, had always been agreeable to him, and produced such an Effect, as they could have wish'd for; their Sovereign Lords having with great Grief un∣derstood, that His Royal Highness had form'd a Design to deprive his said Subjects of their Liberty of Conscience, and of the Exercise of their Religion, which they had en∣joy'd during several Ages, had been moved by a Christian Charity, by a strict Union which they are join'd with to those of their Communion, and by a Confidence of His Royal Highness's Clemency and Justice, to intercede in their Letters of Recommendation in favour of their Brethren in the Valleys. But having received no Answer, they had charged them with this Embassy, in order to demonstrate the great Con∣sideration they have for His Royal Highness, and at the same time to shew how sensibly they were touch'd by the last Edict, which he had published against His poor Sub∣jects of the Vallies; and had given them order to assure him of their strict Adherency to his Interest, and to desire him afterwards instantly, that he would be pleased to maintain the Inhabitants of the Valleys in a perpetual and peaceful Enjoyment of the Exercise of their Religion, and in that Liberty of Conscience which was granted them by his Predecessors, upon the Interceding and Recom∣mendation of several Protestant Princes and States, and particularly of their Sovereign Lords; and that the rea∣son which gave them some hopes to obtain what they de∣sired, was, that His Subjects had done nothing that could render them unworthy of the Favour and Affection of
their Prince, or that should deprive them of a Right they had acquired by such Grants, as ought to be inviolable, because they were no simple Tolerations, but Authenti∣cal Treaties made with the Inhabitants of the Valleys, and that consequently ought to be perpetual and irrevo∣cable, as it is seen in the 20th Article of the Patent of the year 1655. and in the 19th Article of that of the year 1664. that say, That they shall be perpetually and irrevo∣cably observed, and that in effect they have been inroll'd by the Senate of Chambery, in Order to be executed ac∣cording to their Form and Contents. That their Lords were firmly perswaded, that his Roy∣al Highness would not suffer, that in his so happy and glo∣rious Reign, these Patents, followed by several Declarati∣ons, and a world of solemn Promises, should be Cancell'd; and that the Fruits of their Mediation, of their Care, and of their Pains, should be reduced to nothing. That he would not have it should be thought, that he had not for the Protestant Cantons the same Regard, and the same Considerations which his Ancestors had; that that perfect Friendship and sincere Correspondency which has always been entertained between his Royal Highness, and their Lords, as between good Friends and Neigh∣bours, should in the least be changed; that his Territo∣ries should be exposed to a world of Troubles and Cala∣mities; that the Consciences of his Subjects, that ought not to be answerable but to God, should be forced by fear of Death and Torments; and in a word, that the In∣habitants of his Valleys should be oppress'd with Misery, and brought to despair. That therefore they pray'd his Royal Highness with all possible Ardency, well to receive the Intercession of their Sovereigns in Favour of his Subjects, as their Bre∣thren by a Communion of the same Religion, and to be touched by the Sighs and Tears of so many Innocent Souls, who humbly did entreat him to suspend the Execution of his Edict, and not to turn his Arms against his own Peo∣ple, who paying that Religious Homage to God, which is due to him, desired to Seal up by the loss of all their Blood, that Allegiance which they had sworn to his Royal Highness.
That in case their Mediation should produce the effect their Sovereign Lords so much wisht for, it would be the most convincing Mark his Royal Highness could give them, that he made no less Reflection of their Entremise, than his Predecessors of Glorious Memory had done; and that on their side they would endeavour to find means to shew him their acknowledgment, and to render him their reci∣procal Services on all occasions. And whereas the Ministers of State of his Royal High∣ness in the Conferences the Ambassadors have had with them, did mention some reasons, why his Royal Highness had published that Edict, which they desired should be revoked: The Ambassadors thought it necessary to Answer them, and to support their Demand by the Reasons set down in this following Memorial. WHereas the Right Honourable the Ministers of State of his Royal Highness, have given us to understand upon a private Information of our Reasons, that his present Engage∣ment, and into which he did not enter but by the necessity of the present Juncture of the Times, was a great Obstacle to the Success of our Negotiation; we find our selves obliged to represent to your Royal Highness, That the Churches of the Valleys in Piemont, did not separate themselves from the Re∣ligion of their Prince, because they live in that they received from their Predecessors above Eight Ages ago, and which they did profess before they were under the Dominion of Your Royal Highness's Ancestors, who having found them in the Possession of their Religion, have maintained them therein by several De∣clarations, and principally by those of the year 1561, 1602, and 1603. which having been enrolled by the Parliament of Chambery, in the year 1620. for the Sum of 6000 French Ducate, which these Churches paid them, as the very act of enrolling mentions, their Right passed into a Form of Trans∣action, and into a perpetual and irrevocable Law, which has been observed during the Life of his Royal Highness Victor Amadee, and during the Regency of Madam Royale, who confirmed them by her Declaration in the year 1638. These Churches have in following times obtained several other fa∣vourable Declarations of his Royal Highness, Charles Ema∣nuel,
of Glorious Memory, Your Royal Highness's Father, in particular, in the year 1649, and 1653. But whereas to the prejudice of a Right so well established by a Possession out of Mens Memory, and by so many Declarations, the Sieur Ga∣staldo did nevertheless in the Month of February, 1655. publish a Declaration, that did produce some terrible and fatal Consequences to these poor Churches; all Protestant Kings, Princes, and States of Europe, and particularly our Sovereign Lords did concern themselves in their Misfortune, and having interceded in their Favour, by his Royal Highness Charles-Emanuel, they obtained a Confirmation of their Priviledges, and of their Concessions, by two solemn perpetual and inviola∣ble Patents, of the year 1655, and 1664. enrolled in a good Form, and confirmed by the Letters he did write to our Sove∣reign Lords, the 28th of February, 1664. by which he pro∣mised them to see these Patents faithfully executed. To which the Royal Madam, your Royal Highnesses Mother, did engage her self also, by her Letters dated January the 28th, 1679. Therefore, because your Royal Highness's Ancestors had several times solemnly engaged their Royal Word, principally in those Patents that were granted in the presence of the Ambassadors our Sovereigns had sent to that purpose, it would not be just to break so many formal and authentical Engagements, not only because these Priviledges and Patents, being granted in the sight of all Europe, and by the Mediation and Intercession of several Kings, Princes, and States, they are Pledges and per∣petual Monuments of the publick Faith; but also, because the Words and Promises of Sovereigns ought to be Sacred and Inviolable. If Engagements of this Nature might be annulled under pretence of a necessity, to which the Juncture of Affairs might reduce a Prince, or of some Conveniency and Advan∣tage to the Estate, then there would be nothing assured in the World, and nothing would be seen there, but War and Con∣fusion. This Maxim being once established amongst Sovereigns, the Protestant Princes might as lawfully destroy the Catholicks that are under their Dominions, as the Catholicks would have a right to extirpate their Protestant Subjects. There∣fore it is evident, that whether we examine the thing, as relating to the Glory and Reputation of the Prince; or if we consider it according to the Principles of true and just Politicks,
that has no other end than the Security of Sovereign Nations and States, we'll find that the words of Princes ought always to be Inviolable. It is for this Reason that we are perswaded, that no necessity of the present Junctures, nor any Interest will oblige so Just, so Gracious, and so wise a Prince, as your Royal Highness, to follow a new Engagement, that does not only destroy all your Predecessors have done in the Eyes of the whole Universe, but that exposes also your own State and Sub∣jects to the Flames, Butchery, Calamities, Devastation, and to the most cruel and inhumane Rage and Tyranny. It is agreed, that it is natural for a pious Prince to wish there was but one Religion in his Countrey; and that being persua∣ded that his own is the true one, it did belong to his Duty and Charity to do all he can to persuade his Subjects to it. But it ought to be allowed also, that Religion enters into our hearts by means of persuasion, and not by force; and that to convince one of the Divide Truth, there ought to be employed nothing but Instruction, Sweetness, and Exhortation, according to the pra∣ctice of our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles. That Kings and Princes, tho they are Masters of their Sub∣jects, yet they have no Empire over their Consciences, that de∣pend alone from God; insomuch that we have reason to hope, that your Royal Highness, far from forcing your Subjects to do things against their Consciences, you will be pleased, on the contrary, to restore them their Peace, which we implore for them, to confirm their Privileges, and to let them enjoy the liberty to give God that which is due to Him, whilst at the same time they pay your Royal Highness that Respect and Homage which they owe You, as your faithful Subjects. My Lords the Ministers of State, have told us also, That the Inhabitants of the Valleys had rendred themselves unworthy of their Prince's favour: But besides that all the world agrees, that before the publishing of the first Edict, they had given your Royal Highness no reason of Complaints; and that, conse∣quently, it is not their ill Conduct has drawn upon them so ri∣gorous an Order; and that if there were some amongst them that had committed a fault, (which we are yet ignorant of) we ought not to be surprized, if some miserable wretches, that are brought to despair, should do some imprudent actions. Besides all this, we say, Your Royal Highness is too gracious
and too good not to pardon faults of this nature; and too just and equitable to punish the Publick for an Excess that may have been committed by some particular persons. In fine, They would make us believe, That those Patents his Royal Highness Charles-Emanuel granted in the year 1655, and 1664. did not concern Religion, but give them leave only to inhabit some certain places in the Valleys; and that, consequently, our Sovereign Lords, and the other Prin∣ces that were Mediators in this Affair, had no Interest in it. But we beg your Royal Highness to consider, first, That Religion was then so much the Subject of the Question, that properly no other things did belong to it; for besides that the Order of the Sieur Gastaldo, that produced so many dismal Consequences, did destroy these Concessions that were granted to the Inhabitants of the Valleys about Religion, it was pretended at that time to force them to do things against their Conscience, because they were threatned with Death, and Confiscation of their Goods, that would not embrace the Catholick Religion within twenty days after they were ordered to do it. Secondly, All the Mediation and Intercession of the Pro∣testant Princes and States, were only grounded on things con∣cerning Religion and Conscience. They have only acted ac∣cording to this Principle, and the Ambassadors were for no other reason received and heard, but by reason of the Interest they took in a business concerning Religion: And it is for this reason, that your Royal Highness's Predecessors have given seve∣ral assurances, by Letters to their Excellencies the Evangelical Cantons, that the Patents granted upon their request should be punctually and faithfully executed. And, because to the prejudice of all that has been granted them, your Royal Highness has published an Edict that for∣bids them the Exercise of their Religion in all the Valleys, un∣der pain of Death; that commands the demolishing all the Churches, that does banish the Ministers and Schoolmasters, that commands that the Children shall be baptized, and brought up in the Romish Religion, and that deprives by these means those People of their Liberty of Conscience: Our Sovereign Lords, that are united to the Churches of the Valleys by the same Faith, are obliged to continue to intercede for them:
And it is this we do now in their name, in hopes that your Royal Highness will be couoed by some consideration of our Sovereign Lords, and by some Compassion for your Subjects. The Ambassadors having delivered their Memorial to the Marquess de St. Thomas, one of his Royal Highness's Ministers of State that had the direction of the Foreign Affairs, they receiv'd few days after an Answer to this purpose: That his Royal Highness was sorry that he was not in a capacity to grant what they desired in their own and in their Master's Name; That he had far stronger reasons to maintain this Edict, than they had given him to revoke it; and that he could not do as much as to miti∣gate it. That the great Wheels moved and carried along with them the little ones. That the Letter the Protestant Cantons had writ to him, had not been delivered to him but after the Edict was published. That having to his Neighbour a Prince equally Powerful, and jealous of his Authority, he was obliged to carry himself with a great deal of circumspection, and to act according to the jun∣cture of the times, in the same manner as in Switzerland they were sometimes forced, by the turning of the Af∣fairs, to take some resolutions contrary to the good inten∣tions they might have otherways. That the Marquess of St. Thomas had given good and profitable Advice to the two Deputies of the Valleys that were sent to him; and that, instead of giving him some marks of their submis∣sion and deference they were bound to, they had exercis'd all manner of Hostilities against his other Subjects, com∣mitted a thousand insolent things, and held some secret Conventicles. That they were provided with Ammuniti∣on and Provisions. That they had rendred themselves Ma∣sters of the Passages. That they had rerench'd themselves; and that they had done all this within the time of fifteen or twenty days, which had been allowed them to take their last Resolutions. That the Prince was too far engaged. That the Troops which he had raised with great Expen∣ces, were now on foot. That the Edict could not be re∣voked, without wounding his Royal Highness's Reputa∣tion. That he was forced to see it executed, for very
strong Reasons, on which he would let the Ambassadors make their reflections. That the Grants of 1655, and 1664. were a meer Toleration; and that the Valleys had no positive Right to exercise their Religion. That So∣vereigns do no injustice in not being willing to suffer more than one Religion in their Countrey; and that the Evan∣gelical Cantons themselves justified his Royal Highness's Conduct, by not enduring Roman Catholicks amongst them. Moreover, That the Concessions granted to those of the Valleys, had been juridically examin'd; and that it was agreed, that the Concessions and Favours a Prince grants to his Subjects, may be revoked according to his pleasure. That his Royal Highness did forbid the Inhabitants of the Valleys nothing but the Exercise of their Religion, but that he did no ways intend to force their Consciences. But the Ambassadors by their Reply told the Marquess of St. Thomas, That how strong soever his Royal High∣ness's Reasons were to consent to his Edict of January last, they could not prevail over those that did necessarily en∣gage him to observe the promises given before this Edict. That some considerations of State ought not to dispence a Prince from performing his Word, principally if he be entred into this Engagement by the Mediation of another Sovereign; and that whereas the Patents and Concessions granted to the Inhabitants of the Valleys had been acqui∣red by the Intercession of several Kings, Princes, and States, and, in particular, of their Excellencies the Prote∣stant Cantons, and confirmed by his Royal Highness, he could allege nothing that might discharge him from the Obligation of seeing them punctually observed; and the rather, because these Patents have been enrolled by the Parliament of Savoy; and that the only enrolling of the year 1620. had cost the Churches of the Valleys 6000 Crowns. That, in case some Changes happening in a State, or several Reflections that could be made according to the Rules of Politicks, were proper exceptions to elude the Observation of Treaties, there would be no assurance in a
Sovereign's Promise, Faith and Honesty would be altoge∣ther banished ou of their Commerce. And since no body could be assured of the execution of those things which they had agreed upon, there would be left no means to terminate Wars, and to conclude Alliances. That therefore the Concessions granted by the Prede∣cessors of his Royal Highness to the Inhabitants of the Valleys, did acquire them an uncontestable Right, which they could not lose but by an enormous Crime, and by a Rebellion against their lawful Sovereign; and that, far from being guilty of any want of their Duty, they could produce a Letter of his Royal Highness's, of the 2d of September 1684. which is an authentical and glorious proof of their Fidelity, and an inviolable adherency which they had always shewed to their Prince's Interest. That if in case, after the publication of the last Edict, some particular persons amongst them had taken up Arms, they had not done it to make use of them against their So∣vereign, but only to defend themselves against those that abusing his Authority, had undertaken to attacque and to insult them; and that in case there had been some disor∣der committed, those that were the Authors ought to be punished; but that it ought not to be imputed to the whole Body of the Churches of the Valleys, that were in no manner guilty of it. That it could not be said, that the Inhabitants of the Valleys had acquired no Right by the Grants of his Royal Highness's Predecessors; and that they were not only some Favours and simple Tolerations; it being notorious, that they are Treaties made between the Prince and his Sub∣jects; and that these Treaties are perpetual and irrevoca∣ble, and ought to be inviolably observed. That the Prince was equally obliged to execute the pro∣mises he had made to his Subjects, as those that regarded such persons that are in no manner under his Submission. That such Obligations were grounded upon publick Faith and Honesty, which ought to rule in all Treaties of So∣vereigns, without distinctions of those with which they did engage themselves; That if it was allowable to fail in what they had solemnly promised to their people, it would be
impossible to terminate Affairs that should arise between them, nor to appease these troubles that happen in their State; and that two Parties should make War on one ano∣ther, would never end their quarrels, but by the total Ruin of one of them. They added to this, That Sovereigns had reason to em∣ploy their utmost endeavours to unite their Subjects in the same Religion; but that to compass it, they ought not to violate Treaties which had been formerly made with them. That all that was allow'd them in such a case, was, to employ Instruction and Exhortation, and all the winning ways of sweetness, that are effectual to make truth enter into the Souls of their People, to chear their Understan∣dings, and to move them to embrace with good will the true Religion: But that which deserved a particular con∣sideration in this Encounter, is, That the Inhabitants of the Valleys did not hold by the Concessions of their Princes the liberty to exercise in publick their Religion, because it was established in this Country above eight Ages ago, and that they enjoy'd this Right long time before they were Subjects to his Royal Highness's Ancestors; insomuch that having never been of the Religion of their Prince, it could not be said that they had abandon'd it, nor oblige them to return to it. Besides that, his Royal Highness's Predecessors, who did grant leave to the Inhabitants of the Valleys to continue the exercise of their Religion, were very sensible that Unity of Religion was not necessary to the Advantage and Security of the State, for else they would have been very far from granting them so solemn Parents, or from con∣firming them from time to time, as they have done. And indeed they had so much the less to fear from a di∣versity of Religion which is found in Piemont, that those that were not of his Communion, were shut up in a little cor∣ner of the Country; that they were Men without Autho∣rity or Power, and that had no design to extend their Do∣ctrine to the other parts of his Countries. That, on the other hand, he had reason to fear, that his Example should be followed by the Protestant Princes; and that, in his imitation, they did not use their Catholick
Subjects in the same manner that he would use those of their Religion; and that, consequently, the Interest of those of his own Party should hinder him from making use of force to oblige the Inhabitants of the Valleys to renounce their Faith. That though it seemed his Royal Highness would not force them to embrace the Romish Religion, in that he was satisfied to deprive them of the publick Exercise of their Religion, leaving them as to the rest in a full Liberty of Conscience; yet it was visible, that they were not only obliged, under rigorous Penalties, to baptize their Children in the Catholick Churches, and to bring them up in the Romish Religion; which was as insupportable to them, as if they were forced themselves to make profession of it: But that, moreover, being hindred to pray to God accord∣ing to their Faith, their Consciences suffered as great tor∣ments, and lay almost under as cruel constraints, as if they were obliged by force to practice a Worship which is condemned by that Religion in which they have been educated. Besides, That forbidding the People the exercise of their Religion, is to throw them into a dissolution, and Athe∣ism it self; and consequently, to cause them a greater Evil than if they were forced to enter into the Romish Church. These Reasons were so strong, that the Ambassadors ho∣ped they would have some effect in his Royal Highness's mind; and that the Marquess of St. Thomas would be plea∣sed to make them known to him, and employ his Credit which he had with him, to obtain the revoking of an Edict which, without doubt, he had thought to be just, and which he would not have published, if he had been per∣swaded that it was contrary to what a just and equitable Sovereign owes to his faithful Subjects. But they did not content themselves to represent the good Right of the Piemontese Churches, and to support them by solid Reasons, for they employ'd several days in sollici∣ting all the Ministers of his Royal Highness, and all per∣sons they judged capable to contribute to the Success of their Embassy: But above all, they stuck close to the Mar∣quess
of St. Thomas, as one from whom depended all the Good and all the Evil they could expect in this Ren∣counter; and if we ought to judge of things by their ap∣pearance, the pains they took to dispose him to be favoura∣ble to them, were not altogether unsuccessful. For he did protest upon Oath, that they had exposed to his Royal Highness the Contents of the Reply, which he had been charged to present to him; that he had done all he could to make him sensible of the Reasons they made use of to obtain the revoking the Edict; but that the Juncture of Affairs was the cause that he could not perswade his Royal Highness to grant them their Requests. Neverthe∣less, added he, whereas the Prince's Troups are not yet upon March, the Inhabitants of the Vallies may make a shew as if they were willing to execute the Edict, because that such a Conduct is not contrary to the Maxims of your Religion, that are here∣in opposite to the Doctrine of the Catholick-Church, and by these means they will disarm the Prince, and they may find after∣wards some means to prevent the Evils they are threatned with. Our Doctrine (answered the Ambassadors) does in no ways approve the dissembling of our Faith, and oblige us to profess before man the Truth whereof our hearts are perswaded. But this is not our business at present; the Question is, to know whether His Royal Highness could lawfully revoke the Concessions granted to the Churches of the Vallies. Now, whereas they are Ingagements in which he is entred by the mediation of several Sovereigns, and amongst others by that of the Laudable Cantons our Sovereign Lords, it is evident that nothing is capable to break them. Yet to neglect nothing of what could contribute to the success of their Negotiation, the Ambassador made some new Efforts both by the Marquess of St. Thomas, and the other Ministers of His Royal Highness; but they  all, (as they had concerted their Answer) That the Edict was irre∣vocable by reason of the present Junctures, and some measures which his Royal Highness had taken. And because besides the Reasons drawn from the na∣ture of the Concessions granted to the Inhabitants of the
Vallies, and the interest the Cantons had to see them ob∣served, they represented the inconvenience that might fol∣low the execution of the Edict, and amongst others, those his Royal Highness had reason to fear from the entring of Forreign Troops into his Territories, of the loss of consi∣derable number of his Subjects, that had rendred several important services to their Prince, and that were in a con∣dition to spill all their Blood, to signalize their love which they bore him; of the diminishing of his Revenues, which would necessarily follow the destruction of those Wretches; to which they added the blame his Royal Highness would draw upon him by turning his Arms against his own Peo∣ple; the damage which a Civil War would cause to his o∣ther Subjects that were neighbours to the Vallies; with se∣veral other Considererations of this nature. The Mini∣sters of the Prince had no regard for them, and gave the Ambassadors to understand, That the Council of State ha∣ving examin'd them, did judge they were not strong enough to hinder the Prince from publishing his Edict against his Subjects of the Vallies, and that supposing the Edict should really cause some inconvenience to his Royal Highness, he would nevertheless not desist from it, for fear a charge of this nature should be a prejudice to his Authority; and that endeavouring to preserve some of his Subjects, he might run the hazard to lose them all. And though the Ministers seemed to be firm in their Sentiments, and shew∣ed they were not convinced at the Justice of the Demands the Ambassadors made, it was well known that they did maintain the Edict against their own Opinion, and one of them did confess frankly, that his Royal Highness's Coun∣cil had not enough examined the Concessions of the year 1655. and 1664, and that in case they had made some necessary Reflections on them, they would never have ad∣vised the Prince to revoke them; but he did assure them, that the Evil was now without remedy, and that the Soli∣citations of the Ambassador to oblige the Prince to change his Will, would be in vain; and one of the Ministers frank∣ly confessed, that the Prince was Master of this Affair, and that they executed at Turin those Orders that were given at Versailles.
This sincere Confession made the Ambassadors judge that all their Instances and Solicitations would produce no Ef∣fect; therefore seeing it would be impossible for them to obtain the revokation of the Edict, they thought fit accor∣ding to the chief head of their Instructions, to demand that which related to the Second Article of the Orders they had received from their Sovereigns, viz. To procure the Inhabitants of the Vallies the means to retreat some where else, and to dispose of their goods as they should think fit. But because their instruction was, to make about this Point no Proposals to the Court of Turin, but with the consent of the Inhabitants of the Vallies, they told the Marquess of St. Thomas, that whereas for several reasons they had entertained no correspondency with them, they were willing to make a journey into the Vallies, to inform themselves exactly of the disposition of this People, and to get means by the acquaintance of their intentions, to make some overtures of a new Negotiation. But they gave him to understand at the same time, they would by no means undertake this Voyage, but with his Royal Highness's full consent. The Marquess of St. Thomas having acquainted his Royal Highness with the design of the Ambassadors, sent them word that he approved their intentions, and that he would give orders to the Governour of Lucern to do them all that honour, and to shew them all the respect that is due to their Character. The Ambassadors being entred into the Vallies, acquain∣ted all the Comminalty with their Arrival, who dispacth'd immediately two Deputies, and two Ministers to them, to whom they represented: That they had employed all their utmost endeavours to make the Edict of the 31st day of January to be revoked, but that all their Reasons and Instances had been unsuccessful: That it had been gi∣ven them to understand that his Royal Highness was so much engaged with one of the most powerful Monarchs of the whole Universe: That it was impossible for him to break it: And that he was resolved to do all his endea∣vours to unite his Subjects in the same Religion as he had promised him.
Therefore there were no hopes left of obtaining the re∣voking the Orders that had been given against them. That their Sovereign Lords had commanded them that in case his Royal Highness should persist in his resolution to exe∣cute his Edict, they should demand his permission to give them leave to retreat out of his Territories, and to dispose of their goods; But that they had not been willing to en∣ter into any Negotiation upon this Article, without being first informed about their intentions about it. That there∣fore they should assemble to deliberate seriously about so important a business, and to acquaint them afterwards with what they desired of them in the present Junctures. The Deputies and Ministers having conference together about this Proposition, before they resolved upon any thing, they pray'd the Ambassadors to assist them with their wise Advice and prudent Council. But the Ambassa∣dors did refuse to advise them in so intricate a business, tel∣ling them they were better acquainted with their own For∣ces; with the scituation of the Places where they did in∣tend to retrench themselves; with their Ammunitition and Provisions, than those to whom they did address them∣selves to know their Sentiments, and that therefore they themselves could take the best measures about it. Nevertheless, not being able to defend themselves against their ardent desires, and thinking that they were obliged In charity to assist them in so slippery a passage, they at last granted them their desires, But to be able to advise them with a full cognisance of the causes, they did inform themselves exacty of the num∣ber of those that were able to bear Arms in the Valies, of the experience, vallour and conduct of their Officers, of their passages of, and avennues to their Countrey, of their Ammunition, and of the quality and goodness of their Arms: they asked them above all, if the Inhabitants of the Vallies were well united, and having been informed that they all were not above 2500 fighting men, that there were amongst them more than 12000 mouths, only fit to consume; that in some places Provisions begun already to fall short; that the Troops of France and Savoy had shut up all the Passages through which they might expect
Recruits: that they had no hopes of any Succours; that it was not very difficult either to starve them, or to reduce them by force of Arms; that they could not retreat to their Neighbours, as in the precedent War: That the French King, who did formerly protect them, was their greatest Enemy; that with few men they were to defend a large Countrey; that being separated one from another, they could not speedily assist those should stand in need of it; that in the very Vallies there were some Roman-Catho∣licks, that had an eye upon their Actions, and that gave advice to the Court of all their Transactions; and which was worst, that two great Princes were joined to their de∣struction. They told them, that they were much afraid, that considering their condition, they should not be able to resist so many Forces that were about to fall upon them, and that it would be more advantagious for them to think of a retreat out of their Countrey, provided leave could be got to sell their Goods, and to carry along with them what they were able to save out of the Shipwrack: that they were not positively informed of his Royal Highness's intention about it; but notwithstanding he had refused it to the Inhabitants of the Vallies, when they did ask it in the third Petition they presented to their Prince, after his last Edict, yet they were in hopes that it would be gran∣ted them in consideration of their Sovereign Lords. The Ministers and Deputies having heard this advice, de∣sire the Ambassadors to grant them leave to consult toge∣ther about it before they gave them their Answer; and ha∣ving left them, they did debate about it for three hours, without coming to any resolution, every Party maintain∣ing their Sentiments with very great heat. Some of them were of an Opinion, that they ought not to leave their Countrey, but on the contrary, they ought to hazard their Lives in maintaining the Privileges had been granted them in so authentical a manner; saying, It would be the greatest cowardize imaginable, to forfeit their Courage in a Cause wererein the honour of God and their Religion was concerned. They added, that the favour they were to expect, would be of no use to those that had nothing to defray the charges of their journey; that indeed they
might find some purchasers of their Estates scituate in the Plains, but that no body would be willing to buy those upon the Mountains; that there were no security for them du∣ring their departure; that there might happen some change in the Affairs of Europo that would render their con∣dition better than it was at present; and that perhaps France, that did not think they would be capable of the least resistance, finding they did defend themselves with much vigor, and that they did destroy a part of her Troops, might recal the remainder in order to preserve them for some more considerable exploits; that they were in expec∣tation both of money and men, that were to be sent to them by Captain Janavel; and that they could never want provisions for making sallies, from time to time they could oblige their Neighbours to furnish them with neces∣sary Provisions. Those that were of a contrary Opinion, answered all their Reasons in the following manner; That it is true, that both Reason and Piety do oblige us to hazard our Lives in the Defence of our Liberty, and the Exercise of our Religion, when we have some hopes to do it with success; but that when the danger is unavoidable, and our Ruin certain, it is Madness and Despair to precipitate our De∣struction; and that to take up Arms against those, whom it is impossible to overcome, what efforts soever we are able to make, is to be our own Enemies and Destroyers; that they had amongst them but few Persons capable of Defence; and that how resolute and brave soever they were, it was visible they could not very long Resist two Puissant Armies that were going to fall upon them from all sides; that it was to feed our selves up with vain Ima∣ginations, to think that the Juncture of Affairs might change; that we ought to take our measures according to the present Estate of things, and according to what will reasonably happen; and that good Sense and Wisdom did not permit us to ground important Resolutions upon mi∣raculous Events; that all Europe enjoyed a profound Peace; and that France being dreaded by all the States in the World, they had no reason to believe that she would be attacked by any Prince, nor that any thing could hap∣pen
to oblige her to recal her Troops which were sent into Piemont to employ them somewhere else, that they ought to make no account of the Succours they were in expectation of; and that suppose they who had promised, should send them; yet for every Man they should aug∣ment their number with, their Enemies would be able to oppose one intire Company; that they could not subsist very long for want of Provisions; and that suppose their Sallies should be successful (which was not probable) yet all the Provisions which by this means they would be able to get, would not be enough to subsist so many Persons. In fine, they let them see, that their Resistance being infal∣libly by their total Ruin, they would destroy at the same time those Ancient Churches, that had subsisted with so much Glory in the midst of so many Persecutions, and that it would be much better by a prudent Retreat to transport this Divine Light into some other Country, than to extinguish it by a hasty Conduct. Concering poor Families, they said. That they ought to oblige those that were provided, to contribute something towards the Charges of their Journey, and concerning the Goods which they could not sell, that so weak a Conside∣ration should be no hindrance to them; that their Lives ought to be dearer to them than their Lands, and that it was much better to lose part of our Estate, than to lose our selves. The Ministers and Deputies finding that they could not agree amongst themselves; and that besides, it was a busi∣ness could not be decided, but by their Commonalties; told the Ambassadors, that the Case in question being of the greatest Importance, they could take no Resolutions about it, without having first Assembled all their Commonalties to know their Advice, and promised them to bring them to Turin their last Resolutions, provided they could get for them Pass-ports. The Ambassadors being returned to Turin, gave the Mar∣quess of St. Thomas to understand, that the People of the Valleys would rather dye upon their Fathers Sepulchres, than to lose the Spiritual Liberty, and to comply with his Royal Highness's Edict; supplicating him with all Respect
due to him, to be pleased to mitigate it; that therefore, in case his Royal Highness would abate nothing in favour of his poor Subjects, things would in all appearance come to a dangerous Extremity; and that the Rigour which he would make use of on this occasion, would cause the Ruin of part of his People. To which the Ambassadors added, That whereas they were in hopes his Royal Highness would in Consideration of their Sovereigns, moderate the Orders he had given against his Subjects of the Valleys; they had taken the Liberty to make them some Proposals that would prevent all those Evils which the Execution of his Edict would be capable to produce; and that in fine, that they might be informed of the Intentions of this People about it, they desired him to grant Pass-ports for the De∣puties which they were willing to send them out of the Valleys. But the Marquess of St. Thomas gave them to understand, that his Royal Highness had very good Rea∣sons not to grant a Pass-port to the Deputies of the Inha∣bitants of the Valleys and that they might send the Se∣cretary of the Embassy, who might bring them their An∣swer. And accordingly the Secretary was sent into the Vallyes, with this following Letter. WE do not doubt but that your Deputies have faithfully acquainted you with our Sentiments, that are not grounded according to our Opinion, but upon the Publick Good of your Commonalties; and whereas, since our arrival to Tu∣rin, we have been informed there of several things that con∣firm, that our Apprehension for you is just; that our Advice are good and profitable; We hope that you will follow our Counsel we have given to your Deputies, being perswaded that God by his Divine Providence will find out for you a Retreat, where you will find all the necessary Supports of Life and Li∣berty, to serve him in his Fear, and according to your Consci∣ence; and since you know, that the present State of your Af∣fairs require a prompt Remedy, and that there is no moment lost to obtain it from your Prince; We found it very necessary to dispatch immediately our Secretary to acquaint you, that his Royal Highness did not find it convenient to grant Pass-ports for
your Deputies; therefore we desire you to send us presently your Resolution in writing, for fear if you should protract it, our Services would be no more respected at Court, and that you would render them unsuccessful to procure you a free and advantagious Retreat, for which (if you desire it) we will Address our selves to his Royal Highness with all possible Care and Affection, &c. The Commonalties having been Assembled, the Secreta∣ry delivered them the Ambassadors Letter; and after the reading of it, he told them, That their Affairs grew daily worse and worse; that the Ambassador of France did conti∣nually press his Royal Highness to execute this Edict; that his Royal Highness on his side was very impatient of it, either because his Reputation was engaged therein, or by reason of the great Expence he was forced to be at to en∣tertain the Troops that were in his Territories; that since it was impossible to obtain the revoking the Edict, they ought to think upon the most convenient means to prevail with his Royal Highness to grant a Moderation, which they were in a Condition to demand. In fine, he desired them to make Reflection on all the Considerations that had been alledged by the Ambassadors, and to give their Answer in writing. After this Representation, the Ministers and the other Deputies having consulted together, did agree to Answer the Ambassadors in the following manner. My Lords, WE have received the Letters which your Excellencies have done us the Honour to send us by the Secretary of your Embassy, and have been made sensible by him of the extraordi∣nary Care your Excellencies have taken to represent to his Royal Highness, our Sovereign, and his Ministers of State, all the Reasons that were most capable to maintain us in our Right, as also the Answers made upon the Reproaches of our Conduct, as well as in general of all the Valleys, as of some particular Persons, for which we cannot but render to your Excellencies, all the most humble Thanks which the most grateful Persons can be capable of. In the mean time we have made all possible reflections on the
Subject of your Letter; and on what side soever we turn our eyes, we find very great and almost insurmountable difficulties, which we have made bold to set down in the inclosed Memori∣al, which we humbly desire your Excellencies to take into your wise consideration. We are intirely perswaded that your Ex∣cellencies have no other end but to find some solid expedients for these poor Churches; They cannot but make their humble in∣stances, that in case it be impossible to revoke the published Edict, or to find some equitable moderation of it, you would have the Charity to follow these other expedients which you will judge most proper for the conservation of those that rely altogether upon your conduct, after having surveyed the difficulties which the said Memorial mentions. This is, my Lords, the general sentiments of those Churches, that will never desist to pray the Divine Majesty for the prosperity of the sacred Persons of your Excellencies, and the happy success of your holy Emploiment. These are the Prayers of, My Lords, Your most Humble, most Obedient, and most Obliged Servants, the Ministers and Deputies of the Evange∣lical Churches of Piemont. Siderac Bastie, Moderator. David Leger, Adjoint. Jean Chauvie, Secretary. Jean Laurens, Minister. Jean Jahier, Minister. G. Manelot, Minister. P. Leydet, Minister. P. Jahier, Minister. Giraud, Minister. Bertrand, Minister. Jean Manelot. Jacques Peyrot. Jean Baptiste Roberto. Etienne Gautier. Paul Beax. Jean Pierre Guantan. Daniel Alberan. Angrogne, March the 8/1. 1686.
In their Memorial they did remark in the first place, that only the rich Families would be able to provide for their Journies; that the others, how well intentioned soever they were, could not do it by reason of their poverty; and that staying behind, they would infallibly be forced to change their Religion. 2. That it might happen, that after the principal Persons were out of the Countrey, the others would be detained under some pretence or other, though it was promised them to grant them Liberty of doing what they pleased, and that after having revoked such Patents as were granted them by the mediation of several Sovereigns, they would make no bones to break their word with the Ambassadors. 3. That they would fail secretly to obstruct the selling of their goods, forbidding the Roman-Catholicks to buy them; and that after all, they would not be able to sell those that were scituate upon the Mountains, and in barren places, but only those that were in the Plains. 4. They desired the Ambassadors to demand the pay∣ment of those sums that were justly owing to them, and which they could not ask for, before their departure. As also it would please his Royal Highness to prevail with the French King to sell their Estates which they had in the Val∣lies of Peronse, and to sue for the payment of what was ow∣ing them by the Inhabitants of that Countrey. 5. They begged for a sufficient time to sell their goods, and to find out a retreat, and that in the mean while the Execution of the Edict should be suspended, and leave gi∣ven to the Ministers to continue their Exercise as be∣fore. In fine, They proposed to the Ambassadors the difficulty they would have to find Horses and Carriages enough to transport them, with their Families and Goods, out of the Countrey, there being at least in the Vallies 15000 Per∣sons. This Memorial being delivered to the Ambassadors, with a Letter of the Inhabitants of the Vallies, they went to make a visit to the Marquess of St. Thomas, and having told him that they were in hopes of perswading this Peo∣ple
to abandon their native Countrey, provided they could do it with safety and advantage, they desired him to know of his Royal Highness if he was willing to grant leave to his unhappy Subjects to retreat out of his Territories, and in case he found him inclined to it, he should desire him that he would be pleased to nominate some of his Privy Council, with whom they might agree, about the Arti∣ticles of their Retreat, and to remove all difficulties they should meet with. While the Ambassadors staid for his Royal Highness's an∣swer, they solicited with eagerness all his Ministers of State to engagage them to perswade him of what they desired should be granted on this occasion. But their cares did not meet with that success they were in expectation of; for His Royal Highness sent them word by the Count of Marsenas, That being informed by his Ministers, that they made their earnest instances to obtain a free retreat in favour of his Subjects of the Vallies, and to regulate with his Ministers the Article about it he had charged him to give them to understand; that this people having dared to take up Arms against him at the time that no Troops ap∣proached towards their Countrey, had committed a Thou∣sand insolent things, and had dared him with the confidence deserving the most rigorous Punishments; and that therefore they were unworthy of the Favour the Ambassadors desired for them; in so much the more, that before their arri∣val at Court, they had presented several Petitions with a profound Submission to obtain some Mitigation of the Edict, and that now they pretended with their Swords in their Hands to revoke it; but nevertheless, that they assured the Ambassadors, that in case the Rebels should show some Repentance of their past Conduct, and sub∣mit themselves with that Respect they did owe him, he was in a Condition to make them sensible of the Effects of his Clemency, and to show them how much Regard they had for the Recommendations of the Evangelical Cantons. The Ambassadors being surprised with this new Propo∣sition, answered the Count of Marsenas, That it seemed to them, that his Royal Highness could not reasonably de∣mand
of his Subjects, that Submission he had spoke of; that in case this People did declare, that they had fail'd in what they owed their Sovereign, they would render themselves Criminals by their own Confession; that therefore, they could not be obliged to make a Declaration of this nature; and that tho they should employ themselves to perswade them to it, it would be impossible to obtain it, for fear they should blacken themselves with a Crime they thought themselves innocent of, and to give way to a Confiscation of their Goods, that they might render themselves su∣spected by them, in making them such a Proposition; and that such an Overture would produce no other Effect, but to protract the time of their Negotiation, and indeed to render it fruitless. But whereas the Count of Mersenas showed, That his Royal Highness absolutely expected, that the Submission of the Inhabitants of the Valleys should precede the Favour he would do them; the Ambassadors judged, that they ought to apply themselves to the Marquess of St. Thomas to ap∣pease his Royal Highness's mind; therefore having waited on him, they desired him to represent to his Royal High∣ness, that the endeavouring to oblige his Subjects to confess themselves guilty of Rebellion, He desired a thing of them they could not grant; that a Declaration of this nature would cover them with Eternal Infamy; that indeed, with a good Conscience they could not confess a Crime they were innocent of; and that at last, his Royal High∣ness seemed to make but little Reflections upon the In∣stances and Intercession of their Sovereigns; desiring, that the Favours he was asked for, should be the Condition of a Submission, to which his Subjects could not conform them∣selves. But the Marquess of St. Thomas gave them the same Answer they received from the Count of Mersenas, That the Prince was inexorable upon this Article, and that it was impossible to prevail in the least, with his mind, what Reason soever they could alledg; and that therefore it was in vain to endeavour to make time change his Reso∣lution.
The Answer of the Marquess of St. Thomas troubled very much the Ambassadors, who were afraid that this was a stumbling block prepar'd for the Inhabitant of the Valleys; and that there was a Design laid to condemn them upon their own Confession of their Rebellion. Ne∣vertheless they thought that this difficulty ought not to oblige them to break the Treaty which they had entred upon; they consider'd that the Prince might publish in the World, That his Subjects had scorned to accept of his Favours. Besides, they considered, that the ill success of this Negotiation might be imputed to them; but the greatest reason that confirmed them in this design, was, that they found that it would be more advantagious to the Inhabitants of the Valleys to shew this compliance with their Soveraign's Will, than to expose themselves to all the Miseries their Disobedience might draw upon them; it was for this reason that they resolved to consent to the Accommodation was offered them, it being a lesser Evil, than to see the Churches of the Valleys desolate; and the rather, that the Marquess of St. Thomas did assure them, That his Royal Highness, to mark the Esteem he had for them, would grant upon their Intercession, all that he could reasonably be asked for, without wound∣ing his Reputation. But before they did propose to the inhabitants of the Valleys what their Prince expected from them, the Am∣bassadors did desire not only to be informed of the Na∣ture of the Submission which they would oblige them to, but also to regulate the Form and the Terms of it, with the Ministers of his Royal Highness. Therefore having made on both sides several Projects of the Petition which his Royal Highness was to be pre∣sented with, by his Subjects of the Valleys, it was at last agreed that it should contain a very humble Supplication, by which they were to desire the Prince to pardon their Offences, and to be perswaded, that if they had failed in their Respect which they owed him, yet that they were not come short of that Fidelity which could be expected from dutiful Subjects.
After which the Ambassadours having got Passports for five or six of the Inhabitants of the Vallies, they di∣spatch'd to them the Secretary of the Embassy, with this following Letter: GENTLEMEN, ACcording to your Intention which you acquainted us with in your Letter of the 28th of March, and the inclosed Memorial, we have desired of his Royal Highness, That he would be pleased to grant you leave to retreat out of his Territo∣ries, and to dispose of all your Goods; and to that purpose to give us some Commissioners with Power to regulate the manner of your Retreat: Whereof his Royal Highness has given us to understand by one of his Ministers, That being your Soveraign, he could not, without making a breach into his Honour and Authority, enter into a Treaty with you; but that it was requisite you should send him five or six Persons, with full Power to make him that Submission which you owe him; and to ask by a Petition, what Favour you desire should be granted to you; and that afterwards he will let you see the Considerations he has for our Soveraignty. It is true, that we expected a more favourable Answer than this; but nevertheless, to take away all pretences his Royal Righness could take hold on, to make such Deliberati∣ons that might be fatal to you, we think you will do well to send your Deputies hither as soon as is possible, promising you, that we will assist them with our Counsels in the delivering their Petition. Our Secretary is to deliver you this Letter, with the inclosed Passports, which will acquaint you more at length with the particulars of our Negotiation, and with the disposition of the Court in your regard, &c. The Secretary of the Embassy having delivered this Letter to the Deputies of the Valleys which he had as∣sembled, and given them an exact Account of all the Negotiation of the Ambassadors, and of the effect it had produced; made them a long Speech, to exhort them to a compliance with their Prince's Will, and desire
them to dispatch him with all speed, assuring them that in consideration of the Ambassadors, they would obtain much more favours then they did expect. The most sensible and most reasonable Persons of this Assembly, and above all the Ministers, imployed their utmost endeavours to oblige the others to submit them∣selves to the Law which they would impose upon them; because in that extremity which they were reduced unto, they must either perish with their miserable Families, or do what was desired of them. But all those Reasons which they could alledge, were not capable to perswade them; insomuch, that after ha∣ving debated the Question, and consulted together about it almost a whole day, they did dissolve themselves with∣out being able to agree in the same Opinion. Those of the Valleys of St. Martyn, of Pezonse, of St. Bartholemew, of Pazustin, of Rocheplate, of Villard, and of Rozas, and some of La Tour were of Opinion to make those Submis∣sions which were desired of them; and having nominated some to this purpose, with Order to part for Turin, they charged them with Procurations in good form, by which they promised to execute all the Ambassador should find convenient in the Negotiation which they were entred upon for the Interest of the Churches of the Valleys. But those of Bobys, of St. John, and some of Angrogne, flat∣tering themselves with hopes of imaginary Succours, did resolve to defend the Exercise of their Religion with their Arms in their Hands, and sent to the Ambas∣sadours their Deputy named Blanchy, who delivered them this following Letter:
Most High, Mighty, and Soveraign Lords, IN follow of the Letter, your Excellencies have been pleased to write to those Valleys some few days ago, our Churches of St. Jean, Angrogne, and Boby, throw themselves at your Feet, to assure you of their humble Respect, and of their due acknowledgments of the Favours your Excellencies endeavours to obtain for them, from his Royal Highness, our Soveraign, concerning the Continuation of the Exercise of our Religion in these places. And concerning the Proposals that are now on foot, having been uncapable of perswading our People to the same Sentiments, which the other Churches have, in order to comply with your Excellencies Demands, we have charg'd our Deputy, Mr. Daniel Blanchis, Syndicus of the Communalty of St. Jean, to acquaint you by word of mouth, of our true Sentiments. And we humbly beseech you, that you would be pleased to continue the effects of your inexprimable and Fatherly Charity, and principally in regard of your powerful Intercessions by his Royal Highness, about the above-mentioned Subject: Beseeching the Lord to bless your Negotiation, and to be your abundant Rewarder of all the Cares, Pains, and Troubles your Excellencies have the goodness to take for our poor Flocks, in the Name of which we make it always our Glory to carry with all Respect and Submission imaginable, the Title of your Excellencies most humble, most obedient, and much obliged Servants, the Deputies of the following Churches, Deputies of the Church of St. Jean. Michael Purise Jean Muston Jean Putta, for Angrogne. Of the Church of Boby. Marque de Daniel Negrin N. Syndicus Franc. Dane, Counsellor Stephen Pertin, Deputy Angrogne April the 4th, 1686.
The Sieur De la Bastie, Minister at St. Jean, touch'd by the Divisions of these poor Churches, writ to the Am∣bassadours in these following Terms: My Lords, I Take the liberty to render your Excellencies my most hum∣ble Respects, by the Deputies that go to Turin, to make their Submission to his Royal Highness, and to present him such a Petition as your Excellencies will think fit. I and my Bre∣thren are in the greatest consternation and affliction in the world to see our People so much divided about a Retreat, apprehend∣ing their Divisions will spoil your Excellencies charitable Nego∣tiation with his Royal Highness in our behalf, and render their Cares and Troubles unsuccessful. We have employed our ut∣most endeavours to make them sensible, that considering the pre∣sent Junctures of Affairs, it was the best Resolution they could take, but we have not been happy enough to have like success with all. If we were not satisfied of your Excellencies incom∣perable Charity we should have reason to fear that this indiscreet Conduct would much change their goodness and zeal for our Interest. We most humbly beseech your Excellencies to make use on this occasion of your Goodness and Clemency, and to con∣tinue in your infatigable Cares for these poor Churches. I most humbly beg your Excellencies Pardon for my boldness, and beseech you to give me leave to render you my most humble Respects, and to assure you, that I am with all the Respect and Submis∣sion imaginable, My Lords, Your Excellencies most humble, most obedient, and most obliged Servant, Sidrac Bastie, Minister. Angrogne, April 4. 1686. This diversity of Opinion made the Ambassadours a∣fraid, that the Enemies of their Religion taking hold of the division of the Inhabitants of the Valleys might prevail with his Royal Highness to confound the Innocent with the Guilty, and to refuse all a Retreat out of their Coun∣try.
Therefore they sent back into the Valleys the Deputy of Boby, with a Letter to those that were resolved to take up Arms; and they did conjure him to employ his utmost endeavours to make them agree with the other Churches. The Letter was writ in this following man∣ner: GENTLEMEN, IT is true that ones native Soil has great charms, and that most Men have a natural desire to live and to die there: Yet the Children of God ought not to set their hearts thereupon, because they are Foreigners upon Earth, and Heaven is their true na∣tive Country; therefore you will be guilty of mistrust to God's providence, if you fancy you cannot find any other Country where you may live conveniently, and adore your heavenly Father. In what part of the World soever we ourselves be transported, we ought to think ourselves happy, provided we have there freedom to serve God according to our consciences: You ought to propose to yourselves the examples of the Patri∣archs, who have drawn upon them God's blessing by trusting to his promises, and by abandoning their houses and fields, to go to inhabite some remote Country. A confidence of this nature, cannot but be very acceptable to the Lord; and it is without doubt more agreeable with the Spirit of the Gospel, than to take up Arms against your Soveraign; it is to Sufferings Christi∣ans are call'd too, and not to a Resistance: And we do not find that either the Apostles or the Primitive Church, made use of any other Weapons against their Persecutors, but Prayers and Patience. These are the Considerations that have obliged our Soveraign Lords the Evangelical Cantons, to give us or∣der of procuring for you from his Royal Highness, your lawful Prince, a free Retreat, with permission to dispose of your Goods, in case he would no longer grant you the Exercise of your Re∣ligion; and tho' you look upon this Retreat as an insupport∣able Unhappiness, yet they do nevertheless consider it as a Fa∣vour, reflecting according to their great wisdom, upon the mi∣serable condition you are reduced to; and indeed they did think
it would be very hard to obtain it from his Royal Highness, and that in case he did grant it upon their request, you ought not only to accept it with submission, but to shew your great acknowledgement for it: Whereafter you will not doubt that we have been surprized to hear that you make difficulty to re∣solve yourselves to it, and that you have a design to resist two powerful Princes that are resolved to extirpate you, in case you make the least opposition; for by this behaviour you do not one∣ly act against your Duty, against Christian Prudence, and a∣gainst your true Interest, but you give us also just reasons to complain of you, that having engaged us into a Negotiation with your Prince, you will not take hold of those advant∣ages we are in a condition to procure you: Open therefore your eyes, and consider the misfortunes you draw upon yourselves, and the fatal consequences of your design, that must needs turn to the entire destruction of your Churches and Families. Consider, that what is offer'd you, is so advantageous, consi∣dering the present state of your Affairs, that several persons of the greatest Quality, would have accepted of it as the greatest Happiness, in the late Persecutions of France, and that they would have been exceedingly joyful to get stark na∣ked out of their Country without hindrance: If you do make Reflections upon all these things, we are in hopes that the ex∣ample of those that are of a better opinion, will touch and per∣swade you to follow the same Conduct; but if you refuse to i∣mitate it, and if you persist in your obstinacy, you will be guil∣ty before God, not only of having thrown away your lives, which you might have saved, and of having exposed your Wives and your Children to the Massacre, but also of having caused the ruine of these noble Remains of the Vaudois Churches, which you might have transported into some other Country. And do not flatter yourselves of being capable to prevent these Evils by the means of some Succours that some per∣sons have promised you, for we do assure you, that those that entertain you with these vain imaginations do abuse you, and that you cannot be assisted from any side: You ought to consi∣der, that you will be left by all Men, and by some of the ve∣ry Inhabitants of your Country, and that therefore you will
soon be destroyed, either by the Sword or by Famine, and that those that may escape the fury of their Enemies, will finish their Lives either by being burnt at the Stake, upon the Rack, or the Gallows: We conjure you, that you would be prevailed with by so powerful considerations, and to agree with the sen∣timents of the Commonalty, that are resolved to desire of their Prince a permission to retreat out of his Territories, being per∣swaded that the Divine Providence will conduct you to some places where you will perhaps find more advantageous establish∣ments then those you leave behind you; and where those that are poor will not be in want of charitable persons that will provide them with all necessaries. In expectation that God will inspire you with good resolutions, and that you will give to your Deputy such a Procuration as those of the other Com∣monalties have given, we recommend you to his Mercy and his Divine Protection, resting, Gentlemen, your very Affectionate to render you Service. Turin, 5th of April. Expecting the return of this Deputy, the Ambassa∣dors thought fit to acquaint the Marquess of St. Thomas with the disposition of the Inhabitants of the Vallies, and to endeavour to prevent the evils their Division might draw upon them, as well from his Royal High∣ness, as some of their Enemies in his Privy Counsel. Then they went to pay this Minister a Visit, and told him, that the Deputies were arrived, that five of them were ready to make in the name of their Commonalties the Submission his Royal Highness desired of them, but that some others, who not knowing what they were to expect from the goodness of his Royal Highness, were not yet resolved to do it; that in the mean time they were admonished by Letter to follow the sentiments of these that had a desire to submit themselves to his Roy∣al Highness; and that in a short time their Resolutions would be known. He was afterwards desired to intercede in favour of this poor People with his Royal Highness, and to be∣seech
him to have some indulgence for them; That whereas they were prepossessed with some distrust, he would be pleased to clear their Doubts, so that their Sub∣mission might be made by an unanimous accord, to the satisfaction of the Prince and his Subjects. The Marquess of St. Thomas seemed to be surprized with the obstinacy of the People of the Valleys; never∣theless, he gave some hopes that he would imploy him∣self by his Royal Highness to prevent that their delay, to give him the satisfaction he expected, should not be prejudicial to them, and that at last the Prince did not resolve to follow the Counsel of those that were continu∣ally perswading him to rigour. In the mean time whereas the Court seemed to be im∣patient to see the end of this Affair, the Ambassadours writ a Letter to the Marquess of St. Thomas, to give him to understand that they had made a project of a Pe∣tition of the Inhabitants of the Valleys, which they were ready to deliver, if it could be signed by the Deputies; but whereas one of them was absent, they desired him to put off all things till his return. The day after this Letter had been delivered to the Marquess of St. Thomas, the Ambassadours went to him to know the effect which it had produced; and where∣as he was very eager to oblige the five Deputies, who were then at Turin, to sign the Petition which he had found in a good form; it was declared to him, that the Subscription could not be made in the absence of him that was sent into the Valleys; that being joyned by interest, they could not separate themselves one from another, and that in fine, it was agreed, that the Petiti∣on should be signed by all the Deputies at one time. But whereas the Marquess of St. Thomas had some se∣cret Orders to hasten a Subscription of those Deputies that were then at Court; he seemed not to be satisfied with the reasons that were given him for the refusing what he desired; and the next day after he sent one of his Servants to desire the Ambassadours to prevail with
the Deputies to give him that satisfaction he desired. But the Ambassadours writ him a Letter, by which they gave him to understand, that it was not just to separate in the Subscription those that were ingaged in the same Cause, that in case some did sign without the o∣thers, such proceedings could not but have troublesome consequences; and that therefore they did conjure him to expect one day longer the return of the sixth Depu∣ty, and to prevaile with his Royal Highness to grant this little delay upon their request. The Marquess having received this Letter, told the Secretary of the Ambassy, that was the Deliverer of it, That his Royal Highness was extreamly tired with these delays, and that he was much afraid he should take some resolutions that would carry things to a fatal extremity; and that therefore it was necessary to oblige the Depu∣ties to sign immediately their Petition, and to carry it to him in order to be presented to his Royal Highness. The Deputies fearing to offend so powerful a Mini∣ster, in case they refused to appear before him, did re∣solve to go to his House, but what instance soever he could make to perswade them to sign the Petition; and for all he did assure them, that it should be done with∣out prejudice to those of Boby, yet they persisted in their first design, excusing themselves by reason of being in∣gaged to expect a return of the Deputy that was gone into the Valleys, by the incertitude of the success of his Negotiation, by the shortness of time for his return, and in fine, by the danger such a proceeding might draw upon them. The dispositions of these Deputies, and of those of the Inhabitants of the Valleys, that were resolved to take up Arms, gave great disturbance to his Royal Highness, and that which augmented his displeasure was the news he received that they had killed two French Men belong∣ing to the Cittadel of Pignerol. The Ambassador of France that was much offended with his Royal Highness's delay to execute his Edict, did
not fail to take hold on this accident, in order to dispose the Prince to revenge himself of this crime, that was committed by his Subjects in despite of his Authority, and to perswade him to keep no longer any measures with those people whom he was pleas'd to stile Re∣bels. In the mean while that their Enemies were busie to their destruction, their Deputies were at Turine in a mi∣serable condition, and not knowing what resolution to take, they desired the Ambassadors advice how they should behave themselves in this great extremity. The Ambassadors being in hopes that the Deputy who was gone to Boby would return in a short time, and that they might acquaint them with things capable to appease his Royal Highness's mind, thought fit to wait for his arrival before they should take any resoluti∣ons. But whereas the Deputy was waited for a long time, that his Royal Highness was continually sollicited by the Ambassadour of France, to put a conclusion to this business, that besides the Troops that were in his Terri∣tories did put him to very great charges, and the Prince was informed that the Ambassadors had dispatched an Express into Switzerland that might bring them some new Instructions; all these reasons did oblige him to end this Affair, insomuch, that how pressing and urgent soever the instances of the Ambassadors were, in favour of the Inhabitants of the Valleys, to perswade the Prince still to put off for a little while, he published the 9th of June this following Edict: THe Divine Providence establishing Soveraigns above the People, has given to the first the distribution of favours and punishments, that the hopes of the one might make the Good mindful of their duty, and that the sence of the other might prevent the Bad to abandon themselves to evil: This latter ought to fall from Our avenging-hands upon our Sub∣jects of the Valleys of Lucerne, making profession of the pre∣tended
Reformed Religion, because it is notorious that they have not only gain-said with great obstinacy, our Order of the 31st of January last, but that they have also hardned them∣selves in their Crime, and are fallen into an inormous and con∣sumated Rebellion; Nevertheless our natural clemency surpas∣sing their crime, and not contenting ourselves with our Father∣ly kindness, with which we have so long time unsuccessfully waited for their repentance, we have still been willing to leave to their will (which has ever followed bad Counsels) the choice of a good or miserable Condition, and to open them at the last tryal, the gates of our favour, that so they may be able to take hold of it in the following manner, and that in case they should not answer it by a ready obedience, they might not be able to impute but to their own rashness, their deserved punishments, which we shall inflict upon them without delay. Therefore confirming in the first place our Order of the 31st of January last, as far as it shall not be found contra∣ry to this, we have by vertue of this present Edict, with our certain knowledge, full power and absolute authority, and with advice of our Privy-Councel, commanded all our Subjects of the Valleys of Lucerne, making profession of the pretended Re∣formed Religion, to lay down their Arms, and to retire into their Houses within the term hereafter prescribed. We command them also to make no more any Associations, nor to hold any Conventicles, that so according to our intention the Judges of the place may have a free access, and that the Missionaries and other Religious Persons may return to the Churches which they have been forced to leave, and that the Catholicks, and those which have imbraced the Catholick Re∣ligion, may return to their Houses which they have abandon∣ed. And whereas it is not reasonable that the Religious Missiona∣ries, the Catholicks, and those which have imbraced the Catho∣lick Religion, should be at a loss by occasion of several dam∣ages which they have received from those of the pretended Re∣formed Religion, we desire, command, and ordain, that all the necessary sums to endemnifie them be generally and withou distinction be reprized upon the Goods of those of the pretended
Reformed Religion, so as it shall be summary justified before the Chevalier Monzonx, Intendant of Justice of the Valleys, declaring, nevertheless, that in case those of the said Religion prove that the damages have been caused by some particular persons, they may have their Recourse and Warrant against them. And to shew our said Subjects how great our clemency is towards them, we grant leave to those that shall think of a retreat out of our Territories, to do it within the term, and upon the conditions hereafter prescribed: But because their ill will has shewed itself but too much by their past conduct, and that several could hide their evil designs under a false preten∣sion of obedience, we reserve for ourselves, besides those who shall retreat out of our Territories upon their own motion, to ordain it also to such we shall think fit, and as we shall find it most expedient to secure the peace of those that shall stay be∣hind, whence we do intend to prescribe the Rules which they shall observe for the future. And for an augmentation of our favours, we grant leave as well to those that shall voluntarily retreat, as to those who retreat by our orders, to take along with them their Goods and Effects at their pleasure, and to sell those they shall leave behind them, provided they do it in such a manner as is hereafter pre∣scribed. The same is to be understood concerning Strangers, and those that are born from Strangers, who are to conform them∣selves to all but the last Article of our Order of the 31st of January last, here above mentioned. The said selling of Goods shall be made to Catholicks, or to persons that have embraced the Catholick Religion; but be∣cause there may perhaps not be found Buyers within the term here-before prescribed, and that we are not willing hat the Zealots of that Religion, who shall retreat out of our Terri∣tories, should be deprived of the benefits of our present concessi∣on, they may agree about, or six persons into whose hands they shall put their Procurations, who shall have leave to stay during three months in Lucerne, with full liberty to treat and nego∣tiate with whom they think fit to sell the Goods of those who
shall have retreated, and who shall have leave to prescribe in their Procurations the Conditions of their selling their Goods for their better security, to receive the Price thereof in what place soever they desire it should be sent them, without fraud and de∣ceit, of the constituted Procurators, which the Chevalier and Intendant Monzonx shall take care of. Those that shall be willing to retreat, shall be obliged to meet at the Day and Place hereafter specified to be ready to depart without Fire-Arms by the way, that shall be named them, either through Savoy, or the Val d'Aste; to this purpose, we will pro∣vide them with Passports, that they may receive no ill usage or hinderance in our Territories; but that on the contrary, they may find all possible assistance; and because that being in great number they may be exposed to some Inconveniences upon the way, and in the Places through which they are to go overcharged, they shall divide themselves into three Bodies as is herein before-mentioned: The first shall be composed of those of the Valleys of Lucerne, shall meet at Tour this Month of April; the Se∣cond, composed of those of the Valleys of Angrogne, St. Bar∣tholemew, Rocheplatte, and Parustine, shall meet at St. Second, and shall part the day following, viz. the Twenty se∣cond of this Month; the Third and Last made up by those of the Valleys of St. Martyn and Peronse, shall meet at Mica∣dole, and part from thence the Third Day, viz. the Twenty third of this Month. The term wherein our said Subjects of the pretended Reform∣ed Religion, that inhabit the Valleys of Lucerne, shall be obli∣ged to lay down their Arms, in the manner prescribed in the First Article of this present Order, That within Eight Days after the Publication hereof in Lucerne, during which they ought to have obeyed the Contents of the said Order, to enjoy the fruits of our Clemency, by which as well as our Fatherly Affection towards our said Subjects, we leave to its nature and course, notwithstanding the enormity of their Crimes. And by means of a punctual observation of all herein contained, we grant our Favour, Pardon, Remission, Abolition, and a full Amnesty to our said Subjects of all their Excesses, Misdemeanors, Crimes, and other things which they may have committed since the Pub∣lication
of our Order of the Thirty First of January last, as well in general as particular, so that they may not be called to an Account, for under what pretence whatsoever, prohibiting all Judges, Fiscals, and others whom it belongs to, to enquire into it. But because in case they should render themselves un∣worthy of such Favours, by not observing all that is here above-mentioned, within the prescribed term, it would be too perni∣cious an Example to delay any longer their deserved Punish∣ments, after having been prodigal to them of our Favours, and after having waited so long time for their Repentance, we in∣tend to make use of those means which God has put into our hands to bring the Obstinate to their Duty, and to make them feel the Punishments of their great presumption, commanding our Senate, &c. Given at Turin, the 9th of April, 1686. Inrolled the 10th. Assoon as the Edict was Printed, the Mayor of St. Tho∣mas brought a Copy of it to the Ambassador's, whom he would make believe, that it was only on their account, that his Royal Highness expressed so much kindness to∣wards his Subjects, and that notwithstanding the Am∣bassadour of France was very angry, that there was so much condescension made in favour of the Valleys; that nevertheless he was willing to see the Edict faithfully exe∣cuted. The Ambassadors having read it immediately in the Marquess's presence, made some Reflections upon it, and principally were not satisfied with the shortness of time that was granted to those unhappy People to retreat out of his Royal Highness's Territories, and to dispose of their Goods, with the little number of Procurators that were charged to sell the Goods of so great a number of Persons, with the time in which the Goods were to be sold; and with some other Difficulties which they met with in the Exemption of this Edict, and which they resolved to pro∣pose to his Royal Highness, after having seriously consi∣dered them. As soon as the Ambassador had left the Marquess, they sent for the Deputies of the Valleys, that were ready to
make the Submission, and obliged them to return home, desiring them to acquaint their Commonalties with all that had passed; as also with the Contents of the Edict, and to assure them, That unless they did submit, it would be impossible to obtain the least mitigation in the execution of those things therein contained. In the mean time the sixth Deputy, who had been so long time expected returned out of the Valleys, and in∣formed the Ambassadors, That the Commonalties that had made a design to defend themselves, did persist in the same Resolution; and that all he did alledge to make them enter into a better Opinion, had no effect upon their minds; as it was evident by the Letters which were sent them out of the Valleys in the following manner: My Lords, WE did not fail immediately after the arrival of our Deputy, to make some Copies of the Letter which your Excellencies have been pleased to write to our Churches, and they have been read every where after Sermon, there can no∣thing be said that is either more true, or more moving and comforting; and your Excellencies may be fully perswaded, that there is no body but that finds, and does acknowledge that it is the effect of your holy and Christian Charity towards our Churches; yet notwithstanding it has been till now absolutely impossible to dispose our People to a Retreat out of this Country; some out of fear it might cause the loss of several Persons that shall venture to stay behind; others by a principle of Conscience, and others out of several other Considerations, which our Depu∣ty will tell your Excellencies by word of mouth. We are in the greatest consternation about it, and dare not almost appear be∣fore your Excellencies with so much irresolution: Our People ad∣here the more to their Opinion, because they have been acquaint∣ed, that several other Churches, at least a great part of those that composed them, did not know that the business was about such a Retreat, when they gave their Procuration to their Depu∣ties, or if they had understood them, they had changed their minds, which give us just reason to fear, that in case your Excellencies should be farther engaged for this People, you would
be extreamly displeased with their refusal to Retreat; and it was by reason of this fear we had here the last Sunday, when we desired your Excellencies to give us leave to inform our selves of the minds of our People about this Proposition, fore-seeing at the same time that it would be very hard to perswade them to  they were for the most part resolved to be their Father's Chil∣dren, and hope that the Lord will be their Deliverer, that would make use of feeble things to confound the strong, and that Heaven would find out some hinderance to those Designs which are formed against us. We do not question but this extreamly afflicts your Excellencies; and we are touched with it to our very Souls: but it is not in our power to change their Hearts, and to dispose of other Mens Will; nevertheless we conjure your Excellencies in all possible humility, that you would not be pleas'd to abate your kindness to these Churches, neither to deprive us of your powerful and comfortable support, which, under God, has made us subsist till now. For God's sake do always pity us, what way soever our Affairs shall go, we lay our Souls before God, to supplicate him with all ardency, that he would be pleased to direct all things to the Glory of his Holy Name, and the Pre∣servation of our People; and that he would grant by his Divine Providence, by the means of your Excellencies, we may still get the prolongation of some days, that we may once more inform our selves of the Sentiments of our People by the collecting every Man's Voice in particular, if it be possible, to know their last Resolutions; so that we may not be blamed, neither of one side or another. The Lord be the abundant Rewarder of your Ex∣cellencies Charities, and we are with all manner of Respect, My Lords, Your Excellencies most humble, most obedient, and most obliged Servants, The Deputies of Boby, St. John, and Angrogne. Deputies of Boby, John Aghitto, Daniel Graffe, Estiennor Danno, Deputies of St. John. Michael Parisa, John Muschon, Depu∣ties of Angrogne. John Duffa, Piezze Duffa, Lewis Odin, Angrogne, Apr. 9. 1686.
Most High, Mighty, and Soveraign Lords, WE throw our selves in all humility to your Excellenties Feet, to shew you our most sensible and inexpressible displeasure that the great part of our People are not capable to consider with a Christian prudence the Favour your Excellencies endeavour to procure them, by a free Retreat out of this Country, with Body and Goods, and to embrace it with a holy Joy, as a Present from Heaven, and a Grace which they have sighed for at other times; this makes our Hearts bleed, and so much the more, that your Excellencies Letter which you have been plea∣sed to write to them, should have immediately disposed them to an Affair of this nature; yet we dare still most humbly beseech your Excellencies to have the goodness to pass a love on all these Considerations, as knowing very well that one has to do with the Rabble, it is very hard to compass them, and to make them all sensible of the reason, and the state of Things, but by the length of time, and principally when it is aboue abandoning there so old, and so dear preserved native Soyl: there are, nevertheless, a great many, and the most principal of them, that resign themselves intirely to your Excellencies Counsel, Charity, and Prudence, and that will never oppose what you will find most expedient for the Glory of God, and their wel∣fare and preservation. The Ministers also are all of the same Opinion, and we are all willing punctually to ob∣serve the Counsel your Excellencies will be pleased to give us. And we most humbly beseech you to pitty us and our Families, to draw us out of a Misfortune which in all appearance is una∣voidable; this is the Favour we hope from your Excellencies, and pray the Lord to bless your Lordships with all manner of prosperity; and we are with all possible respect and submission, most High, Mighty, and Soveraign Lord, Your Excellencies most humble, and most obedient Servants, Sidrac Bastie, Guillaume Mallanot. Angrogne, Apr. 9. 1686. I. We have been informed for certain, by a good hand, that his Royal Highness will not grant us a Retreat with our Goods,
but that he pretends to detain them for the Charges he has been at already. II. That he absolutely pretends that the Ministers and For∣reigners should be delivered into his hands. III. That we should lay down our Arms, and that we should deliver them up to the Governour. IV. That the Troops are to enter into the Valleys to demolish the Churches, and to obstruct all Divine Exercise. V. In fine, we have been informed, that the Council would by no means suffer that the French Troops should march against us. The Ambassadors had no sooner read these Letters, but they sent back the Deputy with another Letter, of which were made two Copies, one of them was directed to those of St. Boby, and St. John, and the other to those of Angrogne, and La Tour. In this Letter there was remonstrated to them the va∣nity and little solidness of their Reasons they made use of not to accept the Favours was offer'd them. It was agreed with them, That the Laws obliging our native Country were very hard; but they were told at the same time, that the other Law that obliges us to abandon the Eternal God, and to renounce the true Religion, is still much harder; that we ought to think our selves happy, of being able to choose between such miserable Extremities, that it was a Happiness which was refused in France to Persons of the highest kank, and of eminent Merits, that were detained by force in their Country, and forced to abandon them∣selves to Idolatry. That the Affairs of this World were subject to perpetual Revolutions; that Kings and Princes are often obliged to abandon their Crowns, and to leave their Seate to their Enemies: and that therefore particu∣lar Persons ought to undergo without murmuring this Common Law, and to resign themselves with submission to the Orders of Providence, who puts by her chastising the state of her Children, to a tryal to divert their Hearts from the World, and to move them to search with so much more eagerness their heavenly Country; that they had reason to believe that the Arm of God that had supported
them in the Wars past was not shortned; but they were to consider that at that time God had raised some of their Neighbours who did support with their Goods, with their Troops, and their Officers, that then they had none but Friends about them; instead of that, now at present, they were surrounded every where with Enemies; that at that time they had a great many amongst them capable to bear Arms, that they were united together; but that at present they were deprived of all those advantages; that their Soveraign alone was able to extirpate them intirely, and that yet these were not the only Troops they were to fight against, that those of France were ready to fall upon them; and that suppose they were happy enough to get some advantage over them at the first Attack, yet at the last they would not fail to be opprest by the great number of those that would succeed those that were vanquished: that besides their division amongst themselves would be very prejudicial to them; that their refusing to accept their Soveraign's offer would oblige all the Protestant Princes to abandon them, because they had rather rashly take up Arms, than to follow the Counsel was given to them; that they ought not to flatter themselves with hopes of some miraculous deliverance, as was that which God granted to the Hebrews, by routing the whole Army of Senacherib; that in the Age we live in, God makes no Miracles in favour of his Church, as in the time of the Israelites; that the holy Scripture teaches us, that to throw our selves into Dangers, out of which we fore-see it will be impossible to escape, is to tempt God, who abandons those that run headlong into it; that Christian Prudence, the Charity they owed to their Wives and Children, and love of their own Persons, did oblige them to follow the Example of the other Inhabitants of the Valleys; that their Prince looking on them as Criminals, would confis∣cate their Goods, and would make them undergo the most ignominious punishments, if they persisted in their resolu∣tions. That since Divine Providence had bless'd with success the Cares of those that interceeded for them, it was visible that she was willing to disingage them from this
difficult passage; that having obtained some mitigation in the execution of the Edict, they ought to take hold of it; that it was not the fault of those that employed themselves for them, that their condition was not bet∣ter, and that they should assure themselves, that there would be saved no labour to procure them some more advantages; but in case this should be impossible, they ought to accept what was offered them, because consi∣dering their condition, they could not offer to capitulate with their Prince who had great Forces to oblige them to obedience; that in case they refused to submit them∣selves to his will, their obstinacy would cause themselves not only the loss of their bodies, but their very souls; and that they had reason to fear that those who should escape the sword of their Persecutors, would at last be overcome by the rigour of the hardships which they would be for∣ced to undergo, to make them change their Religion; that they had no reason to fear that leave to retreat whi∣ther they pleased, was granted them as a snare to intrap them, because the Court had given them such Securities that ought to set their minds at rest concerning that mat∣ter, and perswade them of the sincerity of his Royal Highness's intention, who would not give leave that any thing should be undertaken contrary to his promise, nor to blast a publick perfidiousness on his glory and reputa∣tion, nor fall short in his regards which he has had till now for the Evangelical Cantons; that in case they had been willing to surprize them, it might easily have been done at the first, but that the Prince would not suffer it, and that he would not suffer it for the future; that in fine, the Troops of Savoy and France were ready to at∣tack them from every side; and that they ought to be sure that no harm would be done them, in case they sub∣mitted themselves to his Royal Highness's order. In the mean while the Ambassadors having consider∣ed at leasure the last Edict of his Royal Highness, found that the Inhabitants of the Valleys could not submit to it without exposing themselves to very great inconveni∣encies, and resolved to endeavour a new to get them
some more advantageous conditions; and to this effect they desired the Marquess of St. Thomas to procure them an Audience of his Royal Highness, and having obtain'd it, they did represent to him, That having made some Re∣flections upon his Royal Highness's last Edict, they had taken the liberty to make some Observations upon three principal Points contained therein, to wit, 1. Upon that which allows the Inhabitants of the Valleys but ten days to retreat out of his Territories. 2. Upon that which prescribes them the number of six Trustees for the sale of their Goods. 3. Upon that which gives them only leave to sell their Goods within three months; and that they desire his Royal Highness to look upon the Remarks they had set down in the Memorial, which they did present him, and to consider that a mitigation of his Edict, they so much wisht for, would be of no con∣sequence to him, but that it was of great importance to his miserable Subjects, who had so profound a respect, and so fervent a love for their Soveraign, that they could not prevaile with themselves to retreat out of his Terri∣tories, and that considered with the greatest trouble in the World, that abandoning their native Country they should be deprived of the pleasure which they had to sig∣nalize from time to time their Loyalty, taking hold on all occasions to expose their lives in his service: That there∣fore they hoped that his Royal Highness would make use of his clemency on their behalf, and to give neces∣sary orders to put them in a condition to retreat conveni∣ently out of his Territories, and to carry along with them what they should be able to get together out of their ship-wrack'd Fortunes; and that by these means he would give to their Excellencies the Protestant Cantons, a fresh reason to continue in that affection and respect they have always had for the Royal House of Savoy, and in their Particular they would let them know that their good offices had not been unprofitable to those Wretches they did interceed for. The Duke answered the Ambassadors, That in con∣sideration of the Protestant Cantons, he had given his
People great marks of an extraordinary clemency; that he had not chastised them according to their deserts, but that he had expected with patience that his people should come to themselves, and consider their duty; and that having pushed their Rebellion to an extremity, and given him new reasons of complaint, by those Insolencies they had lately committed, they had bound up his hands, in∣somuch that he could not grant them their request with∣out wounding his reputation and authority; that the condescention he has had for them, had drawn upon him the reproaches of France, that nevertheless he was wil∣ling they should enjoy the benefit of his Edict; and that in case they would obtain some mitigation of the orders therein contained, they ought to render themselves wor∣thy of it in laying down their Arms, and submitting themselves to his pleasure. Afterwards the Ambassadors presented his Royal High∣ness their Memorial, with the following Contents: YOur Royal Highness is humbly petitioned to consider, that he that will or shall retreat out of the Valleys by vertue of your published Order, is obliged to prepare himself for his departure, for the transport of his Wife, his Children, and his Goods, that will be necessary to him; that he will be obliged to dispose in several places what he cannot carry along with him; that he must provide for the sale of his Corn, of his Pro∣visions, of his Wine, of his Cattle, which he would not be for∣ced to leave at random; and that he cannot trust with his Procurator at Lucerne, and that consequently by reason of the distance of the place, will be incapable to take care of it; that within the term of eight days he will not be able to come to an account either with his Creditors or his Debtors, because those he has to do with do not live in the Valleys, or because there may be some accounts that cannot be regulated but by arbitrati∣on; that in consideration of Goods immovable, there is to be made an exact description of the Vine-yards, Meadows, Fields, and Woods, whose boundaries and limits are to be marked out and discribed, as also of the rights thereunto belonging, and the sums for which they are mortgaged, and that there ought
to be granted some particular Procurations to that purpose; Therefore your Royal Highness having been pleased by an in∣stinct of your justice and clemency, to grant to your Subjects of the Valleys leave to retreat where ever they please, and to sell their Goods which they shall leave behind them, you would not be willing that this favour should be unprofitable to them, by obstructing the favour of this concession by the shortness of time, to take away from them, with one hand what you had given them with the other. Your Royal Highness is also requested to consider that six Trustees are not enough for the sale of Goods belonging to several hundreds of Families that shall be willing to retreat; that this Commission cannot be given but to People of the Country, and consequently to persons without learning and without capacity, and taken up with their own affairs; that besides, these Trustees will be obliged to run to several places to find out Buyers, to let them have a view of the funds which they are to buy, that settlements must be made in seve∣ral places before several Notaries, that they are to watch at the selling of a great number of movables that are dispersed in several Houses, to tell money, to change it, and to send it to them into foreign Countries, to find out some conveniencies for that purpose, to write to their Correspondents for the clearing of several doubts that may be raised, to remove the obstructi∣ons they shall meet with, to defend themselves against some un∣just demands, to receive Letters from those they shall write to from the places of their retreate, to acquaint them with the state of their affairs, and in a word, to be charged with a thousand other occupations that we cannot now foresee: There∣fore because your Royal Highness does not intend to enrich your self with the Goods of your poor Subjects, nor to augment your revenues by their losses, you will be pleased to grant them leave to nominate twelve Persons that within the time prescribed by your Royal Highness, shall proceed to the sale of the Goods of those that shall be retreated: But because it will undoubtedly happen, that within the term of three months, with what dili∣gence soever the Trustees may proceede to the sale of the Goods of the poor Refugees; there will be found few Chapmen, and that every body will expect the end of the term to take ad∣vantage of the necessity which the Trustees will be driven to
to dispose of their Goods, and to have them from those Wretches at an under price, by reason of their fear to lose all, we are in hopes your Royal Highness will have the goodness to prevent this inconveniency, and according to the Agreements made in the year 1663, with his late Royal Highness of glorious me∣mory, you will buy at a reasonable price the movable and im∣movable Goods, that within the space of three months shall not be sold. And because your Royal Highness does distinguish yourself by your goodness and clemency, you are not willing without doubt to oblige any body to impossibilities, and therefore concei∣ved newly brought to bed, or that are in the last month of their time, old and sick Men, you will make no difficulty to dispence in their favour with the Law you have prescribed to others about their retreate, and exempt them from quartering Souldiers, who how well soever dissiplined, cause always some disorder, and carry into all places where they enter, as also to grant them leave to live and die in their Houses without fear of being ill used, and of being spoiled of their Goods and Provisions. In fine, we instantly desire your Royal Highness that you would be pleased to use your clemency towards those of the Val∣leys, that are detained in your Prisons, and towards those that have been taken up on that account, and that you will be plea∣sed mercifully to set them at liberty. The Duke of Savoy receiving the Memorial of the Ambassadors, did promise to take it into his considera∣tion, and told them that he would acquaint them with his will about it. In the mean time that the Ambassadors were busie at Turine, to render the condition of the Inhabitants of the Valleys more advantageous, they took a resolution that caused their total ruine; for instead that before the pub∣lication of the last Edict, the most part amongst them were resolved to look for a retreate some-where else, they did joyn all together by a common consent, and formed a design to defend themselves against those Ar∣mies that were in a readiness to attack them.
The reasons which they alledged in their Councel were, That his Royal Highness's Edict, to which they were commanded to submit themselves, did contain se∣ral things which they could not allow, and others which they could in no manner execute: And first, they said it was not reasonable they should declare themselves guil∣ty of a Rebellion they were taxed with, because they had done nothing against his Royal Highness's service, but only that which they had been obliged to, to maintain the exercise of their Religion. 2dly, That they ought not to approve of the last E∣dict, because it confirm'd that of the 31st of January, by which they were deprived of the liberty to serve God ac∣cording to their faith. 3dly, That they could not prevail with themselves to obey that clause by which they were commanded to lay down their Arms, and that in case they should submit themselves to it, they would expose themselves to the loss of their temporal and spiritual Happiness, and would be forced to undergo the same misfortune which did hap∣pen to them in the former Persecutions, and principally in that of the year 1655, which taught them, by a fatal experience, that they made no bones to break their word with them; and what confirmed them in their opinion was the approach of the Troops that advanced towards their Country, notwithstanding the Marquess of St. Tho∣mas his promise, who did assure them, that they were not to enter into their Country, till after the term pre∣scribed in the Edict. 4thly, That the time which was given them for a pre∣paration of their departure being extreamly short, they could not execute the Edict, considering the great num∣ber of the Inhabitants of the Valleys, the great age of se∣veral persons, and the sickness of several others. 5thly, That it was impossible that the sale of their Goods should be made by Trustees; that suppose they should be resolved to sell them, it should be upon condi∣tions to receive the price of it before their departure, or that it should be put into the hands of the Ambassadors;
and that there should be procured the sale of the Goods of those scituate upon the Mountains, as well as of those that were in the Plains, and of those that were in the French K.'s Territories: And in fine, whereas this sale ought to be made to Roman Catholicks, that they had reason to fear the Priests would hinder them to buy, being assured that they would not fail to be Masters of all, after that all the Inhabitants of the Valleys should be out of the Country. 6thly, That they had reason to fear all from those that hold for a Maxim, That no faith ought to be kept with Hereticks. The Ministers and most reasonable Persons of the Valleys did all they could to hinder this People from coming to this extremity; but all their reasons they did employ to prevent this resolution, were not capable to hinder them from being hurried away by the conduct of those that flatter'd them with imaginary hopes; and these are the very Persons that hin∣dering them to accept of the favour that was offer'd them, were the cause of their ruine. The reason may be seen in this following Letter, that was made use of to make them change their resolution, and to precipitate them to their con∣fusion: Rocheplatte, April the 14th, 1686.Most Illustrious and most Mighty LORDS, I Can find no means to contain the People of our Vallies in their Duty, and principally since a certain Minister (whose name you shall be informed of) is arrived here, who has at such a rate pre∣possessed our People with pretended Succours of all things, that there is no Minister in safety in his Church. Saving three Commonal∣ties, Boby, Angrogne, and St. John, all was at quiet, and re∣solved intirely to submit themselves to your charity and conduct; and still the most reasonable might perhaps at last have prevailed with those who err, as well out of ignorance, as for want of being well acquainted with your Excellencies; but amongst all, my Church at Tour was intirely submissive till his arrival, who has put us all in confusion, save the most reasonable, who desire from you a Particuler to take them under your protection, in order to get them a free retreat to such a place where they may serve God according to his Commandments. I consecrate myself with a pro∣found
found humility to render you my most humble respects, being with a profound submission Your most Illustrious Excellencies most humble and obedient Servant, Girand, Minister of Tour. In another Letter written by the Minister of the Churches of the Valleys, there is to be found a blanck for names, in the following words: MR. — Minister of the Church of Pinache, in the Valley of Pezonse, is come from — where we are firmly per∣swaded he has received order to animate, as he does, all the World rather to die than to accept of the conditions of a Retreat, under se∣veral promises. The Ambassadors being acquainted with this resolution of theirs, saw very well that considering the disposition of this People, there was no appearance to make them change in their opinion, and to infuse into them more reasonable thoughts. Yet nevertheless they thought that they ought to make their last endeavours to oblige them to accept of the favour which their Prince did offer them, though it was not so large and advantagious as they might have wished for: And whereas they considered that the only means to work in some measure upon their minds, was to render their retreat less inconvenient and less troublesome than it was, according to the terms of the Edict, they applied themselves to sollicit for an Answer to the Memorial which they had presented to the Duke of Savoy, that in case it was favourable they could make it known to those of the Valleys, and to make use of as the strongest reason for their perswasion. But his Answer was not such as they expected, for the Marquess of St. Thomas acquainted the Ambassador, that his Royal Highness would not make any larger Declaration con∣cerning the things contained in his last Edict, because his Subjects were obstinate in their Rebellion, and because they refused to lay down their Arms, boasting, that they were in a condition to resist their Prince; that therefore his Royal Highness was resolved to depart to morrow, and to go in person to make these Rebels conform to their duty. That concerning those that would retreat some-where else, they
should faithfully enjoy the benefit of the Edict; and that those that would not submit to it, should receive their so-much-deserved punishment. As soon as they had left the Marquess of St. Thomas, they dispatched an Express to those in the Valleys, and gave them advice of the ill success of their Negotiation, by the follow∣ing Letter: Gentlemen, AT the secret Audience which we had of his Royal Highness, your Prince, we have instantly desired him, that he would he pleased to grant you a retreat out of his Territories upon more gracious conditions then those that are expressed by the last Edict; and we have represented to him as well by word of mouth, as by our Memorial, all the reasons that might be capable to move and to prevail with him to mitigate the Orders he has already published against you: We did solicit him to grant you a longer term to di∣spose yourselves to so troublesome a retreat, and to sell your Goods, and that he would be pleased to augment the number of the Tru∣stees charged to sell them; to give leave that the aged, sick, and infirm persons, and Women newly brought to bed, or that were big with child might stay behind in the Country without being exposed to any ill usage, and without being obliged to quarter Souldiers; and in fine, to give order that his Procurators might sell the Goods that should not be vended within the time prescribed by his Edict: But we have not been able to obtain the least thing from his Royal Highness, because he has been informed that you are up in Arms to obstruct the execution of his orders. We have also endeavoured to perswade the Marquess of St. Thomas that he would be pleased to imploy his credit with his Royal Highness, to dispose him to grant us what we desired in your favour; but he has given us to under∣stand, that as long as you shall keep in Arms, there are no hopes for you. His Royal Highness departs this day for Precairas, and we have had our Audience of Conge, with a design to return immediately into our Country, except God's providence give us some more fa∣vourable occasion to serve you; and since without taking notice of some wise Mens counsels, you resign the event of your Affairs to God's providence, we beseech him that he would be pleased to assist you in your calamity, and direct all to his glory, and your temporal and spiritual welfare; Resting, after we have recommended you to God Almighty's favour, &c. Turine, &c.
Altho' the Ambassadors found the Affairs of the Inhabi∣tants of the Valleys to be in a desperate condition, and that it was impossible for them to prevent their misfortune, yet they would not abandon them, and they thought it would be of some profit to them, if they followed his Royal High∣ness in the Camp, therefore they desired the Marquess of St. Thomas to ask his Royal Highness's leave for it: But the Mar∣quess told them, that their presence might give some jealousie to the Ambassador of France, and the Pope, and that where∣as his Royal Highness had several great reasons not to diso∣blige the Most Christian King, the Ambassadors would oblige him not to insist upon this demand, Affairs being in such a condition, that how disposed soever his Royal Highness were to give them some marks of his considerations for them, he was in no capacity to let them see how much reflection he made upon their Intercession. Therefore the Ambassadors that had had their Audience of Conge, upon condition nevertheless, that in case there should happen an accident that might oblige them after∣wards to appear at Court, there should be had all deference for them, that was due to their Character, resolved to return to their own Country, according to the order which they had received some few days before from their Soveraigns, in a Letter written to them from Zuric, in which the Evange∣lical Cantons commanded them to abandon their Negotiati∣on, in case they did judge it would be fruitless. Nevertheless, whereas they thought that the Marquess of St. Thomas, or the other Ministers might be able to find some favourable moment to prevail with his Royal Highness to make use of his clemency towards his poor Subjects of the Valleys, they resolved to pay them a visit, to desire them to have compassion upon those Wretches, and to render them on this occasion all the good offices they might be capable of; but because the Court was obliged to depart in a hurry, it was impossible for them to execute their design, and they were obliged to make those instances to them by writing, which they could not do by word of mouth: and they re∣ceived presently after the Marquess's answer, who did assure them, that he would take hold of all overtures which those of the Valleys could furnish him with to employ himself for them.
A few days before their departure, they received two Letters out of the Valleys, one writ by all the Commonalties to the Evangelical Can∣tons, in the following manner: Most High, Mighty, and Soveraign Lords, OƲr Churches have for a long time experimented, and principally in these unhappy Troubles that have happened to them, the incomparable chari∣ty and fatherly affection of your Excellencies towards them, and still very lately, by sending our Lords the Ambassadors to his Royal Highness, upon oc∣casion of the Order of the 31st of January last, published against us, as we have been informed of, by the Letter which you have been pleased to direct to us; We are not able enough to acknowledge the cares, troubles, and pains which our Lords the Ambassadors have taken in our favour and preservati∣on, towards our Soveraign, and had they met with hearts disposed to our welfare and quietness, their Intercessions would not have failed of being suc∣cessful; but it ought to be confessed, that our condition is very bad from that side, considering the World; we render nevertheless to your Excellencies, with all the sentiments of acknowledgments we are capable of, our most humble and hearty thanks for so many favours we have received from their so Holy and Christian Charity: We are very sensible, and confess it, tho' with a great confusion, that our Lords the Ambassadors have not had from our People all that satisfaction that might have been wisht for, concerning their resignation into your hands: but we most humbly beseech you to em∣ploy their charity and support towards a People that make to themselves a point of Conscience and Honour to preserve their Religion in their native Country, where it has been a long time miraculously preserved: We are ve∣ry sensible that as to the World, our ruine is unavoidable, but we are in hopes that God will revenge his quarrel, and that good and charitable Peo∣ple will not abandon us, and principally we put our trust under God, unto your Excellencies, and throw ourselves into their fatherly arms, beseeching you for the compassion of God, and in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, our common Father and Saviour, not to deprive us of your charity and affection, and to throw the eyes of your clemency and tenderness upon so many poor Fa∣milies, little Children, and other weak miserable Persons, as to the World, to let them feel the favourable effects of your Christian Goodness: We be∣seech the Lord that he would be pleased to be the perpetual Preserver of your Excellencies, and the abundant Rewarder of all your Holy and Christian Charities; and are with all the veneration imaginable, Most High, Mighty, and Soveraign Lords, your Excellencies Most humble, most obedient, and most obliged Servants, The Ministers, Ancients, and other Directors of the Churches of the Valleys in Plemont, and for All, S. Bastie, Moderator; Gr. Matant, Minister. The Letter which the Ministers writ to the Ambassadors, was to this purpose:
My Lords, WE do intend to communicate immediately to our Commonalti Excellencies Letters: We might have wisht that they had be mindful of those wise Counsels your Excellencies have given them, ¦vent such a danger and desolation that in all humane probability is un¦able: We pray to God that he would be pleased to crown their res tho' against all appearance, with success, and to strengthen their in  and feebleness. I do believe that all the Ministers do design to live  die amongst them, because your Excellencies do not disapprove it: ¦deed it would neither be honest nor excusable to abandon them in  juncture of time; and we would certainly have reason to think o guilty in part of their loss, because a good Shepheard is bound to la his life for his Flock. We continue to give your Excellencies  humble thanks for those Troubles and infatigable Cares you have  our welfare and subsistance; and we conjure you by the compassion  and by the charity of Jesus Christ, not to forget us, but whether it be your stay at Turin, or after your return to the most High and Migh ¦testant Cantons, to favour us with your Affection and Christian  on all occasions. We pray our Great God and Saviour, that he w pleased to reward the Pains and Charities of your Excellencies towar  Churches, with his most precious blessings in Heaven and Earth, an ¦ver your sacred persons with his inviolable protection: These are the  and fervent Wishes of those that are with a profound respect, My Lords,  your Excellencies most humble and obedient Servant The Ministers of the Evangelical Churches of the Valleys of  Angrogne, Rerouse, St. Martin, &c. in Piemont, and in  of All, S. Bastie, Minister. Ang. April 17, 1686. The Inhabitants of the Valleys being disposed in this manner,  just now represented, and the D. of Savoy being departed for the  seemed the Ambassadors had no more business at Court, and that the  go on their journey: but because it might happen that this People, the danger near, and the Troops in a condition to attack them,  willing to make use of the Prince's clemency, by the intercession of  ¦bassadors; they thought that they ought not to leave them, till they  that the Armies, was entred into their Country, and that they had  formed of the success of this Expedition: But having heard that the  had no sooner appeared in the Valleys, but that those of St. Martin taken themselves to their heels, and that the Prince's Troops having the Passages about Angrogne, sound no where the least resistance.  were sensible that they had no more business in Piemont, and they  extreamly troubled that they had not been able to prevent the Desola these precious Remains of the Vaudois Churches. And being arrived  Country, they gave an account of their Embassy to their Soveraign judging of their Negotiation not by its success, but by their conduct  having assured them that they were well satisfied with the zeal and  they had shewed during the whole course of this difficult Affair, gav . Thanks for the Cares they had taken to fill up worthily the Employ  they had been honoured with. FINIS.
