V73 R32917 12782446 93838
A pilgrimage into the land of promise, By the light of the vision OF Jacobs ladder and faith; OR A serious search and prospect into life eternal, pointing out the way and discovering the passage out of mans mutable state of life, into a state of immutable righteousnes and glory, through the knowledg of Christ in Spirit. Written in the year 1662, by HENRY VANE, Knight, towards the latter end of his prison-state; by himself fully reviewed and perfected, some few dayes before his suffering, and left as his last Testimony and service to this present generation, according to the wil of God, before he fell asleep. HOSEA 12.3.4. and 6. verses. He took his brother by the heel in the womb, and by his strength behaved himself princely with God. Yea, he had power over the angel and prevailed: he wept and made supplication unto him: he found him in Beth-El, and there he spake with us. Therefore turn thou to thy God: keep mercy and judgment, and wait on thy God continually. Printed in the yeare 1664.
A TREATISE CONCERNING ETERNAL LIFE. THe purposes and counsells of Gods mind are first taken within himself, before they are or can be knowne to any other. They are therefore called the deepe and hidden things of God. For God is his owne coun∣sellour. There is none that can instruct him. His mind is not only com∣prehensive of all that can be knowne and consulted upon, but hath those eternall springs of light and power, by which he is the supreame cause and orde∣rer of all things. And these, as to their manner and kind of operation, are three. These first and great powers are they, who in their name and manifestation are the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, by whom the same God doth forme and take all his counsells within himself, and put them in execution according to the purpose of his owne mind. These are the severall distinct powers of discerning and will in the same divine essence. With the first of them, God minds things after his owne in∣comprehensibile manner of being, knowing and willing them, as God. Of this pa∣tern there is no imitation. I am, says God, and there is none besides me. With the second, God minds things on earth or in the world, condescending to proportion himself in his knowledg and will to the creature, in order to be found in the likenes and fashion of created nature, and so to act over the law first in himself, that the crea∣ture may be capable to imitate and fulfill it after him. With the third he does so admirably joyne and put both these minds into one, and fix them in such most per∣fect harmony and love, that they are not to be divided; yet keeps and upholds in each, their proper and distinct operations. By this threefold operation, God sets up the eternall law, and causes the manifes∣tation of that which is the very wisedome and reason of God himself, the head of Christ, the person of the blessed mediatour. For he who thus is three in counsell, (wherein he decrees and orders all things, giving the law in one and the same eter∣nall mind) does not execute by himselfe immediatly, but by the Mediatour, his re∣presentative or image, the Angel of his presēce, in whom his name or likenes is pla∣ced, in order to beare it and bring it forth into the sight and participation of others. By the immediate operation of the Trinity he is made and constituted the Lords Christ and true Messiah, the secondary and executing power, ordeined by God, as the breath and voyce of his mouth, to fulfill all his wills and all the counsells of his heart. This is he who was from the beginning, the breath of God, the inspiration of the Almighty, the face and image of the invisible God, First by eternall generation within the mind of God. 2. By everlasting emanation, as the outshining light and express character of he divine essence.
3. By temporall incarnation and inseparable personal union whith the seed of David. According to his eternal generation, he is without Father, without Mother, with∣out descent, coeternally and coessentially God with the Father, or first cause of all; no lesse truly and properly God, then God himselfe. But that which he is by ever∣lasting emanation, is the first born of every creature, he that was before all things, and by whom all things consist. And according to his temporall incarnation, he was made man, like unto us in all things, sin only excepted. He is the inward writing of the eternal law, that is written and lies within the bosome of the father. None can read or unloose the seales on the backside of this writing, but the lion of the tribe of Judah, he that from eternity hath knowne Gods mind and bin his counsellour, as the almighty breath of his month, inspi∣ring and giving life and being to all things, which when put forth, doth execute most exactly all that the dictates of Gods mind require to be done. Without him is not any thing made that is made; Nay, admit the creature could receave being with∣out him (which it cannot) yet the eternal law and will of God could never be knowne to angels or men, unlesse revealed to them by this lively oracle and voyce of his month. For all things are delivered to him of the father, and none knows who the Son is but the Father, nor who the Father is, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveale him. No man hath seen God at any time. The only begotten Son which is in the bosome of the Father, he hath declared him; even he that was in the beginning, was found in the forme of God and thought it not robbery to be equall with God; the WORD in whom is life, and that life the light of men. By him comes all hearing, understanding and obedience to be wrought in the creature. The first creature in which it is wrought, is the building not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, made part of himself, who as Mediatour is a mixed seed of both natures in one person and Spirit. In this Spirit he comes in the dispensation of the fulnes of time, to be made flesh, and so hath in him the voice of God, the voice of the head and cheif of angels, and of the head and cheife of men, by meanes whereof he spea∣kes and converses with all created understandings, in their owne likenes and lan∣guage. Thus comes he to be that spirituall ladder and way of graduall entercourse, by means whereof, the angels that are ascending and descending upon him, doe keepe the doore open betweene heaven and earth, and he fils al things. This is Gods first, best and most perfect worke, finished from the beginning, the works that are so much the object of Gods knowledg and delight, that he therein rests, subjecting them no more to change. This is the building not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, the invisible and exemplary paterne unto both creations; the rock, whence they flow, Deut. 32.4. He is the rock, his work is perfect, or he is the rock that is Gods perfect work; the wisedome which God possessed in the be∣ginning of his way, (in which he was pleased to condescend and set forward toward
the creation of the world) Prov, 8. and 9. chapters; which compared with John. 1.1, 2; doe evidently shew him to be the WORD that was by God as one brought up with him, who was with God and was God; Gods love and delight, in whom he was ever rejoycing. He also had his love, delight or choice, in conformity to the eter∣nal will and purpose of God, among the sons of men, that he makes the habitable part of his earth, of whom David was the type and figure, Psal. 89. where God says (v. 20. &c.) I have found David my Servant, with my holy oyle have Ianointed him. With him shall my hand be established: mine arme also shall strengthen him. I will beat down his foes before his face: and plague them that hate him. I will set his hand also in the sea: his right hand in the rivers. He shall cry unto me, thou art my Father, my God, and the rock of my salvation. Also I will make him my first borne: higher then the kings of the earth. I have sworn by my holines, that I will not lie unto him. His seed shall endure for ever: his throne as the sun before me. Againe, Psal. 78; 70, &c. He chose David also his Servant, and took him from the sheepfolds, from following the ews great with young, he brought him to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance. So he fed them according to the inte∣grity of his heart: and guided them by the skilfulnes of his hands. Most of this is accomplished in Christ, the antitype and Truth, as he is the Son of Man, of the seed of David according to the flesh, called Gods Servant the BRANCH, and the Lord our righteousnes, the WORD of life, that is the rock of ages, whence all things are hewen. He is the platform and exemplary patern of both worlds, in idea as wel as execution, which the divine wisedom contrived and wrought in God, from all e∣ternity, as its great masterpeice, by which the worlds were made; Heb. 1.2. Eph. 3.9. God made all things by Jesus Christ, whether visible or invisible. He was the first patern of all his works. Consequently, according to this first and perfect patern was man made, and to it in some degree and measure restored since his deformation by the fall. In uprightnes was he made, according to Gods image; God is righteous originally in his owne nature, and both originally and communicatively righteous in Christ, who made man upright; Eccl: 7.29. The house which wisdom first builds for her self with seven pillars, is in the per∣son of Christ, Gods only begotten son. For he that built all things is God: and this, as the Son over his owne house, a house not made with hands: that eternal house of the Father, wherein are many mansions. The same WISEDOME, after she had built her house, killed her killing, slew her sacrifice, (the lamb was slaine from the beginning of the world) mingled her wine and also furnished her table. All things being thus made ready for her guests whom she purposed to invite, she sends forth her servants. She crieth upon the highest places of the city; who so is simple, let him turn in hither: as for him that wanteth understanding, she saith to him, come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine I have mingled. Jt shal be to your soules as a tree of life, a wel springing up into everlasting life, in every one of you.
But (as we shal shew more fully afterwards) man in his perfect, innocent state, professing himself wise (when he should have seen himself simple, or at most, wise only in part, wanting yet that which should make him fully and immutably so) became a fool. And because when he knew God, he glorified him not as God, nei∣ther was thankful, he became vain in his imagination, changing the glory or like∣nes of the incorruptible God manifested in Christ, into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, four-footed beasts and creeping things, to the dark∣ning his foolish heart, that changed the TRUTH of God into a lie (the original and first sin) worshipping and serving the creature more then the Creatour, God, blessed for ever. Conformity to Christ, the first and most perfect patern and Rule of all obedience unto Gods word and declared will, is the TRUTH of God, which the first Adam changed into a lie, endeavouring (as much as in him lay) to make it void, and set up some other thing, even himself in the place thereof, (as the law and Rule of his action) which he was forbidden. In departing from and disobeying of Christ who was the law of Gods mouth from the beginning, the word that was commanded to a thousand generations, he tasted the bitter fruit of his own doings, and was ensna∣red by the work of his owne hands. He was enticed by his owne lust: sin conceaved, which being perfected, brought forth death. And if it be objected; 'twas impossible the first Adam should sin against Christ, or the TRUTH of God as it is in Jesus, because where there is no law, there can be no transgression; when as yet nothing was declared of Christ, there could be no offence against him. The Answer is easy and plain. There was both knowledge and need of Christ be∣fore the fall, as well to prevent and keep out sin from entring into the world, as to expiate and deliver from it by his death, after it was entered, and secure against its return againe. This the Apostle Paul asserts with great cleernes in his E∣pistle to the Romans, shewing that Adam was but the Image and figure of him that was to come, Christ, made from the beginning the power of God unto Salvation, and the righteousnes of God that was to be revealed from faith to faith. This, man at his creation and before his fall could not be ignorant of. For that which might be known of God in Christ by the book of the crea∣ture, was shewed to him and made manifest in him. For the invisible things of him, (even of Christ, who is the invisible image of God and hidden mystery ordeined for our glory before the world, and kept secret in God) were cleer∣ly seen and to be known by the things that are made, the creatures he produ∣ced, to the making manifest his eternal power and Godhead, thereby rendring them without excuse that would otherwise be apt to make the forementioned objection, and on that presumption thinke themselvs at liberty to change Gods truth into a lie. But hereby every mouth comes to be stopped, and al the
guilty world are subjected to the righteous judgment of God. Christ, who is the law of Gods mouth, required of man obedience as soon as he was created. He called upon him to be a hearer of the will of God, which he was intrusted to reveale, and teach the most acceptable manner of performing. This did Christ require and teach, as answering the end for which man was at all made by him at first, or redeemed since; even this, that he should not be his owne, or at his owne dispose, but yeild subjection to the will of another, set over him by God, who was to be flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone, and to be therfore trusted and beleeved on, as appointed to feed and guide him to life eternall, and who required that he should glorify God in his soule and in his body, that were Gods, upon the account of al rights and obli∣gations whatsoever. Thus was Christ typified to Adam by the tree of life in the midst of the Pa∣radise of God; as also by the living water, that watered the garden of Eden, a river cleer as crystall, the streams whereof refresh and make glad the city of God, the Holy place of the tabernacle of the most high, Mount Zion that cannot be moved, in the midst of whom God dwells, as the place of his rest, promising to help them with his morning appearance, or the brightnes and glory of his second comming and fuller communication of himself, then A∣dam receaved in his first creation, God was willing Adam should know he was a fountain without botom; so deep, as not to be drawn dry; and would have him o∣pen his mouth wide that he might fill it. He would have him become a vessel yet more larg, capacious and fit for his use, then at first he was made. For he gives not his gifts all at once, but by degrees and after a manner most suitable to his inex∣haustible fulnes and infinit wisdom. God therefore comes forth in Christ as a light and law to mans knowledg and discerning, instructing him to be the hearer and doer of his will, in and under a threefold law and rule of righteousnes; 1. The law of nature, or booke of the creature, visible and invisible. 2. The law of the Scriptures or written book of the revealed will of God. 3. The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, written by the living WORD himself, in the tables of the heart of the Son of Man, taken into hypostatical u∣nion with him, to be his mouth and spokesman, at whose hand angels and men are to receave the lively divine oracles of Gods counsel, appointed to be made known unto them. This threefold law is, as it were, so many transcribed duplicates and co∣pies of what is to be found in the living eternall WORD of God, the Ori∣ginal. In conjunction with this, they are lights and good guides. They
are as a first, second and third stream of one and the same river of pure and cleer water, that gradually leade into that great Ocean of knowledg, light and love, that is to be found in the original. They are prepared and fitted as the sutable, adaequate means to be mans guide and Rule, according to his state and measure of growth up into his head, in and upon whom he may be borne and made to grow as on his root, that may either receave and retein him in an eternal aboad with him, or else leave, reject and finally cast him off, after proof and triall, as an unprofitable branch, that hath taken Gods name and born his likenes in vain, and that shal therfore not be held guiltles, but first or last meet with his due reward. This is seen and found by the experience of angels and men, from the beginning to this present day. Of these three laws then we shal treate in their order, very breifly. 1. First, as to the law of nature or book of the creature, it is no other then the right fashion and make which is given by the creatour to the works of his owne hands, as the creature comes fresh and pure out of the mould into which he cast it in its first creation, bearing his image, superscription or impression. In a more pe∣culiar manner, he created man in his owne image. Through the power of the enli∣vening breath from the mouth of the Lord, all things live, move and have their being; such a being, and such a manner and measure of operation, as God sees fit for them, and pronounces to be good, though not immutably or perpetually so, but subject to spending, wearing out and waxing old, as also to other changes. These are the many things which God creates, which being animated with life from him, doe speak forth the prayse and excellency of their maker, and are as so many kinds of voices and sounds in the world, none of which are without their signification and teaching to those that have eyes to se and eares to heare, with skil to spel and put together Gods mind out of them, as a law and rule for their instruction. The reason and discerning given to angels and men, does qualify and enable them for this, e∣ven to spel out the mind of God, partly by looking forth into the outward and vi∣sible frame of the creation, but more especially by consulting the light within them, the work or impression of the law in their owne hearts and upon their owne beings, which makes them a law and rule to them selves and to one another. For by the tongue of man God speaks to angels in the person of Christ. By the tongue of angels he speaks in and to men. This is the law that was given to Adam in Paradise. 2. As to the law of the Scriptures or written word of God, it is a second dispen∣sation, a voice of words, and that by men, the Servants and Prophets of the Lord, who being inspired with ye breath of Gods living WORD, are taught to think and speak as the Holy Ghost moves them or gives them utterance. Under these words there is an inward Testimony and writing, which is not of private interpretation. These words and divine oracles, committed to writing, are kept by the special influence of Gods providence, and recorded for the succeeding ages and posterity of the Church. These oracles, with the help of the same Spirit that indighted them.
(and alone is able to shew the right meaning and sound understanding of them) are able to make men wise unto Salvation, by sending them to their Saviour, the son and living WORD him self, in and with whom alone, they may have life eternal. All that is thus written and recorded is that which is given for this very end by inspira∣tion from God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction and for in∣struction in righteousnes, that the man of God may be perfect, and perfected unto all good works. Under this dispensation by a voice of words, the seed of faith lies hid. It was not given till four hundred and thirty years after the promise and the making known of the law of faith unto Abraham, without and before the writtē word. And it was not added to make the promise void, or as a law that in and by itself could give life, especially life immutable, not subject againe to wrath and the curse. But it had its use and service in subordination and as a Schoolmaster, pointing to him that was to follow, the seed that was to come. It was as the baptism of repentance preached by John, which in respect of transgressions, was to cleanse and prepare the way of the Lord in the hearts of the Sons of men, dead by nature in trespasses and sins. The Lord that afterward was to be revealed through faith, would have their soules purged and kept as wel fenced as might be in the mean time, against all impurity of evill doing, by this law of written words, which was also a witnes afterwards of Christs birth, death and resurrection. This is a second law that after the fall was given to man as a light or lamp to his feet and lanthorn to his paths: a light, but under a cover, and in a dark place, sealed and bound up as amongst Christs owne disciples, who are taught and learned in the wisdom that is from above. Otherwise, as it may be used, receaving a sense and mea∣ning from the wisdom of the earthly and sensual man, or from the subtil skill of the Serpent, it does become the fortresse and strong hold of sin, a ministry of the letter and of death, a most dark and uncertain guide to any that pretend and profess them selvs to be the followers of it and of the commands in it. For the vision of all is un∣to them, as of a book or letter that is sealed, which when delivered to one that is learned after the manner of men, and not illuminated with the Spirit of TRUTH, saying, read this I pray thee, he sayes (or at least should say) I cannot, for it is sea∣led and I need one to open it. And when it is delivered to him that is not learned in any kind, he answers, (if he deale ingennously) I am not learned; I have not that skill which is required for the reading of it, nor can I se any more into the true meaning of it, them one that cannot read at all, or tell how to spell words and put letters to∣gether. The voice and sound of this law is not of that extent as the first, (which is pub∣lished by the tongue and speech of angels, and other peeces of the creation) but is more peculiar to one sort of men, who formerly were they of the seed of Abraham according to the flesh, unto whom God more especially committed these his ora∣cles,
expecting answerable fruit from all those that having sinned under this law, were reserved by God to be judged and at last to stand or fall by it. The rest of man∣kind amongst the gentiles that lived without this law, were not to be judged by it; but by their owne law, the law of nature, unto which they are perpetually still obli∣ged. This generation of the fleshly seed of Abraham is neither literally nor figura∣tively as yet passed away. For there are too many that since the light of the Gospel hath sinned forth upon them, doe yet desire to be under the law, preferring their station and lot in the earthly Jerusalem, Mount Sinai, that is stil in bondage with her children, and choose so to remaine, rather then to ascend into the Jerusalem that is above and is free. These are the branches Spoken of, Rom. 11. taken out from among the Gentiles, upon the rejection of Abrahams natural seed, who contrary to nature are graf∣fed into the good olive tree, surrogated and taken by God as a nation or people to himself in stead of the other, in the same relation, under the same Covenant and law, being made to partake of the root and fatnes of the same olive tree. These are (notwithstanding all their priviledges in this estate) to take heed of boasting or taking up their rest under the dominion and in the inward principles of that law which excludes not boasting. If they doe, they are fairly warned that their stan∣ding and aboad in and with the root, is not so sure, nor their righteous principles and operations in conformiry to the law, so fixed, but that they may fall and be re∣jected as their predecessours the Iews were before them, to wit, all such of them, whose standing was but by that Covenant, and not by the law of faith, for want whereof God complains against them (Heb. 3.) as children of his wrath and provo∣cation, a perverse, crooked and froward generation, that alwayes erre in their hearts and have not known his wayes. At last, they come to nothing; never enter into Gods rest, though they thinke themselves (and in some sort are) a nation that works righteousnes, in strict observance of the letter of all Gods Ordinances and com∣mands. This is the same law that was by God written in the heart of Adam at the crea∣tion, being renewed and published after the fall, first by the ministry of angels in the hand of a Mediatour on Mount Sinai; which word, spoken by angels, remained stedfast in its revenging property against all that contemned and disobeyed it. Hence is it said in another place, the law works wrath, and is sure in inflicting the penalties and curse threatned. It was committed to writing by Moses, the Prophets, Evangelists and Apostles. Even in the Gospel the law is fulfilled and made honora∣ble. By the doctrine of it, man is taught what he ought to doe and what not to doe. He is bound up to perfect and exact obedience to it, and by reward and punish∣ment, is either encouraged to obedience or restrained from disobedience, being left to his owne dispose and choise, as to any thing of prevailing influence which this law dispenses. Yet is there that in the doctrin of it, which sends all under it to
Christ as the only way and means of their salvation, shewing who this Christ is, and that they must beleeve in him or perish in their sins, and that by beleeving in him they may attein the remission of their sins, and life eternal. This distinct knowledg of Christ the Redemer, Adam had not, nor properly could have before the fall. Neverthelesse, by the things rhat were made, and from the voices and significations of Gods mind ministred by the tongue of Angels, (which Adam in Paradise was capable of hearing and vnderstanding) and out of the book of the creature, more especially the tree of life, he was (and might have bin more then he was) instructed in the maine point, as to who and what Christ was, and how the comming to him and feeding upon him, was the only way and means to make man immutable in righteousnes, by obtaining an inseperable union with the cheif good, without ever falling into sin, yea, as the only sure means to have pre∣vented the fall. In the third and last place, there is the law of the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus, the immediate writing and engraving of Gods owne mind, true in it self and true in the receaver of it, the heart of Jesus the Son of man, the living tables upon which the living WORD by way of self-impression and personal union, does seale and lay hold on that one seed, which is Christ, making it the brightnes of his glory, the expresse character of his essential mind, which is righteousnes and holines itself. This is the WORD that is neer thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart, that thou mayst doe it; that is to say, in the heart and mouth of Christ the second Adam, and head of al true beleevers, by him to be poured out as an anointing for the whole seed, ren∣dring thereby the visiō of Gods mind so plain to them, that he that runs may read it. The ministry of this law is a voice, that, First, invites all freely to come to the waters, every one that is a thirst, and he that hath no mony, to come, buy and eat: yea, to come and buy wine and milk without mony and without price, that they may eat that which is good and delight them∣selfs in fatnes. This first general voice and invitation leaves it to mans choice whe∣ther he wil obey and come, or not. But this law and ministry hath also in it a second voice, that carries with it such a prevailing attractive power, such an unresistible constraining loue, as will receave or admit no deniall. It does so powerfully encline the eare and heart to heare and obey, that by means of this effectual saving grace, there is made an everlasting Covenant between Christ and the soule, even the sure mercies of David. Christ himself in this dispensation is given to be a witnes, commander and leader to those that are under it, upon such teams as never to faile, leave or forsake them. 1. The first of these voices in its ministry, is tearmed in Scripture the day of Christ, first appearance, which hath already risē and had its kingdō in word and also in Spi∣rit, but sowē in weakenes. It hath shined upō the world, had its beginning and conti∣nuance, and is now drawing very neer to its ending, wherein Christ is to be rejected, and that by his owne citizēs, a generation that are inhabitāts of the earthly Jerusalē,
vnder the name of Christians, succeeding their predecessours the jews, (into whose room they are surrogated) in their froward and bitter principles and Spirit, wherein they please not God, and are contrary to all men. This is called the Gospel of the Kingdom, preached (by means of the outward word, accompanied with the Spirit) to all nations, as a witnes, before the end come; or before that dispensation come, that puts an end to it, as perfective of it, restoring it out of its dying and declining state, into a brightnes and glory that is everlasting, as shalbe declared at the rising of the witnesses. It began with the ministry of John Baptist, as the voice of him crying in the wil∣dernes, prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths streight. It was continued, encreased and carried up to its height, even by the personal ministry of the Son of God manifested in flesh, who was born of a virgin, died for our sins and rose againe, according to the Scriptures. And by his ascending up on high, he did lead captivity captive and gave gifts to men, went on in the greatnes of his strengh, conquering to conquer, till the war and opposition sprang up that was raised against him by the man of sin, and Son of perdition, for the space of 42 months or 1260 years, to the overspreading the face of the church with apostacy and thick darknes. Herein so great a progresse hath bin made, that we are brought (as it were) to the shutting in of the evening of this first glorious Gospel day and new Testament ministry in Spi∣rit and by the written word, to the verifying that Scripture (Luk. 17. which sayes, The dayes will come when ye shal desire to se one of the dayes of the Son of Man, and ye shall not se it, because the light of it must withdraw, to give place and make way for the approaching glory of another of the dayes of the Son of Man, even that of his second appearance and Kingdom, at which time he shall shew himself the only Potentate over all the earth, KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS. 2. The second voice and ministry of the Gospel, above mentioned, performed in and by Christs second appearance, is that which (as hath bin said) doth powerful∣ly encline and prevailingly work upon the hearts of men for the obedience of Gods law, binding up their soules in the life that is eternall. This second appearāce, though the yonger, does with Jacob lie in the same wombe with the first, in the hearts of all true beleevers. And though it come not out first, yet at last it obteins the pree∣minence and birthright, causing those that are children of this day, even whilst they are under the first dispensation, to abide with God as pilgrims and strangers therein, as all their Fathers were, and by faith to espy this promised land and heavenly countrey, whilst at a distance and very far off, (Esai. 33.17.) and to wait for it with patience, in a certainty of hope and stedfastnes of confidence, till they enter into, and become actuall possessours of it. The operation and effect which this second day of Christ appearance shal have upon beleevers, in its very morning brightnes, will render them in their minds like to the elect angels in obeying the law of God, active, powerfull and stedfast in wor∣king
righteousnes. It will qualify them also with a meet frame of Spirit for ange∣licall converse, whilst yet in the body, as sutable associates and consorts with them in Gods service and worship. And from the powerfull influences that shall descend from the intellectuall and superiour part of mans mind, quickned with the warmth and life of those holy Spirits in the hand of Christ, the animall or souly life and bo∣dily nature of man shal be formed into such subjection as will by degrees work out a perfect redemption of the body from the bondage of corruption, even in this life, as the needfull preparatory dispensation of Eliah, that first comes and restores all things, before the personal appearing of the son himself. For although he will first shew himself in the glory of the holy angels, as the bright morning star, in the beginning of this day, yet is he to come forth also (in the farther progresse of this day) in the glory of his father, and therein to shine forth as the sun in his strength, after that he hath first sent his angels to gather out of this his Kingdom all things that doe offend, and them which doe iniquity, casting them into a furnace of fire. Whē this preparatory work is done by the messengers he sends before him, Christ will reveale himself from heaven, and by that glorious sight which he will give of him∣self, chang those that then are alive and remain on the earth, into his owne likenes in soule and body, and gather them unto himself, as meet consorts and associates for him in that his glorified state, catching them up to him in that heavenly aire, or Spirit, where they are to be ever with the Lord. In effect, the day of Christs second appearance brings upon the stage of this world, life from the dead, working and declaring the first resurrection, mentioned (Revel. 20.) which is to continue visible to men on earth, one thousand years. The glorious chang which shalbe made in the progresse of this day, upon the soules and bodies of the Saincts, shalbe such as will no more leave them subject to corruption. For over them the second death shall have no power. This is another of the dayes of the Son of Man, which succeeds the first; is to continue a thousand years and then also have its end, upon the sons making a vo∣luntary and entire resignation of this his Kingdom unto his Father, that God may be all in all. For during this thousand years, the son in his Kingdom shalbe exalted, as he to whom the father hath committed all judgmēt to be executed, so that what he binds on earth shall be bound in heaven, and what he looses on earth shal be loosed in heaven. Whom he will he shall slay and whom he will he shal keep alive, as the most absolute Monarch and only Potentate yt ever reigned on the earth, to the end that during this season and space of time, all mē may honour the son with the honor due to the father, and in this appearance of the Son se the father as in his vicege∣rent, and doe him homage in this his living Image, the Lords Christ or anointed one, the man that by God is ordeined to rule the world in righteousnes, even all the nations upon the earth, during this his day, which immediatly praecedes the day of eternity and last judgment, wherein God is to be all in all. The son himself, after
that all things shall have bin subdued and subjected unto him, shalbe subject to the Father that put all things under him. This second day of the Son of Man, is that one day knowne to the Lord, not day nor night, but a kind of middle state between that which is corruptible and that which is incorruptible. It is neither absolutely one or the other, but a mixture of both. And it shall come to passe, in the evening of this day it shalbe light, and the passage out of this into the day of eternity, very pleasing and delightsome. It shall distinguish itselfe (as hath bin already intimated) into the 3 usuall parts of a day, MORNING, MIDDAY, NIGHT. 1. In its morning beauty and appearance, the Eliah comes and restores all things, as is foretold of him, the BRIGHT MORNING STAR, which is to shew to the kings of the east the neer approach of the only begotten Son himself, and be to them and all other inhabitants on the earth, the signe of the Son mans approaching and comming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. 2. In the noontide of this day of the Son of Man in his Kingdom, shalbe seen the height of the sunshine of that royall power and greatnes which shalbe exercised by him in the capacity of universall King over all the earth, the season wherein there shalbe one LORD in his owne person visible, and his name one, throughout the whole world. 3. There shall also be a declining and evening state of this glorious day, which willingly and cheerfully gives place to the day of eternity, wherein the father un∣veyled shall shine forth and be all in all. How fitly does Ezekiel, in the vision he had of the holy waters, represent and de∣scribe this growing, encreasing Kingdō of Christ, revealed in the Gospel the light of Gods law that shines forth in the Son himself, into the obedience and power where∣of, we are to be changed from glory to glory, by the Lord the Spirit. The waters issued from under the threshold of the house eastward, on the right or south side. Ezek. 47. Their first comming forth was by measure, the measure of a man; and gradually, from the ankles to the knees, from the knees to the loins, from the loins to a river unpassable by man, as meer man, in his first constitution of being. 2. 2dly then, the same waters came forth in a communication above and beyond the measure of mans first nature, into a river that man may swim in without drow∣ning or being at all subject to die any more, how much higher soever it rise above the head of the naturall man, the first Adam. And of this, Noah by faith was aware, who, that he might obtein a state of safety from the overflowing flood, (by which al the world, not made beleevers and taken into the arke, were drown'd) obeyed the counsel and command of God, in building the arke and going into it after it was built and ready to receave him. Herein have we a lively type of Christs humane na∣ture, offered up by the immortal Spirit, and brought forth into the life that is from the dead, never to die more, but hath the keys of hel and death committed to him. Unto the likenes of this heavenly building and temple of the living God in Christs
person, every true beleever is fashioned and conformed, and is thereby made a fit vessel to swim in those waters of life, safely and delightfully, which by rising up a∣bove al the measures and proportions of the first world, drowne them, but are the proper element for those that are saved, to live in. They are fitted with enlarged hearts and mouths wide enough open'd, to take in and receave those streams and ri∣vers of the emanations of divine bounty and love, how broad or deep soever they prove, and how high soever they may rise and overflow. For they have the man Christ Jesus their head, the second Adam, who as their forerunner, is gone before to prepare the way for them, and as the true arke in which are many mansions, to re∣ceave them into himself, that where he is they may be also. Of what hath bin already said, this then is the sum. Christ is the eternall WORD and speaking power of God, by whom are all things. He is also (as hath bin shew∣ed) the rock of ages, the place of Gods rest, throughout all generations; the eter∣nal Sabbath, Heb. 4. wherein God finished his works so fully to his content, that therein he took up his Rest, even in the person and Spirit of the Mediatour, the my∣stery, which from the beginning of the world hath lain hid in God, who created all things according to the eternall purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord. Further, This eternall WORD, who is the creatour of all things, visible and invisible, being in the Mediatour the image of the invisible God, does bear the name of the blessed Trinity, and stamps the impression and character thereof upon all the works of his hands. He is the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and Ending of the creation of God. In the Psalms and Ecclesiastes, God is called by the name of crea∣tours, as being three, or a threefold cause of the being that is givē unto the creature; 1. Of the creatures hidden and secret Being, as it subsists and lives in the mind of God, by way of his purpose and decree, and in his fore knowledg; 2. As this seed of creature-being that lives in God, is brought into its naturall and proper form of life, made a part and member of the first creation, in a mutable state; 3. As it is changed and translated out of its mutable state and corruptible fashion, into a form of being and state of life that is immutable; wherein the first creation is not destroyed or annihilated but consummated and brought to its final perfection, so as to answer rhe holy end and design of the Creatour, who as the potter hath ab∣solute power over his owne clay, to make vessels of honour or dishonor as pleases him, and in such manner as is exactly consistent with the wisdom and justice of a most holy God. The nature of men and angels is formed in Gods likenes, wherein they are made with hearing eares, seing eyes and working hearts, to attend unto and observe the divine oracles delivered to them from the mouth of God, as the law under which they are created, the rule of their life and actiō, to guide them in the passage out of their mutable state into that which is immutable, Gods words therefore doe come forth in the threefold dispensation before described, visible and intelligible words to their minds or creature-understandings, answerable to the state they are found
in and to the degree and measure of their growth, whereunto they have atteined. For there can be no communion or intercourse between God and man, but by such divine words as are visible and intelligible to creature understanding, signifying such things as their eyes may se, their ears heare, and that are in themselvs possible and rationall to be obeyed, which all Gods laws to man most certainly are. Hence is it, thar John testifies of the WORD of life itself, that it is visible and hath bin heard and seen from the beginning, being no new commandement, but the old, made visi∣ble and intelligible, first by the book of the creature; then, by the book of the Scriptures, and lastly, by the living mouth and heart of Christs manhood, assumed into personall union with the eternall WORD, and thereby made the brightnes of Gods glory, the expresse image of his essentiall mind, where the vision at last be∣comes so plaine to all beleevers, that he that runs may read it. The humanity or flesh of Christ singly considered, is no where in Scripture called the WORD, but at most the engraffed WORD. For the WORD is that which is made flesh, and dwells in us, which (though after it was born of a woman and found in fashion as a man, actually partaking of flesh and blood with the rest of the children, it was seen, heard and handled, as the glory or manifestation of the only begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth, in the form of a man) was actually in Being and life from the be∣ginning, (which the flesh of Christ was not) and was Davids Root, the BRIGHT MORNING STAR, the Lord, the WORD which David in Spirit saw, (Psal. 110.1.) when he sayd, the Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, till I make thy foes thy footstool. These things premised, our way wilbe much more open and cleer, to proceed in what we have propounded, as to a serious search and pursuite after life eternall. We are hereby naturally lead into the ensuing method, and have our matter pointed out to us for our discussion and enquiry, in these following particulars. 1. What are the things that are the subject matter of the command delivered to man by the divine WORD and oracles of God, that are the law of his mouth, visible and intelligible to man by the light and law of nature, the light and law of the Scrip∣tures, the light and law of faith or the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus. And if the matter be one and the same, that is declared and made knowne in and under these three dispensations, wherein is it that they differ from each other? 2. What is that state of mutability which by nature man is brought into? Is his mu∣tability lost or no by the fall, as wel as his natural righteousnes and purity? may he not yet be changed back againe, at least, to a gradual recovery of his natural righ∣teousnes, yea and yet fatther, into a more excellent state of life and righteousnes then at first he receaved? Is his primitive uprightnes, in kind, recoverable or no? Is it actually and universally restored to all mankind by the blood and ransom of the Redeemer, as the means to lead men to repentance, and bring them all to the practical knowledg of the truth, by inwardly cleansing and purging them from their
old sins and setting them in the way of that amendment and newnes of life, which God by his law calls for, and commands from all men every where? 3. Is it possible for man is his mutable state (considered as either before or after the fall, according to the degree of restoration he does arrive unto) to hear and o∣bey the things of Gods law, and so to keep the commandements and demean him∣self in his actings conformable thereunto, as not to turn from them or let them de∣part from his heart all the days of his life, untill his translation into his immuta∣ble state? 4. And lastly; What is that immutable state in righteousnes and glory, (which be∣gins in the day of Christs first appearance, and is perfected by his second) unto which man is fore-ordeined, and through effectuall calling and plantation with Christ in his death and resurrection, is prepared and made heir of in his mutable state, in order at last actually to inherit and possesse it at Christs seconds com∣ming, that other day wherein the Son of Man is to be revealed from heaven, which hath its MORNING, MIDDAY, and EVENing also, that immediatly precedes the last day of eternity, which hath no division or parts. 1. First, as for the things of Gods law, or matter commanded unto man, which God wills that he should heare, understand and obey, (as that on which his life and death depends, and does therefore with all plaines and certainty set before him, that ignorance or other excuse of any kind may not be pretended by him) all is reduced by our Saviour (who best knows it) into a very narrow compasse, (Luk: 10, 28. in his answer to the lawyer that came to tempt him, saying, Master, what shall I doe to inherit eternall life? The question does plainly intimate, first, that some things were to be done by man, and that by Gods command and instruction, in order to obtein or be made heir of eternall life. 2. That so doing or working the work of God, the inheritance is sure. Christ in his answer denies nothing of this, but thinks fit to try the knowledg of the lawyer, and answer him according to his owne heart and principles. What is written in the law, (sayes he) how readest thou? The lawyer replies, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all they soule, with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and thy neighbour as thy self. This Christ agrees to be the sum of the things conteined in the commandements of God, which man is to doe, and in the doing and obeying whereof, as he ought and God requires, will make him heir and sure of eternall life. Therefore all that Christ adds, is, Thou hast answered right: this do, and thou shalt live. But although these few words contein mans whole duty to God and to his neigh∣bour, yet (as by the following verses does appeare, in the parable of the wayfairing man that fell amongst theeves) there is more in it then at first we are aware of, to perform this duty to God and to our neighbour, rightly, and after such manner as
is acceptable to God. For, so do to it requires faith, that faith which works by love, or which makes us new creatures, giving us the sight of that man in the person of the Mediatour, that hath seen God, by whose testimony we also are taught to so him, and know that he is, and what he is, even the rewarder of all those with eter∣nall life, who diligently seek him. No man knows who the Son is, but the Father, nor who the Father is, but the Son, and he to whom the son will reveale him. He that beleeveth on the Son of God, hath this witnes in himself, by the sons com∣ming into his heart, and bringing this knowledg along with him, giving us to know him that is true, and that we are in him that is true, even in him that is the true God and eternall life. By such knowledg are we preserved from idols, and setting up some other thing in our hearts for the true God, or from ignorantly bestowing our worship, love, and service upon him. He that beleevs not God, hath made him a liar, because he beleeves not the Re∣cord which God gives of his Son, when it is plainly represented and set before his eyes, in such legible characters that he is able to understand and perceave the Re∣cord, even that God hath given unto us eternall life and that this life is in his Son, and is to be had only in the gift of the Son made to us, in a most intimate and inse∣perable union, which he that hath, hath life: he that hath it not, hath not life. What∣soever comes short of this, let it make never so faire a shew for the present, it wilbe sure to end in death. Hence is it, that without faith it is impossible to please God, because otherwise we cannot know him as we ought, with such certainty as not to mistake him for some other thing, or some other thing for him. And so also will it be with us as to our neibour or brother; we shall take him to be our neibour and brother, that is not he; and he that is not, we shall account to be him. For, not knowing the very Image and first patern, set up in Christ, our elder brother, and the lowly meek spirit in him, which with God is of great price, how can we know the children and many brethren that are to be conformed to him therein? Unlesse we know and love him that begets, how can we know and love them that are begotten of him? For both he that sanctifies and they that are sanctified are all of one, for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren; those, who if we be are love unto, we thereby know that we are passed from death to life. And if we love not, but hate them, sitting and speaking against these our brethren, slandering our owne Mothers Sons, we are in Gods account no better then Cain, wicked munderers, whatever righteous works we are conversant in according to the letter of the law. Be we as zealous and forward as we will, in offering our sacrifices and bringing our gifts before the altar, till we be first reconciled to our brother, we are directed to leave our gift before the altar, as better not to offer it at all, with a heart which is without that love by which faith works. In this sence are we to understand 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3. If we have al other gifts and good things from God, that are possible to be had, and not this love with them, we are
nothing, we are but as sounding brasse and tinckling cymballs. The saying therefore of Christ, do this and thou shalt live, according to his owne reading and understanding of the law, is, do this at present, by the light thou art under; but give not off, be not satisfied til thou come to do it by faith, as a new crea∣ture, with the knowledge and love which faith teaches and workes, and thou art a true heir of eternall life, and shalt most certainly enter into it and possesse it for ever. Leave thy sacrifice and thy guift before the altar, in humility and brokenes of Spi∣rit and in lowlines of heart, rather then take upon thee to offer it, untill thou have the Son given to thee and art regenerated. For it is better for thee that thou shouldst not vow, then that thou shouldst vow and not pay. Keep thy foot therefore when thou goest into the house of God (or doest enter upon the performance of his worship and Service in thy natural, mutable frame of Spirit) and be more ready to heare then to give the sacrifice of fools: for they consider not that they do evill, even in their very prayers and duties of divine worship. By faith it is, that the right and stedfast Spirit is formed, the whole and entire heart which God requires. We may then take notice, that there is a twofold reading, preaching, hearing, receaving and obeying of the Word of God and doctrine of his law; the one after a lesse, the other after a more excellent way: the one, proportiond to the sight, hea∣ring, and heart of the natural and earthly man, in his mutable state, properly called the law; the other, proportioned to the sight, hearing, and heart of the heavenly and spiritual man, properly called the Gospel. How readest thou, says Christ to the learned lawyer, when he would point out the law in the former sence; and as to the latter, himself is the reader, preacher and worker of it, as he is the Son himself and word of faith, which through our being in him, (in whose manhood it is as in our mouth and in our heart) is made bread to us, and not only possible, but most desireable and prevailingly attractive unto us to do and fulfil after him. In this sence it is, that Christ is the end of the law to all that beleeve; and the law in its first kind of teaching or reading, is the Schoolmaster or teacher that sends us to Christ, and is appointed to keep us under its rule and discipline, till it put us into the hands of a better and surer guide, which is the Son himself, who by the voice of his Servant or messenger that he sends be∣fore him, gives notice of his comming. But when he comes himself, he teaches the way of God more perfectly, the way of knowing and loving God, of fearing him and keeping his commandements, which is the whole duty of man: According to this gradual discovery and revelation of the mind and will of God in his law, there are several degrees of growth and age, that man is or may be ac∣quainted with, in the conformity and obedience that he is to yeild to Gods holy law and commandement; 1. First, that of childhood, signifying the state of mans mutability and
unstable righteousnes, wherein he is wavering, liable to be tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, apt to be deceaved; 2. The state of youth, or years of discerning and settled judgment, in those that by faith are strong, and have overcom the wicked one, in whom the Word of God is abiding and hath taken fast hold and root, importing the life of the first resurrec∣tion in them, (at least, in the principles thereof) over whom the second death is never to have power; 3. The state of fatherhood and most ripe years, in those that have known him that is from the beginning, and are one with him, one with the father as Christ and the father are one, the church that are in God the father, the Bride the Lambs wife, by whom is made known the manifold wisdom of God and unsearchable riches of Christ, unto the Principalities and Powers in heavenly places, the very holy and Elect Angels. This importeth the life of the second resurrection in them, and the highest ascent into union and communion with God. To all these several kinds of growth, ages, or statures of humane perfection, the word and law of God is a Rule, suiting itself and commanding the same Duties to be performed, (as to the knowledg and love which we are to have and bear towards God and towards our neighbour) accordingly as the heart is principled and quali∣fied for the performance thereof, with a first, second or third measure and degree of light, and power from God, enabling thereunto. For that which God requires of man in the obedience he is to yeild unto him, is according to what he first gives and causes him to have, and not according to what he hath not. The commandement therefore of God, or the law of his mouth, which conteins in it and requires from man his whole duty, both towards his God and towards his neighbour, is (as to the matter of it) the same for the rule of mans walking in com∣munion with God, either in the first or second Covenant, being that which in Scrip∣ture is called the law, as wel as that which is called the Gospel. 1. It is called the law, as it is the divine oracle and righteous command of the supreme lawgiver, strictly enjoyning exact and compleat obedience, and severely punishing the least tittle of disobedience, being dispensed in such manner as leaves it to mans liberty and fredom of wil, to hear and obey, or to refuse and disobey, at his owne peril, upon the penalties and curse declared in it. 2. Tis called the Gospel or good tydings, as it is the free and gracious conde∣scention or good wil of God, appearing towards man, which God the Mediatour exercises, upon the foresight of what man would doe, as left to his owne freewil in and under the law. For this, in pursuance of his fathers decree, does he cleave unto and lay hold of mans nature or the seed of David according to the flesh, resolving to bring upon the natural frame of mans Spirit, as left to his owne arbitrary choice and freewil, a most beneficial and necessary change, through which man is prevai∣led with to give up and resigne back againe that first liberty of his, into the hands of
his faithful creatour who first gave it, and to trust him for the restoring it in such manner and measure back againe, as may be best for him and may most certainly and infallibly attein the end for which it was first given, which was, to fulfil the righ∣teousnes of Gods law. Accordingly does he receave it in a new, a more excellent and certain manner of hold and exercise, wherein it is made impossible for him to transgresse the law of God by sinning, and most possible and free for him to run the race of Gods commandements. Through this new enlargment and fredom of heart, given him by the influencing power of that love which is stronger then death, man is so bound up in the wil of God, so absolutly subjected to what the law requires, as makes him sure to inherit eternal life. The living and primitive patern of this obe∣dience is wrought out in mans owne nature, in the person of the Mediatour, and set before his eyes with an attractive and transforming power, to draw man after him, and transform him into the same image, from glory to glory, from the glory of his first creation in conformity to the law in Christs first appearance, to the glory of the new creation, in conformity to the Gospel, in his second. And thus Christ enables his beleeving followers to fulfil the law after him, who came not to destroy but fulfil it in the Gospel. And as some are thus changed by the attractive influen∣ce of Christs constreining love, others (with whom also his Spirit for a season strives by the same Gospel manifestation of him) are upon their wilful refusal, hard∣ned and fixed in their disobedience. To such he becomes a stone of stumbling and rock of offence; even to those, who after this gracious offer made knowne unto them, doe obstinately despise and reject it, preferring their first and natural fre∣dom of the Sons of men, to this more excellent fredom and glorious liberty of the Sons of God. In order to make triall of them herein, since the fal, Christ hath ob∣teined of the father on their behalf, the restoration of that lesser glory and inferiour liberty of nature (that ought to be resigned for the greater, that excels and is to re∣main) by the price and ransome of his owne blood, from whence flowes a con∣ditional remission of al sinners, as to sins past, and a free and general restoration of them to the priviledg and benefit of their first natural fredom and primitive righ∣teousnes, in kind, and in such degrees and measure, as is requisit and sufficient for the making of such a trial, and rendring them without all excuse, nothing having bin wanting in him to bring them to repentance and to receave the truth in the love of it. He hath given that former sort of gifts to the rebellious also, that prove enemies and haters of him in the more excellent gifts and priviledges that he offers them also in a superiour dispensation, which cannot be receaved by them without an obedient surrender and losse of what already they have receaved from him, at his command. He is a propitiation for the sins of the whole world. Both these divine oracles and manifestations of Gods will, law and Gospel, were made knowne to Adam in Paradise; the one typed out in the tree of the knowledg of good and evil, fitly resembling the first created liberty and fredom of will man was
left to the exercise of under the law: the other, by the tree of life, placed in the midst of the Paradise of God, lively figuring out the better fredom and lasting ho∣lines, which the Son himself makes us partakers of in the Gospel, as he is the end of the law to al that beleeve, and can be perswaded to trust him, as the Gospel requires. In both these respects it is, that John sayes, I write no new Commandement to you, but an old commandement, which was from the beginning. As it first came forth in law and Gospel before the fal, it was the law written in Adams heart, and the Gospel set before the eyes of his mind, by the ministry of angels, in lively types and figures. This we are to understand by the law of nature, by which all natural men shalbe judged, who never have atteined or lived under the hearing of the writ∣ten law or word of God, given afterwards in the holy Scriptures. 2dly: The self-same old commandement of God, that is both law and Gospel, came forth since the fall, by divine inspiration, in the bookes of the old and new Te∣stament, The law was under this dispensation, engraven on tables of stone, con∣teining the ten commandements. The Gospel was represented in the ceremonial law of Moses ministry, under the old Testament. Then againe, the law is written in the fleshly tables of Christs heart, as he was born of a woman, and made under the law: and the Gospel was represented in the two Sacraments of baptism and the Lords supper, instituted during the dayes of Christs flesh, the witnesse whereof is left us upon record in the New Testament, as that manifestation of Gods wil, which the Son himself in and by his first appearance hath brought to light. This we are to understand by the law of the Scriptures, which are not of private interpretation, nor a prophesy that is come to us by the will of man, but that which holy men spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, for a sure ground of truth, to be relied upon. 3dly and lastly; the same commandement or word of God which hath bin from the beginning, is to come forth once more, in and by the son's second and personal appearance in Spirit, a fiery and living law, call'd in Scripture, the law of the Spirit of life that is in Christ Jesus, which by faith is espied and seen as the Land of promise, into which all true beleevers must enter, and where they must inherit the immu∣tability and eternal life, promised; a life from the dead, which those that possesse, whether in the glory of the first or second Resurrection, though as yet but in the seed, shal never die more. The second death shal not have power over them; but all tears shalbe wiped away from their eyes, and all cause of sorrow or fear. This is the Son's Kingdom in Spirit, which he receaves and enters upon, by the appointement of the father. He is pleased to begin it in weaknes and subject it a while to great sufferings, but will shortly enter upon and continue the exer∣cise of it in power, during the space of a thousand years, wherein he is to judg the world in righteousnes, effectually causing his wil to be done on earth as it is in heaven.
The law under this dispensation, is found as the tables of the Testimony laid up in the heavenly tabernacle of Christ the Son of Man; a fiery law of indigna∣tion and vengeance, in severity without mercy, upon all wilful, disobedient sinners. The Gospel under this dispensation, is as the throne or heaven itself, together with the earth that is made Gods footstool, or the natural man, subjected and brought through faith to Gods foot, in a way exclusive to al boasting. This is the new heavens and new earth of which the new Jerusalem consists, that comes downe from God, written in and upon the heart of Christs manhood, glorified, and made immutably holy, shining forth as the living Image of God, in a twofold forme, to wit, in the form of a servant not only made a Son, which is the first; but exalted to a name above every name, and anointed with the oyle of gladnes above his fel∣lows; thats the second. Thus Christ is the WORD (as is above sayd) that is commanded to a thousand ge∣nerations. He that was, he that is, and he that is to come, the Almighty: He was both law and Gospel, in the day or under the dispensation of the law of nature; is the same, in the day and under the dispensation of the law of the Scriptures; and is to come, and wil shew himself to be the same also in the day and under the proper and immediate dispensation of the law of the Spirit of life, that is in him. This is the spiritual day of the Lord, the thousand years Jubilee and Sabbath. This third dispensation hastens apace, draw's very neer, and the faithfull and upright in heart beleeve, expect and wait for the comming of the Lord therein, both as an Eliah, in and by his messengers and Servants, elect angels and beleeving men (that shal re∣store all things, root up every thing that offends, by a swift execution of vengeance on evil doers, in the morning of this day) and after that, in his owne person, wherein the man Christ by whom God hath ordeined to judg the world in righteousnes, wil shew himself as the great King and bridegroom that hath the bride, whose mariage he wil gloriously solemnize on earth, in order to cary her up with him into heaven, upon the expiration of his thousand years reigne, and the Resigning up of his Kingdom into the hands of this father, that God may be all in all. That the matter of Gods command and mans duty is the same, as wel un∣der the law as under the Gospel; and in them both, under all the three dis∣pensations before mentioned, is sufficiently cleered and demonstrated: nor is the difference lesse perspicuous, wherein each of them vary one from ano∣ther. 1. The law of nature writes the matter of the law and duty commanded, upon the nature and in the very heart of man, teaching and instructing him also in the na∣ture of the Gospel, the new nature, by the ministry of angels, in most apt, significant types and figures, suited to his natural understanding.
2dly. The law of the Scripture, first writes the law in tables of stone, and teaches the Gospel by the types conteined in the ceremonial law, or a sort of ordinances that are worldly rudiments, being but the shadow of the good things to come, whereof the body is Christ. Afterwards therefore, Christ coming in the flesh, a∣bolishes and abrogates that dispensation of the mosaical ministry, and in stead there∣of, makes the heart and conscience of man in himself and followers, the fleshly tables, whereon the law is written by the Spirit of the living God. Hereby, a confor∣mity of holy flesh is wrought in man, like unto the flesh of Christ, through the hea∣ring of the word. This is the washing of our body or natural man, with the pure wa∣ter of the living WORD and Spirit of Christ, through the ministry of the outward preaching thereof, to the purging and clensing us from all filthines of flesh. And this is obteined through the vertue and price of Christs blood, together with the a∣tonement and remission of sins past. Under this dispensation it is, that by the doctrin of the cross, signified in the Sacraments of baptism and the Lords Supper, and there∣by lively represented to the eyes of the very natural man, he is taught the Gospel a second time, under the Scripture dispensation of law and Gospel. Neverthelesse, this teaching yet is short of the glory of God to be revealed in and by Christs per∣sonal appearance in Spirit, which as it is the 3. Third and last dispensation of law and Gospel, so does it differ in excellency and glory, very much from the other two. For it is the fruit of the vine, which Christ reservs to drink with his owne brethren and faithful Servants in the Kingdom of his father, or which his father hath given unto him; that those that have continued with the Son in his temptations and followed him fully in the regeneration, may eat and drink at his table in this his Kingdom, and sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel, or the natural and fleshly holy seed, jew or gentile, who at that day shalbe found to be but in their mutable state of righteousnes and life. This is the best wine, far exceeding any before receaved in types, figures and Sacraments, being that which Christ keeps till the last, as that fruit of himself the heavenly and true vine, which will refresh the heart of God and of man, or of the divine and heavenly man, as wel as of the earthly and natural man, brought forth in the exercise of an immutable righteousnes, and made after the power of an endlesse life. The former of these is to sit at Christs right hand, the latter at his left, in this his Kingdom and glory, unto which both of them are fitted and prepared by the father, through the lively conformity they are taken into, and made to beare with Christ, in his death and resurrection. So much be spoken in way of resolution to the first general query of the 4 above propounded, to insist on in this Treatise; to wit, concerning the subject matter of the law or command of God, delivered to man by the divine WORD and oracles of God, under the threefold dispensation thereof, together with the difference of these dispensations under the law of nature, Scripture, Spirit. The time of the latter
branch of the 2d dispensation, beginning with John the Baptists and Christs owne personal ministry in the flesh, is now far spent, and the yet more glorious day of Christs 2d appearance and dispensation in Spirit, is at hand. The second General query to be insisted on, is concerning the mutable state man was created in at first, and remains in, even after the fall, out of which he is again capable to be changed, and either restored and regenerated by the knowledg of Christ in the Gospel, or else cast down for ever, into eternal perdition. The WORD that hath bin the old Commandement from the beginning, that it may evidently appear to all understandings to be the word of Truth, doth branch it∣self forth (as hath bin declared) into two Testimonies or witnesses, which are both of them the law of Gods mouth. The one conteins in it the doctrine of the law of works, the rule of mans first communion with God, in the first Covenant: the other, the doctrin of the law and righteousnes of faith, the rule of that 2d communion which God thinkes fit to take man into in the spirit of his Son, which can never be lost (as the first may) but endures to everlasting life. Now two Testimonies (according to the law) are sufficient for the discovery and confirmation of all truth. Answerable hereunto, does he that is Truth itself, shine and give forth the light of his glory, whose two Testimonies may either be joyned in consortship, harmony and subserviency with and to one another, in the ministry and dispensing of them, and so become a law of life to all that heare and obey them; that new song, mention'd Rev. 14.3. sung before the throne, called chap. 15.3. the song of Moses and of the lamb, sung together in perfect harmony and agremēt, which no man can learne but the 144000 Virgins, that follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth, being redeemed from among men, as the first fruits to God and to the Lamb. But now these two laws or Testimonies of works and of faith, as they may be taught and dispensed in difference, disagreement, inconsistency and opposition, one unto the other, may become a ministry of death, either by setting up and exalting the letter above and against the spirit, or disjoyning the spirit from the letter, as that which may be without it and needs no consortship with it. This is the work of the false, deceitful Spirit, the father of lies, and is not of the Truth. Now these being the Testimonies which from the beginning are commanded by God to be heard and obeyed, no sooner was man created in Gods image and endued with an immortal, intellectual, rational and sensual soule, made a free agent, but God set them before him, as a meet and capable subject, to be made wise and happy in the practice of them. The work of the one of them was immediatly written in his heart by the finger of God at his creation; and the word of the other of them, as soon as he was put into Paradise, was sounding every wherein his eares, and was exposed to the sight of his mind, in the visible types and signes of the Sabbath, the institution of marriage, the tree of life, and by the ministry of the holy angels. Two things are recorded by Moses concerning the first make and constitution
of being, given unto man by God, at his creation. The first, we find Gen. 1.26, 27. where the counsel is taken by the blessed Trinity, his creatours, within them¦selvs, saying; Let us make man in our image, after our likenes, and let him have do∣minion over the visible creation, and be fruitfull, multiply and replenish the earth, ruling over every living thing that moveth upon the earth. So God created man in his owne image, in the image of God created he him, male and female created he them. God is in his being the highest reason, and the operation or work of his mind is discovered and made knowne by the word of his mouth. These two powers in him are reteined in most absolute agrement and usefulnes each unto the other. Answe∣rable to this patern in great, is man made in little, as to his Spirit and soule, with this only difference, that the work of mans mind in reference to Gods law, and his word and outward action in reference to his mind, have not immutability in them, but may disagree and chāge from their first harmony and primitive patern, set them in God. The powerfull impression of this patern on the spirit and soule of man, was such, as in respect thereof it is said, God made man upright or perfect, formed his mind in perfect agrement and likenes of operation with his owne mind, and in full consent and liking of his law, as that which is holy, righteous, Spiritual and good, given for man to obey, as his duty. He disposed him also by a natural bent and inclination of mind, to doe good, resist evil, love righteousnes and hate iniquity. This was the state of mans Spirit or soule, as yet seperate from his body, and not partaker of that flesh and blood, which was afterwards formed out of the dust of the earth. The second thing therefore noted concerning mans building or creation, is, that he also became a living, sensual or animalish soule, actually clothed with bodily or∣gans, that God formed for him out of the dust of the ground; Gen. 2.7. And he breathed into his nostrills the breath of life, or sent mans soule that was before created in Gods image, into that body so appointed and given to it by God, as the earth wherein the seed of mans Spirit was planted, and the feild in which it was made to grow, by reason whereof man became a living soule; that is to say, by the most intimate union and inhabitation, thus wrought by God between the spirit and body of man, there was an awakening and bringing into actual exercise, the sen∣sual and bodily nature of his mind, by sitting to it these meet organs. Neverthe∣lesse, that which was before in the state of a soule separate, an equal and associate to angels, comes by this means to be abased and made of little reputation, being brought to a kind of equality with the beasts that perish. And in like manner, as thus the spirit of man was after its first creation, embodied and made flesh, as a dark shadow of what is done to him, tis said to have bin so with the heavens and earth, when created: yea, even every plant of the feild had a state of being, before it was put in the earth; and every herb of the feild, before it grew; Gen. 2.4, 5,
Now through the intimate union and conjunction that mans body is taken into with his soule, it is made a living, acting, speaking creature, participant with his rational and intellectual spirit, and in fellowship there with, meet to have and exer∣cise dominion, as God appointed, over every living creature that moves upon the face of the earth. Thus the bodily life of man, became in itself as an Eden, the gar∣den of God and the feild that he had blessed and made fruitful unto every good word and work, in subserviency and subjection of desire to mans intellectual and angelical part, which by the very order and law of nature, (as having not only priority, but eminency of being) was given to it, both as Lord and husband, a superiour and yet a kind of equal, joyned with it in such a harmonious consistency, that the actings of both natures made up but the compleat and entire Act of mans judgement and will. Thus was man created male and female in the spirit and person of Adam, before Eve was created, as Gen. 1.27. and 2.28.25. do shew. And he receaved a charg from God, to keep this body in subjection to the dictates of his mind, and not suffer it to usurp authority over that part in him which is most the man, to wit, the angelical or intellectual part. When God had thus planted the garden of Eden or pleasure and delight, in this spirituall sense, as wel as in an outward and literall, he puts mans spi∣rit into it, giving him the keeping, dressing and Rule of it, with this expresse com∣mand, saying, of every tree of the garden thou mayst freely eat; but of the tree of knowledg of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day thou eatest there∣of, thou shalt surely die. For out of the ground the Lord God had made to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for food: the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledg of good and evil. Thus was there a paradise without man and within him, a garden of pleasant fruit, which he might take delight and pleasure in, and which he was appointed to dresse and keep in the order wherein God had delivered it over to him, and to improve it to the end for which he was brought into it by God. And for his instruction herein, he was commanded and allowed the use of the outward as wel as the inward senses of his mind, with this only caution and Restriction, that he should by no means, nor upon any pretēce whatsoever, hearkē to or obey the voice of his sensual and bruitish nature, how rational so ever the judgment of it (which is but flesh) might seeme to be, considered as in its owne single operation, tempting and drawing off the cōsent and love of the intellectual part, from the streight rule of its duty, required in Gods law. For the spirit of the mind, which is the stronger and better part in man, as that which is immortall, remains under the morall and perpetuall convictiō of, as wel as obliga∣tion to the righteousnes required in the law of God, the light of which, although it may be smoothered for a time, cā never be wholly extinguished, but is that work of the law in the heart that is and wil be unalterably either excusing and encouraging or accusing and tormēting the mind, as cause is give by every mās works. It is therefore called the conscience that servs in stead of a thousand witnesses, and whē it is awake,
does alwayes consent to the goodnes and righteousnes that is in the law. By this rule therefore, sin could not make its approaches, but warning would be given, and to know evil barely in the abstract, without consenting to it or becomming one with it, in approbation and delight, was not the thing which God forbade him; but the feeding on it with consent and delight, upon the beholding of its desireablenes in the judgment of the outward senses and as it gratified the bruitish lust and desire of the flesh, so as thereupon to be drawn into a compliance, and induced to make it the Act of the whole man, suffering sin thereby not only to conceave but to be perfected. Hence is it said, 1 Tim. 2.13, 14. that Adam was first formed, then eve; And Adam (or the intellectual and superiour part in man) was not in the Trans∣gression, or could not be deceaved by sin, but saw cause enough to dissent from and resist it. It was the woman, the sensual part, that was deceaved and was in the Trans∣gression, being of such power, as not only to entice, but so to fetch over the con∣sent of the mind, as to make it the act of the whole man. And sin being once thus perfected, brought forth death. All this came by mans ill use of that liberty and free∣dom he was left unto, whilst under the dominion and teaching of the law of workes, which commits unto man the keeping and Rule of his owne soule, upon severe pe∣nalties, in case of failer, and strictly commands the thing to be done, as that which on all accounts it was mans duty to do, but layes no prevailing restraint on him to the contrary, as the law of faith does. The law therefore did in effect shew unto man, that the right way of keeping his soule, according as is commanded, is through the prevailing power of faith, whereby man keeps not himself but is kept unto salvation by his faithful creatour, to whom he has committed the keeping of his soule in weldoing. This was held forth to Adam in the institution of the Sabbath day, the day of the spirit and true Rest. It is both a day of most powerful restraint and of greatest li∣berty to man; a day, that most powerfully and effectually restrains man from sin and all approaches towards it, and that as powerfully binds him up unto God and his service, which is the most perfect freedom. Whilst the bent and inclination of mans will was in its primitive purity, he was left freely to the exercise of his owne liking; and on that account, trusted with the keeping of his owne soule, in the state which God at first deliver'd it over unto him, which being mutable, and not trial-proof, in the time of temptation failed. But let us now consider a little what it was which God delivered to Adam, with such charg and command to keep, or to restore, to him as good as he found it. The Lord committed to his charg and keeping, his precious soule and body, and his owne image that was by him imprinted and stam∣ped thereupon, as his owne coyne and proper goods, to be therefore employed for his use, to his service, and according to his will, only. Man receaved himself, or came thus out of the hands of God, without the least blemish, and so was to keep himself without any diminution or wast, or be exchanged to the profit and advantage of the giver.
Man, thus made in Gods image, with a mind like in operation unto Gods, might very wel be trusted to doe his owne liking. Howbeit, there was hereby planted in him at his creation, a free principle of wel and evil doing, in either of which, he had a capacity to act, but not properly a freedom, by reason of the dominion of the law which he was made under, and bound in the obligation of duty to conform unto. In this sense, man was a servant to the law and under the authority of it, even whilst he enjoyed his primitive natural freedom, which consisted in the right and priviledg conferred by God upon him, of living according to his owne wil, and being at his owne free motion and dispose, til taken from him forcibly, or that he willingly yeild himself up to the service of another, as he did at first unto his God, most freely and willingly consenting to have his law exercise dominion over him. A power then to wil and not to wil at his owne free motion and choice, God gave to man upon trust or conditionally, that he should be ruled by his law, and be care∣ful to keep himself in al his actings, most exactly and unchāgably, in agreement and harmony with that. On this condition, Man was at his liberty to do this or that, which best liked himself, in al other things. He had power to kil and power to keep alive, in a way of just Rule and magistratical governement. He had also in himself a power to doe good and a power to doe the contrary, which is evill; a power to chang and turn away from doing the good he ought to doe, and a power to turn to the evil, he ought not to doe. A capacity or power in him to doe thus, he had from God, and it was not sin. But his choosing to exercise this left hand branch of his primitive fredom, in turning unto and delighting in sin, against the law of God which he knew, rather then delighting himselfe in the exercise of the right hand branch of his fredom, to good, in obedience and conformity to the law of God, this was his inexcusable miscarriage and sin, let him pretend what he wil or can. Now although this were mans natural right, after this manner to be free, as that which in itself is lawfull and good, if wel managed, and conducted to the end for which it is given; yet, the being and standing which is given unto man in this fre∣dom, is most slippery and dangerous, and any long continuance therein, is not at al to be coveted after, when restored since. For this is not the fredom with which God himself is free, or with which Christ the Son is free, or does make the true heirs of his Kingdom free with, nor yet is it the fredom of the holy and elect angels, or of the spirits of just men made perfect, who yet all are most free agents. God himself is the freest of all; yet he cannot but will good, as of his owne nature bound up unto it. He cannot sin or lie. Of this fredom doth the man Christ partake, and by and un∣der him elect angels and men have their share in it; and in and by the exercise thereof, doe inherit the life that is eternall and unchangable. Such true freedom does import a powerful binding up and restraining of the mind from al possibility of doing evil, as evil is taken for sin and the transgression of the law: and as powerfull a bent and disposition of will, to do what is good, right and
acceptable in the sight of God, without any possibility of hindrance, resistance or dis∣continuance, in him who wills or does it. The obteining this latter and most excel∣lent fredom, is the end for which the first or natural fredom was at all given; God would not have his servants in their first make, bound up immutably, even to that which is their duty; but by and with their owne free consent, being in a capacity to dissent, but at their perill. Neither will he have any debarred and for ever excluded from this first fredom, but those that wilfully reject it, that so the doing good after the power of an endlesse life, and the committing of sin with a hardned and impeni∣tent heart, may be found in both sorts of men, a most free and voluntary act, and each receave their reward according to their works. By the impression of righteousnes which man is under from God, as he is made in Gods image, he hath an aptitude, a strong bent, lively inclination and disposition of mind to the right and just which is conteined in the law of God, and wherein mans whole duty doth consist. But because (as hath bin said) man is by nature (not with∣standing all this) left at such a liberty, as that he is not by any certain, prevailing and overcomming power over and against whatsoever shall make resistance, with held and restrained, kept and bound fast to his duty; at this door, through the weakenes of the flesh, sin entered, and death by sin passed upon all men, because in Adam the common parent, all men had sinned. This door unto sin is kept open, so long as mans naturall freedom continues with him, either as receaved at first, before the fall, or by way of restoration through the redeemers blood, since, which we shall speake unto in its proper place. That which opens this door, is mans owne lust, as it is written; Let no man say when he is temp∣ted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted with evill; neither tempteth he any man. But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away by his owne lust, and enticed. Thē, when lust hath conceaved, it brings forth sin; and sin, when it is finished, brings forth death. The mind of God is above all temptatiō to evil. The mind of man is not so, (though formed in Gods image) whilst he is yet under the law and its dominion, and hath not atteined unto nor bin brought under grace. So long then as man lives in, and will not part with his primitive, natural fredom, nor resign it through faith, in exchang for a second gift of it from God, in a better kind and way, he is stil under the dominion of the law; and not only accountable for the breaches of it and transgressions against it, but under the inevitable condemning and revenging power thereof, that wil first or last execute the curse threatned upon all evil doers. But he that is under grace, is be∣come dead to the law, being crucified with Christ, or fastned and bound by the power of the death and cross of Christ, with such a bent of mind and hatred against sin, as no∣thing can alter or chang: and is so quickned and made free and a live unto righte∣ousnes, as nothing can hinder the course and duration of it. By this means the door of the mind is so fixed and fast shut against all sin, as it is not in the power of the gates of hel, ever to set or break it open more.
In the mind of man, we are to acknowledg (as hath bin already intimated) two parts; 1. the spirit of the mind, the superiour and intellectual part, equalizing man with an∣gels. 2dly, the sensitive and inferiour part, which abases man into the likenes and into a kind of equality with the Beasts; and is indeed, capable to make him a beast, yea, actually, and that too generally, does make men so. This inferiour part of mans spirit, is as the door of his mind, the mouth or instrumēt of its cōverse, inward or outward and in distinction from the first and superiour power (the spirit of the mind) is cal∣led in scripture, flesh, or the sensuall and living soule. Hēce that of the Apostle, Rom. 7.25. So then I myself, with my mind, do serve the law of God: but with my flesh, the law of sin. So also our blessed saviour, observing the fleshly drowsines of his disciples, that they could not watch one hour with him, at such a pinch of straits as he then was in; the spirit (says he) is willing: but the flesh is weak. This was the lusting flesh in mā, evē in paradise, whilst in his innocēcy; and through its weaknes, was the door of the mind set open to let in temptation and sin. For it is soon taken and deceaved, and is weak in resisting evil. And it is as soon weary of wel∣doing, if the way to persevere in weldoing, be through the crosse and all kinds of streights, hardships and disappointments unto the flesh, even to this fleshly and sen∣sual part of mans mind. For no sooner does this come into activity and liberty, by the conjunction and fellowship it is taken into, with the intellectual and superiour part, the spirit of the mind, but it is apt to run wild, fly out and grow untamed and ex∣travagant, as that which loves not to be accustomed to the yoke, and held in subjec∣tion to the spirit of the mind, as that is subjected to the law of God. It is apt to judg itself wise enough to make its owne choice, and to trust to its owne single judgment in all its actings. And in case it be cross'd and not complied with by the dictates of right reason in its superiour part, 'tis apt to murmure and be sullenly rebellious, so as to forbeare to do its office and duty to its head and Lord, the spirit of the mind. In order to bribe off and gain the consent and approbation of the superiour and ruling power of the mind, to the way and course it desires to take, it will invent many fair, specious and plausible pretences; make false representations of things, fascinating appearances, and mists, to delude and blind the superiour discerning of the mind. It will turne every stone to obteine its end, spreading before the spirit of the mind, flattering speeches, as nets and bands, to take and ensnare it, as the strong man Sam∣son was serv'd by his Dalilah. This demeanour and practice of the woman, the female and inferiour power of the mind, towards its Lord and husband, the superiour, is most lively described by Solomon, Eccles. 7.26. I find (sayes he) more bitter then death, the woman whose heart is snares and nets, and her hands bands: who so pleaseth God, (which without faith is impossible) shall escape from her; but the sinner shalbe takē by her, he that is a sinner through unbeleife. The spirit of mans mind, by refusing and resisting that offer and work of the spirit of God, whereby it should be brought into a most free subjection and captivity to the law of faith, becomes a sinner, and so comes to be taken by the nets and snares, the enticing words and pretences of its inferiour power, and in downright tearmes at length to be wholly captivated and subjected under the usurped commanding influence of that sensuall life, it ought to rule over. This was the lusting flesh in Adam, as also in Eve, before the fall, which the Ser∣pent knew how to tempt and gratify. And such did the weaknes of this flesh prove,
that it was not able to withstand or resist the temptation. All that the serpent aim'd at, was but to prevaile with this flesh, to think itself so wise and sufficiently able to move and act by the strength and excellency of its owne single judgment, as that it might safely undertake to doe what should be found most liking and agreable to its owne sense, and refuse the contrary, without being bound up to any necessary depen∣dance upon or holding conformity and agrement in its actions, either with the right dictates of the intellectual part, or with the righteous rule of Gods law. This once obtein'd, Satan had his end. For he well knew, that (this being granted) all the rest of the evil he desired to bring into man, and by him into the world, would easily and quickly follow. And this was so pleasing and gratifying a baite to the flesh, the assu∣ming a power to direct its owne steps, take its owne course and way, that it was quickly swallowed downe by man, without any due deliberation or pause upon the matter, suspecting no hurt as yet, till the lust that thus was conceaved, came to be finished, and to take along with it the spirit of the mind, corrupting and seducing that also from the simplicity that is in Christ, and thereby turning the soule from the truth of God declared in his law, to the lie and deceit of Satan conceaved in his crafty suggestion. Thus by degrees was man brought to worship and serve the crea∣ture, that is, the devil, more then the creator, under whose law he was first made, and who is the only true God, blessed for ever. Unto this the Scripture witnesseth, Rom. 1:22, 23. Professing themselvs to be∣wise, they became fools: and changed the glory (WORD, or Image) of the incor∣ruptible God, into an image made like to corruptible man, and unto birds, four-footed beasts, and creeping things. This man came to, by preferring the counsell of a fallen angel, that was gratifying and desireable food in the eye of flesh, before the holy law and commandement of the living and eternal God, which by the eye of his spirit or superiour part of his mind, he saw and knew himself obliged to the observation of. For this cause, God gives men up to the course and full sway of their owne wills and vile affections, leaving them as bondslaves to sin and Sathan, children of wrath and disobedience, in whom the Prince of the aire seats himself as in his throne, carrying them captive to his will. Mans continuance in honour and in Gods image wherein he was created, was but a very little while; He quickly found out and follo∣wed many inventions, contrary to Gods expresse command, written in his mind, as also signified by the sundry peeces of the creation, and sounded out by an audible voice to him, from God himself. Sin, being (after this manner) the voluntary and free act of our first parents, not only conceaved, but finished in the disobedience by them wrought, and persected; the wages of it, which is death, they immediatly receaved. For being presently alienated from the life of God, or the righteousnes performable by them in that image of God wherein they were created, they became dead in trespasses and sins.
The image of God in man was defaced, changed into an image (in some sort) of the devil. All pronesse and inclination of the will to good, was forthwith worn off and lost, upon the fall; and not only so, but contrary qualities thereunto possessed the mind. Thus mans primitive freedom and alacrity to righteousnes, was turn'd into vile subjection and service to the devil, and to all manner of uncleane affections and unrighteous actions. Neverthelesse, this sudden and unexpected chang in man, (brought about by the subtilty and influencing power of the Serpent, by reason of the weaknes of the flesh, that discovers itself in mans mutable state) is not such, but that this deadly wound is capable of healing, and man capable of being thereby restored, yea, to be made not only as good but better then he was at first, through the vertue and effi∣cacious power of Christs sacrifice and death, which was not only a generall propi∣tiation and atonement of sins past, but also for the sanctifying and purifying mans nature for time to come, after a more excellent manner through regeneration, then it was by creation. Unto this regenerate state, our first parents were called by the voice and doctrine of the Gospel, speaking to them in and on the seaventh day, as the only way and means to have prevented the fall, and kept out sins entrance upon the nature of man. For when God committed to the keeping of Adam, his owne soule, (in the good estate wherein he had set it, by making man in his image and after his owne likenes) it was not without a most speciall charg, to keep this choise jewel safe and vncorrupted, at the peril of his very life, till chang'd into a better state. This God required him to do, in the use of the best wayes and means that should be afforded him, even by taking fast hold of instruction, not letting her goe; but keeping her as his life; yea, keeping his heart above all keepings, as that from whence are the issues of life. To this end was the tree of life placed in the midst of paradise, open to his sight, that he might have the view of it. And by what was figured and signified to him in this tree, was it declared, how the keeping of his soule might be by another, even by the Son of God or by the Holy Ghost, the spirit of truth, dwelling in the heart by faith, which the worldly or fleshly mind does not, cannot receave, but by such an act of absolute resignation of itself in obedience to the wil of the Son of God, as is more hatefull to it then the worst of evils. Yet is there no other way possible for man to keep his soule safe for any long continuance, and in the houre of trial, when assaulted by the power of darknesse. The counsel and instruction given by the word of the Gospel in the tree of life, was, that if man found upon full debate and consideration within himself, that he was not like to continue long safe in his owne hands, neither could with certainty keep himself pure and incorrupt as the law required, that then he would be content to ac∣cept for his guardian and keeper, the Son of God himself, in whose person the judg∣mēt and will of man is fixed, so as to be the corner stone to al the rest of the heavenly
and spirituall building, even the effectual means to fix and make immutable in righteousnes both men and angels, that wilbe prevailed with to let him take the charge of ruling and keeping their hearts, in such manner as pleases him. This is the only way for man to become free indeed, with a better freedom then that of nature, abovemention'd; even with the freedom wherewith Christ himself is first made free, as he is the son of man in heaven, who came downe from heaven before he ascended up againe thither; John, 3.13. This good will and gracious offer of the Son of God, figured out in the tree of life, our first parents either neglected and slighted, or the way of his keeping them did not please them, but the suggestions of Satan were rather hearkned unto, that they might safely leane to their owne understanding, as the best and surest way to keep their soules safe. This understanding, how subject it was to be wrought upon and to turn from the truth (though fully convinc'd of it) by the inticing power of the flesh or the sensual and inferiour faculties of mans mind, hath bin already shewed. Adams sin then was not only and meerly the transgression of the law, but was mix∣ed with somewhat an ignorant rejecting and contemning of the offer of the Gos∣pel, which was the only sure means to have translated him (without sin at all inter∣vening) out of his righteous mutable state into an immutability in righteousnes. But such is (and was from the beginning) the tender mercy and long-suffering of God, our mediatour and Redeemer, to Adam's posterity, even in their fallen state, that he not only renews and repeats to man his former gracious offer of Salvation through faith, and the knowledg of himself in the Gospel, but reveales over and besides this, the means and way, how through faith in his blood, all mankind may be againe restored and obteine remission of sins. All that will, may returne againe by vertue of Christs death, into that mutable state of righteousnes and holines, lost in Adam, as the common salvation and a forerunning dispensation to the gift of the son himself, according to the promise. And may it not reasonably be expected that from the experience of the general love and good will which Christ hath thus shew∣ed in common towards all men, that they should be easily prevailed with to give up their soules absolutely into his hands, through that faith that is more precious then gold, unchangable and never failing, through the power whereof we are made more then conquerours over all enemies, even through him that hath thus loved us with an unchangable and everlasting love. For surely, in this God hath greatly commended his love unto all mankind, that when they were without strength Christ died for the ungodly, or for all sinners, whilst yet in their sins. Much more then will the current of his love run towards us, being once justified by his blood, that through him we may be saved to the utter∣most from the wrath to come. For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more, being reconciled, shall we be saved by his life.
This was in effect the voice and doctrine of the Gospel, which God himself prea∣ched to our first parents, immediatly after their disobedience, and at the very same time that he passed his righteous sentence against them for their sin, Gen. 3.15. In this Scripture God promises the sending of his owne Son in the likenes of sinful flesh, to condemn sin in the flesh, and make atonement by the sacrifice of it, that the righteousnes of the law might be fulfilled in all those who walke not after the flesh but after the spirit. And most expressly and particularly is the Gospel as wel as the law preached by God to Cain, Gen. 4.7. and in him to all mankind, whether ever they reap the saving benefit by it or no, as to life everlasting, any more then he did. To him it is that God sayes; If thou doest wel, shalt thou not be accepted? Is there not a meanes sufficient and able to bring thee, even thee back againe into reconciliation and acceptance with God, through the ransom that is paid in Christs blood? But if thou doest not wel, sin lieth at the door, that is to say, the wages and punishment of sin. And this yet is not all; For if thou objectest, what will it advantage me, to have sins past re∣mitted and the breach made up, if there be yet no effectual remedy provided and afforded, to prevent a relapse into sin (more fatal and irrecoverable then the first fal) and a provoking of God afresh, by reason of the unsubjectednes that the flesh or sensual part of the soule is apt to fly out into, and that prevailingly and finally, a∣gainst the restored and anew enlightned spirit of the mind, as it fell out with man at first? To this God answers; it shall be subject to thee, and thou shalt rule over it. It shalbe given againe into thy hand and power to subdue and bring under, if the fault be not in thy self. Why therefore art thou wrath? and why is thy countenance fallen, as if I were partiall in my dealing, and that my wayes were not equall? Q. But what is it, does or can enable cain or any other man since the fall, to doe the good God speaks to him of, and avoid the evil he forbids, as also to suffer ac∣cording to the will of God, and that patiently, though for doing wel? Answ: Surely, there are means provided in and by the Redeemer, and the work of redemption given to him the promised seed to finish, which hath a vertue and sufficiency to free and save all men from the evil, danger and curse that is come upon them by Adams transgression, and to restore them againe to their primitive state of purity and freedom, if the fault be not in themselvs. And when they are brought so far on their way againe, towards the end (for which they were at first created, and since redeemed) that is to say, the inheritance of life eternal; then is renewed unto them by Christ, the offer of saving them to the uttermost, past all danger of a relapse, and of giving them that better fredom wherewith the son is willing to make them free indeed, unchangably subjecting them to the leading and Rule of his spirit, cohabiting in and with the heart that is regenerated, making it thereby fit to receave and entertein him, and bringing into it that state of life, over which the second death hath no power.
Hence is it, Christ is said to be the saviour of all men, but especially of those that beleeve. And his will is, that prayer and giving of thanks be made for all men, of all sorts and degrees, from the highest to the lowest. This is good and acceptable in his sight, who is the God and saviour, that gave himself a ransom for all men, and who therefore will have all men to be saved, as least, so far as to come to the know∣ledg of the truth, and have the offer of it, in a state of free exercise of their will and arbitrary choice, that according as they are prevailed with, either to receave it in the love thereof, or to reject it as a stone of stumbling and rock of offence, hateful to them, they may obtein eternal salvation, or incur the pains of eternal damnati∣on. And yet those that are saved, are to acknowledg and experience, that it is of meer grace and not of themselvs, nor of works, least any man should boast. But it is wrought by the faith that excludes boasting, setting up such a workmanship or buil∣ding in the heart of every true beleever, whereby he is created in Christ Jesus unto good works, that are before prepared and ordeined of God, that they should walke in them. They therefore which truly and savingly beleeve in God, will be alwayes carefull to maintein good works. Oh the great mystery of Godlines, that reconciles absolute empire and soveraigne command in one great king! He makes his absolute dominion to consist with the truest, best and most absolute liberty of all his good subjects, as shewing, that in his service is the most perfect fredom. To be left therefore by him, in such a state of fredom, which may either be lost by us and given up to the will of another, or pluck'd out of our hands by the force of avenging justice, (justly condemning those to perpetuall servitude, that despise and reject their owne truest fredom when offe∣red to them) proves in conclusion the certain way to the greatest servitude and most miserable bondage we can bring ourselvs into. His way is in the sea; his path in the deep waters; his footsteps are not knowne. For it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that sheweth mercy. Yet all are set in a capacity, to will their owne good or evil; to run their race and shape their course, by free choice. But the one seed only, that is, Christ and his fellow-heirs according to pro∣mise, are the winners and overcommers, that reach the mark, get the prize and at∣taine the crowne of eternal life. All others fall short of the glory of God, and by their owne consent and choice are most justly debarred from the prize, and for ever ex∣cluded from the recompence of reward. But can the Leopard chang his spots? can those that are in a fallen state and accu∣stomed to do evil, ever learn to do good, after the manner Adam did it in his primi∣tive rectitude, or in that newnes of Spirit and life, which those that are made free with a better fredom then Adam's was, are created and enabled in Christ Jesus, to worke and come forth in the exercise of? Let us hear what the Scripture in this case sayth; Esay. 1.16, 20. Wash ye, make ye clean: put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes: cease to do evil, learn to do wel: seek judgment or know∣ledg:
releive the oppressed: judg the fatherles: plead for the widow. Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shalbe white as snow: though they be red like crimson, they shalbe as wool. If ye be wil∣ling and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land. But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shalbe devoured with the sword. So Esay 55.1, 5. Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, &c. Is this only spoken to the jews, a people then in covenant, or to all mankind? Se what Peter himself was taught to confesse and acknowledg in this matter, Act. 10.28. The Lord hath shewed me, that I should not call any man com∣mon or unclean, not conceave him to be so rejected and laid aside by God, as not to be in a capacity to have the means afforded him, of being brought to repentance and unto the knowledg of the truth. Consider also the witnesse given by the Apostle Paul, Act. 17. where he preaches the knowledg of God, as of him that made the world and who gives to all, life, breath, and all things. Yea, he made of one blood, all na∣tions of men, who were at first his offspring, created in his image, and caused them to dwell on all the face of the earth. He was bountiful unto them, even in those times wherein he suffered all nations to walk in their owne wayes, doing them good, and giving them rain from heaven and fruitful seasons, that he might not leave himself without a witnesse, and that they by such teachings might seek the Lord, if haply they might feel after and find him, who is not far from every one of us. And although he winked at the former times of ignorance, yet now, since the manifestation of Christ, the promised seed, in the flesh and in the form and fashion of a man, like unto us in all things, sin only excepted, he commands all men every where to repent. If they refuse and prove disobedient, he will take an account of it in that day wherein he hath appointed the world to be judged in righteousnes by that man which he hath ordeined, Iesus Christ, who will have no respect of persons; but as many as he shall find to have sinned without law, shall perish without law: and as many as have sinned in the law, shalbe judged by the law, in that day when God shall judg the se∣crets of men by Iesus Christ, according to the Gospel. We se then very evidently, what Gods command is to all men universally, after the fall. It is no new commandement, but that which hath bin from the beginning, which is, that all men every where do repent, and use the means provided for them in the promised seed, to be washed from their old sins and to come to the knowledg of the truth, or the way wherein to be assuredly saved and inherit eternal life. This commandement is in effect the same it was before sin entered into the world, save only as it now relates to the use of the means of being cleansed from the filth and thraldom of sin, in order to come to the knowledg of the truth, by hearing the voice of the Gospel, or words by which we may be saved from eternal wrath. Thus was it with the centurion. This testimony was given of him, Act. 10.2. that he was a devout man, one that feared God, gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God alway. All this he did, before he had those words preached to him, whereby he
and all his house should be saved; Actor: 11:14. It is the beginning of wisdom to be addicted to the feare of the lord, to have a strong bent and affection of heart to keep his commandement, and pray alwayes. This comes by the voice and operation of the law, as repeated and renewed in the blood of Christ to us, and ministred either inwardly to our hearts by the voice of an∣gels; or in the powerful ministry of the written word, to our outward ears. The former of these ministries, the gentiles were alwayes capable of, and indeed directly under, who were or are without the written law or knowledg of the Scriptures: the other, the jews, or inhabitants of the earthly Jerusalem among Jews or gen∣tiles are under, who rest in the law or written word, making their boast of God therein, having the form of the knowledg and of the truth in the law. Both these notwithstanding the chang that may be brought upon them thereby, are but un∣der the dominion of the law, liable stil to the curse and to a final and total relapse back againe under sin and wrath, if they take not very good heed, and so may come to be trees twice dead, and be pluckd up by the roots. For such enlightned and restored ones as these may prove to be (as wel of the one kind as of the other) if they shal sin wilfully, after that they are come to the knowledg of the truth, there remains then to them no more Sacrifice for sin, but a most certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries; even all the dwellers in that earth, which drinketh in the rain that cometh oft upon it, but in stead of bringing forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, doe bear thorns and briars, which causes them to be re∣jected, makes them nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. But if the same earth, in stead of bringing forth thorns and briars, does become ground prepared and made fit to receave the immortal and incorruptible seed, by the word of God, which abideth and liveth for ever, and to bring forth the proper fruits thereof with patience, meet for him by whom it is dressed, it wil be sure to receave blessing from God, even to be blessed with the having of those better things that are ac∣companied with salvation. For he that is faithfull in that which is least, by the same grace laying hold on him, and keeping him from evil, becomes also faithful in much. And he that is uniust in the least, even in the use of his least natural fredom, wilbe uniust also in much, even in the highest atteinments, which he can arrive unto, in that his mutable state, and whilst in his owne keeping. Without blood there is no remission of sins. But through the sprinckling of the blood of Jesus, who is our passover, whose blood speaks better things then that of Abel, the wrath and severity that is by the law is either mitigated, and all procee∣dings in the way of revenging justice for a time (at least) respited, and the per∣sons reprieved, upon condition of repentance and amendment of life; or else totally and finally remitted. This latter is the case of al true beleevers, that are in Christ Iesus by the new and everlasting Covenant. Thus is that saying made good, Iam: 2:13. He shal have judgment without mercy that hath shewed no mercy; and
mercy rejoyceth against judgment, on behalf of al that are justified frely by grace, through the eternal redemption which Christ hath obteined for them. So then, though al have sinned and come short of the glory of God, he hath not so concluded and shut them up in their disobedience and unbeleif, but in and through the blood of Christ he is ready to shew mercy of one kind or other unto all. I. First, such mercy as is intimated in that parable, Matth. 18. v. 23. to the end; where the lord at first, upon the reckoning he made with his servant, pronounced judgment upon him, commanded him, his wife, children and al he had, to be sold and payment forthwith to be made; (which in effect, was executed in the case of our first parents) but afterwards, upon the servants repentance and humbling himself, be∣seeching frō his Lord only patiēce, and promising he would pay him all, his Lord was moved with compassion, shewed him mercy in loosing him, and freely forgiving him the debt. But this mercy (as appears after) was not that which is called Gods sure mer∣cies, such as David had, because capable of revocation, upon the servants abuse of it, in shewing no mercy afterwards to his fellow servant, which renewed his Lords wrath again towards him, so that he delivered him over to the tormenters, til he should pay all that was due unto him. He also made it a ruled case for al in the like condition, saying; If ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother his tres∣passes, so shal my heavenly father (sayes Christ) doe unto you, that is, not forgive you your trespasses. And Luke 13.7, 9. the same truth is confirmed in another parable, where the Lord of the vineyard sayes to the dresser of it, behold 3 years I come, see∣king fruit on this figtree, and find none: cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground? He answering, said, Lord, let it alone this year also, til I shal dig about it, and dung it: and if it bear fruit, well: if not; after that, cut it down. This first sort of Gods mercies to sinners, is conditional, and universal, common to the whole posterity of Adam. He is moved with a general pity and tendernes to∣wards them in the day of their nativity, when no eye hath compassion on them. Yea to some of them also, he is pleased to shew more particular kindnes, so that of his owne accord, passing by and seing them in their blood, he bids them, live; he spreads his skirt over them, to cover their nakednes, makes that the season of his love ap∣pearing to them, teaching them to deny ungodlines, and adorning them with his owne comelines. Notwithstanding al this, they trusting to their beauty and righ∣teousnes in this dispensation wrote in and put upon them, doe fal, and make them∣selvs worse by their apostasy, then Sodom or Gomorrha. Then the Lord judges it equal, that such righteous men as these, when they turn from their righteousnes (as they finally may) and commit iniquity, should die in it, and also hereupō have all their sins committed before their conversion or change to that state of righteousnes, a∣fresh imputed to thē, though before, God had declared, they should not be mētioned, but buried in oblivion, and that in the righteousnes which they did, they should live. Thus is the Lord many a time ful of compassion to unworthy sinners, whose hearts are not right with him, so as to be stedfast in his Covenant; Psal: 78. He forbears howsoever to destroy them, til he hath made proof of them to the utmost. Therfore
turns he his anger away from them again and again, and stirs not up al his wrath. He deales with them according to the multitude of his louing kindnesses, and the variety of mercies that are in him. There are no sort of sinners then, who in a lesse or greater degree, tast not of these riches of Gods mercies, the more of which is shewed to them and abused and sinned against, the more is their condemnation heightned. For by such demeanour, they do crucify to and in themselvs the son of God afresh, and put him to open shame, counting the very blood of the Covenant, wherewith they have bin sanctified, an unholy thing, and doing despite to the spirit of grace. With these kinds of mercies Christ is the saviour of al men, a propitiation for the sins of the whole world. And thus God is in Christ reconciling the world unto him∣self, not imputing their sins; and he not only commands, but beseeches al men to be reconciled to him, to lay hold on his strength, and be at peace with him, as not ha∣ving receaved in vaine the grace he hath begun to bestow upon them. But besides these his common mercies, declaring his good wil to al men, as not taking pleasure in the death of any sinner, he hath also his choice and peculiar fa∣vour and loving kindnes for some, as it is written, I wil give ye the sure mercies of David, absolute, irrevocable gifts. Those that after this manner find favour in his eyes, have the remission of their sins confirmed with an oath, that their iniquities shal never be remembred any more, and that his mercy towards them shal never faile, he will not leave nor forsake them. My mercy wil I keep for him for ever more; my Covenant shal stand fast with him. His seed also wil I make to endure for ever: and his throne as the dayes of heaven. Their transgressions shal not hinder the good I have purposed to them. For notwithstanding their unworthines, for which I will chastize them with the rod and with stripes, yet my loving kindnes wil I not utterly take from them, nor suffer my faithfulnes to faile. My Covenant wil I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. Once have I sworn by my holines, that I wil not lie unto David, (the man that is after my owne heart) nor to his seed after him, that walk in the steps of his Spirit and faith. Psalm 89. I will build him a house, and establish it for ever, by an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure. In this most gracious promise David acknowledges al his salvation to be, and all his desire; 2 Sam: 23.5. Mercies of both these kinds are with God, who is rich, and plentiful in goodnes, having none like him. He is a God that pardoneth iniquity and passeth by the trangressions of the remnant of his heritage. He reteineth not his anger for ever, be∣cause he delighteth in mercy. He will turn againe, he wil have compassion upon the remnant of his heritage, subdue their iniquities, and cast al their sins into the midst of the sea. But as to the rest of mankind, that prove disobedient, or have re∣ceaved the grace of God (the former sort of mercies) in vaine, that word shalbe made good upon them which the Lord spake concerning the Sons of Eli, 1 Sam. 2.
30; I sayd indeed, thy house and the house of thy father should walk before me for ever: but now be it far from me; for them that honour me, I wil honour; and they that despise me, shalbe lightly esteemed. This shews what condition was im∣plied, upon which God made that promise. Since then by man came death, by man also is come life and resurrection from the dead. And this is revealed to fallen man, in the good tydings of the promised seed, who (as hath bin sayd) declares himself the saviour of al men, but especially of those that beleeve. He hath a common stock and Treasury of goods and spiritual gifts, wherewith the whole world (more or lesse) is watered, fed and enriched by him. For he causes his rain to descend and sun to shine on the unjust as wel as on the just. But over and besides all these, whether natural or spiritual gifts, he hath an in∣heritance incorruptible and undesiled, that fadeth not away, the heavenly and true Treasure which he gives and commits to those who are by him found or rather made faithful in the little that at first is trusted to their use and management, Luk: 16. And he causes them to possesse it in an hereditary right, as coheirs with the only begot∣ten Son, children of the promised Spirit, either in the single or double portion thereof. This is he that is appointed by the father, to turn men back againe to God, out of their fallen, sinful state, by a repentance, not to be repented of. By his name and faith in his name, whoever calls upon him, shal be saved from his sins, and be ledd on in the way to life eternal. He was made a sacrifice or sin-offring for us, that we might become the righteousnes of God in him. Thus God found it consistent with his jus∣tice as wel as his goodnes, to grant remission of sins to al that should seek unto him for it, by the mediation of his Son, who is the righteousnes of God, that without the law is manifested, being witnessed unto by the law and the Prophets, to and upon all that beleeve, without respect of persons. Him hath God set forth and made manifest to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, declaring his righteousnes to be that which procures remission of sins and Gods passing over al that is past, in the way of his forbearance and reprieve, til farther trial and proof had of the whole world, as wel as to be absolutly and immutably the justifier of al that beleeve in Je∣sus, with the faith that abides trial, and by which the world is overcome. The difficulty which yet remains, is that which the Apostle Paul was sensible of, Rom. 10. where he affirm's that whosoever beleevs in Jesus, shal not be ashamed, and that there is no difference between the jew and the Greek, because the same Lord over al is rich unto all that cal upon him; (Whosoever therefore, being sensible of his lack of wisdom, shal cal upon his name, he shal not be upbraided nor sent away empty, but have the means revealed to him, whereby to make him wise unto salvation) But how shal they cal on him, saith the Apostle, in whom they have not beleeved? and how shal they beleeve in him of whom they have not heard? and how shal they hear without a preacher? and how shal they preach, except they be
sent? and who are they that God sends with these his glad tydings, the very feet of whom ought to be beautiful in our eyes, and the report they make, and witnesse they beare, most acceptable to us? The answer there to these and the like questi∣ons, is very short. So then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God: not by that word, whose sound goes forth into al the earth, and into the ends of the world. When the Lord gives forth this general word or command, he hath a great army of preachers, ready to be sent on his message. Great is the company of those who are ready, willing, and have an aptitude in them to publish it. This David wel knew, when be gave a description of three sorts of preachers, within his ob∣servation. The first sort, he mentions Psal. 19. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament sheweth his handy work, even in the mediatour, as in them he made a tabernacle for the sun, which as a bridegroom comming out of his chamber, shines more and more, unto a perfect day. His going forth is from one part of heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it; so that there is nothing hid from the heat (and light) thereof. Thus also God brought forth Abraham, shewed him the stars of heaven, and sayd, so shal thy seed be, preaching Christ to him, in and by the sight of those heavenly bodies. And Abraham beleeved, and it was accounted to him for righteousnes. In like manner were the wise men of the east brought to the knowledg of Christ in his kingly power and office, by the sight givē to them of his star, a star that made him known to thē, and went before them to conduct them to a sight of him in his owne person, which is al that this sort of messengers or preachers of Christ can do. Thus the book of the creatures, by Gods special Ordination and institution, in the way of types ād figures, through the ministry of angels, does teach and preach the righteousnes of God, which is in Christ, in order to lead us to the personal sight of him, that we may in the end hear himself speak. After this manner the righteousnes of God in Christ, is and may be manifested, without the law or written word. Secondly; In the same Psalm he mentions another sort of preaching and teaching of the knowledg of Christ; and that is out of his law, the law of his written word, the ministry whereof is for the converting of mens Soules, and it is a sure Testimony, that makes wise the simple: more to be desired then gold; yea, then much fine gold: sweeter also then hony, and the hony-comb. The righteous statutes and judgments of God signified in his written word, reioyce the heart, and are true and righteous altogether. His commandement is pure, enlightning the eyes. Concer∣ning the law or command of God, thus manifested, Christ sayes, search the Scripturs, whose true office is not only to revive and instruct you in that law that was writ∣ten in your hearts at the creation and lost by the fal, but to send you to me also, that by obteyning a personal sight of me in spirit, you might be farther instructed in the knowledge of me. But ye wil not come unto me, that ye may have life. Thirdly and lastly, (Ps: 8:2:) David shews that there is another sort of preachers
that God sends as labourers into his harvest, saying, out of the mouths of babes and sucklings hast thou founded or ordeined strength, because of thine enemies, and that thou mightest stil the enemy and the avenger. These babes and sucklings Christ himself interprets and expounds to us (Luke 10.21.) first, of those his sent ones, se∣venty in number, which he immediatly authorized and qualified by commission from himself, sending them two by two before his face, as his harbingers and fore∣runners, into every city and place whither he himself would come. Secondly he ex∣pounds it of those babes and children of the fathers begetting, to whom he reveals those things which he had hid from the wise and prudent. One of these babes Peter is acknowledged by Christ to be, (Mat. 16.17,) when he called him the rock. Christ hereupon owned him as one of the blessed seed, who had that sight and knowledg of Christ in spirit, given to him, which none but the father could reveale. Flesh and blood could neither give nor receave it. For such knowledg of Christ requires a spiritual eyesight and discerning, peculiar to these children and babes of the fa∣thers owne begetting, the plantation of his owne right hand, of whom Christ sayes, (Mat. 13.16, 17.) Blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they hear. Verily, I say unto you, many prophets and righteous men have desired to se those things which ye see, and have not seen them: and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them. For all things are delivered to me of my fa∣ther: and no man knoweth the son but the father: neither knoweth any man the father, save the son, and he to whomsoever the son wil reveal him. This sight of the Father and Son, in their mutual relations to, and fruitions of each other, gained by the personal sight of Christ in spirit, is mentiond by Paul, 1 Cor. 9.1. when he says, Am not I an Apostle? have not I seen Christ? or, am not I one of those that by the sight of Christ in spirit and the revelation of the Son in me, have receaved grace and Apostleship to the obedience of faith among al nations, for his name? These are the pure in heart and poor in spirit, that are taught after this most excellent manner to se God and have the knowledg of Jesus Christ, in order thereby to be made ministers and witnesses, as wel of the things at first seē by them, as of those also wherein afterwards Christ yet reserus himself farther and more fully to appear unto them. These speak the things which they know; testify that which they have seē, whether their witnesse be receaved or no, having themselv; first heard the record that God gives of his Son, and set to their seal, that God is trues This is the threefold cord, the lines whereof are streched out over al the world and to the ends of the earth, by the quickning power of the living WORD. He rideth upon the heaven of heavens of old. Loe, he sends out his voice in each and in al these his dispensations, and that a mighty voice, sharper then any two-edged sword, peir∣cing, even to the dividing asunder of soule and spirit, and of the joynts and marrow, a discoverer of the thoughts and intents of the heart. Neither is there any creature, that is not manifest in his sight. All things are naked and open to the eyes of this our great saviour and redeemer. And as he speaks immediatly by himself, by the
voice of his owne mouth, so does he also send out his voice by his hosts or armies of angels, those ministers of his, which doe his pleasure and signify his commands to others, which they receave, as always attending and hearkning to the voice of his word. The word therefore, as at first it is given in a fore-running and preparatory dis∣pensation to the Sons appearance in his owne person, is called Heb. 2.2. the word spoken by angels, the command whereof is so stedfast, that every transgression and disobedience thereof, receaves a just recompence of reward. By the Rule and auto∣rity of the holy and elect angels, exercis'd according to his word and law, was God the Mediatour Pleased to put and keep in subjection the whole first creation, even man also, who in his first and mutable state, is the cheif and highest member there∣of, next under the angels themselvs. By means of this angelical ministry and Rule under Christ, or in the hand of the Mediatour, the righteousnes of God, wrought out in the person of the redeemer, is made manifest without the law, to the gentiles that are without law, that is, the knowledg of the Scriptures or written word; as also by the law, to the jews, that are in and under the teaching of Gods written oracles, and do or may there find the witness and manifestation thereof. In and by these it doth appear, that Jesus Christ died for our sins and is risen again for our justification. By jews in this case we are not only to understand the seed of Abraham according to the flesh, but those also among the gentiles who are planted into the same good olive tree, Christ, on the same tearms of mutability as they were, liable to be broken off again; and those al∣so that are after the spirit, true heirs according to the promise, who are in like man∣ner under this dispensation and teaching, til the seed himself come and take them from this Schoolmaster, in order to bring them under the most lively effectual tea∣ching and instruction of his owne mouth, and by his owne personal appearance in spirit to them, either as the day-star arising in their hearts and giving forth the glo∣ry of his first appearance in his owne face as he is the Son of man, in the form of a servant, and fashion of the first Adam, made immutable; or 2dly, as the sun in its strength, breaking forth in their soules that are gathered to him, appointed and qua∣lified to be with him in the Kingdom of his father, and admitted to the peculiar priviledge of beholding his glory in the face of his most exalted and heavenly manhood, as he is the only begotten, lying in the fathers bosome, he that is above all. What he hath seen and heard in the beholding of the fathers shape and very si∣militude, that he testifieth; but no man receaveth this his testimony, that is but a meer man and no more; For it is not, it cannot be conveyed or communicated un∣to any, but with unspeakable words which it is not possible for man in the single capacity of his first nature and make, though become immutable, to receave or ut∣ter, so much doe they surpasse all the knowledg as wel as expression of meer man. Under the voice of this threefold ministry, God the mediatour (who is the pos∣sessour
of heaven and earth, the maker of them and all therein) hath made of one blood al nations of men for to dwel on the face of the earth; hath distributed to al of them, and determined the bounds of their habitations, as also the different and proper means to bring them back to himself, by repentance from dead works and faith towards the living God. He hath awakened that light in every one that comes into the world, that shal move and cal upon them at some time or other, upon occa∣sion of sundry concurring providences, to seek the Lord, if haply they may feel af∣ter him and find him, who is not far from every one of us. It ought not then to be a thing incredible with us, but that by these means provision is made by God in Christ, and care taken, not only for the restoring of man againe unto that righte∣ousnes and purity of nature which he lost, and to the exercise of that kind of free∣wil which he enjoyed at creation, but yet farther, to regenerate and beget him into a more excellent fashion of being and heavenly frame of Spirit, in and by which the end of his first creation is fully answered, and the law of it accomplished. Of this we shal now in the third place proceed to treat, by way of answer to 3. The third generall Query, which is this. In what sence is it possible for man in his mutable state, considered either before or after his fall, (according to the degree of restoring, healing grace, which he does or may arrive unto) to hear and obey the things of Gods law, without turning from it finally; and, in so doing, to grow up out of his mutable into his immutable state, and be made heir and possessour of life eternal? To understand this the more plainly and distinctly, and to prevent prejudices and mistakes, we shal discusse this subject under these 4 particular enquiries following, as branches of this 3d maine point and general query. 1. Whether was man at first created in a capacity of being, and aptitude of mind, possible to obey and fulfill the law of nature, so to as answer the end of his creation; til brought under a second work of Gods hand, call'd the new creation, and thereby cast into a new mould and frame of being? Secondly, whether man by sin, be so unmade againe and corrupted, so disorder'd and disabled, that by the blessing and vertue of Christs blood, and the proper and fit means that by the father are put into the hands of the Mediatour, he is not in a capacity and possibility, notwithstanding his losse by the fall, to be restored and made able againe to obey Gods law, with the same kind of ability God gave him at first? And upon such restoration, is he not obliged to set about it? at least, to shew his good will, and syncere inclination of mind there unto, according to the measure of the ability he receaves? 3. How was man to employ and make use of his naturall ability and strength, given for the performance of Gods law? and according to what rule might or ought he to have walked with God, either before or after the fall, which would infalli∣bly guide and unmoveably keepe him in the way to eternall life? a way, which is
called the way of holines, such as the uncleane passe not over, and the wayfaring men though fooles, cannot, or shall not erre therein, and at the end whereof is immortality and eternall blessednes? 4. How comes man in a judiciall manner to be hardned by God, and made a ves∣sell of wrath, fitted and appointed to everlasting destruction? And when is it, that he shalbe denied any farther benefit by the Sacrifice or Christs death, and no more permitted to change his mind and turne from his evill wayes, though he should seek it with teares, but be in a certaine expectation of the unquenchable flames of Gods wrath, ordeined for the punishing and devouring of all fixed and impenitent sinners? To the first of these enquiries. The creatour did at the beginning put a created ability and principle of motiō in∣to the creature. But the strength and power of this first impression is not sufficient for the continued motion of every respective creature in its kind, but a perpetuall concourse and cooperation of the creatour is needfull thereunto. Then doubtlesse man, who was made in Gods image, a rationall and free agent, the masterpiece of the visible creation, ought not to thinke himself exempt from such a dependance, nor to covet or desire to be made perpetuall, upō such tearms as would in effect dethrone his creatour and make more Gods then one. The end for which man was at all crea∣ted, was to be perpetually moving in love and service to his creatour, as a vessel pre∣pared with meetnes for the use of his Lord, in whatever he should be commāded by him, for the advancement of his prayse and glory. Now, as loue is the end and perfe∣ction of the commādemēt, so is it the first and cheife principle out of which all true obedience to the commād must proceed, and a duration and perpetuity in this loue and duty is absolutely necessary to mans hapines and continuance in Gods favour and good liking. For untill a man keep Gods commandements out of this principle, and be sure of its unchangeablenes, he neither can be sayd to walke in that Covenāt or agreement with God, nor ever be sure of keeping the condition of that Cove∣nant, upon which God promises to be his God, and to be and abide in loue and communion with him for ever. And it is most unquestionable, that the Lord will faithfully performe his promise and his oath, the two immutable things wherein he cannot lie. The only doubt is, whether man in this first make and frame of mind, be able to performe the duty required of him. Every benefit requires answerable duty. Gods bounty then to man in giving him his being, creating him in his owne image and likenes, must needs lay a strong obligation upon him to loue God with the love that he requires. And if this love be made by God a necessary condition of mans obteining eternall life, it is certainly possible for man to performe this condition, even, to loue the Lord his God with all his heart, soule, mind and strength, either in the power of what he hath, or of what by the same gracious and liberall hand of God he may be made to have. For an impossible condition is all one with a negative, as if God should say, that eternall life and blessednes is utterly impossible and altogether vnatteinable for man.
The nature of man is most drawne and commanded by love. This is that which swayes and carries it in its motions after the object which it pursues. Now the ap∣pearance which God gives of himself in his Son, (the image of the invisible God, the brightnes of his glory and expresse character of his person) is the most beauti∣full and desireable object that can come into the mind of man, for his fruition and inheritance. And he is not only lovely in himself, but full of love to man. He hath such love in him to mans nature, as he hath not to any besides; no, not to the angels. For he took not on him the nature of angels, but the seed of Abraham, which there∣by came to be knit in personall union with the only begotten Son of God. And yet farther, the love of God in Christ towards men is most largly and liberally diffusive, to the filling all those that doe become willing receavers and enterteiners of it, with its owne fulnes and unsearchable riches of divine treasure, shewing itself not in word only, but in deed and in truth, to all those that are taken into cohabitation with it, as the habitable part of its earth. The cords of this love are the cords of a man, attracting by arguments exceedingly adaequate and suited to the reason and understanding of man. Where lies then this great mystery, that it should be impos∣sible for man to continue in the love which God commands and declares, as the law he is to observe and performe, upon the severest penalties of his displeasure? Is it not rather indeed a grosse mistake for any to thinke or say so? And are we not ra∣ther to conclude and affirme, that it was not only possible for man to have perfor∣med this great and comprehensive duty of continuing in the love of God, (which is the fulfilling of all law) before his fall, but is so still, by such restoration of strength and ability as men doe receave by the vertue of Christs death and resurrection? Man in his first creation was furnished with an ability to be his owne keeper in that righteous and good frame wherein he came fresh and lively out of Gods hands, with which he girds himself and goes whithersoever he will. He was created unto good workes, that he should walke in them: he had the enlightning and quickning influence of Gods spirit to assist and direct him therein. Yea, he was so intimately ioyn'd with the Lord the spirit, in love, likenes and agreement, that it may truly be sayd, his soule was (as it were) a part of his, joyned and continued to him as the habitable part of his earth, the temple which he built for himselfe to dwell in. And must it not needs be very irksome and painfull, to depart, be cut of, disioynted and separated by our iniquity, from him that is our life? But as man hath thus a righteous and reasonable soule, which ought to be guided by the mind and law of his God, so hath he also a power of girding and turning himself, according to the free motion of his owne will. He hath in his soule a changa∣ble principle, which can move and conclude either way, to good or evil, according to the differing report and representation that is made to him, by the one or other part of his mind, that is, his intellectuall or sensuall natu∣re, of both which he is composed, as hath bin shewed. So then according
to the arguments given by these different parts of his composition, on the one hand or on the other, (being furnished with a competent measure of divine light to discerne and conclude aright, as to the way he should goe) God leavs him so far forth in the hand of his owne counsell, as to be at liberty to chuse and determine within himself, as it shall seem best to him. In this vnconstant and moveable estate of man, this dividednes and wavering of mind, inclinable to good, and also to evill under the shew of good, man being left free and without constraint, what is it possible for him to doe? can he love the Lord his God with all his heart, soule, mind and strength, and his neighbour as himself, and can he continue so to doe, unchangably and perpetually? The answer very breifly may be, 1. That it is possible for man to be perpetually moved in and by that love to God, which is required by the law. 2. It is possible for man, considered either as before or since the fall, to move himselfe in the performance of this his duty, for a much longer continuance, then he shews himself willing and inclinable to do it, in his mutable state. 3. It must reasonably be supposed, that while man reteins such a changable principle and fountaine of action in him, as the freedom of his owne will, and to be in his owne keeping and at his owne dispose, his obedience to Gods law and his wal∣king with him must needs be (as God him self complains) at an all-adventures and without any stedfastnes in his Covenant. But he that as single and at his owne dispose, in the freedom of his owne will, cannot keep himself firme and stedfast in the performance of his duty, may so yeild himselfe to be bound up in the will and motion of another, who is unchangable, that he may be kept in the power thereof, unmoveable and free from all danger of departing or turning aside to the right hand or to the left, from the holy and streight way of Gods Commande∣ments. And this seeming bondage to the will of another, is the truest, greatest and most absolute freedome, being that which falls to mans share as he comes to be actually united with Christ in the band of the choicest and most excellent mar∣riage union. We may then safely conclude, that it was possible for man, by the ability and strength of nature given him before the fall, to have stood and continued longer in his duty then he did. For before any danger appeared of his discontinuance here∣in, or that any temptation thereunto discovered it self, a way was set open to him in the tree of life, (wherein he was taught how he ought to resigne up him∣self to the teaching and will of another) whereby such a change might have bin brought upon him through a new creation, and the comming of the son of God to dwell in his heart by faith, even that faith which workes by a love stronger then death, as would have rendred him unmoveable in his duty and love to God. It must needs then be acknowledged to be mans owne fault through unbeleife
to resist and harden himself against that working of the holy Ghost which brings up∣on us the pangs of the new birth, as a needfull preparation thereunto. This was the folly of Ephraim, that unwise son, who stayed long in the place of the breaking forth of children, (Hosea 13.13.) as having no mind to endure the pangs requi∣red to the birth of the immortall seed. This was great folly in our first parents, but it is far greater and more dangerous in any restored but to some graduall exercise of the like ability since the fall, when proof hath bin made by man at his best estate, in his primitive purity, what this first ability and sufficiency of nature does amount unto, as to the keeping out of sin. For what can the man (in this case) doe, that comes after the king? If the armour with which our first parents were armed against the great Goliah, did (upon experience) faile them, surely though it be prepared to be put on againe by their posterity, and attempted anew, never so often, it is and wilbe found alwayes best for us with David to forbeare making use of it with any confidence in such selfsufficiency, and to resort to the more sure and effectuall weapons, mention'd, (2 Cor: 10:4: and Eph. 6:11, 17.) and to put on the whole armour of God; to arme ourselvs with the same mind that was in Christ Jesus, that may make us inclinable and ready so to suffer in the flesh as to cease from sin, or so to crucify the flesh by the powerfull operation of this heavenly mind in and upon us, as thereby to put an end to all the motions of sin in our fleshly and sensuall part, which is the door by which at first sin entred. This brings us to the second particular enquiry, in order to the clearing up the third generall Querie in this discourse, concerning the losse and deprivall (which happened unto man through his sin and disobedience) of that naturall ability and aptnes of mind which he had in his primitive purity to love and serve God accor∣ding to his duty. And how far is man (by the vertue of Christs blood, duly applied to him) capable of restitution into the exercise thereof, so as to be once more put upon the proof and triall, whether in the day of temptation he will hearken to the voice of the gospel, by the washing of regeneration and renewing of the holy Ghost, which purifies the heart from all filthines of flesh and spirit, not only from the blood or naturall pollution, from which before it was not cleansed, but also from all those things whereby man could not be cleansed and freed by the law of Moses, by the best naturall ability and strength receaved by him in his first creation, or renewed and revived in him since? In answer to this, we shall as little as may be repeat what hath bin mention'd be∣fore, but rather refer to it. Only here is the proper place to reassume the pursuit of what was but lightly touch'd before, concerning the conditionall Covenant, made by God with Cain, after the fall, which is necessarily implied Gen. 4.7. and may safely be concluded on; 1. Because Cain owned himself a visible worshipper of God, and brought of the fruit of the ground, an offering unto the Lord.
2. Because God in effect ownes as much himself, when he speakes to this pur∣pose, if thou doe well, I wilbe as good as my agreement with thee, thou shalt be re∣warded. But if thou doe ill, know that the Covenant I have made with thee, is but conditionall, and workes wrath upon thy disobedience, whereby the punishment of thy sin will hasten apace upon thee, and be neer thee, even at the door. And that thou mayst certainly know, thou wilt be without all excuse for thy disobedience, if thou persist in it, doe not thinke to lay the fault any where but in the free motion of thine owne will, which thou art restored to the exercise of. For although through the fall, thy lusting proud flesh and sensuall part of thy mind hath gotten the Do∣minion and usurped authority over thy intellectuall and most purely rationall part, it shall be subject to thee againe, as it ought by the law and order of nature. For thou shalt be more and more renewed into a strength and ability to rule over and keep it to its duty, if the fault be not in thy self. This conditionall Covenant with the benefits of it, thus renewed between God and Cain, is that which is renewed by the same blood of the Mediatour between Christ and all the posterity of Adam, vertually and radically. This is that which Christ hath obteined at the fathers hands to be anew entered into with man, for his farther proof and triall. Unto this ministry Christ is enabled and qualified, either by himself or by his messengers and servants, to bring back againe the whole world unto God, according to that invitation of his, Isai. 55.1.2. Ho, every one that thir∣steth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no mony: come ye, buy and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk, without mony and without price. Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labour for that which satisfieth not? hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soule delight itself in fatnes. All this yet lies short of the saving grace and sure mercies of the new and everlasting Covenant, which is propounded by itself afterwards, v. 3. So then, thus far the Gospell is and may be receaved by Cain, and those of whom God swears in his wrath, that they shall never enter into his Rest. Unto these the promise is made conditionally of entering into Rest, and they fall short of it through hardnes of heart and unbeleife. The WORD preached unto them does not profit them, as to eternall salvation, because they are not united to it by faith, or have not the inseperable union contracted between the Son of God and them, in the Covenant ordered in all things and sure, which true saving faith workes. The word therefore and command of God, consisting in a conditionall and in an absolute Covenant from the beginning, are the same two Testimonies of the law and Gospel still, or rather the two Testaments that are in force with mankind by the death of the Testatour, the Lord Jesus Christ. By the first of these, man is renewed and restored out of the fall, and brought in some degree to the fruition and exer∣cise of his first righteousnes and freedome of will, in order to the making proof and triall of him once more. And by the second of them, he is regenerated and begotten
of the immortall seed, into an immutability in righteousnes and glory, in a life that is from the dead, uncapable ever to be lost or faile more. These two Testimonies and Testaments of God, are visible words, inward, spiri∣tuall words and lively oracles, that create their owne suitable organs and vessells in the minds of men, for their reception. And there is an inward sight of them to be had by man as well as an outward hearing, to which purpose it is sayd, 1 Joh. 1.1. That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life: that declare we unto you. That which John saw, heard and handled, was from the beginning, and was seen, heard and handled from the foundation of the world, at sundry times and in divers manners, under former dispensations, till at last the dark shadows of him vanished, and the true light itself began to shine and dawne in his owne personal appearance, first in the flesh, and then afterwards in the Spirit. There are therefore inward and spirituall senses, whereby the man of God sees, heares, tasts, savours and handles the word of God. Such senses there must be, because there is an inward as well as an outward man of the heart, which must not want his due powers and faculties, any more then the o∣ther. For since the words themselvs are divine, even words of spirit and life, how can they be otherwise perceaved then by senses suited to their nature, spirituall senses, distinguished from those of the animalish, outward man of the soule, which is not at all skilled in that manner of knowing and discer∣ning. From the exercise of spirituall life and the senses thereof, proceeds the spiri∣tuall tast, savour and approbation of those divine words, that are the significations of Gods will and law to us. Unto such experienced men, skilled in the words of truth, we may appeale, as to the true and full significancy of divine oracles (which the disputer of this world in the perverse and presumptuous use of his naturall sen∣ses and understanding, contradicts and blasphemes) doe you not see this truth? doe you not handle with your hands this Word of life? do you not tast that the Lord is gracious? This is the much more excellent way of understanding the Scriptures, when after such a spirituall manner we relish, handle, se, tast and have a share in what we know of the word of God, as the Apostle prayes, Phil. 1.9. For this I pray (sayes he) that your love may abound in knowledge and in all judgment, or in every spirituall sense. He that was from the beginning is Christ, the living WORD of God, the WORD wherein was life, and that life the light of men, even of every man that comes into the world. He is the light of men, in and under a threefold dispensation or manner of ministry. He is the word of God
God to men, that makes with them either a conditionall and dissoluble Cove∣nant, or an absolute and everlasting Covenant that can never be dissolved. The first of these is the word of the beginning, by which God begins to make himself knowne and declare his will in his law to all men, that law, by which they must one day be judged. The second is the word of the oath, conteining a free promise to some, and a gra∣cious receaving of them into his love, therein to abide for ever; but a finall and judiciall rejection of others, concerning whom he therein swears, that they shall never enter into his Rest, but be given up to the wayes that they have chosen, and fixed in their owne delusions, in the everlasting chains whereof he binds them up and reservs them with the fallen angels to the judgment of the great day. This is that which is the end and consummation-work both wayes, to all that have passed under the first Testament or conditionall Covenant. Christ, considered as he is the word of the beginning, the author and minister of the conditional Covenant, and of the life and quickning proper thereunto, hath a comming forth in light and life unto men, which is called his first appearance, which he dispenses in the capacity of the promised seed, pursuant to the manife∣station of Gods will unto man in paradise, immediatly after his fall. He is therein declared the saviour and redeemer of man, he by whom alone is remission of sins, and all those that beleeve not on him shall perish in their sins. For as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wildernes, so hath the father provided that the WORD made flesh be lifted up in the sight of all men and preached to them, that whosoever be∣leeveth in him should not perish but have everlasting life. And God would have men know, that he so loved the world as that he gave his only begotten Son to take and beare away their sins, and lead them into the way of salvation, in stead of condemning them upon the fall of our first parents, as he might justly have done. He then that beleevs in the Son of God, is not or shall not be condemned. But he that beleeveth not, that is, receavs not his word in the love thereof, is condemned already, because he hath not beleeved in the name of the only begotten Son of God. The justice of such condemnation will shew itself in this, that when this light is come into the world, men have chosen and loved darknes better then light: yea, to discover the evill of their mind, they hate the light and (as neer as they can) shun all appearance of it, least they should be reproved thereby and convin∣ced of their evill deeds, and be converted, and God should heale them. But how is Christ (the saviour and redeemer) lifted up before the eyes of all men? and how comes he with light into the world, or into the mind of the naturall man, who receavs not the things of the spirit of God, but accounts them foolish∣nes? Yea he cannot know them, because they are spiritually discerned, and are therefore too deep for him to fathom, too high and heavenly for him to reach, being destitute of spirituall senses and discerning suitable thereunto.
By way of answer to this, we must be carefull rightly to distinguish and divide the word of truth, which (as hath bin said) hath a first voyce and the light of its first appearance, as also a second voice and the brightnes of a second comming. It is by means of the first voice, and the light and life ministred in and by the first Testament and conditionall Covenant, that the spirit of the naturall man is en∣lightned, quickned and wrought upon, which is the very same that at first gave him his make and primitive being in Gods image; and now by renewing it self and comming with healing and restoration in its wings, mans flesh is made fresher then a childs, and he returns to the dayes of his youth, that is, his first dayes of primitive purity. This the naturall man receaves as the gift and effect of his boun∣ty that is his Redeemer and Saviour, who is so gracious as to say, and that effectu∣ally; deliver him from going downe to the pit, I have found a ransome; Job 33.24.25. But all this quickning and enlightning is but conditionall and may be lost againe, though abundantly sufficient to make a full and compleat triall of him that receavs it, in order to his finall salvation or damnation. But for a second and fuller answer, we are to know, that this word of the begin∣ning and voyce of Christs first appearance, may and does come forth in a threefold light and workmanship upon the heart and spirit of the naturall man. 1. In that which is a lampe and light in the mind, a worke of the law, or a con∣formity to Gods commandement, conteined in his conditionall Covenant, wrought in the heart, and manifesting itself to the inward senses of the naturall mind by the ministry of angels, with which Christ does enlighten more or lesse every one that comes into the world, and in a more particular manner those that are without law or the knowledg of the Scriptures and written word of God. This means of knowledge being by the providence of God with held from them, so as that they are ignorant of what it speaks to other men that live under the sound thereof, he is pleased to winke at and passe by the day of this ignorance, neither will he pro∣ceed with them in judgment, according to the things they know not, but accor∣ding to the things they know, and have the tast and experience of within them∣selvs. And these are the invisible things of God, even his eternall power and God∣head, the WORD by which all things were created, and whose off-spring and like∣nes we are, according to what we may feel in the inward man of our heart, which was his workmanship, created by him with a strong bent and living conformity unto righteousnes and true holines. To this sort of men the WORD hath an in∣ward voyce and way of teaching, which speaks in them and makes them a rule unto themselvs in their hearing and obeying this inward operation of the word. Their inward sight and hearing is truly and properly obeying, which afterwards is per∣fected in outward action and practice. Such hearers and doers of the law of God, fulfilling the condition, shalbe justified, and God will make good that word of his Covenant to them, if thou doest well, thou shalt be accepted and rewarded.
Concerning these (though as to the outward man they be as yet in uncircumcision, yet keeping the righteousnes of the law, according to what they know) it is said, that their uncircumcision shalbe counted for circumcision, and the want of what they are ignorant of, not imputed to them; Rom. 2. These who by nature (renew∣ed by the Redeemer, though yet unknowne to them, according to the witnesse given of him in the written word) approve themselvs faithfull to their light, in ex∣ercising all good conscience, to the fulfilling of the law, shall condemne them who by the letter and forme of knowledg in the law, are found transgressours of it, when tried and judged by the rule they professe to live under. The cheif thing that by way of caution and warning is to be sayd to this first sort of righteous men, is this; that they take heed to themselvs in this their slippe∣ry standing, so as to continue under the hearing and teaching of this voyce of the Lord, in that soft, pliable and tender frame of heart, in that humble, meek and yeilding temper of spirit, that does become the vessell of clay in the hand of the potter, and the creature under the instructing word of the creatour, the turning away and settled departure from which, is eternall death. For the Lord leaves it to the power, will and choice of the naturall man, when he comes to be thus re∣newed and enlightned by Christ, whether he will hearken to what he has yet farther to say unto him or not, according to those frequent expressions in the Scripture, if ye be willing and obedient; if ye refuse and rebell; and againe, whether they will hear, or whether they will fobear. So likewise John. 7.17. If any man do his will, he shall know the doctrine whether it be of God; or, he shall know more and more, till at last he attein that knowledg wherein eternall life consists; according to that of our saviour, John. 12. yet a little while is the light with you, (the light of his then personall appearance in the flesh) walk while ye have the light, lest dark∣nes come upon you, and you be as he that knows not whither he goes. While ye have the light, beleeve in the light, that is, be faithfull to it, hear and obey it in the present voyce and teaching you are under, and it will never leave leading you forward, till it hath brought you to him, or to that last and highest manifestation of the truth, whereby ye shalbe made children of the light, or of the day, even of that wisedome which is from above. This sort of obedience is that of mans restored freewill by light from the inward word, which is good and pleasing unto God, till man be taught the way of hea∣ring and obeying him more perfectly, and after a more excellent manner, in the way everlasting. The disobedience also of man in this state, is a free and volunta∣ry act, whereby he hardens his heart against the voice and calling of God, and re∣sists the holy Ghost in the worke of life and immortality, which his office is to set up in every truly regenerate soule. It is the whole duty of the naturall man to fear God and keep his commandements, who will bring every work into judg∣ment,
with every secret thing, whether it be good or whether it be evill. Unto this all promises and threatnings of God, all temporall and Spirituall blessings do tend, even to render man obedient to his God, in hearing his voyce, walking in his wayes, and keeping his commandements. This in effect is the maine scope both of the law and of the gospell. And whatever we doe in way of obedience, that falls short of walking unmoveably and universally in all the commandements of God, with our whole heart, how good or pleasing soever it may seeme to us, it is not acceptable nor pleasing unto God. Let no man therefore deceave his owne Soule or dissemble with God, (who searcheth and knoweth the hearts and the reins) nor let any pretend inability or infirmity, since he is neer to every one of us, upon whose name if we call, he will save us from our sins and make our reconciliation once more with God, if the fault be not in ourselvs: Yea, he will save us to the uttermost, if we continue in our obedience, and in a pliablenes of spirit to the voyce and words of his mouth, that will be a sure guide to us, till it have brought us into that kingdome of his, that cannot be shaken. These are the first sort of servants and subjects that may be found faithfull and obedient unto the word and command of God, which was from the begin∣ning. These are they that feare God and work righteousnes, by an inward tea∣ching, suited to the spirituall senses of the naturall mind, which is the same with the light and law of pure nature. Now of these, some, and those the greatest part by far, (being wholly left to their owne choice and in the hand of their owne counsell) continue not in their obedience, but perish through a hardnes and impenitency of heart, in which they rebell against the encreasing measure of light with which the holy Ghost would enlighten them, in order to the enlarging of their hearts to an entire and stedfast walking with God in that Covenant of his that cannot be dissolved. But others of them, through Gods free and peculiar preventing grace, are withheld from so sinning against God, and are layd hold on and apprehended by the son's comming into their soules and contracting a most intimate and inseperable marriage union with them, fastning them to him∣self, the rock af ages and cheif corner stone, by whom their bow is made to abide in strength, and their arms are made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob. Thus of servants, they do with the eunuch and centurion (who were con∣verted by Philips and Peters ministry of the outward word) become Sons, that are heirs according to the promise, or else, they are admitted immediatly to the fight of Christ in spirit, as Paul was in his conversion, unto which heavenly vision they prove not disobedient, being taught not only to live in the Spirit, but to walke after the Spirit. This then that we have bin speaking of, is the first light and workmanship that Christ in his first appearance may and does visit the sons and daughters of men with, even those that are not yet brought to the knowledg of his voice, in and by the holy Scriptures.
There is then a second degree of light and glory, wherein Christ breakes forth in the workmanship of his Spirit upon the hearts and minds of men, which compa∣red with the first, is a more excellent and neer approach to the sight of the Son himself, testifying most particularly in what manner and at what time the WORD was to be made flesh, and in that flesh to be crucified and die for our sins, and to rise againe into a life wherein he was never to die more. Now the voice of this word is from divine inspiration, moving in the hearts and speaking by the mouth of Moses and other the Servants, the Prophets of the Lord, in the old Testament, to John the Baptist; and afterwards, by the holy Evangelists and Apostles, conteining the doctrine of both Covenants, that of works and that of faith, the law and the Gospell; These divine words and oracles were committed to writing and preserved for the use of the Church, from Moses his time downwards to this present day, by Gods especiall and admirable providence, called the holy Scriptures, which are able to make us wise unto Salvation, through the faith which is in Christ Jesus. They are not of any private interpretation, but attended with the ministry of the holy Ghost, in his various distributions and gifts, dividing unto every one severally, as himself pleases, to the making the doctrine flowing from this word, pure and converting the soule, that also which is an enlightning of the eyes, and a washing of the heart with clean water from its old sins; it is profitable also for reproof, correction and instruction in righteousnes, to the making the man of God perfect, throughly furnished unto every good word and work, even such hearers of the word and doers of the work as prove blessed in their deed, if the fault be not in themselvs, in failing to performe the condition of the Covenant, through that faith which excludes boasting, and failes not. This second sort of hearers and doers of the word, are they that are alive unto God through Jesus Christ, by hearing the voice of the living word, in and through the ministry of the outward letter of the Scriptures, testifying of Christ and of the work of redemption given to him by the father to finish, and of his comming, not by water only, but by water and blood, to the paying a ransome for our sins, and for the planting of us into a likenes with him, both in his death and resurrection. Under this second dispensation (which is the ministry of the outward and writ∣ten word, accompanied with the presence and power of the holy Ghost and his gifts) there is a workmanship of Christ, formed in and upon the heart, consisting of se∣verall degrees and growths up into him who is our head, the good olive tree, that is willing, ready and able to receave us into himself, as our spirituall root, which bears us and fills us with the oile and fatnes that springs up from the same into every branch and member of his body, considered either as his body is his living flesh, ot as it is his flesh crucified; 1. As it is the mannah and living bread that is the life of the world or of the world∣ly Church and enlightned naturall man, that may eat and drinke in his presence, at this his table, and eat and drinke his flesh and blood to their owne damnation.
2. There be those that feed upon the crucified flesh, the carkasse or dead body of Christ, out of whose weaknes comes strength, and from whose crucifying comes that meat which perishes not, but is bread that nourishes to eternall life. Thus it is written, Rom. 14. None of us that live, liveth unto himself, and none of us that die, doe or ought to die unto our selvs. But whether our faith be weake and low, and our naturall ability to hear and obey, active and strong in us; or whether the work of our faith be strong and powerfull, and our natural activity weak and low, yea brought into the very grave with Christ, the life or the death is not to be to our∣selvs, but to Christ. In and with him must we live, and in and with him must we die. Whether then we live with Christ by faith, as it is weak, or whether we die with Christ by faith as the work of it in us is powerfull and strong, we should live to the Lord and die to the Lord, that so living and dying we may be found amongst the number of those that are the Lords. For this end, and to enable us to effect this work of faith, whereby we may live and also may die to the Lord, and in neither sin nor serve our selvs, Christ both died and rose againe, and is become Lord both of the dead and of the living, even in this sense before opened. To this agrees what the same Apostle testifies, 2 Cor. 4:12.13. compared with 1 Cor. 4.8, 13. Here we find the Apostle, the father and true elder, as to his growth up into Christ, strong in the faith; and the Corinthians, they are the children, babes in Christ, weak and low in faith, but high, full and puffed up in their fleshly minds. Let us therefore consi∣der the differing characters he gives of the one and of the other, though both be∣leevers, such as in their living and in their dying are or may be the Lords. Ye now are full, sayes Paul, or this is your time of being rich and reigning as kings, with∣out us: but I would to God you did indeed reigne, that we also might reigne to∣gether with you; But it is otherwise with us, even a dying time; We are troubled on every side, perplexed, persecuted, cast downe, alwayes bearing about in our body the dying of the Lord Jesus, God having set forth us that are the Apostles (most strong and eminent in faith) as it were appointed unto death, and to be made a spectacle to the world, to angels and to men. We are fools for Christs sake, but ye are wise in Christ: we are weak, but ye are strong: Ye are honourable, but we are despised. So then death workes in us, but life in you: And we having the same spirit of faith, according as it is written, I have beleeved and therefore have I spoken, we also beleeve and therefore speak; knowing that he which raysed up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also by Jesus, and shall present us with you. That then which is wrought in men by Christ, through the ministry of the out∣ward word, by the spirit and life of his first appearance, is either restoration-work single, or restoration-work joyned and accompanied with true regeneration and eternall salvation. Restoration-work single is that which is called the spirit of bondage, making but those servants that abide not in the house for ever, as having never tasted nor partaken of that freedome, wherewith the Son makes those free
indeed, that he knits into an indissoluble union with himself. But restoration-work, as it is accompanied with salvation, (or the birth of the immortal and in∣corruptible seed of life and righteousnes) is that which is called the spirit of adop∣tion, of power, of love, and of a sound or stedfast mind; that principle of life, be∣gotten and springing up in us, whereby we put off that which is mutable and cor∣ruptible, and put on that which is immutable and incorruptible, as well in the in∣ward man of the heart, as in the outward man of the flesh. We have already shewed that their obedience is accepted with God, who are faithfull to their light, under the first dispensation of Gods word speaking in them, to the inward senses of their mind, as was the case of the centurion. Such persons in every nation are owned by God, as those that fear him and work righteousnes. And this feare is in a sense faith; for they cannot thus come to God and obey him, but they must beleeve that he is, and that he is the rewarder of them that diligently seek him and hearken to his voyce. Neverthelesse, this is not the faith that is in the regenerate, flowing from the spirit and life of the new creature, and working by love; but it is the faith which all restored, enlightned men may have, in confor∣mity to what Adam had before his fall, that knew and obeyed the eternall WORD, as creatour and maker of both worlds, though not as the redeemer and Saviour of men, by the blood of the crosse, from sin and the wrath attending it. This sort of faith is that which flowes from mans exercise of his right knowledg and free will, wherein he was created after Gods likenes, and did receave the truth in his know∣ledg, but in no fixed, permanent love thereof, because he was left free to change his mind as seemed good unto himself, being (in case of his failer therein) perso∣nally responsible to the penalties and curse of the law. For to be created with such a righteous mutable principle of activity and free moving power in the mind, was simply in itself good, and might be lawfully used, to answer the end for which it was given, which was by way of voluntary resignation to chang and turne out of that wavering, unstable active power, though at present righteous, into that love that should bind up the moving power of mans Spirit, into a stedfast and unmo∣veable delight and rest in righteousnes, and into a fixed and unshaken enmity and aversnes of mind to sin and all evill. By this new creation and forming of the spirit of man within him, his first freedome is taken from him and done away, or it is swallowed up into a freedome much better and more excellent, wherein man is made more in Gods image and after his similitude, then at the first. For though all things were in a good estate with man at first, when God made him upright, (that is to say, in a due conformity unto the divine will, for the performance of a pure and holy worship and service to God, justice and true judgmēt to his neighbour, and for the walking in a due sobriety, temperance and continence, as to himself) yet God would have him know, he might be better made through a new creation, which should more then comprehend all the good of his first make, and adde also
to it an immutability. God did therefore forbid man to trust to the uncertaine ri∣ches and fading glory of his first estate, and timely to look and make out for a bet∣ter. But in stead of this, man (notwithstanding Gods prohibition) runs himself a∣ground into a very bad and evill condition. Out of this forlorne state, the first thing that God propounds to him, in and by the knowledg of the redeemer, is his restora∣tion, which God is willing to draw him to by the ministry of Moses, and turn him to by the ministry of Eliah, even the disobedient to the wisedome of the just, to make a ready people, prepared for the Lord, to meet and receave him as he is given by the father in a better Covenant, ordered in all things and sure, of which there can never be any breach either on Gods or mans part, as there was and wilbe againe of the first Covenant, how often soever it be repeated and renewed, unlesse it end in mans being receaved and taken into the second. There is then a ministry of the first Covenant in the hand of the Redeemer, Sprinckled with the blood of his crosse, which is able to rectify the depravation of things caused by sin, and mans first breach with God, consisting in a restitution to∣wards mans primitive purity, and the remission of sins past, and this by a repen∣tance from dead workes, and a returning by faith unto the living God. Moses began this ministry; John Baptist continued or rather renewed it, as the immediate fore-runner unto Christs comming in the flesh; and Elias in spi∣rit and power, (or the spirit and power of Elias that is yet to come as the latter raine of Christs first appearance) shall cary on this work of restoration to its per∣fection and immutability, in the hearts of Christs slaine witnesses, and be as the fore-runner and bright morning-star that is to usher in the sun-shine of Christs second comming. Then will Christ come forth in his owne person, to ce∣lebrate publickly before the eyes of the whole creation, the marriage of the lamb with his bride. This latter Elias is he that must destroy that painted Jezebel, which puts Naboth to death by the authority of Ahab, Revel: 2:20, 22; the earthly lying spirit of the false righteousnes, in the mouth of the false Prophets, which by the secular power in all ages, puts to death Naboth, the spirit of true Prophesy in the mouths of Christs faithfull Servants, by false witnesses, to the treading downe and keeping under the true Prophets of God, during the time, times and half a time, foretold by Daniel and the Apostle John. And as this Elias must rectify the worship of God, so must he set in or∣der the man towards his neighbour. He must turn the heart of the fa∣thers to the children, and of the children to the fathers, putting an end to all differences betweene the spirituall fathers and their children, and the spirits of the later Prophets shalbe subject to the former Prophets. For when this Elias comes, he will untie all knots, answer all objections,
and resolve all doubts. In a word, he wil bring back againe the whole man unto his God. He will restore the naturall man to his right. He will also prepare and point out the way unto the heavenly man, for the obteining of his right. He will reco∣ver all Edom to the house of Israel, and the kingdom shalbe the Lords; O∣badiah. v. 21. And why should we doubt or despair, but such a time there wilbe, when things (which now are, have long bin, and will yet be more turn'd upside downe, all out of order, all confounded) shalbe restored and brought to right againe? Have not all the Beasts had their reigne, and shall not Christ have his? Shall not his king∣dom come, and will be done in earth as it is in heaven, unlesse we pray so without faith and hope? Have we not a promise that there shalbe times of refreshing from this heavenly presence and appearance of the Lord? shall not a generall restitu∣tion of all things be the effect of such his appearance, in the very dawnings there∣of? Were this to be mans work, no doubt would be made of it. O we of little faith! shall we then doubt of it, when God himself undertakes it, the mighty God, the Lord the Redeemer, that is yet to come out of Zion, to turn away iniquity from Jacob, in a spirit and power that all must bow under and fall before? Let us then upon whom the ends of the world are come, lift up our heads in the sight of the neernesse of this redemption, which is hastning apace upon us, in despite of all the opposition that is, can, or shalbe made against it. This then is that which we are to understand by the restoration-work, which God begets, carries on and perfects by the ministry of the outward and written word, as the handmaid and servant to the sons appearance himself in spirit. It is that where∣by man is first brought back againe to God and to himself, in the exercise of his right judgment and freewill. Then is he also ledd out of that into the love which he that hath, dwells in God, takes up his rest in the divine nature, becomming the habitable part of the earth, wherein the divine nature inthrones itself and dwells, as in his temple and resting place. This is the land of Emmanuel, the true Israell's land, the land of promise in the spirit, the city that hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God, Christ himself being the cheif corner-stone thereof. It is therefore the kingdom that cannot be shaken; at the comming on thereof, all that is moveable must be taken out of the way, and give place. He that is least in this kingdom, is greater then John Baptist, though he were greater then all the other prophets that went before him; the meaning is, in reference to this restoration-work, which is the proper effect of John Baptists ministry, through which Gods Covenant is repeated and renewed with man in the blood of the redeemer, after which a breach between God and man is still in possibility and danger to happen, and the spirit of man may be broken off from him, with whom it had bin made one, as a member of the same body. For by the power of this re∣storing, healing ministry of the first Covenant, taking force by the death of
Christ, the Lord does create or make man againe of one mind, one will and heart with him, according to the law of the first creation, which is throughout condi∣tionall, and may be made void through mans default, as appears by what Paul and Barnabas speake to the contradicting and blaspheming jews; Actor. 13.46. It was necessary that the word of God should first have bin spoken to you: but seing ye thrust it from you, and judg yourselvs unworthy, or shew yourselvs not desirous of eternal life; lo, we turn to the gentiles. Oh, how liable is the heart of man under this conditional Covenant, (though never so far advanc'd) to be suddenly broken off againe from God, by its hope and trust in the creature, or in the uncertain riches, that are either within us or without? This the Apostle Paul well knew, and therefore charg'd them that are rich in this world, not to trust in the uncertain∣ty of riches, (no, not in the very inward riches of the heart, as enriched with the restored mutable principles of righteousnes) but in the living God, the WORD that is in our heart and in our mouth, in the person of Christ, the enduring substance that never failes nor fades away. Christ says, wo be to the rich, to wit, that trust and put confidence in any the above-mentioned fading riches, within man or with∣out. Againe he says, Blessed are the poor in spirit, who doe resigne the activity, life, and way of working righteousnes and worshipping God in the fading, restored mutable principles of the first creation, growing weak, feeble and low in all such wayes even of doing well, wherein man hath whereof to boast, in order to a growing rich and strong in the Lord, or in the new-creature life, activity and way of worshipping God, and working righteousnes in spirit and truth, in the steady and unchangable principles of everlasting righteousnes. We cannot serve two masters, God and Mammon. We cannot take that delight and pleasure in any creature or seeming present good whatsoever, which is due from us to God in Christ only, but it breaks off our spirits from the God of life. To delight in and prefer the way of worshipping God and working righteousnes, in the mutable, fa∣ding, humane, creaturely principles of our first creation, when restored, before the performing all in the unchangable, divine, and never fading principles of the new creation, where God comes to work all our works in us and for us, this is a very high provocation of God, the highest and most deeply delusive and unperceaved idolatry, in preferring the creature before the creatour, who is God blessed for ever. Mans disobedience and failing then with God, as to the performance of the condition of the first Covenant, renewed and brought into force againe by the blood of the redeemer, is that which since the fall does cause a new breach between God and man, when it is willfull, working that wrath which the Sacrifice of Christ cannot appease. And man is not free nor safe from the danger of such wil∣full, unexpiable sinning, and so, of that judgment and fiery indignation which shall devour the adversaries, whilst he is under the dominion and jurisdiction of
the law. And under it he is, so long as he is alive to God but upon the condition required in the first Covenant, which makes him a debtour to the whole law, qua∣lifying him with that naturall ability and exercise of free-will, unto which when he trusts, (as he is too apt to do) takes up his rest, and engages in the single strength thereof, to performe what the law requires, then he falls and provokes God to wrath. This will he never be able finally to prevent or avoid, whilst he cleaves to and takes up his rest in the life and activity of his owne free-will, for the enabling him to keep Covenant with God, how rich in stock soever he may at present seem to be therein. His only way therefore is, to passe, or rather suffer himself to be translated out of these his mutable principles, into that love and stedfastnes of heart in Covenant with God, which is the end of the commandement, and proceeds from a pure heart, good conscience, and faith unfeigned. Now of those that are alive unto God in the awaken'd principles and renewed life of the first Covenant, (by repentance from dead works and faith in God the Redeemer and saviour of all men, and this by the voice of Christ, through the hea∣ring of the outward and written word) there are severall sorts, the cheif of which only we shall mention. 1. Those who are diligent hearers, willing and zealous obeyers of what they learn, receave and drink in from the holy Scriptures, which they are convinced is the mind and will of God, written for their direction and instruction in righteousnes, either by their owne private reading or by the outward ministry thereof. Upon this, they make their boast of God, and of the chang wrought in their hearts through repentance and faith; of their walking with God in the purity of his wor∣ship, and towards their neighbour righteously, according to the commandment delivered unto them. Hereby they do indeed come to be quickly and deservedly distinguished from the prophane world, having the forme of knowledg and of the truth in the law and written word, into the mould whereof the whole man is by them endeavour'd to be cast. But all this is but of little availe to them that stay here, and rest in the letter of the Scriptures which are not he, but testify of him that is come himself in his owne personal appearance, God manifested in flesh. And he afterwards died and rose againe, according to the Scriptures, and revealed him∣self in spirit, the better comforter and anointing, which teaches all things. All this the voice of the Scriptures points at and sends those unto, that desire to be made partakers of the life that is eternall. But those that hear or obey not this voice, do provoke, So that though a promise be left unto them of entring into the true rest, they fall short of it through unbeleif and pleasing themselvs with a false rest and satisfactiō in this first degree of restoration-work and lively change which is and may be wrought by the ministry of the outward word, to the bringing of men into a mutable state of righteousnes, which they are upon all occasions
in danger of losing and falling from, how sure soever they esteem themselvs to be. 2. A second sort of hearers there are, obeyers of the holy commandment deli∣vered unto them, not only by the testimony and preaching of the written word, but by the knowledg of the Son himself, Christ in spirit, (which is a degree farther then the first goe) who manifests himself to them in a likenes and glory that is bread, and sutable food to give life to the world, or to man in his first nature. Such practicall knowledge and sight of Christ is able to heal and restore man from the le∣prosy of sin, causing him to escape the pollutions of the world and to be washed from his old sins. Concerning such is it said, that it is impossible for them, having bin thus enlightn'd, having tasted the heavenly gift, bin made partakers of the holy Ghost, or Christ in spirit, and tasted the good word of God, and Powers of the world to come (so far as the natural man can be heightned and rais'd to the capa∣city of, on this side true Regeneration) if or when they fall away, to renew them againe unto repentance. The reason is, because they do eminently crucify the Son of God afresh in themselvs, and put him to open shame; yea, they trample him under foot, accounting the blood of the Covenant whereby they were sanc∣tified, an unholy thing, and doe despite to the Spirit of grace. These, before their personal fall or apostasy, are not properly under the spirit of bondage, as meer servants, but are rather children of that kingdom out of which they may be cast, who strivingly may seek to enter in at the streight gate after an undue manner, and so shall not be able to enter. When once the master of the house is risen up, and hath shut to the door, and they standing without, knock at the door, desiring ad∣mission, and alledging for themselvs, that they have eaten, and drunk in Christs presence, and that he hath taught in their streets, his answer to them wilbe, I know you not whence you are: depart from me all ye workers of iniquity, to the place where shalbe weeping and gnashing of teeth. You shall se Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and all my true prophets, in the kingdom of God, and yourselvs (that have in one sence bin the children of the kingdom) thrust out; Luk. 13:24, 28. Mat. 7:21, 23. and Math. 8:12. These are branches in Christ the true vine and good olive tree, partaking of his sap and fatnes for a season. But by reason of their mutable principles and slip∣pery standing under the first and conditionall Covenant, they come at last to wi∣ther and to be cut off from the root and cast into the fire that never shalbe quen∣ched. Jo. 15:1, 6. Rom: 11. In this last sort, the restoration-work is carried up very high, so as to place them that have it, amongst the number of those mention'd, (1 Cor. 13:1, 3.) that may speak with the tongue of men and angels, have the gift of prophecy, understand all mysteries, and all knowledg. Yea, though they should have all faith, so as
to remove mountains: though they should bestow all their goods to feed the poor, and give their bodies to be burned, and yet not have love, or that faith which works by love, they will come at last to nothing. They will prove and shew them∣selvs to be in the issue, but as sounding brasse, and a tinckling cymball. This is that, the highest restoration-work will discover itself to be, where it springs up but from the single seed of that righteousnes, which is unaccompanied with true regeneration, or that faith which works by love, changing the naturall mind of man from its mutable into an immutable principle of life, righteousnes and glory. 3. Thirdly therefore, this work of restoration may and does proceed in some so far, as not only to set all right and streight within and without man, in a great mea∣sure and in an eminent prevailing activity, according to what it was at first, when he was made in Gods image, but it hath a second and farther operation upon the soule, which prepares and makes ready the will to deny itself, take up the crosse, and become absolutely resigned up to the will of another, even of the Lord, as the sure guardian and keeper of the will in its truest and best freedom, which such ser∣vice of the Lord is, that is in such a manner performed, that we can do nothing a∣gainst the truth, but all for it. Through this second operation, the Lord himself, who is the immortall seed, does most powerfully beget us, and that of his owne will as he is the Son of Man, begotten into the love of the father, and made unmovea∣ble in subjection and obedience to his fathers will. He doth cleave unto us, lay hold on us, and put under his everlasting armes to make our armes strong and to guide us in that way of coworking with him in a joyntnes of will and operation, that nothing can dissolve. Such fooles for Christ sake, with Paul (1 Cor. 4.10.) through the intire resignation of themselvs to the ruling power of Christ in their hearts, will not, cannot erre or miscarry in the holy way of Gods ransomed ones. This is that which the Apostle meanes by love, 1 Cor. 13. and chap. 8.1. where he sayes, knowledg puffeth up: but love edifieth; that is, makes firm and stedfast work of it. It erects that building founded on the rock, (Math. 7.) that is unmoveable, and cannot be shaken. This love of God by which he makes us his choice ones, lies close and concealed a great while in the heart, during which time the work of faith is weak and low, very wavering and apt to faile. But afterwards, by falling into divers temptations, where∣in our faith is put to its proof, it does of weak become strong. When faith thus begins to come forth with power, that love by which it workes is spread abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost which is given to us, whereby we come to experience our selvs to be firmly rooted and grounded in the love of God, to the making us able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the length, breadth, depth and height of it, whilst the communication of it is enjoyed by any measures. Some do ascend yet farther, even to know the love of Christ in its highest and most extensive diffu∣sing of itself, passing knowledge, exceeding all measure, and filling them with all
the fulnes of God. The former communication of God who is love, is the single portion or gift of Christ in spirit, which all true Saints have their share in. The se∣cond is the double portion, which they only do inherit, who are made Gods first born Sons, higher then the kings of the earth, whose names are written in heaven. Concerning this love in both these sorts of true beleevers and Saints, we shall come in its proper place to a more particular search and consideration. First, we shall enquire into it, as it is in its concealed state, making us babes in Christ, in a low and weake exercise of saving faith; 2dly as it hath a time wherein it comes to be spread abroad in the heart, to the warming and quickning of it, and to the fulfilling of the work of faith with power, in an activity that failes not, but is immutable, en∣creasing more and more to the perfect day of Christs second appearance. In gene∣rall, we may say, that this is that love which (2 Cor. 3.) is called the spirit, which where it is, there is liberty, even a liberty with open face to behold the glory or image of the invisible God, and by beholding it to be transformed into the same image, from glory to glory; a state directly opposite to that of the spirit of bon∣dage. The love we speak of, does truly regenerate and bind up the will in a unity of operation with the will of the Son of God. It workes that hearing eare and o∣beying heart to Christ in spirit, in the life and exercise whereof true and saving faith does consist; yea, it is the activity itself, which quickens that faith, and by the which faith workes. This love hath its beginning in us, in and with Christs first appearance; but it is perfected and comsummated by working out the redemption of the body, at the day of the manifestation of the Son of God in the brightnes of his second comming. At that time, the creature itself, the very animalish and sensuall soule in us, with the filthy garments of the mortall body wherewith it is clothed, shalbe freed from the bondage of corruption, and brought into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, putting on the chang of raiment which in that day wilbe provided for it. With this love the father loved our head, the second Adam. And the WORD that was from the beginning, laid hold on the seed of David so as that both he that sanc∣tifieth and he that is sanctified, became one, one engraffed WORD that is the fa∣thers love, the spirit wherein he is alwayes well pleased, which can do nothing but what he sees the father do; and those things he does and fulfills after him, with a heart after the fathers heart. He is so entirely in the fathers love and well-liking, that he shews him all that himself doth, or hath a purpose and intention to do. For this end Christ hath sanctified himself, that is, our nature in his owne person, that he which sanctifieth and we that are sanctified may be all of one, of one immortall seed, and he not ashamed to call us and owne us for his brethren. As he is, so are they that are borne of one and the same immortal seed, each one resembling the children of the great King. They become one with him (through this birth) as he is one with the father. They are fixed and rendred unmoveable in his love, as he is in
his fathers love. This they arrive at, by his declaring to them the fathers name, or giving the manifestation of the fathers love, as he and the father are one, that the love wherewith the father hath loved these his children, may be in them, and that the Spirit of the Son that lives in the fathers love, may also be in them, even the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, father. From thence-forward are they evidently no more servants, but true heaven-born Sons and heirs of God through Christ, being taught to know God after the same manner as they are knowne of him, and to apprehend that for which also they are apprehended of Christ Jesus. It is Christ in the spirit of this love, that apprehends the soule, layes hold on the heart, and cleaves to it, as he is the sealed one of the father, till he change it into the same love and image, from glory to glory, working us into such a conjunction in spirit with him, and likenes in operation to him, that not we, in the exercise of our former and naturall free will, but Christ in this his love and glorious liberty of the Son of God, lives in us and we in him, as in a Kingdom that cannot be shaken. This love does not only cast out fear, but frees from all danger of any more breach of Covenant with God, whence his finall departure from us should follow, or our se∣paration from him. This way of giving himself to us, is love indeed, in a much more excellent way then appeared in such gift as he made of himself to us in our first creation, or in his restoration-work upon us since, singly considered as that whereby he makes a new proof and triall of us. In both those two former sorts of restoration-work above mentioned, God is indeed pleased to make us his people, manifesting himself and his will to us, and making knowne to us good and evill experimentally, so that we have tasted of the evil and of the good, when the Lord hath restored our first fredom, and put it in our power againe, to cleave to him and love him, or else to leave and forsake him. In this state he set Adam, under the counsell, rebukes and threatnings declared in his law, with a liberty to stand or fall. Whoever then stands upon these tearms with God, is alwayes in the same danger, can never be out of the fear of a breach that may happen between God and him, through his owne default. The comming of that love and the spirit of it (above-mentioned) into the soule, does perfectly secure from and cast out all such feare, And this it doth perform by its attracting, prevai∣ling power in and over the will, whereby man is brought to give up the absolute Rule and power of keeping himself, into the will of him that is this love, and is made fully content to be in his hands and under his wormanship, as a little child, created a new unto the good works before ordeined, that we should walk in them. The soule is hereby fitted and prepared with a meeknes and lowlines of mind, to draw together in one yoke with the spirit of this love, whose command is easy and burden light, requiring no more nor other thing to be done, then what by faith we se our head the second Adam in our very nature, to have done before us. And as many as are taught and enabled by Christ, to walk with him according to this rule, that
is as a race set before them in his cross, they are the true Israel of God, and mercy and peace shall for ever rest upon them. Conformity to this rule of the crosse, is the high way, the way of holines, which all the ransomed of the Lord are appointed to passe, and wherein the waifairing men, the true pilgrims on earth, though become as fools and little children, can∣not erre, but will infallibly come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads. But this way of holines appears to flesh and blood so strait a gate to enter in at, so fiery a baptisme to passe through, so bitter a cup to drink up, that none whoever, that are left to the freedom of their owne wills or naturall liberty resto∣red, will ever be inclined to drink it off or conforme to Christs example and com∣mand therein. They looke upon ir as a rock of offence, a stone of stumbling, which they know not how to get over, nor have any mind to it. This bitter cup and hard saying, is provided by God, as the bitter waters were of old, to try the adultresse or false hearted wife to her husband. It hath the like operation both wayes, as the antitype and mystery of the bitter water in the Mosaical ministration. It hurts not those that are chast, in whose spirit there is no guile, but makes them more fruit∣full in good works, such good works as proceed from a lively, operative, saving faith, which those that truly and savingly beleeve in Christ, wilbe carefull to main∣tein. But it corrupts and rotts others, ripening them faster on to their owne de∣struction. It is to this sacrifice of the first freedom of our wills, or free wil offring, that the Apostle exhorts us, Rom. 12.1, 2. I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies, or living soules, a living sacrifice; holy and ac∣ceptable to God, your reasonable service, or the service which your reason owes un∣to God, in seing and accounting yourselvs fools under his teachings, and weak and insufficient, under his ruling power in you. Obj: But it will be objected; If I suffer the freedom of my owne will to be taken from me, I either become a perfect slave, or am reduced into that necessity of ac∣tion, with which all creatures work by a Kind of instinct; so shall I come to be un∣manned, and made a very beast. Answer. In such suggestions and groundlesse surmises, we erre, not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God. If we did, both these consequences of mans being reduced to slavery or bestiality, (through such resignation of his freedom and ratio∣nal powers (that make up his reasonable sacrifice) into the hands of God, who will returne all back againe with usury) would appear exceeding far from truth, as is pos∣sible. For so far is that frō a bestiall state of life and will, that succeeds in the room of our rightly resigned freedom to the will of God, by the crosse of Christ, and fellow∣ship with him in his death, that it highly advances man into a more glorious liberty, evē the liberty of the sons of God, a freedom to good only, a liberty to do all things for the Truth, attēded with a kind of powerfull impotency or impossibility of doing any thing against the Truth. What other liberty thē this is left to the holy and elect āgels, that are by a secōd work of Christs hāds made immutably good, all possibility
in them to evill, being removed, and utterly and for ever taken away from them? This likewise is all the freedom left to Jesus the Son of Man, whereby when the evill one comes, he finds nothing in him, because he and the father are one in their willing power, in exact likenes and agreement. God himself also, the most free agent of all, never had the least possibility or fredom to evill. He hath not the least ability that way. To work evill, is utterly impossible to him. True fredom then is a power to will immutably that which is good; to do it, not only without any resistance or hindrance from within him that wills or does it, but against all the tempting or attempting power of any other person or thing without him, that might induce any chang of mind, if it were possible. Thus God is most free, who tempts none, nor can himself be tempted to or by evill. And thus is he free, who is fully born of God, into a likenes and conformity with his divine fredom of will; nor can he sin, because he is born of God, and so far as the immor∣tall seed in him is his keeper, the evill one cannot touch him, or be able to get within him, but at last is totally and finally overcome by him. This is the love that with a holy and delightfull efficacy, attractivenes and per∣swasivenes, carries the regenerate soule captive to the obedience of faith, con∣straining it with the greatest readines and delight, to run the race of Gods com∣mandement. Christ is responsible for us also to his father, that none of us shalbe lost, but he will rayse us up at the last day, perfected in this love, against which there is no law, or penalties by the law, that are in force, because it is the very end for which the law was at first delivered unto man. Through the power of this love, the inward man of the heart is bound up as in a bundle of life, in and with the ac∣tive and quickning power of the holy and blessed will of Christs manhood. And the will of the sensual and inferiour part of our soule, which is as the door and mouth to the inward man, is so conformed, subjected and bound up in unity of operation and agreemēt with it, as that where the heart so beleevs in Christ and loves him, by the mouth belonging to that heart he is answerably confessed and glorified, and comes at length by both, in exact harmony, to be immutably served and possessed world without end. In this third sort of beleevers, hearers and doers of the law and will of God, under the teaching and outward ministry of the Scriptures, this love is and dwells. These are the truly regenerate, heirs according to promise, that are rooted, grounded and made stedfast with God in his Covenant. These are they that through the transfor∣ming and prevailing power of Christs love, dwelling and working in them, are drawne to that sight and knowledg of the father, and of the Son, and of the unity and agreement of will that is between thē, which flesh and blood cannot reveale. They are taught also to employ and make use of their naturall ability and strength in the restored fredom of their will, so as to answer the end for which that liberty was first given, which was, not that they should therein be their owne keepers, but suffer thē∣selvs
to be kept and subjected under the Rule that God would send and give unto them for that purpose, to lead them in the right way, evidently trod by himself, that is, the way of the crosse and true selfdeniall, which does infallibly guide and un∣moveably keep the wayfairing man that walks in it, from all possibility of erring or falling short of entring into the promised land and true Rest, in which eternall blessednes consists. And in this they are instructed by the sacraments of baptisme and the Lords supper. So much by way of answer to the third particular enquiry, in order to the clearing up what is sought after in the 3d generall querie, in this discourse. 4. The 4th particular enquiry under the same 3d generall head, demands, how man comes in a judiciall manner to be hardned by God, made a vessel of wrath, fit∣ted for destruction, with an impossibility to chang his mind from evill to good, any more then those that are truly saved, can change from good to evill? These are in a state that can never be repented of, nor is there need. The other are in a sad estate, even such as admits of no repentance neither, no, though with Esau they do seek it carefully and with tears. The answer then to this query may be plain and short, from what hath bin al∣ready shewen at large. The steps and degrees by which men come into this deplo∣rable condition, take as followeth. By the good will and patience which is shewed to them by the redeemer, and by them abused, do men come to this judiciall hardning and fixednes in evill. Christ is content freely to begin anew with all mankind, as he is that word of the beginning unto them, which works their restoration more or lesse, towards their primitive state, as man was created, in Covenant with God, be∣fore any breach hapned. And he does commit their soule (so restored againe) to their owne keeping, and under the same law and condition as before, save only that now if they be found wilfully to break off and depart from God a second time, cru∣cifying the Son of God a fresh and thereby putting him to opē shame, there remains no more sacrifice for their sin, no restoration out of it, no chang of mind from it or aversnes to it, but a perpetuall condemnation of them (as they justly deserve) to be made bondslaves to sin and Satan for ever, whose counsell and will they have so inexcusably followed and preferred before Gods. And the higher they have bin rai∣sed up in light and in the participatiō of heavenly gifts, by them abused through the undue exercise of that free will to which they are left, the deeper will they sink in everlasting torments and sorrow, to all eternity, through the sense they shall have of their slighting, resisting and rejecting, against their owne soules, the operations of the spirit of love, the yeilding whereunto had bin the only way to have made them inheritours of it, as well as others. They fondly preferred their conceited way of being saved in the single exercise of their owne freewill and choice, before that way which the love and faithfulnes of God had chosen for them and chalked out to them by the rule of the crosse, in the knowledg of Christ, and him crucified,
evidently set before the eyes of their very naturall man, in the Sacramentall signes of his death, on which he appoints them to feed, as so manifesting him unto them, till he himself come in his owne personall appearance in spirit, to shew them the same mystery in the substance it self, or originall patern. Of the above-mention'd sorts of beleevers, partaking of the light and life of Christs first appearance, from the voice and testimony of the scriptures, together with the sacramentall signes of his death, instituted by commandment from God in his written word, does the visible Christian church consist, that hold them∣selvs to the rule of the Scriptures for their guide, and are faithfully obedient in putting into practice what is therein revealed. Amongst these there alwayes is (as we have shewed) a select number of hidden and beloved ones, kept through the power of faith unto salvation, without whom the rest would be as Sodom, and Gomorrah. And for the sake of this small remnant, (that truly and properly are Gods heritage out of all the rest, as the new wine in the cluster) it is, that the Lord sayes, destroy it not, for there is a blessing in it. These are they that being in and under the law of the Scriptures, the teaching of Gods outward and written word, shalbe judged by this law, as to the things they are found failing in, and as to their comming short of the end set before them in this ministry. Now the end of it is, to bring them by faith to the sight and fellow∣ship of Christ himself, speaking in spirit, as he is the word of the beginning, and gives forth the light of the glory of God in his, owne face, with which he shines in the hearts of his people. This comes to passe when once it pleases the father to reveal his Son in us, setting him as a living patern before the eyes of our faith, that in unity and similitude of spirit with that wherein the works are done by him in himself, we may fulfill the law of God after him, and be brought to live and dwell to∣gether in the same love, which hath its season of dawning in the heart, as the true day-star, to prepare the soule to meet with Christ in the glory of his secōd appearāce. Concerning these is it said, Rom: 8:1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit. When they have be∣gun in the spirit, they do end there also, and draw not back to be perfected in the flesh. As they live in the spirit, so their care and practice is, to walk in the spirit, rejoycing in Christ Jesus, and having no confidence in the flesh. Their praise is of God, not of men. They lose the prayse and honour of men, because they seek both of them from God only. They are strangers and pilgrims with him on the earth, as all their fathers were. They sojourne in tents, in the outward land of Ca∣naan, the streets of the visible church, and various self-chosen wayes of visible wor∣ship, which Christians of different judgments walk in. These invisible saints have their eye set upon the heavenly countrey and building, that hath foundations, which is the workmanship wrought in God, the engraffed WORD, and by him is held forth to the eye of that faith that is the evidence of things unseen, and is able to espy for us this land of promise in the spirit, whilst it is yet at a great distance and very far off. There is evidently set before this eye of our faith, the crucified spirit of Christ, as he offered up himself in sacrifice to the will of the father, learning obedi∣ence
by the things that he suffered, in denying his owne will, that we may tread in the same steps, dying with him that we may live with him, and suffring with him that we may reign with him. Through such fellowship with him in his suffrings, and conformity with him in his death, we shall be found still advancing and pressing forwards, if by any means we may attein the resurrection of the dead, or that re∣demption of the body, which is atteinable in this life, by those that diligently presse after the mark, for the prize of their high calling which is in Christ Jesus. This resurrection and redemption of the body will be experimented upon the ri∣sing of the witnesses, and then better understood. In the mean time, the eagle-eyed beleever lives upon the dead carkasse of Christ crucified, seen so in spirit. And he is content as a mēber of his dead body, to be made the scorne and off-scouring of the world, a member of the forsaken Zion, that dwells in the feild, in a wildernes-state, solitary and alone, that no man regards, be∣cause his dwelling is in the dust, in expectation of rising together with Christs dead body. Untill that season, this sort of beleevers, in stead of being found within the pale of the visible church, do follow Gods invitation of them into the secret cham∣bers of his presence, and do dwell in his house, (a building not made with hands, in the person and spirit of Christ) where they behold his beauty, shutting the doors about them, as to any visible entercourse with the worldly Church. Thus they hide thēselvs, as it were, for the little moment, that his indignation is to last and be exer∣cised on thē by the power, and during the reigne of the Beast. Blessed are those that thus die in the Lord, (though by the world called and accounted phanatick) waiting for the brightnes of his second comming. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear. To shut up thē and close the ministry of the day of Christs first appearance, as after this manner the Redeemer hath bin lifted up in it, and the work of common and temporary as well as of peculiar and eternall Redēption hath bin wrought by him and made manifest to all sorts of men and of beleevers in the world, we shall now come, in the next place, to a distinct consideration of the fourth and last generall head of enquiry, above mentioned in this discourse, which is, concerning the very being, life and constitution of the new creature, or that immutable state in righte∣ousnes and glory, that begins in the day of Christs first appearance, and is perfected by his second. 4. The fourth generall enquiry then is about the immutable state of life and righ∣teousnes in the new creatures constitution, or that change which is brought upon man by the new creation. The new creatures life is founded (as hath bin shewed) in the birth of the fathers love in the soule. Of this love are they born, who are by Christ the immortall seed, layd hold on, cleaved unto, and apprehended in that intimate and inseperable marriage-union in spirit, which is never to be dissolved; in the Cove∣nant, ordered in all things and sure, that is contracted in his person, between the father and the Son, through the holy Ghost. Where ever this union is, there is Gods love; there is Christ inseperably united to that soule for good. And although this kind of life and union, do lie hid and con∣cealed
(as it may) for a long time, asleep in the vessell of the mind, as Christ was in the ship when it was in danger to sink with the waves, yet by it is the soule Kept and seperated to the Lord, as Paul was from the womb, notwithstanding which he wal∣ked as a Pharise, nay, as a persecutour of the true church, till this seed of Gods love revealed itself in him. This is the first degree of the new creatures hidden and con∣cealed state, and this foundation of God is sure; for he knows who are sealed with this his living seal from the womb, though neither as yet themselvs know it, or any other, but only the Father and the Son. The second degree of new creature life, arising from the immortall seed of Gods love, sealed as yet and concealed in the heart of the beleever, is, as it yet lies un∣dermost and at botome, suffring Esau the elder brother to come out first into view. It gives way to the restoration-work which puffs up the flesh, in making the spi∣rit of the naturall man full and rich in his first abilities of pure nature, and exercise of his freewill. Such a saint girds himself as peter had done, when he went whither∣soever he would. He wil be a very active, couragious follower of Christ, whilst he works miracles and all the world runs after him; yea, he will promise faire al∣so to goe even to prison and death with him; but in the hour and power of darknes the faith he acts upon this bottome, and all his other graces faile and abide not the triall, unlesse the seed which lies undermost, appear and shew forth its preser∣ving, overcomming, and never failing power. In this 3d state or degree of new creature life, we are with the Corinthiaus, such as are carnall and babes in Christ, but cannot properly be addressed unto as spiri∣tuall Christians. We are ready in this state, with good Samuel, to say of Eliab the elder brother, surely the Lords anointed is before us, in the restoration-work, wrought by the spirit of Christ in our soules. We are little aware that the true David, the man after goes owne heart, the inward man, which feeds upon that which is not corruptible, lies hid and is not yet seen as he is, but under a veyle only and as through the lattesse. In these, true saving faith is but weak and low, not knowne rightly to themselvs, but upon grounds that may and will fail them. A third state or degree of this new birth and new creature life, is, when upon being found triall-proof, the love of God comes to spread itself abroad in the heart by the holy Ghost; when the seed which is at the bottome and lies under∣most, works and removes out of the way, him that lets, every impediment and weight that presses downe. It comes now to circumcise the foreskin of the flesh, which is the cover and veile under which it hath layn so long hid, bringing under and laying low the fleshly man in us, teaching him subjection and shewing him that law, by which the elder is to serve the yonger and come behind, but no lon∣ger to lead the way or be preferred before him. For the naturall man to come un∣der this discipline, is the great crosse which is so fiery and dreadfull to flesh and blood; the cup, which, if it were possible, every one would avoyd. But, 'tis by this
means, that the naturall man is made subject, and becomes a meet vessell for the use of his Lord. And now, when we are thus in weaknes according to the flesh, most low, broken, and crucified, then are we strongest after the spirit; and the work of faith springing up with vigour, is fulfilled in us with power; so comes it to be cleerly seen to ourselvs, though yet very much hid, as to others. When it hath once rooted and grounded the inward man in this love, it will diffuse the good ointment to the very shirts of the garment, and cloath the beleever with change of raiment, that as the soule is made all glorious within, the outward man may be glorified also, and Christ not only admired in the heart, but glorified in and by the mouth of the same beleever, which is the fourth degree of new crea∣ture life. This fourth and last degree of the perfecting of the love of God in us; is reser∣ved to the day of Christs second appearance, called also the day of the manifesta∣tion of the sons of God, which we shall now in the next place enquire into and apply ourselvs to search after, according to such discovery thereof as God hath bin pleased to make knowne. By way of preparation to this enquiry, let us take notice of what we find described and foretold of it, by the Prophet Hosea, chap. 6. v. 2, 3. After two dayes he will revive us, that is, in the end of the second day. In the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. Life from the dead, and immortality shall be brought to light in us. The day of Christs Kingdom in the spirit, (considered, as the going forth of it is prepared as the morning, which en∣creases more and more to a perfect day) distinguishes itself into two distinct sea∣sons. It comes upon us and to us as the raine, as the former and the latter rain upon the earth. In the former, it is a Kingdom of patience; in the latter, a king∣dom of power. The Kingdom of Christ in spirit, is that stone, which whosoever falls upon, shalbe broken to peices, or they shall split and break themselvs in pee∣ces that fal upon it, whilst it is yet but the Kingdom of his patience, in himself or his suffering servants, who amidst all their sufferings in the flesh, do remain in spirit true members of the Kingdom of the stone, lively stones of Christs spiri∣tuall building, abiding firme and unmoveable under all trialls of persecutiō and op∣position. But on whomsoever this stone or Kingdom of Christ shall fall in the day of its power, when it becoms a mountain filling the whole earth, it shall grind them to powder. It will make them as the chaffe of the summer threshing floore, which the wind of Gods just anger will so carry away, that no place wilbe found for them. The beginning of the third day (mention'd Hos. 6.) seems cleerly to be about the time of Christs ascension, and day of Pentecost, when the former rain of the spirit came downe; or some few years after, at the final ruin of Jerusalem and the jewish Kingdom. To know the certain period of the second day and beginning of the third, will much conduce to the better forming of our judgments, as to the seasons of this Kingdom, that are yet to come. We may hereby also gain some
sight into the two dayes that are past, and the distinguished parts of time that the holy Ghost does intend and signify to us by those two former dayes. By the second of them, it seemes very evident that the day of Abrahams naturall seed, continuing a nation and visible church, owned by God as a peculiar people a∣bove all others, is certainly intended. Yea, in some respect we may carry up this day of Abrahams naturall seed, as high as shem, the blessed Son of Noah, in whose loyns and under whose blessing Abrahams seed are comprehended; Gen. 9:26.27. Blessed be the Lord God of Shem. and Canaan shalbe his servant. The true and right iew is here distinguished from all the wicked, hardned world. 2dly. Tis said, God shall en large or perswade Japhet to dwell in the tents of Shem, or in the same spirit of faith, and thereby become a fellow citizen with the Saints, and of the houshold of God. But if this be not admitted, the date of the beginning of this day cannot be denied, according to Stevens computation, (Act. 7.8.) to have bin, at least, when God gave to Abraham the Covenant of circumcision. And so Abraham begate Isaac and circumcis'd him the eight day. And Isaac begate Jacob, and Jacob begate the twelve Patriarchs, that were the originall heads of the twelve tribes, the Israelits, to whom perteined the adoption, the glory, the Covenants, the service of God and the promises, whose are the fathers, even from the beginning of the new world after the flood; and of whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is over all. God blessed for ever, Amen. By his comming, he gave a revivall to Gods work in the midst of its dayes, (Hab. 3.) or in the end of the second day; and by his death, ended also that whole dispensation of the circumcision, relating to the natu∣rall seed of Abraham and the Mosaicall ministry. The second day being thus found in its beginning as well as ending, it will not at all be difficult, from the beginning of that, (especially if considered as from the time of Noahs bestowing the blessing upon Sem) to fill up the space of time, of which the first day consists. And therein shall we find the continuance of another line, wherein God declared himself for the propagating and carrying on of the holy seed of the church. For after the death of Abel, that was murdered by his brother Cain, Adam knew his wife againe, and she bare a son and called his name Seth; for God appoin∣ted him as another seed, in stead of Abel whom Cain slew, Gen. 4:25. This holy seed from Seth downwards, in way of distinction from the rest of the world, passed under the name of the Sons of God, calling themselvs by the name of the Lord, and continuing so to do, as we find, (Gen. 6.) till the flood came and drowned the old, corrupted, apostate world. This reduced the holy seed to a new root and spring, in the person of Noah, an heir of the righteousnes which is by faith. Hereof he gave the proof, in preparing an ark, at Gods command, to the saving of his house, thereby condemning the world, that slighted and rejected that way of being saved. These are the two dayes, in the end of the second whereof, we have bin revived by
the comming of Christ in the flesh, dying for our sins, and rising againe, according to the Scriptures. It remains now therefore to search out, if we can, what is the tract of time, meant by the third day, which is the day of the continuation of Abrahams seed, as they are Christs. And he that sanctifies and they that are sanctified are all of one; He that be∣gets and they that are begottē are the one seed that are the Sons of Gods absolute and, unchangable choice and love. They are born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, (no not of the Son of man himself, as standing in his owne will, or exercising his owne humane freedom, single) but of God, or of the Son of man, as he and the father are one, having as it were but one will betweene them. Of this holy and good will they are begotten, being taken out of their owne wills, and made to stand and live in the will of the Son of God, as his resigned hu∣mane will lives intirely in the will of his father. So come they to be one with him as he is one with the father. This seed are those that are of Abrahams faith, being of the same spirit and wal∣king in the steps of that typicall father, and of Christ himself, their father in spirit and Truth. These are the true heirs according to the promise, and are called to in∣herit the blessing of Abraham, in the actuall receiving of the promise of the spirit through faith, the adoption of Sons, which makes them like David, a people after Christs owne heart. For the forming and bringing of them to this, God sends forth the spirit of his Son, or his Son in spirit, into their hearts, by which thy cry Abba, father. Thus Christ comes to dwell in them and with them, purifying them in spi∣rit as he is pure, to a like-mindednes in all things, with himself. This spirituall seed who are Christs, (as the children of his Kingdom, the day whereof in spirit begins with his ascension) are said (Col. 3.) to be risen with Christ in the affection and desire of their minds, which is set upon things above. This renders them dead to things below, the seen things which are temporary and perishing, causing them by the eye of faith to espy out for themselvs a life, and to find an ability to worke the righteousnes, that is immutable. However hidden, weak and low this life and ability may be in the motion and activity thereof, for a season, 'tis that that will never faile, as to the effecting in them a conformity to Christs death, and arming them to suffer in the flesh and to continue with Christ the season appointed for his temptations and sufferings, in the whole body of his true members and followers, as well as in himself. It prepares them to be his true witnesses in a sackcloth testimony, a state of patience and persecution from the world, as wel as afterwards to be the witnesses of his power and great glory, when he shall come to be glorified in his Saincts and admired in all those that do beleeve. During the suffe∣ring season, they are patiently to undergoe all, approving themselvs first to be faithfull witnesses under this baptisme of the crosse, as they desire to be found afterwards in the number of the two sorts of his obedient children, that are to
reigne with him; first, such as are chosen out of the world into the common rank of sons; secondly, such as are chosen out of that choice, to be freinds and speciall favourites. They are both of them appointed and prepared by the father, to sit on thrones with Christ, the one at his right hand and the other at his left, when he shall come forth in his power and great glory, as may seem in some sort to have bin perceaved by the mother of Zebedees children, in her untimely and over-forward request on their behalf, Mat: 20:20, 22. She seemed desirous to have them in the throne before they had drunk of the cup, and bin made partakers of the great tri∣bulations wherein they were to abide with Christ, and all other beleevers, in them represented. This suffring season is to hold, till the time of the Gentils shalbe ful∣filled, for the treading downe and trampling under foot by the space of 42. months the holy city and tabernacle of David that hath bin reared up amongst them by the Apostles ministry, after it was fallen amongst the jews; Act: 15. v. 16, 17. When it was fallen amongst the jews, it came to be set up in the midst of the Gen∣tiles, a nation that for a season did very affectionately bring forth the fruits of the gospel. Thus the residue of men, (those that were not regarded till the jewish nation was rejected and broken off from the good olive tree) were brought to seek after the Lord, even all the gentiles upon whom my name is called, saith the Lord who doth all these things. This is the first act and effect of Christs resurrection, or of that day in the spirit, upon the hearts and minds of the children of this his Kingdom, which is preparing them by the trialls allotted to them in the keeping the word of his patience, to sit with him on his throne, and shine forth in the day of his power, not only as bright morning stars, but as the sun itself in its strength, in the Kingdom of their father. The beginning of the whole day of Christs Kingdom, wherein he will have the word of his patience kept in faith and faithfull witness-bearing, was without all question, from the time of his Ascension, according as it is written, Act. 1.8. Ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem and in Samaria, and unto the ut∣termost part of the earth. To like effect spake Ananias to Paul, upon his conver∣sion, (Act: 22:14, 15.) The God of our fathers hath chosen thee, that thou shouldst know his will and se that just one, and shouldst hear the voice of his mouth, that thou mayst be a witnesse unto all men, of what thou hast seen and heard. And al∣though there be something in this conversion of Paul, which is extraordinary, as to his unction and mission into the ministry and office of Apostleship, yet this de∣scription of the Apostles conversion hath that in it, as to the essentiall parts of it, which is common to all the spirituall seed of Abraham. For first, they are all cho∣sen to know the will of God; secondly, to know it by the sight of the just one, Christ in spirit, through faith; thirdly, to heare the voyce and understand the lan∣guage of the spirit of Christs mouth, by the eare that is given them to hear what Christ in spirit saith to the churches, or to particular members of his body; fourthly,
to be witnesses according to their measure and degree of light, in their stations and callings, of what they have seen and heard. In this sence, the whole spirituall seed of Abraham are Christs witnesses, spe∣cially since his ascension, from which time he began to be seen by them in spirit, and to speak to them from heaven, by his indwelling presence in their hearts through faith. True beleevers (as hath bin opened) are of two sorts or degrees. Both of them are free-born sons and citizens of the same heavenly Jerusalem and holy city. Christ calls them his two witnesses, and declares the sackcloth testimony of his name which they are to bear, during the treading down of them the holy city underfoot, even by the gentiles of the outward court, for the space of 42 months. But although that these two witnesses were in being, and also engaged in the work of witnessing what they had seen and heard, according to Christs com∣mission, immediatly after the comming down of the holy Ghost upon them, at the day of Pentecost, not only in Jerusalem and Samaria, but also to the ends of the earth, yet the time of the treading them underfoot by the gentiles of the outward court, did not begin till some hundreds of years after, nor by the same reason could their sackcloth testimony begin, which had relation to that treading downe, and must needs therefore be contemporary with it. When once this began, it was to continue but 42 months, or 1260. years, from the very same time as that po∣wer that was to tread them downe, came to have its beginning as authorized or permitted to make war with them, and bring them under. To the Beast which all the world wonder'd after, and fear'd to make war with, was power given to con∣tinue 42 months, that he might make war with the saincts, and overcome them; Rev. 13.7. Who or what this beast is, was long agoe made knowne to Daniel, and by him foretold and described, ch: 7:23, 24. It is said to be the fourth beast, signifying the fourth Kingdom or universal oppressing power, that should be on the earth, over the saints of God, and that should come in processe of time, to stand up in a diver∣sity from all the other three Kingdoms, or universall monarchies that had gone before it. This considerable variation did come to passe and shew itself in a horn of remarque and note by itself, that upheld the same oppressing power and prin∣ciples against the saints of the most high, (for the treading downe of the holy ci∣ty) that the other three had don before, but under a new forme or name of Chri∣stian, which they had never owned. On the account of this name or outward profession of Christianity, which the fourth beast came to make in the course of the little horne, he plucks up by the roots the worship and many prophane customs that had bin cleaved to, owned and practised, during the reigne of meer down-right heathenisme, all the time of the three former Kingdoms, Babylonish, Persian, Grecian, as also a great part of the Romane, till this fourth Kingdom or universal monarchy came to be headed
with the little horne, under the style of universall Bishop or cheif preist, when the Romane empire that had bin heathenish, came to divide and sinke downe in∣to ten horns or Kingdoms, all agreeing yet in this, to give up their power to the little horne, in acknowledging the papacy and universal Rule over them in spiri∣tualls, by the Bishop of Rome. These ten Kings, with their civil power, thus uniting under one head, as to spi∣ritualls, do together with their head constitute that course and state of the fourth monarchy, under which it is called the little horne. Now when the time of this combination began, is somewhat difficult to say, exactly, and to a year. But if the beginning of this little horne be once rightly found out and stated, it will not be difficult to say when it shall end, or when the witnesses prophesying in sackcloth shal end, which must be at the same time. For the 42 months of this little hornes continuance in its persecuting power and war on the saincts (who prophesy all the same time in sackcloth, as a despised, rejected remnant of outcasts) are according to the true meaning of the holy Ghost, to take their date and beginning from that conspiracy or combination of the ten hornes, uniting in one preistly head, as to spiritualls. Concerning the Rise then of this little horne, we may safely assert, 1. That there was a time certaine, when the papal power did begin, and that time was after the dissolution of the Roman empire, as it was meerly heathenish. And this power was as the corner stone, to cement and build up the ruins of the Roman empire into ten Kingdoms, bearing the name of Christian, and acknow∣ledging the supremacy of the pope. Secondly. That so soon as this power was first in being, the power which hath made war with the saincts ever since, did begin. For these ten Kingdoms, with their Ghostly father the Pope, have ever since bin treading down and keeping under the holy city, or true citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, necessitating the two witnesses, if they will prophesy at all, to do it in sackcloth, that is, under great persecution and tribulation. Thirdly, It is evident, that from the time of such beginning of the power of Daniels little horne, or last branch of the fourth Kingdom upon the earth, the sackcloth Testimony of the witnesses did also begin. And after the continuance of the one and the other for the space of 42 months or 1260 years, the day of the Kingdom of Christs patience is to expire, and the time of the witnesses prophe∣sying in sackcloth is to be no longer. But in stead hereof, the time of the lambs wrath is to come and be revealed from heaven against all this bestiall domination over his saints, and he will openly take to himself his great power, and reigne. He will set up his Kingdom over the heads, or on the top of all the other King∣doms, and Rule with his saints or the earth, one thousand yeaves; Rev. 20. In order and by way of preparation to this, Christ comes in the latter rain of his
spirit upon the earth, to gather the harvest of the world, and keep the last and great feast of Tabernacles, to which the true spirituall Israelits amongst jews and Gentiles are invited, Zech: 14:16, 21. These then are the two distinct commings of Christ, wherein he comes to his people, as the former and the latter raine, in this third day, that is the day of his Kingdom in spirit; the day, wherein first he shews his royall patience and forbea∣rance towards his worst enemies, and the day wherein secondly he shews forth his royall power and universall, irresistible command in earth as well as in heaven. The one as well as the other of these dayes, (or parts of the third day above mentioned) do belong to this great Kings making himself knowne, even as he is the Son of man, ordeined by God to judg the world in righteousnes. But it may be demanded, since both these make but the one day of Christs Kingdom in spirit, called in Hosea, the third day, wherein he hath promised to raise up the children of this his Kingdom, and cause them to live in his sight; how comes it to passe, that during the long time of Christs first appearance, in the Kingdom of his patience, the true saincts are in an outwardly suppressed and af∣flicted condition, as inhabitants of the dust, trampled under foot by the powers of the world? The answer is easy, by this short and cleer distinction. The raising up or resur∣rection of them to live in his sight, which Christ promises, is twofold. 1. Such a raysing up, as is wrought inwardly in their minds, directing them to the sight of things above, and fastning their affections and desires accordingly, binding them up in the life which is hid with Christ in God. This first kind of re∣surrection is knowne and experienced in themselvs, by the renewings of their in∣ward man day by day, under the perishings and decayes of their outward, when they are looked upon as in the grave, in a very sad and low condition, by the eye of the world; 2. But secondly there is a raising them up to live in Christs sight, discernably to the very eye of the world. At that season, glory and honour shalbe put upon their very outward man, and they shalbe called to sit downe at Christs right and left hand, in the Kingdom of his power, to the visible treading all their enemies under their feet, like mire in the streets. They shall also administer healing and refreshing to the whole creation of God. For in this seed, all nations of the earth shalbe bles∣sed, and the very creature freed from the bondage of corruption. The promise then of raising up the true children of the Kingdom, shalbe made good both these wayes, and that successively, the one after the other, as will appear in its proper place, when the day of Christs second appearance in spirit, shalbe particularly spokē to. But in this, the scripture is very positive, and expresse,
that untill we be children of the resurrection in the first of these respects, during the season of suffering with Christ, we shall never be children of it in the second. If we die not or suffer with him now, we shall not live and reign with him thē. It there∣fore highly concerns us, even as much as to make our calling and election sure, to have the certain and cleer discovery, yea and practicall experience of what it is that makes the children of the resurrection in the first sence. For over those only that are such, the second death will have no power. And they also are of two sorts, being found in a first or second degree of life from the dead, which is wrought out in Christ, as he is the Son of man. In the first of these, they are made sharers with the holy angels, in their atteinment and fruition of God, and goe no higher. But in the second, they are sharers with Christ in that higher atteinment and fruition of God which he hath as he is the engraffed WORD, and is admitted accesse to the very similitude and shape of God in his owne proper forme. Man by his owne voluntary sinfull act, hath concluded himself, and God by his judiciall act hath concluded all men under the death of sin and unbeleif. In these chains might man justly have bin left by God for ever, bound up in an alienation of mind from all good. But by the tender mercies of God in the redeemer, he is visited by the power of that voice of the son of God, which raises him out of the grave, awakens him out of this deadly sleep into which he is not at first so deeply plunged, as to be irrecoverable and without remedy. This death is properly of the mind, as become the servant of sin; and it is not only that, by which the spirit of the mind is gone out from its subjection to the law of God, and hath given up itself to the rule of the declared enemy of God, the spirit of darknes that rules in the children of disobedience; but it is also that, by which the outward man of the heart, (called, Coll. 3. the members of the mind, that are upon the earth) with∣draws itself from its due subjection and conformity to the dictates of right reason (that are suggested to it from time to time, by the enlightned spirit of the mind) and gives up itself to vile, sensuall lusts and affections, that carry the whole man captive to sin and death, to commit all iniquity with greedines, and run into all manner of unrighteousnes. The mind which in both these respects is dead, is a downright servant of sin, and is free from righteousnes, or hath freed itself intirely from under its command and Rule, as it is written; know ye not, that to whom ye yeild yourselvs Servants to obey, his Servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether of sin unto death, or of obe∣dience unto righteousnes? The freedom wherein man was at first created, was such as whereby he might freely and voluntarily fix himself, or rather be fixed in the service of righteousnes through beleeving, or in the service of sin by unbeleif. By the one he might have bin for ever free from all danger or possibility of serving sin, or turning from the service of righteousnes. By the other he might in such manner free and discharg himself from the service of righteousnes, as never to be receaved into it againe, but
be for ever condemned to the unchangeable servitude of sin, as his punishment. The first use man made of this primitive freedom, was to free and turn himself out of the service of righteousnes, and yeild up himself in subjection to sin. And the work of Christ the redeemer is to turn him back againe from the service of sin and power of Satan unto God, setting him in as good a condition as at first: yea far∣ther, to free him for ever from any possibility of becoming a servant to sin any more, if the fault be not in himself. This restoring, renewing and regenerating of man, by the power and workmanship of the redeemer, in whom we are anew crea∣ted unto good works, is frequently tearmed in scripture, a resurrection, or quick∣ning from the dead. But now, this renewing work, flowing from the spirit of Christ into fallen man, admits of severall measures and degrees, which are accompanied with answerable operations and effects upon the mind; 1. It turns man back againe from sin to righteousnes, conferring upon him the use and exercise of his free will in Gods service, upon the like tearms of mutability, as he had it at the first creation thereof. And to be thus anew created in and by Christ Jesus, unto good works, is (in a degree and measure) to be quickned with Christ, and raised by him from the death of sin, as sin is the transgression of the law. They that are under this worke and chang, wrought by Christ upon their hearts, are yet but under the law, or under the rule and command given by God in the first Covenant. This ministry of the spirit of Christ, doth in Scripture passe under the name of Moses, John Baptist and Eliah, as the voice of the messenger going before, but not the voice of the Son of God himself, in his owne person. 2dly, Therefore, there is a farther and an additionall work to this, (which suppo¦ses this chang first to be wrought) the operation whereof, is to make this a repen∣tance never to be repented of, this chang unchangable, by bringing the mind into that better state of fredom, which is for ever exclusive of sin, or of any possibility to chang and return to the service of sin againe. This second work enlarges the first, making it more entire within itself then ever it was, in yeilding subjection to righ∣teousnes, as transform'd into the whole will of God, with an impossibility to chang, or turn in affection from it. This is properly the workmanship of the Son himself, called Regeneration, which carries in it the fredom with which the Son makes all those free indeed, whom he causes to receave him in this gift of himself to them, likening them unto himself in that lowly, meek, and subjected frame of spirit, wherein as the Son of man he is prepared to se God, and to do alwayes that which is welpleasing in his sight. Those that are under this second work, are properly beleevers, having faith of the right kind, saving faith. And they are therein created by Christ Jesus unto good works, with another manner of will and spirit then those are of, that are but restored only unto the service of righteousnes, and chuse there to be left, to work out their owne salvation in the single principles of their rectified nature and free will. For in
them, that freewil offering (Rom. 12.1.) is made, the life of that flesh is offered up in sacrifice, which the law of faith commands, as the only way to exclude boas∣ting or a being puffed up in the service of righteousnes; and indeed, to exclude all possibility of finall relapse from God, or returne to the service of sin. This flesh that would live in us, is the power we have to lust and desire, move and act of ourselvs, in the use and exercise of our primitive free will, either to good or evill, as likes us best. This freedom may either be taken away from us by force, or we may be brought through a principle of love begotten in us, of our owne choice to resigne it up, into the hands of another, ordeined of God thereunto, to keep and manage for us. This is that, Christ tells us; (John 6:37, 40.) All that the father giveth me, shall come to me; and it is his will, that of all that he hath given me, I should lose none, but raise them up againe at the last day. For I came downe from heaven, not to do my owne will, but the will of him that sent me. And this is his will, that he that seeth the Son (as he lives, not in his owne will, but in the will of the fa∣ther) and beleeveth on him, (living in the will of the Son, and not in his owne will) should have everlasting life, and be raised up at the last day. To be taken off then by this gift and drawing of the father, from all desire to live in our owne will, or be at our owne arbitrary, single choise and dispose; and to be made willing and contented to live in the will of Christ, to be built up in a conjunc∣tion of spirit, a unity and simplicity in the motion of our will with his, will enable us truly to say with the Apostle, that now, not we live, but Christ liveth in us; and the life that we now live in the flesh, or as yet in the mortal body, we live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved us and gave himself up to death for us, that he might bring us thus to live in and with him. The life that we thus live, is through his enli∣vening and inspiring motiō, who for this very ēd gives himselfe to us in such an in∣timate and unchāgable uniō, as makes him our very life, or the activity and strength through which we act and live. Christs thus being given to us and receaved by us, amounts unto true regeneratiō, and our being made willing to give up ourselvs thus unto him is the presenting our bodies, or lusting fleshly mind, a living sacrifice, that is holy and acceptable to God. This is to make our living soule an offering or rea∣sonable service to God, even the freewill offering of those reasonable first created powers of discerning and desiring, (which however refined, do remaine yet cor∣ruptible, till the transforming work of true regeneration hath passed upon them) and this with Abel's, is reputed by God (and therefore certainly in itself is) a much more excellent sacrifice then that which Cain offered, or indeed can be offered by any that retaine the life of their owne will, as the principle of all their motion and activity in Gods service, be it otherwise never so conform to the letter of the com∣mandement. They that are under this second work and chang, have the Son of God in them, so as to be himself the keeper of their soules, by oath never to part with or give up his
interest in and Rule over them, unto any but the father. After this manner to re∣ceave, have and possesse the Son, is to beleeve and have life eternall, by the new and everlasting Covenant. And not thus to receave the son, is the unbeleif, which when once it takes root, springs up with that bitternes and enmity against the principle, operation and Testimony of saving faith in true beleevers, (and so against Christ himself, who rules in their hearts by faith) as amounts in conclusion to the very second death. For it carries them on, in to that irrecoverable impeni∣tency and hardnes of heart, for which God swears, they shall never enter into his Rest. To be quickned and risen with Christ in this second work and chang, wrought in the soule by him, is that resurrection into life which never is to se corruption or change more. And he that is thus borne of God, doth not commit sin, that is, the sin of unbeleif above mention'd, because his seed remaineth in him, which keepeth him from so sinning, and the evil one toucheth him not. This heavenly, immortall seed and birth of the life that is incorruptible, keeps the beleever in all trialls and temptations, fixed like a rock, and as mount Sion that cannot be moved from holding fast the confidence of a lively hope, to the end. Yet where this resur∣rection and immortall life is in the seed, it does not suddenly appear or shew itself in its owne likenes, according to the mightines of the power that works in us. But however, it is the power of faith, through which we are kept unto salvation. It is that, which (after we have passed over the day of temptation, the suffering season) will be sure to come forth in its powerfull operation, and make us per∣fect, stablish, strengthen and settle us. Hence is it that Christ sayes, if we have faith, (that is, of the right kind) but as a grain of mustard seed, we shall find it to be of such a growing, encreasing nature, that though it be not presently dis∣cerned, yet by it shall we be at last enabled to remove mountains, and nothing shalbe impossible unto it. This is Christs meaning also, when he sayes, that he will raise up such beleevers at the last day, that is, in the day appointed for the mani∣festation of these Sons of God, in which they shall appear as indeed they are, to every eye. And the eye that sees them shall acknowledg them: the eare that heares them, shall bear witnes unto them, that they are the seed that God hath blessed, not only by strengthning them with might in the inner man, and rooting them in love, but visibly raising them up in his power, to the rendring of them mighty in word and deed. With this kind of resurrection, that shalbe visible in the eyes of enemies and all beholders, it is, that Christ will raise up the sons of God (before described) and cause them to live in his sight, in this third day, at the breaking forth of the brightnes of his second personall appearance, as the Kingdom of his power, with which (as with the latter rain) he will visit and refresh the habitable part of his earth, and at same time, burne like an oven, in flames of fire, to the consuming and destroying of all his adversaries.
The way that God will take to make his sons manifest in this day, is by a power∣full work of redemption that shalbe wrought and passe upon the outward as wel as inward man of the heart; upon the speaking, acting powers, as well as upon the understanding and intuitive faculties of the mind, to the freeing of them both from the bondage of corruption, and stating the whole person of the beleever in the glorious freedom of righteousnes and true holines. 7. This shalbe effected, first, by the ministry of the holy Angels, as the Elias that is to come, who like the foure winds of heaven, shall breath with their influ∣encing gales of prophesy upon the spirits of all men, but especially upon belee∣vers, to the gathering them up into a life of spirit, and causing them to be (as it were) absent from the body, in order to be present with the Lord, whilst yet in the body; 2. Secondly, This work shalbe carried on by the revelation of the son himself from heaven, for the changing of our vile bodies into the likenes of his most glo∣rious body. We find (Mark. 1.1, &c.) that John Baptists ministry, though but the mes∣senger sent before Christs face, to prepare his way in preaching the baptisme of re∣pentance for the remission of sins, is called the beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ the son of God. And the Evangelist luke (chap. 1.15.) describing that which qualified John for his ministry, tells us in the words which the angel spake to his father Zachary, that he was filled with the holy Ghost from the womb, for the rendring him a fit messenger to usher in the comming of Christ in the flesh, by going before him in the spirit, and power of Eliah, whose work is to restore all things, making them right and streight; but he is to leave the work of rege∣neration, and ministry of the new creature being and life, to the son himself. The subject which both these ministries cheifly respected, in the day of the dispē∣sation of Christs first appearance, was the inward man of the heart, for the rooting and grounding it in love, and strengthning it under the many and various trialls of the crosse, and temptations that were to be undergone. For beleevers are to beare about in their bodyes, the markes of the dying of the Lord Jesus, whilst he is in his far countrey. He hath appointed them a warfare to manage with the ruling powers of this world, in a way of Testimony or witness-bearing, and therein not to love their lives unto death, but in faith and patience to possesse their soules. Neverthelesse, least they might imagine thereupon (as they are too apt to do) that their faith, if it were of the right kind and unfamed, would presētly come forth into its powerfull operation, he warily cautions them therein, and corrects that mistake, by intimating that this was a thing they were not to expect, till they had shared with him in his sufferings, continued with him in his temptations, and gi∣ven proof of their service and obedience to him, in and under the crosse. For (sayes he) which of you having a servant, plowing or feeding cattel, will say to him by
and by, when he is come from the feild, goe, sit downe to meat? will he not rather say to him, make ready wherewith I may sup, gird thyself and serve me, till I have eaten and drunken? Wait but till such time as that which is yet behind of my af∣flictions in my members, by them to be borne, shalbe filled up, and afterwards ye shall eat and drink. The season for your eating and drinking with me at my table, in my fathers Kingdom, will then come when the work of faith in you shalbe fulfilled with power, and I shalbe admired in all that do beleeve. This is that which is properly to be wrought and effected by Christ at his second comming, upon the sounding of the seventh trumpet, and at the preaching of the everlasting gospel, which is not another but the same gospel of Jesus Christ the son of God, that the ministry of John Baptist was sayd to be the beginning of. But it is called everlasting, from the differing kind of effect and operation it will have, (especially upon the outward man and sensuall part of the mind) from what the dispensation of it under Christs first appearance had. For that which was then sowne in weakenes, and left the possessors of it exposed to various sufferings from the powers of this world, shall now be raised in power at this last day; to the clothing and furnishing their very outward man, with an ability to handle the powers of this world, and all adversaries whatsoever, as they shal se good. That which for the most part is atteined unto, under the dispensation of the gospel, in the day of Christs first appearance in spirit, is but a restitution to that which yet is mutable, a repentance and a reformation that in time of triall failes, being repented of and turned from, upon which such persons sinke downe into a dreadfull apostacy from God, and from the holy commandement delivered to them. But at the day of Christs second appearance, the works of righteousnes shall come forth with power and prevalency, triumphing over sin in all for a sea∣son, as well as in true beleevers, but in these it shalbe permanent and abiding. The life of the immortall seed shall make them perfect in love, and shall by the ministry of glory in Christs second comming, be made manifest and visible to eve∣ry eye. The sun of it shall never set more. This is that which we are commanded to wait for, because it will surely come and not tary. He that beleevs will not make hast, but is taught with the hasband man to wait for this precious fruit of the earth, and to have long patience, till the latter rain be receaved as well as the former. Now the receaving of the latter rain is not to be looked for (in the course of good husbandry) till the seed be in the earth, and hath had its season there to cor∣rupt, chang its forme, die, and spring up with a new eare against the harvest. Happy shall they be who endure to the end, taking the prophets and other holy men that have gone before them, for an example of long-suffering and patience, having heard also of the exemplary patience of Job, and seen the end of our Lord himself, who passed this way to the crowne, and warns all his true followers to expect the like.
The work of Eliah, (as hath bin shewed) is to turne men from sin by repentance, and to cause them to returne by faith to the living God, enabling thē to performe their whole duty to him, as by his law we are commanded. Our blessed saviour (Mat. 17.11, 12.) mentions two distinct commings of Eliah, or two Eliahs. One Eliah, (says he) meaning Iohn Baptist, is already come: the other, (meaning that foreruning dispensation, that is the beginning of the everlasting Gospel) is that which commeth or shall come; and it is to be waited for at the sounding of the se∣venth Trumpet. The latter Elias is first mention'd by our saviour, (v. 11.) that is to come and restore all things, or be the preparatory messenger to that appearance and comming of our Lord, that shall compleat the restitution of all things, (Act. 3.21.) as he hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world began. Enoch before the flood Prophesied of this latter comming and appearance of Christ, saying, behold, the Lord commeth with ten thousands of his Saincts, Jude v. 14. So then, these two commings of Eliah answer to the two commings of Christ, the two dayes of the Son of man, the early and later rain of his first and second appearance, both of which make up that one third day above-mention'd, that Hosea speaks of. John Baptist, in his ministry, which was the first comming of Eliah, was coursely enterteind by Herod, who did to him what he would. But there is another Elias to come, though very much opposed by many, who endea∣vour to confound Christs words in the fore-mentioned Scripture, as if they were all to be understood of John Baptists Ministry only, and did not assert or de∣clare Eliahs second comming. But the context makes it plain; Eliah commeth or shall come and restore all things. This our Lord said, after they had done what they would to the first Eliah, which he acknowledged was come already. And both jews and Christians do understand (Mal. 4:5, 6.) of Eliahs second comming, in the end of the world, immediatly before the great and dreadfull day of the Lords second comming, For then the like universall corruption, apostacy and vio∣lence, yea greater and of a deeper die and malignity (because contracted in times of greater light) then that of the old world in Noahs dayes, will certainly appear, and stand in need of such a refining fire as the ministry of Eliahs second comming will be found to be, in order to restore all things out of that desperate, evill, and forlorne estate. And then shall those that fear the Lord, tread downe the wicked as ashes under the soles of their feet; Mal. 4.2, 3. This is to be the work of Eliahs second comming; but how, and by what ministry shall it be wrought? It will assuredly be found to be the beginning of the preaching of the everlasting Gospel of Jesus Christ, that is to say, of the Gospel preached by that trumpet that gives the certain second, and makes ma∣nifest the Sons of God in an immutable everlasting state of righteousnes and glory, here upon earth; in a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, which is to suc∣ceed
all other Kingdoms, shewing itself to be the stone cut out of the moun∣tains, that will fill the whole earth. This everlasting Gospel, we are told, (Revel. 14.6, 7.) is to be preached by an angel, flying in the midst of heaven, that must with a loud voice, say unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, kindred, tongue and people; fear God and give glory to him, for the houre of his judgment is come This is the houre or the day of that great judgment, wherein God will judg the world by that man which he hath ordeined, Jesus Christ. This houre and day is to have continuance in the course of its execution on the earth, for the space of a thousand years. During this time, the Kingdoms of this world shal become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, as holding of him their universall head, and exercising all their authority under him; Revel. 11.15. So then, in effect, Christ alone shall reigne and be exalted in that day, one Lord and his name one, over all the earth. This day is to begin (as hath bin said) with the second comming of E∣liah, and is described in the Scriptures of truth, as to the severall particulars thereof. The seventh angel sounds, by reason whereof it comes to passe, that there are great voices to be heard in heaven, appointed by Christ, (as he is the bright morning star, and head of all Principalities and powers, the true Michael and Archangel) to seize upon all scepters and governments of this world; to take the Rule and visible power out of the hands of all the Potentates of the earth, and reassume it in such a wonderfull manner into the hands of the holy and elect an∣gels, (who under Christ are appointed the highest and cheif Rulers of the visible world) that by the astonishing dispensations of Gods providence in that season, it will appear and be acknowledged, that Christ hath begun and entered upon the taking to himself his great power, in order to exercise his visible Rule, as the great, only and universall King over all the earth. This he will do, to the intent that the living may know, that the most high ruleth in the Kingdom of men, giving it to whomsoever he will. Yea, it shalbe acknowledged and seen that under the most high, the heavens do rule, Dan. 4.26. All matters shall at that time be carried on in the earth, visibly, by the decree of the watchers, (v. 17.) the supream counsell and senate of judicature wherein the holy angels shall sit and exercise juris∣diction under Christ, for the good of his church on earth. They are mini∣string spirits in this very respect, sent forth and authorized for this employ∣ment, even to minister for them who shalbe heirs of salvation; as it is writ∣ten; all things are yours, and ye are Christs, and Christ is Gods. In that day (saith Christ) for brasse I will bring gold, and for yron I will bring silver, for wood brasse, and for stones yron; (so glorious will then the re∣storation of al things be) and I will also make thine officers peace, and thine
exactours righteousnes. Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting not destruction within thy borders, but thou shalt call thy walls of defence, salvation; and thy gates of justice, prayse. Then the haughtines of man shalbe layd low, and his lofty lookes brought downe; and the worshippers of idols shall goe into the holes of the rocks and caves of the earth, for fear of the Lord, and of the glory of his majesty, when he shall thus arise most terribly to shake the earth; Esay, 2. The same thing is promised, Haggai 2:6, 7. Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens and the earth, the sea, and the dry land. And I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come; that is to say, after the terrible, forerun∣ning dispensation, ministred by Eliah, (that went up to heaven in a fiery chariot to take his seat amongst this heavenly colledge of angels, and be in that glory with other the spirits of just men made perfect,) shall the desire of all nations (Christ himself) come, to perfect and consummate what is left wanting in the operation of the former ministry, and fill his owne house with glory in the sight of the whole world, during the space of a thousand years. 2. But 2dly, although at the sounding of the seventh trumpet, it do come to passe that there be great voices in heaven, what is that to the inhabitants that are on earth, those that are at home in the body, absent from the Lord, whose spirits are fast asleep in the earth, to wit, in the organicall life and exercise of bodily senses? Will not they be out of the hearing of the sound of these heavenly voices? At least, will they be able to understand their meaning, unlesse what is uttered by the ange∣licall tongues, be in words easy to be understood by the spirit of their minds who live and dwell in mortall clay, and that an easy understanding thereof also be com∣municable to the sensuall part of the soule, which is as the door to take in and give out againe, what shalbe heard by the sound of such a heavenly Trumpet? By what is recorded for our instruction, we may be assured, this is not impossible nor un∣practicable. It hapned thus to the Apostle John, before his change by death, even whilst he was a prisoner and a banished man in the Ile of Patmos, for the Word of God and testimony of Jesus Christ. He looked, and behold a door was opened in heaven. By the opening of that door, he came to be made able to hear the voices in heaven, the first and second voice of the angel (Revel: 4.1. 10:8.) as it were of a trumpet, talking with him, which sayd, come up hither, and I will shew thee things which must be hereafter. By the power of that voice calling him, he was immediat∣ly in the spirit, that is, as Paul, absent from the body. He had such an awakening of his inward senses wrought in him, such an opening and making of them meet to heare and receave what by the tongue of the angel was to be delivered, that he was in the spirit, or in the exercise of the same kind of life and manner of conversing with spirits, that they are in one with another, or that the spirits of just men made perfect do use with the holy angels, when in the state of soules seperate from the body, made equall to angels, and children of the resurrection, in the first degree or
step of it, which is called (Revel. 20) the first Resurrection. The Apostle does there speak of the time, when this way of heavenly converse between the saincts that are on earth and the holy angels, shalbe frequent and usuall, and no such won∣der or strang thing, as yet by most it is accounted. This will be brought to passe by the opening of the door in heaven, interpreted by Christ himself, (Jo. 1.51.) in his answer to Nathaniel. Because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the fig-tree, beleevest thou? Thou shalt se greater things then these. What greater things? A door open in heaven, as a means of easy and familiar entercourse between the inhabitants of heaven and dwellers on earth. The angels are to be employed as messengers of intelligence between Christ and his Saincts, before the time of his owne personall converse with them on earth. For (saith Christ) verily, verily, I say unto you; Hereafter you shall se heaven open, (or the gate and door that is made into it and kept open by me) for the ascent and descent of my holy angels, between me and my Saincts on earth. At that day Christ wilbe glorified in his Saincts, and honour them in the sight of them that hate them: God will answer them before they pray; whilst they are yet speaking, he will heare, and speedily avenge them of their adversaries. He will grant them the desire of their hearts. But when will this day be, that these great and wonderfull things shalbe seen? The text is plain and expresse, Revel. 11. Tis evidently to begin at the rising of the witnesses, who shall immediatly upon their rising, be thus in the spirit, as John was on the Lords day, in the Ile of Patmos. This wil be the proper and usuall dispen∣sation in that day of the Lord, that is to begin at the sounding of the seventh trum∣pet. The spirit of life from God shall then enter into the witnesses, set them upon their feet, and immediatly qualify them to be in the spirit, or have their inward senses awakened and fitted to hear and receave messages from heaven, and the knowledg of the mind of their Lord, by the immediate impression and inspiration of angels, employed by him for that purpose. We know this was frequently the case with Daniel and most of the other dear servants and prophets of the Lord. Unto Jacob this great mystery and truth was most particularly and distinctly foretold in the ladder which he saw, the feet where∣of touched the earth and the top of it reached to heaven, and behold, the angels ascending and descending upon it, and the Lord himself standing above, and spea∣king by that means unto Jacob, acquainting him thereby with his mind, and giving to him most rich and precious promises. The interpretation of this ladder was not only made by our saviour to Nathaniel, as we have opened, but it was at the same time given to Iacob with the vision itself, as appears by the Result that came into his mind thereupon, when he sayd, How dreadfull is this place? It is the very house of God, where his throne is. It is the very gate of heaven, through which by the ministry of angels (in the hand of Christ, as he is the son of man, and hath the use
and exercise of all kinds of humane sense, in perfection, in his glorified manhood) the inward and outward man of the saincts shalbe so affected, changed, and trans∣formed, as to give them a kind of entrance into, and a being in heaven, even whilst they are yet here in the body. This Christ wrought and obteined the power of, when he ascended up above all heavens, and as man, did come to have a more excellent name then the angels. Now that he ascended, what is it, but that he (who was in the forme of God, and counted it not robbery to be equall with God) did first descend lower then the angels, into the fashion of an earthly man, the lowermost part of his habitable earth, (Prov: 8:31.) even the animalish and sensuall nature of man, using and exercising as well the bodily as spirituall senses, appertaining to the very naturall man. When he had done this, by laying hold on the seed of Abraham, and recea∣ving it into personall union with himself, he set up that ladder in his owne person; the feet whereof stand on the earth, whilst the top of it enters into the highest heaven. For he that descended, is the same also that ascended far above all heavens, that he might fill and fulfill all things. That therefore which Jacob pronounced in the spirituall interpretation of his vision, is most undeniable. This is none other (sayes he) then the house of God, the building not made with hands, whose buil∣der and maker is God; the fathers house, wherein are many mansions, built by the eternall WORD and wisdom of the father, in the person of the mediatour, consi∣dered as he is the first borne of every creature, and the beginning or first begotten from the dead, (Col. 1.) in whom is that life that is the light of men, who was before all things, and by whom all things consist. The way for God (that is the high and lofty one, inhabiting eternity) to descend and come to dwell in the humble, broken and contrite spirit, as the place of his rest; and the way for the humble, poor, and broken spirit to ascend into the per∣sence and sight of God; all this was wrought out in our nature, by the WORD that made himself flesh, and in that body, died, rose again and ascended where he was before, as in the volume of Gods book it is written of him. This he told his owne disciples (Jo. 14.) In my fathers house are many mansions. If it were not so, I would have told you. Behold, I go to prepare a place for you; to set the lad∣der, by which the ascent and descent is contrived into my fathers house, for such as you are. And if I goe and prepare a place for you, you may be sure I will come againe, and gather you unto my self, that where J am, ye may be also. At his com∣ming again, the same Apostle John finds the thing to be true, that his Lord had pro∣mised. For (Revel. 11.12, 19.) it appears that upon the rising of the witnesses and sounding of the seventh trumpet, the temple of God wilbe opened in heaven (which is the same opening of the heavens before-mentioned, (Jo. 1.51.) and there wilbe seen in his temple the arke of his Testament, the law of the two ta∣bles, written in the heart of Christ the Son of Man, from whose presence the fiery
law is to be dispensed by the ministry of angels, at which there wilbe lightnings, voices, thunderings, an earth quake and great haile. The door into heaven being thus set open, the risen witnesses are spoken to, (v. 12.) saying, come up hither, or be with me in the spirit, in a mind fitted to enterteine converse with me, by the ministry of the holy angels. And for such a blessing and benefit, be not unwilling (as often as there shalbe occasion) to be absent from the body, that you may be present with the Lord. For if herein you should appear vile in the eyes of wordly men, as men beside yourselvs, as David did in dancing naked before the arke; yet is it to God. And when you change againe from that inwardnes of life with God, to be more in outward converse with men, and more sober in their thoughts, it is for their sakes, and for their great benefit ra∣ther then yours, that thereby you may be able to turn many of thē to righteousnes. In this sence, (not excluding the literall) it will be found true, that the saincts shalbe called to be and live in the spirit with Christ, and to walk with God on earth, before their translation, as Enoch did. Answerable to this, it is said, Dan. 12.2. compared with 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. And many of thē that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting con∣tempt. The spirit of our mind which sleepes in the dust of the earth, wilbe wrought off from that love and delight it is apt to take in making the body its home, and ex∣erting itself in such kind of operations as are in and by the use of our bodily organs, and wilbe gathered and carried up by the ministry of the holy angels, (for∣ming a meetnes in the senses of the inward man of the heart) into a converse with them, and with Christ himself in spirit, as a better home and city of habitation then that of the dust of the earth, wherein it hath bin so long an inhabitant. In or∣der to this, the soule will be endued or clothed upon with a hearing eare and a speaking tongue, like to that of the angels, in their immutable state. And for this self same thing we are wrought by God, who hath given us the earnest of his spirit already insome degree, but will give it in the highest degree and measure it is atteinable before the change that comes upon us by death, when this body is to be layd downe and brought into a state of actuall separation from the soule. This change by death, unto those that have partaken first of this awakening, shalbe very easy, like unto the translation of Enoch, who saw not death, or had no sense of it in a way of pain or horrour. His passage was sudden and in a moment, very easy and desireable. The Apostle Paul therefore, speaking of this kind of change, that should happen at the sounding of the seventh trumpet, even in the be∣ginning of it, (as we have opened) does say; behold I shew you a mystery, that which as yet is a great secret, but hereafter shalbe very commonly ex∣perienced; we shall not all sleepe, but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinckling of an eye, at the last trump. For the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shalbe raysed incorruptible. Those whose spirits were before, as
'twere, asleepe in the dust of the earth, and dead in respect of the spirituality and heavenlines they are now awaken'd into, wilbe acknowledged as in that kind and degree of resurrection, which wilbe made knowne at the rising of the witnesses. They shall not die, that is, leave the body with any painfull sense of death, but in a moment shalbe changed and translated into glory. This awakned, risen state, is not that which shalbe peculiar only to the saincts; but wicked men, the children of perdition, in way of everlasting contempt, shall also partake of it, with a like way of operation upon the spirit of their minds, by wicked angels, transforming themselvs into angels of light, and hoping by this means to gaine credit to their ministers as ministers of righteousnes also, which in a way of counterfeit resem∣blance, the father of deceit wilbe preparing, during this ministry of Eliah, till he be bound up by Christ from any more deceaving of the nations in this kind, or any other. This the Apostle Paul does very cleerly intimate, (1 Cor: 13.7.) where he admits, there may be those that may speake not only with tongues of men, but also of angels, who yet not having or living in the spirit of love, there described, will be found to be but as sounding brasse and tinckling cymballs, vessels of great contempt, compared with those that make the right and true musick, (Revel. 14.) those harpers that are taught how to sing the song of Moses and of the lamb in sweet harmony and consortship together, and thereby turne many to righte∣ousnes, who shall shine like bright morning stars. 3. The third particular then, that shalbe an eminent effect of Eliahs second comming, is the raysing up in the world a more excellent way of preaching, hea∣ring and obeying the gospel, then ever yet hath bin knowne upon the face of the earth; even that which (Rom. 11.15.) is deservedly called life from the dead, and is to be the means of bringing in the fullnes both of jew and gentile. This is darkly pointed out by Dives in the parable (Luk. 16.30.) when in his answer to Abraham, he sayes, that if one went to his brethren from the dead, they would re∣pent, hereby glancing (as 't were) at such a kind of excellent and powerfull mi∣nistry, as was intended by God to be set up in the world, whereby to bring men to repentence, or as Luk. 14.23. to compel them to come in, that Gods house may be filled with the fullnes both of jew and gentile. This kind of ministry is that, wherein both for cleernes and certainty of the matter preached, and the power of that spirit in which it is ministred, shalbe beyond all that hath yet bin seen or experienced in the church. For in this day the heavens shalbe commanded to drop downe from above, and the skies to poure downe righ∣teousnes, and the earth to open and bring forth salvation, that righteousnes from heaven and in the earth may spring up together, and this by the Lords owne most powerfull forming and creation, Esay. 45.8. So Psal. 50.1, 6. The Lord, the mighty God hath spoken, and called the earth from the rising of the Son to the
going downe thereof. Out of Sion, the perfection of beauty, God hath shined. Our God shall come and shall keepe no longer silence. A fire shall devoure before him, and it shalbe very tempestous round about him. He shall call to the hea∣vens from above, or make use of the angelicall ministry in the judging of his peo∣ples cause for them, as those that he will first employ to go before him and declare his righteousnes, and then afterwards will he come in his owne personall appea∣rance, and shew that he is judge himself. Christ will give the angels a call, nay, a command and commission, to prepare the hearts and mouthes of the saincts, as trumpets, through which they may give a certain sound, to the making manifest the knowledg and vision of God and of his law in both his Covenants, so plaine, that those who run, may read it. And unto this selfsame thing, the heart and mouth of those that God will think fit to use in this ministry, shalbe wrought by Christ spirit, as the most glorious earnest they can receave here on earth of the life in glory, which they shall for ever enjoy with Christ in heaven. For it shall come to passe, that those who are thus called into this ministry, shalbe found speaking with the tongues, not of men only, but of angels, and to have also the love requisite to distinguish them from all counter∣feits. Yea, they shall have this love of Christ and the spirit of it perfected in them, to the casting out of all torment and feare, making them bold as a lion, fearing the face neither of devils nor of men, in the discharge of this their ministry, which shalbe so powerfull as to turne many, even innumerable multitudes to righteous∣nes, to the admiration of all beholders. The Gentiles shal come to this light, and Kings to the brightnes of the very rising thereof Then shalt thou se and flow to∣gether; and thine heart shall fear and be enlarged, because the noise or abundance of the sea shalbe turned towards thee, (or multitudes and prophane persons who before were to be seen foaming out their owne filth, shall now be converted to thee) the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee, Esay: 60:5. And not the Gentiles only, but the Jews also, (or the mysticall earthly Jerusalem, consisting both of Jews and Gentiles) that earth shalbe made to bring forth in one day, that nation shalbe borne at once. That Zion, so soon as she travels, shall bring forth her children, whose wall the sons of strangers shall build up, and their Kings shall minister unto her. For in my wrath sayth the Lord, I have smote thee, but in my favour I have had mercy on thee. Therefore thy gates shalbe open continually, they shall not be shut day nor night, that may bring unto thee the forces of the Gentiles and their Kings with them. For the nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish. Yea those nations shalbe utterly wasted. In these beleevers shall Christ be admired, and to the exercise of their faith all things shalbe possi∣ble. The power of the keyes shalbe so committed to them as is promised, that whatsoever they bind or loose on earth, shall be bound and loosed in the heaven. These will be found to be the angels that come forth out of the temple, with the seven
vials of Gods wrath, commissionated to poure them out upon the beast, the whore, the false Prophet, and the whole Kingdom of Antichrist. They shall not need to take care, as to what they are to speak and answer for themselvs, when they are brought before Magistrates for Christs name sake, for in that houre a mouth and wisdom shalbe given unto them, which their enemies shall not be able to resist. 3. The third particular that shall accompany the second comming of Eliah, is the neccessary consequent and product, that shall and must attend the excellent and powerfull ministry, above made knowne; For it is by the breath of this mouth of the Lord in his servants, (the loud, plaine and certaine sound of this seventh Trum∣pet, even when it begins to sound) that Jacob must arise, as low and as small as he and the dispersed seed of God will at that time be judged to be, in the eye of the world, or in their owne sight, Ezek. 37.11. These bones, however they seeme to be dried up, must live; and by this breath of prophesy from the Lord, that is to enter into them, they shall once againe stand upon their feet, with that firmnes and stability, as never to fall more. When the command is once given for the spirit of prophecy to come forth in that excellent and powerfull way of ministry before-mentioned; it will first make a great noise amongst the inhabitants of the world. It wilbe a voyce of noise from the city, a voyce from the temple, a voyce of the Lord, rendring recompence to his enemies. And after the noise, which shalbe occasioned by this voice of the Lords second appearance, (to the great joy of his saints, and utter shame of his and their enemies) there shall immediatly follow a great shaking or earth quake, where in a tenth part of the city shall fall, to make way for the more easy and ready comming together of the dry bones, which will thus gradually become an exceeding great multitude, in excellent order. For first, the sinews and flesh will come upon them, and the skin will cover them above, but no breath in them yet. This is a typicall description of the state of the witnesses, who do for a season lie as it were breathlesse and dead in the street of the great city, spiritually called Sodom and Egypt. But upon the command given to the breath of prophesy, that was called from the foure winds, to breath upon these slain, and cause them to live, the breath comes into them, and they live and stand upon their feet, an exceeding great ar∣my, even these dry bones of the whole house of Israel, who looked upon them∣selvs a little before, as those whose bones were dried, whose hope was lost, and who were cut off for their parts. For at this time, God will open as it were the very graves of his people, and cause them to come out from thence into their owne land, the land of the promised spirit, Emmanuells land, by putting (after this admirable and extraordinary manner) his spirit within them, that shalbe in them and to them, as life from the dead, causing them to know that the Lord hath opened their graves fro them, and brought them into their owne land, by vertue of the everlasting Cove∣nant
that he hath made with them, and hath set his sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore. The Lord in this day will performe the word spoken by the Prophet Micah, (chap. 2:12, 13.) I will surely assemble, O Iacob, all of thee. I will surely gather the remnant of Israel. I will put them together as the sheep of the flock, in the midst of their fold. They shall make a great noise by reason of the multitude of men. The breaker up is come up before them: they have broken up and have pas∣sed thorow the gate, and are gone out by it, and their king shall passe before them, and the Lord on the head of them. For the children of Israell shall abide many dayes without a King, Prince, or sacrifice, image, Ephod, or Teraphim. And afterward, shall they return, and seeke the Lord their God; and David their King, and shall fear the Lord and his goodnes in the latter dayes, when the Mountaine of the house of the Lord shalbe established upon the top of the Mountains, and the las shall goe out of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Ierusalem, Esai. 2. And I will assemble her that halts, and will gather her that I have driven out, and her that I have afflicted, and will make of the one a remnant, and of the other a strong nation, and the Lord shall reigne over them in mount Zion, from thenceforth even for ever. And nation shall not life up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more. For all people will walk in the name of their God, and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God, for ever and ever. For a small moment I have forsaken thee and hid my face from thee, but with great mercies and everlasting kindnesses will I gather thee. For thy maker is thy husband, the Lord of hoasts is his name; and thy Redeemer, the holy one of Israel, the God of the whole earth shal he be called. Behold, they shall surely gather together, but not by me. Whosoever shall gather together against thee, shall fall for thy sake. For all thy children shalbe taught of the Lord, and great shalbe the peace of them. In righteousnes shall they be established. They shalbe far from oppression, feare or terrour. No weapon that is formed against thee, shall prosper, and every tongue that shall rise up in judgement against thee, thou shalt condemne. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousnes is of me, saith the Lord. This is Israel my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, and the seed of Abraham, my freind. These and many more like precious promises we meet with in the Scripturs, concerning a most prosperous and glorious state, that shall visibly come upon Gods people even in this world, according to the assurance thereof given unto Abraham, that he in his seed should be heir of the world. All these promi∣ses are reducible only to the state of those times that shall certainly be brought upon the stage of this world, when the Kingdom and second appearance of the great God and our saviour Jesus Christ, shall shine forth in its brightnes upon earth.
This is that which is not only promised so very often, and testified by all the Prophets, but was much spoken of and beleeved amongst the Jews before Christs comming in the flesh. It was universally receaved also in the first age after Christ, and all were accounted hereticks and deniers of the resurrection that did not ac∣knowledg it. And in that great Council of Nice, called by Constantine the great, it was asserted in an article of their Ecclesiasticall doctrine, to this effect; That by foreknowledg God did not make the world in that height of perfection at first, which he intended to bring it unto in the end, because he foresaw, man would sin. Therefore (say they) we expect new heavens and a new earth, according to the scriptures. And then (as Daniel sayes) the saincts of the most high shall take the Kingdom, and there shalbe a pure and holy world, a Land of the living and not of the dead. This David by the eye of faith foresaw, when he sayd, I shall se the goodnes of the Lord in the land of the living, the land of the humble and meeke. Blessed are the meeke, for they shall inherit the earth, and be clothed, beautified and adorned with salvation. So Esay. 26. The foot shall tread downe the lofty city, even the feet of the poor and the steps of the needy. This great truth, was thus witnessed unto, then, and afterwards also, till the adversaries knew no other way to avoyd it, but by denying the book of the Re∣velation to be scripture. In the beginning also of the reformation in England, in a catechisme set forth in Edward the sixths time, and by him authorized the last year of his reigne, that part of the Lords prayer, Thy Kingdom come, is thus commented upon. Hither∣to we se not all things put under the feet of Christ; we do not yet se that stone cut out of the mountaine without any work or endeavours of man, that is to breake and dissipate into nothing the great image described by Daniel, that the little stone which is Christ, may possesse and obtein the empire of the whole world, accor∣ding to the graunt of the father. Antichrist is not yet destroyed, whence it is, that we are to desire and pray, that in Gods due time it may be done, and that Christ a∣lone way reigne with his Saints, according to his divine promises; that he may live and reigne on the earth, according to the laws of the holy Scriptures, and not ac∣cording to the traditions and lawes of men, and the tyrannicall will of this world. So have we it, in that Catechisme. Another passage there is, relating to this subject in the same book, upon the ar∣ticle of the last judgment, distinguishing between the end of the world, and the last generall judgment, saying, that the holy Scriptures call the end of the world, the time of consummation, the full filling of the Kingdom and mysteries of Christ, in the restitutiō of all things. It seemes bu agreable to reasō, that the dayes should come, wherein the corruption, chang, and sin, to which the whole world hath bin heither∣to subjected, should cease. This shall be done by fire, as gold is refined, by which it shalbe brought to its last and highest perfection. And this, man, the lesser world,
shall much more experience, in being freed from the bondage of corruption, and brought into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. For mans sake therefore the visible frame of heaven and earth shalbe renewed with a much more pleasant and beautifull face or for me, then it had before. But secondly, as to the last and generall judgment, the answer is; Christ shall come, at whose voice the dead shall arise, and be made perfect in soule and body. And he shall sit on the throne of his maje∣sty, seen by the whole world, and pronounce the finall sentence, upon the testi∣mony of every ones conscience, out of his owne mouth. Then the Sons of God shall compleatly possesse that Kingdom of immortality and eternall life, which was pre∣pared for them before the foundation of the world, and shall reigne with Christ unto all eternity. But the wicked, which do not beleeve, shalbe cast into eternall fire, appointed for the devil and his angels. This distinction between the dayes of the end of the world, and the work proper to them (called the last dayes, and the great day of eternity, or the last judgment) is well explained and cleered by Mr. Mede, who gives the account before mentio∣ned, in these things. In a word, he declares his judgment to be; that the seventh trumpet, or thousand years reigne of Christ on earth, conteined therein, is that great day of the Lord, the day of his Judgment, so much celebrated among the Jews in their writings, and from them taken up by our Saviour and his Apostles, not a day of a few houres, (as some suppose) but a continued interval of many years, (wherein Christ shall first destroy all his enemies, even death itself) and shall end with the universall resurrection and and passing of the finall sentence, winding up all in the resigning up of his Kingdom to the father, that God may be all in all. Thus the thousand years is no distinct time from the day of Judgment, neither before it nor after; but the same with it, the whole time, during which this great day of judg∣ment does continue, in the very beginning whereof, Antichrist shall finally be de∣stroyed, and not before. These therefore, in Scripture, are called the times of Christs Kingdom, wherein he will shew himself the blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and this for the space of a thousand years, in the last period of which, comes the last and finall sentence (before mentioned) to be pro∣nounced and executed. The reason therefore why the excellent promises (above recited) are not yet performed, is twofold. 1. The times for their performance are not yet fully come, though very neer. But most certaine it is (as we have heard) that they shall and will come. 2dly. Because the seed also to which they are made, is not yet come to be made manifest as they shalbe, in distinction from all counterfeits and false pretenders, which say they are Jews and are not, but do lie. This discrimination, and certaine, cleare discovery of the true seed of God from the false, will be begun to be made by the ministry of Eliah, or the ministry that shall rise up in the spirit and powers already discribed.
This excellent ministry must and wilbe attended with a church of saints answe∣rable, which shall consist of the risen witnesses, the dry bones that this spirit of prophesy brings out of their graves, from the foure winds of heaven, causing them to stand againe upon their feet, an exceeding great army. All of them are to be quickned by the means of this powerfull and glorious ministry, with a spirit of life from God, that enters into them, and shews itself to be that life from the dead in them, which is never more subject to corruption. It is unto these also, that God sayes by a great voyce from heaven, (which they are fitted with ears to heare) come up hither, and they do accordingly ascend up to heaven in a cloud, their enemies beholding them; or rather, heaven is brought downe into their knowledg and possession here on earth, whilst as yet they are clouded with their mortall body, which (nevertheles) shall at last be changed in a moment, and they not se death. In the meane time, they shall experience their very mortall body freed from the bondage of corruption, and restored to the primitive purity, glo∣ry, use and serviceablenes unto the mind, which it had in paradise in the persons of our first parents, before the fall. And to these shall it be given to se the opening of the heavens, long since promised by Christ, and the temple of God that is there, opened also, and in the temple the arke of the Testament, both which (Revel. 15.5.) are put together, and called the temple of the tabernacle of the Testimony in heaven, which in that day shalbe opened; the true tabernacle or sanctuary, which God pitch'd and not man; Heb. 8.2. In this temple dwelleth the fulnes of the God head bodily, the vision whereof is to be made plaine to the eye of our sensuall part, or to our inward bodily senses, that by seing the mind of God in such legible characters in the spirit and person of Christ, the like mind may be found and seen in all that are his, who are then to appeare in the same likenes, by seing him as he is. That which Christ is, and in spirit shalbe seen to be, as the mind of the father is wrought out in him, the Apostle Paul points out, Philip. 2.5, &c. 1. He is in the forme of God, the WORD of life, who was in the beginning, was with God, and was God. And thus considered, he accounts it not robbery to be Gods equall. 2dly, In the dispensation of the fulnes of time, the same that is in the forme of God, is also found in fashion as a man, and is made flesh, with the use of a living soule, in the very earthly and outward senses of it, bearing the form and like∣nes of the first Adam in his primitive purity. 3. He that thus descended into flesh, and the lowermost parts of his habitable earth, (in which earthly make and nature, he became inferiour to angels, for the suffering of death) is the same that out of this does ascend, and is exalted far above all heavens, by being made in his humane spirit, soule and body, the temple wherein all the fulnes of the God head dwells bodily, and a meet vessel to receave, possesse,
and be the minister of it unto others. He is the WORD of life, the brightnes of the fathers glory, the expresse character of his substance, by which this manhood is sealed and made heavenly, partaking with the living WORD, as he is the Angel of Gods presence, in whom is Gods name. He is the cheif and highest Angel, and as such, is head of all principalities and power. And over and above all this, in his archangelicall estate, he is the true Michael, Gods equall, the man that is made Gods fellow, or second in the same divine throne of glory. In these three cheif particulars, Christ, the temple of God in heaven, shalbe seen and made manifest, as that which he is and will witnes himself to be, in the hearts of all true beleevers, the sons of his love, that are to be are his likenes, and to be seen with his name and superscription upon them. In this respect it is, that he hath gi∣ven that commandement, 1 John. 4:20, 21. that he who loveth God in Christ, love his brother also, which those that doe not, will thereby prove themselvs liars, if they say they love God. For how can he love God or Christ, whom he hath not seen, that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen? There is a day comming, when that which Christ wilbe seen to be in himself, he wilbe seen to be also in his members, that shalbe receaved and gathered unto him, as joynt heirs and possessours of his fathers love and glory. When Christ, who is their life, shall so appear, they shall also appear with him in glory. They shall no longer remaine in their hidden and concealed state, wherein they are judged according to men in the flesh, whilst they live according to God in the spirit. Nor shall they any longer be like Princes wal∣king on foot, whilst Servants ride on horse back. Behold then, upon the opening of the temple of God in heaven, the powerfull and glorious effects that the ministry of the spirit, flowing from thence, shall pro∣duce and be accompanied with, for the making manifest the true Israel of God. The Lord himself will descend, first, with the voice of the Archangel, that last and most glorious trump of God, Christs humanity, as head of the elect Angels, all principalities and powers being subjected unto him, who as he is the Son of man, is made the cheif of the āgels, and the prime minister of the WORD of life, for food unto them. This beginning of the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, is that which (as hath bin said) is the ministry of Eliah, and goes before the ministry that shalbe immediately exercised by the Son himself in his owne person. By Christs revealing himself from heaven, the head of angels, he employes them as his reapers in the end of the world or in the last times, to sever the wicked from among the just, and gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend. He will send a quickning Spirit of life from his presence, that will breath the breath of prophecy into the holy angels, those voices that are to be heard in heavē, saying, The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ. These voices wilbe heard, as it were the voice of a Trumpet, talking with the Saincts on earth, and calling them up into the same heavenly converse with themselvs, causing them
immediatly thereupon, to be in the spirit, beholding the throne that is in heaven, and him that sits thereon, as the head of those holy and blessed spirits, who are all desirous to do him homage and worship, refusing to take that to themselvs which is due only to their head, and which the saints themselvs on earth, would be but too forward to give them, as was the case of John, Revel. 22.8, 9. Under this ministry and dispensation, the church and every particular member thereof, do become the children that are all taught of God, inwardly, by this heavenly breath or angelical inspiration. For this qualifies and enables them by the sight of the just one, to know the mind and will of God, and to do and fulfill it af∣ter Christ, as they se he hath done it before them, with a heart and spirit like unto his, as he is the son of man. And as so considered, he is head of the holy angels, by them speaking to and inspiring the church on earth. He is also the head of that church in God the father, that is above the angels, so as unto principalities and powers, the very elect angels, by the church in this sence, (even the generall as∣sembly of the first borne, whose names are written in heaven) the manifold wis∣dom of God shalbe made knowne. By these divine men, who are the bride the lambs wife, he will shew himself speaking and inspiring the good angels in heaven, to all eternity, and judging the evill and wicked ones into the flames of eternall fire. The first of these attainments, is that wherein the lower and common ranke of beleevers (called in scripture, the fulnes of the gentiles, compared with the true Jews, Gods first borne sons) are gathered into society with the holy angels, into a copartnership with them, in an immutability of righteousnes and glory, and so into Christ their head, as into their proper element and sphere, in which they are raysed up to live in his sight, and to eat and drink with him at his table, in his fa∣thers Kingdom, to all eternity. Over these the second death never hath power. And this is called the first resurrection, which the other sort of beleevers, those that are the fulnes of the Jews, do enjoy in common with them, during the thousand years reigne of Christ on earth. And after that, they have a farther ascent into the life and glory of the second resurrection, which is not to be revealed in the power of it, untill Christ have resigned up the Kingdom unto his father, that God may be all in all. But during the thousand years reigne of Christ on earth, both these houses of Israel shalbe gathered as sheep under one head and shepheard, into one sheepfold, and shine forth only in the life and glory of the first resurrection, witnessing to the headship of Christ, which he exerciseth over the angels, and by them, over the very church itself, whilst the Kingdom of the son is unresigned by him into the hands of the father. The life and glory of both these resurrections (whether as they respect the mind or body of the true saincts and children of God, or both) is that immortality which is brought to light by Jesus Christ, the life from the dead, which will shew
itself in the times appointed thereunto, and translate us at length into eternity, where time shalbe no more. And we are begotten (even while here in our mortall bodies) through fellowship with Christ in his resurrection, unto a lively hope of this inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, which fades not away, ready to be revealed in these last times. Untill then, it is in faith only, and the seed of it does beget and produce the two sorts of beleevers, so frequently mentioned, who now by this ministry of Eliah are beginning to be made manifest, and shalbe distinguished as the true Israel of God, from all strangers and deceitfull workers whatsoever, that either love or make a lie. The first of these, are in their principles said to be of the common faith, and to have teined the common salvation. Thus Paul writes to Titus, as his son after the common faith Tit. 1:4. And Jude (v. 3.) sayes, I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common salvation, to the fulfilling of the scripture, (Rom. 4:17. Gen. 17.5.) speaking of Abraham; I have made thee the father of many nations, as wel as of one nation peculiar, above and besides all the rest. For so Abrahams seed was to be a seed made up of many nations, and a seed of one more pecu∣liarly beloved nation also, that were to be seperated to him, to dwell by themselvs and not be reckon'd amongst the nations that are the fulnes of the Gentiles. Abra∣ham is but the typicall father, Christ is the father in spirit and truth to this two∣fold seed. In Gen. 13. and 15. chapters, God promised Abraham, to make of him a great people, numberlesse as the dust of the earth or the stars of heaven, which he makes good in the fulnes of the true Jews. But (chap. 17.5.) he gives an addi∣tional seed also, which he there promises him, besides what he promised before, saying, behold, my Covenant is with thee, and thou shalt be a high father of a multitude of nations. Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, that is high father, but Abraham, high father of multitudes. Hence is it, that in Gods everlasting Covenant, there comes to be found salvation for a multitude of na∣tions, common (as it were) to all mankind, if the fault be not in themselvs, and not salvation only for one great nation, the Israel that is Gods first borne. God hath therefore an everlasting love and salvation, which comparatively spoken of, is that which is common and extensive to a numberlesse multitude, that he saves out of all people and nations, kindreds and tongues, that are upon the face of the earth, who yet are not brought so neer to him, as that peculiar na∣tion of his, which he makes a Kingdom of Preists. But they have a portion that is full and sufficient, comming from the hand of their everlasting father, who like to Jacob in the type, hath his specially beloved Josephs and Benjamins by Rachel, the choice delight of his eyes, and hath his ten sons besides, that are also children of his blessing, sons and not bastards or cast-awayes, but such as he ownes for le∣gitimate, and makes heirs of his Kingdom. They are provided with inheritances in the land of promise.
And as there is such an everlasting love and salvation spoken of in the scripture, which is called common in the respect above mentioned, so is there also a common faith and salvation, that is but temporary, begets but such a repentance unto life (as the effect of it upon the minde) from whence there is a turning away againe and a drawing back unto perdition. This kind of beleevers, in stead of holding fast faith and a good conscience, do put away their good conscience, and concerning faith do make shipwrack, being not able to ride it out in the stormy weather of temptations. They do therefore declare by the event, that they never had faith of the right kind, but that the chang of mind brought upon them by the prea∣ching of the gospel, and knowledg of the Lord Jesus Christ, amounted but to such a repentance as might againe be repented of or turned from, and but to such a faith as might faile, though both were the fruits of the gospel, or good tydings of the worke of redemption and reconciliation, wrought in the person of the me∣diator, as ministred but by the first and conditionall Covenant, which obliges the children of it in a debt to the whole law, upon the terms of renewing to them their primitive naturall activity and use of their freewill, for the performance thereof. Thus Christ gives himself to be the life and reconciliation of the whole world, commanding all men every where to repent, excluding none from this benefit of his death, the atonement of sins past, and after this manner to have faith and repentance wrought in them, if the fault lie not in themselvs. The same gospel then and blessed knowledg of our Lord and saviour Jesus Christ, is in the ministry and preaching of it, the everlasting gospel, (as accom∣panied with fruits that end in salvation, and are permanent and abiding) and is also the gospel whose candle may be put out, and candlestick removed out of its place, as Christ not only threatned to the seven churches of Asia, but actually executed, upon their apostasy and unworthy walking under the light thereof. And if the scope and intent of the Epistle of Jude be well weighed, to∣gether with his expressions, wherein he makes mention of the common sal∣vation and faith once delivered unto the saints, we shall find that he does very evidently set forth the division and contention which did arise in his time, between these two ministries of the gospel, and those that had these differing effects and operations produced thereby upon their hearts. For the same common salvation and change, wrought by the preaching of it, upon the minds of the hearers, which begot in them repentance from dead works, and faith towards God, if it were accompanied with the faith of the right kind, once delivered to the saincts, through the power of which we are
kept unto salvation, he shewes plainly, (v. 20, 21.) that being built up in this our most holy faith, and praying in the holy Ghost, we shalbe kept from falling, and shall keep ourselvs in the love of God, waiting for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, unto eternall life. But if this faith be wanting, whatever other effects, enlightnings or quicknings, the knowledg of Christ and preaching of the gospel may have upon us, in the judgment of the Apostle Jude, such are to be looked upon as having no more certainty of salvation, nor probability of a good end, then those of the children of Israel, that the Lord saved out of Egypt and the house of bondage, but destroyed before they entered into Canaan; or then those angels that fell, and kept not their first habitation, or then Sodom and Gomorrah; Yea, or then the rejected nation of the jews, by whose wicked hands our saviour was crucified. They stumbled at the stumbling stone, and though they sought after righteousnes, yet was it, as it were, by the works of the law; children they were, in whom (as it is written, Deut. 32.20.) there was no faith. Upon this very ground, the church of the gentiles that were taken into the place of the jews, and had Gods name called upon them, doe run the same hazard with the Jewish church, that is, of being cut off from the good olive tree, when they shalbe found to be but such as have not their standing by the faith that is triall proof. They therefore shall in like manner be swallowed up into a universall and most signall apostasy from the truth and power of the gospel, a little before Christs second comming. It is no marvell then that the Apostle Jude is so earnest in exhorting to contend earnestly for the faith, as it is of the right kind and primitive purity, wherein it was once delivered to the saincts, bringing forth those fruits in them that accompanied salvation, and were not to be fallen from. This contention, warfare or battel was in heaven, in the very church itself, between those that had a stronger and firmer birth of grace, and those of a weaker, that was wavering, uncertaine, and capable to prove abortive, as not comming of Sarah, the free woman, that is the mother of us all. Ne∣vertheles, in this contest and warfare, the woman that brings forth the manchild, is necessitated to fly for it into the wildernes, though a conquerour, whilst the battel was fought out by spirituall weapons only, in a church way. For when once the secular powers came to exercise a ruling stroke and de∣cisive jurisdiction in the Christian religion, then she betook herself to the wilder∣nes, became solitary and neglected by men. In that wildernes state, the remnant of the womans seed, that keep the commandments of God and have the faith of Je∣sus, continue (for a season) trod under foot, and oppressed by their opposite brethren
that are countenanc'd and upheld against them, by the power and strength of the Kingdom of the beast. For having got possession of the outward court of the tem∣ple, which is left out, as no longer regarded by God, they become a fit seat for An∣tichrists throne, a great bulwarke and strong hold for the man of sin and Son of per∣dition, whereby to maintein his war against those worshippers that are so in spirit and truth, and not in word or forme only, and whose place it is to officiate either in the temple itself, or in the most in ward and most holy part of it, called the Holy of Holies. Having thus distinguished between that which in Scripture is called the com∣mon faith, or common salvation, in these its two differing effects and fruits, pro∣ducing in some a birth of life and grace which is immutable and cannot fayle or be fallen from; and in others, a birth of repentance and faith that is changable, may be repēted of, shipwrack'd and miscarry; it remains for us to proceed in describing and declaring the second and higher degree that is atteinable in that faith which was once delivered to the Saincts, called by Jude, our most holy faith. He seemes there∣by to intimate, that by the knowledg of Jesus Christ and ministry of the Gospel, faith may be wrought and begotten in the heart, according to a threefold degree, wherein righteousnes and true holines is revealed from faith to faith; from faith of the lowest ranke, which is that that failes, to that of the second ranke, which failes not, but makes us conquerours, and from thence to that of the highest ranke, which gives us power with God to prevaile in all things we desire, beyond all we can aske or think, making us more then conquerours, and with Abraham to be cal∣led the friends of God. The first is holy, the second is more holy, the third is our most holy faith. The most holy faith is that which (Ephes. 3.16.) is said to be granted or given of the riches of Gods glory, wherein he hath an inheritance in his saincts, (chap. 1.18.) and through which he does put forth the exceeding greatnes of his power, towards us that beleeve, according to what he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his owne right hand in the heavenly, far above all princi∣pality, power, might, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but in that which is to come. So then, according to the power of this exceeding mighty operation of God in that gift of Christs Spirit, wherein he grants to some Saincts to beare a more peculiar likenes to him, the beleever becomes so exceedingly strengthned with might in the inner man, so rooted and grounded in love, that he is not only made able to comprehend with all Saints, that are sons after the common faith, what is the length, breadth, depth and height of the knowledg and love of God that shines forth in Christ, as he is the Son of man, made head of all Princi∣palities and Powers, which is the highest image of God, short of the fathers naked similitude, in his owne proper shape and forme; but he is (over and above all this) enabled to know the love of Christ that passeth knowledg, and to behold God in
that glory of his, that shines forth in the face of the blessed Trinity, wherein he hath bin delighting himself in and with the eternall WORD, from before the founda∣tion of the world. Into this glory, Christ in his manhood, as our fore-runner, is entered, even within the most inward veyle. This was the forme of God, wherein Christ was found, before he assumed his manhood, and he reteins his manhood both in an inferiority to it and in an equality with it, by reason whereof, Christ as man, without robbery is accounted equall with God. In this state of glory, he is the bridegroome to this most excellent sort of beleevers, who therefore dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among the na∣tions, but are a peculiar nation of Gods jewells and choice treasure, a Kingdom of preists, his heritage and immediate possession, that as the Tribe of Levi, are made to approach neer unto him, in stead of all the first born sons of Israel. These are the 144000, described (Revel. 14.) to be such as have their fathers name written in their foreheads, and that are not defiled with women, but are virgins which fol∣low the Lamb whithersoever he goes, and are redeemed from among men, as the first fruits to God and to the lamb; the pure, undefiled bride and spouse of the lamb, that is the only one of her mother. These are farther described (Revel. 7.) as those that are the chosen out of every Tribe of the chosen seed of God, by a small certain number of 144000, a royall preisthood, selected and taken out of all the Tribes. These being thus first selected out, how are the remaining parts in and of every Tribe considered? Are they looked upon by God, as the world? as a people left to themselvs? No, by no means, but also as Gods chosen people, in relation to the rest of the world. They are his sons accor∣ding to the common faith, making up the gentile fulnes, as the other doe the Iews. And accordingly, in their gentile fulnes, or rather as surrogated Iews, (Rom. 11.) have the sutable characters given to them. For (sayes the Apostle Iohn) after this, I beheld, and so, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, peo∣ple, kindreds and tongues, stood before the throne and before the lamb, clothed with white robes and palms in their hands, representing their victorious faith, in and under the great tribulations they had and were to passe through, in participa∣tion with Christ in his sufferings, for the testimony of Iesus, during the reigne of the Beast. Amōgst these, he that sits on the throne shall dwell for ever. And they will neither hunger nor thirst any more, nor shall the sun light on them, nor any heat, for the lamb will feed them and lead them into living fountains of waters, in the state of the first Resurrection, where all tears shalbe wiped away from their eyes. Those then whose hearts are purified by this faith, in either of these two de∣grees of it, as it is our precious or our most precious faith, (that which brings us into the common state of salvation with the gentiles, that is durable and everlas∣ting,
or that which brings us yet farther, into the peculiar priviledg of the Jews and first born Sons or God) are the people that properly are Abrahams seed, and heirs ac∣cording to the promise. And their day of manifestatiō hastens apace. They have bin hitherto, even from the beginning of the world to this day, a seed of hiddē, invisible ones, that in all changes of times remaine the pure invisible church. And they have all along bin kept undefiled, having that birth of God in them which preservs them, that sin does not adulterate their hearts, or alienate them from God, neither can the evill one touch them. Thus was it with the seven thousand concealed pure and spirituall worshippers that God had reserved in a time of universall apostacy and corruption in his visible worship, (in Eliah's time) which never did nor would bow their knee to Baal. In reference to this seed, in all ages, is verified that which is spoken by the Pro∣phet Esay, (chap. 1.9.) Except the Lord of Sabaoth had left unto us (that are the vi∣sible church, and have the visible signes of Gods presence and the purity of his Or∣dinances amongst us) a very small remnant, (a seed of hidden ones) we had bin as Sodom in the height of sinning, and bin made like unto Gomorrha, in the extraor∣dinarines of our punishment. These are they that God accounts his jewels, the people that are of price and value with him, whatever reproach and disesteeme they are in from the world, in all times. These have that faith in the seed of it, by which they are possest with an abi∣lity to do all things for the truth, and nothing against it; and this, through Christ the power of God, inwardly strengthening and bringing them forth into a likenes of ability with himself, to do all things by his quickning of them, as he himself hath done by the fathers quickning of him: that they may live by him, as he himself, according to his manhood, lives by the father, who does in him all the works. God hath now for neer these six thousand years, kept these his jewels by him as a reserved hidden treasure, that he resolvs in a fit season to bring to light, and make a shew of openly, in the sight of the whole world. In the mean time, he calls them into the secret chambers of his love, and is encreasing their faith and patience, un∣der the great and various trialls wherein they are with God, strangers and soiour∣ners in and to the world, and to the delights and comforts of it, as all their fathers were. This time of hardship and suffring from the world, must not alwayes be their lot. There is a day approaching, wherein the time of their ill usage from the world shalbe no longer. God will have his season to shew kindnes and love to them and to do them honour in the sight of the whole creation; a day, in which his pur∣pose, and determined resolution is, to make up his jewels, and bring them all together, from all parts where he hath kept them hid and concealed. In this day, he will spare them and shew favour to them, as the father spares his owne son that serveth him, and in serving pleaseth him.
And so visible a distinction in this day will God put in the way of the dispensations of his providences, even to the eye of the world, between them that serve him and them that serve him not, between the righteous and the wicked, that every eye shall take notice of it. And it shall have such a powerfull effect upon the beholders, that there shall come people, the inhabitants of many cities, yea, the inhabitants of one city shall goe to another, saying, let us goe speedily and continually to pray before the Lord of hosts; I will goe also. Yea, many people and strong nations shall come to seek the Lord of hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord. Ten man shall take hold out of all languages of the nations, on the skirt of him that is a jew, saying, we will goe with you, for we have heard that God is with you. The jews that they will thus take hold of, wilbe such as are so indeed, having the faith that failes not, but makes them the receavers of that anointing which teacheth all things, and is truth and no lie. By this heavenly anointing they are in their very principles distinguished, I. From those, whose faith is so far from being of the same precious kind with theirs, that it is sure to faile in the most needfull time, in the day of temptation and triall, when the winds blow and the rain deseends, and the floods come, and beat upon them. Such faith is of little or no price. Secondly. The true Jew, by his faith and anointing, wilbe likewise distinguish'd from those that have no faith, but are unreasonable persecutours of those that have, being void of all right discerning in matters of faith, These true Jews and Israelits indeed, are (as we have shewed) the two families in Jacobs house, children of the same Jacob, but not by the same Rachel, of whom were only Joseph and Benjamin. This distinction in Jacobs family seems to be ta∣ken notice of by the holy Ghost, (Ezek. 37.16.) where the twelve Tribes are com∣pared to two sticks, or stems, springing out of the same root, as two houses, nations or families of the same Israel. Upon the one stick, the Prophet was commanded to write, for Judah and for the children of Israel his companions, to whom (as we know) the Kingdom and scepter was assigned, and out of whom Christ according to the flesh, came. Upon the other stick there was to be written, for Joseph the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel, his companions. For the seperated one from his brethren, the exalted one above his brethren, the dreamer, to whose sheafe all the other sheaves, yea, the sun, moon and stars were to do obeysance. To him in a word, was assigned the first birthright, in the double portion of it, the upper and the nether springs, the blessings of heaven above, of the deep that lieth under, of the breasts and of the womb, the blessings of the father that have prevailed above the blessings of his progenitours, in an extent to the utmost bounds of the ever∣lasting hills, that are appointed to be on the head of Ioseph, and on the crowne of the head of him that was separate from his brethren. These are the blessings written for Ioseph, and for all the house of Israel his com∣paniōs,
or of his faith, spirit, and principles. Both these sticks (the two houses or chur∣ches of beleevers and Israelits in deed) are to be made up into one new Ierusalem, in Christs hand. Both flocks are to be gathered into one sheepfold and visible univer∣sall church-state of the revealed sons of God, distinguished from all people on the face of the earth, besides. And they shalbe gathered into one universall Kingdom and civil state, that shall beare rule over the whole world. For thus saith the Lord, behold, I will take the children of Israel, (the scattered sheep belonging to this fold) from among the heathen, whither they be gone, and will gather them on every side, and will bring them into their owne land, even into the promised new Ierusalem state, the new heavens and new earth, wherein dwells righteousnes, figured out by the land of Canaan. And I will make them one nation or seed of my blessing in the land, upon the mountains of Israel, and one King shalbe King to them all. And though Iudah shall be there with his companions, and Ioseph with his, under distinct writings and enrollings, assigning unto each their lot, yet both shall make but one church and Kingdom, one spirituall seed or nation of Abra∣ham. They shall no more be two, so as to be divided into two Kingdoms, either in church or state. They shall neither envy nor vex one another, any more. They shall be fully agreed, and live in peace, as inhabitants of the same city, the new Ie∣rusalem, uppet and lower, as the hebrew word imports, (Ps. 51.) or heavenly and earthly, consisting of sons of a higher and lower dignity, of this man and of that man that is borne there, whether of noble or common degree, all free heaven-born citizens and subjects of one and the same great and universall King. They shall dwell in perfect unity together, and be of one accord as brethren, singing the song of Moses and of the lambe, in sweet harmony and consort, and the stranger and the uncleane shall no more passe through this glorious city. For there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that does defile, nor that worketh abomination or maketh a lie, but they only which are written (with the writing that is upon both those stickes before-mentioned) in the lambs both of life. This is the church and civill state, which the ministry of Eliah is to prepare the way unto, as the end to which all the work of restitution which thereby shalbe wrought, does and must tend. This will be effected by the powerfull preaching of the everlasting gospel, by a ministry that shall have the tongues not of men only but of angels, filled with the inspiration of the holy Ghost, as also yeilding vengeance and flames of fire, as a day of great judgment and distinction that is to be brought and executed upon ungodly men and willfull opposers of that work, by the pouring out upon them the seven vialls of Gods wrath, like as Moses his ministry did upon Pharaoh King of Egypt, so long as he hardned himself and refused to let Israel his son and his first born goe free, and serve him according to his duty. By Eliahs second comming then, (according to the particulars before declared, together with the end itself, in order to which, this ministry of restoring all things is appointed) we are to understand no other then the spirit and power wherein the
slaine witnesses of Christ shalbe quickned, made to stand upon their feet, and have withall an ascent given to them into heaven, as visible associates and copart∣ners with the holy angels, in their power and great glory, like bright morning starrs, and signes of the comming of the son of man, even whilst they are yet remaining in the body, on this side death. This second comming of Eliah therefore is not to be confounded with Christs owne personall comming, which succeeds, and comes to give us actually and com∣pleatly a part in that which (Rev. 20.) is called the first resurrection. The change effected by Eliah's comming, will rather be a transfiguration, then what properly can be called the first resurrection, by which our bodies wilbe made like unto that glorious body of Christ, in which he lived on earth, fourty dayes before his ascen∣sion, and in which power and glory he is to shine forth, like the sun in his strength, as the brightnes of the day of his second comming encreases and rises up to its height. For the ushering in hereof, this signe in heaven of the son of mans comming, is to go before, which (as hath bin said) is no other then the spirit and power which the slain witnesses, (or the dried, dispersed bones and members of Christs dead body, his hidden, invisible seed of beleevers, his church at that time on the earth) shalbe quickned and raised up into, as a heaven upon earth, in the sight of the whole world. The wise or teachers that then shalbe among them, shall shine as the brightnes of the firmament; and they that turne many to righteousnes, as the stars for evermore. By the power of that faith which brings life and immortality to light, in the minds of those that are true Israelits indeed, inhabitants of the new and heavenly Jeru∣salem that is above, we have declared, that Abraham in type and Christ in spirit and truth, is the father unto two sorts of Sons, that are both heirs and witnesses of what they se and heare from Christ. They are both written among the living in Je∣rusalem, with a writing that is never to be defaced or blotted out. Some of them are made conquerours, and others of them more then conquerours, through Christ that hath loved them, and caused them to abide and continue with him in his tem∣ptations, and to beare a conformity in their minds to his death, (armed with the same mind as he was, for suffering in the flesh) as well as carrying about in their bodies, the marks of the dying of the Lord Jesus. They have heard and receaved that language of faith in them and to them, with which Paul acquaints us (Tim. 2.2. 11, 12.) If we be dead with him, we shall live with him: if we suffer, we shall also reigne with him. Unto this carkasse or dead body, the eagles, the fowles of heaven, by a ministry of the spirit of life from God, wilbe gathered together. And as a breath from the foure winds of heaven, a wind of prophesy and divine inspiration, in the spirit and power of Eliah, shall come forth and shew itself in these slain wit∣nesses, where ever they shalbe found, throughout the whole world, and bring them together into one sheepfold of visible government both in church and state. In this posture, it will be found most true, that by fire from
heaven, and as the Lords owne sword, they shall plead with all flesh, and the slaine of the Lord shalbe many, that shall fall under them, in attempting to rise up against them. For in and by this ministry of Eliah, the Lord will come with fire and with his chariots like a whirl-wind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebukes with flames of fire. When you shalbe awakened to se, by the comming of this glorious ministry of God, what in this day shalbe wrought, not by might, nor by power, but by the spirit of the Lord, the seven eyes which run to and fro through the whole earth, (rejoy∣cing to se his work goe on, and taking care that there be sutable dispensations of divine providences to further and advance it, whereof the decision to be made in the valley of Iehosaphat will not be the least) then your heart shall rejoyce and your bones flourish like an herbe, and the hand of the Lord shalbe knowne towards his Servants, and his indignation towards his enemies. Then shall the thoughts and words of the enemies of Gods people, in designing against them, (however hidden and secret, even in their very bedchambers) be knowne and discovered by this mi∣nistry of Eliah, and the Mountains full of horses and chariots of fire shalbe like walls round about the city of God, to defend them. And not only the eyes of the Prophet, the eyes of the inward man of the Saincts, or of the spirit of their mind, but the eyes of the Prophets servant also, the beast on which he rides, the sensual and outward man of the soule, in the exercise of the very bodily senses, shalbe o∣pened to se that there are more with the people of God then can be against them. So shall all feare be removed far from them. To the word of this Eliahs ministry in the hearts of beleevers, the whole crea∣tion shalbe obedient. The heavens at their prayers will shut or open. They shall do greater things on earth, then ever yet have bin done, by the power that Christ hath with the father, which in this day he will begin visibly to set on work, and exercise for the good of his people. But the great question is, when shall these things be? Answer. The signe of Christs comming is already spoken to, in this ministry of Eliah, which does immediatly goe before it. And when this ministry comes and reveales itself in power, (as it must in the hearts of all the true Israel of God) it will untie all the knots and difficulties that do yet remaine to be resolved, concer∣ning Christs second appearance, and things to come. But when may this second comming of Eliah be expected? 1. After that Christ in spirit hath as signally bin rejected by the generation of Jews under the gospel, (which were surrogated and engraffed in the room of Abrahams naturall seed) as he was by that Jewish nation which crucified him at Jerusalem. And when (accordingly) they shall have openly declared it, by the like severe proceedings against the true spirit of prophecy, manifesting itself in Christs witnesses, who by humane laws and bodily punishments wilbe suppressed, kept
under and put to death, as much as lies in man to do. 2dly; When this persecution and rejection of Christ in his members, hath had its progresse and course with the preaching of the gospel itself, during the six trumpets, from the one end of the earth to the other, which hath shined as light∣ning from the east to the west; and when the gospel and obeyers of it, shall meet with the sharpest brunt of opposition, so as that the dead bodies of the witnesses shall not be suffered to be put in their graves, during the last three years and half of this houre and power of darknes that is to come upon the church of Gods hidden ones, the remnant of the womans seed, that keep the commandments of God and faith of Jesus. But they are nevertheles helped and much saved from the flood of their enemies malice, by the like mistake as was that of Herod, who slew all the children from two years old and upwards, hoping amongst them to find the pro∣mised seed, but failed. The earth helps the woman. The earthly Ierusalem with her inhabitants shall prove a skreene to the heavenly Mount Zion. 3dly. When the wise virgins as wel as the foolish, shalbe found in a deep sleep of security, and think the worst past, looking for nothing more but the comming of the bridegroom, before it be yet midnight. The witnesses of Christ wilbe ready to make account that their 1260 years of suffering under the reigne of the beast, is either expired or upon the very point of expiring, and therefore begin to put off their sackcloth, or lay it quite aside, as taking for graunted that the time is come, that sorrow and sighing are flowne away, never to returne more. But they will afterwards find themselvs deceaved, and that they are but falling into the times of the three last years and halfe, it being Gods usuall and accustomed method from the beginning, to usher in any great exaltation of his saincts, with some desperate extreamity and calamity, im∣mediatly foregoing. And therefore, till after the wise virgins sun be turned into darknes, and the foolish virgins moon be turned into blood, the BRIGHT MORNING STAR of Eliahs ministry comes not. But then, it does immediatly follow. 4thly and lastly; when Antichrist and all enemies of the witnesses of Christ shalbe in the grearest peace, unity and joy imaginable, amongst themselvs, at the beholding the dead bodies of the two prophets that tormented them that dwell upon the earth, and shall cry peace, peace, as esteeming their mountaine to be made so strong, that it can never be moved. In one word; When the sunshine of their prosperity, peace and power is at the height, and to their thinking, impossible ever to set againe. Let this suffice, without proceeding farther to speak concerning the two other parts of this great day of Christs second comming, which wilbe dignified with his owne personall reigne on earth, the THOVSAND YEERS of the FIRST RE∣SURRECTION. Then will he put an end to this very day of his owne Kingdom,
by his free and voluntary resigning it up into the hands of the father, that God may be all in all: Let me only adde this word, that the visible reigne of these saints of the first RESURRECTION here on earth, for a thousand years, wilbe in the new Jerusalem state, that is to come downe from God out of heaven; in a state of beatitude and glory, partaking of the divine presence and vision of Christ their King, in an immutable righteous state both of body and Soule, distinguished from the state of the nations that shall walke in her light, all the world over, and be hap∣py and glorious also, but changeable. THE END. Mistakes in the printing. Page 9. lin. 36. for teams, read tearms. p. 21. l. 30. this, r. his. p. 41. l. 32. themselv, r. themselvs. and l. 33. trues, r. true. p. 43. l. 26. to as, r. as to, p. 70. l. 21. 3d, r. 2d. p. 83. l. 31. hasband, r. hus∣band. p. 84. l. 29. contracted r. contracted, p. 91. l. 3. tempestous, r. tempestuous. and l. 14. eujoy, r, enjoy, p. 95. l. 40. powers, r. power.
