W2603 99833262 37737
monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION, For Recalling and Prohibiting Seamen from Serving of Foreign Princes and States. MARIE R. WHereas We have beén Advertised, That great number of Mariners and other Seafaring Men (being Our Natural-born Subjects) have betaken them∣selves to the Service of Foreign Princes and States, in this time of War, when there is occasion to use Men of their Sort and Calling; We for Re∣dress thereof at present, and for Preventing the like for the future, by this Our Royal Proclamation (with the Advice of Our Privy Council) do strictly Charge and Command all Masters of Ships, Pilots, Mariners, Seamen, and other Seafaring Men whatsoever, and wheresoever (bring Our Natural born Subjects) who are in Service of any Foreign Prince or State, or do Serve in any Foreign Ships or Vessel, That forthwith they and every of them do withdraw themselves, and depart from such Foreign Services, and return home to their Native Countries. And further, We do hereby strictly Prohibit and Forbid all Masters of Ships, Mariners, Sea∣men, and other Seafaring Men whatsoever (being Our Natural born Subjects) from Entring themselves, and do hereby strictly Charge and Command them and every of them front henceforth to for∣bear to Enter themselves into Pay, or otherwise betake themselves to the Service of any Foreign Princes or States, or to Serve in any Foreign Ship or Vessel, without Our Special Licence first Had and Obtained in that behalf; to all which We expect due Obedience, and exact Conformity. And We do hereby Publish and Declare, That the Offenders to the contrary shall not only incur Our just Dis∣pleasure, but be proceéded against for their Contempt according to the utmost Severities of Law. And further, We do hereby Authorize and Command all Our Officers and Ministers in Our respective Ports, and all Captains, Masters, and other Officers Serving or Employed in any of Our Ships or Vessels at Sea, to Stop and make Stay of all such Person and Persons as shall endeavour to Trans∣port or Enter themselves into the Service any Foreign Prince or State, contrary to the true intent and meaning of this Our Royal Proclamation; and also to seize upon, take, and bring away all such Mariners, Seamen, and other Persons aforesaid, as shall at any time after the First day of February next be found to be Employed, or Serving in any Ships or Vessels belonging to any Foreign Prince or State, or to any Merchant, or other Person or Persons, being Subjects of any Foreign Prince or State. And We do hereby further Declare, That in case any Mariner, Seamen, or other Persons aforesaid, Serving in any Ships or Vessels belonging to any Foreign Prince or State, or to any Merchants, or other Per∣sons, being Subjects of any other Prince or State, shall at any time after the said First day of February next be taken in such Service by any Ships of War belonging to the Governments of Algiers, Tunis or Tripoli, they shall be left to remain in Slavery according to the Treaties and Capitulations between Us and the said Governments in that behalf, and are not to expect to be demanded by Us. Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Tenth Day of October, 1692. In the Fourth Year of Our Reign. God save King William and Queen Mary. London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceas'd; Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesties. 1692.
