W2936 12922494 95425
Imprimatur. Feb. 1. 1678. Guil. Jane, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Lond. à sacris domesticis.
A SERMON ON THE Gunpowder Treason, WITH REFLECTIONS ON THE LATE PLOT. BY THOMAS WILSON Rector of Arrow in Warwickshire. LONDON: Printed for Henry Brome, at the Gun in S. Paul's Church-yard. MDCLXXIX.
A SERMON ON PSALM cxxiv. If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, now may Israel say, &c. to the end. NO notice is given what was the particular occasion of the penning of this Psalm; but we see in general it was some eminent deliverance; which the Psalmist commemorates, acknowledging God to be the Author of it, and exciting Israel to bless his holy name for it. The whole is sutable to our present business of cele∣brating our deliverance from Popish Conspi∣racy. The which I wish we may do with the devotion and hearty affection of this holy man, for this will be acceptable to God, who de∣lights to hear his People speaking of his mer∣cies,
and shewing forth his power and wonder∣ful acts, and singing of his righteousness cor∣dially and reverently. And it will be obligato∣ry to him to follow us still with his goodness, and to heap more benefits upon us: and plea∣sant will it be to our Souls, when in a sensible manner we remember how the God of Hea∣ven owned and favoured us, and mightily wrought for our deliverance. And finally it will be profitable to us, our hearts upon the due consideration of his love and bounty, and power and marvelous doing, being excited both to serve and trust in him the more at all times, and to the end. In the Psalm there are these things to be ob∣served, every one sutable to our present Solem∣nity, which therefore I shall accordingly ap∣ply: viz. I. A Danger. II. A Deliverance. III. A Thanksgiving. IV. A Confidence in God. I. The Danger. It is variously expressed, and with great emphasis: First, it is said, Men rose up against us. Which I judge rather means an open insurrection, than a secret combination: and herein indeed there is some difference betwixt
Israels case and ours. But yet our danger was not the less for this, but rather the greater. For open enemies we may either hide our selves from, or else make preparation against: whereas there is no defence, neither escape (unless heaven assist) when men work under Ground, and lay in Barrels of Powder, which kindles in a moment, and as suddenly destroys. And there is something in the Psalm sutable to this. It is this expression (which again shews the Danger:) If the Lord had not been on our side, they had swallowed us up quick. Like as when the Earth opened and swallowed up Korah and his Company: or like as when Fire fell down from Heaven suddenly upon Sodom, and consumed the Inhabitants: or like as when an hungry Lion tears his prey, or rather when a Whale swallows a Man alive: or like as when a Deluge overflows, or a violent Torrent snatches us away, or the raging Waves of the Sea involve us. And so is it said, Then the wa∣ters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our Soul: then the proud waves had gone over our Soul. And no more mercy in our Adversaries than in those Creatures, either the Lion or the Whale, or Fire, or Water, or the Earth when it cleaves asunder and sinks under our Feet: and
I may add, no more mercy than in the Devil. For his Children they were, acted by his Spirit, and his work they undertook, which is to de∣stroy: we have had experience of their bloody hands and cruel nature; Usser. de Eccles. succes. cap. 9. 10. Temple's Irish Rebellion. Fox's Acts. Clark's Mar∣tyrol. who have slain thou∣sands of those they call Hereticks, and have racked and tortured and mangled their bodies, burned them alive at the stake, bored out their eyes, ripped up their bellies, held their hands in the flames of candles and their feet in boyl∣ing oil, and in such cruel manner have tor∣mented and killed, as only infernal furies could invent: and there is something in the Psalm that signifies this (which we are further to take notice of, as that which expresses the Danger:) for it is said, Their wrath were kindled against us. And truly not a little did our Enemies rage, but even like the fire of a furnace, or like the fire of hell it self: and they rage so still, for they have been long vexed that they have lost their precious things, and are spoiled of their glory; that their wealth is departed from them, and masses and indulgences, and their trum∣pery of beads and girdles, candles and oil, and such like stuff is undervalued and will not sell at the old rate: and that which hath vexed them as much as any thing, is that light is bro∣ken
forth which reproves their deeds of dark∣ness and discovers their shame and nakedness, and that holiness is advanced, which troubles their sore and evil eyes. For Cain hated his Brother for no other reason but because 1 Ioh. iii.12. his own works were evil and his Brothers righteous. And the wicked ever since the beginning of the world have persecuted the just out of meer en∣mity of nature. And then as our Romish Ad∣versaries have been long vexed, so have they as long hoped for a day of vengeance wherein they might satiate their fury. And no question it would be like hungry dogs, or like lions that have been long tied up without meat, by de∣vouring; as they have often made it manifest enough by shewing their teeth and barking, by houling and roaring, by their hellish conspira∣cies and bloody attempts. And remember we again (as it is here said) that if the Lord had not been on our side, we had been swallowed up. As we were near perishing, so we had perished, if he the Almighty and Gracious God had not stretched out his hand and saved: For as for us we knew not the matter, till he by his Pro∣vidence discovered it; and therefore could do nothing for our delivery. There is yet some∣thing more in the Psalm which expresses the
Danger; and that is the saying, Our Soul is esca∣ped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers. And as Israel was like a bird in the snare, so were we: the net was cast about us, and there wanted only the drawing of it (which a small force could do) and the fowlers were hastning to the slaughter: the train was laid and instru∣ments of death prepared, and there remained nothing but putting the lighted match to the powder: so near were we unto death. And the expression, Our Soul is escaped, invites me to observe that our Souls as well as our Bodies were in this eminent danger. For their design was to introduce their abominable doctrines and idolatrous worship, which are as danger∣ous as poison it self, and of a worse conse∣quence than their fire and fagots; tending to kill eternally, the Soul in the other world, as their cruel hands kill the body in this: and let me tell you, when Government is altered, and a false Worship commanded and established, and upheld by supream Authority; then alass poor Souls are easily seduced, and some through fear, some through flattery, some for worldly gain, some by example, and some through custom and education fall away, and multitudes by one means or other turn about
presently, though to their own destruction. And therefore let me insert here my earnest re∣quest and exhortation in the Lord, that all Protestants pray for our Protestant Governors and Government. Now considering all this, the secrecy of the Plot, and the rage and malice, and power and bloodiness of our enemies, and their abomina∣ble doctrins and worship, and the near ap∣proach of the execution of their intended villa∣ny, we cannot but be sensible that our Danger was exceeding great. Reflecting upon what hath been said, I can∣not but demand your judgment in one particu∣lar before I proceed; and that is this, whether these men that are so conversant in plots and conspiracies; that plot and conspire the death and ruin of others; that plot and conspire a∣gainst their Prince, and the supream Council of the land; that plot and conspire after such a bloody and devilish manner; that kill and de∣stroy, and exercise such barbarous and inhuman cruelties; and all this against peaceable and quiet people, and such as are more sound in the faith, and more holy in their lives than them∣selves: whether I say these men have the spi∣rit of God and the power of holiness in their
hearts? whether they are Ministers of Iesus Christ, Priests of God, Priests of Righteousness? whether their Head and Father the Pope that abets them in these practices and stirs them up to them, be the Successor of Saint Peter? whe∣ther Christ's Holy Vicar? It seems to me, and it is altogether true without contradiction, that they are like the Beast in the Apocalyps that kills those that will not receive his mark in their fore∣heads, nor worship his Image: And that they are like that Babylon (if not the very same) the great Whore, whom St. Iohn seeing things to follow afterward in the Church, saw drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. Rev. xi.15, 16, 17, & 17.6. For I see them not so cruel to any as to Saints, as to those that fear God and worship him purely according to his plain truth, as it is recorded in the Scriptures. I demand again, whether these men (like good Christians) do according to St. Paul's admonition, 1 Thes. iv.11. Rom. xii.18. Study to be quiet, and as much as lieth in you, live peaceably with all. And whether they observe his other like in∣junction, Eph. iv.3. Endeavour to keep the Unity of the Spi∣rit in the Bond of Peace. And whether they are like our Saviour that came not to destroy mens lives, but to save them: and that Luke ix.53, 54, 55, 56. rebuked his Dis∣ciples for desiring him that they might Com∣mand
fire to come down from Heaven and consume the Samaritans, because they did not receive him. And in a word, whether Bloody Iesuits and merciful Iesus are alike. II. The Deliverance, which we have set down in these words, Our Soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers: the snare is broken, and we are escaped. Alass the strength of a bird is as nothing to the breaking of the fowlers net; so that if she get out thence and fly away, it is a strange accident: And no more was our strength to the extricating of our selves out of the net and gin and trap, all the subtil devices and complicated intanglements and killing in∣struments of our enemies. That we escaped then was a wonder, and that the snare was broken whereby we did escape, was the work of Gods own hand: and is it not his doing, when (according as it is said again) proud waves did not swallow us up; when waters and a stream coming upon us, did not overwhelm and drown us: when kindled wrath did not con∣sume us: And in these words also we are shewed our Deliverance and whence it was, The Lord did not give us as a prey to their teeth. For he could have delivered us up into their hands, and he might have done so with justice enough, because
of our sins: and therefore as it was his Power, so it was his Goodness that saved us. And seeing that the combination was secret and the plot carried on with all subtilty, we discern again that it was his Eye (to which nothing is hid) that discovered it. And add we, that the De∣liverance was from death and murther, from war and confusion, from Popery, which is stuf∣fed with all that is naught, with pride and ava∣rice and luxury, with lies and feigned miracles, with wicked craft and treachery and dissimu∣lation, with rebellion and horrid cruelty, with superstitions innumerable, and abominable Idolatry. And that the deliverance was of King and Parliament and a whole Realm, and of those that deserved no such thing at their hands as they intended. And finally that it was the deliverance of Gods own people, that have aban∣doned the corruption of his Religion, and that have embraced the truth as it was delivered to the World by his Servants the Prophets and A∣postles of our Lord Iesus Christ, and that desire to live in his fear, and to serve him acceptably with pure worship according to his own will, not mans, that their Souls may be saved. Considering all this, I say, the deliverance was wonderful, and a good work, and from God it
came. So that upon the whole we may justly say with the Psalmist, If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against us: if it had not been the Lord who was on our side, they had swallowed us up quick. Our help was in the Name of the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth. And therefore unto him is due Praise and Blessing, and Glory and Thanksgiving: which is our next particular. But before I enter upon it, let me put in here one thing which is worthy of the Observation both of us and our adversaries: and that is, that as God hath delivered us, so he will deliver us still, if we still hold his Truth without cor∣ruption, and keep our selves in innocence; re∣nounce error and false worship, and live sober∣ly, righteously, and godly. For he will maintain his own Doctrine, and defend them that pro∣fess it, and that withal fear his Name; and he will punish his Enemies, and bring to nought their devices, and dissolve the attempts of decei∣vers and bloody-minded men. He is the Tower and strong Castle, and the Rock and Mount of Israel: he is their shield and defence. We have seen by long experience that God hath defended his Saints and true worshippers, every Age from the beginning of the world affording nu∣merous instances hereof. And not only so,
but we have his promise written down, and an hundred times repeated in his Book, that he will defend them. Read a little: Prov. xi.3. The integrity of the upright shall guide them: but the perverseness of transgressors shall destroy them, V. 6. The righteousness of the upright shall deliver them: but transgressors shall be taken in their own naughti∣ness. V. 20, 21. They that are of a froward heart, are an abomination to the Lord: but such as are up∣right in their way, are his delight. Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished: but the seed of the righteous shall be delivered. And Chap. xii.3. A man shall not be established by wickedness: but the root of the righteous shall not be moved. V. 7. The wicked are overthrown and are not: but the house of the righteous shall stand. V. 13. The wicked is snared by the transgression of his lips: but the just shall come out of trouble. And seeing that this is so, it is without cause that we fear what evil men can do, whilst we do not make our selves like unto them, turning aside from God into crooked paths, and provoking him by the like offences against our selves: and it is also but a vain thing, meer folly and madness, for our adversaries to attempt any thing against us, and to think to establish themselves by wicked enterprises, though carried on with
the greatest subtilty and adjutant power. For do they think to kill, and so to flourish? to rebel against the Lords Anointed, and the Higher Powers which he hath ordained, and so to prosper? to drink the blood of Saints, and so to grow fat? Blood hath a cry, and a loud cry, and it will be heard: and right dear to God is the blood of his Saints. And Iezebel, (such an one that had little sense of holy things, and indeed little knowledge of Gods ways and works) could ask the question, 2 King. ix.31. Had Zimri peace who slew his Master? As having observed this, that such slayers are slain themselves, are pursued with troubles, and commonly come to a fearful end: as there are many instances of this nature recorded in the History of the Iudges and Kings of Israel and Iudah. And this woman might have reflected upon her own action, and have said to her self in like manner, Shall Jezebel have peace who slew Naboth? And the same indeed was verified in her: Vers. 32. &c. for as soon almost as she had spoken the word, she was cast out of the window of her Chamber, and dashed upon the ground and trodden to pieces by Iehu's horses. Wherefore the only way for our Adversaries to prosper is to keep themselves in the ways of Righteousness: and
let them do so as much as they please, and effect against us what they can: for we know that then they will not have the heart to hurt us, and not only will forbear to lay axes and fagots, and such tormenting things upon us, but will not so much as press us with an heavy hand. But as for Iniquity, they will never esta∣blish themselves by that; and their unrighte∣ous machinations and actions are but like making ropes of sand to pull down a Tower, and like the Thief's twisting of Cords to hang himself. For David hath told us from his ex∣perience and observation, that Psal. ix.16. the wicked are snared in the works of their own hands. And not only so, but he hath delivered it unto us from the mouth of the Lord as an established truth, that so it shall be; that Psal. vii.16. & xxxvii.14, 15. their mischief shall return upon their own heads, and their violent dealing shall come down upon their own pates; and that their swords which they have drawn out to slay the upright, shall enter into their own hearts; and their bows which they have bent against the poor, shall be broken. Only in this one thing may our adversaries be feared, namely in their enticing of us to sin; as Balaam taught Balak to draw Israel to fornication and Idolatry, for which cause (they yielding there∣unto) the wrath of God fell upon them, and
they were destroyed by a Plague. Rev. ii.14. Num. xxv.1. &c. Num. xxxi.16. And there∣fore in this matter let us take good heed to our selves: for their temptation, and this kind of smooth and soft dealing is more to be feared than their plots and menaces, and murthering instruments: their Fornication and Idolatry, if we hearken to their charms, and betake our selves to these abominations, will do us more injury than their gun-powder and knives, and bills and swords. But yet though by this means they may bring down judgments from Heaven upon us, yet shall they not hereby establish themselves, but shall be punished with us for the same wickedness, and for their Temptation. And so it fell out both to the Midianites that tempted and defiled Israel, and to Balaam that gave the Counsel. For God said thus, Vex the Midianites and smite them: for they vex you with their wiles, wherewith they have beguiled you in the matter of Peor. Num. xxxv.17.18. And so it was done, as we read Chap xxxi.7. &c. They warred a∣gainst the Midianites, as the Lord commanded Mo∣ses: and they slew all the males; and they slew the Kings of Midian; Balaam also the son of Beor they slew with the sword. And the Children of Israel took all the women of Midian Captives, and their little ones. And Moses said unto them, have ye saved
all the women alive? Behold, these caused the Chil∣dren of Israel through the counsel of Balaam to com∣mit trespass against the Lord in the matter of Peor, and there was a Plague among the Congregation of the Lord. Now therefore kill every male among the little ones, and kill every woman that hath known man by lying with him. So that by no wicked way, neither by temptation, nor by conspiracy, can our adversaries prosper. Flourish they may for a time; but then they shall wither as the grass: and lay their hands and rods upon our backs they may; but they shall not alwaies abide there, for the Lord will deliver his people out of the hand of the oppressor and the unrighte∣ous man. And so speaks David, with whose eminent and comfortable words I conclude this matter: Psalm xxxvii.24. to the end, The good man though he fall, shall not utterly be cast down: for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand. The Lord loveth judgment, and forsaketh not his Saints; they are preserved for ever: but the seed of the wicked shall be cut off. The wicked watcheth the righteous, and seeketh to slay him. The Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged. I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading him∣self, &c.
III. The Thanksgiving. We have it in these words, Blessed be the Lord, who hath not given us as a prey to their teeth. And considering that if we had fallen into the power of Romanists, they would have used us as hungry and ravenous beasts do their prey, tearing it in pieces and de∣vouring, we must acknowledge that the bles∣sing which we render unto the Lord for our de∣liverance, must not be a faint breath, but all the affections of our Souls, the most hearty praise. And what is due to him that hath saved us from the fowler, from the lions teeth, from the stream and proud waves, from the wrath of enemies, and that wrath kindled of hell and boiling-hot? for truly we cannot reasonably believe that the wrath of any enemies is hotter than that of ours, Papists, who have all along exercised the sharpest severities. Now a man looking back upon the dangers which he hath escaped, and remembring how he walked over a deep well slenderly covered, and did not fall into it; and how he passed through a company of wolves and bears and lions, and was not de∣voured: Oh how will he rejoyce, how will he thank the Lord, and what a lively sense of the mercy will he carry in his heart all the days of his life? And may the remembrance of this
mercy which this day we received from the Lord, never be defaced so long as time shall endure; nor the quick sense of it abate, neither in us, nor in our Children after us, till we shall be free from the cruelties and malice and con∣spiracies of Popish Enemies. Which will be when they shall be converted from their Er∣rors, and changed from their savage nature, and the mystical Babylon shall be destroyed; or when we shall be removed from Earth to Heaven. If we owe God praises for our life, health, and food, for preservation in time of war, famine, and pestilence, for recovery out of desperate sickness; what greater praises do we owe him for the enjoyment of our Protestant Religion, and for our deliverance from slaugh∣ter, from confusion, from strange tortures, from cruel deaths, from Popery, which is a mass of evils? for I put you in remembrance again, that not only evil to our Bodies was designed, but a worse mischief to our Souls. Blessed be God then, that our Religion, which is spiritual, substantial and lively, is not turned into idle and dead Ceremony, shews and gazings, crosses, beads and reliques: that the Holy Scriptures are not kept from our people, and that we have not Prayers in a language which they understand not,
whereby the affection (which alone makes the service acceptable to God) is quite deadned and killed: that we are not taught to pray to An∣gels and dead Saints, and to ask of them protecti∣on, grace, pardon; saying, Rom. Breviar. fest. Jan. Beate Pastor Petre, clemens accipe voces precantum, i∣minumque vincula verbo: resolve, cui pote∣stas tradita aperire terris Coelum, apertum claudere. O Blessed Peter, to whom power is given to open and shut Heaven; loose by thy word the bonds of our sins. Ib. Commun. Apost. Apostolorum gloriam tellus & astra concint. Vos seculorum Iudices qui templa coeli claudi∣tis sanate mentes languidas: augee nos vituibus. O ye Apostles, who shut and open Heaven, heal our sick minds, increase our vertues. Ib. Offic. Mar. Dei mater alma, fun∣da nos in pace. Solve vincia reis, profer lumen caecis, mala nostra pelle, bona cuncta posce. Nos culpis solutos, mites fac & castos. Vitam praesta puram, iter para tutum, ut videntes Iesum semper collaetemur. O Mother of God, establish us in peace, loose the bonds of the guilty, bring light to the blind, drive away our evils, procure for us all good things. Make us free from sins, and mild and chast. And blessed be God that we do not creep and kneel to an Image and say, Ib. Fest. Maij. Arbor, ornaa Regis purpura, electa digno stipite tam sancta membra tangere: cujas brachiis pretium pe∣pendit saeculi. O Crux ac spes unica, piis adage gratiam, reis{que} dee crimina. O Crux, quae sola fuisti digna portare talen∣tum mundi, dulce lignum, dulces clavos, dulcia ferens pondera: salva praesentem ca∣tervam in tuis hodie laudibus congreg∣tam. Tree on which Christ did hang. O Cross, Ave.  Luk 1.28. hail [or, peace, or happiness to thee] our only hope, increase the righte∣ousness of the righteous, blot out [or, abolish] the sins of the guil∣ty. O Cross which alone wast worthy to bear the talent [or, price] of the world: sweet wood, bearing the sweet nails, the sweet weights: save the present company gathered this day together to praise
thee. And blessed be God that we are not taught nor incouraged, nor tempted to rely upon the penances and satisfactions, masses and sacrifices, absolutions, pardons and indulgences of others, as if they could hereby prevent our falling into Hell-torment, and being fallen into Purga∣tory-torment, could deliver us out of it. And blessed be God that we call not Sacramental Bread and Wine, our Lord and Saviour, falling down and adoring them with divine worship. And blessed be God that we see not his faithful servants imprisoned and tortured, and burned for refusing to submit to these abominations. All which evils we might have seen, if our Ad∣versaries had prevailed: Blessed be God for our King and Parliament, our wholsom Laws, our peace and safety, and our lives. Blessed be God for our ministers, and for sound doctrin, and the pure truth of the Gospel. Blessed be God for the salvation of our Souls: all which we might have lost, some of which we should certainly have lost, if Romes design now and at many other times had succeeded. Blessed be God from our whole heart for his manifold mercy to us both now and evermore. IV. The Confidence in God, which these words describe, Our help in the name of the Lord, who made
Heaven and Earth. That is, our help was, is, and shall be in the Lord of Heaven: They had found that God had saved them, and they were resolved to trust in him ever after. And well may we do so, who have had the same help and favour from him in like eminent danger: and as his goodness invites us to trust in him, so doth his power, he being the Almighty and only Supreme that made Heaven and Earth, and there∣fore can do what he pleaseth, dissolve the for∣ces of the mighty and blow away the devices of the cunning, fetter all the Devils of Hell that rise up against us, and by his Command turn them back in their furious rage. And we are again to remember his Eye that seeth in the dark and secret places where wicked men plot mischief: and his Providence that is over all his works even to a small Sparrow: and his Promise, that he will defend his people, and op∣pose his enemies. And now as we trust in him, there remains nothing else for us to do, but to keep his Laws diligently and to walk before him with an upright heart: for then shall we surely find his help. They work wickedness; and can they trust in him? If they do, it will be in vain: the impudence indeed they have as to look up to Heaven when they are as deep as
Hell in their wicked consultations, and to say masses and make prayers to the God of righte∣ousness for the cutting of innocent mens throats, and for the accomplishing of such unrighteous∣ness as the Devil only puts into the hearts of his slaves, and which only he and his children would rejoyce to see accomplished. But do they indeed trust in God? It is rather in the Devil, in their invented visions and feigned miracles, in their plots and perverse deeds, in their dissimulation and treachery, in their re∣bellion and murthers: for I see that to these they betake themselves continually, as those that have no hope otherwise to prevail. And no wonder, for a false Religion must have in∣direct means to help it up, and a bloody Faith will make bloody work; they devise a cunning device, and gather together the powers of the Earth; and now say they we shall prevail; we will fall upon them before they be aware and will destroy; we will terrifie with torments, and we will take away their chief men by death, and as for the rest they will not dare to speak. But, alas, all this is as weak as a feather, and as vain as that which is most so, because he is against them that made Heaven and Earth. For the Lord hateth the workers of iniquity
(as the Psalmist speaks) and abhorreth bloody and deceitful men. He loveth the faithful, and plentifully rewardeth proud doers. The righteous Lord loveth righteousness, and his countenance doth behold the upright. He will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in time of trouble. And they that know his name will trust in him; for he hath not for∣saken them that seek him. For who is God save the Lord? or who is a rock save our God? Arise, O Lord, and let not man pre∣vail; let the heathenish people be judged in thy sight. Put them in fear, O Lord, that they may know themselves to be but men. Destroy thou them, O God; let them fall by their own counsels: cast them out in the multitude of their transgressions, for they have rebelled against thee. But let all those that put their trust in thee rejoyce; let them ever shout for joy because thou defendest them: let them that love thy Name be joyful in thee. For thou Lord wilt bless the righteous, with favor wilt thou compass them as with a shield. Amen. But let me add a few words more because of the new attempts of our Adversaries, who like their Fathers have again consulted with the
Devil and the grand wickedness of their hearts, to kill our King, subvert our Government, and change our Religion. But remember, Dear Brethren, that men cannot curse those whom God will bless, except it be with their tongues, which is only a brutum fulmen, a Popes Bull, a clap of Thunder without the bolt. And be ye sure that those God will bless that love and serve him, keeping themselves from sin and follow∣ing peace and holiness with a pure heart: as Balaam (after he had attempted several times to move God against Israel; for this end building seven Altars and offering upon every one a bullock and a ram, and repeating this again and again) confessed, saying, Num. xxiii.20, 21, 23. God hath blessed, and I cannot reverse it. He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither hath he seen perverseness in Israel. The Lord his God is with him, and the shout of a King is among them. Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any divination against Israel. And if the case be so, that God sees not iniquity a∣mong us (not such as that he will curse us for it, perverseness, and rebellion) then may we boldly say, Let the sons of Belial conspire and contrive what they can: let the covetous Priests build seven Altars and add seven more to them, and let them offer upon every one seventy times
seven bullocks and as many rams, Masses, Re∣liques, Candles, Hosts, and what they please: let them lay their crafty heads together, and call up all the Devils of Hell to their consultation: let them prepare all sorts of deadly instruments, and fortify themselves according to their cun∣ning, and gather together the Kings of the Earth against us: Tush, it is in vain, and the evil which they devise they are not able to bring to pass: Psalm ii. He that sitteth in the Heavens will laugh; the Lord shall have them in derision: he shall speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure. We fear, I see, deceitful workers, un∣godly plotters, serpentine Jesuits, bloody Pa∣pists; and so we do Witches, Sorcerers and Conjurers. But much rather may we fear our wickednesses, than all the generation of this black rabble in Earth and Hell. And as the presence of some of these malicious and mis∣chievous creatures strikes some into trembling; so would to God we were all as much afraid of sin, and did not take this more dangerous ene∣my so near unto us and love its Company so dearly as to invite it to our house and put it into our bosom and let it lodge with us from day to day all the year about.
But Sirs, what can you do? you that put the Nation into fear with your evil machinations, you Sons of Rome? You can smite, you'l say; you can torment, you can burn, kill and de∣stroy us. Some of us you may, but all you shall not: and the Devil can do as much as this, and this is right well in his eyes. But can you pull the Sun out of Heaven, or toss about the Moun∣tains? Neither shall your Hell-gates prevail a∣gainst the Church of Christ, to throw it down and lay it wast utterly, which is built upon the firmest Rock, and which that mighty Son of man, the Son of God, compasseth with his Arms. For God is stronger than the Devil, and will save his people from that evil Spirits rage and yours; otherwise he were not what assuredly he is, a loving and watchful Father. You remember the voice from heaven, Acts ix.4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me. And you may thence observe that the troublers of his Church con∣tend not with frail man only, but with the Mighty Iesus, who can dash you into pieces in a moment: And you may conclude from the same words, that he will not always suffer him∣self to be bruised and beaten, persecuted and afflicted. And do you not think that we can pray to our Father in Heaven, who can send
us more than twelve legions of Angels, which shall vanquish the Devil and his powers of darkness, your confederates in your wicked en∣terprises? And what? can we not kill you, as well as you kill us? Our strength is as great as yours, but our will (thanks be to God) not so wicked. You cannot say in Conscience that you fear any such thing from us as we do from you, death, and burning, and tortures. And did you fear so much as loss of Goods or Imprison∣ment? Were you not in quietness? Lived you not in peace and safety? Who troubled you? Did you not enjoy as much liberty in the ex∣ercise of your Religion as you could in reason expect? more I dare say you had than your Re∣ligion deserves: that is, than your Latin-Ser∣vice, your Half-Communion, your denial of Marriage to Priests, your Masses, Indulgences, Purgatory, and Papal-Supremacy, your Image-worship, your Invocation of Saints and Angels, your Adoration of Sacramental Bread and Wine, and such like stuff deserves. All which is properly your Religion, that which we call Po∣pery, wherein you differ from us and from the truth of the Gospel. I think you were blind and did not understand your own happiness (as you esteem this Liberty to be so:) or you
were mad and foolish and would endeavor to deprive your selves of it by abusing your in∣dulgent friends. But God now intends you a greater happiness; and that is, to shame you out of your adherence to Rome, and to convert you from her corrupt Religion (I wish you were so wise as to embrace the opportunity and good providence:) when his providence namely discovers to your face your Popes and Priests, and other friends unrighteous doings, and raises up the spirits of all honest men a∣gainst you for the same, and lays upon you some restraints and penalties to curb in your insolencies and exorbitant actions, and to se∣cure us from your Swords and Daggers, your Poysons and Stabs, your Coleman's Confusions, your Fauks's Powder, your Irish Rebellion, your Spanish Inquisition and Invasion, your Paris Massacre, your Queen Mary's Faggots, and Bishop Bonner's butchers hands. You boast of your Loyalty to our present King and his Father. But what you have done like Loyal Subjects, did it proceed out of a Loyal Principle, or out of Necessity? Was it Faith that acted you, or Fate? What you have done well, was it not for want of opportunity to do worse, or for want of a Popes Bull, which to∣lerates
and commands Rebellion? If Loyalty to an Heretick Prince (especially when he is de∣clared Excommunicate) be your Conscience and Faith and Principle, then abhor and renounce your Pope and Church which teach you ano∣ther Lesson. For says your Cap. iii. Lateran Council under Pope Innocent the Third, thus: Si Domi∣nus temporalis requisitus & monitus ab Ecclesia terram suam purgare neglexerit ab haeretica pravi∣tate, per Metropolitanum & caeteros comprovincia∣les Episcopos Excommunicationi vinculo innodetur, & si satisfacere contempserit infra annum, significe∣tur hoc summo pontifici, ut ex tunc ipse vasallos ab ejus fidelitate denuntiet absolutos, & terram exponat Ca∣tholicis occupandam, qui eam exterminatis haereticis sine ulla contradictione possideant. That is, If a Tem∣poral Lord being admonished by the Church, neglects to purge his Dominion of Heresie, let him be Excom∣municated by the Metropolitan and the other compro∣vincial Bishops, and if he refuseth to satisfie within a year, let this be signified to the Pope, that thence he may declare his Subjects free from Allegiance to him, and expose his Dominion to be possessed by the Catho∣licks, who expelling the Hereticks may justly possess it. And thus thundred Pope Paul the Third in his Bull against our King Henry the Eighth: Hist. Concil. Trident. p. 68. Because he hath cast off obedience to the Church, he
is therefore deprived of his Kingdom, and his fautors of all their goods, honors and fortunes, his Subjects commanded not to obey him, Foreigners to have no Commerce with him, and all to take up Arms against him and his People, and to take unto them his King∣dom and Fortune for a Prey and Reward, and to keep his People in servitude, And thus says Pope Pius the Fifth, in his Bull against our Queen Eliza∣beth:Camb. Annal. Elizab. p. 179. Regnans in excelsis hunc unum super omnes gentes & omnia Regna Principem constituit, qui evellat, destruat, dissipet, disperdat, plantet & aedifi∣cet. Illius auctoritate suffulti, qui nos in hoc supremo Iustitiae Throno voluit collocare, de Apostolicae potesta∣tis plenitudine, declaramus praedictam Elizabetham, haereticam & haereticorum fautricem, eique adhaeren∣tes in praedictis, anathematis sententiam incurrisse: Quinetiam ipsam praetenso Regni praedicti jure, necnon omni & quocunque dominio, dignitate, privilegioque privatam: Et item proceres, subditos & populos di∣cti Regni, ac caeteros omnes, qui illi quomodocunque juraverunt, à juramento hujusmodi, ac omni prorsus dominii, fidelitatis, & obsequii debito, perpetuò abso∣lutos, prout nos illos praesentium auctoritate absolvimus, & privamus eandem Elizabetham praetenso jure Reg∣ni, aliisque omnibus supradictis. Praecipimusque & interdicimus universis & singulis proceribus, subdi∣tis, populis, & aliis praedictis, ne illi ejusve monitis,
mandatis, & legibus audeant obedire. Qui secus egerint, eos simili Anathematis sententiâ innodamus. That is, Christ hath wade Peter and his Successor, Prince over all Nations and Kingdoms, to pluck up, destroy, scatter, consume, plant and build. By his Authority, who hath placed us in this supreme Throne of Iustice, We out of the plenitude of our Apostolick power, declare Elizabeth, as being an Heretick and a favourer of Hereticks, and her Adherents, to have incurred the sentence of Excommunication, and more∣over to be deprived of her pretended right to the King∣dom, and of all Dominion, Dignity and Priviledge whatsoever, and also the Nobility, Subjects and Peo∣ple of the Kingdom, and all others, who have sworn unto her in any sort, to be absolved for ever from the said Oath, and from all duty of Dominion, Allegiance and Obedience, and by these presents we do absolve them, and deprive Elizabeth of her pretended right to the Kingdom, and of all other things before named. And we command all the Nobles, Subjects and People, that they presume not to obey her, or her Orders, Man∣dates and Laws: And those that shall do the contrary we bind with the same Anathema. We swear in the Oath of Allegiance, to bear true Allegiance to our King, and to defend him against all Conspiracies and Attempts which shall be made against his Person and Crown to the uttermost of our Power, and to do our
best endeavour to discover all treasons and traiterous Conspiracies which we shall know or hear of to be a∣gainst him. And is this an unlawful Oath? And may we break it? And can any one absolve us from it? Would you plot Treason, and attempt the Death of your present King and the ruin of his Crown? And them that do so, will you not disclose, if you know them? And we that have sworn to disclose such persons, if we can, ought we not in your judgment so to do? You see what your Pope and Council teach you, and in Mr. Fowlis's History of Romish Treasons, you may see an hundred or two hundred more Popes and Doctors of your Church which teach the same traiterous and rebellious Do∣ctrin: but I hope some of you are of a better mind. And I desire you to read again the for∣mer citations, and then with the words of St. Peter and St. Paul, that you may see how contrary to the Apostles your men teach you. For says the one Apostle thus: 1 Pet. xi.13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake: whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Gover∣nours. For so is the will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. Ho∣nour the King. And says the other Apostle, Rom. xiii.1. Let every Soul be subject to the Higher powers.
For there is no power but of God: the powers that be are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the Ordinance of God: and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. Render tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honour to whom honour. And is this plucking up, destroying, scattering and consuming? Is this absolving subjects from their Allegiance, and commanding them to take the Kingdom from their King? Is this de∣priving Kings and Temporal Lords of their Dominions? And remember that Nero, an heathen and monstrous wicked man, and a persecutor of the Christians, was at this time King of the Roman Empire. And yet says the Apostle Whosoever resisteth the power (be he Peter then, be he Pope) he shall receive to himself dam∣nation. Forbear, Bold Actors, for it is not now night, that you should play your wicked pranks among us and not be discerned. Nor are our hearts so bad (though bad enough) as to love, or favour, or comply with your gross errors, idolatrous worship, and hellish practi∣ces. You and the Devil have too much cor∣rupted us: but we are not yet corrupt enough to joyn society with you. You have not yet
bored out our eyes, that we cannot look into the Bible, nor have you yet burned those Sa∣cred Writings (and I trust never shall do either.) But if you should, yet can you not extinguish the light of our Souls, any more than you can take the Holy Spirit from us: and whilst that remains we shall abhor your ways. There are thousands in our Land that will not bow down to your Baal; so clear is their knowledg, so great their courage, so strong is their faith, so mighty their zeal for God, so upright are their hearts, so good their consciences: though some timerous and more ignorant Souls you may de∣ceive, and fright into a base compliance; but yet neither these, by all that you can do, will love your Popery. Smite us (if God please) and we shall abhor your Church the more which delights in blood and cruelty; and feeling the unrighteous plagues of your hands, we shall more sensibly know what manner of persons you are; and we will unite together (who are not yet so close and kind among our selves as we should be) with one Soul and shoulder against you. Smite us, and we will kiss the Rod from our Heavenly Father's Hand, and will keep his Laws more perfectly. Smite us, and we shall
be better. And resolved we are, do ye what you can, either tempt or kill, to serve the Lord, and to serve him better than we have done; not after your manner, with shew and pagean∣try, trifles and empty shadows, blind minds and stupid devotion, in candles, images and agnus dei's, oil, chrism and water, beads and shaven crowns: but with heart and soul, pu∣rified and inlightned, in love, peace and pati∣ence, in sobriety, justice and mercy. And then I tell you (what I know will sound strange in your ears) that you are undone, and your King∣dom's ruin'd. Go on in the imaginations of your hearts,Mat. xxiii. xxxii. &c. and fill up the measure of your Fathers, and then fall and die. For as Basil taught the Chri∣stians to say to their Persecutors, Isa. viii.9. , If you shall again prevail, you shall again be overcome. THE END.
