W3154 08792279 41837
Divine Poems (by way of Paraphrase) ON THE TEN Commandments. Illustrated with Twelve Copper Plates, shewing how Personal Punishments has been inflicted on the Transgressors of these Commandments, as is Recorded in the Holy Scripture. Never before printed. Also a Metrical Paraphrase upon the Creed and Lords Prayer. Written by George Wither Es{que} Author of Brittains Remembrancer. Psal. 119. 5. Would God my ways were so directed that I might keep thy Statutes. Licensed according to Order. LONDON Printed by T. S. And are to be sold by R. Jane∣way in Queens Head Ally in Pater Noster Row. 1688.
To all such as have formerly been Friends to the Author, his Daugh∣ter and only surviving Child De∣dicates these Meditations. IT was seldom my Fathers practice, (especially of late years,) to Dedicate his Works to particular or great Per∣sons; And did I attempt any euch thing now, I should be afraid lest I might disturb his rest in the Grave. All you therefore that had a
kindness as well for his Per∣son as his Works, I desire to accept of my good will in sending this Relique of his abroad in publick; Which though it hath been writ∣ten some considerable time, is but lately minded or come to hand. And however it happened to be bundled up with other old Writings (where I found it) yet I verily believe it was design∣ed for the Press by thos many alterations he had made, which had so blur'd the Original Copy, that I
was forced to get it Tran∣scribed before it was fit for my self or any body else to read: And having now perused it, I could not in conscience conceal such ne∣cessary Truths as are there∣in contained, in hopes that it may take the effect him∣self desires in his Epistle to the Reader exprest in his Pray∣er; believing, that that good Spirit which first dictated those Petitionary words will accompany them to the Worlds end. And then I al∣so believe, that what I have
done in making this publick will be acceptable both to God and Man, which that it may, shall ever be the Prayers of Your assured Friend in all Offices of Love and Service E. B. From my Lodgings at Mr. Snowdens a Printer, at the lower end of Great Carter-lane, the 23d of April, 1688. ADVERTISEMENT. THE Copper Plates mention∣ed in my Fathers following Epistle, in some of his removals from one Habitation to another have been lost, so that I have been forced to get new ones made.
TO THE READER. IN that great Plague, which (as I be∣lieve) was the most contagious Pesti∣lence that euer afflicted this City of Lon∣don, it pleased God to enclose me there, and to give me grace to make such observa∣tions upon his Justice and Mercy, as I hope (however others esteem of them) shall ne∣ver of me be forgotten during life. A while before this last Visitation, the same gracious God provided me a little place to escape unto, where I did but only
hear of that which my Brethren suffered, and therefore (as I may well fear) was not so sensible of their misery as I ought to have been. Yet I was not altogether without Medi∣tations as became the time, (but as the necessities wherewithal God hath yet exer∣cised me would give leave) endeavoured to employ some hours in the consideration of things pertinent to the Honour of my Pre∣server, that I might not appear less thank∣ful for this deliverance, which was without Terror, than I seemed to be for that which I obtained with fear and danger. Part of my Musings were upon the Moral Law, the neglect whereof (being the cause of all Plagues) is never impertinently thought upon, much less when the hand of God is extended to chastise us for infring∣ment of the same. And what I then medi∣tated,
is now offered unto the publick view, that it might the oftner occasion me and others to be mindful of our Duties. Neither my Estate, nor the place I lived in would afford me the use of Books, at that time, therefore instead of them I perused mine own Heart to to see what I could read there: For in the Heart of Man it was originally written. And though our corrup∣tion hath now so defaced it that we need some helps to explain the essential meaning of the Holy Text long since written in Stone; Yet if we would but be so diligent as good Antiquaries in examining defective In∣scriptions upon decayed Monuments, we might sometime find the Truth more cer∣tainly than by trusting over-confidently to the search of others, who many times deli∣ver their own Fancies instead of the right meaning of Gods Law.
Others I confess (though not many in the English Tongue) have to this purpose de∣vulged large Commentaries But some want Money to purchase them, and some want leisure to peruse them: for they are so large that many Readers had rather venture to break all the Commandments than to scan over those Tracts; and yet perhaps these brief Meditations have expressed somewhat which is not found in any of them. I profess not (as I have elsewhere said) to teach the Learned, but to be unto them a Remembrancer only of what they al∣ready know (which will otherwhile happen by this means even when they take up my Books to peruse them with contempt rather than for any better end) yet they who are as Ingenious as Learned, have entertain∣ed them with good respect as not unuse∣ful.
The same Spiritual nourishment which others have tendred more artificially dres∣sed for the publick Feasts of the Soul; I have here and elsewhere indifferently fitted for their private refreshments, who are best nourished with plain Diet, and who have heretofore wanted either opportunities or due care to come to those Repasts. And if I can but find means to relieve the Blind and Lame in understanding, till a more powerful means shall fetch them from the Hedges and High-way-sides to be Guests at the great Banquet, I shall hope to have done somewhat worth my pains. Ignorant persons may be advantaged hereby mediately or immediately; by re∣ceiving Information or occasion of Refor∣mation: yea the Composing thereof in Verse will cause many to be the more de∣lighted therewith; Some the better to re∣member it, others out of curiosity to take
notice of it, who may afterward give it more serious entertainment, and no doubt all good men will afford it a favourable censure so far as it shall deliver the Truth. So far only I desire it should be allowed, and in that desire do humbly submit the same to the Censure of Authority, and the Success to Gods blessing. Which I beseech Oh Glorious God so to manifest in this Mite vouchsafed out of the Infinite trea∣sury of thy holy Spirit, that like a grain of Mustard Seed it may be fruitful to the encrease of Piety beyond the expectati∣on answerable to so despised a means: For some in these days have perverted the plain meaning of thy Law; yea some have lately strived both by their words and works to make the same wholly void and of no use, that they seem either not to have known, or to have quite for∣gotten; That thy Truth remaineth from
one Generation to another, or That thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, in so much that we may justly repeat unto thee this complaint of thy Prophet David; Lord it is time for thee to lay to thine hand, for they have destroyed thy Law. Hear my prayer O Lord, and though I am small, and of no reputa∣tion, yet since I would not forget thy Law, deliver me from mine Oppressors, and so teach me thy Statutes, that I may keep them unto the end; yea though the proud have me in derision, and almost made an end of me upon Earth, yet let my heart be made so upright in thy Statutes, that I may not be ashmed to remember thy promise made to thy Servant, even that where∣in thou hast caused me to trust; Let it quicken me, and be my comfort in my troubles. For thou art all my por∣tion, and I have determined to keep
thy word; Before I was afflicted I went so much astray that it was good for me to have some troubles. O let me hereafter be always exercised in thy Law; Let it be a Lanthorn unto my feet, and a Light unto my path. Look upon me, and be merciful unto me as thou usest to be unto those who love thy name. Let the proud be ashamed that they have dealt falsly with me. Let such as fear thee be turned unto me, and comfort thou me according to the years wherein I have been afflict∣ed, that they who see it may glorifie thy name, for mine eyes have almost failed with waiting for thy assurance. Though I have gone astray like a Sheep, yet seek thy Servant, and deal with me according to thy mercy. Let all these my Supplications come before thee, that my Soul may live, that my Lips may praise thee, and that my
Tongue may sing of thy Goodness and Mercy for ever and ever, Amen. Sir, among other kindnesses vouchsafed in your Neighbourhood, I received from you the Copper Plates, which are now made use of in this Book. The words which I have added unto those dumb Figures will make them (I hope) much more profitable, and cause them to be a means of publishing those Caveats and Universal Duties which are pertinent, as well to the General well-being of Man∣kind, as to the Glory of God; which two things were the proper ends of our Crea∣tion, and ought also to be the chief care of our life. To those ends therefore, and that your cost might not be unprofitably bestowed, I have returned the Coppies of those Fi∣gures which you gave me, illustrated with
such Meditations as my leisure and abi∣lity could afford. And they do now as well speak as make signs what is prepared for wilful Transgressors of these Laws, whereby if God may receive any honour, or his Children profit, I desire it may be some honour and advantage, which is the desire of Your Hearty and Well∣wishing Friend GEO. WITHER.
The Decalogue. And these wordes which I Command th this day shalbe in thine heart. And thou shall rehearse them Con∣tinually unto thy children and sha¦lt talke of them when thou in thine house and as thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest downe & when thou risest up. And thou shalt binde them for a signe vpon they Shalbe as  thine eies Also thou shalt wri¦te them vpon the postes of thine house and vpon thy gate 6 Deut: 6.7-8.9. I THOV SHALT HA¦VE NONE OTHER GODS BVT ME II THOV SHALT NOT MAKE TO THY SELFE ANY GRAVEN YMAGE III THOV SHALT NOT TA¦KE Ye NAME OF Ye LORD THY GOD IN VAINE IIII REMEMBER THAT THOV KEEP HOLY Ye SABBOTH DAY V HONOR THY FATHER AND THY MOTHER VI THOV SHALT DO NO MVRDER VII THOV SHALT NOT COMMIT ADVLTERIE VIII THOV SHALT NOT STEALE IX THOV SHALT NOT BE¦ARE FALSE WITNESSE X THOV SHALT NOT COVET Beholde I see before you this day a blessing and a Curse; The blessing if ye Obey the Comaundements of the Lord your GOD which I Cōmand you this day.And the Curse if ye wil not obey y• Commandements of ye Lord your GOD but tne Out of the way wh¦ich I Command you this day to go after other gods which ye haue not known. Deut 26 27 28 Optimum t aliena frui insania Happy shall that man become, Who this Law departs not from: Blessings will descend on him, From the Mount of Gerizim; But from Ebal they shall hear Curses, who rebellious are. Death, for them, attending stands, Who shall break these just Commands; And to those who them obey, God proposeth life for aye.
THE Prologue Let All these following Lessons learn, For all Mankind these Laws concern. ALL you who Sons by Grace or Nature be, Give ear to what my Muses preach to me; For, what I now do purpose to declare, No less, than Universal Statutes are, Which every Child of Adam (here beneath) Must keep in person, on the pain of Death, Or, by a faithful Penitence procure An able Pledge, to pay his Forfeiture. You, who by Nature, had the means to know What Duties, Creatures to their Maker owe; Read here, what by God's Finger once was writ Within your hearts; that you may practise it. And having lost that Light which Nature gave, Take what you may by Grace's tender have. On fleshly Tables once again renew The fair impression which at first he drew:
For, 'twas your Sin which thence Gods Law did blot And, Ignorance therefore excuseth not. You, whom the special grace of our Creator Brought by his power Almighty thro' the Water Of sound Baptism, (and, within the Flood Of his dear Sons most pure and pretious Blood; Drown'd all that Hoast of Sins, which our Grand Foe Had mustred, for our final overthrow:) Observe you also, this renowned Law, To keep it, with a loving filial awe, Lest (though you scap'd enraged Pharoh's Hoast) Your entrance to the promis'd Rest be crost: And lest your following what your Lust deviz'd You, in your lawless wandrings be surpriz'd By those (yet living Tyrants) who possess The passages, of this Lifes Wilderness. For, though in Act we cannot keep entire So strict a Law, we may in our desire; And where Desire is not perverted quite, We have a ready means to set it right. If any say or think this Obligation Pertaineth only to the Jewish Nation; They are deceiv'd; for if they well compare These Precepts, to those Laws which written are Within our hearts, it will be out of doubt That, these, are but the same transcribed out. In Stone, they were engraven long ago Lest all the World should quite forgetful grow
Of these their Duties. To the Jews God gave them To be preserv'd from loss: From them we have them Distinguish'd by two Tables to be known, From Laws, that were peculiars of their own: And though some literal circumstance be found Appearing to oblige beyond the Bound Of Legal Ceremonies, which to some A means of stumbling and offence become; Yet they, that meekly minded are, shall see The Essence whole, and so distinct to be From what is meerly Jewish; that no Doubt Shall give the weaker conscience thereabout; For that which is essential may be 'spide From what should only for a time abide As evidently as our bodies are Discerned from the ground which once we were. It is the Abstract of the Law of Nature; And that which every Reasonable Creature Which hath a Body, must submit unto, With Incorporials, we have nought to do: Nor us, to search concerns it any way What Law they are obliged to obey. Salvation comes not by this Law indeed, Yet knowledge of our Sin, and that we need, A Saviour for it, by this Law is taught; Till which be known, no safety can be wrought. Tis true, we can keep it, yet it may Keep us, from running quite out of the way;
Or, keep us humble, That the works of Grace, May in our hearts, the better take their place. It maketh no man pure; Yet 'tis a Glass By which the fairest of old Adams race May view themselves deform'd, and also see In what defects they should repaired be. It makes not streight; and yet it may supply A helpful means, our selves to rectify. It gives not sight; but they that see may find It yieldeth light to those who grow not blind, By wilful faults; and Stubbornly contemn Those Beams of Grace, which might enlighten them. It gives not strength to go, (we must confess) But, yet, it shews a way to happiness; And, they who can but love it, when they know it, Shall either be vouchsafed strength to go it. By mediate help, or by immediate Grace, Exalted be to their desired place. It cannot merit Love, But it may shew, Whether, or no, our Love be false or true. Though 'tis not life; It is the death of Sin, Whereby the life of grace doth first begin To shew that living Faith, wherein consists The truth of their profession who are Christ's; And they are not suspected without cause, False Christians, who conform not to these Laws. It is a needful Tutor, though it stand With looks still frowning, and with Rod in hand
'Tis truly Good though Ill thereby we know, And oft befriends us, though it seem a Foe. It all condemns not, though it puts in fear, It brings to Christ; and then it leaves us there. In brief, this Law shall ever be in force, Though from Believers God remove the Curse. It shall in Essence never fail a jot, (Although some Accidents continue not) And therefore, they whose Faith shall them prefer, Observe it as a good REMEMBRANCER. To these for comfort and encouragement, The promise which attends it we present With all the circumstances, which may give Assurances, of what they well believe; Without those Plagues or Terrors which we find Presented to correct a slavish mind, For they that love their Founder need no bands But love to keep them true to these commands. Love is the Laws fulfilling, 'tis that end To which both Laws and all good Actions tend: And he that Loves, unto himself is made A Law, whereto we nothing need to add. Before the rest, our Muse, to fright them sets The Tipes of punishments, and horrid Threats: If either, may bring home the Soul that errs, God's be the praise, the Comfort of it theirs. And let me share the prayers and the bliss Of those that shall pe profited by this. Amen.
Commandment I. I Thou shalt have none other Gods but me &c. Pharoh, by great wonders wrought To acknowledge God was brought, And had Reasons light to see Who, his only God should be. Had he well that Guift employ'd, Special Grace, had been enjoy'd; But, no use thereof he made, And so, lost the gift he had; Stubborn too, the Fool did grow, And ran headlong to his woe.
Command. I. Serve but one God, and let him be That God who made and ransom'd thee. TO such as love, our God of Love makes known A Duty, and a benefit, bestown; That they might know the object of their Creed, And, in the way of Righteousness proceed. For, by the Preface (of what follows here) A freedom from a Bondage doth appear. And by the Substance of this great Command, A Duty we may likewise understand. To them whom no kind usage may perswade From sinful Paths (till they afraid are made) We here exhibit Pharoh, as a chief Of those, who suffered for an Unbelief Join with contempt of God; that, such from thence Might moved be to faithful penitence, To them that shall with Reverence and fear Receive the holy precept which they hear, We shew with love and mercy how they may Observe the Streight, and Shun the crooked way.
There is one God alone; That God is he By whom we formed and reformed be, And they who serve another, or deny His Attributes, commit impiety. This God, (that's God indeed) though he might say, My will and pleasure is, you shall obey Me only as your Lord, (and unto us No reason render, why it should be thus) Proceeds not so; but hath declared why We should accept him for our Deity, And peradventure this vouchsafed he To teach them knowledge who his Viccars be; And shew to us (by being meek and kind) How from false Gods the true one we may find. For to be God is to be good, and so In Goodness infinite, to overflow, That all may tast thereof (excepting none) Such is my God, and he is God alone. The Egyptian Bondage, tipified all The Race of Adam, in their native Thrall, And as their temporal Saviour, Moses than, Left not behind one hoof, much less a man, Inslav'd to Pharoh, so the blessed Son Of this Great God hath ransom'd every one From that sad house of Bondage and of pain Where we, without Redemption else had lain. For which great favour, he from us doth crave, That we no other God, but him should have.
And that we love him with a Reverent awe, Which is the whole fulfilling of this Law This Gracious God, by many is rejected, And as they understand, or stand affected, They take, or make up New ones of such things As almost to contempt, the Godhead brings. He of himself would make some Deity Who his own power so much doth magnify, As if by that he thought to gain access To present and to future happiness. He makes the World his God who thinketh fit To love, to follow, serve, and honour it; As many do, and they who much incline To love this God, are enemies to mine. He makes his Lust a God who doth fulfil In every thing his own unbridled Will: This Tyrant many serve; Yea this is He Who makes them Bondslaves, whom God setteth free. He makes the worst men Gods who doth obey Their Pleasures, in an unapproved way, Or their imperious threatning so much feareth As think it from his Duty him deterreth. He makes the Devil, God; who doth believe, By evil means good blessings to receive; Which very many (very often) doe Whose words deny him, and defie him too. But some of us not only Guilty stand Of being breakers of this first Command,
By serving Gods beside; (and more than) him, Who from Death, Sin and Hell, did us redeem. But, either we neglect him also quite, Or, practise works to him so opposite, That into worse impieties we fall Than such, as yet, confess no God at all. For, by distrust, self-love, backsliding fear, Inconstancy, Presumption, fruitless Care, Impatience, Grudging, Frowardness or Pride, With other such; our God we have deny'd More oft than once, and oftner fear we shall Into this error through our frailty fall. This Law, (in some degree) is also broke, Unless we, to our powers, due care have took To Shun each cause of breaking it; The Chief Is Ignorance, (the ground of misbelief.) The next, is to be oft, and willingly Among Professors of Idolatry. The Third is Servile fear, which many ways The Heart unto Idolatry betrays. The last (not least) is when the sway we give To any Lust or Sin: For (thus believe) Such men, to gain the full of their delight, Will change their God, or leave Religion quite. Yea, they who hate at first so gross a Sin, Are by the Devil this way hooked in. This Meditation here had found an end But that there are, some others who offend
Against this Law, in such a high Degree As that they must not quite unmention'd be. The truest God, confessed is by them Their only God: They serve and honour him In outward shew; and if believe we may, What they themselves have pleased been to say, They love him too; But either they mistake him, Or, by their own Invention, so new Make him, That though they speak him, by a gracious Name, The goodness of his nature, they defame By making him the Authour to have bin And cause original of every Sin: For in affirming that the fall of Man, And Sin, and Death from Gods meer will began, They say no less, although they praise him much For being good to them, and some few such. To say of these I am no whit afraid, As of old Idol-Makers, hath been said, Their God and they are like, for on their Will They ground their practices (which must be still Supposed Just) and some, perchance, of them Would be as cruel as they fancy him But that their Finite Natures cannot reach The Tyranies which they of him do preach. Let us of such impieties beware, What we conceive of God let us have care, And not (with foolish Hereticks) suppose By teaching common truths, and making shows
Of holy piety to keep Gods eye From seeing when we wrong his Majesty. For, if he be displeas'd with such as make Good Creatures of his Godhead, to partake, How much more cause have they his wrath to fear, Who make him worse than his worst Creatures are? And that prime Attribute have overthrown, By which, he chiefly to be God is known? For, none are bound to serve him (by this Law) But such as he did out of bondage draw. For if he drew not all, then some there be Who, though they have a God, ours is not he, At least in such a manner as may give These Unbelievers courage to believe. Their God they say did some unhappy make To shew his power; and for his Glorys sake; My God is he, who pittied their Estates, Whom these do fancy hopeless Reprobates An Issue leaving out of that temptation, In which they lying to their Just damnation, And for the day of wrath no sinners made But such as do abuse the Grace they had. Their God is he, who forc'd mankind to fall And mine is he, who did Redeem us all. My sweet Redeemer, so my heart incline, That, I may always keep this Law of thine Amen.
Commandment II. Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any Graven image &c. Superstition here is free If her Idols rais'd may be; And with Zeal the same pursues If will worship she may use. When, she should obey or hear Sacrifice, she doth prepare. Such Religion to profess Is but irreligeousness: And for that presumptions vain, Many Israelites were slain.
Command. II. Let every Hand and Heart refrain An Image of our God, to fain. THree thousand suffered by their brethrens hand, For offering violence to this Command; And for committing of the same offence, The Sword hath been in action, ever since, (Some where or other) to the devastation Of many a powerful and renowned Nation. For to adore one Godhead, and no moe, Save him, to whom such Duty all men owe, Sufficeth not, unless our adoration Be such as may obtain his approbation. A forged worship meriteth a Rod As truly as a falsified God; And such as do their own Religion frame, Serve but their Fancies; though God bear the name. When humane wit, had fool'd away the notion Of Gods true Being, and of true Devotion, She calling to remembrance that each Creature Had in it some impression of his nature,
Did blindly seek him, by that couz'ning light, And lost at last the knowledge of him quite. For, some did make him Figures like their own; Some like to beasts, and some like forms unknown: Then by degrees the Devil screwed in To seem a God, and made the foulest Sin, Thought pious worship: For, though vile it be To picture him whose form we cannot see, And to ascribe to him imperfect features Who gave their bodies to the fairest Creatures; And in whose Essence all perfections are, Yet in their wickedness they staid not there, By wicked Ceremonies they invited The world to think the Godhead was delighted With hellish actions for their living seed, In horrid wise to death did often bleed As acceptable offerings murtherous hands Were thought the Actors of his just Commands. And drunken Riots with lascivious Games Seem'd holy Duties and had holy Names. Nor did the Gentiles only thus misdo But many Jews, and many Christians too, The self same sins in Essence did commit, Though with new Vizzards they had covered it. For how much better are their Festivals Then Bacchanalian Riots, in whose Halls And Parlours are assembled (in the stead Of those poor Souls, whom Charity should feed)
A Rout of Roaring Ruffins, who are there For nothing but to drink, or game and swear? Except it be that they might soon undo Those fools which do abuse Gods bounty so? Mens follies make them frequently to err, And, then, they Vice for Vertue do prefer. Their Superstition, makes them think amiss Of God; And then their service of him, is Accordingly devis'd: they favour not That worship, which their wit hath not begot. They fear him Tyrant-like, and dream that he Is pleas'd with such like works as Tyrants be. For Carnal wisdom, cannot be content, Unless it may be suffered to invent, The Scoenes, which make her Stage Religion seem To Superarrogate in her esteem. Some, tho' they Scoff Idolatry, are hardly brought To serve a God of whom they have not thought. A circumscribed Form, to which, they may Address themselves, in that corporeal way, Which they affect and therefore up they rear Such Calves, as to their Fancies do appear: Yea sometime such Ideas they devise, As Piety would hate, and wit despise. Some others are too homely, and too bold Another way, and no man layeth hold Upon the Truth, who thinks to seize thereon, By searching for it, in himself alone.
These Sins against this Precept justly blam'd As thereto accessary have been nam'd, In what we mused, on the Law before To which are added here, three other more, Vain Curiosity, blind Superstition, Prophaneness, and a changeable Condition. By these we are perverted, yea, by these Our God is formed as our fancies please; Sometime (like those of whom the Psalmist speaks) The God which to it self mans Fancy makes; Is either blind or careless. God, (says one) Beholdeth not those evils that are done, Tush, God regardeth not, another says, The folly or perverseness of our waies. Some others make unto themselves, a God So mild, as if he never us'd a Rod. And, some again do fancy him to be So cruel; that their God appears to me To be that Saturn, now set up again, Who (as the ancient heathen Poets fain) Devour'd his Children; And they fain him, for That which the God-like nature doth abhor. These Evils to prevent; This Law divine The wandring humane Fancy doth confine All men in Sacred worshipings restraining As well, from Intellectual Objects faining, As from Corporeal forms: And him God threats Who due performance of this Law forgets.
For God himself who knoweth best how far By representments, it convenient were, To shadow forth his nature, did devize As many and as few as might suffize. God knew, that if mans frailty might not see Some objects, whereupon might fixed be His weak Devotion, he would either make Vain Fictions, or Devotion, quite forsake. It therefore, pleas'd, his goodness to prepare Those objects for the Jews, which fitting were For them, such was the Serpent made of brass Till by Idolators abus'd it was. Such were their Temple and the Mercy Seat On which or towards which their eyes were set, In their Devotion; that the wandring sence There being fixed, Faith might raise from thence The safer flight, and that Religion may A body have, wherein her Soul may stay, For, doubtless that Religion is untrue, Which hath no outward shape for men to view. As for the Jews: Our weakness, tendring too God, hath vouchsaft the like, for us to do. He hath advanc'd for us to look upon The Image of his Crucified Son, And limb'd him in his word with such dimensions As may, and should employ our Apprehensions, Without all vain additions of our own, Until, the Essence of it, may be known.
Nor of our selves nor to our selves was made This Image; But, the same, from God we had. He set it up, for us to fall before it; To contemplate; to honour; to adore it. This Image he that faithfully shall view, Thereby, that long left Image may renew, Wherein Mankind was framed by God's hand, And in that likeness we shall ever stand. Still praised be that Image, which hath power To perfect such Imperfectness as our: And let all those who shall the same despise Be guilty of the worst Idolatries. Oh Christ so perfect my renewed will That I this holy precept may fulfil. Amen.
Commandment III. Thou shalt not take ye name of ye Lord thy God in vaine &c III Curses, Blasphemies, and Oaths, Some, can vary as their Cloaths; And, the Ruffin, now, begins To seek fashionable sins, No more fearing to blaspheme, Than to take a praiseful Theme; But the Sin they count so small, Doth aloud for vengeance call: And, in Figure here we view What for this offence was due.
Command. III. If thou wilt free be kept from blame; Take not in vain, GOD's holy NAME. TO fright Blasphemers, we present them with An Emblem, of the Son of Shelomith: (Who worthily, condemned was to dye, And, Stoned for his daring Blasphemy:) For, 'tis a Crime now ripened in excess, Though branded with a horrid Guiltiness: And of this Blott, (who ever standeth free) All these that follow deeply Guilty be. The Common Swearer: For, his impious tongue Not only to the Godhead, offers wrong; But, (to his power) he sometime rends and tears Christ's holy Body, when he vainly swears. He that affecteth cursings groweth foul, By what this Law forbids, For; on the Soul Which loves to Curse, these plagues are often brought Which to befall another, are besought. They are not in a mean degree to blame, Who shall prophane the great Almighty's name
Through Levity, as when him name they shall, For trifling Causes; or, no cause at all. He, that with Oaths, protests in matters vain; Or, swearers for Truths, what he himself doth fain; Or, tells for certain, an uncertain thing; Or, vows to God, what he neglects to bring; Or, maketh vows of what are not allowed: Things lawful; or, things comely to be vowed: Even he who ere he be that shall transgress These ways, is tainted with a guiltiness. For, all these ways, Gods name is vainly used; And such offences cannot be excused. To these we add our Scevites, who presume The power of Exorcisms to assume, And work by Conjurations of such kind, As may no lawful approbation find, And much from these, those Cheaters differ not, Who by confederacy the name have got, Of eunning men or women, and pretend, To know black Arts and Practice, to defend Our bodies, or to keep our goods from harms, By wicked Spels; prophaning in the Charms, The names of God, or portions of his Writ; For, in such Actions they dishonour it. Nor is he better who delights to make, Gods Truth a Theam for vain discourses sake, Or, thence extracteth Jests; or, reads, or hears His Word, with heedless Eyes, with careless Ears,
Or unprepared Heart. Nor, are they less Prophane; who to conceal their wickedness, Or, meerly to be deemed men devout: Still at their Girdles bear, Gods Book about, Or, Study holy Scriptures to devise: A Cloak for Sins; and proofs for Heresies, Or, truths pervert their falshoods to maintain, For, all of these assume Gods Name in vain. They of the like offence partakers are, Who (as they term it) make a Holy War For Christ; And in his name do that pretend, Which is for some concealed wicked end. All they who pray for these, (by name of such, Do fight Gods Battles) do offend as much If they shall know it; For, accursed is Such bold and bloody policy as this. He that plots Treason, or invents a Lie, The Cause of God or Truth to justifie; Doth Stray as wide: For, to assist his Foes, These in Gods Name; within his Ensign goes. Moreover they are guilty of this Crime Who in undecent manner or ill time Reprove, or threat, or comfort, or apply Gods promises, or Judgments, or deny, Their needful application in Gods Name, When time, and place for them require the same. For, of the Service, careless they appear, Pertaining unto him, whose name they bear.
He breaks this Law who runs ere he besent, And in Gods name speaks what God never meant, He that from Holy Orders, goeth back, And by his Idleness becometh slack In Duties of his Calling; or (grown rich, By Church promotions) thinks it overmuch, To execute that Function as he ought, To which with wealth and honour he is brought, Even he, what fair excuse so ere he make, Is justly said Gods name in vain to take. For, if he proveth guiltless, he receiv'd A dispensation, more than I believ'd. A Prayer without Faith; a formal mention Of Gods due praise, without a due intention. Yea, vain or complemental Salutations, Without Sincerity are prophanations Against this Law, though many men have thought, That these are signs of persons better taught. Dissembling Fasts; Thanksgivings mumbled out, With babling Repititions, (and devout,) In nought but feigned Term or length of Time, Do make men guilty, likewise, of this Crime; Nay many Sermons of the vulgar strain, Are taking of the Name of God in vain. He that his Church or Chappel hath bedeckt, And yet Gods living Temples doth neglect. He, that a love to those, doth seem to carry, Yet, leaves defac'd his outward Sanctuary;
He that to bend his body is asham'd, When he shall here his blessed Saviour nam'd. He that without an inward Adoration, Bows outwardly, or, with an Affectation, To mimick Gestures; or, performs the same, Unto the vocal sounding of the Name, Or either practiseth, or leaves undone, Such Duties in Contempt of any one: Even He (though to be guiltless he pretends,) Against this Third Commandement offends. But none this holy precept more have broke Than they, who on themselves Christs name have took; Yet live like Infidels, excepting those, Who guild Hypocrisy with Godly shows, And under pious habits use to prey, On those, (who being more sincere than they) Are threatned, and suppose all well bestown, While these will take; till nothing is their own. God keep his Lambs from these as from the worst Of all Dissembers, and the most accurst. The Faults condemn'd, seem nothing to have bin To this abhorred Hell begotten Sin, Are Drunken Jollities, vnbridled passion, A wicked Custom, Slight consideration, And evil Narture (but much blame is cast, On Tutors and some Parents for the last,) All these must therefore shunned be by him, That would not Swear, For-swear, Curse nor Blas∣pheme.
This must be likewise heeded, that unless We still (on all occasions) do confess, The Name of God; and Sanctifie it too, By such good Duties, as we ought to do: (As in Relieving those who in his Name,) Shall ask (without abusing of the same,) In swearing by it, when just cause requires, In suffering for it, (though by Sword and Fires) When God may be dishonour'd, by a base Forsaking of our Faith, or of our Place. Yea, if we be not ready to our might, In all Gods Attributes to do him right; And honour him, in Deed, in Word, and Thought, In what we can, (although not as we ought) We faulter in our Duty; and 'tis plain, We do profess to bear Gods name in vain. "My Heart LORD GOD so settle in thy way "That I this Law, may never disobey. Amen.
Commandment IV. IIII. Remember that thou keep holy ye Sabbath day &c. 'Tis not in the Common Creed That he gather'd Sticks for need, Who for Sabbath breaking dy'd, For all wants were so supply'd, That it seems he did transgress, By Contempt, or Carelessness. He commits the same offence, 'Gainst this Precepts moral sence, Who the Christian Sabbaths wrongs, And a Plague to him belongs.
Command. IV. To hallow, do not thou forget Those times, which God apart hath set. YOu that our Christian Sabbath do despise, Behold this Figure with regardful eyes: For, though on us this Precept doth not lay The Ceremonial service of the day; Or, to a Jewish Sabbath, us confine; It n'retheless, a Duty doth enjoin, Which no man living can be freed from Till to the general Judgment Christ shall come. For, Nature urges, that convenient Rest, Should be allowed both to Man and Beast, Lest their corporeal substance should miscarry Before the time; And 'tis as necessary, The Soul should have some leisure to attend His will, on whom her being doth depend. Freemen, may rest their bodies when they please, And Wise men, know how for to take their ease: But, lab'ring Beasts, and Men who are depraved, Or, they whom wants, or Tyrants have enslaved,
Had restless lived, till their life time ended, Unless this holy Law had them befriended; And they who to the flesh most favour show For Soul affairs, but little time allow. This God at first foresaw, and for that cause (Though in Mans heart he then ingrav'd his Laws Essential, and long oblig'd him not To such additions as time since begot) Yet when he found that error and transgression Had wholly rased out the first impression; To stop Corruptions Growth, he afterward To Rites, to times, and places had regard. All men at first had liberty to take What daies they pleased holydaies to make; Or, for convenient Rest. Nor did from all This freedom cease when God the Jews did call To keep their Sabbaths; For, to one set day No Nation were oblig'd save only they; Nor, had the Gentiles any other ties Save to observe it in a moral wise, So far as might preserve unto the Creature The freedom and well being of its nature. A Law concerning Rest and holy Dues Confin'd indeed the people of the Jews To one set day, even one set day in seven, To them were Ceremonies also given Concerning it; which no man might transgress (Save in great need) without much guiltiness
That Law, which nature simply had received At our first being was to them derived With such like Accidents as might be best To keep them firm, and bring in all the rest In Gods appointed season to embrace The Law of Nature in the Law of Grace. Their Customs and their Ceremonial day With Christ was buried and so swept away. When he arose from death, that to renew And celebrate the Sabbath of the Jew, We are no more obliged than to rear Their Temple, and to build their Altar here, And yet, lest man's corruption and the lack Of Accidents, might bring the Substance back. Even to the first neglect, Christ dist instate His Church with power to change or abrogate The Circumstances of this Law, so far As needful seem'd, Provided that it were Essentially preserved, and in this She hath performed what required is. For, though the time be changed, it retains The same proportion; It for use remains The same in Essence, and that being so The same obedience, is now due thereto, And, to what Circumstance the Church thinks fit, To help continue the right use of it. Now therefore, though that every day be free For works which truly necessary be;
And, though those Worshipers which are sincere May worship any day or any where, Yet none can without guiltiness despise The Places, Rites or Times, of Sacrifice Appointed by the Church, while they accord What may be authorized by the word. This Law is therefore broke when we despise The Fastings, Feastings, or Solemnities The Church appoints, or if we shall deny Such daies to honour and to sanctify By rest from Common Labours, whensoere We may without much damage, them forbear; Or, if we vilify those Christian Rites Whereto the publick discipline invites, Or, them perform not on their proper day As often as conveniently we may. This Law is broke, if to our lab'ring Beast, Or, Servant, we allow not so much rest As nature shall require, and may conduce To keep them able for our lawful use. Or, if we shun not all occasious too Whereby we may against this Law misdo. And they are these; A hardned heart, a mind Prophane, and unto Greediness inclin'd, A false belief; false liberty; false knowledge, Frequenting of the Company and Colledge. Off false believers; (From whom self will pride And Superstition no man can divide.
Let no man then that lawless freedom take Which may occasion strife or scandals make, By needless Labours, nor mis-censure them Who take some liberties which they condemn, In things indifferent, and shall not move In such gainst which their Governors approve; And in their manners let them peaceful be, Though they in their opinions disagree. Let not those times the Church hath set apart To rest the body, to instruct the heart, And to preserve a due Commemoration Of every blessed means of our Salvation, Be judged vain, or, that they do not draw Authority sufficient for this Law: But let them know for Truth, though not for news, That all the Feasts and Sabbaths of the Jews Were but the Types of ours; and that if they Shall for the Shades the Substance cast away, They are unwise; and guilty of offence Against this Precept in the moral sense. Let those who for the bodies ease and pleasure Part of this time allow; preserve the measure That's justly due, and in due manner too Do that which is allowable to do: Not for the Soul's well being caring less Than to prevent the Bodies weariness. Let them who of the Soul most heedful seem, Remember, still, the Body to esteem.
A Portion of that Manhood, for whose sake Our Sabbath-maker did all Sabbaths make, And give it so much liberty as may Make pleasant all the Duties of the day. And since no private Spirit can impose A Rule for all; let all be rul'd by those Who by a publick Spirit come to learn What may a publick body best concern. Or, if among us any one shall deem There is a truer way made known to him; So let him walk that he himself approve To be in all his waies a Child of Love. For sure I am, that if the common peace He keep until humility increase, True knowledge in him he, then plain will see Who best expounds this Law the Church or He. Come Holy Ghost, so sanctify my heart, That from this Law I never may depart. Amen.
Commandment V. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, &c He that sought his Fathers death Sonless, yielded up his breath. He, that would his Prince have slain, Had his pardon sent in vain, For although the King for gave, Justice urg'd her due to have, That Rebellious Children may Learn this precept to obey, And the Subject stand in awe How he Sins against this Law.
Command. V. On them all honours due, bestow, Who, by the Name of Parents go. WHat of Rebelling Subjects will become, And graceless Children view in Absolom: For, whose Offence the Earth did (as it were) Refusal make his Bodies weight to bear, And Heav'n rejects it; that they might present Him hanging for a dreadful Monument Through Ages all, to warn and keep in awe The sleighters and Infringers of this Law. This foremost Precept of the second Table Unto the first, in this is answerable They both enjoyn and Honour where 'tis due, Their differences are these which do ensue: Here blessing follows; there it went before One Parent, that concern'd; This, many more. He that shall break this Precept, maketh snares Wherein to hang himself at unawares, And overthrows (as much as in him lies) All Common-weals, and all Societes;
Yet, some affect it not, but loudly cry For times which may erect a Parity. And, some who dream they keep it, are to blame By being ignorant how far the Name Of Parent reacheth, which we briefly show, That they might better do and better know. We from the Parents of our bodies have A natural being; and they justly crave To be obey'd in all things, but in those Which either may Superior powers oppose, Or, to some Being hurries us, that shall Be worse, than to have never been at all. Beside these Parents, we to many moe A Duty, by this Obligation owe. The Fathers of our Country, by this Law First claimeth of us, Honour, Love and Awe, And from himself, the same Prerogatives To his Inferiour Magistrates derives. There is a Fatherhood in those that be Our Elders, and our Betters in degree. Our Masters also, may have warrant here, To challenge from us, Reverence and Fear. And Husbands also may infer from hence Good proof of right to their preheminence; And if a witness wanted thereunto, My Wife I know would say the same I do. And that, I give God thanks for as a blessing, That is not founnd in every mans possessing.
Our Ghostly Fathers by whose careful pain We are anew begot, and born again; (Ev'n to a life more excellent than that, Whereto our fleshly Fathers us begat) Have Honours due, no less than those to whom, We Sons and Daughters in the Flesh become, Yea and our Fathers in some sort they be, Who, from Thrall, Wants, and Death, hath set us free. All these from us an Honour may command, According to the place wherein they stand; To some of them we do not owe alone, That Honour which may outwardly be done, Or, that unfain'd respect, which doth accord, With bare Obedience. But we must afford All helps, whereby we also, may prevent The Want, the Shame, the Harm, or Discontent, Which may befall them, we should meekly bear Their words and blows, ev'n when unjust they are; We should not pleasure take in any thought, With which dishonour may to them be brought. Though they should curse us, we must always bless, Defend their lives and hide their nakedness, We should not hear them wrong'd: nor should our tongue To all men tell it, when they do us wrong, But pray and strive, that blameless we might prove, How crookedly so 'ere they please to move. For he alone who thus obey them shall, Hath an Obedience Evangelical.
Among those many who these Laws do break, And pass unheeded any breach to make, On this Command, who greatly are to blame, In being disobedient to the same, The first and worst are that ill tutor'd sect, Who Magistrates, and Rulers contradict, They who at all Superiors madly strike, And fain would have us honour'd all alike, Are deeply guilty, and this just command, They frustrate make; if ought I understand. The other sort, doth Government forsake, Of whom God pleas'd this gracious Law to make, Do sometime also grievously transgress, Against this Law when they by wilfulness, By Pride, or Cruelty, provoke or stir, Those to rebel, who Sons or Vassals are. For, he that wilfully gives cause of ill, Shares equal Guilt with him that acts it still. By sinning he brings others to be naught, Then suffers by them, for the Sin he taught. For they who Tyrannous Commands do lay, Shall find their Servants treacherously obey. The Crimes forbidden here as having bin, Occasions of a more immediate Sin, Against this Law; are Envy, Self-conceit, Licentiousness (which thinketh over streight, All tyes of Government.) Forgetfulness, Of those Commodities which we possess.
By them who Rule us likewise we may add, Ingratitude; Ill habits sooner had, Than lost) Gross Rudeness; and the Vice, Whence most Sins flow insatiate Avarice. I now remember that I named not Some other Parents overmuch forgot. We have a Heavenly Father unto whom, His Children should more dutiful become Than yet they be. But, what to him we owe, The former Table of these Laws doth show. We have a Mother too, which (more our Sin) Hath in this Age 'ore much neglected bin, Nay worse; (I would it were untruly said) She hath dishonour'd been and disobey'd, More like a cruel Step-dame than like her, Within whose blessed Womb conceiv'd we were. I mean the holy Church the Spouze of Christ, For we her wholsome Discipline resist, Her comely Ceremonies we despise, Her Government we often Scandalize, We slight her Blessings, we her Counsels hate, We of her Ornaments and her Estate Dispoil her; her best Children we betray, And when she would embrace we run away, In all which things we disobey this Law, And vengeance both on Soul and Body draw: God grant this wickedness we may repent, Before he change into a Punishment,
The Blessing promis'd: For he from the Land, Will root the breakers of this great Command, That men may know the danger to contemn, A good Condition; when 'tis off'red them. Some are already gone: And though few see, Or will confess) that they afflicted be For this offence: yea though few think that they, Were rooted out, because they went away By their own choice: Yet God to them hath shew'd Their error by some Plagues which have ensu'd; Since their departure, that they might perceive, How frowardly they did their Mother leave; And that the truly penitent might there, Enjoy the Blessing they did forfeit here. God open so their eyes in their distress, And so instruct them in that Wilderness, To which they run, that (though like Sarahs Maid, They fly from her with whom they should have staid They may divert our heavy Condemnation, And leave a blessing to this Generation. Lord Grant thou this, and that those may not shame Their Brethren who departed without blame, To civilize the Lands which know not yet, Their blindness, nor what Sins they do commit. And gracious God, preserve a Heart in me, Which to this Law may still obedient be. Amen.
Commandment VI. VI Thou shalt do no murder. &c. Murther leaves a bloody stain, Which unpurged will remain, Till a Flood of Tears it cost, Or till blood for blood be lost. Nor old age, nor length of time Cleared Joab of this Crime, Nor his Power, though great it was, Nor a priviledged place Could his head from vengeance hide, But for this Offence he dy'd.
Command. VI. Thy Makers Image do not spill, Where God commands thee not to kill. NOne had been safe, unless the bloody sin Forbidden here, had both restrained been, And still pursued (mischiefs to prevent) With open and with secret punishment. Therefore Almighty God (who hath decreed That he who sheds his Brothers blood, shall bleed) Attends it still with vengeance: and the Sword (According to the dreadful sounding word Pronounc'd long since to David) shall not leave Him or his house who doth of life bereave A guiltless man; till for that crying guilt, Some Blood of his untimely shall be spilt. For though like him, whom here we represent Men, may by greatness, keep off punishment, Till they are old, it will their heels pursue, And give them at the last their bloody due; For I have rarely heeded one in ten, Of those rash-headed, and fool-hardy men,
Who (as they fondly term it) fairly kill; But, they or theirs, have either suffered still, Deaths violent; or died in their prime, Or, Issueless; for this Blood-spilling Crime. Yea, and for ought is known, the self-same Doom On those who yet escape, e're long may come. And if the fair done Murthers have these Fates, How shall he scape that foul ones perpetrates! Of this offence, let all men conscience make For their own weal, or for their Childrens sake Whom they beget: For in the same degree Wherein they murther, it repaid shall be, On their own persons, or on some of those By whom her due, just vengeance may not lose. If thou hast took away the life of Fame From any, thou shall suffer in thy Name. If by unchristian Anger, or by hate, Thou shalt occasion what may ruinate Anothers Being; in thy Generation, Or in thy self, expect retaliation; Unless Repentance in a Fount of tears Shall cleanse that stain, which nothing else out∣wears. Oppression makes the Poor his life to leese Like Poysons which destroy men by degrees, With lingring Deaths, and in an age or two That Sin doth all those Families undo Which were enrich'd thereby, yea I have seen Their Sons who by oppression rais'd have been,
To fall from large Estates by some and some Till they to such base poverty have come, As brought them to the Gallows: Therefore they Act murthers who take means of life away By an oppressing hand; and murther not The poor alone; but those whom they begot. He is in Heart a Murtherer who prays For others deaths; and in effect he slays, Who can, but will not save, if to afford Deliverance, with Justice will accord. Nor from this error are they counted free, Who, wittingly shall an occasion be To other men, of that which may intice By word, or by example to this vice. Such are those Hacksters, (who themselves do name Men of the Sword) (but sure enough I am) (Men of a base Condition) these are they Who flesh our blooming Gentry in the way Of brutish Quarrels, and their minds possess With Rage instead of sober Manliness. Just of their stamp, are they who shall provoke Their Friends unto Revenge for what was spoke In drink or passion; making them believe They were disgraced if they should forgive; And so the Fools are urged to pursue Those wicked Counsels which at last they rue. Another way as faulty are those men Who publish by the tongue or by the pen
Those Heresies and Fancies which undo (Here and for aye) themselves and others too. These last, are out of question deeply dy'd In this red Crime, though some of them can hide Their Guilt with holy shews. The former sort Though well esteem'd, and such as none report Or take for Murtherers, would soon be cast If an impartial verdict should be past. There is a murthering poyson in some words And Flatteries, are otherwhile the Swords That Kill their hearers, though when they infect, They do not murther by a line direct. Moreover, other while unkindness may Strike dead a Gentle heart; and such as play False play in Love, (as when they do allure And causlesly reject) may soon procure Untimely Death. But such like youthful Crimes Though jested at, bring vengeance many times. He that by lawful means doth blood require For blood unjustly Spilt, with more desire To satisfy his rage, than to prefer True Justice, is a parcel Murtherer. And so are such, who practise to encrease A publick Concord, or mens private peace. In some degree of Murtherers are they Who to their might remove not far away All such occasionings as may begin Or help to perfect this inhumane Sin
And therefore by this Law we are forbidden, To keep an Enmity in secret hidden, That may provoke Revenge: which to prevent A Duty doth precede the Sacrament Of Christian Unity; and they commit Against this Law who fail to practise it. Pride, Wrath, Scorn, Avarice, Wine in excess, Wrongs, Jeers, Neglects, and Jests with bitterness, With other such (which either are or draw Occasions on, to violate this Law) Are breaches of it. And though few suspect, (Because these are but breaches indirect) That such enormities unpunish't be (For that, but seldom they inflicted see Immediate stripes) yet, questionless, by such Those troubles are brought on, that shorten much The life of Man; and thereby finish'd are His numbred years before he is aware. The Souldier (whom I had almost forgot) Is very peaceful, if he murther not. To kill is his profession; yet I say, He murthers if his Prisner he shall slay, The battel being past. The Voluntary Whom, an ambitious Avarice doth carry, To hostle Actions, when his lawful Prince, Nor sends nor calls him, nor the just defence Of his own person, or his Countries good Engageth to become a man of blood.
Ev'n he may be suspected, not to tread A path so noble, and so warranted As he conceives: yet neither praise I them, Nor do I peremptorily condemn Their practice, but refer what I have said, In their own conscience to be rightly weigh'd. "Lord give us eyes our Secret sins to see, "While time and place to us vouchsafed be, "That we may leave them, and that Love embrace "Which will conceal them with her vail of grace. "For, if with Joab we grow old in Sin, "Which hath not really repented bin, "Till thou growst angry; vengeance will not tarry "But smites us dead, ev'n in thy Sanctuary. "Thrice holy Trinity, my Heart possess, "And, I, this Precept, never shall transgress. Amen.
Commandment VII. VII: Thou shalt not Commit advlterie. &c. When this Figure thou hast ey'd, Think how these two Wantons dy'd, And what horror was therein, When Death took them in their Sin, Hurrying them from their delight, To an Everlasting Night. Mind it well, and mind it so, That thou still may'st careful grow, From those evils to be free, Which this Law forbids to thee.
Comman. VII. Commit thou no such Act unclean, As here Adultery, doth mean. BEhold this Figure, you, who take delight, To give the Reins to wanton Appetite: And, say within your selves; why may not we, Struck suddenly, in our Polutions be, As well as these and others, who have bin, Attatched in the very Act of Sin? Consider this and tremble: For no year Wheels round, but, we of one or other hear Thus taken; That, you might forsake the snare, And others be forwarn'd of coming there. Permit Adultery, and none shall breed Without a Mungrel and a mingled seed, Allow such mixtures and none then shall know, On whom the dues of birth-right to bestow, Save a blest Faction. And what havoke then Will Trecherys and Murthers make of Men? And, who will careful be to foster that Which no man owns, and Brutish Lust begat?
So needful was this Law, that here to dwell Without it, were to live the life of Hell With Fiends incarnate, whose licentiousness Their own and others mischiefs would increase. Be therefore thankful for it; and declare Your thankfulness with diligence and care In keeping of it; that you may have rest From sorrows here, and be hereafter blest, And lest your Duties from you, may be hidden, Observe that by this Precept is forbidden, Not only such uncleanness as polluteth A Married Bed; but, that it those reputeth, Offenders too, who simply fornicate Or in a married or unmarried state, Abuse their Members in the wanton fact Of any lawless or uncomely Act; Which appertaineth to that fleshly sin, Which by this Law hath interdicted bin. No breach of Wedlock was perchance in that Bold Zimri did with Cosbi perpetrate, Yet vengeance followed on it, to affright All those who in Laciviousness delight, Young Onan climed not his neighbours bed, Yet God for his transgression struck him dead. And let the shameless wantons of our days, Who boast (as of a deed that merits praise) How many untouch't Virgins they deflowr'd Lest by a sudden Plague they be devour'd,
For less than that of which these villanies boast, Full Three and Twenty Thousand lives did cost In one days round; and it may forfeit them Their freedom in the new Jerusalem. To shun gross wantonness will not suffice, Unless the wandrings of Adulterous eyes, Lascivious touches intermixt among The temptings of a lust provoking tongue, Bewiching smiles, And Gestures, which intice, Both mind and body to embrace this Vice, With such like Cycean Charmings, be supprest, Which help transform a Man into a Beast, Nay if the secret longings of the Heart, We labour not (with all our strength) to thwart, When they incline to Lust; we thereby shall Be guilty, though in Act we never fall. If therefore blameless we would still abide, We must some precious Antidotes provide Against this Poyson. We must careful prove Far from us, all occasions to remove, Which may allure: And they are such as these Vain Songs and Poems, which are made to please A wanton ear, and movingly express The longings and the acts of Wantonness. Obscoen Discourse; Lascivious Company; The giving of an opportunity, (That may be shunn'd) to such as we do know Are not so bashful as to let it go.
These are occasions, of especial note, s Bounds to this Offence, not so remote, But, that they bring it easily to pass, Yea, otherwhile before it purpos'd was, And, for that Cause, this Law commands doth lay That we remove those from us far away. Nor are those all the temptings unto lust, But there be others which avoid we must As much as these; Fantastical attires, And wanton dressings kindle lustful Fires. This makes them so esteemed, and so sought, That otherwhile they are full dearly bought, That some to play the Harlot have been fain Those various costly Dressings to maintain. Oft visitings, and spending of the day, With such as trifle half their time away n Complements, (and intercourse between Each other, but to see or to be seen.) Ev'n these things blow the Flame, and many a one By such impertinencies, is undone. The faring delicately in excess, The common sin of beastly Drunkenness, Are here Attatch'd, Arraign'd and Sentenced, For often causing an Adulterous Bed. Constrained marriages made up by Friends, For Honour, Wealth, or such improper ends, Both partys very frequently undo, And cause Adulterys and Murthers too.
Where Youth and Age of too unequal years Together match; both Jealousies and Fears Are Guests, and rarely have such weddings bin Without occasions of this filthy sin. If, therefore of this Crime we would be clear, Let us endeavour alwaies to forbear All such as these, as well as to eschew A gross Adultery, and so pursue Each means which may be helpful to acquire A blameless practice and a clean desire. That we may Soul and Body beautify With every flower of Spotless Chastity. For, carnal whoredom was long since a gin By Satan forged for the bringing in Of Ghostly Fornications most impure, And frequent Testimonies may assure That they who love strange flesh as many do, Will change their God with small perswasions too. LORD from these vanities direct our eyes Which may at unawares the Heart surprize; The Law within our members we do find Doth cross the Law that's grafted in our mind. That which we hate we are intic'd unto, And what we love we often fail to do. Our Will thou hast renew'd but in the Deed We are not, yet, enabled to proceed With such a Constancy as we desire, Nor with such pureness as thou dost require.
Make perfect what in me thou hast begun, Compel me, that I after thee may run. et not the world adulterate in me The Love which I have promis'd unto thee; Although my waies be crooked in thy sight, reserve thou my affection still upright. And let thy Love so keep my heart in awe That I may still be blameless of this Law. Amen.
Commandment VIII. VIII Thou shalt not steale, &c. If a Souldier might not thieve, No man may, as I believe; If such measure Achan find For a prey in war purloin'd, What, on these will Justice bring Who rob Country, Church and King? With his Children Achan fell (Yet I hope their Souls are well.) But if these do not amend Greater Plagues for them attend.
Comma. VIII. What want so e're oppress thee may Steal not, anothers goods away. LIght fingred Achan here doth figur'd stand, Who for infringing of this Eight Command, Brought both on him and his a fearful Doom To make it known to every age to come, That Sacriledge and pilfring may undo Both such as use it, and their Children too. So strongly are these Precepts knit together, And have so much dependance each on other, That none of their whole number can be mist, Nor virtue perfect, without all subsist. A Families necessities, who can Support aright or honour God or Man With due respects? or fully exercise The praiseful work of Christian Charities, Unless this righteous Law had been ordain'd Whereby each man his own might have retain'd? The painful hand had wrought but for a prey For slothful Drones to spoil and steal away,
Did not this Law prevent; and they should then Possess most wealth who were the strongest men. None would have labour'd but for present need, And to procure and keep, whereon to feed, Would so imploy us, that we should not find A leisure hour to rectify the mind, By knowledge, or by seeking that which is The Essence of our Being, and our bliss, For, as base Poverty hath dwelling there Where lawless living and disorders are; So, where that Poverty, doth much abound, A brutish Ignorance is alwayes found, For, though wealth makes none wiser, yet, it might Yield means of knowledge, being us'd aright; And equal are the sins, to rob the rich As spoil the poor although they seem not such, Since that which makes the difference in the facts Is in the sufferer, not in him that Acts. Let no man therefore, lay his hand on what Is portion of another mans Estate, With purpose to defraud him; lest it bring A Gangrene, and become a cursed thing, Which will devour what he before possessed, And stop him in the way of being blessed. Rob none; But of all other shun the Theft By which poor widdows are of that bereft Which is their lively hood, or that whereby The Fatherless compelled are to cry
To God for vengeance. And be wary too Thou do not willfully thy self undo By execrable things, lest Achan's Crime Bring on thee Achan's death, in evil time. For, though Deaths due for every sin that's done Some louder cry, and bring it sooner on. There are a thousand Thieveries by which The worldling is advanced to be rich With little sence of sin, although they be Infringements of this Law in high degree. The Trades-man stealeth by a frequent lying In bargaining, in selling and in buying; And most he suffers by this fair-tongu'd thief, Who entertains of him the best belief. Some Courtiers have their pilfrings, which they call Their Fees or Vails, whereby when dues are small, And, their expences large, they soon grow great, And keep their Master also in their Debt, Whose Royal name is used to conceal Their frequent robbing of the Common weal. Some steal into Estates by their unjust Abuse, by whom they have been put in trust; And men so frequently this way misdo, That such are counted honest Livers too. Some rob the Church (and this too is no news) By keeping from her Labourers their dues, And by assuming as their own Estate What Piety to God did consecrate
Some Church-men rob the Layty by taking That Calling on them without conscience making Of those performances, for which God gave The portions and the places which they have; And doubtless, for the sins of such as they The Churches heritage is took away. Some by Authority or quirks of Law Raise projects from their neighbours to withdraw Their livelihood: Some others do no less By outward shews of strict Religiousness, Or cloked honesty, the latter sort Make means to Cousin by their good Report. Some wantons, (guilty of no petty wrong) Steal Hearts, which unto others do belong. Some steal both Goods and Persons. Thus do they Who take the heirs of mens Estates away Against their Wills; And when this theft's begun, Most commonly both parties are undone. Some steal the wit of others. And an Ass To be a witty Creature, thus may pass. Some steal rewards and praises which are due To other men; and these are not a few. Some steal preferments, I could tell you how, But will not, lest indanger'd I may grow By babling of it; or lest other some May by that means to wealth and greatness come, Who do as yet retain their honesties, Because they have not learn'd such tricks to rise.
Some steal mens good opinions, by concealing Their own enormities, and by revealing Their Neighbours errors, with such shews of Ruth As if they were all Charity and Truth. Shun all such thievish Paths, for he that follows These Tracts, may peradventure scape the Gallows, But shall not scape unpunish'd, though God may Defer his wages till a longer day. As those are not excus'd; So shall not he From our Infringement of this Law be free, Who nourisheth a cause of this offence By Idleness, by Prodigal expence, By vicious gaming, by regardlesness To husband wisely, what he doth possess By keeping to himself what was bestown As well for others uses, as his own; Or by withdrawing (through deceit or might) The hirelings wages or the poor-mans right Whereby those may be driven to supply By stealth or fraud, their griping poverty. More such occasions, he himself may find Who doth examine with a single mind His private practices, and how the end Of one thing on another doth depend. Oh Lord vouchsafe me grace to be content "With whatsoever thou to me hast lent "As long as life on me shall be bestown, "Let me be fed and cloathed with my own,
"And, not with that which being none of mine "May make my Neighbour want, or else repine; "If by a wilful or unwitting wrong "I have detained ought which doth belong "Unto my Neighbour, Give me means and will "By restitution for my doing ill "To make amends, or else do thou repay them "The dues which I unwillingly delay them. "Forgive thou also my unrighteousness, "That it corrupt not that which I possess, "Or marr my thrift; and for the time to come "So wary keep me of departing from "This Law, that I may still in heart and hand "Continue faithful unto this Command Amen.
Commandment IX. IX Thou shalt not beare false witnes against, &c. Who can hope for Justice where Magistrates false witness bear? Or, secure in falshood be, When great Princes scape not free? She who Naboth's death contriv'd Was in Wrath of life depriv'd, And her flesh by Dogs was torn Though a Queen and Princely born, That all others heed may take How this Precept they do break.
Command. IX. In any case no witness bear, Of things which false or doubtful are. VVEre this Edict omitted, who could say, He should enjoy his life or Goods a day? If nigh his habitation chance to dwell, Such Neighbours as the wicked Jesabel, (And her curst Instruments:) whose downfall, here Is typifi'd, that such may stand in fear. Where could we be secure from perjur'd men, Unless God sent forth Vengeance now and then, To find out those who secretly contrive How, others of their portions to deprive, Since, very often this offence hath none Who can behold it, but, that God alone? Or, by what means might they be kept in awe, Whose greatness makes them careless of this Law? How safe seem'd Jesabel, by being great? And, yet, how boldly did the Prophet threat Succeeding Vengeance? and though she were high, How low upon a suddain did she lie?
That high and low, might view her cursed plight And more in truthful honesty delight. Most know, that, of this Law they breakers are Who bear false witness, at the Judgment Bar, And very many are not without fear, In such ungodly actions to appear, But, few do seem, aright to understand, Their other breaches of this Ninth Command, To lie, accounted is a fault so small, That many feel no sence thereof at all, But, make a Play-game of it: yea and some Such Patrons of that Evil are become, That they allow, and justifie the same As Praises rather meriting than blame. But, this will prove though held a petty sin The Serpents head, that brings his body in, And, an officious lying, may in time Ingage us to commit a greater Crime; However he that an untruth shall speak, Or Truth (if to deceive) this Law doth break. To praise is commendable; yet thereby When we of others better testify Than they deserve; true vertue we deride, And sinners in their sins are justifi'd, Unless it be (by such a modest praise, As flows from hope, our Friend affects the ways Which yet he walks not) that our praise may be A Gale to ripen what we blooming see:
For this is neither purpos'd to deceive The Hearer; nor advantages to weave For him that speaks it: but a wise intention To cherish budding Virtue by prevention; But, he that flatters doth pollute his mouth, And is a falsifier of the Truth. The Parasite, who shames not to uphold, Whatever by his Patron shall be told, Or, seeks by Jeering to discountenance, A simple Truth; and falshood to advance, Against this holy Precept so offends That punishment his Guiltiness attends, Yea, they who get access to great mens Tables, By coming furnished with News and Fables, Are thereby often guilty of this sin, Which by this Law hath countermanded bin. When we dare venture to reiterate, Those Rumors which the common people prate, On meer surmises; we are accessary To many slanders: We make Truth miscarry, And bear false witness to the wrong of many, When we suspect not that we wronged any, Nor can we satisfie for these offences, Which then may follow, if our Sov'raign Princes, Or there affairs of state, shall wrong sustain By such false tales as we receive or fain. When out of levity Reports we make Of others frailties; or occasions take
To mention Jestingly, what may disgrace The person either absent or in place, Without just motives (or content shall grow) To hide what Love and Equity should show We in the main, or in some circumstance False Testimonies; may thereby advance. But, he that uttereth slanders in despight, Or justifies the thing that is not right, Or judgeth rashly in anothers Cause, Or any needful witnesses withdraws, Or (by concealing what for truth he knows) Betrayeth Innocency to her Foes; Or, hears another injur'd in his Fame, With Silence when he may prevent the same; Or unto any one occasion gives Whereby, he falshood, for the truth believes: Ev'n every such a one false witness bears, What Cloak of Honesty so'ere he wears? Nor are they guiltless, who avoid not that, Whereby occasions rise to perpetrate Against this Law. As Bribery, Respect Or disrespect of persons, which infect The soundest minds, and bring them by degrees, Their innocent Integrity to leese. Yea, he who so loves Bribes, though he were wise, They will make deaf his ears, hood-wink his eyes; And so corrupt his heart, that he shall know No Truth, except some profit thence do flow;
Nor, any falshood fear to entertain, Whereby he may assured be of gain. And, lest by some those men be judged free From this offence (if any such there be) Who by False Miracles, false Revelations, False Dreams, false Visions, false Interpretations Of Holy Scripture; or by such like patchings Of Carnal wisdom, and of Sathan's hatchings Affirm that thing for truth which is a Lye; Know that these Juglers in degree as high As he that's worst; prove guilty of this Sin Which by this Precept, hath forbidden bin. For though our Doctrines be not so unsound, But that some truths among them shall be found, Though cloath'd in Lamb-skins we do seem to go, Though for a blameless life we famous grow; Though in our formal Zeal surpass we shall The Pharisees, and ev'ry Priest of Baal; Tho' oft we fast; tho' loud we pray and long; Tho' we seem'd wrong'd, and patient of the wrong; Tho' we affect the Crown of Martyrdome, And dye as if we death had overcome. Yea, tho' we seem as Angels, who from heav'n Had Power, and Knowledge, and Commissions giv'n; Yet, if our Zeal, our outward Piety, Our Knowledge, our affected Constancy, Our suffirings, and the Truths which we have said Were that the God of Truth might be betray'd
And falshood favour'd; We offenders are, Against this precept, we false witness bear. And all our Godly shews, are fruits of evil Delusions and Impostures of the Devil. Lord sanctify my heart, and keep my tongue, That, it may neither do my neighbour wrong, Nor prattle those Untruths, which may oppose The Verities, thy Spirit shall disclose; But, grant that I who see how these offend May find out mine own Errors and amend; Yea, Lord so teach me and be so my Guide, That, faithful to this Law I may abide. Amen.
Commandment X. X Thou shalt not couet thy Neighbours House, &c. When in us this Vice begins, Crowns we pawn for crooked pins. And by coveting of more Forfeit what we had before. Blockish Ahab therefore mind Who by fooling in this kind Life and Kingdom (to his cost) For a Kitchen-garden lost; And his fall is on Record That his fault might be abhorr'd.
Command. X. Anothers right desire not, But be contented with thy Lot. THou who to covet deem'st it no great crime, Consider well, what wickedness in time Arises thence, what danger and what shame Unless thou timely shall repent the same This folly, and the sequel of it view In Ahab, and his guiltiness eschew By heeding of this Law, whereon depend All Duties, which the former Laws intend, And which to us a Duty hath exprest More hard to be observ'd than all the rest. A power we have receiv'd to bend the knee, To take, to give, to speak, to hear, to see, And execute those Actions which may give Most lookers on, occasions to believe That all God's other Laws we do fulfil, In some degree according to his Will. When we are false at heart, and keep not on With such uprightness, as we should have done;
And were this Law left out, some persons might Perswade themselves that they were most upright. But by this Precept we are taught to see How foul the insides of our Vessels be. This findeth out, and smiteth every sin Ev'n on the head, and where the Roots begin, By checking of that Lust which unexprest In outward acts lies lurking in the breast: For 'tis the Cursed Root, whence every thing Which may be termed Evil, first doth spring; And if it be subdued e're fulfill'd Within his Egg a Cocatrice is kill'd. This Law in Soveraignty assumeth more Than all the Precepts mentioned before; For it injoins to keep within command My lustful heart, which is not in my hand; And, whose desires, will offer, come and go In spight of all that I can think or do. Within my flesh and blood a Law still dwells Which naturally against this Law Rebels, And so rebels, that though my hands were clear, My heart would foul and vitious oft appear Unless a purging Medicine she acquires To purify her thoughts and her desires. Yea, though Man could not, and God would not see The secret wickedness that is in me, This Law, would never let me quiet bide Till of my Guilt I should be purifi'd;
For every hidden lust it open lays, And still so shows me mine own wicked ways, That when by others I am righteous thought, It frights my Soul, and tells me I am naught. At first, into dispair it almost threw me, But God's good Spirit pleased was to shew me, That, what my power extended not unto His Grace would so enable me to do, As that it should suffice if I assaid To join my good endeavours to his aid. Then I began to see, this Law did wound, Not to destroy, but, that I might be sound, And that it is a needful Probe whereby We may aright the curing Salve apply. It shew'd me mine own frailty, that it might Unto another make me take my flight. And by instructing me to know my sin Hath taught me where amendment should begin For when the Heart hath learned to obey, The Members will the sooner find the way. Though our Desires, from evil are not free, To us their Guilt imputed shall not be If we resist them: And although they wound, We shall at last with Victory be crown'd. Keep well this Law, and all the Precepts here A Thousand times more pleasing will appear. Guard well thy heart, and then this Precept will Be found a Precept easie to fulfil.
Break this, and thou hast broken down the sluce To Flouds, which thy destruction will produce. The total sum of what this Law requires, Is first, that we confess our own desires, To be corrupt: For purity begins To enter by confession of our sins. Next, let us force our Longings to obey The former Sacred Precepts what we may, Because, the failing in one Duty, still Lets in another lusting after Ill. And, Lastly let us alway be content With what the Grace of God to us hath lent. For, none will keep Law moral, or divine, Who much at his Condition doth repine. How can they love their God to whom he seems To bar them what their appetite esteems Without regard their welfare to provide (As many think) whose wishes are deny'd? How can he love his Neighbour who doth crave Their Heritage, their wives or goods to have? And what Commandement will he respect Who neither God nor Neighbour doth affect? Contrary wise him who Contentment hath, Naught urgeth to pursue a lawless path; For, to what end should he who doth possess That precious Jem, embrace a wickedness? He loveth God, because he surely knows God's Power and Wisdom, justly doth dispose
That portion which will prove the best for him, Although it may be bitter for a time: And him he therefore serves, as he is able, In every Precept of the former Table. And while this Christian mind he entertains, He findeth Godliness, no little gains. Nor will those men who in their lots delight Or covet or usurp a neighbours right, For, he that is contented first believes That every one his propor share receives And not anothers; next he strives to see How perilous to him these things may be, Which God withholds; and weighs with such regard How fit those are which he for him prepar'd, That resting in his portion well apaid Nor House, nor Land, nor Wife nor Man, nor Maid, Nor Oxe, nor Ass, nor any thing that is Another man's desires he to be his; But praiseth God, for what to him he gave, And thanks him too, for that which others have. Against no Law he greatly can transgress Who is arriv'd at this contentedness. And if to get this Grace our mind we set, By Gods assistance, we may compass it In that degree, whereby attain we may To what we call perfection of the way. But flesh and blood no further can aspire Until that Kingdom comes, which we desire.
Strive what thou mayst, affections to withdraw According to the straightness of this Law, Thy Neighbours wife desire not then from him Though kind, wise, rich, chast, good & fair she seem; For most who have this way their longings gain'd, Instead of Blessings, Curses have obtain'd, By coveting the goods to others due, The beggary of many doth ensue. And Servants gotten, by anothers wrong Are seldom gainful, to such Masters long, Because by being lawlesly possest, They either prove unfaithful, or unblest; But he that with his own remains content, Shall gain much Bliss, and many sins prevent. That which doth give occasion to transgress Against this Law, is want of watchfulness, To heed the baits which our betrayer lays In every object and in all our ways. The want of meditating in our thought What inconveniences are dayly brought, On such as make no covenants with their eyes, Nor bound these longings which in them arise. For, such as this way do their best endeavour, May stumble, but they shall not fall for ever. "Lord, in my self, I could not find the Will, "Much less the Power, Thy statutes to fulfil. "But, I now feel my heart to entertain "A willingness; Oh! be it not in vain.
"Thy Grace alone renew'd this Will in me, "And I a worker now desire to be, "Who may, if thou enable to proceed, "Improve my willingness unto the Deed "Deny it not, Oh God! but from this day "Ev'n to the latest moment of my stay, "Vouchsafe unto me thy assisting Grace, "That I may run a warrantable Race. "And keep this Law and all thy Laws entire "In work, in word, and also in desire. Amen.
The Epilogue. CHRIST IESVS Who is made vnto us Wisedome Rightousnesse Sanctification Redemption1 Cor. 1. 30 the whole World lieth in Wickednesse 1. Ioh. 5. 19 Rom. 7. 24. O Wretched man that I am who shall deliuer me from ye body of this death Behold the Lambe of GOD which taketh away ye sin of ye world.Ioh.1. 29 Deliuer him from going down to the pit I haue found a ransome. Iob. 33. 24. Rom. 6. 23. the Wages of sinne is Death ii Timo. 2. 26. That they may recouer themselues out of ye snare of the deuil who are taken captiue by him at his will Though no flesh this Law obey, In it self; In Christ it may: Though it frighteth us for sin; Yet our peace, it ushers in: And, in us prepareth place, For the saving Law of Grace. When this Grace hath taught to Love, Hardest works will easy prove, And that sin we shall abhor, Which we doted on before.
THE Epilogue. The Law from God's meer love proceeds, Though strict it seems and Terror breeds. NOW having well observ'd this glorious Law (A Creature cloath'd with Majesty and awe.) Methinks the Body of it seems to me, Compos'd of such essential parts to be, That, he may find, who rightly from them shall All as but one; each one of them as all; And, that who ever breaks or keepeth one, Observes or breaketh all, in what is done: As will appear to him, who well attends How ev'ry Precept, on the rest depends. He cannot possibly or love or fear One God aright, who willfully doth err In Idol worshippings; in vainly using God's holy Name; In holy Times abusing; Or, in permitting so perverse a nature As to abuse Himself, or any Creature Belonging to this God, with such a mind As may Contentment in such evils find.
And what is of this Law averr'd; we may In ev'ry other Precept boldly say. Moreover I conceive, it cannot be Of less impossibility, that he Who gives the Creature ev'ry way his right, Should in his heart his good Creator slight: Or actually offend him without sense And sorrow, for so hainous an offence. He that right Conscience makes to keep one Law, Of breaking all the other stands in awe. He that his Parents honours as he ought, Can never favour Murther in his thought, Or thirst for Vengeance: never will his eyes, Or heart, or members act Adulterys: No due from any Creature will he take, He dares of none conceive, receive or speak, Untruths or slanders: He will never crave (Or by a secret longing wish to have) What may not be desir'd; Nor ought commit Which his profession may not ill befit, But penitence, will smite him for the deed, And in his heart a faithful sorrow breed. Much less will he grow wilfully to blame, In Prophanation of Gods Days, his Name, His Worship, or his Essence; For, in one, Well doing, all good Dutys will be done, And this which from one Law, is here exprest, May really be said of all the rest.
The like we may as doubtlesly averr Of them who 'gainst one Law perversly err: Begin at which you please, they so are chain'd, All sins are in the breach of one contain'd. One wickedness contracts another still, And that another; either to fulfill Or hide the first; until all guilt comes in And wheels him round the cursed Orbe of Sin. For, what hath he to bar him from the rest, Who but in one hath wilfully transgrest? What other sin would he have left undone, Which might have hindred his beloved one? Or, if perpetually he do not act All wickedness, and ev'ry filthy Fact? Why is it so, unless (perchance) because, His finite Nature cannot break all Laws, At once in Act; Nor his desires extend, To ev'ry thing wherein he might offend? For ev'ry sacred Law, is in his Will (Inclusively at least) infringed still, And Guiltiness would actually appear, If power and fit occasions present were. For, as the Laws fair Body is compos'd Of portions qualified and dispos'd, In such a manner that we plainly see, The perfect Essence, of the whole to be In ev'ry part; so, likewise, hath our Sin An ugle Body, and each Limb therein
Containeth (whether it be great or small) Essentially, the perfect Guilt of all, And, by this Body, Death a means hath found To give to all Mankind a mortal wound. But, prais'd be God, his Grace provided hath A Light, a Guard, an Armour, and a Path By which we may be quite delivered from The Body of this Death; and also come To walk the way of life, which else had bin For ever barr'd against us by our sin. The Lamb of God by whom we do possess Redemption, Wisdom, Justice, Holiness, With ev'ry matchless token of his Love; The Guilt of that transgression doth remove, Which woundeth first our Nature; and from him, We have a cure for ev'ry actual Crime. He, hath fulfilled what we could not keep: He, gives us power to walk, who could not creep: He, paid the price of that which we had bought: He, got our Pardon e're the same we sought: He, bore the stripes for us which we did merit: He, purchas'd Crowns that we might them inherit: Our Fears he doth prevent; our loss restore, And (to the true Believers) tendreth more Than Adam lost. Yea, he doth freely give To ev'ry Soul a power which may believe And persevere, if well he shall employ, The Talents and the Grace he doth enjoy.
And with a mind in all Temptations meek, This power in Christ, not in her self doth seek. Ev'n they that perish, till they do contemn God's profer'd Love: potentially in them Retain this power by God's Free grace, until Their Flesh seduc'd, like Eve, doth move their Will, Like Adam, to consent and then to Act A wickedness, and to approve the Fact Against their Conscience: For then God departs From their polluted and rebellious Hearts; And back returneth not until from thence, That Guilt be washed by true penitence, The means whereof he also must bestow, Or else into obdurateness they grow. Affirm we may not, that God will not come To any (whom he so departeth from,) Twice, thrice, or oftner: For we cannot know How far the limits of his Mercys go; Nor by what measure, or by what degree Of wilfulness, he so displeas'd shall be. As to forsake for ever, since he may Shew mercy where he pleaseth while the day Of life-time lasteth there is hope of Grace For every sinful Soul of Adams race. Just Job confesseth that God oft assays To draw the sinner from delicious ways Job 33. 14. The raising up of Lazarus from death, When he had four days yeilded up his breath,
Inferreth also that some few obtain God's mercy who had dead and stinking lain In their transgressions; till there was no place For help by outward means, or common grace. But this his mercy is the highest pitch, And if a God who is in mercy rich Vouchsafe it any where, he doth afford Much more than he hath promis'd in his word; For, though he may confer it when he please, Yet, to have left such promises as these Had better'd none; but made those worse, by far Who, for the Grace obtained, thankless are. "Oh who enough can praise thy matchless Love "Most gracious God! Who pleasest from above "To look upon the Vassals here below "Our Nature, and distempers tempring so; "And so providing that the blessing lost "Is purchas'd for us, at anothers cost, And may by every Soul enjoyed be Who shall accept the means ordain'd by thee. Though as did once the Jews some Christians grudge As if the Childrens teeth were set on edge By what their Fathers eat and doubtful grow (Although thou makest Oath, it is not so) That most of those, which are or which have bin Since time began, shall die in Adam's sin; And are in him rejected without place Or means of hope of truly saving Grace;
Yea, though this be an error whereby such As err that way have urg'd thy Justice much; Yet we who fear and trust thee (and to whom The knowledge of thy secrets therefore come) Remember well (and therefore heed have took) That Thou, the general Covenant being broke) Which first was made in Adam) pleas'd hast bin To tell us of a new one, since brought in, And made with all men so particularly That no man for anothers Crime can die: A Covenant in Christ from whom both Will And Power we have receiv'd to fulfil So much as shall to thee be acceptable, If we endeavour, as thou dost enable: And whereas, when this knowledge we did want, We dreamed that thy New made Covenant Concern'd but few, we doubtless did aver A Doctrine which from Truth did widely err, For that which we did ignorantly call A Covenant, is no such thing at all: Because we then supposed nothing done, Nor ought believ'd, but on one side alone. A Covenant (as men of Judgment know) Is that which is contracted betwixt two; But, thou by that which some of us do say Dost all thy self; and giv'st nor power nor way To Act or will what absolutely can Be said to be the Act or Will of Man.
We stand for nothing thou alone believ'st, Thou actest all thou givest and receivest; Yea, if we this assertion must allow None truly worketh good or ill but thou; Man's but a sufferer, whatsoe're he does, He doth because he can nor will nor chose. Lord let us know the better, and so know What powers and faculties thou doest bestow On us, to fear and serve thee, that we might In work, and word, and thought still do thee right; For, thou so equally hast all things done, And shew'st such mercy unto every one, That ev'n by those who shall thy wrath abide, In every thing thou shalt be justifi'd, And none shall truly say, when call'd they are Before thy Throne of Judgment to appear, That thou hast more exacted any way From any man, than he had power to pay, Till by forsaking thee he forfeit made Of that enabling Grace, which once he had. This Law of thine which an appearance hath Of Terror, of Severity and Wrath To those dull naturalists, who have not weighed How by the Law of Grace it is allay'd; Even this fear'd Law when first the same was made, No other end but Man's well being had; Nor hath as yet, except it be to those Who sleight thy kindness, and believe thy soes.
The former Table, which we weakly fain (Doth only to thy glory appertain) Concerneth in the points of highest nature, The Welfare and the glory of thy Creature. To thee what is it, whether we adore Thee for our God, or none, or twenty more? Thine Honour was at full e're we were made, And would be so though we no being had. 'Tis our Advantage that thou let's us know To whom in our necessities to go, And leav'st us not as when we Gentiles were, To wander all our life times out in fear, In Darkness and in Error; yet to find Nor ease of Body neither peace of mind. 'Tis our advantage that we may be bold To scorn those Bugbears, which in times of old Men trembled at; and that the power and fame Of what was nothing, but an empty Name Enslav'd us not to come with vows and praise To worship it, as in our Heathen daies, Which benefit we by this Law obtain'd, And which without this Law we have not gain'd. 'Tis our avail that such a God we have Who lets us know that he hath power to save, And, that when we our selves to him apply, We need not fear a Rival Deity Will angry grow; and do us in despight A greater Wrong, than thou hast power to right.
Or, that a Jealous Juno can make void The hopes which in thy Love we have enjoy'd. It is our gain to honour thee alone, And that we need not now to Cyprus run To worship Venus; then to seek Apollo At Delphos; and from thence a course to follow As far as famous Ephesus to see If great Diana in her Temple be: And thence again to post, in hope to meet With Jove inshrined in the Isle of Creet. Our Times and Substance wasting to receive That from them, which they had not power to give. What were it unto thee; (but that our peace Thou lovest) if we dayly shall increase Our vain will-worshippings, till we devise As many Superstitious Fopperies As we have sensless Dreams? Or if our daies We spend on Idols, forging Puppet plays, And false Ideas, till all truth be lost? And then, (which is effected now almost) Fight, brawl, and preach, to make up Sects and Fac∣tions To help maintain the Whimsies and Distractions Which fool us, till we find some Chrotchets new Unknown to Christian, Heathen, Turk, and Jew? Moreover, (but, that our own harm it were) To know no power whereof we stood in fear, And were it not a merciful prevention Of miseries, of mischiefs, and contention
Which else would rage among us if we had No name, in which with Reverence might be made Vows, Oaths, and Protestations; Or if we Should not believe a Will and Power in thee To heed and punish it, when wrong were done; What benefit to thee, ensu'd thereon, For which thou shouldst vouchsafe to make a Law To keep the damn'd For-swearers hearts in awe? What suft' rest thou, when mad Blasphemers rave Against thy holy Name, that thou need'st have A Law to curb them? Or, what have they done More than those Dogs, which bark against the Moon If they themselves, or, others of their kind No damage by those Blasphemies did find? And but, that sweetly provident thou art Ev'n for the meanest and least worthy part Of all thy Creatures; what was that daies rest To thee, which thou ordain'st for Man and Beast? Their pain or ease, Thy Rest augmented not, Nor, profit by the Sabbaths hast thou got; Or, by the Festivals ordain'd by thee, For, they, not thine, but mans advantage be, Our Essence being of a double Nature, And, thou best knowing what best fits the Creature, Requirest all men so their time to use, That Soul and Body, may receive their dues But, what missalls to thee if any spends His Times in vain or to preposterous ends?
Some of us peradventure fancy may, That thou hast honour by the Sabbath day, And that it adds to thy contentment then, To hear and see great multitudes of men Assemblies make, to invocate thy Name, And in their songs to magnifie the same. Indeed this is our Duty, and when this Upon thy days by some performed is: Thou tak'st it as a honour done to thee; That in such Dutys, we might serious be, Yet, still the benefit is all our own. Thy praise is neither more nor farther blown, To thy avail, nor doth our holiness Conduce to ought, but our own happiness. The days on which we memorize thy Graces; And meet together in thy holy places, Are much for our avail; for then and there Thou teachest us, our, Crosses how to bear; What to believe and hope there we may learn How we 'twixt Good and Evil may discern, How Truth from cursed Error we may know, What Path to shun or take, what work to do, And how and whom to love (which is the Sun And height of all whereto on Earth we come) Which manifests that only for our sake, It pleased thee some days of Rest to make. Sure ev'ry mean capacity is able To understand, that in the second Table▪
Mans welfare is immediately intended, And that therefore, those Laws be recommended To universal practice; so to stay Our minds from running out another way. For if our lives ambitiously we spend In brawls for honour: If we set an end To all our kind by Murthers: If we please To plague our selves with ev'ry foul disease, And ev'ry grief of Heart, which will arise From Fornications and Adulterys: If all our Labours should be made a prey To Thieves, till want had worn us quite away; If we should plague each other by our Lies, By slanders or in humane Perjurys; Or, if our hearts upon the Rack were set By lusting after what we could not get, These madnesses our mischiefs only be, But neither harm nor discontent to thee; Except in this respect, that having took Our Nature thy Compassion cannot brook, To see thy Members injur'd by the Sin, Which lawless people are delighted in? Thou hast affirm'd; (the better to apply Thy workings to our mean Capacity) That all things for thy Glory thou hast wrought, And, yet it is not therefore to be thought Thou wantest Glory, and didst work for more, Or, that it gain'd ought wanting heretofore.
Nor may we think a power so truly wise, Should work for that which we are bid despise. But rather that thou honour dost expect To be to thee ascrib'd as an effect, Of fruitfulness belonging to the Natures, And undespis'd condition of thy Creature, Yea, I believe unfainedly oh God, By what I from thy self have understood, Thou wrought'st for Love. Not meerly to attain Thy Creatures love, for that had been as vain: Because indeed, as little need thou hast Of their imperfect love, as of the blast Of their weak praise. Oh Lord thy love it was Thy Love essential which did bring to pass, The works thou mad'st; That blessed love of thine Which is thy Self (Oh Essence most Divine) For, being All, and all at full possessing In thy Self-being, thou conceivd'st a blessing To be conferr'd on others: not to add Ought to that Blessedness, thy Essence had. Thy wisedom infinite, a passage found (By thy eternal Power, which hath no bound) Distinct, and finite Natures forth to bring (without impairing or deminishing Thy perfect Essence) which of thy perfection Should give some Demonstration, by reflection. Among the rest one Creature thou did'st name, Compos'd of all, which th' vniversal Frame
Therein contained; And the same did'st make Not only so, as that it might partake Of all Created things, and also be A certain Medium 'twixt them and thee, But, which is to the honour of it more, Thine Image in it self it likewise bore, And had  possibility to be, United (undivisibly) to thee. A Species of this Creature, Lord I am, And, for what end created we became As I conceive it, here, I mean to tell Oh teach me better, If I say not well, Thou being Love it self, and therefore kind, It was thy gracious and eternal mind, Mankind a Sharer in thy bliss to make And grant him License also to partake That Glory which thou didst enjoy alone, Before all other Beings were begun, And this great favour Lord thou pleased wert, (As well became thy Wisdom) to impart By Means, Degrees, and on the same condition Through which we best might gain the best fruiti∣on Of what was purposed; and come to be United (as I said before) to thee. To Adam this great Mystery appear'd Till disobedience, Foggs in him had rear'd Which dull'd his Reason, and his heart declin'd From Thee, within himself, this bliss to find.
The Law thou gav'st him, was not (as is thought By some of us) that proof might so be sought Of his Obedience: For thou knowest all Before it is; and what shall still befall, Much less (as other some conceited are) Was that Command intended as a Snare Those to entrap whom thy eternal Hate, Had fore-decreed. Oh God! to reprobate? Far it is from the Goodness of thy Nature, To be a God so Cruel to thy Creature, And far, far be it from thy Creatures too, To their kind Maker so great wrong to do. This, rather, seems the cause there could not be A possibility, that Thou and We Should make a perfect Unity, unless Our Nature had Essential Righteousness: For, otherwise, thy Justice would abhor That which thy Mercy did endeavour for, And, from uniting us, become so far That thine own Attributes would be at War. When therefore Man seduced fail'd in that, Which might have perfected his blest Estate, And, that perform'd not whereby Justice might, In our Advancement take a full delight, Behold, thy powerful Mercy did prevent Our total ruin by a Wonderment Beyond the Worlds Creation, out of nought. For, when by Sin we further off were brought,
From what thou had'st intended us, then by The not obtaining of an Entity Thy all-inventing wisdom found a mean Through which our Essence made e're while un∣clean Should be re-purifi'd and so perfum'd That personally it might be then assum'd Unto thy self; and Man thereby attain A Happiness not to be lost again. If some few easy Duties he will do When Grace enables Nature thereunto. And doubtless every Man shall one day know That thou on him such portions didst bestow (Ev'n pers'nally) that if he be undone, It was not Adams, but his fault alone. This Mystery thy goodness brought to pass, And for no other end, Oh Lord it was But for our good; for neither dost thou need Our Praise or Love; nor is it for the deed Of Love or Praise, or Worship or of ought Which by our faculties to pass is brought, That thou requirest them of us; but that we Should not unto our selves defective be In doing our endeavours to attain So much as lieth in our power to gain Lest it indamage us, and in the way Unto our true perfections stops may lay. Essential goodness hath essential peace Without all diminution or increase,
And therefore he who blessedness desires To that above all other thing aspires. To love and give due praise, is better far Than to be lov'd, or to be praised are To him that hath subsistance of his own Ev'n I my self (whose heart is overgrown With imperfections) love without respect Of any end but meerly to affect Those whom I love, and rather would have done Ten thousand kindnesses than sought for one. And Lord if such a failing love as mine, May reach to this; how infinite is thine? And, Oh how far art thou from things so vain As loving meerly to be lov'd again By such poor worms as we whose best affection Is but a passion full of imperfection! Indeed thou bid'st us love thee; but, for what Save to preserve us capable of that, Which we receive; and that we might not miss The comfort which in Virtue placed is, And of whose hapless want, he cannot chuse But feel the loss whose conscience doth accuse: Yea thou commandest love, that love may make Our nature of thy nature to partake: Without which quality there cannot be The true Communion 'twixt us and thee, Which is the very height of all our bliss, Or which indeed the Essence of it is.
For could we be of thee, Oh God! approv'd, Or, could we of all creatures be belov'd Tho' we no love return'd (nor had in us, An object for the love conferred thus) Which were impossible; we ne'retheless Should suffer by our own unworthiness An inward Hell, and to our selves invent, Occasions of continual discontent, As to those envious men, it may appear Who causlesly injurious often are. To those their honest neighbours whom they find To them as friendly as they are unkind, For outward plagues pursueth so this sin, Nay also, so affects him still within, And till his nature be depraved quite, His own Injustice will his heart affright. Yea they whose Crimes are pardon'd are not free From suff'rings though they well assured be, That neither God nor Man will blame them for, The passed Frailties, which they do abhor. For then our hearts will grieve do what we can, If they have injur'd either God or Man. And then more favour is vouchsaf'd to them, The more themselves they censure and condemn. Therefore, although I can forgive my Friend, Yet, I would have him wary to offend, Lest, when he finds his error griev'd he be, Within himself, that he hath wronged me,
And in his heart a torment suffer should, From which my love would keep him if I could. Ev'n so oh Lord my God (though in degree, More infinite than can conceived be: And, in a manner, which I am not able By any Figure to make demonstrable) In meer Good-will to Man, thou pleased art To preach unto his ear, or to his Heart Those Dutys, which to thee from him belong, That he, unto himself, may do no wrong. Because we seem a great esteem to have Of Love and Praise, and thereby to receive, Content and profit; thou dost oft propose By us to be perform'd; such things as those, As Dutys which are much of thee desired, And at our hand, for thy avail required, But doubtless thou dost only seem to be Like us, that thou might'st make us like to thee, And that, (if thee we love) we might be won To do as for thy sake what should be done. For our own Good; As Parents kind and wise Have dealt with Children in their Infancies. And whereas, Lord, it hath been said by thee, That thou wilt of thine honour Jealous be: Thou only Jealous art, lest our neglect Of thee, our own perdition may effect. Thou dost things Honourable; and though none Did praise thee for them, they should still be done.
Thine honour is essential: That we give And which from us thou pleasest to receive Is but an accident; which ever may, Without thy loss, be present or away. And when thou either thanks or praise requirest To perfect us, those Dutys thou desirest. This we long time have so misunderstood, As if we did conceive thou wert a God, Affected with Self-Love, or Fruitless Fame, (Although we mannerly express the same) Yea we have dream'd that thou this world did'st make And us and all things for thy Glorys sake. In such a sense, and for such praises too As we effect, when our best works we do. I would we thought no worse; or would we knew What damnable absurdities ensue, Our groundless Fancies; For by them thou gain'st Some fear, but little hearty love obtain'st. By these false thoughts of thee, we do encrease Our own self Love, and all vain gloriousness, Within our selves hence is all we intend, Our whole endeavours for a private end, And that a froward peevishness is own'd, In most of all our actions to be found, For who can possibly be just or wise, Who to his God imputes absurdities? Lord now we better know thee; and are shown Both by thy words and works what should be done;
Our selves we yet improve not as we ought, By what thy Workings and thy Word have taught, But both Self-love and Vanity have share, Ev'n in our Actions that most pious are. We Counsel, we Relieve, Write, Preach and Pray, That Honour, Gain, or Pleasure bring it may, To our own Persons; and would little care How wicked and unhappy others are, Had we our aims; and still might them possess Amid'st our Sins and their unhappiness, Ev'n I my self who love a better mind, Do in my self so much corruption find, That (I confess) received Injuries, More mov'd me to reprove Impieties, Than mine own goodness, and that from my sin My best performances did first begin, For which let pardon, Lord, vouchsafed be, And more sincere hereafter make thou me, For, this may peradventure be the cause, We preach thy Gospel, and pronounce thy Laws, And write without effect; ev'n this that our Corruption makes the means, to want the power It might have had; Else 'tis because we hide Thy Love, and have that saving Grace deny'd, Which thou to all extendest; and which none Shall want, who striveth to lay hold thereon. To help amend these faults now I have said, What, I believe thy Spirit hath convey'd
Into my heart: If I have err'd in ought Let me, oh Lord, by thee be better taught If truth I speak, let other men from hence Partakers be, of my Intelligence, Make me and them thy love so fully view, That we in our affections may be true, And give us Grace the truth of them to show In doing well, the Duties which we owe. Amen.
A Metrical Paraphrase Upon the CREED. SInce it befits, that I account should give What way unto Salvation I believe; Of my profession here the sum I gather. First, I confess a Faith in God the Father: In God, who (without Helper or Partaker) Was of himself the Worlds Almighty Maker, And first gave Time his being: who gave birth To all the Creatures, both of Heaven and Earth. Our everlasting welfare doth consist In his great mercies, and in Iesus Christ;
(The second person of that Three in one) The Father's equal, and his only Son; That ever-blessed, and incarnate Word, Which our Redeemer is, our life, Our Lord For when by Sathans guile we were deceived, Christ was that means of help, which was conceived; Yea, (when we were in danger to be lost) Conceived for us, by the Holy Ghost. And that we might not ever be forlorn, For our eternal safety he was Born? Born as a Man (that Man might not miscarry) Even of the substance of the Uirgin Mary, And loe, a greater mercy, and a wonder; He that can make All suffer, suffered under The Jewish spite (which all the world revile at) And Cruel tyrannies of Pontius Pilate. In him do I believe, who was envied, Who with extreamest hate was Crucified: Who being life it self (to make assured Our souls of safety) was both dead, and buried: And that no servile fear in us might dwell, To conquer, He descended into Hell: Where no infernal Power had power to lay Command upon him; but on the third day
The force of Death and Hell he did constrain, And so in Triumph, He arose again. Yea, the Almighty power advanc'd his head, Aswel above all things, as from the dead. Then, that from thence gifts might o men be given, With glory, He ascended into Heaven: Where, that supream and everlasting throne, Which was prepar'd, he clim'd; aid sitteth on That blessed feat, where he shall make abode To plead for us, at the right hand of God And no where should he be enthroned rather, Than there: for he is God, as is the Father And therefore, with an equal love delight I To praise and serve them both, as one Almighty: Yet in their office there's a difference. And I believe, that Jesus Christ, from thence, Shall in the great and universal doom, Return, and that with Angels He shall come, To question such as at his Empire grudge; Even those who have presumed him to judge And that black day shall be so Catholick, As I believe not only that the quick To that assise shall all be summoned, But, he will both adjudge them, and the dead.
Moreover, in the Godhead I conceive Another Person in whom I believe: For all my hope of blessedness were lost, If I believ'd not it the Holy Ghost. And though vain Schismaticks through pride and folly Contemn her power, I do believe the holy Chast Spouse of Christ (for whom so many search By marks uncertain) the true Catholick Church. I do believe (God keep us in this union,) That there shall be forever the Communion Of Gods Elect: and that he still acquaints His Children in the fellowship of Saints. Though damned be Mans natural condition, By grace in Christ I look for the remission Of all my foul misdeeds; for there begins Deaths end, which is the punishment of sins. Moreover, I the Sadduces infection Abhor, and do believe the Resurrection: Yea, though I turn to dust, yet through God, I Expect a glorious rising of the body, And that, exempted from the cares here rife, I shall enjoy perfection and the life That is not subject unto change or wasting, But ever-blessed, and for ever-lasting.
This is my Faith, which that it fail not when It most should steed me, let God say, Amen. To whom, that he so much vouchsafe we may, Thus as a member of his Church, I pray.
A Metrical Paraphrase Upon the LORD'S PRAYER. LOrd, at thy Mercy-seat, our selves we gather, To do our duties unto thee, Our Father. To whom all praise, all honour, should be given: For, thou art that great God which art in Heaven. Thou by thy wisdom rul'st the worlds whole frame, For ever, therefore, Hallowed be thy Name. Let never more delayes divide us from Thy glories view, but let Thy Kingdom come. Let thy commands opposed be by none, But thy good pleasure, and Thy will done.
And let our promptness to obey, be even The very same in earth, as 'tis in heaven. Then, for our selves, O Lord, we also pray, Thou wouldst be pleased to Give us this day, That food of life wherewith our souls are fed, Contented raiment, and our daily bread. With needful thing do thou relieve us: And, of thy mercy, pitty And forgive us All our misdeeds, in him whom thou didst please, To take in offering for our trespasses. And for as much, O Lord, as we believe, Thou so wilt pardon us, as we forgive; Let that love teach us, wherewith thou acquaints us, To pardon all them, that trespass against us. And though sometime thou find'st we have forgot This Love, or thee, yet help, And lead us not Through Soul or bodies want, to desperation Nor let abundance drive, into temptation.See Pro. 30. 8, 9. Let not the soul of any true Believer, Fall in the time of tryal: But deliver Yea, save him from the malice of the Devil, And both in life and death keep us from evil. Thus pray we Lord: And but of thee from whom Can this be had! For thine is the Kingdom.
The world is of thy works the graven story, To thee belongs the power, and the glory. And this thy happiness hath ending never: But shall remain for ever, and for ever. This we confess; and will confess agen, Till we shall say eternally, Amen. Thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and upon thy Gates, Deut. 6. 9. FINIS.
