W413 12064149 53336
Some Instructions In the Art of GRAMMAR; Writ to assist a Young Gentleman, in the speedy understanding of the LATINE TONGUE. Licensed, and Entred According to Order. LONDON. Printed by I. B. for William Miller, at the Gilded Acorn in St. Paul's Church-yard, where Gentlemen and others may be furnished with School-Books, and most sorts of Acts of Par∣liament, Kings, Lords Chancellors, Lord Keepers, and Speakers Speeches; and other sorts of discourses, and State-matters; as also Books of Divinity, Church-Government, Hu¦manity, Sermons on most Occasions &c. MDCLXXXXI.
The PREFACE. THo' Speech be Natural, yet Languages are Artificial; some also much more than others, and far different in their particular Rules, tho' in the Essential Parts they most∣what agree. These Notes were many years ago drawn together as a short Scheme of the Artifice of the Latine Tongue, as also the causes or reasona∣bleness of it; which (as was conceiv'd) would very much conduce to both its perfecter learning and easilier remem∣bring; since we much better both ap∣prehend and retain what we understand than what we acquire only by rote. But it could not be made intelligible except compared with some other Language already known, as to us is the English.
Now tho' both these Languages agree in brevity, yet there are many differen∣ces betwixt them, and in some things of very frequent use; (As, that the Latin wants the exact distinction be∣twixt definite and indefinite Arti∣cles &c.) Yet here is no more taken no∣tice of, than what was necessary for the understanding of them: As chiefly that what the English mostwhat ex∣presseth by Particles, and Auxilia∣ries, the Latin useth variety of Cases and Terminations. This design must Apologize for the brevity of the whole discourse, i. e. for the omission of very many Rules, and more exceptions. For as the more general Rules need the fewer excep∣tions, so the exceptions (many times but few in number▪) are moe easily learned, and better retained by the seasonable industry of the Instructor. The Schemes of the Declensions
and Conjugations were designed to be in one Table, because the Learner having them all in his eye at once, might easily find out his own Termination, and by that▪ the most of the Accidents of his word. Thence also would he draw seve∣ral Observations, which might give him a great insight into his work. As, that all Declinables (the others are very few▪ ending in ae are either Substan∣tives of the first, or feminine Adje∣stives after the first, Declension. All ending in orum of the second; In ei of the fifth; In ubus of the fourth; in ebus of the fifth, &c. There are also some few references to Rhetoric and Logic. For the Learn∣er, who intends to advance further in∣to Arts and Sciences (and such only need to learn Grammar) will joyfully apprehend, that all these three Arts are concerning words and speech, tho' the manner of considering them be in each, diverse.
Somewhat also is done towards rendring the English correspondent to the Latin in Syntax; tho' in truth, the English, using most particles and prepositions, hath not much need of such Rules. By which it hath the ad∣vantage of properly expressing the co∣herence of the words in other Langua∣ges. So that I think it hardly to be shewed where good and proper Latine may not be also expressed in proper Eng∣lish: As, v. g. induo tibi tunicam, I put a coat on thee. Induo te tunica, I cloath thee with a coat. But induor fortitudinem being not expressible in English, is scarcely to be read, except in the most antient Translation of the Holy Scripture, and some Ecclesiasti∣cal Authours, or perhaps also once in Plinies Natural History. But in these I suppose induor is taken for a Depo∣ponent. Vescor Caseum, I eat cheese, vescor caseo, I feed upon cheese. Potior
urbem, I obtain the City, which I had not; sine labore patria potitur, he makes-use- of or enjoys his Country. Me gravissime nocere posset, he could hurt me: nocet mihi, he is hurtfull to me. But in the former sense laedo is more frequently used than noceo. Lastly, for the Prosodia; there is an endeavour (whether successfull the Learned will judge) to fix pronuncia∣tion upon some certain Rules, partly natural, and partly from custom. For were there not somewhat of reason in it, it would be hardly credible what Tully, Quintilian, and others observe of the exact judgment of the ordinary People in their pronunciation. Whe∣ther these Rules be critically true, I know not; At least I hope what is here done may excite some others of greater experience and leisure to add, amend, and perfect.
Corrigenda & addenda. PAge 14. line 14. for D, reade D. l. 15. for M. reade M. p. 16. l. ult. for cujus. r. cujas. p. 20 l. 30. for pacâruat. r. pacârunt. p. 25. l. 13. The Imperative &c. plainer thus. The Impera∣tive hath in proer speaking only the Second Per∣son; Tho' the Latins use sometimes amato and amanto in the Third. But these not properly commands, but permission, or the like: The Sub∣junctive is also a distinct Mode, but the Optative, Potentiall (many others the like may be used) are not divers manners of speaking, but serve instead of Auxiliary words, as, possum, volo, opto, utinam, &c. which are to be distinguished only by the sense. p. 28. l. 2. for did, r. do. p. 40. l. 25. for verè, r. verò. p. 51. Dative case. The Rule for the Dat. Case is better thus expresed. Whatever Substantive, Adjective, Verb, or Participle signifieth good or bad to or for any one, requires that to whom or which it is good or bad to be of the Dat. Case. p. 52. l. 10. as they say commonly. p. 57. l. 20. for asuescimus, r. assuescimus. p. 61. l. 35. Academia—part of this Paragraph is misplaced, belonging to Reg. I. p. 63. l. 10. for cgo, r. cōgo. p. 64 l. 4. for ve∣ravolucris, r. ver volucris. p. 66. l. 13. for Strjis and Phrjis, r. Strygis, Phrygis. l. 14. r. Chalybis. p. 68. l. 17. for Grammatices, r. Grammatici▪ p. 69. l. 8. dele, vel altum, dele etiam lin. ult. In the Schemes of the Declensions▪ p. 4. l. ult. for Manis, r. Manu. In the Schemes of the Verbs. p. 2. l. 13. for ianto, r. iunto. All false-pointings it is hoped the Reader will correct.
IN Latin Speech there be Eight parts. Noun, Pronoun, Verb, Participle, Adverb, Conjunction, Preposition, Interjection. WE cannot speak nor discourse except i be of somewhat, i. e. of some Subject▪ and something also we must say (affirm or de∣ny) of that Subject; for either it is, or hath, or doth, or suffereth something of another. So that these two are so necessary, that without them we cannot express our minds. The rest are Auxilia∣ries for the more easy, short and convenient ex∣pression: As Pronouns instead of Nouns. Partici∣ples partake both of Nouns and Verbs. Adverbs more fully express th signification of Verbs; sometimes also of Nouns. Prepositions and Con∣junctions belong to Sentences. A NounNoun. is the Name of Thing, or Subject, and every thing must be Signified by a Noun, which is its Name. Of Nouns some be Substantives,Substan∣tive. which signi∣fie such things as subsist of themselves, and without the Addition of any other Noun may be the Subject of our Speech or discourse. In English also they may have, [a, an] or [the] applied
to them, as Homo, a Man, Dominus, the Lord. A, or an, is used when we speak of a thing with∣out determining which we mean. The, when we speak of one certain and determinate thing. Others be Adjectives,djective. or Adjuncts, which re∣quire to be joyned to some Substantive to make their Signification distinct and Intelligible, and in English they may have [thing] or [person] joyned to them. And Note, that Adjectives are sometimes placed without Substantives expressed; and then, if they be of the Masculine or Femi∣nine Gender [a Preson] He or She, Man or Woman, is understood, as Doctus est, [He,] or [the Man] is learned. But if of the Neuter Gender [thing] is understood, as hoc album, this white [thing.] Adjectives, (in Rhetoric called Epithetes, and in Logic Concretes,) frequently signify Acci∣dents, or somewhat joyned or belonging to the Subject, as Quantity, Quality, Place, or the like. Of Substantives some are the Names of one Single thing, or person, and are all called Pro∣per Names (in Logic Singulars, Particulars, or Individuals) as Socrates, Ioannes, Bucephalus, Laelaps, &c. Some are Common Names, or the Names of whole kinds of things (and in Logic are called Universals) as Homo, Equus, Arbor, Vir∣tus, &c. Some also are Collectives, signifying ma∣ny things together, as Plebs the People; Exer∣citus an Army; Grex a flock or herd.
Of Numbers. Nouns, Pronouns, Verbs and Participles are de∣clined into Two Numbers,Numbers 2. Singu¦lar and Plural. the Singular, when we speak of one, the Plural when of more. Greeks have a Dual Number when they speak of two or both, it is not very necessary, and therefore in our Language given over. Regularly in English the Plural Number is made by adding s to the Nominative Singular, as King Kings, House Houses, Table Tables, But there are many Irregulars; as when the old Saxon termination en is reserved, as Ox, Oxen, Man, Men for Manen. Of Cases. Nouns have divers Relations to Nouns,Cases 6. and other parts of Speech, the which are in divers Languages diversly expressed: Sometimes by Prepositions, as in English, tho' we have a Ge∣nitive Case by adding s to the Nominative, as Man, Genitive, Mans, as Mans wit. Sometimes by various terminations of the word it self, which are called Cases, of which in Latine there be Six. The Nominative Genitive Dative Accusative Vocatie Ablative Case.
Note, the Nominative is not properly a Case, [and Aptotes are not so called because they have no Case, but none proceeding from the No∣minative] for The Noun or Name it self is said to be the Nominative Case,omina∣e. it is the Foundation or Sub∣ject of Speech, i. e. when we speak it cometh before the Verb, and answereth to the Questi∣ons [Who?] or [What?] as Venit Rex, the King cometh. If in English two Nouns come together, and the Particle [of] be applied to the later of them, that later in Latine is to be in the Geni∣tiveenitive. Case; as the Sword of Cesar, Caesaris gladius, the praise of Virtue, laus Virtutis, giving of thanks gratiarum actio: The same reason is if s be added to the Nominative Case of the Noun precedent, as Cesars Sword, Thanks-giving. If a Verb signify doing or giving to any Per∣son or thing, the Name of such Person or thing is in Latine expressed by the 3d. or DativeDative. Case. As, I do hurt to thee, Noceo tibi: it proiteth the Common-wealth, prodest Reipublicae: I, give thee Counsell, do tibi Consilium. If a Verb signifying doing or making precede a Noun signifying the object or effect of such action or making, that Noun is to be put in the 4th. or AccusativeAccusa∣tive. Case, and it answers to a que∣stion made by [Whom?] or [What?] as, Le∣go Virgilium, I read Virgil. If a Noun signify a Person or thing spoken-or called-to, it is to be put in the VocativeVocative. Case, & it is mostwhat the same with the Nominative.
If any of these Prepositions, in, with, thro', for, from, by, or than, or such others as are na∣med in the Chapter of Prepositions come before a Noun, that Noun in Latine is to be put in the 6th or AblativeAblative▪ Case. Instead, or place, vi∣ce, loco; with art, arte; Learneder than Plato, doclior Platone. Note, that our English Language is in ex∣pressing these Relations more accurate, and di∣stinct then the Latine; But the Latine more Elegant then the English, as avoiding the so frequent repetition of the same Monosyllables. Note, that in Construing Latin into English, you add always the signe of the Case, because it serves instead of the termination. Of Genders. Some Languages have no Genders,Genders ▪ Masculine Feminine Neuter. but express Sexes some other way, as the English doth the Male by [He,] the Female by [She;] these for Persons: All Things by [it.] But the Latine hath three Gen∣ders, the Masculine, the Feminine, and the Neu∣ter; to which three they commonly apply the like Genders of the Pronoun Hic, Haec, Hoc. Some Nouns accordingly are declined with one Arti∣cle, as hic vir: Some with two, & that two ways; first, if the word include both Sexes, as Homo, a Man or Woman, Conjux a Husband or Wife; and then that Gender must be used of which Sex you speak; these words are said to be com∣mon. 2ly. If you may use either of them indiffe∣rently,
as, hic or haec Dies, a Day. Hic or oc Vul∣gus, the Common People; And this is called the Doubtfull, and uncertain Gender. Some as Adje∣ctives, are of all three, if they be applicable to Things, as well as Persons: but if to Persons on∣ly, they are not used but in two,(except impro∣perly) as Pauper, Dives, &c. And so these at any time may be applied to a Neuter also, as Pau∣per tugurium, a poor Cottage. General Rules to know the Genders of Nouns. Genders being framed to express the several Sexes All He's are Masculine, all She's Feminine; And the English for all others use [it.] Things that have no Sexes, tho' it matter not of what Gender their names be, yet have the Antient Languages, and some of the Modern been diligent in assigning them Genders, and thereby have brought an unnecessary obligation upon themselves, and difficulty upon the Learn∣ers: Lapis, Petra, Saxum, the same signification of different Genders: Baculus, and Baculum, the termination only changed, both Masculine and Neuter. And genders of things having no foundation in signification are very difficultly comprehended in Rules, those of the Termina∣tions are the best. When the Sexes are not easily distinguished, sometimes the word is of both Genders, as hic and haec Anguis, an he or she Snake, hic or hc anas
a duck or drake; Bubo, bos, canis, grus, halcyon, histrix, limax, linx, python, perdix, sus, talpa, da∣ma, and the like. Many times the same Gender serveth both Sexes, as, hic Passer a Sparrow, haec Aquila an Ea∣gle, both he and she, haec Vulpes a Fox: These follow the Rules of the Declensions, and when they would express an he-fox they say Vulpes mas, if a she, Vulpes foemina. Those words which signify what belongs to either Sex, are both Masculines and Feminines, as Civis a Citizen, whether. Man or Woman, Sacerdos a Priest or Priestess, Parens a father or mother, infans, adolescens, a young Person, Comes a Companion, dux a Captain, host is an enemy, Iu∣venis a young Person, Miles a Soldier, Princeps a Prince or Princess, Serpens a Serpent, Sodalis a companion, vates a Prophet, or Prophetess. Yet many Substantives which in signification agree to both Sexes, admit an Adjective of one only, as we say not, sur magna, but foemina fu∣rax; Many also have Feminines besides the Mas∣culines, as Propheta, Prophetissa, Antistes, Antistita, Cantator, Cantatrix, — trix being the terminati∣on of the Feminine Gender, and is changed into — tress in English, as a Singstress. Yet Natrix a swimming or water-Serpent is of both Genders, as Serpens is, Also, Homo, latro, exul, praesul, pugil, eques, haeres, and the like, which are commonly ap∣plied to Males, are rarely, if at all, used in the Feminine Gender.
Other Rules for the Genders. 1. All Nouns ending in-um are Neuters, and of the second Declension; so are those that have no more syllables in the Genitive then in the Nominative Case, ending in —on and are Greek words; and in —e, making —is in the Genitive, so are Nouns ending in —le, —al, —ut. 2. All indeclinable Verbs made Nouns, Nouns in —i, and —n indeclinable in the Singular number, are Neuters; so are words that sig∣nify materially, the word nomen being under∣stood. 3. Nouns of the 1st. and 5th. Declension ge∣nerally are Feminine. 4. Nouns of the 4th. Declension coming from Verbs, are Masculine, others (not coming from Verbs) are most Feminine. 5. Most Nouns follow the Gender of their common Names, as Winds, Rivers, Mountains, Moneths, are Masculine, because Ventus, Flu∣vius, Mons, and Mensis are so, (tho' the names of Winds and Months are Adjectives.) So also Lands, Countries, Isles, Cities, Virtues, Trees, Herbs, Shipps, and generally whate∣ver bears, are Feminine. Yet these Rules are not so universall, but that sometimes they follow the Rules of the terminations, as those ending in —us, and —er, are Masculines, as Pontus, Spinus, Oleaser: In —a, Feminines,
tween Page 10 and 11. I. The First Declension hath the same number of Syllables in the Nom. & Gen. Ca∣ses; the Terminations are of Latin Nouns in a which are Feminine. Of Greek Nouns in & es (most Masculine, and so are Latine Nouns derived from them) and e Feminines▪ Singulariter. N. haec Musa Pluraliter. hae Musae Sing. N. Aene G. hujus Musae harum Musarum G.—ae D. huic Musae his Musis D.—e A. hanc Musam has Musas A.—am vel an V. ô Musa ô Musae V.—a A. hâc Musâ his Musis. A.—â II. The Second Declension hath 7 Terminations, whereof ir, ur, er, us, have ometimes more Syllables in the Gen. then Nom. and are always Masc. So are those nding in o, (Greek Nouns.) But humus, alvus, colus, vannus, are Feminines. Sing. N. hic Dominus hoc Regnum Plur. hi Domini haec Regna G. hujus Domin hujus Regni horum Dominorum horum Regnorum D. huic Domino huic Regno his Dominis his Regnis A. hunc Dominum hoc Regnum hos Dominos haec Regna V. ô Domine ô Regnum ô Domini ô Regna A. hoc Domin. hoc Regno his Dominis his Regnis
III. The Third Declension hath many Terminations: Those words that have the same Number of Syllables in the Nom. and Gen. Cases, are for the most part Feminine. Nouns whose Gen. increasing hath the last Syllable but one long, together with Verbals ending in ti are Feminine, except such as end in n, o, or, os, ns, Compounds of Dens, as assis, and uncia, which are Masculine, as are also most Monosyllables. Nouns of many Syllables ending in al, and a, are Neuters. Compounds of Frons are of the Common of two. Nouns whose Gen. increasing hath the last Syllable save one short, are Masc. But those ending in do and go; as also Greek words ending in as, o, is▪ are Feminines: and Latine Nouns ending in en, c, el, put, ur, and us, are Neuter; as also Greek Nouns in ma. Halec signifying the Pickle is Neuter, but signifying the Fish it self is Feminine. Neuters in al, ar, and e, have for the most part the Abl. in i. The Accus. ends sometimes in em, sometimes in im, accordingly the Abl. in e, or i, and then the Nom. Plur. (of Neuters) ends in ia, the Gen. in ium; As do all Nouns whose Nom. Sing. is terminated with 2 Consonants, as Urbium, Montium. xcept Hyemum, and those whose Nom. ends in ps. Sing. N. haec Cuspis Rete Plur. hae Cuspides Reti G. hujus Cuspidis —is harum Cuspidum —ium D. huic Cuspidi —i his Cuspidibus —ibus A. hanc Cuspidem —e has Cuspides —ia V. ô Cuspis —e ô Cuspides —ia
IV. The Fourth Declension hath the same number of Syllables in the Nom. and Gen. Cases: The Terminations are us and u; Neuters in u in the singular Number have all Cases a like, and in the Plur. the Nom. Acc. and Voc. end all in . Nouns of this Declsion, (especially those derived from Supines of the fourth Conjugations) are Masculine: Acus, domus, idus, socrus, colus, manus, porticus, tribus, are Feminines; specus, and penus, doubtfulls. Acus, laus, artus, arcus, tribus, ficus, specus, quercus, partus, ver, make the Dat. and Abl. Plur. in ubus only: quaetus, portus, genu in ubus, or ibus, all the res in ibus. antiently Sing. N. haec Manus Manus Plur. hae Manus Manues us G. hujus Manûs Manuis harum Manuum Manuium uum; D. huic Manui Manui his Manibus Manuibus ibus A. hanc Manum Manuem has Manus Manues us V. Manus Manus ô Manus Manues us A. hâc Manis Manue his Manibus Manubus ibus
V. The Fifth Declension hath but one Termination, and all words of this De∣clension are Feminines; except Meridies, which is Masculine, and Dies, which is doubtfull in the Singular, and Masculine in the Plural: And all have more Syllables in the Gen. then in the Nom. Case. Mot Nouns ending in ies are of this Declension. Sing. N. haec Species Plur. hae Species G hujus Speciei harum D. huic Speciei his Speciebus A. hanc Speciem has Species V. ô Species ô Species A. hâc Speci his Speciebus
as if Aqa were understood, in names o Rivers, Matroa the Marne: In —um, Neuter, as Eboracum, York; Crustumium, a river so call'd; as if Oppidumor Flumen were understood: In -e, also Neuter, as Reate, Praeneste, Caere; Some in -ur also are Neuter, as Tybur; but Robur, Acer, signify more properly the wood or timber; Siler, the Cork or excrescence upon the bark; and Thus, the Gum rather then the Tree it self. And it is very frequent to have the fruit, product; or the part destined to use, of one gender, and the Tree of another, as, Malus, malum; Spinus, spina; Buxus, buxum. 6. Primitives, and their Derivatives, and Di∣minutives, the Compounded, and that whereof it is compounded, as Centussis, are of the same gender. 7. All Greek Nouns made Latin retain their Gender, as all the Compounds ending in —odus, are Feminine, because of . These Rules are to be first observed, then those that follow in the particular Declensions. Rules for the Declensions. All Neuters have the Nom. Acc. and Voc. alike, and in the Plural number these Cases end all in —a: Those that end in —, have no Vari∣ation of Cases in the Singular Number. The Nom. and Voc. are the same; except in the Singular Number of the 2d. Declension, where when the Nom. endeth in—us, the Voc.
endeth in —, and when the Nom. in —ius, the Voc. sometimes in —î, to hinder the ungratefull sound of 2 Vowells coming together, as Vir∣gilî, instead of Virgilie. The Abla. and Dat. Plural are always the same, and end always in —is or —bus. The Gen. Plural always ends in —um, and many times there is a Syllable cut off in the midst of the word, as virûm for virorum. Nouns compounded of a Nom. and Gen. have only the Nom. declined, as Tribunus-plebis; but of two Nom. both are declined, as Ius-jurandum. Many words being derived of the Greek do retain much of their Greek manner of Variati∣ons of Cases. And this manner of expressing Ca∣ses in divers Declensions came from the Greek, nor is it necessary to a Language, but it is more Elegant, by avoiding the same termination, which many times also would be harsh and un∣pleasant. Note, the Antients never used Diphthongs, but pronounced, ae, as a , which is the reason of changing the later Vowel, as in the 1st. Declen∣sion ae is often changed into ai, (of a sound like unto it) as pictāi. Of Adjectives. Because AdjectivesAdjectives must belong to Substan∣tives of all Genders, they must be of all Gen∣ders; And sometimes the Genders also vary in Terminations, then the Masculine ends in —us,
or —er, the Neuter always in —um; and both these are of the 2d. Declension, the Feminine always in —a, and of the 1st. Declension, as Bonus, bona, bonum. Gen. Boni, bonae, boni, &c. Some Adjectives have two Terminations, then the 1st. is Masc. and Femin. as Tristis, the 2d. is Neuter, as Triste. And these, as also those of one Termination and all Genders as Foelix, follow the 3d. Declen∣sion, as hic and haec Tristis, and hoc triste, Gen. Tristis▪ Hic, haec, and hoc Foelix. Gen. Foelicis, of all Genders. Some few Irregulars there are as, Ambo & Duo, which are of a peculiar number, called the Dual, because they are never used but when we speak of two and no more: their declining is irregular. Also Vnus, Solus, hic, ille, iste, ipse, is, alius, alter, uter, neuter, qui, &c. make the Gen. in —iüs, the Dat. in—i, as Vnius, Solius, &c. in other Cases they are like other Adjectives. Most Adjectives signify such things as are ca∣pable of more and less, as more white or whiter, less white (which the Philosophers call Intension and Remission) and may have magis and minis applied to them, as magis albus, minùs albus; to express this there are two degrees of Comparison.Degrees of Compari∣son . (That which Signifies the thing it self is called the Positive, and is no degree.) 1st. The ComparativeCompara∣tive. which Signifies [more] and hath after it [than] with an Abl. Case, as Pulchrior Helenâ, more fair than Helena; and it is formed of the 1st. case of the Po∣sitive
that ends in —i, by putting to it —or for the Masculine and Feminine, and —us for the Neuter, Gender; as of Casti, castio and castius. All these follow the 3d. Declension. 2d. The Superlative,Superla∣tive. which Signifies [most] and hath after it [of] or a Gen. Case of the Plural Number, as Sapientissimus omnium, the most wise or wisest of all: And is formed of the 1st. Case of the Positive that ends in —i, by putting to it -ssimus, as of Casti, castissimus. Yet if the Adjective end in -er, it is made by adding -rimus, as ener, tenerrimus. And some in -lis make -llimus, as Facilis, facillimus. All these are declined of the 1st and 2d. Declen∣sion. Some other Irregulars there are, as also many Nouns, which do vary from the ordi∣nary regula Delensions, some because of a more gracefull Sound: Some because their Primitives are disused, and new ones succeed∣ed: Some also because of their derivations, of all which particulars other Grammarians must be consulted. Of Nouns some are (1) Primitives, some De∣rivatives, that are made from them, such are those called Patronymis, which are words de∣rived from the Names of Parents, or some Re∣lations, or their Country, City, or the like. The Masculines end in —des, or —on, as Anchi∣siades, Iapetion; Feminines in -as, -is, -ne, as Ilias, Priamis, Adrastine, Acrisione, those from the Stock or Countrey in -us, as Anglus, Romanus, or ensis, as Oxniensis.
2. Possessives, which signify some propriety or possession, and may be expounded for the Gen. Case of their Primitives, as Paternus, Pa∣trius, Patris: Regalis, Regius, Regis; And end mostly in —aris, -oris, eus, ēus,—icus, us,—lis, -nus, -vas. Diminutives, ordinarily retaining the Gen∣der of their Primitives. There is great variety of their Terminations, as -cio, -sio, -aster, ulius, -ellus, -ella, -ellum, -illus, -illum, -olus, -ola, -olum, -ulus, -ula, -ulum, -culus, -cula, -culum, -inulus, -un∣culus, -iscus. 4. Denominatives, as, ferreus from ferrum, pietas from pius, some of thse are Substantives, some Adjectives, some Masculines, some Femi∣nines, some Neuters; and of all Terminations. 5. Numerals, whereof some are called Car∣dinals or Principals, as, unus, duo, &c. and An∣swer to the Question made by Quot; These from tres to Centum are not declined. Others are called Ordinals, that signify Order, and an∣swer to the question made by Quotus, as Primus, Secundus, &c. Others Distributives, which an∣swer to Quoteni, as Bini, by two's, or two by two, Terni, by three and three. Others Multiplicatives, answering to Quotuplex, as Duplex, double, Tri∣plex, triple. Others imply weight or time, as Lapis Centenarius, of an hundred pound weight, Bimus, of two years old.
The Romans had a manner of counting, which was used also by our Fore-fathers the Saxons, and is by some Nations at this day: As for 2 and ½, they said Sestertius, a, um; i. e. Semistertius, the 3d. is an half, and it is thus marked IIS, or HS, for the usual Characters for Numerals were— I. the most obvious and easy to be written. V. quinque, five, the half of X. decem, ten. But why noted by this Crux decussata, I know not. L. quinquaginta, fifty, half of C. Centum, one hundred. D. quingenti, five hundred, half of M. Mille, one thousand. Millia many thou∣sands. 1. Such Substantives as end in -tio, changed in English into -tion, as temptation, and —itus, the English whereof ends in -ing, as hearing, are derived from Verbs, and signify either the Action it self, or the thing produced by the Action, as Lectio a reading, or a Lesson read; Sectio, a cutting, or a cut; Auditus a hearing or a thing heard. 2. Those that end in -bilis come from Verbs, and augment the signification, as Laudabilis worthy to be praised, Flexibilis easy to be bent; And we express them by an Adjective ending in -ble, as Laudable, Flexible. 3. Those that end in -tor, Masculines, and -trix, Feminines, augment the signification, as Cantator one that useth, or maketh it his trade, to Sing, Amator, a Lover.
4. Those that end in -bundus signify so also, as Ludibundus gamesome. 5. Also Substantives and Adjectives are much alike in their signification, and therefore de∣rived one of another, as Pius, godly, Pietas, godliness: Beatus, blessed, beatitudo blessed∣ness. Those Substantives that end in —ts, -tudo, we English by a word ending in -ness, Feritas fierceness, pietas godliness, magnitudo greatness. Because that a Noun and Verb signify the same thing, it must needs be that there is great affinity between Nouns and Verbs, and that Nouns may be changed into Verbs, and Verbs into Nouns, as Amor, Amo; And again Substan∣tives into Adjectives, and Adjectives into Sub∣stantives, as Amor, Amabilis, Albedo, Albeo, Al∣bus and such like. Of Pronouns. They are called Pronouns because used for, or instead of Nouns, for they are not the Names of any things, and therefore not Nouns, yet are they Subjects in a Sentence; They regulate Verbs and Actjectives, and therefore have the same use as Nouns. They are not of absolute necessity to speak, (for instead of I and My, may be used my pro∣per name) but of very great convenience for brevity, Elegance, and Perspicuity. They are used for and instead of Nouns which signify
Persons, or appertaining to Persons; for As Things are signified by Nouns, so are Per∣sons by Pronouns [in Logic a Person is nothing else, but one single or intellectual Man or An∣gel, but in Grammar it is otherwise, for] per∣sons are either in speaking the Speaker, called the first person; or the spoken to, called the se∣cond; or the spoken of, called the third Person▪ And of this Person are all Things, except by some figure we either speak to them, or feig them speaking; and then we understand T or Ego. Of Pronouns, some are called Demonstratives, as Ego I, Tu thou, Sui of himself, Ille, Ipse, is, he, Hic this. Some Relatives, which referr to some Sub∣stantives spoken of before, ille, ipse, iste, hic, is; but not properly qui, which sometimes includes both the Antecedent and Relative, as▪ Qui malè agit, odit lucem, He or that Man▪ who doth evil, hateth the light; Yea, tho' of diverse Cases, as [Ei] Qui Simulat Verbis, nec corde est fidus amicus, Tu quoque fac simile. Do thou the like to him, who— Some Possessives, which Signify possession, as Meus mine, tuus thine, suus his, noster ours, vester yours, nostras of our Family or house, Vestras of yours. Quis is an Interrogative, Who? And is used both in the Masculine and Feminine Gender, Quid? What? of the Neuter. So Cujus, cuja, cujum, and Cujus whose is it?
Singul. Nom. Ego, I. Tu, thou. Gen. Mei, of me. Tui, of thee. Sui, of him. Dat. Mihi, to me. Tibi, to thee. Sibi, to him. Accu. Me, me. Te, thee. Se him. Abla. Me, in, for me. Te, in, for thee. Se for him. Plural. Nom. Nos, we. Vos, ye. Gen. Nostrum, of us. Vestrum, of you. Dat. Nobis, to us. Vobis, to you. Acc. Nos, us. Vos, you. Abl. Nobis, with us. Vobis, in, with, for, from &c. you. Sing No. Ille, he, illa, she, illud, it, Ge. Illius, of him, her, it, Da. Illi, to him, her, it, Ac. Illum, him, illam, her, illud it, Ab. Illo, with him, illâ, with her, illo, with it. Plur. No. Illi, they (men) illae, they (women) illa, those (things) Ge. Illorum, of them (men) illarum, of them (women) illorum, of those (things) Da. Illis, to them (men or women) to those (things) Ac. Illos, them (men) illas, them (women) illa, those (things) Ab. Illis with them (men or women) with those (things.) In like manner is declined is, ea, id, the signiication is the same as ille. Hic, haec, hoc, &c. idem, eadem, idem, &c.
Sing. No. Iste, he this, ista, she this, istud, this thing. Ge. Istius of this him, her, or it. Da. Isti, to this him, her, or it. Ac. Istum, this him, istam, this her, istud, this it. Ab. Isto, in this him, istâ, in this her, isto, in this it. Plur. No. Isti, these he's, istae, these she's, ista, these things. Ge. Istorum, of these he's, istarum, of these She's, istorum, of these things. Da. Istis, to these he's, she's, or things. Ac. Istos, these he's, istas, these she's, ista, these things. Ab. Istis with these he's, she's, or things. Ipse (and antiently ipsus) ipsa, ipsum, &c. Sing. No. Qui, who. Quis, who? quae, quod, what, Ge. Cujus, of whom, of what. Da. Cui, to whom, to what. Ac. Quem, quam, quod, whom, or what. Ab. Quo, quâ quo, with whom or what Plural. No. Qui, quae, quae, who or what. Ge. Quorum, quarum, quorum, of whom or what. Da. Quibus vel queis, to whom or what. Ac. Quos, quas, quae, whom or what. Ab. Quibus vel queis, from whom or what. Quis is only used in asking a Question in the Nom. Case, concerning Persons, all other questions are asked by the other Cases.
Pronouns are also variously compounded. With Pronouns, as, Egoipse, tuipse, tute, supsius, I my self, thou thy self, of himself, istic, illic, for iste hic, ille hic, this very same, sese, quisquis. With Nouns, as, Aliquis, i. e. alius quis, some o∣ther, quomodo, after what manner, hujusmodi, of this manner, &c. With Verbs, Quivis, who thou wilt, quilibet, who thou pleasest, quisputas? With Adverbs, Numquis, whether any, nequis, least any, eccum, behold him, i. e. ecce eum, ellum, i. e. ecce illum. With a Conjunction, Ecquis, i. e. et quis, and who, siquis, if any, quisnam, for who? quisquam, quisque, nequis. With other Particles, Meâpte, tuâpte hujusce, Ejusce▪ huncce, huccine, hoccine, quidam, quispiam, quicunque, egomet, mimet, I my self, of me my self, tuimet, of thy self, sibimet, to himself, &c. Of Verbs. Verbs signify the same thing as Nouns,Verbs. but after another manner, for, as Things are na∣med, i. e. expressed or represented by their Names, i. e. by Nouns, so are their Actions, do∣ing and suffering one from or by another, (with∣out Action, Motion, and Power, there is no
Entity) by Verbs. As the manner, time, place, and such other circumstances of action, are by Adverbs, and the relation of cause, effect, and such like, by Prepositios. A Verb then is a part of Speech, signifying doing or suffering, and hath always adjoyned to his signification some difference of time, past, present, or to come. In all action either the agent and patient are severall, i. e. the action passeth from one Subject to another (which actions are called by Philosophers Actiones transeuntes) and such Verbs are called Transitives:ransitiv. and then that, which is applied to the agent is a Verb Active,ctive. and it endeth commonly in o; and that which is applied to the patient, is a Verb Passive,assive. and endeth commonly in or: Or else the same Subject is both agent and patient, or the action, or rather motion, remaineth in its agent, (such are called by Philosophers Actiones immanentes) and then the action is signified by a Verb Neuter,Neuter. as ardeo, I burn, glorior, I boast. And these Verbs are known because they are not changed into Passives by taking -r to them, as all Actives are. Some Verbs called Neuters include an Ac∣cusative Case in their signification, and such are properly Actives, as Curro cursum, cursus curritur. This is more frequent amongst Poets, as Omnes se for as proruunt. Et mutata suos requiêrunt flumina cur∣sus. But then they give such Verbs an Active sense, as if it were, proripiunt or pacâruat. Note, in general that some Neuters signify Action either transi∣tive, as faveo, noceo, and these indeed are actives,
but govern not an Accus. Case; or intransitive, as curro, ambulo; tho' curro be properly Active, and hath its Passive, at least in the 3d. Person, as curritur (Subauditur cursus, or Stadium.) Sum, Volo, and some others are properly Verbs auxi∣liary. So that according to the signification there are no more then two sorts of Verbs (besides the auxiliaries) Active and Passive; for Neuters are sometimes Active sometimes Passive, but they are called Neuters because their form and ter∣mination doth not correspond to their signifi∣cation, as ardeo I am burning, gadeo I am rejoy∣cing, nor can they be made Passives. The Auxilia∣ries in Latine are but few (except you will so call those that require an Infinitive Mode always af∣ter them, as juvat, oportet and the like.) Sum, forem from fuo antiently of the same sig∣nification as sum, which also retains some of its Cases, as sui, and those derived of it, forem an∣tiently was fuerem; existo; possum; Su, or its Cases are understood in every Verb, as well A∣ctive as Passive, and its meaning is, that what is signified by the verb, of predicate agrees to that which is signified by the Subject. Some Irregular Verbs there are ending in -or, which retain both Active and Passive significa¦tion, and are called Common,Common. and have both Active and Passive Participles, their Participles in -ns, and -rus, are always Active, loquens, lo∣quuturus; those in -us, are both Active and Pas∣sive, as Veneratus is both worshiping and wor∣shiped, in -dus as Venerandus, always Passive.
But most of them have laid aside their Passive signification, and retain only their Active (and are therefore called DeponentsDeponent.) as loquor I speak▪ amplector I embrace. All Actives require before them a Nom. Case signifying the agent, doer, or maker, i. e. if they signify to do, as lego libros, dormio somnum; and these have an Acc. Case after them signify∣ing the Patient. Or if to make, as aedifico domum, scribo literas, the Acc. Case after these is the effect: And if the Active be changed into a Verb Passive, the Acc. becomes the Nom. and the Nom. (that from which it suffers or the doer) the Abla. as, Amo te, I love thee, is changed into, Tu amaris à me, thou art loved of me. And therefore many times the verb-Passive is used, the Nominative Case of Patient not ex∣pressed, (which some mistakingly call Imper∣sonals) especially if the sense of the Nominative Case be included in the Verb, as curritur ab illis, i. e. cursus. Every Action is performed in some time, and therefore every Verb implies, above that which it signifies, Time either Present, Future, or Past; past either in passing, perfectly past, or a good while ago past. So there be five TensesTnses. 5. or Times; the Present. Imperfect. Pluperfect, or more then Future. Perfect. perfect, preterit.
Pluperfect. ueram, ras, rat, Plur. ramus, rtis, .   Potueram,   Volueram, &c.   Tuleram, Future. Ero, ris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, runt.   Potero,   Volam, &c. es, et. Plur. emus, etis, ent.   Ibo, bis, bit. Plur. bimus, bitis, bunt.   Quibo,   Feram, es, et. Plur. emus, etis, ent.   Ferar, reris, rere, retur. Plur. remur, remii, rentur. Imperative Mode. Possum, Volo, Malo have no Imperative Mode. Es, esto, esto, este, estote, sunto. Noli, ito nolito, nolite, itote, I, ito, ito, ite, itote, eunto, Es, esto, esto, este, estote. Fer, ferto, fero, ferte, fertote, ferunto. Fere, fertor, fertor, feruntor. ferimini feriminor
Subjunctive Mode▪ Present. Sim, sis, sit, fuat, simus, suis, sint.   Fuam,   Possim,     Velim, &c. is, it, Plur. imus, itis, int.   Feram, as. at, Plur. amus, atis, ant.   Fiam,   Ferar, raris rare, ratur, Plur. ramur, ramini, rantur. Imperfect. Essem, es, et, Plur. emus, etis, ent.   Forem,   Possem,   Vellem, &c.   Essem,   Ferrem,   Fierem,   Ferrer, reris rere, retur Plur, remur. remini, rentur.
Perferct. Fuerim, ris, rit, Plur rimus, ritis, rint.   Poturim,   Voluerim, &c.   Tulerim, Pluperfe & Fuissem, ses, set, Plur. semus, setis, sent.   Potissem,   Voluissem, &c.   Tulissem. Future. Fero, ris, ris, Plur. rimus, ritis, rint.   Potuero,   Voluero, &c.   Tulero.
Infinitive Mode. Present and Imperfect. Esse. Perfect and Pluperfect Fuisse.   Fore vel futurum esse.         Posse.   Potuisse. Future           Velle.   Voluisse.             Nolle   Noluisse.             Malle.   Maluisse.             Esse.   Edisse   Esurum esse.         Ferre.   Tulisse.   Laturum esse.         Fieri.   Facitum esse vel∣fuisse. Factum Laum iri vel faciendum ferendum   Ferri.   Laium Present.       Participles.           Ens.   Future.             Potens.                 Volens.                 Malens.                 Ferens.     Laturus.           Factus.     Faciendus.           Latus.     Ferendus.         Note, that Fui, and its Cases come from the Antient Verb Fuo; Forem being con∣tracted from Fuerem, and fore from fuere, now mostly used in a Future sense. Note, only the Anomalous Tnses of divers of these Verbs are expressed.
In English they have these Signs, Do Did Had done. Shall or will. Have done.   In the English Language we use very many Verbs Auxiliaries. For Actives, do, have, may, can, shall, will, ow. For Passives, am, are, art, &c. and Verbs Passive also instead of the Preter-perfect, Preter∣pluperfect, and in the oblique Modes the Future, use the like Tenses of the auxiliary sum and the Participle. Note, also that our English Language changeth not the ermination in any Tense besides the Imperfect, and Singular number; for all the rest we use auxiliary Verbs, whereof we have divers according to our intention; which ex∣presseth our meaning very distinctly: as I love, or do love: thon lo est, or dost love: he loveth or doth love. The Plural Number hath only love. The Imperfect. I loved or did loe: thou lovedst or didst love: he loved or did love. The Plural hath only loved. The passive is formed of the active, by adding r to -o, as am-o, amo-r, amab-o, amabo-r, a∣mat-o, amato-r. By changing m into r. Amaba-m, amabar. By changing s into ris or re. Ama-s, ama-ris, ama-re, amaba-s, ba-ris. By changing t into tur, ama-t, amat-ur, a∣maba-t,
amaba-tur. By changing mus into mur, ama-mus, ama-mur, amaba-mus, amaba-mur. Hence we have two presentPresent. Tenses, the one more emphatical, as I love, I do love; two Imper∣fects, I loved, I did love; two Futures I shall, and I will, love; The one signifying somewhat of force, the other Voluntary. We have but one Preterperfect,Preterper∣ect. which is by the Auxiliary have, and the Participle, loved; one also Preterpluperfectpluperfect. by the Imperfect Tense of have, as I had loved. The true importance of that called the Pre∣terimperfectPreterim∣perfect. Tense, is that it signifies a thing be∣ginning to be done, or suffered, wherefore ma∣ny times the Ininitive Mood is used for it, coeperam, or some such like Verb being then un∣derstood.pluperfect. The Preterpluperfect Tense is pro∣perly used to make up the later Clause of an Hypothetical proposition; as, cum venit (vl veniebat) ad me Tabellarius, jam literas absolve∣ram; and this may be the reason why it is cal∣led lus-quam-perfectum, because it signifies a thing done before the other preterits: and therefore both these do properly belong to the Subjunctive Mode. The FutureFuture. Tense of the oblique Modes hath a signiication many times mix'd of past and future, as Dixeris egregié, thou shalt have spoken excellently. There be also several manners of applying or using Verbs,Modes 6. for either we declare a thing to
be, or, not to be; do, or, not to do; suffer, or, not to suffer. This manner or mode of speaking (making in Logic a Categorical Proposition) as also asking a question is called the IndicativeIndicative. Mode. Or if we command a thing to be done, called the Imperative,Impera∣tive. (and therefore the Impe∣rative hath no first person Singular but the Fu∣ture Tense is used for it:) The Imperative, Op∣tative. &c. all speak of that which is to do, to be, or to suffer, and therefore they depnd upon the Future Tense, to which they are like, and into which they are resolved. The Imperative has properly neither First nor Third Person Amemus v. g. is properly the Optative. Both that and Amanto are properly Permissions not Commands: As let us—let him— let them-love. Amet also is the other Mode. For this called the Imperative, is used also to express forbidding, exhorting, deprecating, and the like. If we wish a thing might be done,Optative. 'tis called the Optative, 'tis therefore like the Imperative, and used instead of it. Or if we say a thing may be done, it's called the Potential.Potential. Or imply the thing may be done upon some condition, called the Subjunctive,Subjun∣ctive. or Conjunctive Mode, which is never used but with a Conjuncti∣on, i. e. when it serveth to one part of an Hy∣pothetical Proposition. But there may be as well other Modes named, as Optative and Potential, as the Volitive for will, would, so another for shall, should, &c. It is there∣fore
much more Regular to name only the Sub∣junctive introduced by a Conjunction, and to say that the same terminations serve to the other Auxiliaries. The Potential is also called the Permissive, when it signifies a thing to be permitted or granted, as Habeat, Valeat, Vivat cum illâ: but this is no other then possit understood, Possit habere he may have her. The Optative and Potential are expressed in English by divers Verbs Auxiliaries, as can, could, will, would, shall, should, ow, ought, may, migh: Whereby it appears that our Lan∣guage is more distinct then the Latine. The Infinitive,Infinitive. Infinite, Indefinite Mode hath only the bare signification of the Verb, without cosignifying Person, Number or Time, for tho' it seems to have divers Tenses, yet are they used promiscuously; It serves very well for distin∣guishing the Conjugations, which are four.Conjugati∣ons four. The First hath a, before -re, and -ris, and the second Person persnt ends in -as, and a runs thro' the Tenses, Amo, amas, amare, amavi, amatum. The second hath ē long, before -re, and -ris, and the second Person ends in es, which e runs thro' the Tenses, Doceo, doces, docēre. The Third hath ĕ short, before -re and -ris, and the second person ends in -is, Lego, legis, legere, legi, lectum. The Fourth hath ī long, before -re, and -ris, and
the second person ends in is, and i runs thro' th Tenses, as Audio, audis audīre, audīvi, audītum. There is no reason for them in Nature, but the variety of them conduceth somewhat to the Ornament of Speech, and ease of pronunciation. Verbs Active are said to have three GerundsGerunds 3 ending in, di, do, dum, but they seem to be Par∣ticiples or Nouns, and the Rules for the Con∣structions of Nouns serve them: For those in -di, are Participles or Adjectives of the Gen. Case, as Amandi of Amandus; in -do, of the Ablative (rarely of the Dat.) in -dum of the Nom. and Accus. Gerunds also are sometimes taken passively, as Vritque videndo Foemina, i. e. by being seen: Memoria excolendo augetur, by being husbanded. As also two Supines,Supines▪ the one of an Active sig∣nification, ending in -um (which is no other then a Participle) the other in -u of a Passive signification; and therefore Verbs Neuter have none of that Supine, the first Supine having that signification as Vapulatum, to be beaten: This later Supine is the Abla. Case of a Noun of the fourth Declension. Whatsoever doth or suffereth is supposed to be a Person, so there be three Persons,Persons 3. and two Numbers.Num. 2.
Indicative Mode. Amo,Present Tense. I love, or, I did love. -as, thou lovest, or dost love, &c. Amabam,Imperfect. I loved, or, did love. -bas, thou lovest, or, didst love, &c. Amavi,Perfect. I have loved. -visti, thou hast loved, &c. Amaveram,Plperfect. I had loved, -ras, thou hadst loved, &c. Amabo,Fre. I shall love, I will love. -bis, tho shalt or wilt love, &c. Imperative Mode Hath no distinction of time because it is only Future, nor first Person Singular, becaus no Person Commands himself, bt instead of that is he will. Ama love thou. Amato let him love. Amato do thou love. Ameus. Let us love. It is the Optative Mode.
The Forming thro' their Modes and Tenses of Verbs Active. Indicative Mode.     1. 2. 3.   1. 2. 3. Present Tense Singular. Amo as at Plural. amus atis ant Doceo es et emus etis ent Lego is it imus itis unt Audio is it imus itis unt Preter-Imperfect. Amabam abas abat abamus abatis abant Docebam ebas ebat ebamus ebatis ebant Legebam ebas ebat ebamus ebatis ebant Audiebam iebas iebat iebamus iebatis iebant Perfect. Amavi avisti, avit avimus avistis averunt, vel, avêre Docui uisti uit uimus uistis uerunt, vel, uêre Legi isti it imus istis ernt, vel, êre Audivi ivisti ivit vimus ivistis iverunt, vel, ivêre Preter-plperfect Amaveram averas averat avramus averatis avernt Docueram ueras uerat ueramus, ueratis uerant Legeram eras erat eramus eratis erant Audiveram iveras iverat iveramus iveratis iverant Future. Amabo abis abit aims abitis abunt Docebo ebis ebit ebimus ebitis ebunt Legam es et emus etis ent Audiam ies iet iems ietis ient Imperative Mode. Singular. Am, , ato Plur. ate, atote anto Doce, eto, eto ete, etote ento Lege, ito, ito ite, itote unto Audi, ito, ito ite, itote ianto Subjunctive with Cum, Si, or other Conjunction. Pesent. Sing. Amem es et Plur. emus etis ent Doceam eas eat eamus eatis eat Legm as at amus atis ant
The Optative and Potential Mode are the same. Amem, I may,Present. I can, I shall, I will, I ow to love, &c. Amarem, I might,Imperfect. I could, I should, I would, ought to love, &c. Amaverim, Amavissem I might &c.Perfect. Pluperfect. I ought to have loved, &c. Amavero,Future. I shall &c. have loved, &c. The Subjunctive Mode hath always a Conjunction joyned with it. Si if, eum when, quamvis altho', or the like. Si amem,Present. if I may love. Si amarem,Imperfect. if I might love. Si amaverim,Perfect. if I might have loved. Si amavissem,Pluperfect. if I had loved. Si amavero,Future. if I shall have loved. The Preter- and Preterpluperfect-Tenses in these Modes are not distinguish'd in our Lan∣guage, nor is it necessary they should; In the Latine there is either no difference, or very hard to be expressed.
General Rules. The Preterperfect Tense ends in -i, and o∣dinarily is framed of the second Person of th present Tense by changing -s, into vi, as amd▪ amavi, Audis audivi, Fles flevi: But the u is no always a Consonant, but sometimes a vowel and then the former vowel is omitted, to avoi the concourse of so many Vowels (as it fall out frequently in the second Conjugation) Domas domui, doces docui, mones monui. Also for better sound sometimes a Letter o Syllable is cut off, as Iuvas juvi, for juvavi cavi: This is frequent in the third Conju∣gation, where the Preterperfect Tense man times follows the Consonants of the Present, -bo makes bi, bibo, bibi, and psi, scribo, scripsi. co, ci. vinco, vici. no, vi. sino, sivi. xi. dico, dixi. üi. gigno, genui. do, di. edo▪ edi. ni. cano, cecini. si. ludo, lusi. psi. temno, tempsi. go, gi. lego, legi. po, psi. repo, repsi. xi. rego, rexi. pi. rumpo, rupi. si. spargo, sparsi. i. strepo, strepui. guo, xi. distinguo, distinxi. quo, qui. linquo, liqui. ho, xi. veho, vexi. xi. coquo, coxi. jo, xi. mejo, minxi. ro, vi, sero, sevi, & serui. lo, i. colo, colui. i. li. vello, velli. ssi. uro, ussi. mo, mi. emo, emi. ri. verro, verri. ii. tremo, tremui. so, vi. lacesso, lacessivi. psi. sumo, sumpsi. si. facesso, facessi. ssi. premo, pressi. i. pinso, pinsui.
to, vi. peto, petivi. dio, di. fodio, fodi. ti. verto, verti. gio, gi. fugio, fugi. i. sterto, stertui. pio, pi. capio, cepi. si. mitto, misi. pui. rapio, rapui. vo, vi. volvo, volvi. pivi. cupio, cupivi. xi. vivo, vixi. rio, ri. pario, peperi. uo, i. arguo, argui. tio, ssi. quatio, quassi (ob∣solete) x. struo, struxi.     xo, i. nexo, nexui. sco, vi. pasco, pavi Com∣posita . cto, xi. pecto, pexi.     xui. pexui.   dispesco, dispecui. cio, ci. facio, feci. ci. disco, didici. cui. elicio, elicui. sci. posco, poposci. These Rules hold in all Verbs of this Conju∣gation; But they are most what Regulated by the sound, or sometimes by the Original in words borrowed from the Greeks; sometimes also they borrow Tenses of Verbs of the same or like signification, which are out of use. There be certain Irregular Verbs in all or many of their Tenses, such as these that follow, whose Irregularities only are set down. Sum, and its Compound Possum(or potis sum.) Where any Person of Sum begineth with (s) pos- is added, and where with a vowel pot- or potis, as pot-es, pos-sim, possem for potessem. Nolo, is as much as non volo. Malo, as magis volo.
There are also Verbs derived from other Verbs, and their Terminations are used instead of Verbs Auxiliaries; as those ending in -urio (called com∣monly Frequentatives) signify a desire to, as Esurio, from Edo, is, sum, I desire to eat; Miurio, from Mingo, nxi, mictum, I desire to piss. In -sco, (called Inceptives) signify entring upon a thing or action, as Adolesco, I entr upon my growing Age; Quinisco, I am taking a napp or nod. As Adjectives are Adjuncts to Nouns, or Sub∣jects, so are ParticiplesParticiples to Action and Passion, or Verbs; And they are half Adjectives, taking from them form and part of their signification, or signifying Verbally as Adectives, and there∣fore are declined as Adjectives; and yet they partake (tho' Nouns) of Verbs, Tense, Signi∣fication and Derivation. Participles Are not a necessary part of Speech, for Ad∣jectives may supply all their use, but are chiefly invented for short and elegant speaking. There are four sorts of Participles, two come from Verbs Active, i. e. such as end in -ans, from Verbs of the first Conjugation, and -em, from those of the thre other: and in -urus. Two also come from Verbs Passive, those in -tus, -sus, -xus, and others in -ndus.
—ans Amans loving. Are declined lik Faelix. Actives in—ens Docens teaching. —urus Amaturus, about to love. All these are declined like bonus, and in Syntax follow the Rules of Adjectives. Docturus, about to teach. —tus Amatus, loved. Passives in —ss Visus, seen. —xus Flexus, bent. —ndus Amandus, to be loved. Docendus, to be taught. The two ending in -ans, or -ens, signify the Subject actually doing, being, or having, such a thing. Those ending in -urus signify the Subject in∣clined to be, do, or have, tho' not actually do∣ing; and those are called Actives, bcause agree∣ing with, or belonging to, the Subject or Agent. Those in -tus, -sus, -xus, signify the object actually done, been, or had, as Amatus, actually lved. Those in —ndus signify the object or thing it or worthy to be done, not expressing whe∣ther actually done or no; And these two last are called Passives▪ because they signify the ob∣ject or Nominative Case of the Verb Passive.
Of Adverbs. Adverb▪ are joyned to Verbs and sometimes to Nouns, for the expressing of some circumstances or Modes of being or acting, as, 1. In a Place, answering to the question, Vbi? as, Hîc, istîc, illîc, (iste hic) (ille hic locus,) alibi, nusquam, intus, foras, ubicunque, ubivis, sicubi, su∣periùs, inferiùs, ubiubi▪ alicubi, inibi, necubi. 2. To a Place, answering to the question, Quo? as, Huc, istuc, illuc, aliò, aliquò, siquò, eòdem, quòlibet, quòvis, neutrò, quòcunque. 3. From a Place, answering to the question, Vnde? as, Hinc, istinc, illinc, inde, alicunde, ali∣unde, sicunde, necunde, indidem, undelibet. 4. By a Place, answering to the question Quà? as, Hàc, illàc, istàc, alià, &c. as if viâ were un∣derstood. 5. Towards a Place, answering to the questi∣on, Quorsum? as Horsum, istorsum, illorsum, dex∣trorsum, sinistrorsum, &c. 1. In Time, answering to the question Quan∣do? as, Cras, herì, hodie, pridie, &c. 2. How long, answering to the question, Quamdiu? as Diu, &c. 3. How often, answering to the question, Quoties? as, Saepe, rarò, &c. Of Quantity, answering, &c. to quantùm? as, Multum, parum, satis, nimiùm, &c. Of Number, semel, bis, ter, quater, centies, mil∣lies, &c.
This comes in Page 34. Irregulars. Indicative Mode. sent Tense Sing. Sm, es, est, Plur. sumus, estis, sut.   Possum, potes, potest, possums, potestis, possunt.   Volo, vis, vul, volumus, vultis, volunt.   Nolo, nonvis, nonvult, nolumus, nonvultis, nolunt.   Malo, mavis, avult, malumus, mavultis, malunt.   Eo, i, it, imus, itis, eunt.   Qeo, quis, quit, quius, quitis, queunt.   Edo, es est, estis,   Fero, fers, fert, ferimus, fertis, feru.   Fio, fis, fit, fimus, fitis, fiunt.   Feror, ferris, re, fertur, ferimur, ferimini, .
perfect. Eram, ras, rat, Plur. ramus, ratis, ra.   Poteram.   Volebam, Nolebam, Malebam, bas, bat, Plur. , batis,   Ibam,   Quibam,   Ferebam,   Fiebam,   Ferebar, baris, bare, baur, Plur. baur, bamini, bantur. Perfect. Fui, isti, it, Plur. imus, itis, erunt, ere.   Poui,   Volui,   Nlui,   Malui,   Ivi,   Quivi,   Edi,   Tuli,
Preter. Imperfect. Sing. Amarem, ares are Plur. aremus aretis arent   Docerem eres eret eremus eretis erent   Legerem eres eret eremus eretis erent   Audirem ires iret iremus iretis irent Perfect Amaverim averis averit averimus averitis averint   Docuerim ueris uerit erimus eritis erint   Legerim eris erit erimus eritis erint   Audiverim iveris iverit iverimus ieritis iverint Pluperfect. Amavissem avisses avisset avissemus avissetis avissent   Docuissem uisses uisset uissemus uissetis uissent   Legissem isses isset issemus issetis issent   Audivissem ivisses ivisset ivissemus ivissetis ivissent Future. Amavero averis averit averimus averitis averint   Docuero ueris uerit uerimus ueritis uerint   Legero eris erit erimus eritis erint   Audivero iveris iverit iverimus iveritis iverint▪
Infinitive Mode. Present and Imperfect. Amare Perfect and Pluperfect Amavisse Docere Docuisse Legere Legisse Adire Adivisse Participles. Present. Amans Future. Amaturus Docens Docturus Legens Lecturus Audiens Auditurus Gerunds 3, Supines 2. Amandi, ando, andum. Amtum, Amatu Docedi, endo, endum. Doctum, Doctu Legendi, endo, endum. Lectum, Lectu Audiendi iendo, iendum. Auditum, Auditu.
Verbs Passive. Indicative Mode. Present Tense Sing. Amor aris, vel, are atur Plur. amur amini antur Doceor eris, vel, ere etur emur emini entur Legor eris, vel, ere itur imur imini untur Audior iris, vel, ire itur imur imini iuntur Preter-Imperfect. Amabar abari, vel, abare abatur abamur abamini abant Docebar ebaris, vel, ebare ebatur ebaur ebamini bantur Legebar Audbar iebaris, vel, iebare iebatur Future. Amabor aberis, vel, abere abitur abiur abimini abuntur Docebor eberis, vel, ebere ebitur ebimur ebimini ebuntur Legar eris, vel, ere etur emur emin entur Audiar ieris, vel, iere ietur imur iemini ientu Imperative Mode. Sing. Amare, ator Plur. aminor antor Docere, etor emior entor Logere, itor iminor untor Audire, itor iminor ntor
Subjunctive. Present. Sing. Amer eris, vel, ere etur Plur. emur emini entur Docear earis, vel, eare eatur eamur eamini eantu Legar aris, vel, are atur amur amini antur Audiar iaris, vel, iare iatur iamur iamini iantur Preter-Imperfect. Aarer areris, vel, arere aretur aremur aremini arentur Docere ereris, vel, erer eretur eremur eremini erentu Legerer Audirer ireris, vel, ere iretur Infinitive Mode. Prsent and Imperfect Amari Doceri Legi Audiri Participles. Present Amatu Future Doctus Docendus Lectus Legeudus Audit Adiendut
Of Order, inde, deinde, deinceps, praeterea, &c. Of Quality, doctè, pulchrè, benè, malè, forti∣ter, &c. many of these admit Comparison. Of Separating, seorsum, separatim, singulatim, &c. Of Gathering together, simul, unà, pariter, &c. Of Doubting, forsan, forsitan, fortassis, &c. Of Calling to, O, heus, eho; Of Affirming, profectò, cert, nae, ità, quidni, &c▪ Of Denying, non, had nquaquam, minimè, &c. Of Forbidding, nè. Of Confirming, certè, sanè, planè, nempe, uti∣que, &c. Of Swearing, herculè, pol, aedipol, mehercules, &c. Of Choosing, potiùs, satiùs, potissimùm, imò, &c. Of Exhorting, eja, agè, agitè, agedum, eho∣dum, &c. Of Wishing, utinam▪ o, osi, si, ut. Of Shewing, en, ecce. Of Comparing, magis, minùs, maximè, &c. Of Likeness, ita, itidem, tanquam, &c. Of Happening, fortè, fortuitò, casu, fortunà. Of Intension, valde, magnopere, impensé, &c. Of Remission, sensim, paulatim, pededentim, vix, aegrè. Of Excluding, tantù, solùm, tantūmodo, so∣lummodò, &c. Of Diversity, aliter, secus. Of Granting, Licèt, estò, sit it, sit sanè. Of a thing not finished, ferm, feré, prope, pro∣pemodum, &c. Of Explaining, putà, utpote, utput.
Of Prepositions. Adverbs signify the manner, time, place, or some other circumstance of doing, and there∣fore are joyned unto Verbs. Prepositions signify some Relation of one thing of Person to another, either as Distance, Situation, Cauality, or the like. As Of distanc and  Situation. Tho' these that sig∣nify local distance or Situation are orrowed to signi∣y things of lik Nature. Cause, act, or de∣pendance. Ad, to. * Apud, at. Adversus, against. Adversum, Contra Ante, before. * Cis, on this side. Citra, Circum, about. Circa, Erga, towards. Extra, without. In, into. Intre between. * Infra, below. Itra, within. Iuxta, by. Pone, behind. Praeter, besides. Super, above. Supra, Trans, beyond. Vltra, Versus, towards. Ob, * for. Propter, Per, by. Penes, in the power. Post after. * Secundum, according to. Vsque, untill. A, from. Ab, Abs, De, of, or concerning. E. of, out of. Ex. Pro, for, or instead of. Absque, without. Sine, In, in. * Cum, with (in composi∣tion, con) *
Prae, before.* Coram, before. Sub, under. * Clm, privily. Palam, openly. Tenus, until, up to. Accus. Case. Those marked * in composition with Verbs go vern mostwhat Da. Case. Abla. Case. Note, Tenus, if the Substantive be of the Plu∣ral Number, governs a Genitive Case, Aurium tnus, genuum tenus, (altitudini,) or some such word being understood, as up to the (height of the) ears, knees. Super, Govrn both Cases. Sub, Subtr, Cum, tenus, Versus, usque, are often set after the Noun, Nobiscum, cpulo tes, Londinum versus, ad Occidentem usque. Am, di, dis, re, se, con, are Prepositions ne∣ver used but in composition.
These Prepositions are also compared. Citra, citerior, citimus. Citer is also Read. Itra, interior, intimus. Infra, inferior, inimus. Ante, anterior. Vltra, ulterior, ultimus. Extra, exterior, extremus. Exter also. extimus.   Supra, superior, supremus. Superi and Posteri still in use. summus. Post, posterior, postremus. Prope, propior, proximus, and hence proximior, Ovid. Of Conjunctions. Conjunctions are principally used to joyn Sen∣tences together, and therefore they make those, which by the Logicians are called Hypothetical Propositions, a great force of Speech depends upon them. Sentences, I say, for when they seem to joyn only Nouns(no Sentence can be without a Verb) yet they intimate the Verb, or other Regiment expressed, which is to be repeated to every one of these Nous, tho' for brevity it be omited; as, Emi  centum aurei & pluris, i. e. & emi pluris. Pater & Mater abijt oratum. And there∣fore
many times the Verb is put in the Plural Number, as if (illi) or (nos) or (vos) wer understood; as, Ego & tu (nos) sumus in tuto. Xenophon & Plato (illi) fuêre aequales. Copulatives, joyn the Sentences together, with∣out shewing any other dependence one upon another. First affirmatively, Et, que, quoque▪ ac, atque; Deinde, porrò, insuper, which intimate the order. Cum, tum, vel, which are doubled or corresponding one to another. Secondly, or Negatively, Nè, neque. Disjunctives, Aut, ve, vel, seu, sive. Causals, which inferr the reason of what was said before, Nam enim, etenim, naque, quia, quòd, quippe, quoniam, quandoquidem. Illatives, which inferr the Conclusion, upon somewhat preceding. Ergo, ideo, igitur, itaque, proinde, ideirco, &c. Conditionals argue such dependance of the An∣tecedent and Consequent Sentences, that if the first be true, the other is also true, but if the o∣ther be false, the former is also false; as,si, sin, dum, tum, modo, dummodo, ni, nisi. Discretives, which make a difference of the Consequent from the Antecedent, sed, verè, at, ast, atqui verùm &c. Saltem, certè, &c. Dubitatives and Interrogatives, An, anne, num, utrùm, nuquid, nene. Exceptives, which except the Consequent from the Antecedent, and their Redditives, deny the Consequent, as, Et si, tamesi,  etiamsi, quan∣quam, quamvis, &c. to which correspond, Ta∣men,
attamen, veruntamen. Declaratives, as, Vti, veluti, sicut, sicuti, seu tanquam. Of Interjections, Interjections are questioned by some, whether they are to be accounted Parts of Speech, be∣cause they signifying suddain motions, or ex∣pressions of the Passions of the Soul, are rather sounds only then words; As are those of Beasts, which, having no Language, yet have cerain noises or sounds to express their wants, and o∣ther affections. In some Languages they are ac∣counted Adverbs. There's no need of any dis∣course concerning them, since they are known sufficiently by their Pronunciation.
Of Syntax. HItherto we have spoken only of single words, it follows that we speak of them as united into Sentences. WOrds are joyned together in a Sentence, either By Concord. or, Rection. 1. Between the Subject and the Verb. 2. Between the Subject (or Substantive) and the Adjective. To every Sentence are necessarily required First, a Suppositum, (most poperly so called which cometh before a Verb-Active) Subject, or Noun of the Nom. Case, of which the Speech is made, or something instead of it, to come be∣fore the Verb. 2dly. A Verb, to agree with the Nom. Case, or Subject, shewing the Relation of being, doing, or suffering, betwixt the Subject and the predi∣cae, which is that spoken of the Subject. 3dl. Somewhat to follow the Verb, which they call a Predicate, and is spoken of the other, and is many times included in the Verb, as Rex Venit, i. e. Rex est Veniens. Note, that there are divers sorts of Sentences. 1. That which hath no more then one Verb,
and the dependents upon it, which some Au∣thours call Periodus Supina; as Prosperum selus vulgò virtus vocatur. 2. Which consists of more then one Member, and of more then one Verb, but so that each Member stands by it self; as Christus è coelo, glorificate: Christus in terram, ob∣viam prodite. Which period consists of four Mem∣bers, the two later corresponding elegantly to the two former, separated by an half-period or colon▪ 3. Which consists of divers Sentences, but some interposed between the parts of ano∣ther; which interposition is either by a Con∣junction; as Fortuna, cum blanditur, captatum, venit. Quae nocitura tibi, quámvis sint chara, relinque. Or by a Relative; as Deforme est, quos dignitate prae∣stas, ab ijs virtute superari. Quem spe transit, ca∣sus aliquando invenit. Or by a Participle, or by an Ablative Case put absolutely, or by a Paren∣thesis. And therefore in Construing, it is best for a young Scholar to dispose the words after the natural order, separating the Sentences one from another; beginning with the Voc. Case, then the Nom. and what depends upon it, then the Verb with the Adverb joyned to it, next the Ac∣cusative with its dependents, then the Abla. or Dative, as they follow▪ It is necessary also to sup∣ply all Ellipsis's, Antecdents, Defective Cases, one Verb applied to divers Nom. Cases, or the same Nom. Case to divers Verbs, Subauditur's, &c. Ellipsis, or omission of a word is very frequent in the Latin, as it is in all Languages that affect
brevity. Such words are of Nouns Substantive which signify a thing common or well known; Areola longa denûm pedum [mensurâ.] Verbs also▪ especially Substantives, and Prepositions; Vacu [à] curis. The particulars see in the Rule following. Note, also that the Latins seem to speak many times rather according to the matter and signi∣fication, then the words and ordinary Constru∣ction, as, Omnium rerum mors est extremum. Dumillia viri. Abundantia earum rerum quae prima mortales ducunt. Salust. Post quam cremata est Ilion. Ovid. Decipimur specie recti pars maxima vatum. Populus supermur ab uno. Ego Petrus & Paulus currimus. Tu mecum gaudemus. Alter alterius onera portate. Scelus ludificatus et Virginem. Infinite are there examples, which Grammarians reduce to Figurative and Anomalous expressions. The First Concord. The Verb agreeth with its Nom. Case (Sub∣ject, Suppositum) in number and person, i. e. the Verb is the same number and person, as its Suppositum, as, Magister legit. But an Infinitive Mode requires an Accus. Case before it, which is resolved by quod, ut, nè, quin; as, Non dubito Christum dixisse, i. e. quin Christus dixerit. Yet Ininitive Modes also sometimes have Persons going before them, i. e. when they are used for the Imperfect Tense, for then coepit, or the like is understood, as omnes omnia bona dicere [coe∣perunt.]
Ordinarily the Person is the Nom. Case co∣ming before the Verb, but in Verbs called Im∣personals, the Thing cometh before the Verb, as, Oportet me ire Oxonium, ire Oxonium cometh before Oportet. And commonly the whole Sentence is the Subject. And indeed there are no Verbs Imper∣sonals, but all have Persons (except Infinitive Modes) the most used in the third person Sin∣gular, when the Subject is well known, as, Pluit, i. e. Aqua pluit. But if there be an Extra∣ordinary Subject, it is expressed, as Saxa pluunt. This is if Pluit be taken as a Verb-Neuter, But if as a Verb-Active, then Deus, or Iupiter luvius is understood. So the third Persons of Verbs-Passive are ma∣ny times used, as if they were Impersonals, espe∣cially when the Subject or Nom. Case, is includ∣ed in the Signification of the Verb, as [potus] bibitur; vivitur [vita] exiguo meliùs; for vivitur is the same with vita ducitur, and is therefore used, as it were, impersonally. And for those generally called Impersonals, Oportet, libet, licet, , poenitet, piget, mi∣seret. Some of them, as dcet, poenitet, licet, are Personals, and have oftentimes their Suppositum expressed; the other also (oportet, piget, libet, licet) have always an Infinitive instead of a Noun to com before them: In the others their Subject is included in their signification; as [taedium] tui me taedet, taedet being taedium capit, in poenitet, poena is included, in miseret, miseriae, and perhaps opus, in oportet. But because the mat∣ter
requires ordinarily no other then a third person, they are improperly called Imperso∣nals; wherefore if there be occasion to signify another person, these Verbs are so used. Si no dedecui tua jussa. Stat. The Second Concord. The Adjective, whether Noun, Pronoun, Par∣ticiple, or Relative, is of the same Case, Gender and Number, with its Substantive, (suppositum or Sub∣ject:) But in Relatives the Substantive is to be repeated over again in the Case of the Relative, and therefore sometimes that Case of the Substan∣tive only is expressed, as Bellum crudelissimum, qu [bello] omnes premebantur. Vltra eum locum qu [loco] Germani frequentes consederant. Popuo ut placerent [fabulae] quas fecisset, fabulas. If a Verb hath two Nom. Cases,Reg. I. or an Adje∣ctive two substantives joyned together with a Conjunction, or in Poetry with [cum] (as Re∣mus cum fratre Quirino Iura dabant.) they agree with the more worthy person and gender; Ili cum Lauso de Numitore sati. But change many times the number, (the person being un∣derstood) two Singulars being equall to one Plural, as, Ego & Lelia sumus amici. Tu sorórque boni estis. So Nouns of Number, and Collectives, many times have an Adjective or Verb Plural: Turba ruunt, i. e. Turba [ruit, hi & illi] ruunt. Pars in frusta secant.
Many times the Verb (especially Substantive) is understood,Reg. II. and many times the Suppositum both to the Verb and Adjective; And if the Ad∣jective without Substantive be of the Masculine gender, or Feminine, a person [viz. vir or foe∣mina,] if of the Neuter a thing [negotium] is understood, as Triste [negotium] lupus [est] stabulis. Sunt [homines] quibus [hominibus] in Satyrâ videor [ego] nimis acer. Est [homo] qui nec Spernit. Sunt [aliqui homines] quos notaverat. Si d te mordet, sumptum filij quem faciunt, i. e. Si id [negotium scil. sumptûs] t mordet, quem sumptum filij faciunt. Vrbem quam statuo vestra, i. e. Ea urbs quam Vrbem statuo. Eunuchum quem dedisti nobis quas turbas dedit, i. e. iste Eunuchus quem Eu∣nuchum dedisti. Quam quisque nôrit artem in hâc [arte] se exerceat. Many times a whole,Reg. III. or some part of Sen∣tence is the Suppositum, as Ingenuas didicisse fideliter artes Emollit mores. In tempore veni quod primum est. If an Adjective or Verb be placed between two Suppositum's it may agree with either of them,Reg. IV. as Amantium irae amoris redintegratio est, sive, sunt. Avis quae (or qui) passer appellatur. Lutetia quam (or quos) Parisios dicimus: Tho it is better it should agree with that which is the Fonndation of the Sentence.
Of Rection. I. Nominative Case. The Copula or bond of all Speech (as the Lo∣gicians observe) is Sum with its Cases: which in truth denotes nothing else but that the Sub∣ject and Predicate signify the same, as Homo est animal, the meaning is what is signified by Ho∣mo, is also signified by Animal. Wherefore it is necessary that Sum, and such like Verbs should have such a Case after them, as they have before them, which is the Nom. except in the Infinitive Mode, for then it is the Accus. both before and after. Such like Verbs they call. 1. Verbs Substan∣tive. 2. Many Verbs Passive, as dicor, vocor, &c. 3. Many Neuters, as Maneo, dormio. Vt hoc La∣trcinium potiùs quàm bellum nominaretur. Terra manet immobilis. Many times the Precedent Case is understood, and not expressed, as, Licet nobis [nos] esse bonos: Cupio [me] dici doctum: Fuit magni animi non esse Supplicem, Hoc, [nempe eum] non esse suppli∣cem [signum] magni animi. En, ecce, and divers Interjections govern not a Nom. Case, but a Verb is understood, or Voc. Case, and sometimes an Accus. Ecce homo i. e. [hic est] homo. Ecce hominem, i. e. vide hunc ho∣minem. II. Genitive Case. The General Rule is this that (of) which cannot be changed into (concerning) or (from)
before a Noun Substantive, requires that Substan∣tive to be of the Gen. Case; And this happens generally when two Nouns, not signifying the same thing, come together: for then the later is of the Gen. Case. Dei misericordia, Gods mer∣cy, or, the mercy of God; the Gen. Case in Englis being made by adding (s) to the Nom. Puer bonae indolis, a Youth of good towardliness. Instar Montis▪ for, Note that Instar is a Sub∣stantive undeclinable, and ad is commonly un∣derstood, as, ád instar [similitudinem] montis. Note, that many Adjectives, Participles, and Ad∣verbs stand also instead of Substantives; and there∣fore govern a Gen. Case, as, Cupidus [cupitor] auri: Amans [amator] virtutis: Tenax [tentor] pecuniae: And many of such Substantives being dis∣used, the Adjectives themselves, and Participles, stand for the Substantives, as, Conscius furti. Im∣patiens irae. For Adverbs, as, abundè fabularum; affatim pe∣cuniae, i. e. abundantia sive copia. Tunc temporis; ubi gentium, or the like; for tunc signifies time, as ubi doth place. Tunc, i. e. illâ horâ, vel parte, temporis. Vbi, i e. in quo loco, gentium. Sometimes also the precedent Noun is under∣stood, and not express'd as, Boni viri [officium] est. Verbs of esteeming, accusing, condemning, ad∣monishing, acquiting, pietying, and such as are like the Adjectives of the Rule precedent, as of Possession: Sum, interest, refert, &c. govern a Gen. Case, because the general word is understood.
Parvi [pretio] penditur proitas. Accusat eum [cri∣mine] furti. Damnatur [crimine] repetundarum. Miseret me [miseria] tui. Hic animi [dubio] pendet. In these also more generall some Substan∣tive is implied in the Verb, or understood, as, Curâ, causâ, crimine, pretio, dubio, &c. and there∣fore most of these Verbs also do govern a Noun in the Abla. Case. Magno virtus aestimatur. Con∣demnabo te eodem crimine. Meâ [causâ, vel gra∣tiâ] refert, interest,&c. So Memini, and the like, govern a Gen. Case, by an Ellipsis of a Noun. Meminit [memoriam] mei. Satagit [agit Sat] rerum suarum. Venit in mentem [recordatio] illius diei. And therefore many times they govern an Accus. of the Person, in whom is the Action or Passion, as taedet [taedi∣um habet] me tui. So Miseret, misereor, pudet, piget, poenitet, &c. have a Gen. Case by an Ellipsis. [Ipse] miseret sui. [udor] peccati pudet me. The Names of laces with the English (at) are in the Gen. Case, where, (Vrbe, oppido,) or such like is understood, as, Vixit [in urbe] Lon∣dini. He lived at London. govern a Gen. Case, a Noun being understood. Romanorum [Romanus] fortior. Many times a Gen. case is added to Verbs and Adjectives after the manner of the Greeks, or ra∣ther a Nn being understood; Desine [mentio∣nem facere] querelarum. In general all Verbs in Composition govern such Cases as they do out of Composition, as,
Quod eos soire aut nostra aut ipsorum interesset [i. e. esset inter officia vel munera nostra, vel officia ipso∣rum] Interest Regis rectè facere, i. e. est inter [mu∣nera] Regis, &c. Quae Superest Claudij aupona, i. e. Quae est super, &c. To which add Refert, i. e. rei fert. Vel dic quid referat intra Naturae fins vi∣venti. i. e. rei ferat. Mea unius est Remp. defendere i. e. est inter mea [officia] [mei inquam unius [officia] &c. Or Mea [cura mei] unius est Remp. &c. Or. [de] meâ [curâ pars] est Remp. &c. III. Dative Case. All Verbs that either signify, or include in their signification any acquisition, getting, giving, offering, or the like, (that is almost all Vrbs,) also all Nouns and  articiples, which include or suppose such a Verb, govern a Dative ase, and those Datives have to before them; as praesidio; a defence to thee; or, thou hast obtained me for thy defence. Sacrificium, [quod Sacrificetur vel tribuatur] Deo. Huic habeo quod detur. So, tibi doceo; tibi soli amas; Mater, at cui vides, Med▪ But all these and the like in a different sense from the Accusative; i. e. to the advantage of any one. So, tibi decet; huic latuit; huic dormio; huic succurro, huic misereor; Sen. Iubeo tibi; I give thee Commandement. Vae [est] victis. Surripuit mihi os; lac subducitur agnis; as we say to gain thy loss. Mihi cuncta perent quisquis est Hecubae est miser. So when two Dative Cases, they both signify acquisition; erit tibi laudi; hoc, erit mihi curae. the one signifying the end why or the
thing which is acquired, the other the Person to whom acquired. But attinet, pertinet, and such like, tho' the Participle (to) belong to them, yet govern not a Dat. but an Accus. Case, with the Preposition ad. Heus! quid ad te pertinet? Perhaps because those words signify not the relation of Acquisi∣tion or the like, or because it so pleased the Founders of the Language, who have used their li∣berty, when no reason for it; as they say noceo tibi; but laedo te. IV. Accusative Case. The Accusative Case follows all Verbs Active▪ or, signifying actively, and there is no Active that hath not an Accusative Case express'd, or understood, terra movet, [Se:] It also comes be∣fore an Infinitive Mode Passive. Amo te; cupio i amari à me; ardebat Alexin; ambulat maria; terras navigat. It also follows Verb Neuters, if a pre∣position be understood. Vixit annos centum, i. e. per annos centum; ante annos centum; in hunc an∣num. Eo [ad, in, versus] Romam. Pendet [adcircà] libras centum. Nouns, also and Adverbs, have an Accusative with a Preposition, prid [ante] Compitalia. Obsidio vix [in] paucos di tolerabilis. Albus [quoad] dentes. Fractus [quoad] membra. But sometimes a Verb is also under∣stood; O! [miremini] curas hominum! E [videte] quatuor aras. Ecce [spectate] hominem.
V. Ablative Case. The Ablative Case is always governed by a Preposition expressed or understood. Doctior [prae] omnibus. Major est calceus [quám pro] pede. [Sub] Paulo praeceptore discam. And is applied to all Verbs Passive where there is the Preposition a or ab: And by many Actives where of or from is expressed or understood; They are frequent∣ly expressed in Latin. Hoc á te petit, sperat, ac∣cipit, Distat à Lutetiâ. Liberatur á malo. Tho' sometimes also they be understood. Cavere malo. Tecto prohibere. Likewise Nouns that signify the matter where∣of a thing is made, the Instrument whereby, the cause from which, the manner how, are all put af∣ter Adjectives and Verbs in the Abla. Case, as, Ardet [prae] dolore; Perfodere [cum] Sagittis; Punire supplicio: Totâ [in] cute contemisco: Lade floret: Foelix [in] nato: Dives opibus: [a] Iove natus: Ingenio vacuus: Vti [de] aliquo: Fungor [ab] officio: Dignatur honore. Sometimes Potior governs a Gen. Case, as, Potiri rerum, then facultate is understood. In all these the Preposi∣tions are understood, which, in ours and most modern Languages, are commonly expresed; Insomuch that whereas we use divers Verbs in∣differently with or without Prepositions, the same Verbs in Latin govern sometimes an Accu. sometimes an bl. Case. Vtor, I use, I make use Vescor carnes, carnibus, I eat flesh, I feed upon .
When two Nouns, or more, one a Substantive, the other an Adjeive or articiple, come toge∣ther, and are not govern'd of any Verb, they are put in the Abl. ase absolutely. In our Language we exprss this by (being) or a Participle Active, Me vivo, I being alive. Te amante, Thou loving, or eing in love with. And is used both for brevi∣ty and Elegancy, it being instead of an interpo∣sed Sentence, [a] rupto foedere regni. Marco [sub judice palles; so in these also a Preposi∣tion is understood. Note, that antiently the Abl. ended both in e and i, whence Ruri agit, i. e. rue. The Answer is made in the same Case in which the Question is asked: (except in Pos∣sessives, as, Cujum pecus? Aegonis. Cujus pecus? Meum: or when the Verb governs divers Ca∣ses, Quanti Constitit? Denario. Furtíne accusa an hoicidij? Vtroque: which shews that in Verbs of valuing [pretio] or some such Noun is understood.) Quid agitur? Studetur. Quis di∣ves? Qui nil cupit. Quis pauper? Avarus. This Rule is also observed when the Question is made by Adverbs, which signify as much as the Que∣stion made by the other: Such are, Vbi, i. e. in qui loco est; Vbi vivit? arthagine. Nons of the First and Second Declension are many times put in the Gen. Case, and then Vrbe, or such like is understood. Qo, i. e. in qem locum? Quo vadis? in An∣glim Qua, i. e. per quam viam? Qua iter fecit? P Gaam.
Vnde, i. e. à, è, ex, de quo loco? Vnde venis? Ab Inferis. Quamdiu, i. e. per quod tempus? Quam∣diu vixit? Per tres annos. Quamdudum, Quando, i. e. quo tempore? Quando accidit? Superioribus diebus. And therefore since any Proposition may be expressed by a Question, whenever the answer is, tho' the Question be not, expressed, the Go∣vernment is the same. Comparatives require an Abla Case, with the Sign [than] (the Preposition prae, pro, or quam being understood) latone doctior. More learned, or learneder, than Plato. The Superlative, and Partitive Nouns (and Comparatives when they have the Nature of Su∣perlatives, i. e. when preferred to more, or when a Partitive, as Animalium fortiora quibus crassior est Sanguis. Fortior manuum est dextra;) and Nouns of number require a Gen. Case: Philosophorum [Philosophus] maximus. Vter horum. Sapientum [Sapiens] octavus. The Subject being always understood. Comparatives and Superlatives also require the same Case their Positive doth; Similior Patri. Literis quam Armis instructior. Gratissim mihi fuerunt.
De Accentu. PRosodiam dicimus eam partem Gramma∣tices, quae docet rectè pronunciare Syllabas, qoad Accentum & Quantittem sive tempus. Unusquisque inter loquendum duplici utitur Tono, sive Vocis modulamine. Gravi scil. sive or∣dinario, & Acuto sive vehementiore: Et in pro∣nunciatione periodorum & Sententiarum voees magis notabils variatione Toni in acutiorem animis Auditorum firmiùs imprimuntur: Quales sunt illae locutiones Tropicae, Metaphoricae, Hyper∣bolicae &c. vel Figuratae, quales voces iteratae, cor∣respondentes, oppositae; Aliae denique omnes qui∣bus totius ententiae Emphasis inesse videtur; Sicut Epitheta, voces praecipuae in Exclamationi∣bus, Interrogationibus, & quibuscunque sensum loquentis efficaiùs exprimentibus. Sed haec non ad Grammaticum sed Rhetorem spectant. 2. At in pronunciatione vocum accentuatur ea Syllaba quae gratiorem efficit sonum; Et an∣tiquitiùs quidem cum Lingua Latina (de quâ so∣lùm hic tractare intendimus) fuit etiam verna∣cula, meliùs & accuratiùs de hâc pronuncia∣tionis ratione judicabatur consuetudine & usu, tum de accentu tum de tempore; sive syllaba erat gravior aut acutior, brevior aut longior: Nec verò multitudo pedes novit, nec ullos numeros tenuit, nec illud quod offendit, aut ur, aut in quo offendat, intellexit: Et tamen omnium longitudinum & bre∣vitatum in sonis, sicut autarum graviumque vo∣cum,
judicium ipsa Natura in auribus illorum col∣locavit, ic Orator. Idem in Paradoxis, Histrio, si paulò se movit extra numerum, aut si versus pronunciatus est unâ syllabâ brevior aut longior, exibilatur & exploditur. Hodie ferè in desue∣tudinem abijt Accentus, nec satis accuratè de Tempore distinguitur, unâquaque Gente Latinae Linguae enunciationem propriae suae confor∣mante. Franci quidem Accentum ultimae syllabae contra totius mundi consuetudinem imponunt, ut & breves frequenter producunt, ut Dominus, ac si scriberetur . 3. Ratio autem & intentio Accentuum omnino alia est à differentiâ pronunciationis vocalium, sive literarum, (tempus enim vocales tantùm re∣spicit) haec enim omnino consistit in temporis & morae observatione quâ quaeque vocalis pro∣nunciabatur; illa autem in variatione Toni & elevatione vel depressione vocis, eo modo quo nos inter canendum a suescimus, neque ab hodiernis Graecis penitus omittitur: & in Carminum re∣citatione, quae eorum Cantus erat, maxima cura habebatur utriusque tum Accentûs tum Temporis. 4. Accentus Acutus sive Toni variatio apud nos (non loquimur hic de Scripturâ quâ nonnun∣quam tum Gravis tum Circumflexus notatur) nunquam fieri debet in ultimâ syllabâ; Ut in ultimâ Accentus siat Latinitas vetat. Serv. nisi quis dicere velit Enclyticas que, ne, ve, ce, Accen∣tum in ultimum praecedentis more Graecorum transferre. Sed cum illud praestant, ipsae quidem voci praecedenti tanquam partes adjunguntur,
adeo ut penultima acuatur. 5. Sed in Dyssyllabis omnibus & Polysyllabis longa penultima acuitur: Quod si penultima sit brevis Accentus est in antepenultimâ ut Dóminus àffatim. In compositis vero à facio fa— retinen∣tibus accentus est in fa— ut benefácis, frigefácis, nobis pleniorem A sonum respicientibus: An∣tiquitùs enim acuebatur in antepenultimâ. Mo∣nosyllabarum Gravis est pronunciatio, sit brevis vel longa; unde fit ut ultimae in Carmine syl∣labae ratio non habeatur. 6. Polysyllaba accuuntur tantùm in Antepe∣nultimâ licèt ultima acuatur ut Mènsâ. Antiqui∣tùs videtur fuisse differentia Temporis non Toni. In Virgíli, Aemíli & similibus accentus adhuc servatur in penultimâ, quia antiquitùs dicebant Virgílie, Aemílie. Ultima enim Vocalis primò vix pronunciari coepit, dein & omitti, vel for∣tè coalescere.
De Tempore. 1. UNaquaeque Vocalis duplex habet Tem∣pus, Longum & Breve.§. II. Graeci—e & -o-diversa nomina & Characteres tribuerunt, Sed pari ratione bina deberent esse a, i, u, quae ideo Communes dicuntur, quia idem Character utrique Tempori communiter inservit. Verum apud Latinos, prout & Nostrates, singuli sunt Characteres, potestates diversae: & usu & consuetudine quae longae, quae breves plerunque dignoscuntur, neque ver∣naculam, ut peregrinam Linguam, discntibus adeo necessaria est Characterum varietas. Anti∣quitùs tamen vocales longas duplicatione elon∣gabant ut feelix, poopulus. (arbor) maalus (arbor) & pro i—longum usurpabant—ei. 2. Temporis praeter longum & breve nullam differentiam agnoscimus: Et brevis Syllabae u∣num tempus esse dicitur, longae verò duo; hoc est Syllaba longa duabus brevibus est aequalis. Sed revera magna est differentia temporum tum longi tum brevis. Aliae enim multo celerius pro∣nunciantur, adeo ut vix earum sonus audiatur, ut, Alvearia, Harpyia, Cui, Anteambulo, Eadem, Dij, Inquino, Anteire, &c. Syllabae quae pluribus constant Consonantibus, vel etiam vocalibus so∣nantioribus, majorem postulant dilationem & quò è pluribus eò impeditiùs & productiùs pronun∣ciantur, ut, Ex, Rex, Grex; nulla autem syllaba
contine plusquam sex literas, ut Stirps. Scrobi. 3. A, & O, sonantiores sunt, majorem enim oris apertionem postulant; V, & I, suaviores cum sibilatione quâdam pronunciantur; E, verò exilis. 4. Notandum est antiquam in prounciatione consuetudinem etiam literis & scriptione varia∣tis, ferè semper rtineri, ut Cāi, Pompēi, diēi, facieī & reliquis quintae Declinationis in—iei de∣sinentibus. Quoniam veteres dixerunt Caij, Pompeij, dieīj, facieij. Eeo, eis, eit, eitur, quae postea coaluerunt in Eo, is, it, itur, sic Punire erat poenire, Murus, moerus, Munire, moenire, & de moenia, Vti, oiti, Ludus, loidus, Cura, coira, Punicus à Poenus.
DeVocibus Graecis inter Latinos.§. II 1. GRaeca retinentia formam Graecorum, re∣tinent etiam quantitatem, hoc est , & ,Reg. I. semper sunt Naturâ longae, , & , semper na∣turâ breves, , dubiae. Māter, Păter, Poēma, Orpheūs, Aër, Lertes, Dēïphobus, Diatypōsis, Me∣tamorphōsis, Antiphōna. In Graecis autem diver∣simode Scriptis variatur etiam quantitas, ut Eous, aliquando , aliquando , scribitur aliquando . 2. Graeca vero sequentia formam & analogiam Latinorum sequuntur etiam Regulas quantita∣tum Latinas.II. Graeca nomina cum in Latinum vertuntur, nostrâ Regulâ pronunciantur, nisi maneant Graeca; Sopha, Symphona, Monarcha, Geographa, Crepda, Oedipŭs, pi. 3. E Graecis derivata,III. fi Diphthongum servent, sunt longa, ut rphēus, Cassiopēia. Quod si diphthongum, servatis utrisque voca∣bus, dividant, prior est brevis, quia ante alteram, ut Orphĕüs, Polymnĕia. Si vero una Vocalis tantùm retineatur, & pri∣or, brevis est, ut Platĕa, Caesarĕa, Laodicĕa, Cy∣clopĕa. Academia est dubia quia scribitur &  frequentius autem brevis, quia saepius etiam  scribitur. Cheragra & non Chiragra scribitur apud Martial. Lib. 9. Epig. 93▪ quando scil. est brevis. Si posterior retineatur plerunque longa est, Aristobūlus, Oedipūs, podis, Darīus, Alexandrīa, Thalīa.
Regulae generales ante alias observandae.§. IV. CUm minimum Temporis sit unius vocalis,Reg. I. necesse est ut vocalis ante alteram sit brevis. Dus, Iustita. Sed  inter i & i nominibus quintae Decli∣nationis (ut dictum est) et aliquando etiam ane i solum longa est, dicebant enim aliquando fideij, speij, reij &c. tunc enim ei est longa. Pari ratione Fi cum suis, ubi non est r, etiam longa est; quia olim scriptum erat Feio & feirem; feires, postea vero solutâ diphthongo per Me∣tathein vocalium facta est fierem, fieres, &c. Sic etiam Genitiva in—iis sunt ambigua ut Vnius, illius, ipsius, olim enim dicebant Vneius, illeius, &c utrius, nutrīus, alter utrīus, solius, autem & als semper longae, alterus semper brevis. Diana liquando producitur ac i esset Deiana, aliquando corripitur ae si esset Deana. Cum duo brevia Tempora uni longo aequi∣valen, diphthongi omnes sunt longae, sunt enim aequales duabus ocalibus,II. Musae, aera, nam olim ut distintae vocales pronunciabantur, ut, pictai, aulqi, aës,  scribebantur aesar, Phaëthon—(In prosà adhunc separat vocales.) Duae etiam vo∣cales in eâem syllaba post s longae sunt ut sūa∣vis, sūetus, mansūetus; Praeo tantum dubia est.
Aliquando Diphthongus in duas resoluta vo∣cales in priori, Diphthongi quantitatem retinet, in altera, omittit, ut Eligēia; sed hanc Licentiam Poëtae videntur sibi assumpsse. Quid dicendum est de inqunat et de diph∣thongo ui generatim? Cum apud Horat. brevis est; Mihi videtur pronunciatum fuisse inkinat literis q et u coalescentibus. Duae vocales coalescentes per Crasin,II produ∣cuntur, ut, Cgo a Căgo, Tibicen pro Tibcen, t pro t, alīus pro alus. Bīgae pro bjŭgae, malo a măgis vlo, retinent enim tempus duarum bre∣vium. Sic et quae antiquum scribendi modum con∣trahunt, ut, Iūs, jūris, pro Ious, jouris, ūfens pro Oufens, sic et cōpruisse, vēmens, dēro, nil, cō∣nesto, bōbus, cōgito, bcula, ex cperuisse, vhĕ∣mens, dĕĕro, nihil, chnosto, bvibus, căgito, b∣vcula. Vocalis ante duas Consonantes vel duplicem,IV. (x et z) vel eandem iteratam, syllabam produ∣cit; licèt ipsa vocalis non sit longa, neque sem∣per ut longa pronuncietur. Pronunciatio enim talis Syllabae est impeditior, et hoc▪ sive in ∣dem Syllabâ ut, ars, abs, dns. Sive si una Con∣sonans sit in un, ali in aliâ Syllbâ, ut ig-nis, bèl-lum, vr-te; ive vocalis in unâ, Consonae in aliâ syllabâ ut ma-tris, a-mnis, a-cris, ambula∣crum, vel una demum in unius vocabuli sine, al∣tera in initio alterius, Formosamresonare, &c. Si, l, vel, r, sequantur mutam in eâdem syllabâ
(on in eâdem cum vocali) in Carminibus, syl∣laba ista praecedens frequenter est communis, etsi vocalis sit brevis. Et primo similis volŭcri, mox veravolūcris— Ovid. &c. Nox tenĕbras profert, Phaebus fugat inde te∣nēbras. Idem. In eâdem Syllabâ] nam ōbruo, quamōbrem et si∣miles sunt semper longae. Si vocalis sit naturâ longa nunquam fit brevis Sustulit hic Mātrem, Sustulit ille Patrem. Mart. Sio ācris, ātri, frātris, ambulācrum, delūbrum, sa∣lūber, volutābrum. Et pronunciatio sequitur Na∣turam vocalis. Ratio autem Regulae est; quia vocalis (quae conjungitur in sono istarum consonantium) in pronunciatione includitur in mutâ & liquidâ; Et proinde binae istae Consonantes in eundem ferè sonum coalescunt. F autem muta debet in∣telligi ut Si vocalis brevis in fine unius dictionis ante∣cedit duas consonantes (maximè Sc—Sp—St—) in initio sequenti, Poëtae Licentiâ suâ utuntur, projudicio producunt, vel (ut soepus) cor∣ripiunt. Imbuerē fragilique viros faedare triumpho. Occultā spolia, &c.
De Incrementis Nominum & Verborum.§. V. QUae ex alijs siunt, sive per Variationem Ca∣suum, sicut in Nominibus et Verbis; sive per Compionem, sive per Derivationem, sequun∣tur plerunque quantitatem eorum ex quibus siunt. Casus Nominum, quoad omnes syllabas praeter finalem,Reg. I. sequuntur quantitatem Nominativi. Mūsae, Măgistri, Lăpidis. Si Genitivus singularis habeat plures Syllabas quam Nom.II. penultima Genitivi habetur pro Incremento, & reliqui Casus servant quantitatem Genitivi in eorum incrementis. Sermōnis,—ōni, —ōne,—ōnes,—ōnibus. Iter (olim dicebatur ) & Supellx, & composita à Caput in—ps; duplex habent incre∣mentum, utrumque breve, itnĕris; supellectilis, prima est longa positione, altera brevis, & sola propriè dicitur incrementum. Et in bicptis etiam posterior est incrementum, prior enim syllaba est tantum explicatio simplicis Caput con∣tracti in Nominativo. Incrementum in primâ declinatione nullm reperitur. In secundâ verò brevis est,III. ut vir, viri, puer, puĕri. In tertiâ dissyllabi fcti ex Mo∣nosyllabis Nominativis plerunque longi; ut Rex, rēgis, Lex legis, Plebs, plebis, sol, solis. Ver, veris. Quae srvant vocalem Nominativi naturâ longam. Sed
grĕgis, dis, trŭcis, nŭcis, bvis, Ivis, măris sunt breves. Incrementum in—a est longum, Vectiglis, Calcaris, Titanis. Masculina vro in—al, &—ar, &—as corripiuntur, t, Sal, slis, par, pris cum composit is, mas, măris▪ Fax, facis, trabs, răbis, lampas lampădis, faeminina. Incremntum in —e, breve est, abies, abiĕtis, pes, pĕdis cum compositis & derivatis, Hymen, Hymĕnis. Excipiuntur in —eni, Lien, ēnis, Syren, ēnis. Incrmtum in i, vel y breve est, Nix, nvis, pix, pìcis, Stryx, Strjgis; Phrjgis, Stipis, pollcis, chalijbis. Excipiuntur Vibex, vibicis, apsis, apsidis, & Genitivus in —inis &—ynis a Graecis: Plurima item in—ix &—yx, sunt longa, felix, perdix; excipe ilcis, Histrcis, forncis, natrcis, mast∣gis quae corripiuntur. O Incrementum longum est, Sol, sōlis, Ros, rō∣ris, & omnia Comparativa, Melior,—ōris. Brevia autem sunt Neutra, ut, Marmor, bur, frigus, corpus, tempus, &c. Et composita ex . Item Memris, arbris, lepus lepris bvis, compos comptis. Et quae consonantem habent ante—s— ut, Scrobs Scrobis, & nomina Gentium, ut, Cap∣padcis, Allobrgis. V Incrementum breve est, murmŭris, furfŭ∣ris, gtŭris, pecŭdis. Excipiuntur Genitivi in—udis,—uris, &—utis, à Nominibus in—us, ut, Virtutis, tellūris, palūdis. Item. Pollūcis, frūgis.
Penultima Genitivi & Dativi Imparisyllabicī in Numero Plurali dicitur etiam Incrementum.IV. In—a—,—e—,—o—, producuntur. In—i—, &—u—, corripiuntur, ut quibus, trbus, montbus, lacŭbus, in dativis; sed non sem∣per in genitivis. Incrementum in quartâ Declinatione non da∣tur, & de incremento in quintâ priùs dictum est. De Incremento Verborum.§. VI. PRima syllaba & Characteristica Conjugatio∣nis semper servant propriam quantitatem. Crementum Verbi est quod excedit secundam personam Numeri singularis praesentis temporis Indicativi, Activi. Et ultima vocalis illius personae dicitur ab aliquibus primum crementum, vocales sequentes dicuntur esse in secundo cremento. A in omni Cremento longa est, Ammus,Reg. I. Le∣gebmus; Excipitur dămus, dăre &c à do, cum compositis. Quae tamen in secundo cremento producitur, dbmus, dabtis, dabtur. E in utroque cremento producitur,II. nisi post ponatur—r—nam tunc corripitur; sic omne prae∣sens tertiae Conjugationis cum praeterito imper∣fecto Subjunctivi Modi, ut, Legor, legĕris, legĕ∣rimus, legĕrem. Re ante re vel ris semper producitur Amarē∣ris,
amarre, legerris, audirēris. E, ante—rim,—ro, semper corripitur, Amavĕrim, amavĕro. Sicut & e in bĕris & bĕre, Amabĕris, Docebĕris. In crementis primis Sum, Fero, & Volo, e sem∣per corripitur, nisi obstet positio; Eram, ĕro, fĕ∣ram, vĕlim. I,III. in primo Cremento Verbi quartae Conju∣gationis semper producitur Audimus; Item in Verbis sum Nolo & Volo (cum Compositis) sitis, nolito, veltis, velmus, possimus. Itidem in praete∣rito in—vi,  etivi, petiveram. —Imus, in omni praeterito corripitur, vid∣mus, &c. In Subjunctivi praeterito arò, si un∣quam, producitur, in futuro autem tum corripi∣tur tum producitur. Licet multi praesertim a∣pud nos, & antiqui aliquot Grammaticis futu∣rum producunt ut a praeterito distinguatur. O,IV. In cremento producitur, Legitote. V, Corripitur, Volŭmus, Quaesumus. Perfectum dissyllabum priorem,V. & in plurali etiam habet longam, exceptis, ddi, stti, bibi, tŭli, fidi, scdi: Prima syllaba iterata in praeterito brevis est, ut & secunda. Excipiuntur Pepedi. Cecīdi. Omne praeteritum in—vi at—si desinens pe∣nultimam producit. Omne supinum dissyllabum priorem habet longum,VI. ut citum a cio; excipe dătum, stătum, à stiti, satum, tum, rătum, ctum à cieo, ltum, s∣tum, quitum, rŭtum. Omne supinum polysylla∣bum penultimam habet longam, Amatum, quae∣situm,
volūtum, &c. Exceptis quae desinunt in —itum praeteritis perfectis non desinentibus in —ivi. Postum, tradtum, montum, &c. Supina in—tum post u, a, i, e, quorum prae∣terita desunt in—vi longa sunt, ut vivi, vietum, flèvi, fletum, sic deletum, & composita a pleo, ad∣jūtum, auditum, amatum, at—ui corripiuntur, ut, monitum, moltum, altum, vel altum, vomtum, frenttum, gentum, streptum, sed inolevi, obsolevī, & exolevi,—ētum: abolevi, aboltum. Actum ab acui, argūtum, delibūtum, extum, futtum, im∣būtum, mintum, plūtum, sptum, sternutum, sta∣tūtum, sūtum, tribūtum, indūtum, excipiuntur. Rūtum autem breve est.
De Compositis.§. VII. COmpositum sequitur,Reg. I. in ijs Syllabis quae re∣cipiuntur a simplicibus, Regulam simpli∣cis; etiam Dipthongo aut Vocali variatâ. Lūdo, collūdo. Laedo, collīdo. Amīcus, inmīcus. Cădo, occdo. Caedo, occīdo. Sed à Dio, Nomina in—dcu, corripiun∣tur, Causidcus. à Nūbo, Pronŭbus; Connubium vero dubium. à Sōpio, fit semispitus. à Nōtus, agntus, & cogntus. à Iūro, dejĕro. à Fīdo, perfdus, unde tamen infdus, &c. Praepositiones eandem in Compositione re∣tinent Quantitatem,II. quam habuerunt extra com∣positionem. Longae autem sunt— A, āmando āverto. Excipe ăperio, nisi forsan componatur cum ab, & rejiciat consonam, ut, operio cum ob) E, ligo, mitto. S, sparo. Sēcurus. Dī, divido, praeterquam drimo & dsertus. C, sequente Consonà, cōgo. Dē dēpono.
Breves sunt. Ab, ăbeo. Ad, deo. In, neo. Ob, beo, mitto, perio. Pĕr, pĕreo. Sŭb, Sŭborno. Sŭpĕr, Sŭpĕraddo. Intĕr, inĕreo. Rĕ, rĕdeo, rĕnuo, rĕfero. Prō, naturâ longa est, tamen in aliquibus est brevis, ut in Prĕfiteor. Prtervus. Prficiscor. Prcella. Prcus. Prfanus. Prfundus. Prfect. Prnepos. Prfari. Prcello. Prfugus. Prfugio. Prfestu. Preptis. Prpero. Et in reliquis quae proficiscunter a  ante ut prpheta. Procumbo, procurro, profundo, propello, propulso, propago, (Nomen & Verbum) propino, sunt communia.
In ijs quae componuntur ex alijs non praepo.III. sitionibus, a & o, frequenter producuntur, quare, alioqui, quandōque.☞ In e, i, u, frequentius breves; Nĕfas, trĕde∣cim, nĕqueo. Biceps, bcelox, bvium, Agrcola, alger, manŭ∣mitto Exceptis quae vocalem naturâ habent longam; Sēdecim, nquam est enim a nec; memet, venei∣cus, vidlicet. Tamen vidsis breve est. Exceptis etiam Biduum, &c. Triceni, &c. Ni∣mirum, ibidem, ubique, &c. O, brevis est in Hodie, quque, quandquidom, & compositis cum Nomine, Sacrsanctus.
De Derivatis.§. VIII. DErivata retinentia vocalem Primitivorum, sequuntur etiam Quantitatem. Sălūbris à sălte. Sĕcūris à sĕcre. Lăvācrum à Lăvatum. Rĕfrt à Rĕfero. Rfert a r—fert. Suffoco a faux, Suffco a fcus, Sĕcuris a sĕo. Sēcurus à Praepositione se. Longae sunt è Brevibus. Vox, vōcis, à vco. Lex, lgis, a lĕgo. A Lectum supi∣no potius. Rēgula & Rex, rēgis. à rĕgo. A rectum su∣pino potius. Sēdes, a sĕdeo. (etiam sēdile.) Mbilis, à mveo. A mōtum. Sōpio, à spor. Feralis, à fĕrus. Mcero a măcer. Secius à sĕcus. Ambtus, (participium) ab ambtum. (Ambtus vero Nomen est brevis.) Brevia deriva∣ta è longis. Dux, dcis, à Dūco. Apta Dŭci non est Vxor, non aptà∣que Regi. Quae dci non est apta, nec apta rĕgi. Dcax, & Adjectiva in—us, a Dīco. Năto, à ātum.
Breva deri∣vata e Longis. Nto, à nōtum. Quăter, a quātuor (antiquitùs scri∣bebatur quattuor.) Fdes, à fīdo. Păgella, a pagina. Odium, ab ōdi. Săgax, à sagio. Arena, ărista, ab āreo. Cma, à cōmo. Cŭrulis, à curro, vel crrus. Frăgor, frăglis, à frango. Psui, à pōno. Gĕnui, à gigno. Ofella, ab Offa. Lŭcerna, à luceo. Mămilla, à mamma. Quăsillus, à quālus. Scŭtulatum, à scūtum. Sgillum, à signum. Slutum, à solvo. Tigillum, à tignum. Văricosus, à varix. Vlutm, à volvo. Ag Cog ntum ab Ag Cog nōvi. Relquum, à relīqui. Derivata Adjectiva in—ōsus, ōrus, āceus,II. lon∣ga: in—tius, vel—cius,—nus, &—mus fere semper brevia.
Derivata frequenter addunt vel demunt Con∣sonantem,III. ut Quantitatem mutent, ut Rettulit à rĕfero. Dsertus a dissero, fărina a farris. Derivata in—ites habent penultimam longam.IV. Adjectiva in—īnus à Rebus animatis sensitivis descendentia,V. item Distributiva Numeralia, No∣mina cognationis, Propria & Gentilia penulti∣mam producunt. Abellīnus. Adulterinus. Agri∣gentīnus. Amitīnus. Albīnus. Bombycīnus, &c. Adjectiva in—nus à Plantis, Lapidibus & alijs inanimata significantibus. Item ab Adver∣vijs temporalibus, aut Substantivis Anni Tem∣pestates notantibus, descendentia, penultimam corripiunt. Quercnus. Corallnus. Crastnus, Chrystallnus. Cedrnus. Hornotnus. Serotinus. Participia Passiva à Supinis facta seqnuntur plerunque Quantitatem Supinorum, Adjūtus, Petītus.
De Syllabis Medijs.§. IX. A producitur ante,Reg. I. g, & u, bundus, bilis, cu∣lus, la, lum, cea, ceum, cius, cia, cium, cus, ca, cum, dus, lis & le. In infinitis in—men & —mentum,—nius,—nia,—nium; in habentibus vocalem aut a ante r in finitis in aris, are, arius, arium, ante t in finitis in atius, aicus, ato, atus, atim, ates; in Ablativis & ab hisce derivatis. In Reliquis omnibus corripitur. E,II. producitur ante, c, d, l, m, t, r, in sub∣stantivis in—erium, ante—simus. In Reliquis Corripitur. I,III. producitur ante, qu; excipe relquum; re∣lquiae. In Verbalibus ante—bilis &—bundus, in derivatis à supinis penultimam producentibus, ante—culum, à Verbis quartae Conjugationis▪ ante do, dinis; Ante des, in Patronymicis a No∣minibus in eus: ante go; in Neutris, ante le; in Verbalibus ante men & mentum, à verbis quartae Conjugationis. In—inus exeuntibus modo non significent Materiam & tempus: Ante sinita in —na &—ne: Ante—tus in derivatis a Substan∣tivis: Excipiuntur Adverbia in tus, ut fundtus, pentus. Ante ta, tis, tes, tos, tim, tius in Verbali∣bus à quartâ Conjugatione. O,IV. producitur ante, n, s, t, cimum; In Neu∣tris habentibus m, ante, vel post o; ante—rius, ria, rium: rus, ra, rum. V,V. producitur ante, c, g, m, n, r, s, t, lis, &
lium in derivatis. Deiderativa autem corripiuntur, Esŭrio, Partŭrio. Excipe Scatūio. Nomina in urius, uria, Mrcŭrius, luxŭria. Etiam decŭrio. Excipiuntur etiam Nolmus, volŭmus, quae∣sŭmus, &c. Et composita à ruo in supinis erŭtum, &c. De Finalibus.§. ▪ 1 1 2 3 FInita in b,Reg. I. d, t, l, r, brevia. 4 5 6 7 8 in,II. , n, as, s, os, producuntur. 9 10 in,III. is, & us, corripiuntur. 11 12 in,IV. a, i, , longae. 13 14 in,V. e, breves; In, o, dubiae. in, y, breves.
1. Excipe Hebraea ut Iōb, Iacōb, Davīd. 2. Excipe sl, sōl, nīl, pro nihil, & He∣braea, ut Ioël. 3. Excipe fār, lār, nār, vēr, fūr, cūr, & pār, cum compositis, Graeca etiam in , ut Aer, cra∣tēr, charactēr &c. nisi patĕr & matĕr quae brevia sunt. Cōr producitur apud Ovid. 4. Nĕc, donĕc Corripiuntur. Fac, Masc. hic & Neut. hoc sunt communia. 5. Corripiuntur Forsăn, forsităn, ăn, tamĕn, attamĕn, veruntamĕn, n, cum compositis exin, subn, den, pron: Quae patiuntur Apocopen, vidĕn, audn, nemn, nost n; Nomina etiam in —en quorum Genitivi exeunt in nis, ut Carmn, crimĕn, &c. Graeca in . Ilion, elion, &c▪ Ac∣cusativi in in vel yn, Alexn, Ityn. etiam in an a Nominativis in a, Iphigeniăn. Aeginăn. 6. Excipiuntur ea quorum Genitivus exit in ădis, ut Văs, Pallăs. Et Accusativus pluralis No∣minum Graecorum tertiae Declinationis, ut He∣roăs, Hectorăs. 7. Brevia sunt Nomina tertiae Declinationis imparisyllabica, in quibus penultima Genit▪ vi brevis est, ut milĕs, segĕs, divĕs, &c. (Longae sunt tamen abiēs, ariēs, cerēs, pēs cum compositis, & paris;) ĕs quoque à sum cum composit is, po∣tĕs, adĕs, &c. penĕs etiam & neutra in es, Hippo∣manĕs, Cacoethĕs, adde Nominativos Graecorum plurales, Cyclopĕs, Naiadĕs, Dryads, &c. 8. Excie Comps, imps, s ossis; & Graeca in  desinentia, Dels, Chas, Pallads, Phillids. 9. Longi sunt obliqui, ut Musis Dominis, No∣minativi
etiam ingul▪ longorum imparisylla∣bicorum, Samnīs, ītis, Salams, nis, Itm Nomi∣na in—is à Graecis in  deinntibus, Simoīs. Monsyllaba omnia praeter is, qus, bs. Se∣cundae etiam personae temporis praes. Indicat. Modi verborum quatae Conjugationis, ut, auds, adde velīs & sis cum compositis, & adver∣ba forīs, & gratīs. Commune est tempus futur. Modi Subjunct. Is, mihi dives eris, si causas egers, inquit. Martial. Da mihi te placidum, dederīs in carmine vires. Ovid. 10. Excipiuntur imparisyllabica quorum Ge∣nitivi habent penultimam longam, salus, utis, tellūs, ūris. Item Genitivi Singul. Nominativi, Accusativi, Vocativi, Plural▪ Nominum quartae Declinationis Hujus manūs, hae manūs, has manūs, ô manūs. Monosyllaba etiam Crūs, mūs, sūs. No∣mina eitiam in—us, facta è Graecis in ovs Panthūs, Melampūs, Cliūs; praeter Oedipŭs & Polypŭs se∣cundae Declin. 11. Brevia sunt ejă, ită, quiă. Omnes etiam Casus in—a (exceptis Vocativis à Graecis in as, Aene; & obliqus primae declin. Mus.) Numeralia in— sunt communia. 12. Corripiuntur nis, quasi. Vocativi etiam & Dativi Graecorum quorum Gnitivus exit in os, Palladi, I hillid,  Amarill, ô Alex. Communia sunt mihi, tibi, sibi, ubi, ibi; Sicu semper breve est, alibi longum. 13. Producuntur obliqui quintae Declin.
cum suis Adverbijs odiē, quotidiē, quibus adde . Secundae etiam personae singul. Modi Im∣perat. Activi verborum secundae Conjugat▪ Docē. Adverbia ab Adjectivis in—us, aut—er desinentibus, derivata, pulchrē, bellē. Ferm etiam ferē & Ohē: Sed benĕ, malĕ, magĕ corripiuntur. Monosyllaba producuntur omnia praeter quĕ, nĕ, vĕ Encliticas, cĕ, tĕ, ptĕ, Adjectiones sylla∣bicas. 14. Producuntur obliqui in o, Dominō. Ad∣verbia ab Adjectivis derivata Tantō, &c. Eō cum compositis, ideō, &c. Communia sunt Sedulò, crebro, serò, mutuò. Semper brevia, modo, quo∣mod, cit; saepius etiam sunt, Amb, du, eg, hom, sci, nesci, im, illic.
Propriorum Nominum qutitates ad has Terminationes revocantur. A in penultimâ, brevis est in Nominibus quae desinunt in ăbus, ăces, ăcus, ăgus, & ăgum, ălus, (excipitur Sardanapalus) ămes, ăres, ăris, ărus, ăla. Longa est in ācum, (in iăcum verò corripitu ādus, & da, mus (excipe Graeca & Asiatica) āne, ānes, anus (excipe Concănus, Dardănus, Marcomănus, enomănus, Sequănus, & (ut vulgo) Lipomănus) asis, asus, tus, ates, athes, (excipi∣untur Pelătes, Lapăthes, Zelătes) ata, ati, āvus, āvum, . E, in penultimâ— Brevis est in ĕres. Longa est in ēdus, ēne, ēnus (praeter Diadumĕ∣nus, Misumĕnus, & Arĕnus) crus & ēra. I, in penultimâ— Brevis est in cus, si Nomina sint Latina vel à Latinis aut Graeis orta. Si vero sint Nomina bar∣bara producuntur excipiuntur Cperncus; ga, ta, ito. Longa est in īcum, īde, īdus, īmus, īnus, & ina tum propria tum Gentiliia, irus, isus, ītus, & īta, tum propria tum Gentiliia, ītes nomina Gem∣marum & Lapidum, Vinorum; & Gentilia, is Gen∣tilia Foeminarum.
O, in penultimâ— Brevis est in lus;, & rix. Longa est in ōdes, ōmus, ōnus, & ōna, ōta, ōtes, ōtis. V, in penultimâ— Longa est ubique. Hebraea, Syriaca, Arabica, Turcica, has sequ∣untur regulas. Quibus additur terminatio Latina, produ∣cuntur, ut Adamus, Abrahāmus: Excipe cre∣menta ab ar & or quae corripitur, ut Salmana∣săris, Nabuchadonosris. Quae vero propriam terminationem retinent penultimam corripiunt, ut Absălon. Excipiuntur Aāron, biram, Abīron, Adiram, Adūram, Asa∣tēla, Asemōna, Aseroth, Arbōna, Bahūrim, Barjē∣su Barjōna, Bethoron, Bethsūra, Crbōna, Elele, Esricam, Gaderoh, Gazēta, Ierūsa, Mammōna, Noēmi, Rabbōni, Sabactāni, Salōme, Zabūlon. Books Printed for and sold by Will. Miller, at the Golden-Acorn in St. Pauls-Church-Yard, London. Folio. BOok of Martyrs, in 3 Vol. Willets Synopsis Papismi —-on Genesis and Exodus Charleton's Physiologia
Extravagant Shepherd, a Romance Love and Revenge, a Romance, by Iames Hayward Hart's Diet for the Diseased Reconciler of the Bible Bishop Smiths Sermons Spanish Bawd Rycauts History of the Turkish Empire Nani's History of the affairs of Europe Violet's Proposals for calling to account all Com∣mittee-men, Sequestrators, Treasurers and Cu∣stom-Commissioners, Collectors of Monthly Assessments, and all that have been intrusted in the Publick Revenues. Ben. Iohnson's Bartholomew-Fair, Staple of News, and the Devil is an Ass. Quarto. Iackson's Concordance Weemse of the Ceremonial Laws —Observations atural and Moral —of the Judicial Laws of Moses —of the Moral Law Hookers Souls Preparation Hookers Souls Humiliation Strouds Anatomy of Mortality History of Prince Arthur Cmpleat Bolton's General Directions for Comfortable Walking with God. Quercitan's Practice of Chymical and Hermetical Physick for Preservation of Health. Feltham's Resolves White on the Sabbath Heylin's History of the Sabbath Sibbs on Hosea
Cooper's Heaven Opened on Rom. 8. 1. Benefield on the first Capter of Ams Dodd on the Lords Prayer Chapman on the 117 Psalm Dodd and Cleaver on the Ten Commandements Octavo and Twelves. Milton Paradise regained Compleat Chymist Government of the Togue Janua Linguarum Vestibulum Reserata Scudder's Christian daily walk Lowder de Corde Farnaby's Epigrams Childrens Dictionary History of the Great Mogul, first and secon Part. Fanshaw's Horace, Latin and English Holidays Persius in English Hopton's Concordance of Years Arundel's Secrets I. de Lunas Spanish Grammer Monarchy Asserted by a Committee▪ of Parli∣ment in Speeches. Novae Solymae Nomen clatura, English, Latin and Greek New Light to Alchimy Bagshaw's Rights of the Crown of England Locker's Balm for Bleeding England and Irelan Heath's Trimph of King Charles II. Leigh's Description of England Nosce Te Ipsum, a Poem by Davies Ladies Calling
Waraeus de Antiquitatibus Hiberniae Pantoni Apparatus Theologiae Epicurus's Morals, English Humes Iacob and Boaz, or the Stedfast and Un∣waveing Christian. Ward of Wit, Wisdom and Folly Brough's Sacred Principles in Welch Beverley's Great Soul of Man Vines on the Sacrament Gourdon's Tyrocinium Linguae Latinae Dent on the Revelations Continuation of Sidney's Arcadia Smith's David's Blessed Man Arcandam by William Ward Traihern's Exposition of St. Iohn's Gospel Tymes Silver Watch-Bell Frewen's Sermons on Rom. 14. 2. to 9. Four General Heads, Christian Religion Sur∣veyed and Explained. Ball's large Catechism Dig's Unlawfulness of taking up Arms against the King Hieron's Dignity of Preaching, 1. Thess. 5. 20 Chetwind's Historical Collections Leeches Grammer Questions Crashaws Meat for Men, or Service on the Sa∣ment. Sharps Midwiery Merry Drollery Compleat Lod. Vives Exercitationes Ling. Lat. Ross Virgilius Evangelizans Textoris Epistolae Tullii de Officiis
Elborough's Exposition on the Common-Prayer French School-Master Daphnis and Cloe, a Romance Bunworth of the French-Disease Observations of Fulke of Meteors Knowles Rudiments of the English Grammar Justini Historia Nasmiths Divine Poems Ramsey of Poysons Stewards Catholick Divinity Lucius Florus in English Harrington's Art of Law Hows Marks of Salvation Starkies Natures Explication, and Helmonts Vin∣dication Boteler of War in Marches, Battles and Sieges Hill's Natural and Artificial Conclusions St. Bernard's Meditations English Dictionary and Expositor Third part of the Bible and New Testament Herles Wisdoms Tripos Countess of Kents Rare and Select Secrets in Phy∣sick and Chyrurgery Staphurst Officina Chymica Londinensis Fettiplace's Christian Monitor Mall and Polhill of Holy Living Sibbs Christian Portion —-Fountain Sealed Ametius Bellarminus Enervatus L'Florus Notis Stadii Granado of Prayers and Meditation Cottons None but Christ Fettiplace's Holy Exercise
Abbot's Young Mans Warning-piece Bradshaw and Hildersham On the Sacrament Bacons History of Life and Death Garbuts Demonstrations of the Resurrection Idiot in four Books by Cusanus White's Ground of Obedience Vade Mecum, a Manual of Essays, by T. D. Warwick's Meditations Web's arrignment of an Unruly Tongue —-Agars Prayer Understanding Christians Duty Henshaw's spar hours of Meditations Resolution of Doubts between the Church of Rome and the Reformed Church. Midnight Trance. Nordeus Poor Mans Rest —-Pensive Mans Practice Holy Sinner, by W. H. Barclaii Argenis —-Euphormio Boltons Help to Humiliation Mothers Blessing Bradford on the Lords Prayer and Ten Com∣mandements. Doctrine of the Bible Boltons Prayers Coral of Steel, Experiments in Physick Clark of Comfort Life of Mrs Clark Lukins Interest of the Spirits of Prayer Marshals Epigrams, by Busby Protestant Prayer-Book Wit Revived
Novels Catechismus Pietatis Eons Catechism Fentons Catechism Gougs Catechism Balls Catechism Bernards Catechism according to the Common-Prayer. Pagits Catechism Veseys Catechism Mayers Catechism Drants Epigrams Ovid de Arte Amandi in English Supplication of Saints Spurstow's Divine Meditation Smiths Compleat Practice of Physick Moral Practice of the Jesuits Duty of every one that intends to be saved English and French Cook Oxford Jests Refined and Enlarged Smiths Ioseph and his Mistress Combachii Metaphysicae Rusneri Symbola Tuckney's works Contess of Kents Manual Lessius of Health 24o FINIS.
