4365 99842878 7573
THE SPEACH OF THE KIRK OF SCOTLAND TO HER BELOVED CHILDREN. HEu, heu Domine Deus, quia ipsi sunt in per∣secutione tuâ primi, qui videntur in Ecclesia tua primatum diligere, gerere principatum; impe∣dire salutem est persequi Saluatorem. Bernard. Alace Alace ô Lord God, for they are cheesest in thy persecution, who love the first and chief places and to bear rule: to stay the course of salvation is to persecute the Savi∣our. Bernard. SImplicitas amentia, malitia sapientia nomen habet, viri{que} boni us{que} adeo irridentur, ut fere nullus qui irrideri possit, appareat. Petrarch. Simplicitie now carieth the name of mad∣nes, malice the name of wisdome, and good men are so derided, that almost no man can be found to be derided. Petrarch. Imprinted in the yere 1620.
THE KIRK OF CHRIST IN SCOTLAND TO HER DEARLY beloved Children, wisheth purity and peace. AS I your loving mo∣ther fearing to be fi∣nally deserted of my glorious Spouse the Lord Iesus, and to be childles hereaf∣ter, haue weeped sore in the night this time bypast my teares are on my cheekes; Among all my lovers few to comfort mee, my friendes haue dealt treacherously with me, they are become my enemies, Lament. 1. 2. So would ye my dear children dolefully cry out: The joy of our heart is ceased, our daunce is turned into mourning, the crown is fallen from our heads, woe unto us that we haue sinned, Lament. 5. 15. 16. If ye were touched with the sense and feeling of your present e∣state, and could by the thick shad∣dowes of this evening be brought
to consider the comfortles desolati∣on of that approaching night of darknes, after so bright a day of vi∣sitation. But so much the more dangerous is defection, and the my∣sterie of iniquitie the more pernici∣ous, that it proceeds from so subtile beginnings as to your simplicitie ar almost insensible. It is not time then for me your dolorous mother to keepe silence. But love and feare presse me to put you in minde, that it hath been in all ages the holy disposition & hap∣py practise of all Gods people way∣ting for the appearing of Iesus their Lord, tēdring the weal of his spouse, and taking to hart the aeternall sal∣vation of their own soules; to setA three fold consideratiō of every Christian, ap plyed to the present pur∣pose and tyme. continually before their eyes. 1. His inaestimable goodnes towardes his Kirk. 2. Her case and condition, while she is militant here on earth. And 3. in consideration of the one and the other, the duetie required and expected at their handes, wher∣through
in the goodnes of God they have beene safe from that dreadfull ruine, that hath overtaken the wicked. And which I wish you my beloved children to escape by calling to minde in like manner at this tyme of your danger and my distresse. First how wonderfull the Lordes mercies have been towards me his Kirk in this nation. Secōd∣lie my present case crying with the complaints of a mother for help at your hands. And thirdly what is due from your affection, places, and callings to me, in whose wombe ye were conceived, and by whose care ye are brought up to that which ye now are. That what∣soever is commanded by the God of heaven, it may be diligently done for the house of the God of heaven. For why should he be wroth against the realme of the King and his sonnes, Ezra 7. 23. And that Christ may say to me yet once againe: Thou art beautifull my love as Tirzah,
comelie as Ierusalem, terrible as an army with banners. Cant. 6. 3. Words and motions of this sort as they have been, so they will be but oyle to feede the fire of the furie of such incēdiaries, as make their own earthlie particulars their highest projects; for the wicked shall doe wickedlie and none of them shall understand; yet by the grace of God manie shalbe purified and tryed & the wise shall understand. The grea∣test wisdome of the greatest of you in other matters; and your gracious countenance towards me, and the meanest of your brethren at other tymes, suffereth me not to doubt of your audience of any message or motiō from heaven; but especiallie be my mouth, which may either dis cover, or prevent anie spirituall or temporall danger. Now the spirit of wisdome and knowledge give unto yow all wise hearts, that in the sight of God ye trying thinges that differ may approve things ex∣cellent
(which is above the reach of the naturall man) that ye may be sincere & without offence till that day of Christ your Lord & mine. THe riches of the unsear∣chableFirst of the great good∣nes of God to the Kirk of Scotland. favours of my spouse towardes me have beene so greate, he hath made his glorie to dwell so sensiblie in this land, that I may bouldlie say, Mercie and truth righteousnes and peace had never since Christs com∣ming in the flesh a more glorious meeting, & amiable embracing on earth, then ye have seene amongst your selves in the roughe end of this northern Yland: which therfore hath justlie obteined (to my no small comfort) a great name among the cheefe Kirkes and Kingdomes in the World. A people that sat inIn making the Gospel to shine here beyond the light of o∣ther nations. darknes hath seene a great light, and to them who sat in the region of death light is sprung up. To what nation under heaven (when now the sunne of righteousnes hath shi∣ned
upon the most part of the world) hath the Lord communi∣cated the Gospell for so large a time, with such puritie, fulnes, pros∣peritie, power, libertie and peace. The hottest persecutions had never greater puritie, and power; the most halcyon hereticall tymes had never more prosperitie and peace; the best reformed Kirks in other places can hardlie parallel your ful∣nes and libertie. And all these with such continuance, that not on∣lie hath he made the truth to stay with you, as he did the sunne in the daies of Iosuah; but when the cloud of your iniquities did hasten it to goe downe, in his mercie hath he brought back the glorious sunne by manie degrees as in the tymes of Ezekiah. Oh that ye had known the long pleasant day of your visi∣tation, and in this your day the things belonging unto your peace. Christ hath not onely beene one, & his name one, in respect of his pro∣pheticall
office for your informati∣on, of his priesthood for the expia∣tion of your sinnes, and intercession for you: but also hath displayed his banners; and hath shewed him∣self (few can say the like) a sover∣aigne King in our Land, to governe you with his owne scepter erected in his Worde, to cutt off with his sword all monuments of Idolatry, and superfluitie of pompous cere∣monies; & to restore all the meanes of his worship in Word, Sacraments and discipline to the holy simplici∣tie and integritie of the first paterne shewed in the mount; frō the which, by that wisdome of man which is ever foolishnes with God, they had fearfully and shamefully swerved. The sincerer sort of the bordering nations about you, haue been so ra∣vished with that beautie of the Lord upon your Sion, with that crowne of glorie and rich diademeTestified by their confes∣sions' and wishes. by the hand of our God set upon your heades, that they have made
you the meath of ther religious wi∣shes: they haue with vehement de∣sires longed to see the things that ye have seene. And have not spared to profess, that in your case, they would rather suffer themselves to be dissolved, then that one pinne of that holy Tabernacle so divinelie compacted should be loosed. Within and amongst your selves that puritie of profession received u∣niversallie with so full consent, that Prince and Peeres, Pastors and peo∣ple were all for Christ, one heart & one soule of these who beleeved, with such evidences of Gods favour that the windowes & gates of hea∣ven seemed to be opened, to raine downe upon this Land spirituall gifts to save you, as sometime they had beene readie to powre downe raine to destroy the world, every hand almost received some gift, and every head crowned with some grace, with such successe that it brought a rare unitie, prosperitie, &
peace upon Kirk & cōmon wealth. With such power and presence of the spirit of God in converting, comforting & confirming his peo∣ple that Satan was seene fall like lightening from heaven, the infidel and unbeleever casting himselfe downe on his face, and confessing that undoubtedlie God was amōgst yow, and in the middest of your meetings, as the soules of his own secret ones can best beare witnesse, who have beene most submitted to that holie and happie simplicitie, the effectes whereof yet remay∣ning in the harts of many, all world∣ly power be it never so violent sall not be able to remove it. And with such terrour from God and the Kings Lawes, that ye wan∣ted not your Theodosians publikly humbling themselves. The hardest hearted and haughtiest were made to stoup. The Atheist either chan∣ged in heart, or in countenance, and forced to play the hypocrite, the
proudest papist, eyther made like you, or made to leave you. Heresie never hatched within your walles, and the Babylonish brood of schis∣me in the infancie till this tyme was dashed against the stōes. Ye sought not then (my dere children) with Iohn and Iames like great Princes one to sitt on the right hand, ano∣ther on the left; nor to be busked with earthly glorie and Persian pompe, better beseeming the kings of the world, then the kingdome of Christ. The Carbuncles, the Sa∣phyres, the Emeraulds, the Chry∣solites; the gold, the precious stones, wherewith my foundation, walles, windowes, gates were set and ador∣ned, were out of the Lords own thesaurie. Your ambition was then set upon spirituall glorie, the cōquest of syn and Satan by the po∣werfull puritie of the Word, Sacra∣ments, and discipline. The joy of your soules was to see Christ reig∣ning in the middest of his enemies,
his sword dividing the father from the sonne, and the sonne from the father: yea & a man frō himself, par∣ting the soule and the spirit, the joynts and the marrow, and end∣ing in glorie to God, and peace up∣on earth. Then were the taberna∣cles of God amiable; then provoked ye one another with cheerefulnes to go up to the mountaine of the Lord, to the house of the God of Ia∣cob: ye were sure there to learne his wayes, and how to walke in his pathes. Then found ye the Lord his glorie filling his Sanctuarie, and one of the largest springs of the blood of Christ from Eden watring the citie of God, and glaiding your soules wearied with sinne. This was my beautie so truelie glorious in the sight of God and his Angels that all the glorie of this lyfe is un∣worthie to enter in comparison with it. Better to you to have this glorie under a crowne of thornes with our Saviour, in a chaine with
Paul, in the Lyons den with Dani∣el, then all the splendor of Tiberius, of Nero, of Darius, wherewith the weak eyes of the world are dazled, and pitifullie (to my great griefe) bewitched. And surely your forgetfull ingra∣titudeHis goodnes in the man∣ner of the working of her reforma∣tion. were inexpiable, if with the mater ye remembered not the fin∣ger of God wonderfully working in the meanes of that glorious refor∣mation. We have to regrate that the Atheisme of these dreggs of tymes and manners is become so gross, that all events now are sacri∣legiously ascribed to second causes. If Naaman his cure, or Anna her fruitfulnes, or the Egyptiā or Baby∣lonian libertie had fallen out in these godles tymes, it had beene counted foolishnes and simplicitie of men over religious, upon the ig∣norance of alterations wroght by nature, or policie, to attribute them to God. Yet God is the Lord; Of him and through him and for him
are all things. Ezrah, Nehemiah, and the godly of that time acknow∣ledge no less the wonderfull work∣ing of God in their redemption from the bondage of Babylon, then their fathers did their deliverance out of Egypt, Although the power of God was not so miraculous in the one, as in the other. Consider a little, and mark the constitution of the tyme before this reformation was wrought, the grandeur, pride, & insolencies of my office bearers thē; the averse disposition & induration of the personages both at home & abroade, upon whom in mans eyes it did depend; the heathenish dark∣nes of idolatrie and palpable blind∣nes of superstition, wherin the mul∣titude was wrapped, and ye shal be forced to say, that he who would have intended a change of religiō, might have received that desparing answer, which a man of great spirit and place, an enemie of Romish pride, and a desirer of reformation
gave concerning Luthers purpose. Frater fra∣ter abi in cel∣lm et dic mi∣serere mei Deus Brother, brother goe to your cloys∣ter and say have mercy on me ô God. All seene second causes were pos∣ting on in a contrarie course; or if any possibilitie of alteration could haue beene imagined, what hope could there have beene therof, ex∣cept it had beene wrought more gla∣dij cruentā∣di. with the edge of the sword bathed in blood: as Grostead the Malleus Romanorum hammer of Rome said a little before his death. Yet (to the endles praise and wonderfull goodnes and wisdome of our God be it remembred) the great worke was so singularly brought about and perfected, that almost without blood, except the blood of a few martyres, (wherein through the same wisdome and goodnes, for commending and ra∣tifying the truth, the mouth of the sword of persecutors was dipped,) the whole bodie and shadow, sub∣stance and ceremonies, roote and branches of Romish Idolatrie were at once cut off.
Thus by reason of the wonder∣full manner of Gods working, of my own feeling, and yours of the won∣ders wrought amongst you, and of the testimonie of others both friends and foes about us, may not ye with one voice say and sing with the Kirk, Psal. 126. When the Lord turned againe the captivitie of Sion, we were like them that dreamed, then was our mouth filled with laughter and our tongue with singing; Then sayd they among the heathen the Lord hath done great things for them, the Lord hath done great things for us wherof we are glad. And would God as your delive∣rāce was in many things like that of Israel; so your infidelitie and un∣thankfulnes were not like theirs; there arose an other generation which knew not the Lord, nor yet the work which he had done for Is∣rael. A generation not onely un∣thankfull, but contumelious against that glorious work of God & wor∣thie
instruments therof, and there∣fore ready to bless that which the Lord hath cursed, and to build that which he hath destroyed. For is there not start up of late within my skirts a new sect of shameless misha∣pen formalists (my indignation can∣not bear such monsters) who blush not to joyne with my enemies the papists in breathing out reproach∣ful obloquies against your reverend fathers and brethren, Calvin, Beza, Knox etc. as though their zeale a∣gainst Romish idolatrie (the defor∣mities whereof by new colours are now beginning to seeme beauties) had been excessive; and by dispara∣ging their credite to bring the truth preached by them in suspi∣tion, and that glorious work of re∣formatiō, wherin they were so wor∣thy instruments into question. He that is the keeper of Israell vindicat his owne cause from the blasphe∣mous mouth, and uncouth strata∣geme of this generation of vipers.
Finally that the Lord might shew▪His strong hand against all her ene∣mies forraine and domes∣tick. that he left nothing undone; haue ye not experienced the blessing of Abraham; hath he not blessed them who blessed you, and cursed them who cursed you; he hath been not onely our sunne, but our shield. What instrument framed against you hath prospered? What tongue arysing against you hath not the Lord cōdemned? that all the world might know, that God was your sa∣viour, and the strong God of Iacob your avenger. Your forraigne ene∣mies haue bene made the objects of your pitie, and so many as haue rent my bowels within, have peri∣shed tragically in their own divices. No sooner began they, till now, to reedifie the cursed walls of Iericho, but they have beene buried under the ruines of them. All which hath proceded of his own good pleasure. If ye should say that the cause were any worthynes in your selves above other nations, not onely my spouse
Christ, and his faithfull servant Moses would cry out against you, but all the world that knowes what ye are in other respects would laugh you to scorne. The Lord who shewes mercie on whom he will shew mercie, hath done it. It is wonderfull in my eyes, and should have moved the most obdured, and stonie hearts amongst you to melt, & answerably to spend themselves to his honour in the duties of holi∣nes and righteousnes, which alas ye have not done, as now shall ap∣peare by the sequel of your iniqui∣ties, casting me your poore mother into so great a doole & desolation, which is the second point of your Christian consideration propoun∣ded in the beginning. Would God it might pleaseThe present distress and doleful face of the Krk. him to blesse your senslesse soules with a holy remembrance of that which ye once were, and from whence ye are fallen. Ye would surely finde, that as in manners and
conversatiō from small beginnings by degrees ye are now come to great abominations; so both in the lyfe of your profession, and in the outward worship of God, ye are further fallen from that which of late ye were, then now your case is distant from that which ye feare. To let pass the desperate pro∣fanessCrying sinns of the godles multitude, and luke∣warmnes of the best preachers and profes∣sors. of many crying sins even be∣yond the cry of Sodome (conside∣ring all the circumstances of the mercie of God, of the meanes and space graunted to you to repent) by continuall importunitie deaving the eares of divine justice, that had not the Lord had respect to some of his secret ones; who kneele before him day and night to continue his gracious favour with you, misre∣garded of the world, but my chari∣ots and horsmen: had he not a pur∣pose to prevent the insolencies of my enemies, I have sayd I would scatter them abroad, I would make their remembrance to cease frō amongst men,
save that I feared the furie of the ene∣mie, lest their adversaries should waxe proud. And which is principall, did not the Lord for his own names sake, and the praise of his mercy spare me, we had long since beene consumed and the enemy had en∣tered within my gates. To let passe that lukewarmenes & careles mediocritie in the matters of God, that neutrall adiaphorisme in my affaires, which hath in it a native and proper power to hasten at the hand of God the removall of my candlestick, and to bring in the fa∣mine of the word. For how can the Lord without indignatiō suffer men to esteeme basely of the least circumstance, which he willeth to be observed. And not to insist in that fall from your first love, decay of your wonted zeale, secret inde∣votion even in true christians: where is that wonted power and demonstratiō of the spirit in preach∣ing? that cheerfulnes in holy ex∣ercises?
that circumspect walking before God in all your wayes? that preparation to divine dueties? that spirit of deprecations? that spiritual profite of hearing, communicating, meditation, and conference? that consciencious diligence in winning of others, & working upon your ac∣quaintāce to bring them within the bosome of my love? that jealousie over your hearts? that indignation against errours, idols, Apostates? Is not the life of religion condemned under the names of hypocrisie, sin∣gularitie, melancholie, simplicitie, puritanisme etc. And the light there∣of either smothered under the ashes of this errant tyme, or put in a theefes bowet; so that the godly now born down with a bastard mo∣destie, and spirituall pusillanimitie, dissemble and conceale the grace of God for eschewing the shame & of∣fence of the world, which the wic∣ked not long since, did simulat, and counterfeyt for currying of credite
with me and my follovvers. But leaving all these, I come toThe glory of the Kirk tur∣ned into shame. complaine of the alteration made upon my outvvard face and gover∣ment. May not I novv, as once the vvorld becomming Arrian, poure out my sighes, and vvonder hovv so suddenly I am changed from that vvhich I vvas, and become that vvhich novv I am. All the rites of Rome are not more odious to ma∣ny novv, then my present ceremo∣nial cōstitutiō vvas to them of late. The formes and fruites of preach∣ing fearfully changed, the crystal∣line fountaines of holy Scripture troubled with the mudd of mans putide learning, the ministration of the Sacraments brought in un∣der a new guise of mans shaping, the painfull ministerie turned into a busie Lordship, and these who are set over soules, & should warre un∣to God are become seculars, intan∣gling themselves with the affaires of
this life; nothing but a pompous shadow for Gods simple service. Demas & Diotrephes are become the paterns of wisdome and praee∣minence; Chrysostome is thrust out and Arsatius placed in his rowme, beloved Liberius is set a syde and lightlied, Foelix is set to feede the flock; pratling tymeservers are be∣come preachers, & powerfull pas∣tors put to silence; plaine and fre∣quent preaching reproved, a redd liturgie commended; Alevite for a Preist, and lesse then a levite for mouth and messenger to Gods peo∣ple; Non residents with their flat∣tering varlots sit in the chaires of dignitic, fed with pluralitie of be∣nefices, and painfull promoovers of the Kingdome of Christ, and sub∣verters of Antichrist with igno∣rance the mother of devotion, borne down and despised, Labou∣rers vexed with angvish of Spirit, & loyterers live in wealth & ease, In the tyme of confusion, wicked men
attayne to honours, and that seat of dig∣nitieIn turbis pravus eti∣am sortitur bnorem et quam digni∣tatis sedem quieta rep. desperat eam perturbata se consequi posse arbitra∣tur. wherof in a peaceable common wealth they dispared, in the tyme of trouble they hope to procure. Com∣mandes are cancelled. Canons are made commandes. And as Gerson complained in his tyme, a Monke more severely punished for going with∣out his cowle, then for comitting adulie∣rie or sacrilege. Or as Chaucer, the Fryer more bound to his habit then a man to his wife. The duties of Mi∣nisters, and edification of Christi∣ans tyed to the senses practise of trifling ceremonies. And hence we see it is, that old hypocrites are become professed Atheists; Phila∣delphian professors are come to a Laodicean temper, Papists wax insolent and obstinate, the faithfull pastors either put frō the building of the Sanctuarie, or forced to build with the one hand, and with Nehe∣miah to beare off these corruptions with the other; the people through publick contradictions and present
practises contrary to late preach∣ings, know not what way to incline. But as usually it falleth out in mul∣titudes when they are shaken with contrarie doctrines, and tossed be∣twixt errour and trueth, from be∣ing doubtfull in questions moved a∣bout religion, their hearts in end are opened, and themselves made na∣ked to receive everie corruption & vanitie. As the contentions about Eutyches opinion thrust out Christ and brought in Mahomet. Yea ex∣cept the Lord restreyne and stay, they rush into Atheisme in opiniō, and Epicureisme in conversation, where through the lyfe of religion is utterly extinguished. The case of religion herein not being unlike unto that of the miserable woman in Plutarch, whō her suters divided amongst themselves in members, because that every one could not have her whole. Thus she perished and they were disappointed. What may be the finall event, your synnes
may make you justly to feare, what it shall be, the alpowerfull God, who rules all events, knowes well. This ye may see at least, that pul∣pits and schooles, taverns and ale∣houses, towne and village, Gath & Askelon, are all busied with these broyles. Which make me the daughter of Sion to complaine and in doole to deplore that in so dis∣tressed a case, there is no compassi∣on in my sonnes. That of so many whome I have brought forth and brought up, there be so few to cō∣fort me, almost none to guide me or take me by the hand. Yea after tryall I finde that my own minis∣ters and domestickes, beholding the invention of their own heades, & concupisence of their own hearts, without respect to God or his wordThe causers of her cala∣mitie, the same that have beene in other Kirks here∣tofore. are the prime authors of my cala∣mitie & actors of this my mischief, according to the bitter complaint of the godly learned of old, search∣ing the causes of all the abuses,
wherwith the glorie of the christian Kirks my sisters in the tyme of their peace hath beene blemished or de∣faced. I will content me with two witnesses, who speaking of their own tymes, directly point at ours, & taxing the enormities of the Kirks then, paint out in lively colours our present corruptions, that we may see the coincidence of the course of synne and may feare the similitude of judgements. The one is learned Gerson a∣boutSome of thē drawen out of Gerson a the neglect of Scripture and multi∣plying of traditions. the yeare 1420. who observed two principall causes of the sicknes∣ses & soares of the Kirk in his tyme. One was the neglecting of the lawes of God and direction of Scriptures, and the multitude of mans inventions. No tongue (sayth he) is able sufficiently to expresse, what evill, what daunger, what confusion, the contempt of holy Scriptures (which doubtlesse is sufficient for the govern∣ment of the Kirk, for otherwayes Christ had beene an unperfect Lawgiver) and
the following of humane inventions hath brought into the Kirk. For proof hereof he addeth, let us consider the state of the cleargie, to which heavenly wisdome should have beene espoused. But they have committed whordome with that filthie harlot, earthly, carnall, and divelish wisdome; so that the estate of the Kirk is become meerely brutish & monstrous, heaven is below, and earth is above, the spirit obeyeth, and the flesh commaundeth, the principall is estee∣med as accessorie, and the accessorie as principall. Yet some shame not to say, that the Kirk is better governed by hu∣mane inventiōs, then by the divine law, and the law of the gospell of Christ, which assertiōis most blasphemous. For the Euangelicall doctrine by the profes∣sors of it did inlarge the bounds of the Kirk, and lifted her up to heaven, which these sonnes of Hagar seeking out that wisdome which is from the Earth, haue cast down to the dunghill. And that it is not wholly fallen, and utterly overthrowne and extinct, it is the great
mercy of our God and Saviour. The other cause of the Kirks ruineThe vari and ambitiō of Bishops▪ he observed to be, the ambition, pride and covetousnes of Bishops, and their Hierarchy. He pareth not to say, that in imitation of Lucifer they will be adored and worshiped as God. Neither doe they think themselves subiect to any, but are as sonnes of Be∣lial that have cast off the yoke, not en∣during whatsoever they doe, that a∣ny should ask them, why they doe so, they neither feare God, nor reverence men. Hence was it, that not one∣ly hee, but innumerable others of the wise men, & holyest of the Kirk, longed and looked for a reformati∣on, a long time before Luther was borne; wishing that all things were brought back to that estate, they were in the tyme of the Apostles. And what wonder, that perceiving among our selues, the same causes and many the like effects, we trem∣ble for feare of a more dangerous ecidivation.
The other witnes is Nicolas O∣remCauses out of Nicolas Orem: as the profanity of kirkmen. a man learned & pithic, who in a sermon before Pope Vrban the fyft in the yere 1364, noteth among many moe, these causes of the ap∣proaching miserie of the Kirk. The profanitie of the Kirk beyond the synagogue, we know (sayth he) how Christ rebuketh the Pharises, the clear∣gie of the Iewes for covetousnes 1. for that they suffered doves to be sould in the temple of God 2. for that they ho∣noured God with their lipps and not with their heart, and because they sayd, but did not. 3. for that they were hy∣pocrites. To the first then let us see whether it be worse to sell both Kirk and sacraments, then to suffer doves to be sould in the temple. To the second, there be some who neither honour God with their heart nor with their lipps, who neither doe well, nor say well, neither doe they preach any word at all, but be dumbe doggs not a∣ble to barke, impudent doggs that ne∣ver have ynough. And truely there
be also some, whose intollerable pride & malice is so manifesty and notoriously kindled up like a fyre, that no cloke nor shadow of hypocrisie can cover it. But are so past all shame that it may be well verified of them, which the Prophet speaketh, Thou hast gotten the face of an harlote, thou wouldest not blush. An other cause is the unaequal pro∣portionWant of proportion in the Kirk. seen in the Kirk, where one is hungrie and starved, an other drunk, by reason wherof it cannot be, that the state of the Kirk can long endure. As he cleareth by the comparison of the proportions in Musik in common wealths, and in the bodie of man, wherupon he in∣ferreth. If in the bodie of the wealth Ecclesiasticall some who be the heads be so enormously overgone in riches and dignity that the weak mēbers of the bo∣dy be scant able to beare them up, there is a great token of dissolution and ruine shortly. A third cause is the pridePride of Prelates. of Prelates declared in their great horses, troupes of horsemen, the
superfluous pomp of their waiting men and great families. To them the Lord speaketh by the Prophet Amos, ch. 4. Hear you fatted kine of Samaria, ye that doe poore men wrong & oppresse the needy, the day shall come upon you &c. Besides these he alle∣gethDivers other causes. the tyranny of Prelates, which as it is a violent thing, so it cannot long indure, the promoting of the unworthie, and neglecting of the worthie, the tribulations of out∣ward policie & cōmotions of peo∣ple, the refusing of correction in the Princes and Rulers of the Kirk, the backsliding from righteousnes, lack of discreet and learned preach∣ers, promoting of children unto Kirk offices, and such other like. This sermon changing the name & time, might seem to haue bene stu∣died for our present estate. And happy were we, if we were not mis∣caried with the perillous opinions, which he ascribes to the Prelates of that time. One opinion is of them
who thinke the Prelates to bee the Kirk, which the Lord will alwayes keep, and never forsake. An other who deferred time, thinking that the causes & tokens before rehear∣sed, have been in the Kirk at other times no lesse then now. The third of such as say, Let come what will come, let us conforme our selves to this world, and take our time with temporizers. And the last is of such as being unfaithful, beleeve not that any such thing shall come. But so long as men are drunken with one or moe of those errors, what hope is there of happinesse of recovery? We might heare Henricus de Hassia in the yeare 1371. speaking that of our times which he said of his own, That the Ecclesiasticall governours in the primitive Kirk were compared to the Sunne shining in the day time, and the politicall to the Moon shining in the night. But the spiritual men which now are, doe neither shine in the day nor in the night. But rather with
the darknesse of impiety, ignorance, and licentious living, doe obscure both the day and the night. The renowned Bishop of Spalato,Causes brought by the Bishop of Spalato. as holy Bernard before him, com∣plaines more bitterly of that dam∣ned couple of crying sins, Avarice and Ambition, two monstrous beasts, and ravenous Harpies, which have seized upon the harts of Kirk∣men in the time of peace; then of the crueltie of persecution and craft of heresies, which seeme to you to be the most desperate and onely e∣vils. Then (saith hee) speaking in the person of the Kirk, was I at my highest, and at my best esteeme, whiles I went in a thin coat, such as I was cloa∣thed with, when my spouse Christ Iesus betrothed himselfe to me, &c. And afterward; They have thrust upon the world their owne inventions, and esta∣blished their own ordinances, not drawn out of that testament, which my spouse left to me and them, namely the holy Scriptures, but craftily hammered out
of their own capricious projects, and tending to the prejudice of your poore soules my deere children. So true it is, that wealth is a viperine brood of devo∣tion.Cōestae pas∣sim opes in tanti officij reverentiam, pene causam reverentiae xinxerunt. Riches heaped together for reve∣rence of so great a function, almost have removed the cause of reverence. And lest my calamity should seeme common, or my present mi∣series to be lesse, then the greatnesseConclusion from Nazi∣anzen. of my by-past felicities, may not e∣very feeling soule rightly affected towards unity & verity, mournful∣ly deplore this my estate in the words of Nazianzen, describing the case of the Kirk in his time to this meaning. My mind (sayes he) leads me, seeing there is no other remedy, to flee and convoy my selfe unto some cor∣ner out of sight, where I may escape frō the cloudy tempest of maliciousnesse, whereby all parts are entred into deadly warre amongst themselves; and that little remnāt of love which was, is now consumed to nothing. The onely godli∣nes we glory in, is to find out somewhat
whereby we may iudge others to be un∣godly. One of us observes the faults of another, as matters of upbraiding, and not of mourning. By these meanes we are growne hatefull, even in the eyes of the heathen themselves; and (which woundeth us the more deeply) we cannot deny but we have deserved their hatred; with the better sort of our own our cre∣dit and name is quite lost: the lesse wee are to marvell, if they iudge vily of us, who although wee did well, would hardly commend us. On our backes they also build, that are leaud, and what we object one against another, the same they use to the utter scorne and disgrace of us all. But I come now my belovedIII. The dutie requi∣red of us in respect of the two former consideratiōs brethren, to the conscience of your duty in this case (which was the third and principal purpose) the re∣ligion whereof will bind so many as think seriously of the exceeding bountifulnesse of God to mee his Kirk, and upon my manifold crosses here on earth.
One common dutie of all is, thatAnd first a common du∣ty of humili∣ation urged upon all. seeing they be all under the guilti∣nes of ingratitude, and are become a sinfull nation, loaden now with iniquities, as ye have been with mercies before, which doe provoke the Lord to remove his kingdome altogether from you, and to give it to others that would bring forth the fruits thereof (according to the constant course of the severity of his Iustice, both with his own people the Iewes, and with many other fa∣mous Kirkes in the East and West, given over to beleeve that great lye, because they received not the love of the truth, and rendred not to the great King, the fruits of his king∣dome in due season) that now be∣fore the fiercenesse of his wrath come on, all of you, from the house of David to the house of Levi, look with melting hearts, and mourning eyes upon him, whom you have pierced with your iniquities. Oh that yee had lights to search your
hearts, and hearts to repent for your sins in the evening of this your day, that ye could turne unto the Lord with one heart before yee bee over∣whelmed with darknesse. At least, if in these godlesse and devotionless dayes, wherein all your wonted fas∣ting is turned into feasting, a gene∣ral humiliation cannot be obtained, ye that are the Lords owne, and de∣light in his tents, yee that love the beauty of Sion, and have accesse to the face of God, contend with him by the spirit of deprecation, fill your chalmers with strong cries, fill heaven and earth with the grones of his owne spirit, poure out teares day and night, take hold of the king of glory, wrastle with him as be∣comes Israel, pray againe and againe with Abraham; let him not depart out of your hearts, nor from his owne tabernacles in this land; your God lookes to be intreated, loves to be importuned, he is loth to leave you altogether. No sudden eclipse
comes upon you, but like that of old when the glory of the Lord de∣parted by degrees: first, from the Cherub to the doore of the house, Ezek. 10. 4. then to the entry of the gate of the Lords house, v. 19. then from the midst of the citie to the mountain towards the East side of the citie, chap. 11. 23. Better keepe his presence now, then seeke him through the streetes when hee is gone. Choose rather to mourn in Sion for preuenting comfortles Ba∣bel, then sitting desolate by the ri∣vers of Babel, to burst out in bitter teares in remembrance of sweet Si∣on. The triall begins upon Pastors, but ye know not upon whom it shall stay. The large time of so faire occa∣sionTwo things required evē of ordinary professors. First, skill to▪ try the Spi∣rits. in the schoole of Christ, re∣quires two things now at your hands. One is, that yee bee able to try the spirit, and to know with cer∣tainty what to follow. The way to establish your selves, is not with
the Romans to rest upon a blinde faith, receiving for truth whatsoe∣ver carries my name or authority; nor with the rich man in the Gos∣pell, to wish that one may rise from the dead for your satisfaction. Nei∣ther as it was in the time of Eliah, to seek for a miracle from heaven, nor yet to run to any on earth for decision of all questions; for within and amongst your selves all are di∣vided, and without Papists are your enemies; Protestants are strangers to your secrets, and unacquainted with your covenants and oathes: your comfort may be that your fa∣ther died not intestate. Let his testa∣ment bee read with attentiue reve∣rence. Search his latter will which he hath left for a plain and perfect direction to his comming againe. Consider what is most agreeable to his wisedome, what makes most for his honour, for the edification of your owne soules, for the restraint of the liberty of the flesh, and for
the comfort of a distressed consci∣ence, without respect to the appea∣rances of wisedome and humility a∣mong men, or to that which seems most to serve to your worldly cre∣dit, that wooes your flesh, or courts your carnall senses: for this will bee a meager consolation, when the hor∣rors of God are upon your soules ready to be presented before his Iu∣stice. Continue in the things yee have learned and are perswaded of, knowing of whom yee have learned them. Have yee attained by a con∣scientious use of prayer, hearing, meditation, conference, unto a per∣swasion of that which is now in de∣bate; have ye an inward witnes tes∣tifying to your soules, that your teachers by their fidelity, & the effe∣ctual blessing of God upon their la∣bours, have caried with thē the seale of their ministery? Then cōtinue & bee not caried about with every wind of doctrine to the hellish dis∣turbance of the heavenly peace of
your soules. In the time of tentati∣on ponder with your hearts what better warrants yee have for some practises of religion more substanti∣all in mens estimation, and whether the motives of the one alteration may not as wel inforce the other. As ye should be able to try your selves, whether ye are in the faith or not, which Paul requireth of the whole Kirk of Corinth, so should ye have skill to try the spirits, whether they be of God or not. For such are per∣verted, as are ever learning, & never come to the knowledge of the truth. And as in respect of the time yee ought to be teachers, and to be able to edifie every one another in the most holy faith, so are yee charged by the Apostle Peter to be ready to give an account, even to your ene∣mies of that hope which is in you. He that hath faith can try himselfe, can try the spirits, and teach others, and give a reason both of his hope and practise before the adversary.
The other is, that once having gai∣nedSecōdly, rea∣dines to suf∣fer for the least poynt of the  truth. a godly resolution of the truth, you suffer nothing earthly to divert you from the profession & mainte∣nance of the same. It is now high time for you who have been hear∣ing of Christ so many yeares, to be put to your trial, how yee have lear∣ned Christ, & to give proof of your passive obedience, when the Lord calles you, no lesse then of your ac∣tive. Offences, schismes, troubles, persecutions, have been in all times, & in every period of the Kirk hath opened a back doore for a world∣ling to slip forth at. Others before us have had their own trials, & these in the dispensation of God are now made ours. Hee hath never been a Christian in action, that hath not been a martyr in affection. And (let the world still sit in the chaire of the scorners) that professor that will not bee a ceremoniall confessor, would refuse to bee a substantiall martyr. The smallest threed of
the seamlesse coat of thy Saviour, the lowest hem of his garment, the least pin or latchet of that heavenly tabernacle may be a matter of a glo∣rious and comfortable suffering to thee. And the lesse the cause be, it being Christs cause, the more rare & acceptable is thy testimony. The heart may be sound, and voyd of I∣dolatrie, and yet the outward acti∣on of adoration may prove Idola∣trous. Knowledge is greater, and Christ now more glorious, by con∣fessions, martyrdomes, prescription of time, and profession of all nati∣ons, then in the primitive times. He that now counteth it no religion to renounce a Christian rite, and re∣ceive an Antichristian in place ther∣of, would not have spared of old, to set Antichrist himself in the throne of Christs kingdome. We are un∣thristie bankerupts, wasting that thesaurie unworthily, every penny whereof was painfully and narrow∣ly gathered together. The wor∣thy
martyrs of preceding times, and glorious instruments of reformati∣on, if they were alive in these de∣caying dayes, how would they bee ashamed of so degenerated chil∣dren? How ready would they be in your places to suffer for the name of Christ? Or if yee had lived in their troublesome times, spoyled of your goods, hated of the world, pinched in prison, sequestrate from wife, house, and children, looking every houre for death: consi∣der what would have been your thoughts of infidelity, your words of blasphemy, your deeds of de∣fection. If it please my glorious head toYour care and your comfort in suffering. call you to suffer for his name, let your care bee (as Peter hath taught you) 1. to sanctifie him in your hearts, and not to feare the feare of men. 2. to bee ready with your mouthes to make apologie to every one that craveth a reason of your hope: and 3. to have a good con∣versation
in Christ, that they who speak evill of you may be ashamed. And let your comfort be, 1. a good cōscience, arising upō two grounds; One, that ye suffer for wel doing, the other, that the will of God bee so: For howsoever all Christians be cal∣led to suffer, yet every one is not called to every suffering. 2. your conformitie with Christ. And 3. the assurance of an happy out-gate by his power, who was put to death in the flesh, but was quickned in the spirit, and now stands on the right hand of the father to maintaine his owne, and to revenge himself upon his enemies. Deceive not your selves with worldly policie, under the name of that heavenly vertue of Christian prudence, which doth nothing, intendeth nothing, admit∣teth nothing, in deed, in word, or in shew, neither by dissimulation nor simulation against the honour of God, in prejudice of the least truth against the love of your brethren, or
the duties of your own vocation. Prudence never doth the least evill for procuring the greatest good, for avoyding the greatest evill. Shee is carefull of her own duty, and com∣mits the care of the event to God, to whom it pertaines. She is never so perplexed betwixt two evils, but her eye seeth an out-gate without falling into a third evill of sin. She teacheth her followers either with Cyprian in a matter so holy, as is the casting of a little incense into the fire of an idoll not to enter in deliberation; or else after delibera∣tion with that worthy Prince of Conde to make the right choyce, never to choose sin: to remit punish∣ment to the pleasure of superiours, and the successe to the providence of the most high. Beside that common necessitieSpeciall du of Pastors. layd upon you all in generall, there is a speciall dutie at this time requi∣red of my Pastors and leaders. The schooles of divinity, which of late
were a pleasant Lebanon fortimbe to my buildings, are become dennes of ignorance and impiety, sinkes of schisme and sedition for my subver∣sion. The sonnes of the Prophets are made enemies to prophesie; in stead of convictions of heresie, hea∣ring nothing almost, but the cen∣sures of sincerity: in place of the harmony of Christs Evangel deaued with dyted contentions about An∣tichristian geniculation. Among their schoole Doctors sonnes of Is∣mael descended of Hagar, Rconditae prorsum & occuitae eru∣ditionis viri. Mismah Duma and Massa, our toung-tied teachers Audi, vi∣de, tace. all men of profound and hid learning, the greatest Rabbi (but that hee hath no he∣brew at all) whom God hath mar∣ked many wayes in his speeches, preachings, and practises, bitterly condemneth them for heretickes, who stand constant against that, which of late he himselfe condem∣ned of superstition & idolatry both by word and by writ, yet extant a∣mong
his scollers in his patched and plagiarie collections written by ma∣ny of their hands. Thus alas my glory is become my shame, my foū∣taine a puddle, my Naoth, my beau∣ty, is become my loathing, my de∣formity. Hence forsooth shall bee furnished that plentie of excellent labourers cracked of, to fill the pla∣ces of my faithfull watchmen, for their fidelity silenced and deprived. Had my worthy Pastors but the fa∣vour of papists now, or popish monkes of old, casten forth of their places, but not out of their livings, our young divines fore-runners (if ever any) of religions ruine, would neither, like the lyons whelps, make so great haste by their pricking pawes to get out of the matrix, and in into their roomes, nor yet make their mother so pregnant and partu∣rient. I may hope for some of Lu∣thers spirit forth of these Cloysters; and I beseech my God to give them the spirit of discerning. But for the
most part they were never taught to speak against papists for the truth, to deale with the soules of people, nor to live as Christians, and yet must lay their hands upon the Lords Arke, temerating my sacred myste∣ries, entring unreverēly with shooes, and all into my Temple, and mak∣ing that holy ministery a meane of temporall life unto themselves, more then a power of spirituall life to others. The discharge of their calling is conforme to their education and entry, and answerable to the wishes of the wicked people, and wiles of the worldly patrones. In conver∣sation they and others before them so lewd, that now it is esteemed pu∣ritanisme in a Pastor not to be pro∣phane. Every man and minister carefull to walk before God, studi∣ous of Scripture, and given to any abstinence in his diet, as of old hee was set down by Ithacius in his Ka∣lendar of suspected Priscillians: so
now by men of Ithacius spirit, in the roll of Puritanes, who cannot better to their iudgement approve the soundnesse of faith, then by a more licentious and loose behavi∣our. The authority of many prea∣chers is so farre from procuring cre∣dit to their doctrine, that to my great griefe, and discredit of the Gospell, that is thought by many in earnest, which by a learned man was uttered in jesting, of a profane prea∣cher, that hee would not willingly heare him say the Creed, lest hee should take it for a lye, comming foorth of his mouth. This is it which carieth with it a secret cause of the conformity of the most part. For how shal he that makes no con∣science of morall duties in his con∣versation, count it religious to stand against ceremonies in his vocation? Or how can he be a director of thee in rites, who is a neglecter of him∣selfe in substance. The sonnes of E∣li made the people to abhorre the
offering of the Lord, and they were slaine. When Nadab and Abihu were consumed with fire from the Lord for failing in the outward du∣ty of the ministry, in a matter as might seeme of smal moment, Mo∣ses told Aaron his brother, that the Lord would bee sanctified of them that came neere unto him. Few of the best sort can plead in∣nocent of the matter in hand. If people had been more painfully in∣structed in times past, they had been better prepared for the present diffi∣culties. Had ye cleared your selves by your Apologetickes to your friends in forraine parts, I had not been despised in the world: neither had your reprochful defection been proclaimed among your adver∣saries. Had you made your meane to your gracious soveraigne, and layd before his mercifull eyes the pittifull cause of his own deere peo∣ple, lamentably scandalized, and rea∣dy to make shipwrack of their souls
upon these dangerous, sands, and uncouth rockes of novelties et in their way, his maiesties clemency had not suffered matters to come to this desperate passe. If yee, who are the remembrancers of the Lord, had not kept silence, had ye blowen the silver trumpet in the middest of the congregation in the dayes of the holy assemblies, had ye instant∣ly denounced curses against the re∣edifiers of Iericho, had ye informed judicious professors in private and publicke of their owne interest and my danger, had ye withdrawn your presence, your countenance & con∣currence from the ring-leaders of that course, had every watchman been watchfull in his own watch∣tower, defection had not gone on so farre: at least your uncessant pro∣claimes, and continuall protests would both have witnessed to the world, and to the posterity after you, that defection was not univer∣sall, and also would have given your
selves some hope to bee repossessed in your former liberty, not betray∣ed of you by your wilfull silence, but extorted from you by wicked violence. Were this cloud past, and I restored to the sunne-shine of the lightsome countenāce of my God, ye would all be ashamed and blush at your present mis-behaviour. In the time of peace yee would seeme lyons,In pace leo∣nes, in praelio Cervi. but when battell comes, you prove but Harts. Could ye have looked that at the first so many of Gideons ar∣mies would haue fled home. But if the remnant were faithfull and for∣ward, their noyse and light would yet make Madian to flee. They who have yeelded under colour of care for their congregations, but indeed cōstraint for feare of worldly losses, have brought the rest of their bre∣thren in suspition, that either they will follow at last, or else that they deale more obstinately then consci∣entiously. It were good therfore that yee cleared your selves to the
consciences of others by the evi∣dence of reason, and sine lift up your voyce as a trumpet, that the deafest and deadest may heare: that yee were instant in season and out of season, to shew Israel their transgressions, lest yee bee guil∣tie of their bloud. Why should yee bee ashamed to cry that in the eares of others openly, which ye think with your hearts, & speak among your selves secretlie? Who shal stand for Christ, & suffer for his crowne, if yee fall away and betray his honor? If ye hold your peace, Christ will tell you, that the stones will cry out, although whole multi∣tudes of you bee silent. Suppose all Ierusalem should be offended at you, yet it becomes you to crie, Thou sonne of David have mercy on us. And, blessed is he that commeth in the name of the Lord. Let schisma∣tickes load you, according to their malicious custome, with carts full of reproches of schisme & sedition,
yet ye must follow the example of those glorious ministers of God, who before peace upon earth, did sing glory to God in the highest heavens. Ye must first be pure, then peaceable. It is a cursed silence of the mouth, that makes the consci∣ence within to cry. Remember the example of Aphraades; remember the modest virgins behaviour, when shee saw her fathers house on fire; remember the cryes of the dumbe child of Craesus at his fathers danger. The woe is terrible, that belongs to you, in case ye crie not. The Athe∣nian Cynegirus detained the Persian Gallie with his right hand, & when that was cut off, with his left; and being mutilate of both, hee spared not his teeth. No meane should bee left unassayed with God, and with men, to maintain the least par∣cel of truth for his sake, whose truth it is, and who hath concredit you with the bloud of his own sonne. As the Libellatici wer odious of old,
for redeeming from the Gentiles their peace with money: so may ye be suspected of defection, and deni∣all of the truth, if yee shall redeeme either your peace or places with promise of silence. Away with hal∣ting, with luke-warmnesse, with sha∣ming, to utter the words of Christ in the midst of an adulterous and sinful generation, lest he be ashamed of such, when ee commeth in the glory of his father▪ with his holy Angels. Promise of silence is a se∣cret collusion, and indirect appro∣bation of the contrary course▪ a hardning of the adversaries in their wickednesse, and a deserting of your brethren in the cause of God. The occasion of the preaching of the Gospell procured by dealing of this sort, is not unlike to Pilates subtili∣tie, who thought meet to scourge Christ, for saving of his life. Mo∣ses Exod. 10. 25. Daniel chap: 6. 11. Iohn Baptist, Mark. 6▪ 18. had no such wisedome. Albeit all thy
speaking were but as the washing of a blackmore, yet bee not mis-led with the cunning and craftie offers of your adversaries. Their intention is to cast you loose of your own or∣der, to draw you on by degrees, to make the number behind the smal∣ler, the common clamor and com∣plaint the lesse, their owne travels in cutting off the rest, the more ea∣sie and plausible. And in the end, when ye have satisfied their desires, they shall bee hardened in their course, and ye condemned as unfa∣vorie salt, censured by them as old hypocrites, condemned by your owne consciences as betrayers of the truth, and complained upon by Gods people, who haue heard his truth from your lips. But then might I have good hope to be freed from this deluge of defection, and that all my low∣er vallies would at last appeare, if the tops of my mountaines were once discovered. If these who i
the providence of my God are of greatest estate, and have the first pla∣ces in the kingdome, and high and honorable meetings thereof, would go as farre before others in zeale, as they are above them in preferment. Men will mock me (as the servant of Strato the Syrian was mocked at the election of a king) for look∣ing to the West for the sight of the sunne rising. Yet as it was then first seene by that wise servant upon the tops of the Westerne mountaines: so my hope is in this night of deso∣lation, to see the beames of my won∣ted light first upon you of greatest place, and then upon the lower ground, by obtaining at your hands a few reasonable petitions, which I will then propone, when I have by your patience a little dis-burthened my heavie minde, by demanding a few things at the Prelates, once my ministers, † Who are ashamed to heare what they have done, but have no shameQuibus au∣dendi quae fecerunt pu∣dor est, nul∣lus faciendi quae audire rubescunt. Illic ubi o∣pus est, nihil verentur, hic ubi nihil o∣pus est, ibi verentur. In doing of that which they blush to
heare. Where need, i they are voyd of feare: and where there i no need, there they feare: Charging and attesting them, as they will answere to the Iudge of all the world▪ to ponder my demands unpartially, and in the presence of God to answere them secretly, in the cabinets of their soules. 1. First, how they could so farreSome de∣mands pro∣poned to the Prelates. forget themselves in so short time, as to come to this measure of de∣fection▪ of pride and persecution? Would they not have answered, and did they not say in the begin∣ning of this their course, with Ha∣zael, Are we dogges, that we should doe this mischiefe? And conse∣quently what inexpected extremi∣ty they may yet fall into, if they wil∣fullie goe on in this their wicked∣nesse, the end whereof they can∣not see? 2. Vpon what warrant they can receive or urge the five Articles, which may not as well inforce the
whole ceremonies of England, yea the whole Romulean rites of Anti∣christ, as being of one kinde and qualitie, onely differing in degrees. And thus if they can think it tolle∣rable to change my comely Chri∣stian countenance into the painted Antichristian complexion of that Whoore of Babel? 3. Whether the Episcopacie which they esteeme the principall office in the house of my God, hath any pa∣terne in the mount: and if it hath, whether their forme of ministrati∣on bee answerable to that instituti∣on, or to the practise of any ortho∣dox Kirk in the world, or to the caveats sworne unto by their owne mouthes? 4. Whether in the sight of God they thinke the maintainers of the reformed religion, or the late for∣malists more faithfull in their cal∣lings, and consientious in their conversation? And therefore if it be not Pharisaisme to pronounce of
the fidelity of my pastors by their conforming to ceremonies: and ex∣treme malice to think that men in all other things studying to approve themselves to God and the King, durst be bold to resist in these with∣out conscience, for respect to any popular opinion. 5 Whether that meeting of Perth be one of my lawfull Assemblies, justificable in the sight of my Lord and Saviour, and the constitu∣tions thereof concluded for Ca∣nons, to bee urged upon pain of de∣privation: whereupon Ministers are removed from their charges, and many soules famished, for whom he gave his life, for not conforming to a platforme blank as yet, and scarce∣ly drawen in the Idea of their own imaginations? 6 What warrant from Christ my King, and me, can be pretended for bringing my ministery, and me, un∣der this new bondage in the persons of intrants forced at their admission
to sweare, and subscribe. 1. That they shall not onely maintaine his Maiesties prerogative in causes ec∣clesiasticall; which, what it is, or what is the extent thereof, they doe not well understand; but also the present governement of the Kirk, and jurisdiction Episcopall, in all places where they shall have oppor∣tunity, either of privat conference, or publick preaching: and that they shall bee carefull by reading to in∣forme themselves, to the end they may be the more able to withstand all adversaries opposite to the same. 2. That they shall bee obedient to their Ordinary, and all other superi∣ours in the Kirk, speak of them re∣verently, and in all their prayers pri∣vat and publick, commend to Gods protection, their estate not allowed by me. 3. That they shal subject thē∣selves to the present orders preten∣ded to bee the ordinances of the Kirk, and to the orders, which shall be established by consent of the sayd
Kirk, meaning assemblies framed and over ruled by Prelates, and to procure due reverence to the same at the hands of others, by all the means, which they cā use. 4. That if they cōtravene any of these poynts, they shall be content without ma∣king any contradiction, to bee de∣prived of their ministery, and to be reputed perjured and infamous per∣sons for ever. And by these oathes and subscriptions, that they would consider, what mischiefes may bee wrought in the after ages, when they are dead and gone. 7 Whether it were more perti∣nent to deale with their brethren by reason or authority? Ye are madePastores facti estis, non per∣cussores, nova atque inau∣ditae est ista praedicatio, quae verberibus xigit fidem. Aliud est quod agitur typho superbiae, aliud zelo disciplinae: Plus erga corrigendos aat benevolentia quam severitas, plus cohortatio quam comminatio, plus charitas quam potestas. Sed hi qui, quae sua sunt, quaerunt, non quae Iosa Christs, facile ab hac lege discernuntur & qum domi∣ri magis quam consulere subditis quaerunt. Places honor, inflat su∣perbi & quod provisum ad concordiam, endit ad noxam. shepheards, and not strikers. This is a new and uncouth sort of preaching,
which will inforce faith by strokes. Pride effectuates one thing, and disci∣pline another. Favour should be more used then severitie, exhortations more then threatnings, love more then law. But by such forms it is easie to disoern, who are they that seeke their owne, and who the things of Iesus Christ, sayth the Canon law their owne pa∣terne. 8 By what conscience, reason or law, they have deserted their flocks and pastorall charges, entred into civil place and pompe, breaking the caveats, and contrary to their alled∣ged commission for keeping of mi∣nisters in quietnesse and peace, and vindicating the Kirk from poverty and contempt, have they taken upon them the power of both swords a∣gainst the whole subjects of the kingdome, and summarily to con∣fine, ward, imprison, discharge, si∣lence, suspend, deprive, autorize and exauctor at my ministers at their pleasure?
If the Lord should cause a terri∣ble finger to come forth, and write these, and a thousand other their presumptuous dittaes upon the wall over against them, where they use to sit Balthazar-like in their sa∣crilegious pompe, abusing the fur∣niture of his house; their bright∣nes would change, their thoughts would trouble them; so that the joynts of their loynes would loose, and their knees would smite one a∣another. I have borne them, but to my griefe and shame. They have gi∣ven me cause to pronounce the cur∣ses of Iob upon the day of their birth. For they neither care to bee esteemed bastards themselves, nor to brand me with the marke of an harlot. They prove Loammi, and would have me to prove Apostati∣call. Had these my forlorne hopes, but one sparkle of true love to my spouse or me, they would resolve with Nazianzen, to undergo Ionas punishment for stilling of this tem∣pest,
and to preferre my peace to their own preferment. What can I doe but mourne, intreat, protest, rebuke, expostulate. I call therefore heaven and earth, their owne soules, the testimonies of al who have been acquaint with them, and their pro∣ceedings, to beare witnesse against them. Beseeking & exhorting them by the salvation of their own souls, by the tender mercies of Christ, by the precious drops of his blood, by that excellent price of their re∣demption: if there be any consolati∣on in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any love to his glory, to his blood, to his Gospell: and if there be any pitty in their hearts to the breasts which they have sucked, to this sinfull land, and their owne native king∣dome, to returne to God, to repent them of their course, to leave off to allow, to defend, to urge that, yea and persecute for that, which of late they were wont to condemne,
and even now almost could hardly have tollerated. Let them forbeare any longer (as it is to be feared, they have peevishly been doing) to fight against God, to kick against the pricke, to vaunt themselves proud∣ly in the glory of their munition. Their craft is knowen; can they dance naked in a net, and think not to be seen? The seams of their black policies are sewed with white threed. If they shall persist to stop their eares against all admonitions, to harden themselves in rebellion a∣gainst God, still to proceed in their truculent breathings, Thrasonicall boasts, and tyrannous executions, and shall for their backes and bel∣lies, and the making up of their hou∣ses, make havock of the puritie of Gods truth, and the liberty of the kingdom of his sonne: As the Lord lives that sees them, he shal yet har∣den their hearts more, and at last shall tread them in the wine-presse of his wrath, and there shal be none
to deliver them.Petition in  humility t the Nobility and Estate to deale with his Maesty. Now my petitiō, backed with the authority of a mother, to your ho∣nors is, that for the glory of Christs kingdom in this land, the adorning of his majesties crowne, & quietnes of his loyal subjects, the endles praise of your selves, and flourishing of your honorable estate, and the par∣ticular comfort of the Ministers and congregations within this realme in this time of distresse felt and fea∣red. I may by your timous inter∣cession at his gracious majesties hands, and uttermost endevours debtfull to God from your place, obtaine how▪ soone occasion may be offered. 1 A sufficient and ready execu∣tion of former actes of Parliament made against the fearful blasphemy of Gods name, profaning of the Lords day, and contempt of his san∣ctuarie, and service, so universally o∣verflowing this land, not onely in the persons of poore ignorants, in a
manner tyed to these horrible crimes by a cursed custome, & beg∣gerly necessitie: but even in the more honourable sort, whose dam∣nable example encourages their fol∣lowers to sinne without feare: with such additions as may represse and restraine these crying abhominati∣ons in all, without respect of per∣sons. 2 A safe liberty to enjoy the pro∣fession of our religion, as it is re∣formed in doctrine, sacraments and discipline, and hath been openly professed by Prince, Pastors, and people of all rankes, your predeces∣sors of worthy memory, your selves & us, all yet living, these threescore yeares by gone, and above. 3 A full deliverance from, and a sufficient defence against all nova∣tions and novelties in doctrine, sa∣craments, and discipline, and speci∣ally such, as by constitutions of the Kirk, confessions of faith, louable lawes of the countrey, and long
continued practise hath been con∣demned, and casten out as idle rites, and Romish formalities, under what soever pretence they plead for re∣entry. 4 That no act passe in derogati∣on, or prejudice of the actes already granted in favour of Reformation, liberty of Assemblies, convenient execution of Discipline, &c. or for corroboration of new opinions a∣gainst the same: concerning whe∣ther Episcopacie, or ceremonies the shadow thereof, which for the peace of the Kirk by heavenly wise∣dome should bee rejected before they be ratified. 5 That all ministers provided to Prelacies, and admitted to vote in Parliament, be urged to observe the Act granted in their favours to that place; especially the provision ex∣pressed therein. 6 The happinesse to live under his Majesty, and his highnesse ordi∣nary Iudges, and Rulers established
by lawes and custome, and that our cause he lawfully cognoseed, accor∣ding to order and justice, before a∣ny sentence passe against our per∣sons, places, & estates. In the nameTriall to bee made by the word. of Iesus Christ intreating and com∣manding, all worldly and personall respects set apart: yee look with a single eye upon the matter contro∣verted, not suffering your faith in Iesus Christ to bee blamed with partiality: ye try all with the touch∣stone of the Temple, and ballance of the Sanctuarie. Consider the ex∣ample of Moses, when hee saw the Israelite & Egyptian fight. He spent no time in rebuking them for the strife, but drew his sword, and slew the Egyptian; But perceiving a de∣bate betwixt two Israelites, he sayd. Ye are brethren, why strive yee? If the intended novelties be Israelites, then may yee say, Why strive yee; but if they be of that Egypt, from the bondage wherof, the Lord your God miraculously hath set you free,
then may they not be reconciled to the truth: but being slaine by the sword of the Spirit, must also bee proscribed by your authoritie. VseBy true zeale. the triall of Elias against Baals Priests, (albeit without the miracle of Eliah) take my bullockes and theirs, that is, the urged novelties, and the possessed liberties, or alas the liberties that I once possessed, (for now whether I possesse them, or not, it is uncertaine,) lay their peeces on the altars, and on which God sends the holy fire of zeale in the powerfull preaching of the word, and consuming of sinne, let that bee received. When no manBy the fruits, and not by pretext of antiquity, or outward ap∣pearance. was able to discerne betwixt Alex∣ander the sonne of Herod before put to death, and a certaine crafts∣man like unto him, who gave him∣selfe out for Alexander, as though hee had escaped by favour of the executioner: the noble and wise Augustus by griping his hand, tried him to be an Artificer, and punished
him for his falshood. Would it please your honours, whilst so many learned and wise are deceaved with the counterfeit face of these novel∣ties, but to gripe their hand a little, and to try what hath beene their frootes, where they have been ad∣mitted from the beginning: ye shal incontinent finde that they have been voyd of the sap of grace, and that their best workes evidently de∣clare, that they never were begot∣ten, nor blessed by the father of peace. Their own maintainers con∣fesse that the controversie about them, hath brought confusion, breach of the second command of love, rent my body into divers parts, divided my people into divers sects, and the sheep to despise their Pa∣stors, and estranged them from the love of their flockes. It hath con∣firmed the prophane in their impie∣ties, and given way to the common enemies, distracted the mindes of the multitude, and shaken their faith
who for the most part knew no o∣ther difference betwixt Christ and Antichrist, but that which consists in externall shewes and formalities. It hath brought the ruine of Christs kingdome, and increase of Satans, partly in superstition, and partly in impiety. And in a word, generally hath put out the life of true religi∣on, and brought in Atheisme. Bee not satisfied with a fashionable and superficiall triall, but examine them from the very root, and from the ground rip them up. As wise Ne∣hemiah tried who had right to the Priesthood, by searching their line∣all descent from Aaron. It was not sufficient for them to cleare their genealogie by writ from Levi, and Coath: for so the childrē of Habaiah and Barzillai had been admitted, & had brought the wrath of God with them. Men may alledge, and perhaps prove by writ, some such customs as they urge, for some hun∣dreth years in my neighbour kirks,
but except it can bee cleared, that they have their pedigree frō Christ, or his holy Apostles, they ought to be esteemed uncleane, and should not be receiued, as belonging to me, or my ministers. All these, and many moe, have vexed me before, and being mans inventions in the matter of Gods worship, waxed old, and weak, (As it fareth with e∣very errour contrary to the course of verity which groweth ever gree∣ner and stronger) and at last dying, were cast out of my habitations, as vile and stinking carrion, that now the opening of their grave raiseth a noysome fleur in every spirituall and exercised sense, and if they bee taken up againe, shall make many poore soules of weake constitution to perish through their pestilent contagion. It cannot be denied, but they have been defended by some, and digested by others by way of Interim, till opportunity of further reformation in the Kirks and coun∣tries,
where they had place. But be∣forePerih y wants a paterne. this time, we dare be bold to say, never any kirk, countrey, or cōscientious Christian did so much as enter in deliberation: whether they should have been repossessed, where they have been displaced. Let the two renowmed maisters ofHooker and Saravia hē∣selves against the re entry of Res. English ceremonies, profound Hoo∣ker, and fordward Saravia, be heard in this poynt. The one sayes, In as much, as they goe about to destroy a thing, which is in force, and to draw in that, which hath not as yet been recei∣ved, and to impose that which we think not our selves bound unto, and to over∣throw things, whereof we are possessed: that therefore they are to take them to the opponents part, which must consist in one of two things: the one that our orders condemned by them, we ought to abolish: the other, that theirs wee are bound to accept in stead thereof. And the other, A mult unt reform∣ ecclesiae qae ineam  lam veste non admit∣tunt, & pe∣reorinaū ec∣clesiarum mi∣nistri & in∣sularum Ier∣sae & Iern∣ae, quae Anlcan ecclesiae an∣numerentur. Resp um, qui in illis ecclesijs usum hujus vestis vellet introducere, a schismste non posse excusai, sicut nec a superstitione quicquid contra ad suam excusationent posset allegare. he that would bring in the
use of the surplice into the reformed Kirkes, where i hath no place, cannot be excused from schisme, and supersti∣tion, whatsoever hee alledge for his ex∣cuse. As he speakes of one, so hee speakes of all. The drierie lamentations, & hea∣vieThe moane of the Kirk of d under the burd of ceremonies. complaints of the unsupporta∣ble burthen of the ceremonial yoke, powred out in all ages by the holy men of God, may provoke the com∣passion of the hardest hearts. Au∣gustine in his time complained, that the Kirke was pressed contrarie to Christs mercifull institution, with such a servile burthen of ceremo∣nies, that the state of the Iewes un∣der the law, was more tollerable, then the condition of Christians: seeing they were subject onely to Gods ordinances, & not to humane presumptions, as Christians are. How would hee at this time have mourned for the case of other Kirks, and for the perill that I am in! Erasmus, Polidorus Virgilius,
&c. ing the same ditta. It is a cer∣taine truth, many ceremonies, littleQuanto mae∣gis accedit cumulo ritu∣um in Eccle∣sia tanto mae∣gis dtrahi∣tur non tan∣tum libertati Christianae, sed & Chri∣sto, & eiu fide: dum vulgus ea quaet in ri∣tibus quae quae eret in solo Dei filio Jesu Christo per fidem. faith. Look how much is added to the midding of rites, as much is withdra∣wen, not onely from Christian liberty, but from Christ himself, and his faith; while the multitude seeketh for that in rites, which they should seek in the one∣ly sonne of God Iesus Christ. The greater bulk of bodily ceremonies, the lesse spirit of true devotion. The true worshippers under the Gospel shall not say, The Ark of the Lord▪ they shall forget all those outward ceremonies, and never revive them. Moses his vaile, farre more all other things, that neither were nor are frō God, is removed, and now may we with open face behold the glory of God. Then the sea about the altar was of brasse, and could not be pierced with the sharpest sight: but now our sea about the throne is glasse, clearly convoying the know∣ledge of God unto our minds. The Amphiscij can tell, that the more
shadow the lesse light. The sha∣dow alwayes accompanies the bo∣dy, sometimes it followes behinde, but sometimes also it comes before. Ye may be sure the dark body of er∣ror is not farre off, when the sha∣dowes of ceremonies are at hand; and iustly may feare, that they are the harbingers sent before by Sa∣tan (whatsoever be mans intention) to make place for their owne sub∣stance. Oh, if the Lord would open your eyes to see the subtill working of that mystery of iniquity. The web may be divided in mens inten∣tions, who possibly mind no more for time to come, then they urge for the present. But in the iustice of God, punishing the world for the contempt of the truth, and in respect of Satans malice, bringing in his lye, it is all of one threed. And that which is begun by one, may be wrought out by another, entring upon the preceeding labours. Ye see not this weed growing; but it
will be perceived to have growen. The seeds of Popery were secretly sowen in the Primitive Kirke, and by degenerating ages grew up to that monstrous height, which now the world wonders at. But alas all our countrey wit is Mtanoia, af∣ter wit. My people are like the A∣thenians, who (as Demades obje∣cted to them) never intreated for peace, but in mourning gowns; that is, after they had suffered great cala∣mitie in battell. When afterward ye are poysoned with errour, and over laden with crosses, ye and your children after you shall be forced to cry out upon your owne madnesse and folly, that would not see and resist the beginnings of so great evils. The remanent sparkles of naturesLih of na∣ture, true po∣licie, and cō∣mon equity against Eng∣lish formali∣ties in our Kirk. light, looking upon the common providence of God, may let your Honours see, that it serves most for the prosperity of Kirkes and King∣domes, that ilk constitution and
order in a societie should sort with the nature, disposition, and condi∣tion of the people. My people have from the liberal hand of their God, externall abundance for the honest sustentation of their bodies, with a substantial, sound, and simple religi∣on for the salvation of their soules. Yet farre from the artificial fulnes, whereby the Tyrian spirits of the world do disquiet their neighbour nations, striving to subject all to their formes, that they may reigne over all, as Queenes; against the protestations made in all the con∣fessions of faith of other Kirkes. A single forme of policie is more fit for a plain people, and mean provi∣sions, then the gorgeous shew of a pompous port, necessarily requiring rents, complements, and carriage, that neither this land may beare, neither wee nor our fathers have learned. Rites must have rents: their service is both cumbersome & cost∣ly: they scorne the assignations of
our plotted povertie; they strive with Statesmen, Earles and Lords for place & precedencie; they loath the preaching of the Gospell, and like better the chief places of estate. The restitution of the Kirk to her wonted possessions, & to her world∣ly dignities, must goe on together with equall speed. Neither can so long experience be denied, but that ordinarily the estate of the com∣mon wealth accompanies the con∣stitution of the kirk, as the morning starre goes with the Sunne, which Constantine acknowledged in his grant to the Kirkes of Africa, thus beginning his Epistle, Considering that the due observation of things per∣taining to true religion, and the worship of God, brings great happinesse to the whole estate and common wealth of the Empire of Rome: and Charles the 8. of France lamentably experien∣ced. For when he had faire occasi∣ons to reforme the Kirke of Rome at his pleasure, and to help the Kirk
of God, he neglected both: where∣fore shortly after striken with a sud∣den sicknesse, he died, according to the forewarning of Savanarola; who told him plainly, that he should have great successe in his voyage to Italy, for reforming the corrupt state of the Kirk, which if hee did not, he should returne with disho∣nour, and God would reserve the honour of that work unto some o∣ther. All the policie of Achito∣phel, and wisdome of Salomon, can∣not establish a kingdome, wherein the kingdome of Christ is misregar∣ded. His true worship is the pillar and wall of policies. If the Lord re∣move his truth from you, hee will deprive you also of your civill liber∣ties, and give you over into the hands of mercilesse enemies. If he spare not his own strength, and glo∣ry, but give over the one to capti∣vity, and the other to the hands of his enemies, he shall respect you no more thē the mire in the street. The
nation and kingdome that will not serve the Lord shal perish, and these nations shall be utterly destroyed. My faithfull ministers, and obe∣dient children to the meanest are all Gods people, and his majesties loyal subjects and faithfull servants. The testimonies of his love belong to them all for their comfort in this world, and safe conduct to the world to come. As they feare God, they honour his highnesse, they pray for him and his children, and all that are in authoritie, that they may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all god∣lines and honesty. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God their Saviour, who will have all to be safe, and come to the knowledge of the truth. They wish from the desires that lodge within their breasts, long life unto his Majesty, a secure reigne, a safe house, valiant armies, a faithful counsel, good peo∣ple, a quiet world, Et quaecunque ho∣minis & Caesaris sunt vota. They
stand by that reformation, that hath been so profitable and comfortable these threescore yeares by past: gi∣ving more reasons for it, then hath been, or can be clearly answered. How can it stand then with the grounds, either of good policie, or Christian equity, for removing dis∣sentions, to yeeld respect, counte∣nance, support, and authority to the other party, neither having nor giving evidence of reason for their pretended novations against the re∣ceived truth. Although the inferior law were inacted, (as God forbid) yet in all Christian Prudence it ought to give place to the royall law of love, and unity, as being of a more noble descent. But since unity forbids, and peace declares her miscontentment in the begin∣ning, how shall this ever contenti∣ous and unruly Hagar be heard to contest with Sarah. Were not this a way to bring a further rent and de∣solation upon the house of Abra∣ham.
Vpon this ground, what great tollerations have been gran∣ted by Christian Emperours, and Kings, all men know, who know a∣nyInterdū con∣ve men∣us est▪ qam remdj d∣licta incen∣dere. thing in History. It is better som∣time to give connivence, then by unti∣mous cures to waken diseases. And as one sayd to Augustus, It is a speciall poynt of wisedome not to suffer new names, or ought else, wherefra discord may arise. The cause wherein they stand,Judgmēts to be given not according to the bsenesse of the defen∣ders, but ac∣cording to the truth. and for the constant defence wher∣of they are traduced under the o∣dious names of Puritanes, precisi∣ans, schismatickes, Anabaptists, and the like, is an article of your ho∣nours owne worthy profession andRspuite AE∣ne suscipi∣te pum. confessiō of faith, wherof the adver∣saries themselves were preachers, and practisers of late, and have ne∣ver yet made any publicke repen∣tance for their former heresies. Au∣gustine could say. albeit in a diffe∣rent case, Let them exercise crueltieIlli in vos saeviant qui nullo asi rre decp∣i sunt, quali vos deceptos vident, ego utem saevire in vot omni∣ non possū, quos sicut eipsum illo empore, ita unc▪ debeo sustinere. against you, who never were deceived
with the like error, wherewith they see you deceived: but as for me, I am not the man that can be cruell against you, whom I must beare with now, as I did comport with my selfe then. But they have forgotten what they were, and make my ministers to find the truth of that which is in the French pro∣verb: Quison chien veult tuer, larage luyme sus. He that is disposed to have his dogge killed, will first have him thought to be madd. As I will have them for their part to resolve with Daniel, to sustaine the wrong of such Assyrian nick-names, and by the grace of the God of Daniel, wil have them both to abstaine from these impurities, and to professe the detestation of the least shew of them: So I would wish your ho∣nours upon the other part, not to judge of them according to mens calumnies, but to the truth of God. And consider upon your beds, who they are that yeeld, & what are they that stand, and upon what induce∣ments.
Ye can hardly poynt at any one of my ministers, but hee is in some good measure fitted for the work of the ministery. And howsoever according to the diverse roomes in my habitation, lesse or greater, all have not the same measure of light: some torches for more publick pla∣ces, and others smaller lights for their own cottages: yet every one makes conscience of residence to shine in his own roome, both in the purity of doctrine, and life, to my great joy and your benefit, by the blessing of God upon their labours▪ hardly any one of the other side, but hee is either, &c. They have large rents, if not great wealth: the others portion is but meane. The one is encouraged with outward as∣sistance, the other enfeebled with cries, crosses, and ensuing dangers; the one richly rewarded for proud practises, the other are boasted for painfull labours to clear and defend a just cause: the one, men of glo∣rious
state, and great pompe in the world, the other trode upon as un∣worthy of the countenance of the world. The one take leasure from their charge to invent and publish their pleasure: the other have no time frō the charge of their flockes, to cleare the truth. To the one, the presses are open and free: to the o∣ther it is neither safe no possible al∣most to print a few words of this sort; far lesse labours of greater mo∣ment, and better use. The one gets money for their hungry pamphlets: the other counts charges & hazard gaine. The one are both parties and judges of the cause: the other dare scarcely make provocation in publick to the Lord Iesus. The one finally by their defection rise, and become Princes of the world: the other for their constancy are thrust downe, and tyed fast to the crosse. Wherby ye cānot but see, whether the love of the world, or the zeale of God, be the spirit that blowes in the
sailes of their affections. Know yee not, that howsoever they bee coun∣ted few, silly, and of base resolution, yet if they esteemed not more of a good conscience, then they who make a covenant with death and hell, and put the evill day farr from them, they might speed as well as others in worldly projects. Can it bee denied, but they preferre the peace of their soules, and purity of their profession, to the pleasures of the world, wherewith others are pampered? Were it proclaimed by the Emperour, Let us take from themauferamus il∣lis nocentes divitias: ho enim facere est opus cha∣ritatis. these hurtfull riches: for that were a work of charity, the zealots of this course would grow key cold. Suffer not then poverty, pau∣city, pusillanimity, prisonings, war∣dings, difficulties of writing, prin∣ting, uttering and countenancing Gods cause, and thousands of such disadvantages, be a prejudice to that truth, whereof ye are convinced in your mindes. Be not deceived with
this new, fond, and false glosse of indifferencie: look to God, to his word, to the parties, to your owne soules, and to that great day of the revelation of Christ Iesus. As the pretext of conformity. the visor of unity, the null-authority of a pseu∣do-synod, wanting formality, ful∣nesse, and liberty, should not bee a Gorgons head to terrifie them: so should it neither by serpētine slight deceive you. In conformity there is to bee re∣spected,Cōditions of conformity. 1. The substantiall truth of God, wherein all true Conformi∣tants must agree. 2. The sincere mi∣nistery, and sorts of ministers ap∣poynted by the sonne of God for our edification in the truth. 3. Christs incommunicable preroga∣tive in appoynting of the Sabboth, and solemne ministration of the word, sacraments, and discipline. 4. The edificative use of these minist∣rations in the several ages, Kirks, & kingdomes of the world. . A clear
distinction between divine and ec∣clesiasticall rites, the indifferencie in nature, the expedience of use, the diversitie in practise of ecclesiastical: according to the saying. It is not pos∣sibleImpossibile fuerit omnes ecclsiarū qu per civitate sunt & regi∣ones ritus cō∣scribere. Nul∣la religio c∣osdem ritus custodit, eti∣amsi eande de illis doc∣trinam am∣plectitur. to take up all the diverse rites of all Kirkes in all countries. No religi∣on observeth the same rites, albeit it embrace the same doctrine of rites. The attempt of the contrary, will still prove, as from the beginning, a malady a thousand fold worse then the moraine of ceremonies. And without these conditions, a confor∣ming with men, is but a contesting with God. As for the conclusi∣ons of men, Tout proposition huma∣ine a autant d'authorite quel'autre si la raison n'on fait la difference, Even so are the sentences of all Kirkes e∣quall, except the authority of the word make the difference. Belongs not the judgement of discretion to all Christians? Shall my children with weathercockes, be caried with every uncertaine winde of mens
mouthes, like fooles runne with the cry, & suffer themselves like beasts without reason to follow the dreave. This were to make every constitu∣tution like Nebuehadnezzar his Image, and Roman-like to make the name of the Kik the rule of all reli∣gion. Can that one null-assembly, the nakednesse whereof is now layd open to the eyes of the world, beareQuis ferat co qui aā qāpiam sy∣ndum prae∣pont N∣inae. At quis non potius oderit eos qi rejiciunt paū decre∣ta, & prae∣ponunt recē¦tioa nuper Amini, contentione, & vi expres∣sa. Qu cum illis homini∣bus societatē inie velit, qui ne quidē sua ipsi u∣ntu. down all the formall, full, and free councels of this nation before, and all the determinations and constitu∣tions of your worthy forefathers of blessed memory. Who can enter in fellowship with them, who defend not their own conclusions? My ministers have clearly testified by their admo∣nitions presented to the Parliament holden at Perth in the yeare 1606. in generall assemblies, and at other occasions before and since, their de∣testation of all novelties and novati∣ons of that sort thrust upon mee. Many a one that hath consented thereto in shew, and for worldly re∣spects,
resting yet unperswaded in their own minds, and unable to per∣swade others of the contrary judge∣ment, if they saw the day of their liberty, & were free from the stroke of worldly inconveniences, would cry with the Bishops of Asia, Not byNos non no∣stra volunta∣te, sed necessi∣tae adducti subscripsi∣mus: non a∣nimo sed ver∣bis duntaxa consensimus. our owne wils, but by necessity, have we been moved to subscribe: we consented with our words, not with our hearts. And to declare, that that act was unlawfully begotten, the fathers of it would deny that they begat it with that face, & force, that it hath brought with it into the world. Your honours may remember also, your owne religious provision ex∣pressed in that act, whereby mini∣sters are permitted to vote in Parlia∣ment. The particulars of their place and office are remitted to be treated by his Majesty, and generall assem∣bly; but prejudice alwayes of my jurisdiction, and discipline, establi∣shed by actes of Parliament made in any time preceeding, and permitted by the sayd acts, to all generall and
provinciall assemblies, and others whatsoever my presbyteries and Sessions. Men may muse at the matter, al∣ledging that my children makeThe poynts controverted are material. mountaines of mots, tragedies of trifles, and raise a noyse about things indifferent, circumstantiall, acciden∣tal, and that with their brethren. But first it can be no prejudice to them, or the cause they maintaine, that they stand in it against their bre∣thren: seeing they are defenders of themselves; and not persuers of their brethren. The promise, Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are they who in the last time suffer against the beast, as well as they who in the first times were persecuted by the heathen, belong∣eth to them. For if the Lord mea∣sured sufferings by the inequality of his enemies, and not by the equity of the cause, there would bee great disparagement betwixt the Martyrs put to death by the Pope, and the persecuting Emperours. Neither is there any suffering here, but for
that which is papall. It is no shame for them to suffer that of their bre∣thren, which Christ suffered: nei∣ther is it honour to their enemies to doe that, which Iudas did. The Spirit of God Revel. 2. speakes more comfortably to the kirk of Smyrna, a figure of the Chri∣stian Kirk under Constantine trou∣bled with intestine enemies: then to Ephesus representing the primitive Kirk invaded by the heathen. I know thy workes, and tribulation, and poverty, but thou art rich: and I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Iewes, and are not. Feare none of these things, &c. Let him therefore that is righteous, be yet more righ∣teous, and he shall have a crown in the end. Next, let them be considered 1. in the urgers intention. Whatsoever they be in valuation, they are not of so small moment. For albeit they bee concluded by way of counsell, and not of command; albeit that conclusion want a sanction; albeit
no punishment bee determined by law; and albeit that Synod be kno∣wen to be null, yet they lay upon the transgressors, and for their cause, upon their innocent families and congregations, the heaviest of all punishments, except death: and to some equall with death, if not more bitter, and intollerable; heavier then for non-residence, idlenesse, error, wickednesse, scandall. In delibera∣tion they are talked of as indiffe∣rent, but in execution they are in∣forced as most necessary. A necessa∣ry conclusion inferred upon indiffe∣rent premisses. Anticeremoniall Christians more rigorously used then Antichristian practisers of ce∣remonies. Papists without preju∣dice to their lives, livings, and liber∣ties, enjoy the comfort of the coun∣trey. To his Majesties loyall and religious subjects, is denied favour to sigh at home in the cause of pub∣lick and privat grievances, and to go with the armies of Israel against the ilistims of Rome. Let a man
bee Paules presbyter in every, poynt, yet a more of ceremonies shall marre him. Let him be a De∣mas, or Demetrius, a formalizing ceremony shall accomplish him. Is not this to neglect the greater things of the law? Is not this to make the precepts of God of no force for mens traditions? To love themselves above God, and to bee wedded more to their owne wits, then to his divine wisdome. 2 In their bitter effects of chan∣ges brought upon the preaching of the word, ministration of the sacra∣ments, discipline, cōfession of faith, and the whole worship of God in so short time. 3 In respect of the practise of re∣ligion so frequently, and ordinarily to be performed of all: that no man can either bee ignorant or carelesse of any poynt, but must bee setled and throughly resolved in all, except he would hold his soule on a perpe∣tuall rack, and make his whole de∣votion and service doubtsome,
and comfortlesse. 4 According to the confession of both parties, tending to the ho∣nour or dishonor of Christ, serving either to beautifie or deface his spouse, and to the edification or de∣struction of weak Christians. 5 In the estimation of some holy martyrs: who, howsoever in their prosperity they cōtended for them: yet neere the time of their martyr∣dome, when their minds were most unpartiall, condemned them for foolish and abominable. And in the judgement of many worthy men, suffering bitter persecutions for the like: as for officium Ambrosianum, the service of Ambrose against the lame Liturgie of Gregory, and re∣fusing to practise in matters of farre lesse importance. If yee looke to the fountaine, yee sustaine a com∣mon cause with all the Saints, who in any age have opponed them∣selves to the current corruptions of the Kirk & Kirkmen in their time: such as Basil, Ierome, &c. The
Albigenses contemptuously stiled Apostolickes, the Waldenses called Puritans, &c. 6 In consideration of the change brought upon me, and of the course of my declining from my former perfection, my errors now may bee smaller: and yet my case is worse, then in my growing dayes, when I was wrastling against greater infir∣mities. My lukewarmnesse then was a way to, and a degree of heate, but now after my zeale, I am be∣come Laodicean, waxing colder frō day to day: And increase (with Vincentius) I love; but defections & changes I loath. Our bodies (sayth he) albeit in processe of time they grow, yet they change not. The same mem∣bers, the same joynts are in children, which are in men, though in the one stronger and greater, in the other smal∣ler and weaker. But if the shape bee turned into another kinde, or any thing be added to the number of the members, or taken from them, then either the bo∣dy perisheth, or becometh monstrous, or
at the least becomes weak. It is right so in religion, if we begin to make chā∣ges, wherof the kirk of Christ should be a diligent keeper, changing no∣thing, diminishing nothing, adding nothing. I admit no alteration for indifferent that tends to Apostasie, and not to accretion. 7 Considered in themselves, & not in relation to other things more ne∣cessary. A leg or an arm is necessary for a mans body, yet not in that de∣gree, that it is necessary for the life, as the soule. I may live, & be the kirk of God, so long as Christ by his spi∣rit breathes faith into my soule. Yet wanting the least thing which God hath ordained, and receiving supply of a leg of wood from mens artifice, I can never bee beautifull in Gods fight, nor cheerfull in performing my own actiōs; but pines & dwines away, til at last nothing be left, but a stinking carkasse, unfit both for the habitation & celebration of the ma∣jesty of my God. 8 Whatsoever they be in thēselves,
and in their own nature, yet falling under our use and practise, they be∣come to us either good or evill, and consequently, either sin or accepta∣ble service, wherin Scandall beares so great sway, that for avoyding of of∣fencepropter scan∣dalum, quod vel  imbe∣cillitae vel ex ignorantia nascitur, de∣clinandum, omnes quan∣tum cum∣que rectae aut utiles ac∣tiones quae ad animi sa∣lutem non sunt necessa∣riae praeter∣mittendae vel occultandae aut saltem in in aliud tem∣pus differen∣dae sunt. Thom. 2a. 2q. 43. artic. arising upō weaknes or ignorance, all actions, albeit never so lawfull and profitable, which are not necessary to sal∣vation, are either to bee left off, or kept up, or at least to bee put off till another time. Woe bee to them not onely who give offences, but by whom offences come. 9 The Fathers in the primitive times, partly preferring the Ver∣nish of the Iewes religion, and the pompe of Paganisme to Christian simplicitie. And partly with grea∣ter zeale then knowledge, desirous to enlarge the boundes of Christs kingdome, by drawing both Iewes and Gentiles unto their profession, did change sacraments into sacrifi∣fices, Pastors into Priests, Tables into Altars, Prayers into Liturgies,
Saturnals into Christmasse, &c. And pestered the Kirk then, with heapes of their ceremonies. Quod consili∣um specie prudens, re anceps, eventu in∣felix, hodieque lugendum & luendum est Ecclesiae sayth Tilenus, what∣soever some talke now of his Pali∣nod in particulars. It was not law∣full for the heathen Poets to bor∣row matter from traditions of Scrip∣ture, and in their allegorizing veine to persue them for their purposes of profanity. Lesse tollerable for the spouse of Christ to begg orna∣ments from enemies, whether at Ierusalem, or Athens. But farrest from indifferencie, and most intol∣lerable in you, who ought to bee wise by the dolefull experience of others, to walk again upon the same snares, after yee have escaped twice, to make shipwrack, to lick up your own vomit, and to make your sins once of a simple die, now to bee of a scarlet colour. 10 By reason of the warrant, which they seek without the boūds
of the law and testimony. Yee have no other Ephod, no other Vrim and Thūmim but the light of scripture. Herein as in the breast of your high Priest, may yee see and read the will of God for your direction in all your actions, as they are actions of a Christian, even your naturall and ci∣vill actions, farre more your religi∣ous duties. So that albeit yee can neither conclude affirmatively, nor negatively frō the words of mē; yet were your knowledge as ample as the Scriptures, and could your faith adequat the largenes of the revela∣tion therof, ye might inferre a con∣clusion both wayes from them. In all these considerations they can bee no indifferent judges, that call them indifferent. When it was objected by Mauritius the Empe∣rour to Gregorie, that he busied the Kirke with a needlesse contention, when the question was about theQuaedam fri∣vola & in∣noxia, quae∣dam frivol & noxia. name of universall Bishop: hee an∣swered, That some things are frivo∣volous, and not hurtfull, other things
frivolous and hurtfull: albeit in∣deed there be nothing frivolous in the matters of God. Carnall men have coinzed with their wit, a new Category of indifferent things: and have made the Genus summum their own wil. The prophetical & prince∣ly office of Christ is no lesse perfect▪ then his priesthood. And he that ei∣ther addeth to his word or disci∣pline, or yeeldes not obedience to them in every poynt, can have no comfortable hope of full redempti∣on by his sacrifice. It is a fearfull judgement, and a wide doore to fi∣nall excecation & hardnes of heart, first to revolt, and peevishly to rebell against the light once received, and now to be guiltie of affected igno∣rance, closing your eyes against in∣gyring knowledge. Albeit Pastors who are to teach others, in respect of their office and place, be bound to know many things, which o∣thers of another condition and vo∣cation are not, yet considering the occasions and means offring things
to your particular consideration, e∣ven secular persons, and privat men are bound to know & beleeve that, whereof Pastors themselves not ob∣serving it, may bee safely ignorant. Refuse not, resist not the least truth of God for pleasing of your selves, or others. Albeit any of my mini∣sters might with Ambrose, speakingHope of h Ma. gracious favour. to Theodosius & Valentinian, say, touching his majesty, that it is neither imperial to refuse the liberty of speking,Quod neque imperiale si libertatē di∣cendi negare, neque sacer∣dotale quod sentiat non dicere. is causa ve∣ro Dei quem audies si sa∣cerdotem non audies: cuius maiori pecca∣tur periculo: quis tibi ve∣rum audebi dicere, si sa∣cerdos non audeat. nor pastorall not to speak that which he thinks. In Gods cause whō shal ye heare, if yee heare not Gods minister, by whose greater danger sin is comitted. Who dare be bold to speak the truth unto you, if the minister be not bold? Yet far be in frō them to utter any thing, that may exulcerat his meeknes, or provoke their dread soveraigne to wrath. As Emperours know (saith Tertullian,) who gave them the Empire, they know that it was even the same God who gaue unto them to bee men, and to have hu∣mane soules, they will perceive that hee onely is God, in whose onely power
they are so with him. My children acknowledge, that after God, Kings are in order the second: and among all the first. It becommeth them to feare God, and honour the King, who should be as an Angel of God, a defender of the faith, a nurse fa∣ther of the Kirk, and a comfor∣table refuge unto the poore, and simple, in time of need. It is no small part of the hope of my happi∣nes, that his majesty hath declared, that by the grace of God he is set & disposed, equally to love and honor the learned and grave men of either of these opinions, avowing his sin∣ceritie in that religion, which hee ever constantly professed. And confessing, that if his conscience had not resolved him, that all the reli∣gion professed by him and his king∣dome, were not grounded upon the plaine word of the scripture (with∣out which, all poynts of religion were superfluous, as any thing con∣trary to the same is abomination) he had never outwardly avowed it
for awe of any flesh. He calleth it the religion wherin he was brought up, and ever made profession of, wishing his sonne ever to continue in the same, as the onely true forme of Gods worship. He purgeth the good men of the ministery that like better of the single forme of policie in our Kirk, then of the many cere∣monies of the Kirk of Englād. That are perswaded that their Bishops smel of a papallsupremacie, and that the surplice, the corner cap, &c. are the outward badges of Popish er∣rors. And praises God, that there is a sufficient number of good men in this kingdome, and yet they are all knowen to be against the forme of the English Kirk. And shall yee think now, that his Majestie will ei∣ther cease to love, and maintaine his owne loyall subjects for slow pro∣nouncing a sentence in so old a con∣troversie: or will impaire the liber∣ties of the kingdom of Christ, who hath added so largely to his domini∣ons? But rather as hee is the Lords
Lievtenant, bearing the sword to punish transgressors; so as defender of the faith he wil procure and pro∣tect the liberty of his subjects, wher∣with Christ hath made them free, and save them that they be not in∣tangled again into the yoke of bon∣dage. It is a work worthier of his majesties gift, and place, to begin to reforme, where his worthy pre∣decessors left, then to end where they began. To set my sister of England at libertie, which she hath long desired, then to bring mee, who have been so long free, to ser∣vitude, which I never deserved. The speech of Gregory brought by Beda, is very good. It pleaseth mee;Sed mihi placet sive in Romana. sive in Galliarū, seu in quali∣bet ecclesia aliud inve∣nisti quod plus omnipo∣tenti Deo possie place∣e, sollicite e∣g as. Et in Anglorum ecclesiā qu ad fidem n v est, insti∣tutione, prae∣cipua quae de multie eccle∣sijs colligere potuiti, in∣undas. Non enim pro lo∣c res, sed pro bonis rebus loca a∣manda sunt. Ex singulis ergo quibus∣que ecclesijs quae pia, quae religiosa, quae rect sunt, e∣lige: & haec quasi in fas∣ciculum col∣lecta apud Anglorum mentes in consuetudi∣nem depon. sayes he, that whether in the Roman; French, or any other Kirk, yee have found anything, that may more please the Almighty God, that yee careful∣ly make choyce of that. And in the English Kirke, which yet is but new in the faith, whatsoever yee may col∣lect of many Kirkes, by speciall insti∣tution, yee establish: for things are
not to be loved for places, but places for things. His highnesse will never in the most indifferent matters upon his meere pleasure enjoyne any thing that may destroy these poore and tender soules for whom Christ died, which were to fall in the grea∣test breach of the law of Charitie. Prelates would have his Majesty to think, that his royall authority is supported by the shadow of cere∣monies, and would have the subjects to think, that there is no support of ceremonies, but royall authoritie▪ Forbearing in practise, onely in love to the salvation of other bre∣thren, without contempt, will bee esteemed of his majesties wise heart, to be better service, and obedience then their lies, and temporizing conformity: who bring the blood of multitudes of soules upon the whole body of the countrey, a sinne in Gods sight worse then rebellion. How could his Majestie trust my ministers in a∣ny thing, if hee knew not (as The∣odosius
sayd to Ruffinus of Am∣brose) that they wil not transgresse the law of God for any respect to imperiall power. Constantius accepted of them as most loyall subjects to him, who were most faithfull and precise servants of God. I wil never doubt, but his highnesse will thinke them honester men, that give him that which is due, then that which hee will not take. Albeit Courtlie para∣sites alledge through want of better reason, that ceremonies are not so much stood upon as obedience, e∣ven as God tried Adam with one apple: yet his Majesty can tel them, that humane lawes do bind the con∣science, not because of the meere will of the law-giver, but by reason of the utilitie & equitie of the law. Non ex voluntate legislatoris, sed ex ipsa legum utilitate, & ratione. And that it becommeth Christian sub∣jects to professe disobedience in things evill, and against God, pas∣sive obedience in things injurious, and unprofitable, and active obedi∣ence
in things lawful, profitable, ex∣pedient; wherin by Gods grace, my ministers shall be found most cheer∣full and ready. That their scandall in this is not humorous, or Pharisai∣call, may be easily tried by their o∣bedience to Caesar in all matters, e∣ven of greatest difficulties, being rea∣dy, as becomes them, to spend their goods, lands, libertie, and lives, for his preservation, and counting no∣thing sufficient to redeeme his hap∣pinesse. The Lord reprove them who slander his loyall subiects, and let the judge of all the world deter∣mine, whether of the parties doth better establish lawfull authoritie. As hee was reputed sacrilegious in the time of Antoninus Pius, who set not up his Statue in his house: so let him be Anathema, who car∣ries not his Majesties name and glo∣rious estate upon his heart to God, and prayes not for his royall person, hopefull progenie, and happy suc∣cesse to the Lord; with whom is wisedome and strength, who looses
the bands of Kings, and girds their loynes with a girdle; who leadeth Prin∣ces away spoyled, and overthrowes the mightie. In his hand is the heart of the King, as the rivers of waters. Al∣beit in the judgement of men long∣ing for the finall subversion of the truth, and defacing of the Kirk, my most faithfull Pastors bee ready to slip with their feet, and to fall from his Majesties favour, yet will hee, maugre the malice of men, scatter all the clouds of their feare, and in the end, with Ioseph, powre out the bowels of his compassion upon them. Neither wisedome nor authori∣tie can root out affection. He will ra∣therNeque Phi∣losophia, ne∣que imperiū, olli affectus with Antoninus Pius save one true subject, then slay many ene∣mies. Kings ought as rarely put in use their supreame prerogative, as God doth his power of working miracles. Remember, O King, that my glorious Spouse is the Prince of the Kings of the earth, and will bee supreme in his owne kirk. Remember when Theodoius,
otherwayes a religious Emperour, was desired to take order with the tyranny of Flavianus, spirituall ty∣rants in the Kirk being no lesse un∣sufferable then the civil in the com∣mon wealth. And when hee had answered, that hee had taken upon him the defence of Flavianus, that Flavianus cause was his cause, that the things objected against Flavia∣nus, were objected against him. That it was sayd of him, that he had grie∣ved them, whō he should have made to rejoyce, & had made thē rejoyce, whom he should have grieved. Many speeches, as lots, areSupplication to the Nobi∣lity and E∣states urged for that end. offered to your Princely consi∣deration, but the disposition is of the Lord, whom we pray to grant, that the best cause may have the first lot. And who knowes, but your Honors are advanced at this time to intercede for me, that his highnesse may blesse and reward you for hin∣dering hard courses against his harmlesse ministers, and most duti∣full subjects, sincere professors of
the Gospell. Dorotheus and Gor∣gonius, men of great authoritie and place, and of the Emperours privie chamber, when they beheld the pu∣nishment of one Peter with them, spared not to say, Wherfore O Empe∣rour, why doe yee punish in Peter that o∣pinion, which is in us all? Why is that in him counted an offence, which wee all confesse; wee are of that faith and reli∣gion which he is off. The truly no∣ble Terentius for all other sues, which the Emperour desired him to make, craved onely liberty for Christians, and beeing refused of that, gathered up the peeces of his riven supplication, and could not be induced to seek any thing else. The Lord requires not onely profession, but confession at your hands in this case. Whe can yee better make your affection knowen, then when the Lord Iesus in the persons of his spouse, and your owne mother, be∣comes a petitioner unto you. As yee would wish to see his face in mercy in that day of his second
comming: make not by your un∣kindnesse his countenance to fall down upon you now, send him not away with a repulse. He hath run many times like the Roe, or the yong Hart, over the highest moun∣taines of difficulties, to succour you in your distresse, when ye have cal∣led upon him. Let no pretended impediment be an hinderance unto you to help his cause most instantly suing for support at your hands. If there bee any iniquity in my chil∣dren, let them suffer for it, spare them not. But if they be innocent, smite them not. Open your mouth for the dumbe. Iudge righteously the afflicted and poore. Deliver the oppressed, that they may offer sacri∣fice and pray for the life of the king and his sonne. If hard courses be taken against faithfull ministers and people, let not your honours wash your hands of that harme. It is all one to doe them evill, and not to helpe them against wrong done by others. The hoast of Israel spake
in great courage for the life of Iona∣than, and Ionathan for David to the danger of his life. Ebedmelech spake a good word for Ieremie, and was saved when his master Zedekias was slaine. But curse yee Meroz, curse the inhabitants thereof, be∣cause they came not to the helpe of the Lord against the mightie, al∣though they had no hand against them. God that hath given you grace and credit with his highnesse, requireth that ye bestow it upon his matters; and that yee reserve it not for your own. Remember the ex∣ample of that worthy Courtier Ne∣hemiah, who esteemed a libertie to build up the walles of the Citie of God, a sufficient reward for all his faithfull service. As your solicitude is great to leave the com∣mon wealth, and your own hono∣rable houses in good case: so dila∣pidat not my libertie. Leave me not, of whom ye have both your first & second birth in worse estate, to your own incredible griefe, and the
desolation of your posterity. In∣venistis marmoreane ne relinquit la∣teritiam. Vpon the wall that yee have found rather build a palace of silver, Cant. 8. 9. It was that name of Iehovah, and holinesse to the Lord put upon the head of the high Priest, that was the greatest beautie, and crowned all the other inferiour ornaments. The truth of religion, and the purity of your profession, as it hath been, so let it still bee your glory, and the luster of all those in∣feriour gifts, wherewith the Lord hath inriched you. As this is the first great triall of your hearts, Love to Christ and me: so it may be your last occasion. It is not long, since the places, which ye possesse, were filled with your ancestors of wor∣thy memory, (whose constancy in defending the liberty of Gods wor∣ship, is frequently observed in your owne history) who now are passed to their eternity; and ere be long, according to the succession of ge∣nerations one after another, others
shal have their time of your present dignities, both in degree and con∣tinuance. Bend your wits and cre∣dit to do good, while ye haue time. Hazard not the happinesse of your eternity. Do not that, which at the least, while yee live, will be a bleed∣ing wound in your soules. Set your eyes upon him, that is invisible, and that recompence of reward: so shall yee esteeme the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures of AEgypt. And shall choose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. The Lord who searcheth the reignes, sees you, and the secrets of your deliberation, and conclusions, and could make them to found again outwardly in your eares, and to the hearing of others. All your thoughts are legible to that piercing eye, from which nothing is hid. Look not what ye may say for your excuse, or what one partie may say against another, whether in private conference, or publick vell∣tation
by print, or dispute. But in the sight of God cōsider upon your beds, by the light of his spirit, whe∣ther of the two courses from the beginning ye find to be of, through and for God. And we have no great feare, but ye shal be moved to break down that wall of ceremonies, hurt∣full to all, and profitable to the souls of none: that both the houses may be one, as the Lord himselfe aboli∣shed the Iewish ceremonies, and put none in their place. I have many children, some aged, some poore, some consumed with godly griefe, not so much for their own trouble, as for the decay of pu∣rity, and my desolation. They would doe all things for pleasing all parties, wherin God is not displea∣sed, and their consciences not dis∣quieted. But the honour of God, and peace of their soules, they dare not but regard. And albeit obe∣dience to the word should destroy their own & all other mens worldly estate, yet they must still and un∣cessantly
urge it. If in times past your honors have been pleased to hearesome of them in pulpit, and in privat, in the matters of religion: and have not despised their spee∣ches, when there was greater pro∣babilitie for suspition: there is grea∣ter reason now, when they are in ha∣zard of suffring, to beleeve, and take to heart, that which they say, and re∣quire. Wherof as they must be coū∣table to the eternall Iudge of all the world, so shall yee be for your hear∣ing; and shall not escape his hand, if yee harken not, for disobedience to the truth. The world may well dally for a time, and make men so drunke with the wine of wickednes, that through security they may thinke thēselves safe. But be assured, when the Lord shall search Ierusa∣lem with lights, and enter to the fie∣ry yall, every abomination shall kythe in the own colours. If ye hold your▪peace, God will provide for his owne children. But behold hee commeth shortly, and his reward is
with him, to give to every man ac∣cording as his workes shall bee. Al∣beit my messengers may now cry with the prophet, Who beleeves our report; yet that dreadfull sen∣tence shall make the soule once brought within the sight of death, to tremble and quiver. God wil not be mocked. If the righteous scarce∣ly be saved, and God spares not his Angels, where shall they appeare, who make marchandise of his truth; albeit at the highest rate of honour and wealth? The whole word of God, his law, promises, and threat∣nings, his practises, and the works of providence cannot prevaile with the sencelesse soules of men. But death (so violent are his perswasi∣ons, and his might so unresistable) at his first approch, shall make every heart to beleeve and feele, that all the workes under the Sunne are but vanity. The conscience and happy remembrance of one word uttered or suffered for Christ, his crowne, his truth, or his needy members,
shall at that strait fill the soule with greater joy, then all the crowns and kingdoms under heaven. And what is then left to the godlesse, craftie, and merciles wretch, that laugheth at my death, and daunceth at my fu∣nerals: when men afflicted cry un∣to the Lord, and he heareth them: But thou hast proved in the end victo∣rious,Vicii tan∣dem Galilae O Iesus of Galilee. I conclude with that of my be∣loved Bernard, I owe my selfe unto God for my creation, what shall I give for my restauration, especially being re∣stored after such a manner: neither was  so easily restored as created. In his first work hee gave me unto my selfe: in his second, he gave himself unto me, & by giving himselfe, he hath restored me unto my selfe. Being therfore given & restored, I ow my selfe for my selfe, and so ow my selfe unto God by a double right. But what shall I render unto God for giving himself unto me. For though I should give my selfe a thousand times for recompence, what am I in compari∣son of him. And I add, that seeing all
my well-doing can be no recompence un∣to him. I wish the increase of his glory by a second restitution of me unto my selfe, by giving himselfe now the se∣cond time unto me; and am content to be put to a greater perplexity, not know∣ing what to render, that his mercies yet may be the greater. O that it would please him yet again to pitty me. At least, let all the blessed of the Lord keep themselves from troubling the preachers of peace, and bringers of blessings: let them be stout, stedfast, and play the men, that they may all run out their course with joy, and report that excellent price conque∣sed by the blood & bitter sufferings of Iesus Christ my spouse, now at the right hand of the father; for whose revelation I am waiting dai∣ly, that my marriage may bee perfe∣cted, and I with all the Saints may enter into the ioyes conquesed by his bitter suffering. To him with the Father & holy Ghost be all glo∣ry, praise and honor for ever. FINIS.
