8119 99850555 15765
By the Queene. ❧ A Proclamation vvith certayne clauses of diuers Statues, & other necessary additions, first published in the xix. yeere of the Queenes Maiesties reigne, and now reuiued by her highnes commandement to be put in execution, vpon the penalties in the same conteined. WHereas the Queenes Maiestie hath by sundry former Proclamations notified vnto her louing Subiectes of this Realme, the great inconue∣nience and mischiefe that hath growen to the same, by the great excesse of apparell in all states and degrees, but specially in the inferiour sort, contrarie to diuers lawes and Statutes of the Realme, whereof not∣withstanding there hath folowed no redresse, or very litle at al: whereby hath appeared no lesse contempt in the offendours, then lacke of ducti∣full care in those to whome the aucthoritie to see due execution of the lawes and orders prouided in that behalfe was committed, which thing might giue her Maiestie iust cause (were it not that of her own gratious disposition she is naturally inclyned rather to clemencie then seueritie, so long as there is any hope of redresse otherwayes) to commit the execu∣tion of the sayde lawes, to such persons as would haue proceeded therein with all extremitie. Notwithstan∣ding, her Maiesty meaning to make some further tryall, before she haue recourse to extreme remedies, and finding vpon conference had with the Lordes and others of her pryuie counsayle, for the redresse of so gree∣ous and pernicious a sore in this common wealth, the chiefe remedies for the same, to be example, and correction: Her Maiestie therfore for the first, whiche is example, thynketh it very meete and expedient, that the due execution in her Maiesties most honourable house, of such orders and articles as are annexed to this Proclamation, shoulde serue for a paterne throughout the whole Realme, and therefore her Maiestie hath already giuen, and by these presentes doeth giue speciall charge to all those that beare office within the sayde house, to see due obseruation of the same, which she trusteth wil be duely obserued. And fur∣ther her Maiestie doeth generally charge all noble men, of what estate or degree so euer they be, and all and euery persons of her priuie Counsaile, all Archbishoppes, and Bishops, and the rest of the Clergie, and all other persons, according to theyr degrees, that they doo respectiuely see the same speedily and due∣lye executed in their priuate householde and families: and likewise doeth charge all Maiors and other head officers of Cities and Townes corporate, the Chauncellours of both the Vniuersities, gouernours of Colledges, readers, auncientes & Benchers in euery the Innes of Court and Chauncerie, and general∣ly all that haue any superioritie or gouernement ouer and vpon any societie or feloweship, and eche man in his owne householde for theyr children and seruantes, that they likewise doo cause the sayde orders to be straightly kept by all lawfull meanes that they can. And for the seconde, which is correction, her Maiestie hath cause to thinke, that if there had bene that seueritic vsed by those to whom the ouersight of the due execution of the lawes prouided in that behalfe was committed, as to them in duetie appertained, both this sore had bene cured, and this Proclamation not needefull to haue bene published at this present. For the better reformation whereof, her Maiesties will and pleasure is, and so doth straightly charge and commaunde, not onely al Iustices of peace, and euerye of them, to make inquirie of the defaultes and breaking of the sayde orders, at euery their quarter Sessions, and also the Iustices of Assise in ther cir∣tuites, and to see such examples made, and due punishmentes extended vpon the offendours, as by the Statutes of this Realme, with such qualifications as in this present Proclamation are conteyned, is prouided in that behalfe: but also, that aswell the sayde Iustices, as all Maiors, Shirifes, and other head officers, in Cities, townes, and Boroughes, shall at any other time, cause all such persons as shall be founde faultie, and transgressing agaynst this proclamation, after the last day of Marche next ensu∣yng, to be apprehended and brought before them, and finding them culpable, to commit them to pryson, there to tempayne without bayle or mayneprise by the space of one moneth, vniesse the said parties so found culpable, or charged as culpable, shal enter into bonde to appeare before the Iustices at the next quarter Sessions of the peace, or of the Assises to be holden within the same Shyre, Citie, Borough, Towne Corporate, Fraunchise, or libertie, and there to be answerable for al such offences as shalbe proo∣ued that they haue committed contrary to the true intent and meaning of this Proclamation.
And whereas it is appointed by the Statutes of this Bealme, what euery person shall or may weare in theyr apparell, according to the seuerall rates of theyr lyuings in landes or fees, ouer and aboue all charges, and in some cases, of goodes, forasmuch as the lacke of the true and common vnderstandyng of euery mans estate and liuing, in sort before expressed, hath been (as it seemeth) heretofore some prin∣cipal cause of the lacke of the true execution of the sayde Statutes, and that it doeth manifestly appeare, that the same cause will also in time to come worke the like effect, for that there is no conuenient meanes to make the states of mens liuinges and values, in such sort as is expressed in the seuerall statutes, to be commonly knowen, to such persons as ought to haue speciall care of the execution of the lawes and orders now prescribed. Her Maiestie, being desirous for the great benefite of al her highnesse Subiectes, to haue these orders more duely executed then they haue beene, and finding that it is very harde for any mans state of liuing and value, to be truely vnderstoode by other persons, if before proofe made they shoulde seeme to take knowledge of any other values and rates, then of such as be, or ought to be, for the grea∣test nember expressed in the Subsidie booke, and so for lacke of the knowledge of the true rates & values mentioned in the saide statutes, the due execution of these orders may be defrauded: doeth therfore, for the auoiding of the inconuenience that may ensue, order and commaunde, that all persons, that by this Proclamation be appointed to haue care of the execution of these orders, shall for the first calling, arrest∣ing committing, or any other pursuing of any person, for any offence committed against these orders, take knowledge of the rates and values, whereby such persons are sessed in the Subsidie bookes, and shall accordingly proceede vpon such knowledge of their values, to impeache such as will in their apparel offend to the contrarie thereof. Neuerthelesse, if any person shall finde hym selfe greeued to be im∣peached therewith, and for the iustifying of the wearing of his apparell, shall vpon any arrest or indite∣t founde agaynst hym, auowe, and offer to prooue his lyuing to be such, and so great, as by the rates ex∣d in the statutes he may be warranted to weare the apparell for the which he is or shall be impeached:  Maiesties meaning and pleasure is, that euery such person shalbe admitted to make such proofe, and thereupon shall receyue iudgement of condemnation, or acquital, according to the rates expressed in the sta∣tutes, and not otherwise, without impeaching any officer, or other person, that did arrest, chalenge, or pro∣d against him for such matter, though in the Subsidie booke his values were not sufficient to warrant  values mentioned in the actes of Parliament: Not doubting, but that all such persons, as for the main∣tenance of their fonde vanitie in apparell, will seeke to make their liuings to be knowen and prooued to be greater, then they were before in sessementes of Subsidies taken to be, whereof her Maiestie had the losse,  thought meete by such Commissioners as hereafter shall haue auethoritie to rate men vpon the graūt v Subsidie, to be sessed in the Subsidie bookes, according to such values as them selues will auowe to haue for defence of wearing of such kinde of apparell, and also will be content to be answerable to the charge of other necessarie seruices for the Realme, as causes shall require. And because there are many persons, that percase shalbe founde in outwarde apparance more sumptuous  their apparell, then by common intendement the values of their possessions or goodes may warrant, & yet they are not assessed in any Subsidie booke, partly for that they are dwelling in such places of the Realme, as are not chargeable to payments of Subsidies, or that percase they haue escaped to be assessed, or other∣wise not assessed, whereupon such persons may thinke to continue their disorder, without reformation by the maner here next before prescribed: Her Maiestie, for remedie hereof, commaundeth al maner of officers, that where they shall see any such persons in outwarde apparance so offendyng, and not hauing know∣ledge of their values by bookes of Subsidies, as afore is expressed, that neuerthelesse they shall stay such persons, and challenge them for such pretended offence, and deteyne them, as before by this Proclamation is limited, vntill they shall enter into bond, to make good proofe that they can dispende so much in lande and fees, or be so much woorth in goodes, as by the lawes they be thereby warranted to weare such appa∣rell: And that no publique officer shalbe at any tyme impeached for such stay, and deteynor of any such per∣son so apparantly seeming to haue offended. Prouided alwayes notwithstanding, that the sayd publique officer shall not at any time, vnder the co∣lour of the execution of this present Proclamation, arrest any person or persons, whom either they them∣selues shalbe knowen and proued to malice, or els shalbe procured thereto by others, in respect of some par∣ticular quarell, vpon payne of her Maiesties displeasure, and suche punishment as shall be thought meete by the Lordes and others of her Maiesties priuie Counsayle. Gyuen at out Palace of Westminster, the xii. of Februarie, in the xxii. yeere of our raigne. God saue the Queene.
¶ A briefe content of certaine clauses of the Statutes of King Henrie the eyght, and Queene Marie, with some moderation thereof, and other prouisions to be obserued, according to her Maiesties Proclamation aboue mentioned. ❧ Mens apparell. Nne shal weae n Sylke of the colour Pur∣ple, cloth of Golde, or Sil∣uer Tissued, nor Furre of Sables. Vnder the degree of an Earle. Cloth of Golde, Siluer, or Tinsell Satten. Sylke, Cloth, Canuas, or any stuffe in any apparell, that shalbe myxed or imbrodered with any Gold or Siluer. Vnder the degree of a Baron. Woollen clothe made out of the Realme, sauing in Cappes only. Veluet Crymson, Carnation, or Blewe. Scarlet cloth. Furres of Blacke Ienets, or Lusernes. Imbroderie, or Taylers worke, hauing Golde, or Siluer, or Pearle therin. Nor any Enami∣ell, Muske, Ambergrece, Agate, or any other pretious Stone, in Chayne, Button, or Aglet. Nor any Dublet, Ierkin, or other ap∣parel of any stuffe perfumed. Vnder the degree of A Knight of the order, one of the pri∣uie Counsel, or a Gentleman of the priuie Chamber. Gownes, Clokes, Capes, or other vp∣permost garments of Veluet. Furres of Libardes. Imbroderie, or Taylers woorke like to imbroderie, with Sylke, Bugle, or any other like thing. Nor any Cappes, Hats, Hat∣bandes, Capbands, Garters, Bootehose, trymmed with Golde or Syluer. Or Sylke neather Stockes. Shertes, Shertbandes garnished, mixte, or wrought with Golde. Russes made or wrought out of Englande, com∣monly called Cutworke. Vnder the degree of A Barons sonne, a Knight, & Gentle∣man in ordinarie office, attending vpon her Maie∣sties person, or per∣sons that are asses∣sed in the last sub∣sidy books at. CC. li. lands, or fees. None e Spurres, Swordes, Rapiers, Woodknyues, or Hangers. Buckles of Gyrdles. Damasked, vnder the degree of A Knight of the order. One of the priuie Counsell. A Gentleman of the priuie cham∣ber. Guylte, vnder the degree of a Knight. Syluered, vnder the degrees and persons before mentioned. Nal were In trappings, or Harnesse for any their Horses. Studdes, Buckles, or other garniture, being Gilte, Siluered, or Damasked. Nor Stirrops Guylte, Siluered, or Damasked, Nor any veluet in Saddles, or Horse trappings. except The degrees before mentioned, & al other Gentlemen onely in the furniture of their great Horses meete for seruice.
N Veluet in any kind of hose, or in garding of any garment, or in Slippers, Shooes, or Pantophles. Gowne or Hose of Satten, Damaske, Sylke Chamlet, Taffata, or tuffed Taffata, or Hose made of Sylke Lace. Furre, whereof the like kinde groweth not with∣in the Queenes Dommions, excepte Foynes, gray Ienets, Calaber, Budge, outlandish Hare, or Foxe. except Men that be of the degree, & per∣sons aboue mentioned, and men that may dispende one hundred Marks in lāds or fees by ye yere, & so valued in the subsidy bookes, or valued at fiue hundred pounds in goods, or such person as shall continually keepe a great Horse, furnished for seruice in warre. any Bonnet, Hatte, Girdle, or Scaberdes of Swordes, or Rapiers of Veluet. any Satten, Damaske, Taffata, or Chamlet, in Iackettes, Coates, Ierkyns, Dublets, or any silk of any kind, in lynynges of Hose. any Furre of Foynes, graye Ienettes, or other, whereof the kinde groweth not within the Queenes Dominiōs. except The persōs & degrees aboue mē∣tioned, ye sonne of a Knight, or of any man ye may dispend three hū∣dred Markes, & the eldest sonne of hun that may disped one hun∣dred poūds by ye yere, & is so asses∣sed, vt sup. And men yt may dispēd twēti pound lād & fees by ye yere, vt sup. or valued at one hundred pounds in goods, or a Gentlemā attending in ordinarie office vpō any peere of ye realme, or Lorde of the Parliamēt, or vpon the wyd∣dow of any peere, or vpō a knight of the order, or vpon any of the priuie Counsell. Nat e Chauncelor, Treasurer, President of the Counsel, Priuie Seale, and other like great offices of the Realme, may weare in their apparel, and vpon their Horses, Mules, and Geldinges, as they might haue done before by the prouision of former Statutes of this Realme. t Bishops, and other of the Cleargie, Iustices of eyther Benche, Barons of the Exchequer, Master of the Rolles, Sergeantes at Lawe, The Queenes learned Counsell, and the Queenes Phisitions, and al other graduats in the two vniuersities. Masters of the Chauncerie, Apprentices of the Lawe, Maiors, Aldermen, Sheriffes, and al other head officers of Cities & Townes corporate, & Wardens of occupations, during the continuance of their offices. Barons of the fiue Portes. may weare in their apparell, and vp∣on their Mules, and Horses, as they haue done before by the prouisions of former Statutes. Womens Apparel. Sylke of the colour Purple. except such persons of great estate as are ex∣pressed in the Statute of 24. Hen. 8. Cloth of Golde or Siluer tissue, Nor Furre of Sables. vnder the degree of A Countesse. Cloth of Golde, Syluer, Tynselled Satten. Sylke, or Cloth, mixed or imbrode∣red wt Golde, or Siluer, or Pearle, sauing Silke mixed with Golde or Siluer, in lining of Caules, Part∣lettes, or Sleeues. vnder the degree of A Baronnesse.
Veluet Crimson, Carnation, Blewe. Furres of Blacke Ienets, Lusernes. Imbroderie, wreth Lace, or Pacement Lace of Gold, or Siluer. except All degrees aboue mentioned. The wyues of Knightes of the order, & of ye priuie Counsell. The Ladyes and Gentlewomen of The priuie Chamber, Bedde Chamber, and Maydes of Honor. Gownes or Clokes of Veluet, Satten, or of tuffe Taffata. Furres of Libardes. Imbroderie of any Sylke, nor Tay∣lers woorke, like to imbroderie, nor Caules, Sleeues, Ruffes, Partlets or linings trymmed with Pearle, Spangles, or Purles of gold or Siluer. except The degrees & persons aboue mentioned. And wyues of Barons sonnes, and al∣so the daughters of Ba∣rons, and the wyues of Knightes, or of persons that may dispend and be sessed at two hundred pound landes in the sub∣sidie booke. Hattes, Cappes, Hathandes, Capbandes, Garnished or Imbrodered with Gold or Siluer. White woorkes, alias Cutwoorkes, made beyonde the Seas. Sylke Hose. Vnder the degrees and persons aboue mentioned. Gownes, Cloakes, or other vpper garments of Damaske, Sylke Brograine, or Taffata. Kirtles of Veluet, or Satten. Furres, whereof the kinde groweth not within the Queenes Domini∣ons, except Foynes, gray Ienettes, Budge, and Woolfe. Caules of Gold or Siluer, or Caules myxed with Golde or Syluer. Veluet in gardes of Gownes. except The degrees and persons aboue men∣tioned, or the wiues of those that may dispend one hundred pounde landes by the yeere, and so valued in the Subsidie booke, and daughters of any Knight, and such as be sworne the Queenes women, or the wyues of those that shall keepe continually one great Horse, with sufficient fur∣niture for her Maiesties seruice in the warres. Gownes of Taffata, Sylke Grograine, Chamlet, Kirtles of Satten, or Damaske, except The degrees & persons before mentioned, the wife of the sonne & heyre apparant of him yt may dispend one hundred poundes, vt supra, & the wiues of those yt may dispend one hundred Markes by ye yeere, vt supra. Gentlewomen ordinarilye at∣tendaunt vpon Dutchesses, Marquesses, Countesses, May weare as ye wyues of those that may dispende one hundred pounde by the yeere, and are valued vt supra. Gentlewomen ordinarilye at∣tendaunt vpon Viscountes wyues, Barons wines, the wyues of Knyghtes of the order, & of the priuie Connsell, May weare as ye wyues of those that may dispende one hundred Markes, valued vt supra. And may also weare their liuerie Gownes, garded with Veluet. Peticoates of Veluet, nor any Golde or Syluer vp∣on any Peticoate, Vnder the degree of A Baronnesse. Peticoates of Sylke, Veluet, Taffata, Satten, or any Golde or Syluer in any Cloake or Sauegarde, vnder the degree of A wyfe of a Knight of the Order, or of the priuie Counsell, or any Gen∣tlewoman atteding on ye Queenes Maiestie in her Chamber, or the Maydes of Honor. No person vnder the degrees aboue speciffed, shall weare any garde or welt of Sylke, vpon any Cloake or Sauegarde.
Necessarie additions. 1 In primis, that all officers of her Maiesties housholde, and other her seruauntes in ordinarie, not ed within the tates limitted and set forth by the Proclamation, shall obserue such orders for their apparel, as shalbe from tyme to tyme set downe in wryting by the Lord Chamberlaine, the master of the Horse, and other her Maiesties principal officers of her housholde. 2 Item, if any person shal, in contempt & descauding of this Proclamation, deuise any newe kynde or  of apparell, and for garnishyng thereof, and thereby shalbe at greater charge then appertay∣th to his degree and qualitie, and is here aboue mentioned and entended: Then the sayde person to teyne the lyke punishment for his contempt, as if the sayde garment or garnishyng had been especi∣ally prohibited. 3 Item, that it shalbe lawfull for all Iustices of peace, and Sheriffes of Shires, to weare Veluet or other Silkes in their Coates or Casockes, at such tymes as they shall attende vpon the Queenes Ma∣iesties person, or when they shall resort to places of Assises and Sessions, and other generall assemblies in the Queenes seruice. 4 Item, that no person vnder the degree of a Baron, a Knight of the order, one of the priuie Counsel, a gentleman of here Maiesties priuie Chamber, or any other gentleman ordinarily attendant vpon her Maiesties person, shall weare any gardes of Veluet vpon any one garment, exceedyng in the whole in Veluet the breadth of sixe inches. 5 Item, that it shalbe lawfull for the Lordes of the Parliament, to giue for their lyueries, Coates, or Cloakes, garded with Veluet or any other Silke, the gardes in the whole not exceedyng in breadth aboue foure inches. 6 Item, that it shalbe lawfull for the sonnes of those that may dispende. xl.l. by the yeere, being so ra∣ted at the last Subsidie, and for wardes whose land is. xl.l. by the yeere, to weare Sarcenet in the lyning of their Hose, Dublets, Hattes, or Cappes. 7 Item, that it shalbe lawful to weare in liueries, Silke Buttons, and Taffats, Grograyne, Veluet, or other Silke in the facing of Coates, as is commonly vsed. 8 Item, that all inferior persons, vnder the degrees aboue specified, not otherwyse prouyded for, or limitted by this Proclamation, shall confourme them selues in their apparel, in all thynges according to the Statute made & prouided in anno. 24. Henrici. 8. and in anno. 1.2. Philippi & Marie. Or els to susteyne such punishment as by the sayd Statute is prouided. 9 Item, that all Apprentices at the lawe, and vtter barristers of the Innes of Court, and al Mar∣chauntes of any societie, and al that keepe houshold in Citie or Towne, and such as may dispend. xx.l. by the yeere, may weare a welt of Veluet in their Gownes, Iackets, or coates. That no person shalbe impeached for wearyng of any cloth made within the Realme, so long as he shal obserue the order and rates by this present Proclamation limitted. But if any person shall willingly betake the tenor and effect of this Proclamation, then her highnesse pleasure is, that euery such offender shall haue the penalties of the lawes extended against them to the vttermost, without any toleration or fauour.
❧ A Commandement giuen by the Queenes most excellent Maiestie, the twelfth of Februarie, and xxii. of her Highnesse Reigne, and declared by the Lord Chauncelor of Englande, and other the Lordes of her Maiesties most honourable priute Counsel in the Starre Chamber, concerning clokes and ruffes of excessiue length and depth. IT is also to be vnderstood, that the said xii. day of Februarie, in this present yeere 1579. by the Queenes Maiesties expresse commaun∣dement, it was declared and published by the lord Chauncelor, and other the Lords of her Maiesties Councell in the Starre Chamber, that her Maiesties pleasure was, by aduice of her said Councell, that from the one & twentieth of this moneth, no person shal vse or weare such excessiue long clokes, being in common sight monstrous, as nowe of late are begonne to be vsed, and be∣fore two yeeres past hath not bene vsed in this Realme. Neyther also should any person vse or weare such great and excessiue ruffes in or about the vppermost part of their neckes, as had not bene vsed before two yeeres past, but that all per∣sons, should in modest and comely sort leaue off such fond disguised and mon∣strous maner of attyring them selues, as both was vnsupportable for charges, and vndecent to be worne. And this her Maiestie commanded to be obserued, vpon paine of her high in∣dignation, and the paines thereto due, and willed all officers to see to the reformati∣on and redresse thereof, to the punishment of any offending in these cases, as per∣sons wilfully disobeying or contemning her Maiesties commandement. Geuen the xxii. yeere of her Highnesse reigne, as is before expressed. God saue the Queene. Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queenes most excellent Maiestie. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis. Anno Dom. 1579.
¶ By the Queene. ❧ A branche of a Proclamation published the twelfth day of Februarie, in the eight yeere of the Queenes Maiesties reigne, concerning Swordes, Daggers, Rapiers, and Buck∣lers: commaunded by her highnesse to be put in execution, and of all her louing subiects to be obeyed and kept, vpon paine of her Maiesties high indignation, and the penaltie in the same conteyned. ❧ The branche or clause of the saide Proclamation. ITem, her Maiestie ordereth and also commandeth, that no per∣son shall weare any Sworde, Rapier, or such like weapon, that shall passe the length of one yarde and halfe a quarter of the blade, at the vttermost: nor any Dagger aboue the length of xii. ynches in blade at the most: nor any Buckler with any point or pike aboue two ynches in length. And if any Cutler, or other Artificer, shall sell, make, or keepe in his house any Sworde, Rapier, Dagger, Buckler, or such like, contrary thereunto, the same to be imprisoned, and to make fine at the Queenes Maiesties pleasure, and the weapon to be forfayted. And if any such person shall offende a seconde time, then the same to be banished from the place and Towne of his dwelling. Giuen at our Pallace of Westminster, the twelfth day of Februarie, in the two and twentieth yeere of our reigue.1 God saue the Queene. Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queenes most excellent Maiestie. Anno Dom. 1579.
