A3033 W3450 12590889 63921
PIETAS ROMANA ET PARISIENSIS, OR, A Faithful Relation of the several sorts of Charitable and Pious WORKS emi∣nent in the Cities of ROME and PARIS. The one taken out of the Book written By Theodorus Amydenus. The other out of that by Mr. Carr. Printed at OXFORD, An. Dom. 1687.
Licet omnem Ecclesiam, quae in toto est orbe ter∣rarum, cunctis oporteat florere virtutibus, Vos tamen praecipus inter caeteros populos decet mer∣itis Pietatis excellere, quos in ipsâ Apostolicae Petrae arce fundatos & Dominus noster Jesus Christus cum omnibus redemit, & beatus Apo∣stolus Petrus prae omnibus crudivit. S. Leo Serm. 2. Annivers. Assumpt.
Christian Reader. HERE are published for thy be∣nefit two compendious Ex∣tracts; one out of Theodorus Amydenus's Pietas Romana, written Anno Domini 1624. The other out of Mr. Carr's Piety of Paris, Anno Domini 1666; these being Collections of several sorts of cha∣ritable and pious works eminently flour∣ishing in the two Cities of Rome and Paris; which may serve as an Auctary to be added to the many famous Works of our Forefathers here at home, and especially in the Royal City of London: which are omitted here because better known to us, and by others diligently recorded for Posterity. The Publisher hopes, that of such a great variety of patterns of wisely-dis∣bursed wealth, as are here presented, some one or other may take the Reader, and invite an imitation of them; so of∣ten as these relations may happily fall into the hands of persons, that, as they are piously disposed, so also are either
wealthy and single; or having children, and made a competent provision for them, have also reserved a part of their estate for themselves to be expended for their own more happy living and subsist∣ance in the next world; and especially so often as this Manual may come to the perusal of such, who have had beforehand some serious thoughts of our Lord's dire∣ctions and counsels given to them in the Gospel, viz. of their laying up, whilst here, some treasure in heaven. Mat. 6.20, 21. be∣cause such will not fail them, as all trea∣sure here will; and because their hearts and affections will surely follow, and be where their treasure is; and woe be to those whose affections here are not Ce∣lestial. Again, Of their making them∣selves some freinds whilst here, with the Mammon of unrighteousness (for so our Lord stiles wealth Luke 16.9.) That these friends, relieved here by them, may afterward receive them [i. e. when here by death they shall be turned out of doors] into everlasting habitations; so as the poor ejected Steward was received by his Lord's debtors, whom he had before so prudently obliged (such distribution of their wealth being, as the Apostle also
saith, a laying up in store [or treasuring] for themselves a good foundation for laying hold on [or purchasing therewith] here∣after eternal life. 1. Tim. 6.19.) And lastly our Lord's counsel of their taking warning betimes from the unfortunate Builder here on earth of new barns, Luke 12.18. for his increased goods; for whose Soul the Divine Sergeants came the same night, whilst he (saith the text) abound∣ing here in wealth, did not take care to be rich also towards God; and so all these, and his Soul too, lost at once: or warn∣ing also from the miserable rich man, Luke 16.19. who having wealth and plenty given him, wherewith to relieve such as poor Lazarus, rather chose to feast him∣self with them; and so had provided in the next world not so much as a drop of cold water to allay his thirst. I say, such meditations may happily prepare some Readers, at least welcomely to entertain such proposals as this little Book suggests to them: wherein they may see, what various devices many others have used for saving their Souls, with the good management of their Estates: and may imitate them in such a Charity among this great choice as they judge
more necessary, or their means can best extend to. Nor hath the Publisher any jealousy (though this hath been suggested to him) That the Scene of such publick Pieties, being made here, Rome and Paris, will therefore give any just offence. For thus he argues, That the abounding, in any Religion, of such works as are, in all, allowed good and praise-worthy will ra∣ther provoke the rest to a pious emula∣tion; and that those, who think them∣selves to enjoy more light of truth, will hence endeavour not to be inferiour in the true fruits thereof, Good Works. And again; That, tho our own Coun∣try, and the chief City thereof, is very rich in variety of publick Monuments of the great Munificence of our Fore-fa∣thers, yet perhaps some inventions of forreign Charity may be discovered so beneficial; as to be thought worthy to be transplanted also hither: and some new succours to our necessitous neigh∣bours here be happily derived from them: Or, that such as are also found here, yet now but few and rare, may be much more multiplied by occasion of the forreign patterns thereof seen much more
frequent; or, being now more private Charities, may become more publick. And some publick Charities also here attempted and begun, but not hitherto brought to such perfection as is desired or designed, may, by being compared with the same works more compleated abroad, have their defects rectified, and so the work be consummated. For true love to God, or our Neighbour, knows no limits, and useth to be very ingenious in multiplying new devices of serving them both to the uttermost. And, here to name some of those pub∣lick Charities abroad, which seem either not to be at all, or not so frequent, here at home. Such seem to be, That Cha∣rity of providing convenient Receptacles and Hospitals for poor helpless exposed Infants, here, I am afraid, too hastily com∣mitted with a small allowance to the nursing of some poor women, some of them of no good reputation; where part∣ly by their negligence, partly their wants, many of these little ones come to a sud∣dain end; and are as little inquired after, because the parish hereby is eased of a charge. Again such are the frequent Sodalities, or a company of pious persons
united together in the prosecution of some or other charitable designs. As the Sodalities in several trades, for the reliev∣ing the necessities of those inculpably more indigent amongst them. Sodalities for the succouring the necessities of for∣merly wealthy-families; casually im∣poverished, and bashful to publish their wants. For easing poor housholders when burthened with many Children: taking these from them, and giving them education till they come to certain years; or are also fitted for an honest imploy∣ment. Founding Schools only for poor mens children, for teaching them their Catechisme and to write and read, and so dismissing them. Sodalities, For freeing and releasing Prisoners for debt, at least when it is no very great summe, and the per∣sons not scandalous. For visiting, com∣forting and instructing Criminals con∣demned; and endeavouring to bring them to a godly end of their life. Set∣ting up Apothecaries shops; and sup∣plying the poorer sort, when sick, (at least within such a Circuit) with reme∣dies for their diseases, and experienced Tenders of them.
Sodalities of pious Advocates for con∣sidering poor mens causes, defending them when just: and disswading them, when unjust: and for arbitrating differ∣ences. Making provision for the ill-married and causlesly deserted by their prodigal husbands. And, For Women formerly wicked and prostituting themselves out of poverty; upon signs of their true Penitence and Reformation. Providing a place to be brought to bed and lying in, with ne∣cessary attendance hereto, for poor wo∣men great with child and destitute of any such convenience. Providing Dow∣ries for young Virgins of honest educa∣tion that are poor and marriageable. E∣specially the furnishing Hospitals, and o∣ther Foundations of publick Charity, for the necessary overseeing and attendance on them, with such persons as are single, disingaged, and sequestred from the world, and wholly devoted to such an imployment: expecting the reward on∣ly from God, and for the present content with food and raiment, and serving for conscience, not gain. For nothing can prosper where Avarice is not first exclu∣ded. To which also is frequently super-added
the voluntary attendance of other devout persons of Quality, and that of both Sexes from abroad, habited suitably for such an imployment. A thing fre∣quently practised, and by custome not wondred or blushed at; with great be∣nefit, as well to these Visitants them∣selves (so learning humility, tender-heart∣edness, and suffering several mortifica∣tions from such pitiful spectacles of mans misery): As for the more plentiful suc∣cour and relief of those Miserables, who are often made partakers, together with their Service, of their Charity and Alms. Many more might be named, more common abroad, less frequent at home, in all places commendable; the silence in which here may invite you to make a further search for them in the following Relations. Unless I should here also men∣tion that most pious and heroical design, not long since attempted in Paris, of an universal remedy and cure of common Beggars sorted into several Bodies or Classes of them, Men, Women, Chil∣dren, aged, able, impotent: received in several spacious houses. One of them is said to be capable of
four or five thousand persons. In which Houses were lodged Anno Domini 1666. about eight thousand of both Sexes. Those able being kept close to their work and exercises of divers trades. The younger sort trained up in such manu∣factures as may always yeild them an honest livelihood: The whole governed and administred by pious Clergy, and other single persons of much fidelity, wholly devoting themselves to this, tho mean and toilsome, yet most charitable, Service. Now if against such multiplicity of benefactions suted to so various necessi∣ties it be objected, That the super-abun∣dance of such Charities in these places increaseth those that need them, and must make them more careless in their in∣dustry, when they foresee themselves provided for in want: First, This ob∣jection may be made against the exer∣cise of any Charity whatever; even that, if any be, practised by the objectors. For what giving can there be that may not be said to incourage men to beg and ask? And what good can be named that some evil per accidens may not be found to come of it? Secondly, None can be
blamed for, or indeed excused from, re∣lieving the present wants of their neigh∣bours, tho, these should be many times viciously contracted; because the person, however qualified, yet being irrecover∣able as to his former fortunes without such relief must perish. Therefore Cha∣rity looks de facto chiefly at mens wants, however incurred by them: who tho also falling into these by their fault, yet when in them, may be truly penitent; or, not being so, are not to be deserted in misery because they are not Saints. Thirdly, As some, by their fault, so others fall into misery without it; and Charity in such cases still is inclined to think the best: And safer, that ten unworthy be helped, than one truly needy and deserving mis∣carry for want of it. Fourthly, Nei∣ther are such Charities ordinarily per∣formed, but that there is some choice used in the objects thereof; and those persons preferred that seem more to de∣serve compassion. Fifthly, Many other good laws in these places are made for restraint of these vices that bring men to penury; which if rightly executed, there will be the fewer faultily needy. Sixthly, How much soever common
Charities abound, men are naturally so ambitious of self subsistency and inde∣pendency on others, as that none wil∣lingly, and with design, will cast them∣selves wholly on other mens Alms: espe∣cially where can be expected nothing more than necessaries, and receipt into a place, where there are laws to restrain exorbitances, as well as Charity to suc∣cour wants. We see how sollicitously common Beggars decline such relief. Seventhly, Whatever plentiful provision of publick Charities is made in any Com∣mon-wealth, yet these can never abso∣lutely equal all necessities (though it were to be wished they might so:) And therefore every one ought to be jealous, that they may not extend to himself; nor, for such common succours, release his care and industry for his own subsi∣stence. But if the bowels of Charity could be so far enlarged to all conditions of men, as that none at all might fear want, the world would still have the more not to complain of, but give thanks for. And we have an admirable prece∣dent and pattern thereof in the primitive Oeconomy practised by the Apostles (in those first great effusions of the holy
Spirit) and recommended Act. 2.44. and again Act. 4.32. &c. And those pla∣ces, which more abound in these works of mercy to all their Neighbours, seem so much nearer to approach to that primi∣tive Copy left us by the holiest of men.
THE CONTENTS Of the First Part. Of Corporal Works of CHARITY. CHAP. I. Of Hospitals for the sick and in∣firm; and first of those common for all sick Persons. Such are, 1. The Hospital of the Holy Spirit. 2. The Hospital near St. John Lateran. 3. The Hospital of St. Mary of Consolation. 4. The Hospital of our Lady in the Garden. 5. The Hospital of St. Roche 6. The Hospital called John of God: Or, Be doing good Brethren. 7. The Hospital of St. James in Augusto for the Incurables. 8. The Hospital of the Holy Trinity for Con∣valescents. And of St. Anthony for Crip∣ples. Of St. Lazarus for Lepers. And of Sodalities taking care of the poor when sick in their own Houses; without their re∣moval to Hospitals. And of decayed Gentry, bashful to publish their wants. And furnish∣ing Apothecary's shops for the use of the poor. 9. The Pazzerella, or, Place for Mad-People.
CHAP. II. Of National Hospitals for the sick of their own Country. CAAP. III. Of the Hospitals destined to the se∣veral sorts of Artificers and Tradesmen. CHAP. IV. Of the Hospitals for Orphans, Boys and Girls, not having Parents. CHAP. V. Provision against some other Casual∣ties, as first, Domus Pia; a place wherein those that are ill married are succoured. CHAP. VI. Of certain Alms, of Bread, and Wine, and Manies ordered to be given. CHAP. VII. Of the Mount of Piety and Pawns. CHAP. VIII. Of visiting the Prisons, and re∣lieving poor Prisoners. CHAP. IX. Of the plentiful provision of Dowries for poor Maids. CHAP. X. Concerning publick places appointed for the reception and entertainment of Pilgrims and Strangers of all Nations. CHAP. XI. Of National Hospitals for enter∣tainment of Strangers according to the Nation they are of. CHAP. XII. Of the Roman Charity for Burial of such Dead as dye extream poor; or are exe∣cuted by the hand of Justice. The SECOND PART. Of Spiritual Works of CHARITY. CHAP. I. Of initiating Children in the first Ru∣diments of Learning and Holy Mysteries of Christian Religion.
CHAP. II. Of the greater Schools and Publick Roman College, and the Ʋniversity call'd the Sapientia. CHAP. III. Of certain private Colleges in the City of Rome. I. Of the Roman Seminary. II. Of Colleges built in Rome for particular Nations. 1. Of the German College. 2. Of the English College. 3. The Greek College. 4. The Maronites College. 5. The College for Neophites. 6. The Scots College. 7. The Clementine College for the Illyrians. 8. Of two particular Colleges founded by two Cardinals in their own Palaces. 9. Of the College for Orphans. 10. Of the College Matthaei, or St. Hierom's College 11. Pallotta's College. 12. Cardinal Gymnasius's College. 13. Of several Religious Houses having Read∣ers and Professors after the manner of Colleges. 14. St. Bonaventure's College of Minor Con∣ventuals. 15. Of the College for Catechumeni. CHAP. IV. Of publick Sermons and preaching the Word of God in Rome. CHAP. V. Concerning certain Religions Com∣promisers of Strifes, Deciders of Law-Cases, and just Defenders of right Pleas. CHAP. VI. Of visiting sick and weak persons,
and the Administring of Spiritual Refection to the devout while they are dying. CHAP. VII. Touching the Indefatigable Ad∣ministration of the Sacraments, Penance and the Eucharist. CHAP. VIII. Of publick and common Suffrages for the Dead. The THIRD PART. Concerning the general Devotion towards God CHAP. I. Of the publick Devotion of the Pope and Cardinals, and People of Rome, in observ∣ing Holy Festivals, and visiting Churches. CHAP. II. Of the Patriarchal, Collegiate, and Parish Churches in Rome. CHAP. III. Of the many Monasteries in Rome, of Religious Men and Women reciting the Ca∣nonical hours, and offering up other Hymns and Lauds to God night and day; and the Priests at due times celebrating the Holy Mass. CHAP. IV. Of the Lay-Sodalities, and Con∣fraternities in Rome, and of their Oratories. CHAP. V. Of the Congregations of Cardinals consulting about Ecclesiastical Affairs, and matters of Religion.
A Faithful Relation of seve∣ral sorts of Charitable and Pious Works eminent in the City of ROME. THE FIRST PART. Of Corporal Works of CHARITY. CHAP. I. Of Hospitals for the Sick and Infirm. And first of those common for all sick Persons. Such are, 1. The Hospital of the Holy Spirit. THere is not far from the Vatican, near the banks of Tyber, the most famous Hospital for Sick Persons, that is in all the world. It contains within its circuit so many great Palaces and Courts; and so many more ordinary houses; that it seems to be ra∣ther a whole town than one house.
The first Author of this great Work was Innocent the third; as appears by many In∣scriptions upon the Hospital it self. This In∣nocent left behind him in Rome two remarkable Monuments of his charity towards necessitous persons. The one was an Hospital for Slaves, who, being redeemed out of the hands of In∣fidels, have not wherewith to subsist; of which elsewhere. The other in this place, where Pope Leo 4. Anno 851. having finished that part of the City called after his name Borgo Leonino, built therein a Church dedicated to the perpetual Virgin St. Mary. And Anno 1204. This Innocent the third adjoyned there∣unto another Hospital; this which we are now treating of. And as he put the first Hospital under the care of a certain religious order then newly instituted by him; so did he this under another Order likewise approved by him; whose Title is that of the Holy Spirit, yet with∣out changing the Title of the Churches dedi∣cated to St. Mary the Virgin in Sassia. And this Hospital, because built at the sole charge and cost of the See Apostolick, is imme∣diately under it onely, and exempted from all kind of Impositions and Grievances. Now tho, in the Bull of Innocent, exposed Infants, which are here generally received and main∣tained, are not particularly mentioned; yet it seems such also were meant by the clause added, and other objects of Pity: Which clause was also in the Bull of Nich. 4. Anno 1291. And at last was so declared by the Bull
of Sixtus the fourth. An. 1476. And because none should imagine, that the Reception of such Infants did begin first under his Pontificate, there is set up in the Hall, being a great and fair room, many Inscriptions, and the Pictures of many dead Infants brought out of the neigh∣bouring Tyber, and laid at Pope Innocents feet; And an Angel said to advise him from heaven to make some provision against such miscarri∣ages. Hence all exposed Infants are here received by order from the Pope; and being once re∣ceived are never turned off again or forsaken. For the Males, as soon as they are grown up to it, are taught husbandry or some other Mechanical Trade, and some made Scholars; as the Genius of every one is discerned to be addicted: and what they take to therein they may be always furthered if they will. As for the Females they are delivered into the hands of Nurses and honest Matrons to be trained up; and being grown of age are compelled either to to become Nuns, or to be bestowed by the House in Marriage. And if they become Widdows, are received again into the Hospital, if they desire it, very freely, as the Daugh∣ters of the place. Time indeed, that silently eats all things, had much decayed what Innocent had built; when Pope Sixtus the fourth. 1471. set him∣self to rebuild all from the very foundations, and amplified it to a magnificent State; which went on still augmenting by the munificence
of several succeeding Popes. Leo X, Paul III, Pius IV, Pius V, Gregory XIV. In grati∣tude to which liberalities, are set up distinct Inscriptions. But to return to the descrip∣tion of this great Hospital, and the Church ad∣joining: There serve and officiate in the Church men of a religious order wearing a white Cross on their breasts; who likewise are set over the Hospital to govern it, and take care of its In∣comes, Rents, and Revenues. These have an innumerable company of servants that receive wages under them. Over all is a Master with the title of a Com∣mendator, who now for some years hath been still chosen out of the chief Prelates of the whole Court. The Church is all built of Tivoli Stone beau∣teously adorned with pictures, and all other sacred furniture, that may advance the devo∣tion of christians; the Hospital or Common-house for reception of strangers is exceed∣ing great and capacious, having within its precincts divers Palaces with their distinct Courts. In one apartment are maintained forty Nurses that are imployed in giving suck, and nursing up the Infants abandoned by their pa∣rents; besides these, others, which for their exceeding great number amount sometimes to two thousand, are put abroad to nurse at such a rate; for here they refuse none, Ba∣stards, or Legitimates, if in a perishing con∣dition.
In the second apartment are maintained about four hundred and fifty of the same chil∣dren, after they are a little grown; and then they have their masters and servants to teach them the Christian Doctrine, to read and write, and some beginnings of those Trades they seem most inclined to; That at twelve or thirteen years old they may be put forth, and bound thereto in order to subsist of themselves. In the third apartment are kept above five hundred of the girls: and are there cloistered in the Monastery dedicated to St. Tecla, stand∣ing within the precincts of the said Hospital; where they are educated by fourteen Nuns of St. Augustine's Order in the discipline of that Rule, and by many other Mistresses, in all the arts and skills proper for women; and every year forty of them are given in marriage ac∣cording to the order of Pope Sixtus; which is done still on the Wednesday in Whitsun-week. For then all the Bridegrooms are invited to a sumptuous feast; and the Virgins having their dowries and other provisions sutable to their new condition given to them, are each of them sent away with their husbands. And that the Bridegrooms may before hand sometimes see those, whom they will make choice of, for their Brides; The Virgins are led forth thrice a year in procession. First on the Sunday next to St. Anthony's day when they go to St. Peter's, next on St. Mark's day; beginning from his Church the Procession of the Litanies, and ending it at St.
Peter's; Whither also they go forth a third time on Whit-monday: the Volto Santo being there shewn them at their first and last Procession. The fourth apartment contains the sick in a lower gallery, so long and so large, that 'tis capable of a thousand single beds, which com∣monly in the summer are all filled with sick per∣sons. And on the outside thereof next the streets runs along a Portico or open Cloister, the full length of the Gallery; into which at several doors come forth those that tend and serve the sick after they have done with them; and cleansed all within, to take by turns a little air and refreshment: tho, the Gallery it self of the sick is always kept most sweet and neat. Opposite to this Gallery on the other side of the Court stand the several chambers for such sick persons; whose infirmities are of that quality that it is not fit to lodge them with others, but each must have a chamber apart. Cross the upper end of the Gallery below are several roomes, as so many Apothecaries shops the best furnished of any in Rome of all things necessary for diseased persons. Over these are several Chambers well furnished and fitted for such persons of quality as falling sick have not the conveniency to be so well looked to and tended elsewhere. For these Pope Sixtus the fourth, hath built a Palace apart, as this Me∣morial testifies. Nobilium calamitate & aegritudine motus seorsim ab aliis locum idoneum, decenter que ornatum his tribuit.
Great care is here also taken of all those things which the sick bring hither with them; whe∣ther cloaths, goods, or moneys: All being in∣ventoryed and deposited in the Treasurers hands, to be punctually restored to them, if they recover; or to their heirs, if they dye. In this great building are also two other places of note. The one is the Palace of the Commendator and his family, which consists of some Ninety in number: All which have their employments, offices and charges about the sick; He going himself often to visit them. And, besides many appointed Physitians and Surgeons; who in their turns, if need be, watch whole nights with their patients (for nothing is omitted that may conduce to the health of the body.) Besides the religious men of that order, who are perpetually upon the place, and other servants that are paid their wages for it, There are many Monks and Fryars of all orders, that dayly visit the sick; not only exhorting them to patience, and feeding their souls with the word of God, but bringing them likewise early fruits and the first of all sorts that the season there affords; and some∣times sweetmeats and other refreshing things, coming from forreign parts. Among these persons are chiefly the Priests of the Congregation of the Oratory founded not many years since, by the authority of St. Philip Neri; whose institute and approved vertues require to be spoken of more particularly in another place.
The other place is the Church (touch'd upon before) together with the chambers adjoining for the foremention'd Religious, and for the other Priests who assist the sick. For besides the Penitentiary (who assoon as any sick persons are brought, in the first place heareth their confessions) others administer the Sacraments to them, That of the Eucharist, and when the case requires it, that of Extreame Ʋnction: others accompany the departing Souls with the Church's prayers and recommendations. There be four Chaplains to say Mass; And those sick, who lye below, have there, in the middle of their Gallery, a neat Chappel with an Organ often play'd on, also for the recrea∣tion of the sick. And those above have ano∣ther, but more adorned, and with rich hangings and Church vestments. The yearly Revenue of the whole is very great, and amounts to near a hundred thousand Gold Crowns (every Crown being worth 7. sh: 6. d.) that is: About thirty seven thousand five hundred pounds Sterling per Annum. To this so excellent a piece of Charity as we see here exercised, there is adjoyned ano∣ther no less munificent: which is, That there belongs to the place certain Coaches and Lit∣ters for sick people; wherein they are carryed up and down, in places ot more wholsome air of the City; especially those persons that wast away in languishing Fevers; that accord∣ing to the prescript of their Doctors they may take some freer air.
II. The Hospital for the Sick near St. John Laterans. Near the Lateran Church, John the Cardinal Columna, whom Pope Honorius the third, about year 1216. admitted into the sacred Colledge, built a very large Hospital for poor sick people, dedicating it to our Saviour as this title in stone testifies. Hospital. Salvat. Refugium Pauperum & Infirmorum. And endowed it with a great Revenue; the government and care of which he hath commit∣ted to the congregation of the Gentlemen of Rome: by whose means the wealth thereof is not a little increased. This Hospital is a double one; one part for men, the other for women; and a street or publick-way between both: either of them are served by ministers and attendants of their own sex. In the winter time they make or∣dinarily fifty beds in the womens part; and in the mens a hundred and fifty, which some∣times are even double in number. In the sum∣mer, when diseases rage more, persons of all conditions that have Fevers, or sores, or wounds, are here received, maintained and cherished after the same manner as they are in that other Hospital of the Holy Spirit. The servants attending on the sick are very many: The Physitians, Surgeons and Priests sufficient for it. Those that are sick of a ling∣ring
and almost spent Fever have here also a kind of Coach to take the better air in, to ex∣hilerate their spirits and exhale their disease. The whole fabrick is very conspicuous by reason of its sumptuous building; and is ordered by the prime Nobility and Gentry among the Romans with great diligence and ingenious care: Besides their great charity towards the sick, they do likewise other good works of piety to be spoken of in their due place. III. The Hospital of St. Mary of Consolation. There was an Hospital in Rome called St. Maria in Portico, so ancient that we have no Memorial left of its beginning: That such there was an inscription tells us. Divae Mariae in Portico sacrum Societatis Hospitale. Or else surely the memory of it was lost either in that miserable sack of the town under Cle∣ment the seventh; or else by the frequent over∣flowing of Tyber, as many other things there unhappily perished. The Church thereof is still standing, tho to another use. Not far from hence another Sodality devoted to the Blessed Virgin under the Invocation of Graces and given to good works erected an Hospital for the sick. And not far from this again another Soda∣lity devoted to the Virgin too, under the litle of Consolation, founded another Hospital for the sick. The near standing together of these
Hospitals hath reduced them all three, to that of the Consolation, at this day: the other titles being grown out of use, it is called by that name only of Consolation: perhaps there∣fore because it is a name that sounds well to sick people. Here are received, as in the other Hospitals abovenamed, in several apartments both men and women of what condition soever, if they be sick of Fevers, or have any wounds or sores; there they have Physicians, and Sur∣geons, and servants to attend them. The Church is all built of Tivoli-stone, ex∣cept the Frontispeice that is yet unfinished. To it belongs a convenient number of Priests. There are beds made for the sick in the winter a hundred: and in the summer two hundred. The whole fabrick takes up a great deal of ground; and all the care of it belongs to that Confraternity, as I said, of the Consolation. The yearly Revenue is great, and every day addition made to it by the charity of good people. IV. The Hospital of our Lady in the Garden. About the year of our Lord 1390. Boniface the ninth being Pope, in that region of the City beyond Tyber there began a Sodality devoted to the Blessed Virgin; which, because it built a fair Church to the honour of a certain image of the same Virgin found in a Garden, there∣fore had the Church and the Sodality too their title from a Garden. To the Church is added an Hospital for the sick.
The Hospital receives those that are sick of Fevers or troubled with sores, or wounds, There is a Physitian and Surgeon and Attend∣ants and all other things else provided that are necessary for the restoring of an infirm body. To the Church belong many Priests; And the Hospital, although it exclude none of any degree or condition, yet more willing∣ly admits Mechanicks; as Coopers, Millers, Mariners, Taylors, Gardiners, Carpenters, Carmen, Plowmen, Vine-dressers, &c. which sort of people contribute very charitably to it. The Confraternity or Sodality, who have the care and regiment of all, consists not of any Gen∣tlemen but of such Mechanicks. Beds for the sick are made there ordinarily about fifty in number, and in the Autumne and other sickly times of the year: two or three times as many. V. The Hospital of St. Roche. In the year of Jubile 1500. under Alexander the sixth, another Sodality was instituted and devoted to St. Roche; which, near the Church of St. Hierom of the Illyrians, bought of the said Illyrians a peice of ground, upon which they erected an Hospital, and joyned it to a very fair Church both built by the same Sodality. There are belonging to the Church eighteen Priests, and four Acolites. In the Hospital are received in lodgings apart for both men and women of all sorts, that have sores, or be sick
of Fevers, that here they may be cured of them. But they have a particular care of Tradesmen, as of Mariners, Hosts, Carpenters, Plasterers, Ministrels, Confectioners, Fish-mon∣gers; &c. For by the charity of such men the Hospital hath received a great addition: They make no less then fifty beds dayly in the healthi∣est times, and in the sickly can supply an hundred. The care of all is committed to a Sodality, who also on the day of the Assumption of our Lady give portions to some poor Virgins. And because this Hospital at first served onely for men, Antony-Maria Salviati Cardinal (a man often to be named for his great munificence to pious uses) adjoyned to the former Hospital another great Fabrick for women; and en∣dowed it with a revenue: the Inscription upon it testifies both. VI. The Hospital called of John of God, or, Be-doing-good, Brethren. In the City of Granada in the farthest part of Spain there was living about the year 1540. John Colavita vulgarly called John of God by profession a Bookseller; who selling off all his Books made use of the money onely toward the relief of the sick. In which good work he soon found assistants, by whose help in a short time many Hospitals were founded, not only over all Spain, but throughout almost all Italy too. In the Island in Tyber at Rome there is a fair one
that receives a hundred sick people and more if there be need, with extraordinary charity. It hath no yearly revenue, but is maintained by the alms of good people, gathered up by certain religious Hermits living together ac∣cording to the rule of the said John Colavita. These take the whole care of the Hospital upon them, and do themselves indefatigably serve the sick. They have to that purpose an Apothecaries shop furnished with the best druggs that can be got together at any cost. Their Church is well adorned, and dedicated to our Saviour. And the whole Hospital in∣creaseth dayly in repute and alms; for the ex∣traordinary charitable offices which these fore∣said religious persons do there to the sick. These religious Hermits call themselves Fate-ben-Fratelli, or Be-doing-good, Brethren; because that saying was frequently used by their Found∣er John Colavita: when he went up and down to gather the charities of people. VII. The Hospital of St. James in Augusto. For the Incurable. This Hospital of St. James in Augusto taking its name from Augustus his Gardens, in the place of which it is built, acknowledgeth for its Founder Cardinal Peter de Columna in a Mar∣ble stone there in the wall Anno 1338. Pontif. Benedict. 12. Hither are brought to be cured all with old sores or wounds; such as have their sinews
shrunck that labour with the Hernia, and such incurable diseases; whence it is named, The Hospital of Incurables: A Work of very great charity and therefore contributed unto by ma∣ny worthy men; among whom the Marble stone, that is in the East Church (for the Hospi∣tal hath two Churches belonging to it, this, and another at the West, end) records Anthony of Burgos. But Fryer Clement Cardinal of Ara Caeli left this Hospital as his heir to his whole estate; as a table in that Church for a memorial shews. Nor was this Hospital a little benefited by Bartholomew de la Cueva of St. Cross in Hieru∣salem as appears in a like Marble table. This Hospital received yet more advantage by Lo∣dowick de Torres Arch-Bishop of Salernum as is in a like Marble table. Besides these Cardinals spoken of and other great Prelates, many there have been of the inferior rank both men and women (whose names it were tedious to re∣cite) who by charitable Legacies have much promoted this famous work of Christian piety, which I set not down here for brevity sake; yet must not forget that of Paul the third; of which there is extant a large Memorial in a Marble stone inserted in the wall of the West Church. Lastly to all these succeeds Antonius Maria Salviatus the Cardinal, a man of a princely mind, as the stately Monuments of it testify. He razed down that Church which we called the East Church, and raised another, a most
magnificent one, in its place; a peice of ad∣mirable structure, great capacity and royal furniture as is to be seen; He increased the revenue of this Hospital very liberally. The Church is adorned with very rich fur∣niture; the Divine office therein performed by twenty four Priests and six Acolytes. The sick have many to attend upon them. The whole Hospital with all its revenue is governed by that Sodality which heretofore was named St. Maria del Popolo; because it was instituted in the Church of that Denomina∣tion; but now it is translated to this we speak of, and so intitled: The Sodality of St. James for the Incurables. The order they use in this house of charity is most accurate: I had it from the Sodality it self most particularly set down, but too long to be inserted here, where brevity is pro∣mised. Besides the ordinary care used about the sick, once every two years they make a Decoction that is very chargeable, for such as have that miserable disease, which the vulgar calumniously call the French pox (for that goes too amongst the Incurables) and so distribute it among those that are sick thereof. The houses, that were added to the old Hospital by the Cardinal Salviati, are very large ones and bear his Inscription. The beds here made for the incurable persons are no less than a hundred, and more if there be need.
The Hospital of the Holy Trinity for Convalescents. And of St. Anthony for Cripples. And of St. Lazarus for Lepers. And of Sodalities taking care of the poor, when sick, in their own houses, without their remo∣val to Hospitals. And of decayed Gentry, bashful to publish their wants. And furnishing Apothecary'S shops for the use of the poor. Thus much of the Hospitals for the sick. To which may be added that other Institute of no less piety; whereby these that are re∣covering after their Fevers have left them, taken out of the forenamed Hospitals for the the sick: and carryed in the Town Coach for that purpose into the Hospital of the most Holy Trinity, that we speak of. Where for three days they are entertained with more plentiful and stronger dyet; that so being restored into their former strength, they may be the sooner enabled to follow their work and wonted bu∣siness. Not unlike to this also is that house of St. Anthony in Esquiliis; founded indeed for such as are sick of the Plague; but because that sick∣ness, by the mercy of Almighty God, is very rare in that City, it is imployed to receive the lame, and maimed, and such other Cripples. But because it is not convenient for all, that
fall into Fevers to be removed from their own house, and carryed to a publick Hospital; especi∣ally for Masters of Families, who have wives and children to take care of; lest besides the affliction of their bodies they should suffer thereby another in their minds. The charity of the Romans hath extended it self to benefit these also, that they may be looked unto and helped in their own houses. For this good work there is appointed a Sodality of pious men; above fourscore years since instituted in the Church of the twelve Apostles. The brethren of which Sodality largely bestow upon these kind of sick money; and provide them of a Physitian and Physick; and if they have the testimony of their parish Priest for their honest life, they are releived with great charity. And to this purpose for the releiving of these Poveri Vergognosi, persons of condition that are fallen into want and are ashamed to let it be known, here are elected every year, in the honour of the twelve Apostles, twelve Gentle∣men of Rome, and a Prelate of the Court for their Prior. Who, dividing themselves to the several regions or quarters of Rome, visit in private, all persons of such condition, if they will but put their Memorials here into a cer∣tain Box (which is locked and stands exposed among other boxes for the poor; so that they may do it as concealedly as they please) and they shall not be long without relief sutable to their want; for twice a week the Box is opened, and the Memorials considered.
Out of all this it appears, that there is scarce any sort of relief and easement to be imagined for the poor sick: which is not in all its kinds abundantly practised in this City, the very Mo∣ther of Charity. Here also come fitly to be spoken of, those two Cardinal Burghese and Lodovisius. The first of whom hath furnished up an Apothe∣cary's shop, abounding with all sorts of Drugs, and Physick, and Remedies for the use of all the poor in that parish where his Palace stands. The other hath provided the like shop, but far greater; so that it may supply all sorts of remedies, for all sorts of diseases, gratis to the poor of all the City and its Suburbs; and to that purpose hath alotted a yearly revenue of two thousand four hundred Golden Crowns, that is about nine hundred pounds sterling. And thus much of the Hospitals and places of refreshment for those that are sick, or lan∣guish. I may add two more, tho, small ones, destined for those whom they call Lepers; both dedicated to St. Lazarus, because he is suppo∣sed to have had that disease. The one is out of the Walls not far distant from Porta Angelica, and at the foot of Mons Amarus, or vulgarly Monte Marici: where heretofore a Frenchman kept an Inn; who dying An. 1480. left by Will wherewith to build a Church and this Hospital adjoyning for poor Lepers, dedicating it to that Lazarus who lay at the rich mans gate. Altho, there is also a Memorial kept of St. Lazarus, Brother
to St. Mary and Martha, always on Passion Sunday: the Gospel on the Friday before be∣ing of his resurrection. Here also the Vignerols keep the Feast of St. Mary Magdalen to whom our Lord ap∣peared in the shape of such a Vignerol or Vine∣dresser. These therefore maintain a Priest for her Altar: and having many years persevered in this devotion they came at length to make up a confraternity An. 1598. and had the privi∣ledge to deliver a Prisoner from death on the same Feast. Whereon also they contribute some Dowries for marrying-off some of their poor Maids. The place is united to the Cha∣piter of St. Peter, which maintains a parish Priest there, for those Souls that live scattered in the Vineyards thereabouts. The Alms for maintenance of the sick are partly given by the Popes Major-Domo, and partly gathered from the passengers in that Highway. The other Lazaretto, or Hospital for Lepers, is within the Walls at the foot of the Aventine-Hill in via ostiensi; and was erected by the for∣mer Hospital to gather here the alms of such as visited the seven Churches. The Chappel here is very little, yet the house is furnished with beds fit for such diseased people, and they are maintained by the Alms foremen∣tioned.
The Pazzarella or Place for Mad-People. The first Founder of this great work of Cha∣rity was Ferrantes Ruiz of the Kingdome of Navar, and Angelo & Didaco Bruni Father and Son, Spaniards. Afterwards An. Dom. 1561. by approbation of Pius the fourth, over this good work was set a Sodality of lay-per∣sons: a house was built near to Via lata, and a Church adjoyning dedicated to the Blessed Virgin under the title of St. Mary of Pity. In this Hospital are received the crazed persons of whatever Nation they be; and at their first entrance care is taken by Physitians to restore them to their right mind, by Helle∣bore or any other Medicines proper to that effect. If the madness prove incurea∣ble, there they are kept during life, having food and rayment, necessary to the miserable condition they are in, charitably provided for them. Altho there be both men and women in that house, yet they have their apartments so severed that they cannot come together. All know their Keepers: who, as occasions require, correct the outragious, and there∣fore they stand in awe of such. Persons of all Nations Germans, French-men, Spaniards, Dutch-men, and others are here maintained and governed with a great deal of charity, and (considering their distemper) difficulty also. A Venetian Lady was moved to a great pity of these poor Creatures upon
sight of them: and at her death left them heirs to her whole Estate. CHAP. II. Of National Hospitals for the Sick of their own Country. ALthough these common Hospitals for all sick, which we have spoken of, may suffice, even for the sick of the greatest City: For if we cast up the accounts exactly, we shall find ready in them no less then fifteen hundred beds dayly made, besides what are supplyed in a much greater number in sickly times. Yet se∣veral Nations have been willing to shew their particular care and provision of this nature for their poor Country men. As the Castilians do receive the Poor of their Nation, that are sick, in an apartment of that house of Reception dedicated to St. James, se∣parate from those that are in health; and with very great diligence provide all necessaries for them. The like do those of Flanders in St. Julians house of reception to their Countrymen. The Portugueses do the same in St. Anthony's house. The Lombards make use of, to that purpose, the house dedicated to St. Ambrose and St. Charles.
Those of Genoa the house of St. John Baptist. The Armenians that of St. Maria Egyptiaca. Those of Arragon that of the Blessed Virgin of Monserrat. The Britons that of St. Ivo. The French that of St. Lewis. The Illyrians and Dalmatians that of St. Hierome. Who over and above furnish their sick, who desire rather to continue in their own proper houses, with money to buy physick and pay the Physitian. To these we may add those of Bergamo, of whom we have hitherto said nothing. These have founded a Church and built a house of entertainment near to the forum of Antoninus devoting both to the two Saints Bartholemew, and Alexander. The Church hath a conveni∣ent company of Priests maintained for it. In the house are entertained all the sick of their nation, if they be poor and desire to lye there; if they be rich, there be fair houses adjoyning for them with an Apothecary's shop of their own. The Florentines have built an Hospital for their sick, not far from that their stately Church of St. John Baptist upon the banks of Tyber. Those of Siena have theirs near the Church of St. Katherine of Siena in via Julia. In both these places is very great charity shewn to the sick of either Nation.
CHAP. III: Thirdly of the Hospitals destined to the se∣veral sorts of Artificers and Tradesmen. WE have spoken of the Hospitals of our Lady in the Garden, or St Lazarus and St. Roche and St. Martin: that by parti∣cular obligation were appropriated to men of certain trades and professions there reckoned up. But yet some of them refusing a Commu∣nity with others, have erected certain Hospi∣tals peculiar for the sick only of their own pro∣fession. Among those are, First, the Apothecaries. To a Company or Sodality of these was allotted heretofore the Church of St. Laurence in Foro Romano, now Boario, from the year 1450. It is an ancient Fabrick, and of old dedicated to the Emperor and Emperess Antoninus and Faustina; as ap∣pears by the title yet to be read in the Fron∣tispeice. Divo Antonino & Divae Faustinae. It stands by the ancient Via Sacra leading to the Capitol. Near to this Church have they built an Ho∣spital for those of their profession, that fall sick. A work very much promoted by Cardinal Astorgius Agnensis of Beneventum; and the sick are there looked unto with great care and neatness.
Secondly, The Hospital of our Lady of Loretto for poor Bakers. The year of Jubile 1500, The better sort of Bakers set up a Sodality among themselves, and joyning their monies together bought a peice of grcund near Trajani-Forum: On it they built a very stately Church of choice Architecture, dedicating it to our Lady of Loretto. The Church it self indeed is an excellent peice, all of Tivoli stone; in the building whereof were expended about fifty thousand Crowns. All being contributions of Charity. By it is the Hospital, common to all afflicted with Sores and Fevers, but more particularly designed for Bakers; because raised upon their purse, altho the inscription says nothing of it; Hospit. Societat. Divae Mariae Laureti. The care of the place totally belongs to that Sodality. Thirty beds for the use of the sick they furnish; but on an occasion they add more daily. All things that can be thought of necessary, or convenient for recovering of health they there supply. Next the German Bakers, of which sort there is no small number in this City, have been wil∣ling to have an Hospital too, for their sick, adjoyning to the Church of St. Elizabeth near Campus Florae: the Church is well adorned with holy Utensils, and the Hospital with beds and other necessaries for the sick, good diet and attendance.
Again for the servants belonging to the Popes Family, (there being a very great num∣ber of them) about the year 1537, There was a kind of a Body or pious Sodality erected out of them; which, behind St. Peter's Church at the entrance of the old Circus of Nero, built up a Temple to St. Martha, and by it an Hospital for the servants of the Courtiers, which fell sick, and could not be well looked unto in the Palace it self. This Temple, by reason of the many in∣dulgences granted unto it by several Popes, is much frequented by the devouter sort; that hardly there is one that visits St. Peter's Church which doth not likewise go unto this of which we speak. The Hospital is abundant∣ly furnished with beds and other necessaries for treating of the sick. In the year of our Lord 1580. the Coach-men and Carmen joined together, and out of them∣selves instituted a Sodality of the better sort, which built an Hospital in Campus Martius near Tyber, onely for sick Coachmen and Carmen. Here therefore are entertained all the infirm of these Professions. Nor are they dismissed until they be known to have recovered their former health, so as to be able to drive their Coaches or Carts, and govern their horses. Of these sorts of men there is no small number in Rome, since the very Coaches and Chariots of the Gentry exceed two thousand, not reck∣oning Carts or Country Waggons.
CHAP. IV. Fourthly, Of the Hospitals for Orphan Boys and Girls having no Parents. LET us go on to see how Rome, the Nurse of all sorts of people, is never wanting to assist the needy of what condition or age soever, but takes care of them assoon as born, and once received into her care, fosters them up as long as they live, and being dead pays their funerals. In all great and populous Cities there uses to be a great number of Infants exposed; not so much by the fault of the mothers, as for the great poverty of their parents: Now be∣fore there was a certain place appointed for such in this City, These poor Infants were punished not for their own, but for their pa∣rents faults or fortunes, and almost all perished miserably. Pope Innocent the third, being ad∣monished by an Angel, built that Hospital of the Holy Ghost in Saxia, for these Innocents, as we shewed before. If any misery befall persons under age and young, that they are not able to maintain them∣selves by their own work, and withal have lost both father and mother: The City hath also two houses for such Orphans, the one for males, and the other for females.
The first had its beginning in the year 1540. by a Sodality of many pious Citizens of Rome then instituted; who disliking, That young Boys should run idling up and down the City, thought it fitter that some Hospital should be built for them: which good work Paul the third, who then was Pope, much encouraged, and assigned a place for this Fabrick near the Pantheon, or Agrippa's Temple, close by the parish Church of St. Maries in Acquiro of the Visitation, granting that Church to the use of the Sodality and Hospital. After this first Church was pulled down, and the Sodality built up another most magnificent, and on a larger plot of ground, adjoining to it a very spacious house by means of the alms of good people, to keep the Boys in. To this work much was contributed by the often mentioned Antonius Maria Salviatus the Cardinal, who by his wonted liberality hath much encreased the revenue of the Hospital. As for those Lads, who are apt for learning, the same Cardinal hath built a very magnifi∣cent Colledge apart for them, and largely en∣dowed it. The care of the Church, of the Servants, and indeed of the whole Hospital, is intrusted to the foresaid Sodality: Who are very dili∣gent to search into the dispositions and incli∣nations of the youths, and so to make choice of them severally, to apply every one to such a course of life as fits best his own Genius. The second of those houses is for female Or∣phans,
for it being not convenient for Boys and Girls to live promiscuously in the same house; The Girls have their Hospital in another place, and indeed a very large one, near to the Church of Sanctorum quatuor Coronatorum; which here∣tofore is said to be the Palace of the Popes. Herein are a very great number of such Maids, who are instructed and taught, and ruled and governed by some Nuns of St. Bennet's order; who are there likewise cloistered up. The Girls, being grown of age, receive their Dowries from the same Sodality, and so are either marryed-off, or, if they have a mind to it, enter into some Nunnery. Now because in these houses for Orphans, according to the laws of the Foundations, none are to be received but such as are deprived of both parents; The Roman charity cannot con∣tent it self to leave unprovided for, other young Boys and Girls, who perhaps have but one pa∣rent left them; or if both, yet such as are either decrepit, lame, or blind, or impotent by some other defect, that they cannot maintain their children; even for such also hath Rome, an in∣dulgent Nurse of all sorts of poor, taken care with a very provident liberality. John Leonard of Sicily was a man, as his Works shew him, of a very good mind and singular charity towards the poor. He having been in his more youthful days a Gentleman-Usher in this City, and observing therein ma∣ny boys idly to run up and down, had pity upon them, and got together a very great
number of them, and lodging them himself in divers borrowed houses, maintained them as well as he could for many years, with such Alms as he procured from the charity of good people. He was one that had no learning, and therefore by an Irony was wont to stile himself the lettered John, and the boys of his institution still retain the name of Literati. This holy Institute in a very short time found many Favourers. Who growing into a con∣gregation, bought a very large house for the bringing up of these boys, near Domitian's Arch: To which is added a little Chappel. This house is now endowed with some re∣venues, but nothing at all competent for the maintenance of so great a multitude. Hence it is that the younger boys are led about some∣times through the streets of the City by one that governs them, singing their prayers and praises to God and the Blessed Virgin, in a certain childish harmony; thereby to beg alms of good people: And the greater being set to manual labour get victuals for them∣selves and their Companions: in summe all are imployed to a good end. That which is most commendable in this work, is the good education and training up of poor children, whereby they are timely in their slippery age estranged from the common vices of youth. The same Leonard had gathered together Girls too; but because he alone was not able to go through with the care of both Boys and
Girles he deserted this design. Altho, the Maids were afterwards disposed of to several persons: And in the year 1595. found a com∣mon Patron, namely Cardinal Hieronimus Rusti∣cuccius. This Cardinal having bought many houses near the Church of St. Euphemia in Trajani Forum, did, as as they say, by the perswasion of venerable Cesar Baronius (who afterwards was Cardinal) build out of them a very large house to receive all these Maids gathered now together from those several places wherein they lived before dispersed. And over them he set honest Matrons, who taking the care of their Education, should instruct them in all ways of Religion and Holiness. The lesser among these, as before the lesser among the Boys, are led about the town singing also, there∣by to implore the benevolence of the chari∣table; and the greater are kept to their Needle, and other female imployments. When any are grown of age, by order of their Governors, they are either to be marryed or professed Nuns. Over this house are set, by order of the Car∣dinal the Popes Vicar, some grave Priests; but the supreme authority rests in the Cardinal Vicar. The number of Boys is usually about three hundred, and so likewise is that of the Maids. This institute and the Congregation that looks to it, hath for Protector the Cardinal Ludo∣vicus Ludovisius; who often supplies both
houses with his liberality according as their exigencies require. There are never wanting in great Cities wicked mothers; who, never having affected chastity, make their Daughters like themselves; and expose them to be abused for a small gain, and sometimes against their wills. That the wickedness of such wretches might be prevented, there hath been by the impor∣tunity of St. Ignatius Loyola instituted in the City a Sodality, Anno 1540. whose care it is with all sagacity to search out for the daugh∣ters of such infamous women; and having found them, to take all from ten to twelve years old from the power and tuition of their treacher∣ous mothers, and to place them in a Mona∣stery built for that purpose, there to be taught and trained up by grave Nuns in all Christian discipline. When they come to be marriage∣able they have provided for them husbands, or if they had rather vails; in the mean time they are maintained at the charge of the Mona∣stery. There is a very stately Church all built of Tivoli stone, and dedicated to St. Catherine de Funari, added to this Monastery by Cardinal Frederick Caesius, Bishop of Porto, as the in∣scription over the great gate thereof declares. For the better education of these poor Girls, the Augustine Nuns take care of them. This Monastery is governed by a Sodality, consisting of Roman Citizens, the very prime of them; whether you consider their extracti∣on, estates or vertues,
The number of Virgins here are about two hundred. CHAP. V. Provision against some other casualties; As First, Domus Pia. A place wherein those that are ill-married are succoured. MAtrimony the most indissoluble bond of humane society (wherein is found that chief and inexplicable freindship and unity be∣tween man and wife) yet is not unoften by the fault of the parties undone, cut asunder, or at least loosened: namely when this indi∣vidual conversation and cohabiting is injured by a stubborn contumacy; for hence grow anger, strifes, and at the last a separation from the marriage-bed; which is caused by the ill condition sometimes of the man, sometimes of the woman. But least women should incur the ignominy of being dishonest, when they live separate from their husbands, there is provided a house for entertainment of such ill-yoked persons: wherein they are received, until such time as they are fully reconciled to their husbands, or their husbands to them. This house is called Domus Pia, and stands near to the Church belonging to the Monastery of St. Clare. Which Church on one hand hath St. Clare's Monastery, and on the other, this
house. So that they have a kind of commu∣nion together; but yet no farther than in the use of the Church standing between them. The care of this house is committed to a Sodality of the prime Citizens of Rome; as likewise is that of St. Clare's Nunnery, of which in due place. Secondly, The charitable Provision for re∣pentant Strumpets. Neither are the Whores themselves (of which by the perverse and vicious nature of mankind, there is too great a number in great Cities) deprived of the Roman charity, if they once come to repent themselves. For near Antoninus his Forum is there built for such, a very large Monastery dedicated to St. Mary Magdalen: Wherein are received all such, as repenting themselves of their past voluptuousness, are disposed to dedicate them∣selves and the rest of their lives to God. Here such make profession of a regular course, and observe the monastical Discipline so exactly, and with so great constancy; that it is a kind of miracle, that women accustomed to a looser sort of life, should now be kept under so strict a rule. A great part of the Fabrick of this Monastery was added by Cardinal Peter Aldobrandini, but in a few years after suffering by fire was again magnificently re-edified by Pope Paul the fifth. The care of this Monastery belongs to the
Nobility both of the City and Court, joining together in a Sodality; which suffers not the penitents to want any thing. The number of these women amounts at this day to three hundred. They say Paul the fifth, at that time, when he visited this Mona∣stery lately then burnt, and saw so many signs of true repentance, shed tears, and stood as it were amazed at the terrible penances and se∣vere sanctity practised by these women. Now because none are admitted here unless they first make profession to be perpetually en∣closed, after which there is no recalling; and it is likely that some, that have made that pro∣fession, may afterwards come to repent them∣selves; and others, that have hot yet made it, may be deterred from ever making it by the indispensableness thereof. Therefore Frier Dominick de Jesu Maria, one of the reformed Carmelites, whom the vulgar term Discalceat or unshod, hath lately out of the alms of pious people, built another large Monastery, wherein such women are received, as changing to an honester course of life, desire yet to try whe∣ther they can go through with the reforma∣tion of themselves: and upon tryal have time to deliberate whether they will make that pro∣fession in that other house, or else continue here as long as they can live single. Thirdly, A house for old and decrepit Persons. We have seen how the Roman charity hath
made provision for all, of all ages and degrees, that need their help. And it is not to be be∣lieved that it should fail them, who fail through age. Wherefore Pope Sixtus Quintus, a munifi∣cent Prince, hath built a very large Hospital and endowed it with a great yearly Revenue for old people, and for the blind, lame, maimed, or made impotent by any other natural de∣fect, so that they cannot labour. Over this Hospital is set a Sodality of certain honest men; who are to take care of all things, and to judge of such as are fit to be received. They admit alike men and women, but in several apartments, and maintain all in decent diet and cloathing as long as they live. CHAP. VI. Of certain Alms of Bread, Wine and Monies ordered to be given. AT the foot of the Vatican, near the Church of St. Peter (the Prince of the Apostles) at the West end there stands a fair Church dedicated to the blessed Virgin; and near it a large Church yard, wherein none but Strangers and Pilgrims are buried. Behind this Church is a large house, wherein by the appointment of several Popes, thirteen poor people are daily dined by two Priests
that have that charge. It is piously believed that this custome came down from St. Gregory the great, that most holy Pope; who usually entertaining twelve poor men every day, had the honour once to treat for a thirteenth poor person our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, whence this number hath ever since been religi∣ously observed, to this day. Besides this charity there is distributed by the Popes liberality Bread and Wine in great abundance, unto two thousand poor people, on every Friday, in honour of our Lord's Passion. The Convent of St. Anthony gives every day two loaves of bread a peice to as many poor people as come thither for it. The Hospital of our holy Saviour, near the Lateran Church, bestows every day upon every one of the poor, as much bread as will suffice each of them for a day. The like is done by the Convent of St. Paul in Via Ostiensi. The Hospital of the Holy Ghost, gives bread and wine every evening to a great multitude of poor. But because the forementioned Alms are not given but to such as come themselves to demand them; and many, because they live afar off, or because they come of honest fami∣lies reduced into povery, are ashamed to go from door to door to ask an alms; for these, who are stiled the shame-fac'd poor, an in∣genious provision is made by the Sodality
(which we spake of above) of the Holy twelve Apostles. There is placed in that Church a little Desk under lock and key, into which at a chink are thrust in the Petitions, wherein the necessitous person expresseth his wants, and sets down his place of habitation. Thrice every week this Desk is opened by the officers, the Petitions read, and some of the Sodality dispatched away to find out the Supplicants, and to releive them according to the quality of their indigency. The like order is observed by that Sodality of Charity, set up under Pope Leo the tenth, in the Church of St. Hierome, near to the Palace of Farnesi: This Sodality there distributes every Saturday a great quantity of bread to to the poor; and to those modest beggars, what money the confraternity thinks fit; by whose piety the largess hath been maintained and increased. Besides all these munificences and charities the Pope monthly distributes to the Convents of Mendicants, and to other shame fac'd poor, great summs of monies, under the name of common charity; which are still encreased as the exigents of times require; and are dis∣pensed by the secret Almoner, as they call him, who hath no limits set him what to be∣stow. The Pope is imitated by the sacred Senate or Colledge of Cardinals, as in all other ver∣tues, so especiaily in their liberality to the poor: To instance in every particular Cardi∣nal
would be besides my purpose, and there∣fore I omit it. It is found by an Extract out of his Book of accounts, That this one Cardinal, viz. Alex∣ander Perettus, Cardinal Montalto Nephew to Pope Sixtus the fifth; by his Sister did bestow upon the poor, a million and seven hundred thousand gold Crowns; besides the Alms that he distributed to single persons with his own hands, and great gifts conferred upon his freinds. CHAP. VII. Of the Mount of Piety and Pawns. THere is nothing more for the benefit of poor people, than, when their necessity requires it, to lend them money upon their pawns, without exacting any use for it. In the time of Pope Paul the third, there was a place appointed for the receiving of the pawns of poor people, and they called it the Mount of Piety and of Pawns. It grew much in re∣quest by the liberalities and priviledges in∣dulged unto it by the same Paul; and other Popes of Rome, even unto this day. Here are received the pawns of all poor and indigent people whatsoever, and no, or, at least, no considerable use paid for the money given out upon them. The time alotted for
redemption is eighteen months: if the pawns are not redeemed in that time, they are sold at an outcry; and the summe registred for how much, it it exceed the money given out upon them; the overplus is restored to the owners, whensoever they shall call for it, nei∣ther is their calling for it limited to any time. There are great store of Officers that be∣long to this place, all which, have their month∣ly Salaries paid to them for their labour out of the Treasury of the house. It is governed by very able and sufficient men, both Roman Citizens and Courtiers, that make up a Sodality. Who take exact accounts of all the incomes, that no fraud be used by any inferiour officer. The work is indeed a peice of very great Charity, and extreamly beneficial to the mean∣er sort of people; for all such flock thither, not onely of the City, but of the Villages, Farms and Towns all round about, to whom it is very gainful to take up monies upon their pawns before harvest, and then having done their harvest, and made money thereof, to redeem them again.
CHAP. VIII. Of visiting the Prisons, and releiv∣ing poor Prisoners. SInce in a great confluence of people of divers Nations some outrages will still happen; for repressing of them, there are in Rome many publick Prisons, and Judges ap∣pointed to give sentence of punishment upon the guilty. The Judges are the Pope's Vicar, the Chamberlain, the Governor of the City, the Auditor of the Chamber, the Senator of the people, and many others: And whereas Judges exercise judgment many times not in their own persons, but by Deputies; it hap∣pens sometimes that the prisoners are deferred; and so lye longer in fetters than perhaps their cause requires. Now to prevent this mischief there are Visi∣tors appointed every month to visit the pri∣sons; and whom they find there deteined ei∣ther for crimes or for debt, and judge injured, they take care to have dismissed, or to release the punishment inflicted, or to moderate it. It belongs to that Sodality for charity late mentioned, tho they be liberal to the poor also, yet principally to intend this; that by all means they may afford what help they can to the imprisoned. And therefore they de∣pute
some Prelate; whose office it is to be present with the Chamberlains at the visitation of the prisons, and to assist the guilty in their cause to the utmost. And to do it the better, there are adjoined to him, with an honorable Salary, two Proctors; who, seeing and ex∣amining the Process of the Guilty, endeavour to defend them what they can, both by words and writing. The poor prisoners have much need of these. For tho the Apostolick Chamber hath allowed them an Advocate and a Proctor for their de∣fence; yet so great is the number of the causes, that oft times these are not sufficient. This Sodality likewise, besides this diligent defence of the guilty prisoners, do thrice every week furnish bread to those among them that need it; and to the sick send a Physitian, and very largely provide Physick, and all other things necessary for their recovery. In the foregoing Chapter we told you that this Sodality did maintain a Convent of Priests at St. Hierome's: out of this Convent they order some to go every day, and say Mass to the Prisoners, that they may not want that comfort. Besides this extraordinary charity towards the prisoners, which is practised by this So∣dality; There are also in Rome many other persons, which go from door to door begging bread and money for them; among whom are those religious men of the Society of Jesus. Again, that other Sodality of the Florentines,
called the Sodality of Mercy, upon certain festival days in the year make great Dinners for the prisoners. Again, the Preachers often stir up the peo∣ple to give more liberally by telling them, that the money gathered is for the prisoners. By all which good offices some succour is afforded to that most miserable state of men; and the punishment of such wretches is not quite taken off; yet at least in a great measure eased. There is yet another pious Sodality in Rome, for the benefit of poor prisoners, in the Col∣ledge of St. John de Pinea, near the Minerva, consisting of Roman Citizens and Officers of the Court, much honoured by the munificence of Pope Sixtus the fifth. This Sodality every Monday sends certain Visitors into all the prisons, to take the names, the Country, the Cause, the Judge, and the Notary of those that are newly committed; and with great charity and diligence sollicite the Judge and Notary, that each ones cause may be brought to speedy trial. It is a custome likewise of this Sodality twice every year, (That is upon the Feast of the Nativity, and Resurrection of our Lord,) for all the prisoners of debt under a hundred Crowns, freely to pay their Creditors what each one oweth; and delivering them out of prison, to give every one a Crown in their purse, and to send them home to their own houses.
CHAP. IX. Of the plentiful provision of Dowries for poor Maids. IN this charitable work, as in all other, it will be evident, that the common-Parent, Rome, excells all other Cities of the world, by that very great number of Dowries which are there yearly bestowed. Nor is it easy to set down the certain number of them: For altho the Dowries, arising out of certain pious Legacies, be constant and uniform, and the account of them easily cast up; yet besides these there are innumerable other Dowries given by certain Sodalities. Who, because they intend not this kind of charity only, but other sorts also, do therefore set aside for Dowries proportionably to the stock of their yearly Revenues. So that if they have laid out more in other good works, the less remains to be given in Dowries, and if but little in others, almost all is distributed in these. And again, because those particular Dowries, espe∣cially which arise out of legacies, come not always to publick notice: I must content my self to speak of those onely, which I my self have come to know. Upon New-years day, then, that Society of the Holy Name of God, founded in the Church
of St. Mary's Supra Minervam distributes cer∣tain Dowries to young Maidens. On the seventh of January, the Sodality of Inholders give more Dowries. On the fourteenth of January, there is a Legacy to that purpose of St. Hillary's Chappel in the Lateran Church. And on the same day, the Sodality of St. Julian of the Flemmings, give Dowries to the Maids of their Country. On the second of February, the Sodality of the most Holy Sacrament, in the Church of St. Mary's, in Via lata give their Dowries. On the ninth, the Sodality of St. Apol∣lonia give theirs in the Church of the Augu∣stines. On the twenty fifth of March, the Sodality of the Annunciation Supra Minervam exceed herein all the rest, giving Dowries every year that day to above two hundred young Maids. And I suppose this Sodality gave the first be∣ginning to this good work: Wherein they were much helped by Pope Leo the tenth; and likewise Pope Ʋrban the seventh left them his sole heirs. The Dowries, that this Sodality furnisheth, are distributed to these young Maids (every one led up between two noble Matrons cloathed in white, and with their heads veiled) by the Pope himself; who with his own hands de∣livers to each one a Purse, with a Bill in it for the receiving of so much money; and this he doth publickly at the time of high Mass.
Upon the twenty fifth of March, other Dow∣ries are given by the Sodality of Cooks, Panter∣ers and Pasterers, in the Church of St. Vincent and Anastasius. On the first of May, Dowries are bestowed by the Sodality of the Muletiers, in the Church of St. Anthony. On the twelfth day, the foresaid Sodality of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin, by a particular largess, give Dowries to Maids of Siena only. On the nineteenth day, the same Maids of Siena receive their Dowries from the Sodality of St. Katherine of Siena. On the twenty sixth day, the Sodality of Neapolitanes give their Dowries, in the Church of the Holy Ghost, which belongs to that Nation. On the ninth of June, the Sodality of St. James, vulgarly termed Scossacavallo. On the eleventh day, the Sodality of Naza∣rius and Celsus, in a Church of that title. On the ninteenth day, the Sodality of all the Officers, belonging to the Capitol in St. Maries of Ara-caeli. And on the same day, the Sodality of St. Francis de Paula in his Church. On the twenty fourth day, the Sodality of Piety of the Florentines, which differs from that other Sodality of Mercy, of which we shall speak anon. On the same day, the Ligurians or Genouesi give Dowries to the Maids of their Nation,
in the Church of St. John Baptist belonging to them. On the sixth of August, the Sodality of our Saviour in St. Maries Supra Minervam. On the tenth day, the Sodality of St. Bernard in the Church of St. Susanna. On the fifteenth day, which is dedicated to the Assumption of our Blessed Lady, the Soda∣lity of the Confalonery. On the same day, the Sodality of St. Roche, in the Church dedicated to him. On the two and twentieth day, the Sodality of the Holy Rosary, in St. Maries supra Mi∣nervam. On the eighth of September, the feast of the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin, the Society of the Annunciation of the Confalonery, and of Lo∣retto. On the fifteenth day, the Sodality of St. Marcellus, in his Church. On the same, the Sodality of the Butchers, in St. Maries de Quercu. On the twenty ninth day, the Sodality of St. Michael the Arch-angel, in his Church. On the thirtieth day the Sodality of Charity of the Courtiers, in St. Hierome's Church. On the fourth of October, the Sodality of our Saviour, in St. John Lateran. On the same day, the Sodality of the Con∣falonery, and also the Sodality of those of Bo∣nonia, in the Oratory of St. Petronius, be∣longing to them. Likewise the Sodality of the most Holy
Trinity, of the Pilgrims and Convalescents. On the sixth day, the Sodality of the Ro∣sary, in St. Maries supra Minervam. On the fourth of November, the pious Lega∣cies of St. Maries of Ara caeli. On the twelfth day, the Sodality of Taylors, in the Church of St. Homobono. On the sixth of December, the Sodality of St. Nicholas, of the Lorainers, in the Church of St. Lewis. On the eighth day, the Sodality of the Con∣ception of the blessed Virgin, in St. Maries su∣pra Minervam. And on the twenty sixth day, the Sodality of St. Saviour's, in St. John Laterans. To all these may be added, such Dowries as accrue upon particular legacies, whereof the number is very great; and also which are given by other Sodalities, and especially Na∣tional ones, not upon set days Anniversarily, but as the necessity of times and persons may require; All which, if they should be cast up, would amount to a yearly summe of monies, almost incredibly great. This is to be noted, that all the Dowries given at several times are not equal, but some more, some less; for one Sodality gives thirty Crowns, another forty, another fifty, to be distributed to that end. That of the Annun∣ciation of the Blessed Virgin gives eight hun∣dred Crowns, and besides to every one a Robe, and a pair of Chopines. For bestowing these Dowries, this is the
order. A Petition is put up to the Sodality, in the name of the Virgin that is marriage∣able, expressing her condition, age, and habi∣tation. Then there are deputed out of the Seniors of the Sodality certain Visitors; who go all together to see the several petitioners and their lodgings: and if they find them of ho∣nest report among their neighbours, and have a good testimony from their parish Priest; they make relation thereof to the Sodality: And ac∣cordingly are they written down among those that are to receive Dowries. If they find it otherwise, they make no relation at all. Those that are writ down are certified of it; that if they happen to contract themselves in the mean time, they may ingage for so much more to be added to what was promised in Dowry. But if any one of those that are written down, and so appointed to receive a Dowry, behave herself less decently than becomes a Virgin, they presently send her word that she hath for∣feited that favour; and herein are the consti∣tutions very rigorously observed. Now because one of the forementioned Dowries is too little to put off the Maid with; therefore one and the same person may be ad∣mitted at several times to receive many Dow∣ries given by divers Sodalities. So that some come to receive at last no less than four hun∣dred or five hundred Crowns before ever she be given in marriage. Just now while I write this I am told, that a certain pious and rich man is lately dead,
who hath left by Will a certain in some of money, yearly payable, to make up a handsome Dowry for such women of the common Stews that shall be willing to be married. A work well thought upon, and which will not want cer∣tainly a reward sutable to its Charity, from him who leaves nothing unrecompensed. CHAP. X. Concerning publick places appointed for the reception and entertainment of Pilgrims and Strangers of all Nations. NOthing is more sacred, nothing more ac∣ceptable to God, than a pious Hospitali∣ty in entertaining Strangers. The Holy Religion of Christians doth not onely perswade it by way of counsel, but also by precept commands it. Frange esurienti panem tuum, egenos vagosque induc in domum tuam. Isaiah 58.7. Break thy bread to the hungry, and the needy and wandring persons bring into thy house. And it is a matter of high commendation, not onely for private persons, but also for Cities themselves, that there be both private and publick. We shall not speak of the private Hospitali∣ty, because the actions of private men come to be taken notice of onely by few: but we shall here treat of the publick, to show how far in it the City of Rome excells all other Cities of the world.
The first and chiefest of all these publick houses, wherein Strangers of all sorts, come when they will, are curteously and with all kind of Civility entertained, is; That which they call the Hospital of the most Holy Trinity near to Xistus his bridge. This Hospital had its beginning under Pope Paul the third, very mean, (as most other pious inventions) being first set on foot by Crescentius Sylva a Priest of Siena. This holy Priest observing many strangers uncertainly wandring about the City, hired, with the help of some of his friends, to whom he communicated his purpose, a large house and fitted it with beds, and there lodged as many of those strangers as the largeness of the house and the number of the beds could well receive. So charitable a design wanted not assistance: So that in a short time he had built there a fair Church, and purchasing more houses there∣abouts added, them to the Hospital, and Priests for divine service to the Church. This Hospital, or House of publick recep∣tion, is governed by a company or Sodality of Lay-men (that is a lay charge) tho they ad∣mit Clery-men too, which Sodality takes care for all things necessary. And tho there at any time is used Hospitality after a most curteous manner; yet in the year of Jubile, (by reason of the extraordinary multitudes of Strangers then flocking to Rome) this institu∣tion appears in its greatest lustre. For some∣times
in one night there are counted no less than fifteen thousand Guests. Indeed so great a multitude of men cannot be received in the proper lodgings of the house onely, tho very capacious; and therefore others adjoining are always hired for the year of Jubile. And as this, and the other expences put them much in debt, then; so are they freed from that debt again in the other years wherein the layings out are not so excessive. The year of Jubile 1600. being ended, and an account taken of the number of Strangers here in the compass of that year entertained and booked, they were found to be of men four hundred forty four thousand five hundred: and of women twenty five thousand five hun∣dred. The order used in the practice of this chari∣ty is admirable. As soon as the Strangers are arrived, they all have the first night their feet washed, and are refreshed, the women apart by themselves from the men. After thus washing in the Holy year a Sermon is made to them, and then they are conducted to the table; their meat being served-up, as also their feet washed, this first night, usually by honourable persons. The Supper ended, they are conducted to Bed; so without all noise, that it may seem a kind of miracle that so many men of several nations accord so quietly together. The time of their entertainment here is but for three days; tho it be extended further to those who come from far.
To this pious work, because the Revenues of the house are not able to bear so great a charge, many and large charitable contributions are supplyed by others. This is certain and to be admired, that by the providence of God there was never yet wanting to furnish the table in a handsome manner. For such Strangers as are Priests, tho the diet allowed them be the same with the rest; yet in reverence to their order, they have a proper house apart destined to that use. About the year of our Lord 1460. by the confraternity of St. Lucy (between the Capi∣tol and Marcellus's Baths) and because it hath not a Church commodiously adjoining, there is hired by the Sodality, till they can build one of their own, another large house wherein all the poor Priest may be entertained for a whole months space, or longer if need be. And this house, that it may be publickly known, wears this title in the front: Hospitium Pauperum Sacerdotum Peregrinorum. An House of Entertainment for such poor Priests as are Pilgrims, or Strangers. Like to this house there is another of later times, erected by Don John Baptista Vives a Spaniard; who buying a fair Palace standing at the foot of Collis Hortulorum in Rome, de∣signed it for such Strangers, Priests; such as are of those nations, who have no particular Colledge of their own in that City, and for the propagation of the Faith; as the follow∣ing
Inscription on its Frontispeice declares, added in Pope Ʋrban the Eight's Pontificate. Collegium De Propagan. in univer. Mundum Per Sacerdotes Seculares Catholicâ fide Urbani VIII. Anno primo. And altho this Founder dwells himself still in this Palace; yet was he no hindrance to the Priests living there, but conversed with them, and was often on his occasions permitted pre∣sent at their consultations; of which the chief scope is to propose advises, ways, and helps by which the Christian Catholick Religion may best be propagated over all the world. Some of these Priests make no scruple voluntarily to offer themselves to be sent even into the Coun∣tries of Hereticks, or Infidels; either by preach∣ing and good example of life to recover them from their errors; or even by effusion of their own blood to assert the Catholick verity. CHAP. XI. Of National Hospitals for Entertain∣ment of Strangers according to the Na∣tion they are of. BEsides the general places of receit for stran∣gers forementioned, many Nations be∣cause
of the general confluence of them to Rome have here erected houses for the Reception of of their own Countrymen. The first of these in honour to be named is that of the Germans dedicated to the Blessed Virgin under the title de Animâ, or of the Soul. It had its beginning An. Dom. 1350. upon occa∣sion of the Jubilee by some of their own nation; who having no Issue of their own, gave up their houses for the Entertainment of such Strangers subject to the Empire as came to Rome; and built them a Church, tho not very large, in honour of the Blessed Virgin on this condition; That therein Prayers should be made to God by such Strangers as were there to be enter∣tained, for the Founders Souls; and thence it had its name of St. Mary of the Soul. By the munificence and charity of later times this house of entertainment hath been much en∣larged, a fairer add more capacious Church built, and the Revenue thereof much in∣creased. Over it is set a congregation of twelve or fourteen men of the same Nation, by whose pru∣dence and authority it is menaged and laid out in pious uses; especially in Hospitality to poor German Pilgrims, at what time soever they come. For to such there is provided for many days convenient dyet, and lodging. When they depart the town a peice of money do correspon∣dent to the quality of the person is bestowed on them for their voyage. The women have a
house apart, where are constantly maintained in a decent manner such as have been the Daugh∣ters and Wives of Germans. To the Church for divine offices celebrated after a collegiate manner, belong fourteen Priests, a Sacrist, an Organist, four Acolytes. Out of these Priests, who are stiled the Chap∣lains, is chosen one to have a care of the Pil∣grims and to order them, and therefore is na∣med their father: And whereas by a late Rule solemn High Mass is to be said early in the Morning, he is not to dismiss them until they have heard it. There is an house of Hospitality also for the French, dedicated to St. Lewis, with a fair Church adjoining. It is governed by a Con∣gregation of thirty persons, twelve Frenchmen, six Lorainers, six Savoyards, and six Britons; and when any one of them dieth, the congre∣gation chooseth another in his room. All things belonging to the Church are ad∣ministred by twenty six Priests; to whom Car∣dinal Contarello added eight Singers, and an Organist, that on Festivals sing the Service. That Hospitality is ordered by three of the said Priests; whereof one is always the Enter∣tainer, and the other two his Assistants by turns. All Strangers of the French Nation, that come, are received here for three days, and then are dismissed with some gratuity given them, as a pious and charitable Token. Such houses of Hospitality and publick en∣tertainment are here provided for most other.
Nations; namely such distinct houses for the Spaniards, for the Fortugueses, the Lombards, Geroneses, Low-Courtrica, Bohemians, Polonians, Hungerians, Illyrians, Swedes, Goths, and Van∣dals, for the Britons in France, for the English, the Scots, the Indians, and Armenians. The House for the English was begun An. Dom. 1398. by John Shepard an English-man, and then Inhabitant of Rome (upon a sad accident happening upon an English woman straying up and down the City by night) augmented after∣wards by others, who built also close by it a Church, dedicated to the most Holy Trinity. And near about the same time a certain English Merchant built a Church to the honour of St. Edmond King of that Nation (Whose Feast is kept the twentieth of November) and ad∣joined to it a little Hospital for English Mari∣ners, in the Region beyond Tyber, near St. Chrysogonus. In both these places was Hospi∣tality practised, till the defection of that Na∣tion. After which English-men coming very seldome to Rome, Gregory the thirteenth (being Pope) added to that house of Entertaintment a Colledge for that Nation, and adjoined moreover the foresaid Hospital for Mariners, but not yet taking away the former custome of Entertainment. The Scots had in Rome their house of Enter∣tainment in Campo Martio; and near it a Chap∣pel dedicated to St. Andrew, the Patron of that Kingdome; but when it fell off from the Church, there was none left either to ex∣ercise
or to receive Hospitality. Some years after Alexander Seaton, a Nobleman of Scotland, yeilded up, in the name of his Nation, that House and Chappel to the Sodality of Corpus Christi, of the Parochial Church of St. Andrew, near adjoining; upon this condition; That the Sodality should be obliged to receive and entertain poor Strangers of the Scottish Nation; which it willingly undertook, and bound it self by publick Instruments drawn to that pur∣pose, and is ready to perform the promise when any one come to receive the benefit. An house of reception was assigned for the Indians, near St. Stephen's Church in the Vati∣can, by Pope Clement the seventh. What is necessary for their entertainment being sup∣plyed to that house out of the Apostolical Pa∣lace it self, it being thought a very unworthy thing that any kindness should be wanting to a Nation that came to Rome for Devotion sake, from a Country so exceeding far off. And by reason of that great distance there is no time prescribed them for to stay, but if they will always abide here, they shall be always maintained, where they are with all diligence taught the Catholick Faith, that if they re∣turn again to their freinds, they may discover to them too, how they are deceived. Much what in the same manner are the Ar∣menians treated; who after three days Enter∣tainment are asked for their Testimonials, which being produced, if they are found to be of the Grecian Schisme, they are advised to
forsake their Error, and are taught the Latine Rites and Religion, that if they should return again to their freinds they may profess and defend it. There is also near to the Porta Pia, founded by Pope Pius the fourth, an house for the re∣ception and entertainment of Hermits. Most of these houses of Charity formentioned have a Church also adjoining to them, and divine offices administred there by a certain number of Priests. The care of the Hospital and Church is undertaken by a congregation of Lay persons, of the chief of the said Nations, electing others when any dies. The Hospi∣tality used and shewed to men, and women apart for avoiding scandal. The time of their entertainment is ordinarily for three or four days, but some for a longer time, namely for a month or more. CHAP. XII. Of the Roman Charity for Burial of such Dead, as dy extream poor, or are exe∣cuted by the hand of Justice. IT is not to be imagined that Rome, the great advancer of Piety, while she releives Living by so many inventions, like a careful Mother, should leave the Dead without all obsequies. The Sodality of Piety did first
take care to bury in holy ground such dead bodies as they found throughout the streets and passages of Rome, or could recover when drowned in Tyber. But because, as we have seen, they came to be wholly imployed in o∣ther works of Charity, There was erected another Sodality of good people, who were wholly to intend their office, and no other: and for such poor as dying left not wherewith they might be decently and christianly buried, they were to take care to have such bodies carried to their graves with all just rites, with a convenient number of torches, and Priests, and brethren of the Sodality accompanying them, even when they were to be brought from any of the Suburbs or farthest part of the liberty of the City, or out of the fields, and Country not a little way distant: neither could the Win∣ter rains, nor the Summer heats any way re∣tard them in so holy a custome, so that there was still found in this City more than one good Tobias. Add we unto this peice of Charity another of the Florentines, or rather of the whole peo∣ple of Tuscany, which is a work admirable for its extraordinary benignity towards such as are condemned to dye. This Sodality, the day before that execution is to be done upon the condemned person, sends some of their num∣ber, such as are most fit for that important work, and very often those of the prime Gen∣tleman, to the prison wherein the person to be executed is kept, who receives not the sen∣tence
for execution till these be present. He, after this sad sentence given, commonly falls down before them on the gournd, immediate∣ly howling and beating himself almost distract∣ed, and miserable wretch as it were tortured with the thoughts of his punishment denies the fact, beseeches the Judge, and knowing not what to do or say, like a foolish man imputes the justice he hath deserved either to some fate of the Stars; or blasphemously chargeth God with what his sins have brought on him. The Brethren of the Sodality begin with gen∣tle words to perswade the miserable Creature, yea they take him up lovingly in their arms, and embracing him exhort him to patience according to the condition of the party: and with many arguments drawn out of the prin∣ciples of Christian Religion; As that God him∣self for his sake became man, and endured all the miseries of humane nature, and tho he had committed no offence, yet refused not to suffer death upon the Cross; That he was guil∣ty of many and indeed very greivous crimes, such as often deserved death before God, and therefore that he came now to bear the punish∣ment due to so many heinous offences: and so they go on suggesting these and such other things whereby desperate and exulcerated minds are brought to a sounder temper, till at last he come to confess his faults, and, being truly contrite, be reconciled to God. All that whole time, both of the day and night, is spent in divine exhortations and dis∣courses
till the hour of execution come; which when it begins to draw near, Mass is said; and the person to be put to death receives the Com∣munion, wherewith being fortified, he is pre∣sently led forth towards the place of execu∣tion: the Sodality going by two and two before the man that is to dye, (being all covered over head and all down to the very feet with black vestments, or frocks of Buckram, and car∣rying a black Cross) continue reciting Prayers. Those two, that spent the night before with him in calming his mind, take him now in the middle between them, and so supporting him with their shoulders and arms lead him through that part of the City which he is to pass. In the time of suffering they exhort him to constancy with many arguments, showing him that many have past that way to life everlasting. They mind him that the Kingdome of heaven suffers violence, as our Saviour Christ himself mani∣fested both by word and deed; neither do they forsake the poor wretch as long as he hath any breath in his body. Execution being past they return home by two and two in great sadness and silence, but return again in the same order before night to the place of execution, and nobly with their own hands cut that infamous Rope, and so laying the Corps upon a black Bier, carry it to a funeral Solemnity to the Church of the Sodality dedicated to St. John the beheaded.
The Second PART. Of Spiritual Works of CHARITY. CHAP. I. Of initiating of Children in the first Rudi∣ments of Learning, and Holy Myste∣ries of Christian Religion. OF all the Spiritual works of Charity, that may be reduced to a certain Rule, this is the very first: To teach the ignorant found Doctrine, the neglect whereof how much pre∣judicial it is for the Common-wealth, we need no other demonstration than the unhappy ex∣amples of our times. Children are here taught, almost from their very Infancy, the misteries of the Christian and Catholick Faith, in every Parish upon Holy days, with very great care. For it is of much concernment with what liquor you season a new made Vessel, for the scent thereof it re∣tains a long while, if I may not say for ever. Now this work is performed, not so much
by the Rectors themselves of every Church, as by the Colledge of Priests, erected particu∣larly for that purose; to whom is adjoined a Sodality of Lay persons, who being distri∣buted according to parishes contribute their help to assist the Priests. And tho Children may be initiated in the misteries of faith with∣out being taught to read, if they have good memories, and retain what they learn; yet we find it easier to deal with those who can read. Wherefore throughout all the regions of the City there are publick Schools erected, whose masters have their Salaries allowed out of the publick. And not many years since, certain men out of great charity towards poor Boys took this burthen upon themselves, to whom afterwards Clicerius Landrianus, a Gentleman of Lombardy, and Commendator of the Mona∣stery of St. Anthony in Placentia, made no small addition: and at length by the Popes appro∣bation, the Church of St. Pantaleon, near to the Street of the place Navona, in the middle of the City, was assigned to that charitable Colledge of those men forespoken of; and houses thereabouts provided, sufficient to receive above twelve hundred poor Boys. Hither then, from all parts, come every day forenoon, and afternoon, tle Boys of the town of what condtion soever they be, to be taught: And being distributed to several Classes, par∣ticular care is had of them. Here they are taught the first Rudiments both of Learning and Christian Religion, and least when they
are dismissed from School, they should run playing about the town, the same men that have care of them, conduct them all along in troops by two and two to their houses until they see every one at home. This work seems very pious, were it but for this, That those men that undertake it are very far from all ambition, or pride of Spirit, for they deal not but with Children, and these of the meaner sort too: and this also not to teach them the Sciences, but with a great hu∣miliation of themselves, and shunning often∣tation, to know their letters and to read, and such inferiour Documents. This Institute, from the great good that ac∣crues from hence to the Republick, is spread over all Italy: and might very easily be propo∣gated throughout Europe. CHAP. II. Of the greater Schools, and Publick Roman Colledge; and the Ʋniver∣sity called the Sapientia. THose Boys that have been spoken of to have learnt the first Rudiments of Read∣ing and Writing, &c. in those publick Schools, and being for the most part poor mens Chil∣dren are set, as soon as they come to years and strength, to such Mechanical Arts as their
Parents most desire. And some of them whose Parents are better able, or can find some friends and Maecenas's to do for them, are sent to the great School of the City, the Roman Colledge. This Roman Colledge was the Foundation of that never sufficiently to be commended Pope, Gregory the thirteenth; and he committed it to be governed by the Fathers of the Society of Jesus. A Fabrick not yet compleated, but what is done is most magnificent and princely, of so large an extent that it may seem a town rather than one house. Herein are maintained, of the Religious of that Society, Readers and Auditors two hun∣dred These Auditors as they grow perfect in the Sciences, so are preferred to be Readers not in this Colledge only, but throughout all Italy. A convenient yearly Revenue to this pur∣pose was assigned them by that most Holy Pope. The Reading is performed both in the Fore∣noon, and in the Afternoon, there being a wonderful concourse both of Secular and Re∣ligious persons, coming out of their Convents thither, nay out of divers Cities of Italy, by reason of the same of the most renowned Col∣ledge of all the world. There is taught in the first Classes severally the Latine, and the Greek tongues. Unto Grammer is adjoined Rhetorick and Poetry, and what other Arts conduce to hu∣mane Learning.
When this course is gone through, the Scholars may bethink themselves whether they will go on and study those Sciences which are taught there, that is, Philosophy and The∣ology, or rather apply their pains to the Law, and Physick: if they like the former Studies, they are taught all the parts of Philosophy, Natural, Moral, and the Mathematicks; and, if they will proceed still, Theology, either Scholastick or Moral. But if they like better Law, or Physick, they betake themselves to the University of the City called the Sapientia. This University hath a Fabrick of Schools, large and stately, and Professors in them of all Sciences; they have very ample Salaries: But because Philosophy, and Theology, do flourish most among these fathers of the Society of Jesus, the Professors of those Sciences have yet very few Auditors. Yet the Law being distributed into many Classes, as also the Art of Physick, hath Pro∣fessors there of all parts of it, and according∣ly very many Auditors. The Professors here have their Salaries out of the Princes Tributes, assigned to them by the munificence of many Popes, especially Leo the tenth, and Sixtus the fifth. The Government of this place, for what con∣cerns the maintenance thereof, belongs to the Chamberlain, and Clerks of the Camera Apostoli∣ca; and, for what concerns the Professors and Reading, to the Advocates of the consistorial Hall, who have power to make the Auditors
Licentiates and Doctors in the faculty of the Law: but the promoting of Doctors of Di∣vinity is in the power of the Master of the Sacred Palace Apostolical; of whom we shall speak in due place more largely. CHAP. III. Of certain private Colledges in the City of Rome. BEsides these two publick ones, The City of Rome hath many other private Colleges, founded by divers Popes, Cardinals and other Ecclesiastical persons; and the Alumni or Stu∣dents maintained in them, have either Readers of their own, or else at the hour of publick lectures, according to the Statutes of their houses, repair to the foresaid publick Schools; and Lecture being done return home to their own Colledges. I. Of the Roman Seminary. The first of these private Colledges is that which they call the Roman Seminary, which Pope Pius the fourth, according to the De∣crees of the Trent Council instituted and found∣ed, wherein a hundred young men are main∣tained and taught Divinity, according as that Council prescribes. The maintenance, for them
and their Rector, is by a competent yearly Revenue taken out of the Ecclesiastical income of the City of Rome. This Seminary is governed by the Fathers of the Society of Jesus, with exact care taken of the young men. Besides these Alumni, who live upon the publick charge, there are in this Seminary also Gentlemens Sons, called Convictors, to di∣stinguish them from those Alumni: These pay so much a Month more than what is allowed for any one of the Alumni, whom they ex∣ceed likewise in number; for hither come to be brought up in Learning not only the No∣bility and Gentry of Rome, but of all Italy, and many too from the other side of the Alpes, and beyond the Seas. The manner of Education and breeding of young men here is admirable; for they are trained up to Piety as well as Learning. They go to hear their Lecture to the Roman Colledge and every Classis of them; hath one of the Fathers of the Society that calls them to Repetition of those things that they heard from their Readers. Every particular Chamber hath one of the same Society for a Prefect, which is never out of the company of the young men of that Chamber, but is always with them whilst they dine and supp, and walk; and when they go to the Colledge, and when they return. Their Diet is plentiful, and yet frugal. After this same manner live all the other Colledges
which are subject to the Government of the Fathers of the Society, here to be set down in order. II. Of Colledges in Rome built for particular Nations. First, Of the German Colledge. Pope Julius the third founded a Colledge in this City for the German Nation. For whilst Luther raged so in Germany, he thought by the means of the Alumni maintained in this Colledge, who after some time spent in Rome were to return again to their own Country, their seduced Countrymen might be reclaimed to a better understanding. Neither was his hope altogether frustrate, but yet he dying, this Colledge, which was scarce supported by a competent yearly Revenue, began to decay, so that it was almost reduced to nothing. Whereupon Gregory the thirteenth, for the great zeal he had for the house of God, much approved the design of this Colledge, and even founded it again by setling on it a very ample yearly Revenue. The Government hereof, as of all the other Colledges founded by that Pope, is committed to the Religious of the Society of Jesus: and he would have it called the German and Hunga∣rian Colledge, because in it are maintained both Germans and Hungarians, and some Flemings.
The Alumni of this Colledge are about a hundred and fifty, more or less, their diet and clothing convenient, they go, as we said before of the Seminary, at their set hours, to hear the publick Lections in the Roman Colledge. There are among them some young men of the chiefest Gentry in their own Country, who having finished their Studies return home, and do excellent service for the Catholick Faith. The Church belonging to this Colledge is the Pa∣rish Church of St. Apollinary, near to the place Navona; as also the great House adjoining be∣longeth thereto. The Service in the Church is performed by the Alumni, and to it is added a Quire most famous for Musick, for which alone there is allowed yearly the summe of two thousand Gold Crowns. II. Of the English Colledge. The same most Holy Pope Gregory founded Colledges in Rome, for almost all other Na∣tions that fell into Schisme from the true Faith and Religion. As to the English he assigned the Church of the most Holy Trinity, near the Campus Florae, together with the adjoining houses very ample and large, and a sufficient yearly Revenue. III. The Greek Colledge. For the Greeks he built a Colledge from the
Foundation, and a Church dedicated to St. Gregory Nazianzen in the Via Flaminica, and endowed it with a yearly revenue. IV. The Maronites Colledge. For the Maronites, that is for those that to this day remain Christians almost by a kind of Prodigy, inhabiting still Mount Libanon, he built likewise a Church and Colledge at the foot of the Mount Quirinal, from the very Foun∣dations, adding unto it a yearly Revenue: That so they being well instructed in the true Religion, when they return home may be able to inform others in what themselves have so well learnt; and when they are to take that journey, they have a very large Viaticum allow∣ed them by reason of the length of the way. V. The Colledge for Neophytes. For the Neophytes, that is for those that are newly converted from Judaisme, or Athisme to the Christian Faith, he began to build a very large Colledge, as the beginnings thereof do shew, near to the Basilica Agrippa, but being prevented by death could not finish it. Yet afterwards Pope Clement the eighth by a good summe of money contributed much to the set∣ting forward of that work before begun.
VI. The Scots Colledge. For the Scots the same Pope Clement built a Colledge in the Mount Quirinal; and endowed it with a yearly Revenue. All these foresaid Colledges are governed by the Fathers of the Society of Jesus: and the Students in them at the tolling of a Bell go all to the publick Lections in the Roman Colledge, as we said before of the Roman Seminary. VII. The Clementine Colledge for the Illyrians. The holy house of Loretto, famous through∣out all the world, hath ever anciently main∣tained in the City of Rome some young Schol∣lars Illyrians, to be instructed there in Learn∣ing, and especially in Divinity: That return∣ing to their freinds they might inform them in sound Doctrine. These wanted a common Colledge, which the aforesaid Pope Clement (insisting in the piety and zeal of Pope Gregory) built for them, a capacious one in Campo Martio upon the banks of Tyber, calling it after his own name, The Clementine Colledge. He intrusted it to be governed by the Re∣ligious Fathers of the Summascan congregation; who (besides the Illyrians, for each of whom the foresaid holy house of Loretto pays a hun∣dred Crowns a year,) as the Roman Seminary, take the Sons of Gentlemen of any part of Italy for Convictors, whom they restore again to
their parents, well educated in Piety and Learn∣ing. This Colledge hath Readers of its own foundation both in Grammer, Rhetorick, Philo∣sophy and Theology. And therefore the Alumni thereof frequent not the publick Roman College as the Alumni of other Colledges do. VIII. Of two particular Colledges, founded by two Cardinals in their own Palaces. Dominicus of Capranica was a noble Roman, and made Cardinal by Pope Martin the fifth. But a very little before his death he turned his own Palace into a Colledge, calling it Collegium Capranicum after his own name, not far from Basilica Agrippa. In this Colledge are maintained thirty and two young men, who are to study Divinity, or Law, and not to leave the house unless they are Doctors. The Government of this Colledge he order∣ed to belong to the Sodality of our Saviour ad Sancta Sanctorum, but the Election of the Schol∣lars to be in the power of many and divers. Each Region of the City elects or presents one, but the Regions, Montium Columnae, Trivii, Campi Martis & Pineae, present two. The Family of the Colonni six, the Family of the Capranicans seven, the Arch-Bishop of Firma, and the Bishop of Ancona, and Fano, one a peice. And tho, as I said, the whole government of this Colledge belong to the forementioned So∣dality, yet they chose thirteen of their own
number, men of great integrity, to whom is committed the particular care thereof, and the right of approving persons elected and pre∣sented, or if they be found unworthy, to reject them: For none are admitted but such as are ingenious, and well given. Cardinal Stephen Nardino of Forly, Arch-Bishop of Milan, seems to have emulated Cardi∣nal Dominick in this work. For accordingly in imitation of him he also founded a like Colledge in his own Palace, and put it, and the govern∣ment of the Schollars therein, under the same Sodality of our Saviour, ad Sancta Sanctorum: to which Sodality therefore he left many great Legacies. These two Colledges have each of them their Rectors, and other necessary Officers, but yet no Preceptors or Readers, but every day the Students of them go at their hours to hear the Lections at the publick places of the City, that is, either the Sapientia, or the Roman Col∣ledge. IX. Of the Colledge for Orphans. This Colledge was founded and built by Antonio Maria Cardinal Salviato, to which, by particular concession of the Pope, was a∣lotted the parish Church of St. Maries in A∣quiro, whose title when the foresaid Cardinal had obtained, there was then Rector of that parish Church a good pious man, who had been bereft of his Parents in his Childhood:
and so, having had experience what a miserable and desolate condition of life that is, earnestly be sought the Cardinal that he would repair that antient Church then falling to decay, and think of relieving poor Orphans. The Cardinal took the Church quite down, and in its place built up another from the foundation, adding to it an Hospital, and a Colledge, to which he presently assigned ten thousand gold Crowns; and afterwards by Will left to it a Farm of the value in those days of twenty thousand gold Crowns. Altho the Colledge and the Hospital be con∣tained both within one Circuit, yet they have no Entercourse one with another, but each hath its own Rectors and Offices. The Colledge hath no determinate number of Alumni, but it is still filled up out of the Hospital, by such youths as are found there of better disposition and wit, and of these many are afterwards preferred to Prelates, Noblemen, yea to Cardinals themselves to be their Chaplains, or Secretaries, or Assistants in their Studies, in all which offices they com∣mendably show of what importance it is to have a good education. X Of the Colledge Matthaei, or St. Hierome's Colledge. Hieronomo Matthaei being of a very rich Fa∣mily in Rome, and then made Clerk of the Camera Apostolica, and next Auditor of the
same Camera, and at last advanced into the number of Cardinals by Pope Sixtus Quintus, founded a Colledge and dedicated it to the Saint of his own name. He left no certain yearly Revenue to it, but injoyned his Heirs and their Successors forever to supply to that Colledge all things necessary for the mainte∣nance of the Alumni thereof, which they faith∣fully execute. This Colledge hath Readers of its own, both in Philosophy and Theology. XI. Palotta's Colledge. Evangelista Palotta of Picenum, named Car∣dinal Cusentinus by Sixtus Quintus, founded a Colledge of twelve young men, who were to study Theology in his own house; and dying left the most Reverend John Baptista Palotta, his brothers Son, his Heir, a man of great in∣tegrity and famous for an Embassy into Por∣tugal from Pope Ʋrban the eighth: To him he committed the care of this Colledge. Peter Corso Protonotary Apostolick, and Re∣ferendary of either Signature, left for his sole Heir the Sodality of the Holy Ghost of the Sicilians on this side Pharos: on whom he laid a charge, That they should found a Colledge for their Countrymen: So much the Stone saith upon his Sepulchre.
XII. Cardinal Gymnasius's Colledge. Dominick Cardinal Gymnasius founded a Colledge in his house altogether like this, and himself still living is head of it, prescribing the Laws and the number of the Alumni. XIII. Of several Religious Houses having Readers and Professors after the manner of Colledges. Now besides all these foresaid Colledges there are in Rome many Convents both of Monks and Mendicant Friers, wherein to all of those Orders severally are dayly read most accurate Lections by the chiefest and most learned Professors in Philosophy and Theol∣ogy. As To the Benedictines at St. Calistus. To the Vallumbrosians at St. Praxedes. To the Dominicans at St. Maries Supra Mi∣nervam. To the Friers Minors observantines in Ara caeli. And so to others, each in their own Convent, whereof it would be too tedious to give an exact Catalogue. And tho, these Lections and Studies are not perpetual in these places, but may upon occasion be removed at the pleasure of the Superiors, yet this happens very sel∣dome; but where once a course of Studies and Arts is introduced, it is still preserved as it were a due to that Convent.
XIV. St. Bonaventure's Colledge of Minor Conventuals. Pope Sixtus Quintus in the Convent of the twelve Apostles hath sounded a Colledge for the Minors Conventuals, under the title of St. Bonaventure, which is not subject to be remo∣ved at all, for he hath annexed to it a very fair yearly Revenue for the maintenance of a good number of Professors of the same order, among whom there are learned men not a few. XV. Of the Colledge for Catechumeni. The City of Rome, the supreme Seat for the Christian Faith, ought not to be wanting in providing an honorable house of Reception for all those who forsaking Baal, or turning from being Jews, Saracens, Musulmans, or any other prophane Sects in the world, fly to her for succour. For these there is appointed a place at the foot of the Capitol, and a Church there dedi∣cated to St. John Baptist. The house is very large, and in it are received in several quarters such men and women who are come over hap∣pily to the Service of the true God. They are first taught the sacred Principles and Mysteries of the Christian Faith, then brought to be baptized, and when baptized if they be young people, and adult, and can easily get their living, they are dismissed. If they
be old persons they are retained, if Children they are there educated till they be fit for la∣bour; and Girls if they come thither Infants with their Parents, they are both maintained so long together till they want no Nurse, for then they are led away to a Monastery of Fe∣male Catechumens near to Nerva his Forum; where they are educated in all Piety: and grown marriageable, are either provided with Husbands, or, if they had rather, live Nuns in the same Monastery under the Rule of St. Do∣minick. Both these houses are under the go∣vernment of a Sodality of grave men, Citizens and Priests, but the maintenance is supplyed by the Rectors of the Church of our Lady in Montibus, of which in its place. The Protector to both is the same Cardinal of great integrity and learning, who alone by the Popes Bull is the competent Judge of the Catechumeni. CHAP. IV. Of publick Sermons and Preaching of the Word of God in Rome. ALtho, in the Advent before the Nativity of Christ our Lord, and in that antient time of fasting in the Church of God, the Lent before his Resurrection from the Dead, Sermons are most frequent, the word of God being
then preached every day in most Convents, Collegiate and Patriarchal Churches, at which times come abroad great and learned Orators most powerful in preaching; yet for the rest of the year the Pulpits are not silent, for on every Festival there are Sermons at the Au∣gustines, at the Dominicans, Servites, Carme∣lites, Jesuites, and other Mendicants in the Morn∣ings after Mass, and in the Afternoons after Vespers: and the same is done likewise in many Colledges of Secular Priests, which occasions a very great increase of spiritual improve∣ments. There is in Rome a congregation of pious men, termed from their praying Oratorians, whose Founder was Bishop Philip Neri, now registred in the Catalogue of Saints by Pope Gregory the fifteenth: To these Gregory the thirteenth assigned a little Church called St. Maries in Vallicella, which being pulled down was built again into a larger and statelier Fa∣brick, for the most part by the Caesii, as we shall declare anon. The Institute of this congrega∣tion is to meet every day at set hours to spend them in Prayer, both vocal and mental, where are present a very great number of Secular per∣sons. The time of Prayer being ended, there is proposed by any one of the company some short point tending to the edification of their neighbour. From thence one of the Congre∣gation takes occasion to discourse by way of Sermon for half an hour, that done another steps up, and doth the like, and after him an∣other
even to four, so that every day at divers times you may have no less than four divine discourses or Sermons, all much con∣ducing to Christian perfection. These are made in the Church. But besides these there are o∣thers twice a week, Mondaies and Fridaies, made in the Oratory, different from the former both in argument and design. For first the Litanies are said, next a Quire of Musick con∣sisting of most sweet melody of voices, and ad∣mirable harmony of musical instruments, where∣by Praises are sung to God; then follows a Sermon, whereby all that are present are in∣vited to chastise themselves, at which time the lights are removed, and the company, be∣ing onely men, begin to chastise their bare backs, some with Cords, some with other kind of Whips, in good earnest, during which time the Psalm, Miserere mei Deus, is recited with a loud voice; which being ended, sign is given of ceasing, and every one putting on his Doublet again returns to his place; the lights are brought in, and after most solemn Musick all are dismissed. This custome of praying, chastising, preach∣ing, conferring and singing, is used in many other confraternities and sodalities of Lay-men. It is observed at St. John Baptist in Campo Martio near St. Silvesters, on Mondaies, Wednes∣daies and Fridaies. On Tuesdaies in the Congregation of So∣masca at St. Blases in Mount Citerius. On Thursday at the Clarks regular of St. Paul in Antoninus's Forum.
On Saturdaies at St. Maries de Plancta. And on the same day, and on the Sundaies, at the Jesuites in the Oratory of the congregation of Noblemen, where meet not only Lay-men of the chiefest Nobility, but also the greatest Prelates of the Court, even the most eminent Cardinals of the Roman Church. And that the ordinary sort of Citizens, who get their maintenance by their handicrafts, may not be deprived of their portion in these Spi∣ritual Reflections and Sermons; there is preach∣ing for them by the Fathers of the same Society on every Sunday and Holiday in the Roman Colledge; at what time all other Lections cease. Besides in the same Colledge there is a congregation of Scholars of the better sort that frequent that Colledge devoted to the blessed Virgins Annuntiation, these being pro∣posed as Examples to the rest. And because, besides these Gentlemen, Mer∣chants and Tradesmen, there is a great mul∣titude of common country people that flock to Rome from all the places round about ad∣joining, upon all Holidays; therefore the Je∣suites have a fatherly care of them also, and preach to them the word of God, where they stand assembled in the publick Streets and Market places of the City, thereby working upon them to free them from their natural rudeness, and breed in them a deeper sence of piety and devotion. Wherefore in those Ser∣mons to the vulgar they use such fervour of Spirit, and such incitements to repentance,
that you shall see great companies of them im∣mediately after Sermon ended following the Preacher into some Church, and there pre∣sently to confess their sins to a Priest ready for that purpose, and with due preparation (more than usually is found in such people) to the great comfort of their Souls to come and receive the Holy Communion, which is there delivered to them in great charity: and com∣monly when they are to depart, to every one is given some little present as a token of Chri∣stian Charity. For a Close, and as it were a Corolary to this Chapter, we will crown it with the Insti∣tute of the Sodality of the Rosary of the blessed Virgin; which to so great benefit of Souls was erected in the Church of St. Maries Supra Mi∣nervam. The Brethren of this Sodality meet still upon the first Sunday of every month, and having recited first the prayers of the Rosary go round the Church with tapers in their hands, as the Orthodox always did, using the solemn Litanies. That done, one of the Re∣ligious of that Convent makes a learned and devout Sermon to those of the Brother-hood and the rest of the people there present, in the praise of the blessed Virgin; which ended they return to their Prayers and so depart. This is done (only the Litany omitted) thrice in every week to the great edification, of the Brethren themselves; and of all the people. For tho Prayers may be said at home, yet sure∣ly
not so well as in the Church, where are so many Fathers; and where so great a cry, aug∣mented much by a happy conjunction, is sent up to Almighty God. For thou obtainest not thy suit so easily (saith St. Chrysostome) when thou prayest alone, as when in com∣pany with thy Brethren; for in this is some∣thing more viz. a concord, a conspiring, an union of love and charity, and above all the intercession of the Priests; for to this end are the Priests set over the people: That the peoples supplications, which are but weak and faint, climbing about theirs which are stron∣ger may together with them be carried up into Heaven. This holy Institute hath had many Privi∣ledges and Indulgences granted unto it by several Popes. CHAP. V. Concerning certain Religious Com-promi∣sers of Strifes, Deciders of Law-Cases, and just Defenders of right Pleas. ALtho by all laws it be permitted by every one to use all good means to defend him∣self and his rights, yet because that love, which we carry towards every thing that is our own, doth still flatter us so much, that we will have our opinion for the most part to be preferred
before the judgment of all others whatsoever; it often falls out that in this kind we run into many and gross errors. Many good men have set themselves to prevent these Errors; but especially and more accurately those of the Oratory, who, as soon as they understand any persons to disagree, make it their business to find out the cause and the original of the dis∣cord: which being discovered they use all their arguments that may exhort, and in a manner compel the dissenting parties to terms of agree∣ment. There is in the common-wealth very great use of this kind of perswasion to union, for what is more desirable than the Concord of Subjects, it being the States safest Establish∣ment. But if the Controversy beget a Law-suit, and come into the Court, and of the two parties contending one be so poor as that he be unable to maintain the Law-suit, he is releived by a Sodality newly erected among the Clarks Re∣gulars of St. Paul in Antoninus his Forum. This Sodality consists of Advocates and Proctors, who meet every Thursday, and there diligently examine the Petitions exhibited unto them con∣taining the cases of such Suits and Controver∣sies. When they find the cause good, they de∣clare it so to the Petitioner, and promise that they will undertake the prosecution thereof in the Court; and they as faithfully perform their promise, defending the cause undertaken most stifly. But if they find it not good, they per∣swade
seriously the party to leave off his Suit which he hath begun. The like charitable and just defence of causes is undertaken by another and far ancienter Colledge of Proctors of the Court, called the Colledge of St. Eustacius, out of which the poor have their Proctors assigned to follow their causes. Lastly the Tribunal it self of the sacred Rota, if any one plead Poverty, doth allot him a Proctor and Advocates, and appoint his writings to be drawn up by the Actu∣ary without any fees; least his poverty should make him forsake his cause and so suffer in his Right. CHAP. VI. Of visiting sick and weak persons, and the administring of Spiritual Refection to the Devout while they are dying. THE Congregation of the Cratorians so often mentioned, as they are still in ex∣ercise of all works of Christian Piety: so to visit the sick and assist them by all kind of services tho never so mean, or, if they find them ex∣treamly weak, to prepare them to dye well, is one of those employments which they chiefly intend, not only going to the publick Hospi∣tal, but very frequently to private houses also
to serve the sick in what they need, and with∣all to comfort them with solid and devout discourses. But because this Congregation, looking to many other things also, cannot solely and wholly apply it self to this, which yet amongst Christians may deservedly be accounted the chiefest, since the salvation of Souls, which all Christians so greatly value, depends on dying well: Camillus de Lellis a Priest of the Diocess of Theate instituted a Congregation, whose proper office should be to take care for the sick, and never to leave them until they either grew well, or made a happy end in our Lord. The Brethren of this Institute do execute this charge with great care and charity to the utmost of their power. For being called to any sick person they go not from him, unless it be at such times when they return home to refresh themselves at their meals, and then also others first come in, and stay in their place, till the former return again to dismiss them. There is a manifold and singular good use of these Brethren for the sick. For altho the first design of them was to dispose such as were dying to a vertuous and christian departure, yet their perpetual conversation with sick per∣sons conduceth very much to their recoveries. For by dayly experience they become skilful, and know better than Physitians themselves when and what and in what quantity meats and drinks are to be given to the sick, which is none of the least necessary Praecognitums in
the Art of Physick. Again they put the weak in mind, that, if God should please to take them out of this world, they dispose by their last Will and Testament of their temporal goods according to right and equity; provided al∣ways that they think not of leaving them any thing, which to ask they decline, so as no∣thing more. Lastly, they procure with all diligence that such as are dying be fortified with the most Holy Sacraments of the Church. These Brethren have their Convent at St. Mary Magdalen's, near the Pantheon, or the Temple built by Agrippa. An Institute it is extreamly necessary and of great Charity, and now almost spread over all Italy. Those that are professed of this or∣der wear on the right side of their breast a very great Cross of Cloth of a dusky colour, representing the wood of the Cross. The rea∣son of it is, they say, a certain Vision which the Founder s Mother had, who being great seemed to her self to bring forth a Man child so marked, and falling into labour was de∣livered of Camillus.
CHAP. VII. Touching the indefatigable Administration of the Sacraments, Penance, and the Eucharist. NOT only those that are dying are to be exhorted unto penitence, but the well also, since nothing is more uncertain than the health of the body, which not only dayly, but hourly changes: so fickle and unconstant, that he whom we saw but now in great bodily strength, and thought he had an age yet more to live, is instantly carryed out to be buryed. This man, while he is fighting, his very Arms betray him, another a Wall falls upon; one tumbling out of his Coach sends out his Soul away in post hast; another the Physitian lays asleep, and the Medicine which should heal him, kils him. If we consider it right, there is no path so much beaten as that from life to death. Christians therefore should take spe∣cial care to make good that in deed which they profess in belief: that is by true contrition of heart to procure the Grace of Almighty God, to whom nothing is more pleasing, no∣thing more acceptable than this. Wherefore the frequent use of this Sacra∣ment of Penance in the City of Rome is very admirable.
For, besides that in every parish Church the Priest by his office is bound to administer that Sacrament to all his Parishioners, All Regular and Religious people also practice it dayly in their Convents, as the Augustines, the Do∣minicans, Franciscans, Servites, and other Men∣dicants: whose Churches we see well filled with confessional Chairs. But a particular care in this kind is taken by those Priests especially, who are of the Society of Jesus, and those also of the Congregation of the Oratory. For among these you may see every festival day an infinite num∣ber of people confessing their sins to the Priests, and receiving the Holy Communion with great Devotion. These Sodalities or Confraternities, which we have said are introduced by the Jesuites, the Oratorians, or by other Clerks Regular: and indeed all other Confraternities of Lay-men whatsoever (of which we shall speak in the Third Part) have their principal designs; That the Brethren of each respectively do at least once every month confess their sins to the Priest, and come to the Table of Christs most holy Body. It is a late invention of the Jesuites to admit a free and promiscuous concourse of all sorts of people to the receiving of the Blessed Sa∣crament; this they call a General Communion, wherein such multitudes have met, that some∣times no less than thirty thousand persons have been found to have been refreshed by them with this Spiritual Banquet in one and the
same day. An Institute it is of all others most sa∣cred, and now spread into several places; for in divers Cities it is practised once a month, and may be beneficial in all Churches. And that so signal a work of Piety may not grow chargeable to any parishes, there is a particular Sodality in Rome consisting of Lay-men, which have care of it; who bountifully supply the Wax-candles, and all other costs and charges. And for Priests to receive Confessions and give Absolutions there come together some out of all orders, and he that manageth this busi∣ness chiefly is one Peter Garavita, a profest Father, and Priest of the Society of Jesus. And that you may not imagine, that only Citizens and Inhabitants of Rome are invited to so an effectual means of Devotion, as are Confession and Communion: for the benefit of Strangers also, and several Nations that live far off, there are established by the Popes Authority three Colleges of Penitentiaries, respectively adjoining to the three Patriarchal Churches in this City, wherein are maintained Priests skilled in all languages, and enabled by special authority from the Pope to absolve the sins of such Penitents. 1. At St. John Lateran these Penitentiaries are of the order of the Friers Minors Obser∣vantines of St. Francis. 2. At St. Peter's in the Vatican these Peni∣tentiaries are Jesuites. 3. At St. Maries of the Manger, which they vulgarly call St. Maria major, are the Do∣minicans.
And that every one may find easily where the Penitentiary sits, that is, of his Country and Language; There is written over their Seats in great Characters the name of the tongue wherein he hears Confessions. viz. The Peni∣tentiary for the French tongue. The Peniten∣tiary for the English tongue, and so for the rest. CHAP. VIII. Of the publick and common Suffrages for the Dead. NOW we come to shew the world the Pie∣ty or Charity used in Rome toward the deceased for freeing from the pains of Pur∣gatory such as are detained therein according to the antient Prayer made for them, con∣tained in the holy Canon of the Mass. Memento Domine Famulorum tuorum qui nos Praecesserunt cum signo fidei, & dormiunt in somno pacis, ipsis Domine locum refrigerii, lucis & pa∣vis ut indulge as deprecamur. This memory of such as sleep in Christ the City of Rome shows by many arguments that she preserves. For all those foresaid Congregations or Sodalities, when any of their Brethren decease, do upon set days recite for them the Prayers prescribed by the Church of God commonly called the Office for the Dead.
And least these, which are not Members of any Sodality, should be destitute of the suffra∣ges of such Prayers: There is established in Rome, ever since the year 1582. in the parish Church of St. Blase, in the Via Julia, a Soda∣lity of Lay persons, called the Sodality of the Suffrage. Because the onely intent of it is to be imployed in the Suffrages for the Dead. In the foresaid Church are maintained seven Priests, that every day say Mass for those Souls of the faithful, who dye in the grace of God, but are kept from his presence in Purgatory till they are purged from such spots as they contracted here. The Brethren of that Soda∣lity, tho Lay persons, do yet every Festival recite the foresaid Psalter of the Church for the dead; and, during the whole octave of the Commemoration of the dead, do every day say solemn Litanies, and make Processions from their Oratory, to the Church of St. Gre∣gory, and to other principal Churches in the City. And likewise very often in the year do they repeat the prayers of forty hours; nor do they omit any thing prescribed by the Church that may any way serve towards the expiation of those Souls. But on the Holy day set for the Commemo∣ration of the Dead, which is next after the Calends of November, and some days follow∣ing, there is a great concourse of all sorts of people to the aforesaid Church of St. Gregory, where Prayers and Oblations are made for the
Dead with so much chearful Piety, as shews that the memory of the dead is never oblite∣rated among the Romans. In this sort of Charity likewise those three Patriarchal Churches mentioned above (viz. That of St. John Lateran, St. Peter's in the Vatican, and St. Maries at the Manger) have this laudable custome, to send the next day after the Commemoration of the Dead no small number of Priests with Torches, and other necessaries for divine Service, to every parish Church in the City, there to sing the solemn Mass for all the dead that respectively in each lye buried: because the parish Priest alone is not able of himself to discharge that peice of Charity.
The Third PART. Containing the General Devotion towards GOD. CHAP. I. Of the publick Devotion of the Pope, and Cardinals and People of Rome, in observing Holy Festivals and Visiting Churches. FIrst on all the chief Feasts of the year the Pope is publickly present together with the Cardinals at Morning and Evening Prayer; and in the greater Solemnities himself sings Mass: At which Masses there is always a Ser∣mon in Latine, unfolding the Gospel appoint∣ed by the Church for that day. In Advent upon every Wednesday, and in Lent upon every Friday, there Preaches before the Pope and Cardinals some Religious Person, learned and eloquent; who with great Power, and Christian liberty reprehends the vices of the greatest Prelates, if any such are found faulty.
On the day of our Lord's Supper, that is Maundy-Thursday, the Pope with his own hands (following the example of our Saviour) doth publickly wash the feet of twelve poor men; and after wipe them with a Towel, and then giving them a dinner, in which he himself serves at the Table, suffers them not to de∣part till they have received every one a Gar∣ment, and a summe of Money. On the Feast of Corpus Christi the Pope with great Devotion carrieth in Procession the Blessed Sacrament about a great part of the Borgo. On Ash-Wednesday he introduceth the So∣lemnity of Stations at St. Sabinas, in his own person. And in all these Solemnities the Car∣dinals do perpetually accompany him. On the Feast of the Resurrection and Nativity of our Lord, both the Pope and the Cardinals administer with their own hands the Blessed Body of our Lord to all of the Court rightly prepared. The Pope also and Cardinals do often visit, as their employments permit, divers Churches of the City? Here also we must not forget that great order of extraordinary Piety, which Pope Clement the eighth instituted and transmitted to his Successors. For that a holy Guard of men devoutly praying might never cease, no not for the least moment of time in this City of Rome: He ordained that Prayers for forty hours continuance should be still observed
in a successive order throughout all the Churches of the City. This takes its beginning for the first forty hours in the Popes own Chappel, then passeth into St. Peter's, next into St. John Lateran's, and so in order into all the Collegiate Churches of the City. The order and manner of these Prayers, is thus. The Blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist, be∣set with great company of Torches and Ta∣pers, is publickly exposed over the Altar; immediately one of that College kneels before that Altar, most intent to his Prayer for the space of an hour, and that hour ended, another succeeds him doing the like, and then another, him; People of all sorts and condition, during the same time, night and day coming in by turns, and making their particular private Prayers there until full forty hours are run out; these finished, the devotion is transferred to another College for the same time, and after∣wards to another, until it returns as at first to the Popes Chappel again. This Solemnity of the forty hours Devo∣tion is celebrated in the most decent sacred and silent manner as is possible. The Popes of Rome have also this custome, for the averting of Wars between Christian Princes, and upon other grand occasions, to in∣stitute solemn Supplications, Litanies and Pro∣cessions, wherein themselves are assistant, go∣ing on foot a great part of the Town, as from their own Palace unto St. Mary Major, or
some other Church of the City: The whole Body of the Clergy preceding, and singing the Litanies with an exceeding great Devotion. The Piety also of the people of Rome as eminently appears in observing Festival days, to the honour of God, and also his Martyrs and Saints; in which Rome far exceeds all other places. There is scarce any one in the number of all the Saints that hath not some Church, or Chappel dedicated to his name in this City. And upon the Anniversary Feast it is adorned with handsome furniture, and visited in great devotion, by an infinite multitude of people, especially by the chief and noble persons, men and women, and liberally supplyed with gifts and presents. During the time of Lent-Fast there are al∣ways observed in some Church or other by the faithful people, certain holy Stations out of antient Tradition; which Stations are held in great veneration, and celebrated by a great concourse of all sorts of People in a solemn manner. And tho the Worship of God be still con∣tinued in all times, yet the Solemnity of visi∣ting the Churches is so great in the year of Jubile; and so numerous the devout people that perform it, as will hardly find belief. I my self (saith the Author) lately saw in the be∣ginning of this year of Jubile 1625. more than once above forty thousand persons upon one day devoutly going from Church to Church in very great fervour of Spirit, and in comely
order: not one discomposed, not one but what appeared with that modesty which be∣comes a Christian. There are heard no prophane pratlings among them, no wanton glances cast to and fro; but every one having God present in his mind, and his eyes fixed on the ground he walks upon, either recites his Rosary, or directs either mental or vocal Prayers, with great affection to Almighty God. That which I most won∣dered at, in this matter, was, That all that great multitude consisted of the people of Rome (for in that beginning of the year Strangers were not yet come thither:) They as it were endeavouring to give good example, and to be Leaders to all others in the paths of Piety. CHAP. II. Of the Patriarchal, Collegiate, and Parish Churches in Rome. There are three chief and Patriarchal Churches in this City; The first whereof is St. John's in Lateran, the Episcopal See of Rome; altho by reason of the unwholsomness of the air thereabouts, and for greater secu∣rity to the Popes, their habitation hath now for many years since been translated from thence to St. Peter's in the Vatican, where the Palace is grown as big as a little City. This Church
hath for its Founder Constantine the Great; tho, by its age falling into decay, it hath been often repaired by several Popes. The second Patriarchal Church is that of St. Peter's in the Vatican. This also originally was built by Constantine the Great; but since levelled with the ground, and another in its place built far more magnificent. The third Patriarchal Church is that of St. Maries ad Presaepe, which is also called ad Nives, because, by a miracle of Snow falling there in August, it was built in that place by John Pa∣tricius by intimation of Pope Liberius. In all these three Churches there is dayly celebrated the Holy office of the Mass, and the Canonical hours sung upon Festivals with Mu∣sick and the Organs, to the praise and honour of Almighty God, the Bestower of all good things. There are also in this City twelve more fa∣mous Collegiate Churches of Secular Priests. In all which, or in the most part, Praises are sung to God always, night and day, and cano∣nical hours observed, with a Quire and Musick in some Festivals. There are in Rome also sixteen other Churches Collegiate of Secular Preists, which are either National Churches, or peculiar to some So∣dalities: Of National Collegiate Churches e∣leven; of Sodalities five. In all which are ob∣served likewise and sung dayly the canonical hours, and at Evening Lauds to the Blessed Virgin; and on Festival days they have their Musick, and each Church is furnished with a sufficient number of Priests.
There are also in Rome eighty eight parish Churches, some of the Collegiate Churches being also Parochial. The Rectors of which are by their office bound to celebrate the Holy Mass for their Parishioners every day, to be ready to baptize such as need it, and to give the Holy Commu∣nion to all desiring it. The Canons of the Church having also prescribed to Lay persons that they at least once in the year, viz. at the Feast of the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, do receive the Communion in their own parish Church; and whosoever faileth herein in Rome is publickly separated from the Com∣munion of the faithful, at the Festival of St. Bartholomew. Whereupon every year a most exact account is taken of the number of all the Inhabitants of this City. The Rectors of these Parishes make up an University among themselves, and often meet and have excellent discourses about such things as belong to the care of Souls: and sometimes they propose certain Theses in Theology to be publickly disputed. To these Rectors also belongs the care of the House of entertainment for poor Stranger-Priests mentioned before, Chapter the tenth. These Rectors create an Officer, whom they call Primicerius. This man to those who are to be entertained in that house gives a Ticket, directed to the Keeper thereof; who having read the Contents without delay re∣ceives courteously the Bringers of it.
CHAP. III. Of the many Monasteries in Rome of Re∣ligious men and women, reciting the ca∣nonical hours, and offering up other Hymns and Lauds to God night and day: and the Priests at due times celebrating the Holy Mass. OF Monks in Italy there be twelve Congre∣gations, which commonly are called Gaudentes, because their Institute permits them to enjoy a yearly Revenue. These are distin∣guished by some title, taken either from their Founder, or from the place where they first founded. And each sort of them have their several, and very fair, Monasteries in Rome. [Of these enjoying Lands and Rents the Author numbers twenty eight Convents in the City of Rome. Of Mendicants, whose institute permits them to enjoy no yearly Revenue, the Author num∣bers to be in Rome Convents in all fifty one.] The Institution of those Societies are various; Some taking the three Vows of 1. Poverty [i. e. none having any Propriety, but all their means in common] and 2. Obedience to the commands of a Superior [i. e. in all things lawful] and 3. of Chastity or Celibacy. Others living together without taking
such vows, and at liberty to relinquish the Society when they please, only obliged during their stay to obey and conform to the orders thereof. Some keeping a solemn Quire for celebrating the divine Service; others, hin∣dred by several charitable offices to their neigh∣bour, omitting it, and performing their De∣votions apart. The chief ends also and designs of their In∣stitution are different. Some more dedica∣ted to retirement, continual Mortifications as to the pleasures and contents of this life [i. e. so far as health permits it] in sleep, diet, clothes, bed, lodging, company, discourse &c. (the way to be weaned from all affection to any thing in this world) accustoming themselves to night-watching, solitude, abstinence from pleasant meat, or drink, frequent fasting, si∣lence, clausure, not receiving visits from kin∣dred or freinds, hair-cloth, hard lodging, nar∣row cells, and spending most of their time ei∣ther in the publick praises of God by night and day in the Quire, or in private Prayer or contemplation in their cells. Others more designing an active life, and the abounding in various works of Charity toward their neigh∣bour, whose purposes and employments are such as these. For studying Divinity in or∣der to the confutation and conversion of He∣reticks. For hearing Confessions, Preach∣ing, and administring the Sacraments, being assistant herein to the Secular Clergy and Parish Priests, where these wanting their help. Or,
For assisting the Bishop also in his govern∣ment, and being sent and employed where the necessities of his Diocess or Province seem to require it: taking onely a single vow of Obedi∣ence [i. e. in licitis] to him, as the Oblates of St. Ambrose founded by St. Carolo Borromeo. Again; For directing men in making their Spiritual Exercises, and in all cases that con∣cern their Conscience, as to good or evil. For giving Spiritual Exercises to such as de∣sire Ordination into the Priesthood, and in∣structing them in the duties and ceremonies of their office. For the Education of youth in sound Doctrine and Christian Piety, and in humane Learning, and the Sciences in order thereto. For reading Divinity to those young Students that are designed for the Clergy. For expounding the Catechisme or Chri∣stian Doctrine to the more ignorant, to Chil∣dren, to the poor. For Missions to forlorn Villages, and places full of ignorance and de∣stitute of Spiritual Instructors, but this with the Bishops Licence: Or Missions also into re∣moter Countries for converting Infidels and Heathens to the Catholick Faith. For the Education of Forreign youths, who after being well instructed in the Catholick Religion, may return into their own Countries Heathen, or Heretical, for the same Service. For the Redemption of Captives. For the govern∣ing of Hospitals; or tending on the sick there; or also tending on those labouring under in∣fectious diseases. For assisting, when called
for, the Agonizants, such as are dying; and preparing them for a happy end. For com∣pounding and preparing several sorts of Medi∣cines for the sick. Lastly, For being the Superintendents and Overseers of the Chari∣ties and Benefactions of others of what kind soever they be, Colleges, Seminaries, Hospi∣tals, Schools, &c. persons so qualified as they are [i. e. single and under a Vow of Poverty and Obedience or of enjoying in this world only necessaries, and for unity in all their busi∣ness, steered by the commands of a prudent Superior] being the fittest for any such trusts. These among others are the Designs and Work of so many Religious Societies. And thus are they diligently labouring, some more chiefly in one of these employments, some in another, as their Founders and Constitutions variously direct and distinguish them: which employments are here promiscuously put to∣gether and set down, because it would be too tedious to distribute and apply them to the particular Institutions. And in all these Convents and Religious Houses, the Canonical hours and other Hymns and Lauds are dayly sung both night and day, unless it be among those who pro∣fessedly and according to their Institute are so imployed in some other work, that they cannot attend both; solemn Mass also cele∣brated, and on Festivals added the Musick of the Organ, unless it be in the reformed Con∣vents; for they neither use Organ nor sing∣ing,
but recite Lauds and Hymns to God in their Churches, according to the canonical hours, in somewhat an higher but unison tone. And by these we see that the City of Rome hath so many Centinels and Watchmen, that whensoever our Lord shall come, he may not find her sleeping. Besides these of Men, there are also other Religious Houses of Women: some with, and some also without, clausure, that the more may be attracted to such an holy and retired life. These also are accurate observers of di∣scipline, and most conspicuous for holiness of life, some eating no flesh at all, and observing a perpetual Fast; and after they have taken the habit, being never seen again by any per∣son living out of the Monastery, no not by the nearest of their kindred; using no beds, but instead thereof sacks of Straw or bare Boards; not wearing any linnen. Never quitting their Habit, tho very course, day nor night, but in it watching and sleeping [yet nothing more in these mortifications is permitted to be done than what is ordinarily found to consist with health; and a relaxation thereof made in case of sickness]. Some of these Religious are of Virgins; some onely of Non-Virgins. Of the first of these there are in Rome houses thirty one, and three of the other. One of honest Widows, who, destitute of any of their kindred with whom they may live, have here a kind of Asylum, and safe place of refuge.
Another of such as have been loose wo∣men, and now are become Penitents, and do deliberate on a better course. The third is that famous Nunnery of St. Mary Magdalen, in Viâ latâ, for Harlots that have left off that miserable course of life, and now are known by the usual name of Convertitae. In all these Nunneries, besides the particular Prayers that are made to God for all Christian people, they sing likewise their continual hours, as they are prescribed by the Church, night and day, with no less devotion and de∣cency then is used in the Convents of the men. The rest of their time, vacant from Prayers, is spent in band-labour, spinning, or other womans work; the gain thereof is to be be∣stowed on the necessities of the house, or in Charity to the Poor abroad. CHAP. IV. Of the Lay-Sodalities and Confraternities in Rome: And of their Oratories. THere is a great number in Rome of these Lay-Sodalities, that profess great Piety to God, and Charity to their Neighbour. Confraternities both National, as of Germans, French, Spaniards, &c: And of several Trades or other Professions; As of Taylors, Shoo∣makers, Scriveners, Stationers, Cooks, Bakers,
Goldsmiths, Fishermen, Painters, &c. which Sodalities may also be ranged to heads. The first, of such as use long vestments down to their feet, being a kind of Frocks, when they meet together after a Collegiate manner in all publick functions. The other, of those who use no Garment, and intend only their charge in a private way. Of the former of these Sodalities are num∣bred above forty; and of the later above thirty. [Of all which, as also of the Churches where they are founded, and to which they relate the Author gives a particular account.] There are also three Sodalities of women exercising Charities, like to several of those of the men forementioned, Part 3. Chap. 3. One Sodality of which also takes care of those guilty Women, that for their offences are con∣demned to death. Now the intent of all these Confraternities and Sodalities is, in the general, one and the same, viz. By their Prayers and good works to render Almighty God propitious to the world, and with all readiness to assist every one of their Neighbours in their particular necessities, as far as they are able. And the Brethren of all these Sodalities are employed on every Holy-day in certain works of Charity: either in giving Dowries to poor Girls, or distributing Alms to the needy: or visiting the Prisons, with a purse made up to releive those that lye there for debt, or for other civil causes; or to visit the sick of their
own Confraternity, or to do the last office to their Dead; and to pray for their Souls: And altho every one of the forenamed Sodalities do interest themselves in all these good works which I have named, yet do they chiefly in∣tend that particular peice of Charity, for the sake of which they were framed into a So∣dality; so not hindring the offices of others. And very many of these Sodalities, besides their being founded in several Churches to which they repair, have also of their own certain Oratories apart like to Churches, wherein on all Festivals they sing the Canonical hours. CHAP. V. Of the Congregations of Cardinals consult∣ing about Ecclesiastical Affairs and matters of Religion. THE Pope being in a double capacity; As the common Father or Pastor of the whole Catholick Church: And as a Prince of that Dominion and Territory, which is im∣mediately subject unto the Church: and not being able to do every thing by himself which belongs to the administration of either charge, hath many Assistants in both functions, espe∣cially the Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church, whose help and counsel he makes use of in di∣vers qualities.
In the first and principal place, by calling together, as it were, a Senate of those Fathers, which is termed a Consistory; wherein the Pope layeth open those affairs which are of most weight and importance concerning the State both of the universal Church, and also of his particular Dominion, asking these Fa∣thers their several Opinions thereupon, and then deliberating what is fit to be done. And because this Consistory cannot well be assembled weekly: and there intervenes many times such businesses as require quicker dispatch; Therefore there is erected for such matters a certain particular Congregation of Conscript Fathers, who may meet together oftner, and certify the Pope of what is therein done and decreed; for those Decrees receive their Exe∣cution only from him. Other businesses which dayly occur, and re∣quire not a compleat Senate, are committed to several Congregations of Cardinals; in∣teressed, some in the Ecclesiastical Discipline and whole State of Christian Religion; and some in the civil administration of his tempo∣ral Dominion. The several Congregations, set over matters of Religion, are seven. The First is the Congregation of the Holy Inquisition into Heretical pravity. In this Con∣gregation are examined and sifted all persons opposing the Catholick Faith, and those that are found to offend therein punished. The Fathers of this Congregation meet every Wed∣nesday;
and on Thursday the next day give an account before the Pope of all the Acts and Deeds done among them in that Congrega∣tion. The Second Congregation, for matters in Rel gion, is that of the most illustrious Fa∣thers, who are chosen Interpreters of the Holy Council of Trent; to whom is committed the interpretation of the Sanctions of that Council for the manner of putting them in execution. Into this Congregation are chosen those Fa∣thers who are the most learned of all, and the Secretary to it is always reputed one of great knowledge. The Third Congregation for Religion is that to which is committed the care of Eccle∣siastical Rites and Ceremonies; who are to correct all offences against them, and to oppose all Superstition, or whatever exteriour kind of worship that hath not been admitted into the Catholick Church. The Fourth Congregation of Religion is set over the affairs of Bishops and Regulars. Between whom since many difficulties do arise dayly; and it is not expedient that they should be determined by any solemn judicial Act: This Congregation hath power to end or com∣pose such difficulties yet without any form of Judicature. The Fifth Congregation for Religion takes care of those Books, which are dayly set forth in print, to revise them; and such as they find impious against Faith or good Manners, to re∣ject,
and forbid all Catholicks the reading of them: and to insert the names of them into the Catalogue of prohibited Books, whence the Congregation is stiled The Congrega∣tion of the Index or Catalogue. The sixth Congregation for Religion is that called The Congregation of Propagating the Faith, of late erected by Gregory the fifteenth. The principal intent whereof is to reduce all Hereticks and Schismaticks to sound Doctrine, and a right understanding. This Congregation is held twice every month; and once before the Pope himself. The seventh Congregation of Religion, which hath its name from the Ecclesiastical immunities, was instituted by Pope Ʋrban the eighth. Before these are brought all contests about Jurisdiction, between the Officers of Kings and Princes, and Bishops, or other Ec∣clesiastical persons; and their chief care is to preserve the Ecclesiastical Liberties free from all temporal burthens and encroachments. FINIS.
PIETAS PARISIENSIS. OR, A short Description of the Piety and Charity com∣monly exercised in PARIS. Extracted out of Mr. Carr's Relation thereof, Published An. Dom. 1666.
THE CONTENTS. CHAP. I. Of the Piety of the Priests and the People in the dayly service of God: and of the extraordinary care taken in their Ordina∣tion. CHAP. II. Of the beginning and Progress of the Congregation of the Mission. CHAP. III. Of the great assistance and chari∣ties which Father Vincent procured to be sent into Loraine, and into Picardy and Champain (wasted with War) and distributed there by these Missioners. CHAP. IV. The Establishment of an Hospital in St. Lazar's Suburbs, for those Children found exposed in the Streets: and of the Dames and Sisters of the Charity in Paris and elsewhere. CHAP. V. Of an Hospital of old Men and Wo∣men founded in St. Lazarus's Suburbs by Mr. Vincent. CHAP. VI. Of the Charities procured for the poor Criminals condemned to the Gallies. CHAP. VII. Of the Hospital of the Holy Ghost, situated near the Town-house, in a place called the Greeve. And of the Hospital of the Holy Trinity in St. Denise's Street.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Hospital of les enfants rouges, or God's Children, as a King of France would have them called; in the Street Port∣fein near the Temple: And of the Hospital called the Misericorde, or Work of Mercy. CHAP. IX. Of the Hospital in St. German's Suburbs called la petit Maison. Of the Ho∣spital of the three hundred blind men called Quinze-vingt. And of the Hospital called the Providence. CHAP. X. Of the Hospital named la charite in St. German's Suburbs. CHAP. XI. Of the Hospital General. CHAP. XII. Of the Hospital called l' Hostel Dieu: Or God's House. CHAP. XIII. Of the Hospital called our La∣dies of the Incurables. CHAP. XIV. Of divers other Charities which cannot so well be particularized.
CHAP. I. Of the Piety of the Priests and People in the dayly Service of God: and of the extra∣ordinary care taken in their Ordination. THE Pastors of Paris are all, generally, known to be men of exemplary lives, and sound learning, being, the most of them, Batchelors, Licentiates, or Doctors of the famous faculty of Sorbonne. These calling to mind what St. Paul hath taught, and look∣ing upon it with a venerable astonishment, that every high Priest taken from among men is appointed for men, in those things which appertain to God, that he may offer gifts and sacrifices for sins, as well for the people as also for himself, use all care and industry to apply the merits and medicinal grace pur∣chased by our Lord's painful passion to the poor sinful Souls of their flocks, by deriving into them those fountains of grace which are conferred by their ministery in the Sacraments of Baptisme, Penance, the blessed Eucharist, &c. Therefore also besides themselves (not sufficient for the necessities of those great multitude of people under their charge,) a great number of
other Priests, which these good Pastors take into their Societies and Communities (some forty or fifty, some an hundred, some more, some fewer, according to the vast numbers of their parishioners) approach daily to the sacred Altars from morning till noon with humble re∣verence and veneration to answer their peoples expectations and devotions, who concur with them in a sweet harmony to offer up their Vows and Prayers. So this true, clean, and unbloody Sacrifice (which the Prophet Malachi fore∣told) being offered to God in every place, and seconded by the sacrifice of the lips and hearts of the pious people, serves for the happy imployment of the whole forenoon. The af∣ternoon wants not its parts neither, which is dayly performed in the evensong and com∣pline, so that the Church doors are rarely shut up in Paris all the week long. Besides these general pious practices of the people, which they exercise every day in the week all Paris over, there is scarce one day in the year in which there is not some particular solem∣nity, at one Church or Monastery or another, (to which there is great confluence of people, by reason of some eminent Preacher:) or the exposing of the Blessed Sacrament, and pardons to be gained; as it appears by a certain Al∣manack, made of set purpose to direct pious people to the said Solemnities. And as there is no day passes without publick Service done to God: so there is no hour of the day or night in which God's praises are
not sung in Paris. The Oratorians begin the divine office at Seven a clock in the evening. At St. Geneviefues at Eight. The Penitents at Nine. The Carmelites at Ten. The Carthu∣sians at Eleven. St. Victors, our Ladies, and others till Two. From Two till Four at the Benedictines, Bernardins, and divers others. From Four, till Five, Six and Seven; this done at all Collegial and Parish Churches. So that what the royal Prophet foretold, is perfectly accomplished: From the rising of the Sun to the seting of the same, God's holy name is praise worthy, praised and magnified. Thus is Piety practised all the working days of the week, all the year long. To which on Holidays is added a Sermon, and upon Sun∣days Holy Bread, Holy Water, the Procession and Prone (that is a familiar explication upon the Gospel of the day) for the forenoon, to∣gether with a formal Sermon and Catechisme for the afternoon: This is the ordinary pra∣ctice all Paris over. But the Pastors zeal for the instruction and inflamation of the people's hearts stays not here, but further by himself, or his order, there are most eloquent Sermons made all the days of Advent and Lent (save Saturdays) by the same Preachers, who are followed with a wonderful concourse of Audi∣tors, and a no less admirable quiet attention of so great a multitude. Can then our Adver∣saries, without affected malice, pretend that the Papists are nousled up in ignorance? which with the proud Manicheans they impudently
object against them. And as the dignity of Priests and height of pastoral functions is most venerable and dreadful; so is their care as great, as far as humanly can be devised, to make a hopeful provision of young Priests to assist them in their life time, and so to suc∣ceed in their places after their deaths. And to this effect a Secular Priest, and a great ser∣vant of God (whose admirable works of Cha∣rity have made him famous all the world over, as here below you shall see.) F. Vincent de Paul suggested an effectual means to the most illustrious and most reverend Arch-Bishop of Paris, then being (to wit, above thirty years ago;) who highly approved and confirmed it, and ordered it to be observed by all who should pretend for holy orders at his hands: and it is still continued with like approbation, by his command who doth now illustrate the said See. viz. That all who should take holy or∣ders, should be obliged to make a spiritual re∣treat at St. Lazares (where this Father Vin∣cent governed) for the space of ten days; that none should rashly intrude themselves into so dreadful a Ministery. And whereas this is a thing as worthy the approbation as imitation of all Bishops, it may be of good use and edifi∣cation to put down here the exercises in that holy retreat in particular. Ten days then before the Collation of holy orders, all the Ordinandi repair to St. Lazars, sometimes fifty or sixty, sometimes to the num∣ber of one hundred, where they find bed and
board, and all things ready by God's provi∣dence without their care or cost; and they are all most humanely and charitably received not so much into the house, as into the bosome, of the pious Inhabitants. Two different Entertainments are made to them every day, the one in the morning, upon the chief heads of moral Divinity: the other towards the evening, of the vertues, and qua∣lities proper to their intended function. There are Ten made in all of either kind. The Forenoons Entertainment. The first day, They speak of the censures of the Church in general. The second, Of the said censures in parti∣cular; as of excommunication, suspension, in∣terdicts, and irregularity. The third, Of the Sacrament of Penance; as of its institution, form, effects, and of the conditions necessary in the Confessor. The fourth, Dispositions to the Sacrament of Penance; to wit, contrition, confession and satisfaction, with indulgences. The fifth, Of divine and humane laws; and of sin in general, with the division thereof, the circumstances, the kinds, causes, effects, de∣grees and remedies. The sixth, Of the three first commandments which contain man's duty to God; and of the three Theological vertues, with the vertue of Religion, and its Acts. The seventh, Is an explication of the other seven commandments, which concern our neigh∣bour.
The eighth, Of the Sacraments in general, and of confirmation, and the Eucharist in quality of a Sacrament. The ninth, Of the Eucharist as it is a Sacri∣fice, and of extream Unction and Marriage. The tenth is the explication of the Creed, with what is necessary to be known by every Priest, and what they may teach the people thereupon with profit. The Afternoons Entertainment. The first day is of mental Prayer. First the motives to it for Clergy-men. Secondly wherein it consists. Thirdly the method and means to perform it. And in this they are exercised every day for some time. The second day the Speech is of ones Voca∣tion, and of the state of a Church-man. That this Vocation should be had before one pre∣sents himself to Orders; wherein it consists, and which are the marks of it, with the means to know it, and to correspond with it. The third speaks of the spirit of a Clergy-man: and shews how he is to enter into this spirit: wherein it consists: the marks of it, the means to acquire it, and to grow perfect in it. The fourth treats of orders in general: of their institution, necessity, matter, form, effects, and differences, with the dispositions necessary to receive them. The fifth, Of the first Tonsure, with an ex∣plication of the doctrine of that Ceremony, The obligations contracted by it, The dispo∣sitions and qualities required.
The sixth, A discourse of the lesser orders in particular: their definition, the matter, form and functions, with the vertues required to comply with them worthily. The seventh, Of the office of Subdeacon, and the vertues proper to this order, and par∣ticularly of Chastity. The eighth, Of the office of Deacon, and the vertues proper to it, particularly of Chari∣ty to our neighbour. The ninth, Of Priesthood, and of the know∣ledge necessary for Priests, to acquit themselves of their duty. In the tenth is a discourse of the life of a Clergy-man, wherein it is made appear, that they who have received holy orders ought to lead a much more holy life than that of Lay-men, with many advices to help towards such a life. All these things they repeat in their conferences made afterwards, the better to commit them to memory. They make every day about half an hour of mental Prayer, and conferences upon it after∣wards, to instruct such as are less exercised therein, how to use considerations, to move affections, and to make resolutions. They are dayly exercised in the functions of the or∣ders which they are to take, and in the Cere∣monies of the holy Mass. They are made to recite the office altogether, and to observe the stops &c. They are disposed to make their general con∣fessions, at least from their last general one;
and the next day they communicate high Mass. They have seven hours to repose in by night, and two hours of holy conversation every day, this is after dinner and supper. In which time they read the holy Scriptures, and Molina of the dignity and sanctity of Priest-hood. Upon Sunday, after they have taken orders, they assist at high Mass, and communicate in thanks∣giving for their holy ordination, and so return to their own homes. Thus they are most substantially and piously prepared; which good dispositions are visibly observed to be followed with such blessed ef∣fects, that great benedictions of admirable re∣formations in the whole Clergy of France are seen every where. CHAP. II. Of the beginning and Progress of the Con∣gregation of the Mission. IN the year of our Lord 1624, March the first began the happy establishment of the com∣pany of the Congregation of the Priests of the Missions, in the College of Bons-enfans, con∣ferred upon Mr. Vincent Paul by the most il∣lustrious John Francis de Goudy, Arch-Bishop of Paris, to that purpose. viz. His Bro∣ther the General of the Galeeres, and his most vertuous Lady being well acquainted what
great things Mr. Vincent had performed in di∣vers of their own Lord-ships in that kind for the good of their poor vassals and God's glory, had long conceived a pious desire to concur jointly to be Founders of the said Mission, which they imparted to their brother the Arch-Bi∣shop, to make use of his power over Mr. Vin∣cent's Spirit (whom they knew to be as slow in undertaking, as diligent and faithful in per∣forming what he once undertook) to induce him to accept the charge; which was done accordingly, and he wholly acquiesced to the Arch-bishops pleasure. Hereupon were four thousand Pistols put down by the most noble and pious Founders in Mr. Vincent's hands in ready money, upon the following conditions. First, That the end and whole imployment of these Missionaries should be to send to, and to procure the corporal and spiritual good of, the poor people of the villages; and that too so wholly, that they were not to meddle to preach, or administer Sacraments in any con∣siderable towns, save in case of extream ne∣cessities, but to go from village to village to instruct and assist those poor abandon'd Souls. Secondly, That they were to renounce all Church benefices, dignities and offices, to apply themselves intirely and purely (with the leave of the Ordinaries) to the saving of those poor people, by Sermons, Catechisms, general Con∣fessions, &c. And that too at their own costs and charges, without admitting of any retri∣bution or reward in what kind soever. Thirdly,
That the Election of proper Subjects should be at Mr. Vincent's pleasure, who should go∣vern them all his life long. And that which is worthy of special observation, is; That these blessed Founders so purely and dis-in∣terestly aimed at God's glory, and the good of the poor alone; that they made no reserves of any fixed thing relating to themselves in particular, either in point of honour or profit. With this vertuous foundation Mr. Vincent be∣gan to comply, having one only companion in the beginning, which soon after increased to the number of ten or twelve, and e're this (as we may guess with probability) amounts even to thousands: And from that rich sourse whole colonies did spread themselves not only all France over, but even extended themselves to forreign lands. The first establishment, flow∣ing from this fountain, was began at Toul in the year 1635. by the consent and approba∣tion of the Bishop of the place. The second at Richlieu 1638. founded by the most eminent Cardinal of the place, with obligation to preach &c. according to their pious Institute, to the poor of the Diocess of Poitiers, as also to those of Lucon, of which he had formerly been Bi∣shop. The third was founded by the said Car∣dinal at Lucon it self in the year 1645. with full power granted by the Bishop thereof to preach and teach &c. all over his Diocess. The fourth at Troy, in the year 1638. by the charitable assistance of the Bishop of the place. The fifth in the Diocess of Geneva, in the
year 1640. where the Commander of Sillory founded them a Seminary, where they still labour with much fruit; still with the appro∣bation of the Bishop of the Diocess, which I shall not hereafter need to mention. The sixth in the year 1641. at Rome, by the Dutchess of Ayguillon, who also founded seven of the said Missionaries in her Dutchy of Ayguillon. The eighth was founded again by the said Dutchess at Marcelles. The ninth in the Dio∣cess of Caors, in the year 1643. by the Saintly Bishop thereof. The tenth in the Diocess of Reimes, by the Arch-Bishop Vallancy, 1644. The eleventh at Montmir in Brye, by the Duke of Reti, in the year 1644. The twelfth at Zaintes, by the Bishop and Clergy the same year. The thirteenth at Mons, by the Bishop 1645. The fourteenth in the Diocess of St. Mala, at St. Meen, in the year 1645. The fifteenth at Genua in Italy, at the instance of Cardinal Durasto Arch-bishop of the same place, in the year 1645. The sixteenth at Agen, by the Bishop of the place, 1650. The seventeenth at Crecy in the Diocess of Meaux, in the year 1641. The eighteenth was founded at Vaso∣via in Polognia, by the liberality of that most pious Queen in the year 1651. The nineteenth in the Diocess of Montauban, by the Bishop of the place, in the year 1652. The twentieth at Tregaier in Britaine, by the Bishop and Count of the place, in the year 1654. The one and twentieth at Adge in Languedoc, by the Bishop and Count of the place, in the
year 1654. The two and twentieth at Turin in Piedmont, at the instance of Mr. le Marquis of Pianezz, who founded them 1654. The three and twentieth at Amiens, by the Bishop of the place, with the perpetual direction of his Seminary. The four and twentieth at Noyon, by the Bishop of the place, with the direction of his Seminary. This was resolved upon in Mr. Vincent's life time, but was only accomplished after his death. He sent also Missionaries into Africk, to Tunis and Algiers, to aid, instruct and comfort the poor Christian slaves, who were there, to the number of twen∣ty or thirty thousand. To Madagascar, also beyond the line, a voyage of six months sail, to endeavour the conversion of those poor In∣fidels. Finally to the Hebrides in the furthest parts of Scotland, and into Ireland. CHAP. III. Of the great assistance and Charities which Father Vincent procured to be sent into Loraine: And into Picardy and Cham∣pine (wasted with war) and distributed there by these Missioners. BY these Missioners the pious Father Vincent, having the noblest hearts of Paris adhe∣rent to his pious Counsels, and their purses lying open to his charitable suggestions; in
the extream wants and calamities of Lorain hapning in those days, procured to be sent thither at divers times, and caused to be di∣stributed amongst the most needy, to the summe of sixteen hundred thousand Franks (that is, sixteen hundred thousand Pistols) to which the said Missionaries added no less large proportion of their solicitudes and pains, who spent their whole time for many years toge∣ther in visiting the poor and the sick, and in furnishing many thousands of them with all things necessary for body and Soul. Con∣cerning this: God's providence, who will have honour to follow those that flee it, and exalt him who humbles himself, failed not to draw divers authentical testimonies from the grateful hearts of the obliged persons, addressed to this Father; which may not be suffered to lye in obscurity. The Letter of the Vicar of Tou. I John Midot, Dr. of Divinity, Arch-Deacon, Canon and Vicar-general of Tou, the See being vacant, do certify and attest, that the Priests of the Congregation of the Mission, who reside in this town, continued any time these two years to comfort, to cloth, to feed, and give Physick to the poor with much edi∣fication and charity. First of all they have taken into their own house a matter of sixty sick persons, and have lodged about twenty
more in the Suburbs. Secondly, They give Alms to a number of other bashful poor, re∣duced to extream necessity, who betake them∣selves hither for refuge. Thirdly, They re∣ceive a many poor naked and lame Soldi∣ers, which return from the King's Army, into their own house and care. In which chari∣table actions, and other their pious com∣portments, all good people are wonderfully edified. In witness whereof I have signed and sealed these presents. Toul, Dec. 1639. The Coppy of another Letter. SIR, Since a great many years, that this poor town hath been afflicted with Plague, War, and Famine, which hath reduced it to this excess of misery wherein now it is, in lieu of consolations, we have only met with rigo∣rous dealings from our Creditors, cruelty from the Soldiers, who forceably robbed us of the small quantity of bread which we had; So that it seemed, that the heavens had no∣thing but rigours for us: when behold one of your children in Jesus Christ, came loaden with Alms, which hugely tempered the ex∣cess of our misery; and raised our hopes in God's mercy. Sir, Since our offences have provoked his wrath, we humbly kiss the hand which doth punish them; as also we receive the effects of his divine mercy, with the re∣sentments
of an extraordinary acknowledg∣ment. We bless the instruments of his in∣finite Clemency, as well these who relieve us with these seasonable Charities, as those who procure them, and distribute them amongst us; and you in particular, Dear Sir, whom we look upon, after God, as the principal Author of so singular a blessing. To tell you how well it is applyed to this poor place, where the chief persons are re∣duced to nothing, the Missionaries you have sent will relate it with less interest than our selves. They have been eye-witnesses of desolation, and you will find in the sight of God, the eternal obligations we owe you, for having succoured us in this our miserable condition. From the Officers and Council of Luneville, 1642. A Coppy of another Letter. SIR, YOU have so singularly obliged us in the assistance you have afforded to our poor beggers, to our bashful indigent, and to our sick persons; and more particularly to our religious houses, that we should prove un∣grateful if we deferred any longer to testify our sensible acknowledgments; we being able to assure you that the charity which you have sent hither, could never be better distributed
and employed than upon our poor people, who are very many in number, and especi∣ally upon the religious women, who are de∣stitute of all humane assistance; some of them not enjoying any part of their small revenues since the wars, and others not receiving any thing from the richer sort of the town, who formerly gave them Alms, they being now deprived of their own means. Whence we find our selves humbly obliged to beseech you, Dear Sir, as by these presents we do, to continue the same charitable assistances, as well to the poor, as to the Monasteries of this place, which hitherto you have done. It is a subject of a great merit for those that do these good works, and for you who have the conduct thereof, which you per∣form with so much prudence and dexterity to the gaining a great Crown in heaven. From the Magistrates of Mets, 1664. This Information also concerning the calamitous State of Lorraine, was sent to Mr. Vincent by one of his Missionaries. BEing arrived at St. Michell, I find so great a number of poor people, that I am not able to give to all; there are above three hundred in very great necessity, and three hundred more reduced to extremity. Sir, I tell you no more than the bare truth, there are above a hundred of them who appear only
Skelletons covered with skin, and are so ghastly that unless God did strengthen me I should even dread to look upon them; their skins are like tawny Marble, and are so dryed up, that their teeth seem to be dry and discover∣ed &c. At our last distribution of bread, there were one thousand fifty two poor peo∣ple, besides the sick who are in great num∣bers, which we assist with food and conve∣nient medicines &c. O Sir, what a num∣ber of Souls go to heaven through poverty! Since I came first into Lorrain, I have assisted above a thousand poor people at their death, who shewed, all of them, that they were per∣fectly well disposed to dye &c. The same Father also excited by the fresh Informations of his pious Missioners, who were labouring every where in the middle of desolations, concerning the great calamity and misery of the nearer Neighbours of Picardy and Campaine, devoured and wasted with war and famine, and consequently with sickness, applyed himself again for their relief to the compassionate bowels of the good Ladies of the Charity; which pious Dames he assembled once or twice a week to such purposes, and communicated to them his Intelligence. In which one writes thus to him. There are abundance who are afflicted with Fluxes and Feavers, others covered with
Scabs, and purple spots, tumors and impost∣humes, many swelled, some in their heads, some in their belly, and some all their body over. These infirmities were caused by eat∣ing wild roots, and bread of bran: Our ears are filled with pitiful lamentations and out∣cries for bread: and howsoever sick they are, they dragg themselves through rain and mire two or three leagues off for a few pottage. Many dye without confession, and the other Sacraments, and even burial it self; the poor dead body being left in their homely cottages till they are eaten up with wild beasts. Another writes thus. We are newly returned from visiting thirty five Villages in the Deanery of Guise, where we found near upon five hundred people so excessively miserable, that they seise upon dead dogs and horses, which are the Wolves leavings. And in the very town of Guise there are above five hundred sick persons, who are lodged in Caves and Dens. Some of them have eaten no bread in six or seven weeks, not so much as that which they make of barly bran, which is the diet of those which fare best: but their meat is lizards, froggs, and wild-herbs, &c. By these La∣dies accordingly a provision of all things was presently made at Paris, necessary for body and Soul; and that too in such abundance, such a number of suits of apparel, shirts, smocks,
shoes, stockings, coverlets, sheets, and other linnen necessary for the sick: as also druggs for physick, confectures, &c together with Chalices, and other ornaments for the Church &c. and with Corn to sow the neglected fields which lay fallow, and what was sent in dry money: that it amounted in all to five hundred thousand Franks, making half a french Million; to the eternal praise of the Charity of Paris be it remembered for ever. CHAP. IV. The Establishment of an Hospital in St. Lazar's Suburbs, for those Children found exposed in the Streets. And of the Dames and Sisters of the Charity in Paris, and elsewhere. AS Mr. Vincent, and the pious Parisian La∣dies Charities had wrought, and were still working, wonders among the poor di∣stressed people abroad: so his and their pious care did not the while overlook Paris, nor was wanting at home. Here he considered the la∣mentable condition of so many poor abandon'd new-born Infants, whose bodies and souls are exposed to utter perdition, either by the un∣natural cruelty of naughty women, or by the extream poverty of necessitous parents, who covertly leave them in the streets to all adven∣tures;
of which kind of deserted Innocents it is observed, in this vast world of Paris, that scarce a year passes without three or four hun∣dred in the town and suburbs; and such a grow∣ing nursery, every one will judge, cannot be maintained with a little. He therefore by their charity procured an Hospital to be built in St. Lazar's suburbs, for the future recep∣tion of such children as were found so exposed; the annual maintenance whereof, amounts to no less than four thousand pistols, which is still growing up to more and more, for Charitas numquam excidit. And these poor souls are till this day nourished and brought up under the care and assistance of ten or twelve good Sisters of the Charity, with the help of a num∣ber of Nurses, who live in the said Hospital, together with a many more in the Country, who receive a monthly pay. When they are once weaned they are delivered back to the Sisters of the Charity; who in teaching them to speak, teach them also to pray, to know God, to love and serve him. As they grow up in years they are taught some little works to keep them out of idleness, till providence sort them with some fit occasion for their fu∣ture being. The same Father also by his powerful ex∣hortations, and for the advancing them in the fear, of God, and of their poor neighbours, as also for the more plentiful relief of the ne∣cessitous, prevailed with the Princesses and Dutchesses, and other Ladies of the prime
Nobility of Paris, to the number of two hun∣dred and above, to devest themselves of the rich and sumptuous robes suitable to their illustrious conditions, and to present them∣selves in the Hospitals in the modest attire of simple gentlewomen, with aprons before them, to serve and comfort the most despicable crea∣tures alive; as common Beggars, Porters, and wounded Soldiers, most nasty and gastly to behold. And this they make their business, and go seriously about it, as if it were a thing belonging to them of duty, without discover∣ing any niceness of or disdainfulness thereat. Nor do they go thither for fashion sake, and by way of divertisement: but as their hearts are full of compassion upon the beholding of such sad ob∣jects, so are their mouths full of consolation and instruction, and their hands no less replenished with charitable presents agreeable to the infir∣mities of those, otherwise contemptible, crea∣tures (if they did not eye our Saviour Christ in them); which relief the poverty of the Hospi∣tals could not ordinarily afford to so vast num∣bers. Whereas those good Ladies made plen∣tiful provision thereof in every kind, in a Chamber near adjoining which they hired to that purpose. And every day by turns four of them performed that pious ministery of going from bed to bed to make the distribu∣tion, with an humble meekness well suited to so Christian a work. By these familiar and plea∣sing corporal assistances the good Ladies gain∣ed the hearts of those poor people, and in
consequence their Souls: for it was observed, that in the space of one year, they induced seven hundred and sixty of those infirm and maimed persons to abjure their Heresy, and imbrace the Catholick Faith. To say nothing of multitudes of others, who were moved by their vertuous examples and wholsome advice to make general confessions, and to resolve of a more Christian life than formerly they had led. Nor did this superlative example of chri∣stianity keep within the compass of what these noble Ladies performed in their own persons: but as the nature of good is to be communicative, it spread it self not only all over Paris, but even extended to many remote Villages and Diocesses, to the extream solace and relief of poor honest families, who were as little accustomed to beg their bread, as otherwise little able to gain it by their daily labours. The Institution of the Charity in the most of, or even all, the Parishes of Paris. The blessed example of these good Ladies served as the primum mobile under God to in∣cite other Ladies of an inferiour rank, toge∣ther with many honest and vertuous Burgesses of the best sort, to emulate them in so blessed a practice; and it had so powerful an influence upon them, that the most, or even all, the parishes of Paris have meetings at least every month (being all associated together in a holy
confraternity) to discover and confer upon the necessities of their respective parishes at the Curate's house, and accordingly, by col∣lections among themselves, to provide relief for them. The distribution of their charita∣ble collections was at first performed by the good Ladies own hands, who took the pains to go and visit the poor and the sick of the parish, and take a more particular assurance of each ones necessity; but in a small time they were taught by experience, that some o∣ther course was to be taken to carry on so pious a work effectually: for they found that part∣ly the care of their family could scarce dispense with their absence, partly their husbands had no great satisfaction in their conversation with such infirm and nasty poor people; but espe∣cially they saw that their small strength and skill in that kind came not home to the ne∣cessities of the sick: wherefore they advised of some better way. And Mr. Vincent, who ne∣ver was at a loss to invent means to promote charity, found out, and setled a constant and effectual way to continue the work, and it was this. M. Le Gras, sometime wife to Mr. Le Gras, Secretary to Queen Margaret, now Widow, whose maiden name was Marilac, of the family of the most vertuous and famous Chancellor of that name, who had the most eloquent and pious Camus Bishop of Bellay for her spiritual Director, till he delivered her up into Mr. Vincent's hands, where she was like to lose nothing in point of her propension
to serve the poor: this vertuous Lady, I say, was the person pitched upon by her present Director, as the prime instrument for the de∣signed settlement. And certainly divine pro∣vidence was as much in this choice, as her un∣dertakings were blessed with admirable success. For she being wholly addicted to the service of the sick, he trained her up in that way, to fit her for some greater work for the future, and made her make her first Essaies in the Vil∣lages of divers Diocesses, where there was o∣therwise no Hospitals to succour the poor and sick, as in that of Beavais, Sanlys, Soisson, Meaux, Chaalons and Charters. In all which with in∣credible pains, being onely accompanied with some other gentlewomen and a Maid, she set∣led Confraternities, which last till this day. But while he and she had no other design but this lowly way in the Villages, God had a greater design upon them to bring it into the great town of Paris, where she is made the mo∣ther of a company of course Country Maids, which he devised for certain aids to the ver∣tuous Dame of Paris, to the effect intimated as above. They are called Maids, or Sisters of the Cha∣rity, and were instituted by Mr. Vincent to serve the poor, especially those that are sick, as he had already instituted Missions of men to preach to the poor. Mrs. Le Gras was the woman who was put to instruct them in vertue, and to breed them up, and fashion them to the end for which they are gathered together, viz.
to assist the Dames of Paris to serve the sick in their parishes, in the Hospitals, or where else they may be called. As they are brought up by that good mother in humility, patience, and painful labours, agreeable to their end, so they are suted to it in their attire; which is, a plain course gray coat, without welt or gard, made close to their body, with a close plain kerchief to their head; and their imploy∣ment is to carry the Pottage-pot between two of them, upon a staff all up and down the pa∣rish (which they keep as bright as the Hol∣lander doth his Andirons); and to distribute broth and meat, with other necessaries, to the needy according to the exigency of their seve∣ral wants. This Pot is prepared by turns in the Burgesses house of the Confraternity, who are to afford fire and seasoning, the rest being supplyed by the mutual collections of the pa∣rish. Mr. Vincent's prudence and piety regu∣lated also all those proceedings by constitu∣tions which he gave to the congregation or company of the said Maids of the Charity, ser∣vants of the poor: which by his credit he got to be approved by the Arch-Bishop of Paris in the year 1642. and to be authorized and confirmed by the Kings Letter Patents veri∣fied in the Parliament.
CHAP. V. Of an Hospital of old Men and Wo∣men, founded in St. Lazar's Suburbs by Mr. Vincent. A Good Burgess of Paris came one day on his own accord to Mr. Vincent's Cham∣ber, who, as it appears, had learnt the true way of trading for the Kingdome of heaven (for he was not willing that his left hand should know what his right hand did, least vanity should rob him of some part of his purchase): his money he was most willing to give, or even to steal it upon him, but he was not willing to lend his name to own the gift, but it was freely given, and upon no other condition or obligation than this, That his should never (be forgotten would vanity have indented) be known; and indeed it never was known to this day. And there was it seems no less care used by the Trustee to conceal the summe given, than the name of the pious giver, since it is shut up in these indefinite terms, a con∣siderable summe. Yet the imployment which the good Steward made of it, will he, nill he, discovers it to have been so considerable, that it must needs have passed ten thousand Pistols. With this summe he purchased two houses, a competent garden, and furnished it with all
necessaries, together with an answerable live∣lihood for forty persons: viz. Twenty men, and as many women, which were still to be poor old decayed Tradesmen &c. All these he disposed of in two different houses, the women being separated from the men; which yet he contrived so ingeniously, that one Mass said in a little Chappel, and one Reader at the Table, served for them both. He de∣puted one of his Missioners to say their Mass, to instruct them, and to administer the Sacra∣ments; and some of the Sisters of the Charity to assist and serve them. This house he called the Hospital of the name of Jesus: and passed a Declaration of this foundation before No∣taries, without the name of the Founder at all, that a new name may be given him in heaven. And it was approved by my Lord Arch-Bishop of Paris, and ratified by the Kings Letters Patents. CHAP. VI. Of the Charities procured for the poor Criminals condemned to the Gallies. WHile Father Vincent was setling a live∣lihood for these poor Artificers, who through their age were not able to gain their living, his compassion was called upon to assist others who are scarce worthy to live. These
were the Gally-slaves, whose double misery he eyed with much pitty. Comfort of consci∣ence he supposed they could have little, being burdened with crimes: nor comfort of body, being loaden with chains, and excess of want and misery. And yet he knew too, that to comfort the comfortless, be the person what he will, never ceased to be a work of mercy. He doubted not but that their crimes well de∣served what they suffered, and that a just ver∣dict had condemned them to no more than a condigne punishment in sending them to the Gallies. Yet he conceived withal, that it was not the judges sense that they should perish at Paris who were sentenced to suffer at Mar∣seilles; and that judgment without mercy is to those that shew not mercy. He takes then their sad and comfortless condition seriously to heart. He instantly applies his most hum∣ble submission and sutes to King Lewis the thir∣teenth, and the Magistrates, in their behalf: and obtains the old tower of St. Bernard's Gate for their habitation, till they amount to a competent number, to be sent away accord∣ing to custome. Thus by his care are they provided of lodgings. But where must food be found for body and soul? Food for their bodies for a while issues out of his own and Mrs. Le Gras's small stock. And for their Souls the pious Priests of St. Nicholas de Chardennet, and his own Missioners plentifully furnish. But soon after the divine providence abun∣dantly provides: For a person of Paris of a
vast fortune, left by his last Will and Testa∣ment six thousand pounds a year forever, for the relief of those miserable creatures, whose deserts could lay claim to nothing. This plentiful fund is left under the admini∣stration of the Procurator general of the Parlia∣ment for perpetuity. And whereas the said place of their abode was in the parish of St. Nicholas de Chardennet, the Curate thereof was liable to administer the Sacraments unto them, and to bury their dead corps: which being a great burthen for that poor little parish, Mr. Vincent prevailed with the Administrators to allow the said Priests thirty Pistols per annum out of the Fund, upon condition that they should be obliged to say their Mass, to exhort, catechise them, and perform other spiritual functions requisite; which they discharge most worthily, and with very great care and charity. Thus were the poor Gallerians well provided-for during their stay at Paris. And that they might likewise be so after their departure thence to Marseilles, He (who also himself had formerly been taken upon the Mediterra∣nean Sea, and carryed Slave into Barbary) forth∣with applies himself to the most eminent Car∣dinal of Richlieu, who was then General of the Gallies; and to Madam La Duchesse of Ayguillon, his vertuous Neece: represents to them the miserable State of the Gally-slaves, and the extream want of an Hospital for them, where they might be assisted in the time of their sickness. Their piety procured that such an
Hospial was built. Here again was a house, but other helps were as yet wanting. Where∣upon Mr. Vincent had recourse to the bounty of that most constantly religious Queen Regent (Mother to King Lewis the fourteenth, who now happily reigns) whose memory is in eter∣nal benediction, to deal with him to become the Founder of this Hospital: which was done accordingly by his Letters Patents in the year 1645. and was indowed by his Majesty with twelve hundred Pistols. The blessed effects of this royal Charity you may partly know by a Letter written to Mr. Vincent by a most charitable Gentleman of Provence, called Mr. de la Coste, who had much contributed to that work: His Letter was as follows. These are to give you an account of the Progress of the Hospital, which was especially established by your procurement. You have understood by my last, how, after much resist∣ance, by the help of our Lord and Master they gave us up those that were sick in the Gallies. Certes, I am not able to express the joy which those poor Slaves received, when they saw themselves transported from that Hell to the said Hospital, which they term a Paradise; where at their very Entry they seem cured of half their sickness, when they are free'd from their vermine, whereof they are full; their feet are first washed, and then they are laid in a bed, a little softer than the board
whereon they were wont to lye. And they are quite over-joyed to find themselves lodg∣ed, served, and treated with a little more charity than they were in the Gally; whe∣ther we have sent back a number of Conva∣lescents, who had been dead if they had re∣mained there. Truly Sir. We may well say, that God hath blessed this work; which ap∣pears not only in the conversion of bad Christians, but even of the very Turks, who cry out for holy Baptisme. CHAP. VII. Of the Hospital of the Holy Ghost, situated near the Town-House, in a place called the Greeve. And of the Hospital of the Holy Trinity, in St. Denise's Street. A Company of Burgesses of good note were moved to compassion by the miserable spectacle of poor Children, who through their parents death, or extream want, were reduced to such poverty that they were ready to perish with hunger and cold. They repaired to the Bishop of the place, who erected a many of them into a Confra∣ternity, to have a joint care to relieve those poor Children; which pious office till this day they charitably comply with, as their Prede∣cessors
had done before them; and that so throughly too, that they gave these poor Chil∣dren not only their cares and pains while they were strong and well able, but some even them∣selves too when grown old, with all their sub∣stance; and so happily ended their days among them: and thereby it prospered and grew up to what it now is. The Establishment as it was begun for the necessity of the poor Children of Paris, so it is limited to them alone; in such sort, that none can be admitted there but Children born in Paris, or the Suburbs, in lawful marriage, whose fathers and mothers are dead; Bastards, and others found in the streets, being exclu∣ded as well by the rules of the house, as by the Kings Letters Pattents. These poor Chil∣dren, qualified as above, are even taken from the breast into this Hospital, where they are provided of Nurses at the cost thereof, and are carefully visited and treated. As they grow up they are put to some Trade, as well to Masters who reside in the said Hospital, as to others abroad. Such of the Boys, as they find of good wits and otherwise capable, are bred up in learning, and become Clergy-men: or else, as well they, as the Girles, are provided for in Religion at the charges of the Hospital, if they have a will and inclination to that holy course of life. The rest are disposed of to serve some persons of quality. The boys which have learnt any trade are helped to pass Masters. And the Girls are assisted with some certain
summe of money to marry them. And being come to lawful age, what ever they may have brought with them is restored to all of them in general without limitation. They are cloathed in decent apparel of a Violet colour. There are at this day some two hundred in the house. And besides those as many as make up in all about two hundred and thirty or two hundred and forty at nurse. To all these the common Charity of Paris give subsistance. Such provision made for the poor fatherless children of Paris: yet there were abundance of others in, and about the town, who had both father and mother, and remained yet in a more lamentable condition than those that are deprived of them. These might perish in∣deed through want of succour, yet being in their baptismal innocency they would be eter∣nally happy. Whereas these others by their ne∣cessitous and wicked parents are trained up in idleness, ignorance and malice, their pa∣rents own trade (made their miserable child's portion); and by that bad art, to which they needed no Master, they become able cheats, cut-purses and thieves; and so by that accursed trading often gain a halter and hell to boot. The Provost of the Merchants and Magistrates were excited, by this probable occasion of fu∣ture mischief to the City, to study the pre∣vention of it; and to turn a threatning mis∣chief, to a present mercy: Which was done as follows. Two noble Germans, as it seems to be inti∣mated,
had long ago purchased two Acres of land near St. Denise's Gate, out of a pious de∣sign to lodge poor Pilgrims, who coming weary might sooner meet, with a lodging, than, in a manner with the town it self. To this pur∣pose they raised from the ground a noble fair Hall (together with some other buildings) of twenty one fathome and half long, six in breadth, and four in heighth within. This in tract of time being put to idle, impertinent and even prophane uses, the Parliament and Magistrates, out of their wisdome and charity, rescued it out of prophaness, and applyed it to the work of mercy, for which it now serves. viz. They took all the Boys which passed seven years of age out of their poor and un∣godly parents hands, and placed them in this Hospital; the care whereof was committed to five honest and able Burgesses, who pro∣vided them of men and maids to serve them. As all beginnings are weak, so was this in par∣ticular. Their small beginning stock would hardly reach to two meals a day, till the Cha∣rity of some Burgesses added to their small pittance. They are clad in blew Coats and Capps, and the place affords them food and instruction till they grow up to years of dis∣cretion: and then they are bound Apprentices to certain Journey-men of divers trades; who to this purpose are admitted to live in certain houses, all within the compass of the Hospi∣tal for certain years, and by that means to pass Masters. A Priviledge which the town
allowed of for the good of those poor Chil∣dren, who by this means are enabled to gain their livelihood honestly by their labours, without being a burthen, or a mischief to the town &c. They amount at present to the number of one hundred and fifty. CHAP. VIII. Of the Hospital of les enfants rouges, or, God's Children, as a King of France would have them called: in the Street Portfoin near the Temple: And of the Hospital called the Misericorde, or, Work of Mercy. PRovision being already made for poor Or∣phans of Paris, as well Boys and Girls, as also for Boys taken out of the hands of wick∣ed parents; still new inventive Charity sets up another Hospital, for the assistance of other fatherless and motherless boys, of the villages round about Paris, being about ten or twelve years of age, or under. This blessed work was founded by that vertuous Lady Margaret Queen of Navar and Dutchess of Bar, whom Belforest stiles the mirrour of the Ladies of her time. To this the Charity of good peo∣ple contributed, and in tract of time built a new Chappel and other lodgings. These are clothed in red to intimate Cha∣rity:
and as well these as the Blew-boys gain part of their livelihood by carrying Torches at the funerals of such as desire them. They are now only about the number of forty. Of the Hospital called the Misericorde, or, Work of Mercy. Monsieur Anthony Seiguier, the second Presi∣dent in Parliament, was the noble Founder there∣of extending it self to the number of one hun∣dred Girls, who are plentifully provided of all things necessary. So that certainly this Cha∣rity could not mount to less, all things con∣sidered, than to thirty or forty thousand pounds sterling. In the first place he raised them a fair and regular house from the ground, with a very decent and competent Chappel thereto ad∣joining. The house consists of three quarters (a body as it were and two arms); the fourth quarter being industriously left unbuilt, to receive the morning Sun, and so to afford a wholsome air to those young children. It contains in the first story (the lower rooms being imployed for Refectory, Work-house, Kitchin, Wash-house and other offices) four great Chambers singularly well peirced and aired: in every one whereof there are twenty five iron beds, with white coverlets, each one having her bed apart. They are modestly, handsomely, and whol∣somely attired in Violet cloth and decent lin∣nen,
and well fed. Secondly, He hath or∣dered that they shall all of them be such as want both father and mother, Natives of Paris, town or suburbs; begotten in lawful marri∣age, and destitute of all assistance. Thirdly, They must be six or seven years old before they can be admitted; where they are entertained till they be twenty five (unless haply they have leave for their own advan∣tage to go to some religious house which de∣sires them, or to some good Lady, Gentile∣woman, or Burgess to serve them, or to learn some trade by their means and assistance) and furnished with all necessaries. They have over each Chamber a Mistress to keep good order among them, and to breed them up in vertue and all convenient works, under the conduct of a grave Governor, and learned Doctor of Sorborne, the chief Governor thereof. Fourthly, At their departure, the house allowes each one an hundred Franks to help to settle them in the world, in marriage or other∣wise. Finally, The wise Founder of it bequeathed it to the direction and care of divers Coun∣cellors and Masters of Requests, whereof a person of honour, Mr. Monthalon, was the chief in his kind; as a grave and learned Doctor of Sorborne is always to be the chief and im∣mediate Governor, especially in Spirituality: The first President of the Parliament and the Procurator general are also Sur-intendants (honorarii) of this place.
CHAP. IX. Of the Hospital in St. German's Suburbs, called la petit Maison. Of the Hospital of the three hundred Blind-men, called Quinze vingt. And of the Hospital called, The Providence. THE Children of both Sexes being well provided-for as above, the Charity of the good Magistrates was called to the care of poor aged and distressed persons, as well men as women, whose age and impotency hindred them to gain their living. They are divided into two quarters, the men living apart from the women. This House was for the most part as well built as endowed by the bounti∣ful Charity of Mr. Boulencour, Counsellor to the King, and President of his Chamber des compts, who erected many lodgings and cham∣bers for the lame and impotent &c. They are furnished with meat, drink, and all things necessary, from the grand Bureaux des pauvres, as it is commonly called; which is in effect the great Court of Audience in order to works of Charity, of which I intend to make a par∣ticular description hereafter. Further this Hospital receives poor Vaga∣bonds, as well Boys as Girls, who have got∣ten
scald Pates by lying in the streets, or un∣der Shop-stalls, or otherwise; who are dili∣gently dressed, purged and frequently cured, as it hath happened to above two hundred in this place. Here are also received poor Women, who are subject to the falling sickness, as also o∣thers who are distracted and run up and down the streets in a frantick manner; who yet by good usage are often in length of time recover∣ed to their wits. The grand Bureau de pauv∣res provides this house with a Governor, who is at present a very able Surgeon; who out of his singular charity makes choice to dwell a∣mongst those miserable Creatures, the better to be able to assist them. And he is so far from inriching himself by his loathsome practice, that contrarily he freely spends his own fortunes upon them, in ma∣king many Medicaments and compositions, with hopes to cure their desperate infirmities, as it often happens; or at least to solace their pains. This good man hath another of the same profession, to assist him in that blessed imployment. He liveth near to the place, and fails not to be with them every day, or even as oft as he is called-for, to apply the re∣medies, which the other provides accord∣ing to his order. And whereas this place serves also for a house of correction, there are two prisons to tame incorrigible persons; and to that effect there are four Porters taken out of charity (by reason
of some infirmity) as the rest are, who are ordered to watch over the comportments of the poor, in point of words or actions, or any inveterate vice they may have contracted in their rude Education; and accordingly to apprehend them by the Governors direction. This is not one of the least Charities of Paris, by reason of the strange subjects they are to deal withal, whereof some through their de∣crepit age need continual assistance, others in respect of their irregular and accidental dis∣eases must always have eyes upon them: o∣thers want wit either to assist themselves, or to render themselves capable of assistance with∣out much labour. And others finally through their rudeness and incorrigibleness deserve no assistance at all, unless Charity taught Chri∣stians to render good for evil, and to serve Je∣sus Christ in the worst of his members. Of the Hospital of the three hundred Blind-men, commonly called the Quinze-vingt. That great King and Saint Lovis the ninth was the first Founder. The first occasion of it, as is delivered by Belleforest in the first Tome of his Annals, was the misfortune of three hundred Gentlemen, who having been left Hostages in the Holy land by the said King, were treacherously and cruelly sent home to him with their eyes put out; for whom he made this place. He built them a large Church in a place, as then a wood, which he enriched
with many holy Relicks: Whereof the most precious are, a Peice of our Saviour's Cross; Bones of St. Stephen, and St. Lambert; a Peice of the same St. Stephen first Martyr, as also of St. Matthew the Apostle, and St. Blaise: Bones of St. Laurence; Bones of St. John, St. Paul, St. Martin and St. Hillary, with many more. The Hospital called the Providence, Was founded by that most incomparable Queen Regent, Anne de Austrice, bestowing a House and spacious garden upon the Inhabitants, situated in St. Marceaux Suburbs, and erect∣ing it into a Seminary; where there are always about eighty in number. In this are settled a company of grave Maids; who live most regularly and exemplarly in secular state, being very gravely and modestly attired after the manner of good widdows in the world. Their blessed imployment is to receive gratis, instruct, and direct (in order to their present and fu∣ture happiness) certain poor Maids, who are destitute of parents and means: and consequent∣ly run great hazard, to lose that which can never afterwards be recovered; and to be put withal, together with that irreparable loss, into the high way of perdition. Meanwhile all the other pious inventions of Paris had not reached to the prevention of this danger. For however there are multitudes of Hospitals for the education of poor Girls of a meaner con∣dition:
yet these here, to whom the Queen Regent extended her charity, being for the most part Gentlewomen of noble extraction and condition, Hospitals would but very ill suit with hearts born to better; which accord∣ing to humane frailty flesh and blood cannot easily forget. It was her care then and liberality which provided them of this safe Sanctuary, where they are secured from the arrow flying in the day, from business walking in the night, from invasion, and the Mid day devil. And while they happily live in this holy vacancy from danger, they so improve themselves in vertue and good works, that some of them become capable thereby to be admitted into some cha∣ritable Monastery: others in time meet with marriages suitable to their conditions: and some finally by their ripeness in vertue, and care to follow the footsteps of their Mistresses, are judged fit to be made Mistresses themselves, and to remain there to exhibite the like Charities to others, as they themselves have received.
CHAP. X. Of the Hospital named la Charitie, in St. German's Suburbs. THis Hospital is governed by a company of Religious men, of the order of a Holy man called blessed Jean de Dieu, or John of God; the first Instituter of the same, under the Rule of St. Augustine. They add to the three essential Vows of Religion That of serving the sick all their life long. The extent of their Charity goes thus far, That they ad∣mit of all poor, sick and wounded persons of the Male Sex, without exception, save only such as have incurable or contagious dis∣eases. The Hospital it self is nobly built, well situated, and as neatly kept, as most private houses in the town. What is wholly deputed to the use of the sick consists of three long Galleries or Halls; whereof the greatest con∣tains eighty four handsome beds, with decent curtains, and is especially imployed to receive honest poor Burgesses, whose house it may seem to be (so ordinarily are they lodged there.) The second is furnished with thirty two beds, equal to the former, and it is wholly alotted for wounded men. The third contains twenty two beds, and
is for young Boys who are cut for the Stone. As to their manner of receiving the sick, it is full of humility and mildness. At their arrival one of the Religious washes their feet, which was the ancient and good manner of Hospitality. Then they are laid in a bed alone, as all the rest are (save the little children) with fair clean sheets, clean shirts, pillowbeers, night-caps, and a table napkin, as also a night gown, pantobles, a basin to spit in, and a pot, and a cup to drink in. Their manner of treat∣ing the sick is to have them visited by the Doctor every day once at least, accompanied by the Infirmarian, the Apothecary, and the Sur∣geon, who orders what Physick they are to take, what to eat, drink, &c. And still from three hours to three hours they take some∣thing or other to refresh and comfort them; as new laid eggs, broth, a coulis, jelley, or comfeitures. In fine those good Religious never desert them day, nor night, but watch with them by turns. For the good of their Souls, they are advised upon their first coming to prepare themselves to make a general confession, as the most ex∣cellent and necessary remedy; God's merciful providence oft permitting our corporal sick∣nesses, for the cure of our spiritual infirmities. Either then presently, in case they be danger∣ously sick, or at least the next day, they re∣ceive the holy Communion, which is brought to them by the Priest, before Mass, being ac∣companied by all the Religious, which go all
processionally (with wax candles in their hands) singing the Pange lingua, and veni Creator. Afterwards they hear Mass every day, which is said in the same place, with many other Anthems and Prayers sung by the Religious. They are also taught their Christian doctrine, thrice a week; and besides that a Religious is appointed to instruct them more particularly in point of their Prayers, the Sacraments, &c. Before dinner and supper they are ordered to say Pater, and Ave, for their Benefactors, while the Religious recite the Psalm Miserere, and De profundis; and then they wash their hands, and hear the Blessing of the Table said with a loud voice. When any one is dangerously ill, and drawing towards his Agony, all the religious are called together by ringing the Bell, and come with lighted Tapers in their hands, to say the Prayers appointed by the Church in such circumstances. That done there is a Religious left with them, to assist and comfort them till death. Being dead they are decently brought out and buried: all the Religious being present, with lighted Torches in their hands, who say the office for the dead, and sing the Mass of Requiem for the good of their Souls. And indeed all things are so well disposed in this place, and even so gently, regularly and religiously as to all conveniences, which concern either body or soul, that not only good Burgesses, but with∣all, persons of great quality make choice of it in their sickness. And some of them were so
much edified with that religious treatment, that a pious Knight of England returned home so well seasoned with the agreeable odour of that excellent Charity, which he saw done to any without exception, that by his last Will and Testament he bequeathed nine hundred Livres to that blessed place. CHAP. XI. Of the Hospital General. THis Hospital is called but one (Hospital General) but branches it self into six vast places. That which bears the name, and has the Sur-intendance of all the rest, is situated in St. Victor's Suburbs (close by the Abby of that name) and is known by a more particu∣lar name, our Lady's of Pitty; which the Masters and Administrators of the place built, having to that purpose bought divers houses and gardens, and alotted them all, to receive, lodge, and nourish poor old women and young girls, whereof there are at this hour twelve hundred and odd. The Hospitals depending upon this, are the Salpetriere, Biscestre, Scipion, the Teigniery, and the Savonnery: In which six places, above eight thousand poor Creatures are contained and maintained at present, by the care of the King, and the Magistrates, and the free and common
Charities of all the people, which is re∣ceived in small trunks or boxes, placed in Churches and Shops all the town over. The Salpetriere is far the most ample of all these places, being built from the ground in a fair and regular Quadrangle, and is capable of four or five thousand persons. It is finely situated in a Meadow by the river side, over against the Arcenal. It was especially deputed to the use of Vagabonds and Beggars, which importuned and infested all Paris, whither they swarmed from all the Provinces. It is divided in the use of it into three quarters. One quarter is imployed to lodge poor fami∣lies, not otherwise able to live. Another for men who are obliged to work according to their abilities: And the third for little Girls even from two years old. Scipion is in St. Marceaux Suburbs, and is wholly imployed in a work of singular Chari∣ity: viz. Poor women with child, who have not means at home to be brought to bed, are freely received there, brought to bed and lye in, being provided of Nurses and all things fitting in such a condition. The Castle of Bicestre is an ancient building standing a little out of St. Victor's Suburbs. It is for those who have strength and ability to work. There are in it at this time about eighteen hundred men, who are kept closely to the exercise of their divers trades. The Teignery is in St. German's Suburbs; and is imployed to keep one hundred and twenty,
who are troubled with skal'd heads. As the Savatery is alotted for the charitable enter∣tainments of sixty poor sickly boys. Now as this is the thing of most publick and general concern of all the rest, as being a royal Establishment, and royally endowed by his Majesties liberal Concessions in many kinds; and as the end of it is, not only to relieve the poor for the present, but to prevent poverty and beggary for the time to come: great Art and Industry is used, to train up the younger sort in such manufactures as may always afford them an honest livelihood: and others who, though strong and lusty, and well able to work, yet choosed rather to live in idleness, and beg their bread, are now taught and forced to gain it by their labours. Which that it might be followed without any interruption, it is or∣dered by publick authority, that when any of them happens to be sick they are transported to the Hostel Dieu, that general Refugium Af∣flictorum which never refuseth any. Hence it is that the greatest Officers of his Majesties Court of Justice, Magistrates, &c. are intrust∣ed, and take a religious concern in the men∣agement of this vast work, in quality of ho∣nourable Survisors, having store of able, honest, and intelligent Burgesses, to put in execution what by their frequent assemblies and confer∣rences is found most conducing to the pub∣lick welfare. And no less care is taken for the spiritual advancement of those lazy Vagabonds, who
were too neglectful of their Souls good, and would willingly have loitered it out in the streets and by-corners, with too probable hazard of eternal perdition; had they not been forced in, according to the Gospel, with fair hopes to gain the day-penny of Beatitude. This care is principally left to the wise con∣duct of a Sorborn Doctor, of great learning and vertuous reputation, his name is Mr. Polier, Governor of this Hospital in chief, Director of the Visitation, and of the Carmelites. He humbles himself to take a place, and live a∣mong these Beggars: which as it is a place of little splendor, so proves it to him of less e∣molument; save only that it affords him full utterance for ten or twelve thousand franks a year, which he stood possessed of in patrimony or benefices before he embraced that dear beggarly preferment. He has the sollicitudes of all the six places upon his own shoulders, being assisted with a matter of twenty pious Priests, who incessantly under his directions preach, teach, instruct, comfort, confess, com∣municate, &c. Here it must not be omitted to God's Glory, and the Honour of those ex∣cellent Ladies of Charity, so-often mentioned above with deserved commendations; That they were the first Movers to this vast work; by whom Mr. Vincent was often in their weekly charitable Assemblies sollicited, yea impor∣tuned to give way to, and accompany, their zeal in that kind. But his grave counsel still was, That they went too fast a pace for him (whose
custome was to walk slowly) to keep com∣pany with them. That it was a business of so great importance, and so vast extent, whe∣ther one looked upon the manner how to com∣pass it, or the means to maintain it, that it required a long and mature deliberation. For the rest, that he was singularly edified with their zeal, and infinitely blessed God in it. The first Lady that spoke freely offered to∣wards this great work fifty thousand Livres. The second was ready to oblige her self to give three thousand Livres annual rent. In fine they assured him again and again that there should be no want of means, since many La∣dies of their acquaintances were resolved to contribute in a very large measure. Whereupon Father Vincent had recourse to the Queen Regent, and obtained of her free Charity the Salpebry (as he had before the Castle of Biscestre) which he and those vertu∣ous Ladies, upon better consideration and se∣cond thoughts, freely consigned up into the hands of the Magistrates, who had not only stronger arms (for stronger and more coura∣gious hearts they could not have) to weald so heavy a frame, but by their power withall they were able to call many hands to lighten the burthen. Meanwhile these noble Ladies threw notable summes into these stronger hands; not much caring by whom, so God's work were done. And by their own and the good Fathers care and cost a great quantity of linnen beds, and other moveables, toge∣ther
with ten thousand Shirts by number were provided for God's new House-keepers, and to make the poor welcome. They opened their hands to the needy, and stretched out their palms to the poor: Let their works praise them in the gates of heaven. CHAP. XII. Of the great Hospital called l' Hostel Dieu, or, God's House. THE perfect Description of this vast Fa∣mily is of a work rather to be admired, than to be expressed to the full. It is a Sea which still so ebbs and flows, that it is continual high-water, still a full Sea there. Scarce a day in the year passes, but there are fifty, sixty, eighty, or sometime a hundred new Commers; and haply too a like num∣ber may depart to make place for their poor neighbours, whether as being recovered and sent back to their own houses, or dead and sent to their graves. In a word, this Sea is ever so growing, and so grown, That twenty at least, or twenty five, thousand come and re∣turn, or dye in a years space. Those of any Country, or Religion, or Age, or Sex, or sick of whatever disease, excepting the Pestilence (who necessarily are excluded
for the safety of the rest) are here equally ad∣mitted. They rather laying two or three poor boys in one bed than refusing any. Their ordinary numbers are always vast; they have rarely less than seventeen, or eighteen hun∣dred, often times two thousand, nay some∣times they pass three thousand; as I was cer∣tainly informed by one of the Doctors thereof. Yet that great Provisor, who with five barley loaves and two fishes could satiate a far greater multitude in the wild Desart, can when he pleaseth, and doth in due time, open the hearts and purses of the good Parisians to feed those huge numbers of his distressed members. And however their constant annual Revenues mount to an immense summe; viz. to two hundred fifty eight thousand three hundred and thirteen Livres French, as it is stated by the Admini∣strators of the place, yet are they still obliged to lift their hands up to their heavenly foster father, for sixty seven thousand three hundred Livres (sometimes less, sometimes more) in common years, which yet out of his singular mercy never fails to rise out of the free charity of particular persons. As for the first and principal Founders or Benefactors of this place, as it is found in the Antiquities of Paris, in the year six hundred and sixty, St. Landry the twenty eighth Bishop of Paris, in the reign of King Clovis the second, was the first who put a hand to this holy work, now called God's House, where he nourished the poor out of his own Revenues.
In the year 1258 (according to Gagnin) St. Lewis King of France imployed a great summe, to inlarge the said Hospital, and to augment the Revenues thereof, as saith William Nangis in his life. The Chappel was built by a Bur∣gess of Paris named Gudart Mocreux, as ap∣pears upon a plate of brass in old rhimes. In the year of our Lord 1535. Chancellor Pratte, who was afterwards Cardinal, and Le∣gate in France, made this Hospital be very much amplified by the addition of one spaci∣ous room, which is called the Legates Hall. He gave withal a great substance to maintain the poor of the place, the Religious women who serve them, and the Surgeons, Doctors, and to buy Physick. In the year 1602. King Henry the great caused the great and little Hall of St. Thomas to be re-edifyed. They were begun the fore∣said year, and were finished in the year 1606. together with the three massy Pillars which were raised out of the River. Thus by many hands and sundry additional endeavours at divers times it grew up at length into a huge bulk; yet for all that, it was neither answerable to their large hearts who have the care of it, nor to the vast num∣ber of the poor and needy which continually super-abounds. Whereas therefore the Land could afford them no Elbow-room, the place being limited on all sides (viz. with two streets, our Ladies Church, and the river) they forced the River to afford them place by making a
bridge over the back of it, upon which they have gained a fair large and long Gallery, and by that again they discovered a way open to a greater inlargement: for having purchased a company of old buildings on the other side of the water, they raised upon their ruines a stately vast, and even a royal, quarter consist∣ing of three most spacious Halls, all of hewn stone. Nor are these and the old Halls divided by the River, but it is even it which affords a fair large Court in the middle of them; which is no less agreeable to the eye, than useful for the sick to take the air, and to air the whole house. All the ancient building consists of four great Halls and seven Offices. The Legates Hall, and the New Hall, are ap∣pointed for sick women. The Hall of women brought to bed is assigned for their lying in. The Hall of the Infirmary is alotted for men that are most sick. The Office of St. Denise is for those that are wounded. The Office of St. Thomas for sick men. The Office belonging to Dame Prioress, and three other Religious, is imployed to wind the Dead. The Office of the Wash-house is used to dry the Linnen of the sick and that of the Community. The Office of the Watchers for those who watch with the sick fifteen nights together. The Office of her who keeps the Trunck and the Relicks, and dresses the Church for that use.
The Office of the Porter is deputed to re∣ceive the sick, to see them visited, lodged and confessed. who is withal to give out bread and wine for them. There is also an Apothecary where Oint∣ments, Salves and medicinal Druggs are kept in a readiness. A great Wash-house for all the Clothes in general. A little one where thrice a day they wash the Linnen of such as are more grievously sick. The Vestery out of which the sick are furnished with beds, which yet might rather be called the trash-house, wherein all the poor peoples riches, I mean their raggs, are kept for their use. There are also many more places for the Priests (who are ten constantly, besides many others, who out of their particular devotion come frequently to instruct and comfort the sick) and domestical servants &c. as every one will easily conceive. There are also four Drs of Physick entertained in ordinary with Sur∣geons to the number of twelve. As for the number and quality of those who tend the sick: all the Halls and Offices, and all these multitudes of sick and lame creatures, are looked to, tended and provided for, by the painful and perpetual labours of about a hundred vertuous Nuns of St. Augustines Order (who make their solemn profession of three Vows, of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, in the presence of the Dean and Canons of our blessed lady, who have all spiritual and temporal
jurisdiction in this place): These few Religi∣ous Virgins (few I say compared to the vast numbers of the sick) freely renouncing their own liberty, and all hopes of worldly prefer∣ment, to become the servants of the most poor despisable servants of God: that I may not say their slaves, since a more abject and slavish life can hardly be devised. Whence Boteras an ancient Poet, admiring the charity and constancy of the said Religious women, who serve the sick amidst so much filth and infecti∣on, expresses himself in four Latine Verses to this effect. They make themselves the Slaves of sick and lame, To dress the loathsome sores we scarce dare name, Their Balm is Gore; their Civet, festered wounds, Hence th' odour of their Vertue more abounds. They wash all the clothes of those multi∣tudes of nasty goary impotent, and even too often impudent, people, even in the most rigo∣rous cold of winter; then they stand in the river all the day long in great stiff boots, not unlike to those of Fishermen, be it frost or snow, with their Beetles in their hands, being many times all garnished round about their habits with Icicles. Further they must every one in their turns serve them with their meat, drink, and all things necessary. They must turn and wind them in their bed, make the same, dress their scabs, and wounds &c. watch them amidst
the gastly horror of the night, where Death is domineering in the Hall round about them: Finally assist them dying in great numbers, wind their dead bodies, and send them to their Graves. This ample Charity conceived also that it was not enough to relieve poor people in their sickness, and to send them home being pretty well recovered to make place for others, ac∣cording to the necessity of the place: unless their Charity provided further for their fu∣ture well being, and re-establishment in their accustomed strength and vigour; relapses be∣ing frequently found more dangerous than the sickness it self. Hereupon it was, that those considerate persons took a house not far di∣stant, where those new Convalescents have liberty to pass a longer time in that fresher air, and so wholly to confirm their strength. The Good Sisters of the Hostel Dieu have yet two houses more, which depend upon their cha∣ritable assistance; viz. St. Lewis in St. Lauren∣ces Suburbs, a most spacious, magnificent and truly King-like Building, whose Majestical a∣spect speaks the greatness of a royal Founder, Henry the Great. And another called la Santè, a little distant from St. Marzeaux Suburbs. And they are both alotted to the relief of poor people, who may chance to be afflicted with the plague, whom these good Souls have the heroical Cha∣rity to tend. In their ordinary imploy in their Hostel Dieu
they freely give themselves over to the most abject and slavish life imaginable. But in this they sacrifice up themselves to the most dismal death possible. So that they put the highest rate upon their Charity that man is capable of, as is made good by our Saviour himself, no man hath a greater Charity than to give his life for his friends. CHAP. XIII. Of the Hospital called Our Ladies of the Incurables. THere is also an Hospital founded on set purpose for the poor Incurables; where if Christian Charity cannot cure their desperate diseases, she may at least solace them in their continuing afflictions. And this blessed office of Christianity is performed with so much sweetness and affectionate care in this place, that those poor desolate creatures observing that they suffer not alone, but that their bre∣thren in Christ bear a part of their burthen with them by compassion, they seem to be half cured. The illustrious person who first invented and founded this heavenly habitation, second∣ed by the bountiful liberalities of his pious Ma∣jesty Lewis the thirteenth, who freed them not onely of all duties belonging to the Crown,
but also gave them his Rights of Entrees of Wine &c. together with a general exemption from all subsidies and impositions &c. This illustrious Patron, I say, was the most religious and eminent Cardinal de Rushfaucaud, who lived, beyond the ordinary course of nature, to fee a good part of this design on foot. To which he contributed bountifully. viz. He endowed the place with a yearly rent in perpe∣tuum of three thousand and six hundred Franks, or three hundred and sixty Pistols, and laid down wherewith to build a fair Church and two Halls in the year 1637. The place fixed upon for this most agreeable work was in St. German's Suburbs, in a most healthful and delicious air, consisting of no less than ten acres of ground in one fair peice. There the vast Charity of Paris finds a large field to dilate it self upon. And in very deed it seems it will meet with work enough for a long time, since, as I am told, the Design is to build eight or ten fair large Halls, all to be fur∣nished with beds, as we see at present, with comely white fustian curtains, with each one a straw bed, a feather bed and a good quilt, to∣gether with an Altar to every Hall, where those impotent people may hear Mass in their beds. Of all these designed Halls there are as yet only four perfected. The excellent Administrators of the place are yearly improving the Revenues, as well by common Charities, which by their singular industry and dexterity they procure, as by
the addition of their own means, one of them paying fifteen hundred Livres French, or one hundred and fifty Pistols for himself and his man per annum, and freely contributing as much more yearly out of pure Charity, besides three thousand pounds which he gave the first year to plant and beautify the garden. So that their purely charitable and successful labours, together with their own liberalities, heighten their hopes to such a degree, that they confi∣dently propose to themselves to extend that pious foundation, which was first made for a dozen onely (six men, and six women) to four hundred. Nor will it be much to be doubted of (if God grant life to those admirable Pro∣visors, in whose management the place now flourishes); since by their care, liberality, and prosperous endeavours they have already in a few years multiplied twelve, to one hun∣dred and sixty, which are entertained at pre∣sent. And indeed God's Blessing hath already so visibly appeared upon this holy foundation that since the year 1637, till this present year 1666 (the year wherein this relation was first published) it is augmented by the Charities of Paris, in point of buildings, to the value of five hundred thousand french Livres, and as much more in foundation of beds, making in all a french Million, besides sixty thousand Livres in annual Revenues. That part which relates to the bodily care of the Incurables, and the continual assistances which are necessary for those poor creatures which are incapable
in the least to help themselves, is performed by good young-men (as to the poor men) who out of Devotion subject themselves to that abject imployment, taking a reasonable con∣sideration for that holy and hard service. And as to the women, there are modest Secular Maids, who comply with the like good offices with much religion, sweetness and compassion. The other duty, which concerns their Souls, is abundantly discharged by the continual solli∣citudes of a company of most pious Priests, who live in the place, to be ready upon every call; and who are so absolutely free from all self interest that they pour out their own sub∣stance in that Christian Service, in lieu of ga∣thering together any riches thereby. Witness Mr. Despond the Vicar, who hath the chief charge of the Spirituality of the place, who out of his own Patrimony (in a few years that he hath lived there) hath given to the house above twelve thousand Livres; with inten∣tion to leave his fair and well chosen Library, which is worth ten thousand more, for the use thereof. In a word the beautiful contrivance of the whole building, the excellency of the situation, and the odour of the admirable Charity practiced therein, delightfully allures persons of great worth and honour to reside there, Abbots, Counsellors, &c: Who, after they have given ample testimonies of their a∣bilities in profitably serving the publick the best of their years, know to make a holy re∣treat, and to sacrifice up the honourable rest
of what they sometimes were, to God along in that devout Sanctuary, where they build themselves noble quarters during their lives, to be left to the Hospital as Monuments of their Piety after their deaths. Most worthily may be added to these that most famous Bishop of Beslay, that Lover of the poor and poverty, which he truly practi∣ced; for tho he did not actually live with them, yet did his affection and approbation always accompany them, his ambition, as he oft said, never going higher than to be reputed a poor Chaplain of that holy family: Hence he left them what he had, and the relicks of what he had been to be interred in their Church. Re∣quiescat in pace. CHAP. XIV. Of divers other Charities, which cannot so well be particularized. THere are many other excellent works of Charity exercised in Paris. As in that Hospital of the Racquet in the Suburbs of St. Anthony's, which depends on another in the Town behind the Place Royal; governed by a company of good Nuns of St. Augustine's Order, who receive a many good Burgesses in their infirmities and incommodities, and treat them with much charity and goodness, afford∣ing
them handsome beds, good diet, and all things necessary. There are other two houses; effects of the late Charities of Paris: the one for men, and the other for women newly converted. The first in St. Victor's Suburbs; the other near St. Eustache's. They are taken in, and maintained gratis for three months space at least, to be thoroughly instructed and constant∣ly setled in the truth. God so blessed the pious endeavours of a good Lady called Madam D'Estang, among the good people of Paris, That she has pro∣cured subsistance for two hundred and fifty poor young Maids (which her care hath ga∣thered together); who by her grave prudence are modestly and christianly bred, and care∣fully kept out of harms way; to which that Sex and those green years are but too incident. Multitudes of Girls are taught (for meer Charity) to serve God, to read, to write, to work divers kinds of work, whereby they are enabled to become good Housewifes at home, or to gain their liveli-hood among the Merchants: Taught as well in Religious houses, especially the Ʋrsulanes, whose proper Pro∣fession it is, as in divers particular Congrega∣tions (which are common all over Paris) where good Widdows and ancient Matrons devote themselves to that pious care. To conclude, poor distressed people of the general Hospital, the otherwise deserted Gally∣slaves, and the desolate Prisoners, often expe∣rience
the comfortable visits of the noblest Ladies of Paris: who solace the first with their affable and pious Discourse; and oftentimes deliver the later by paying the summe for which they were imprisoned. One of the most principal of pious Works being, the building Churches for God's pub∣lick Service, and houses of Religious, by whom he may be more constantly, and with∣out all secular distractions, adored. The City of Paris for these is much renowned, the Ca∣tholick Piety of which in thirty years space hath produced at least forty considerable Churches and Chappels with fair Monasteries to the most of them. A particular Catalogue of which is here exhibited. In St. James's Suburbs are these which follow. 1. The Institution of the Oratory. 2. Port Royal. 3. Vall de Grace. 4. The Fuliantines. 5. The Ʋrsulines. 6. The Visitation. In St. German's Suburbs. 7. Calvaire. 8. The Carmes 9. The Jesuites Novitiate 10. The Misericordia. 11. The Dixe Vertue. 12. Chasse Midy. 13. The Incurables. 14. Belchace. 15. The Jacobines. 16. The Petits Austines In St. Mercel's Suburbs. 17. The Misericordia. 18. The Pitie.
In the Ʋniversity. 19. St. Stephen's re-edi∣fied a New. 20. The Sorbon. 21. Clermont. 22. St. Nicholas now making all a New. 23. Bons Enfants. In the Isle de Nostre Dame. 24. St. Lewis. In the Isle de Palais. 25. The Barnabites. In St. Honories Suburbs. 26. Villevesque. 27. Conception. 28. The Assumption. 29. The Feulliens. 30. St. Roch. In the Town it self. 31. The Oratorians. 32. The little Augu∣stines. 33. The Nuns of St. Thomas. 34. The Carmelites. 35. St. Eustace re edified. 36. The Carmelites, rue Chapan. 37. The Jesuites, rue St. Anthony. 38. The Visitation, rue S. Anthony. 39. The Minimes. 40. The Carmes Mitigez Now if thus much be said for the Piety which appears in the Walls, what might not justly be said for the religious lives of the heavenly Inhabitants? Who endeavouring to follow the Evangelical Counsels (which certainly were not given by Wisdome it self to fall fruit∣less to the ground; to be neglected by all men,
to be imitated by none;) of a more perfect way of life than the meer keeping the Com∣mandments (as these oblige all men under pen∣alty of sin) went and sold, or abandoned, all that they had, and all that they could hope for in this world (to become thereby the poor of Christ, and take up their Cross, that is a penitential life) gave it to the poor, and fol∣lowed him; by imitating his divine, chastity, poverty and obedience, as far forth as by his grace they are capable thereof. Who have but one heart and one soul in our Lord, one common habitation, one purse, one pantery, and live at such a distance from any real propriety, that these cold words, Meum & Tuum, Mine and Thine (the sourse of all dissentions) are banish∣ed out of their Society. Whose whole appli∣cation, as well by profession as practice, is to God and godly Studies; whose exercise is to pray and sing heavenly Psalms, Hymns, and Canticles, before the throne of God, day and night; in a word, whose Conversation is in∣tirely in Heaven. FINIS.
