D943A 12264527 57955
A VOYAGE TO THE East-Indies: GIVING An Account of the Isles of Madagas∣car, and Mascareigne, of Suratte, the Coast of Malabar, of Goa, Gameron, Ormus, and the Coast of Brasil, with the Religion, Customs, Trade, &c. Of the Inhabitants, as also a Trea∣tise, of the Distempers peculiar to the Eastern Countries. To which is Annexed an Abstract of Mon∣sieur de Rennefort's History of the East-Indies, with his Propositions for the improvement of the East-India Company. Written Originally in French, By Mr. DELLON, M. D. LONDON, Printed for D. Browne, at the Black-Swan without Temple-Bar; A. Roper, at the Black-Boy; and T. Leigh, at the Pea∣cock, both in Fleet-Street, 1698.
TO THE WORTHY Samuel Sheppard, Esq SHERIFF Elect for the CITY of LONDON And COUNTY of MIDDLESEX. SIR, when I saw so considerable a part of the Nation join'd in the design of settling the East-India Trade upon a new Foundation, I thought I could scarce pitch upon a more seasonable juncture, than this, to make my Authors appear in Eng∣land, to give us an account of their
ten Years Transactions, among the same Nations, where in all probabi∣lity our Indian Trade is to be carri∣ed on to the Honour and Advantage of the English Nation. I will not pretend to enlarge my self here up∣on the usefulness of Commerce in General, or of that of the Indies in Particular; if the station I am in did not excuse me from undertaking that task, the universal consent of all civilized Nations, who look upon traffick as one of the main Pillars of the prosperity of the Common-Wealth, is a demonstration suffici∣ent to over-balance any thing that can be said upon so ample a subject by a private hand. And as to what relates to the Indian Trade in particular, our Neighbours the
Dutch, who have made it the foun∣dation stone of the present flourish∣ing State of their Common-wealth, are living instances, to convince us what improvements may be made in this kind, if managed by a dextrous hand. I might in this place have made some Reflections, perhaps not altogether useless, upon the present condition of some of the Indian Countries, especially upon those on the Coast of Malabar, who being divided into so many petty Princi∣palities, and for the most part Situ∣ated very convenient for Traffick, seem to invite us to be sharers with them in the vast advantages the East-India Trade affords: But when I considered with my self the extra∣ordinary ability of the Person, un∣to
whom I was making my addres∣ses, and on the other hand what slender share of experience I had in these affairs, I was not without reason afraid I should run my self into the same Error a certain an∣cient Grecian Philosopher did, who being Honoured with a Visit by that renown'd African Warriour Han∣nibal, entertain'd him with a very long and tedious lesson concerning the duty of a General. I will inge∣nuously confess, it was chiefly upon the score of your Merits, and the reputation you have so deservedly acquired in the management of an affair of the utmost consequence to the Glory and Advantage of the English Nation, that when these Indian Travellers after their return
home from a long and most dange∣rous Voyage, were to make their appearance among us; I judg'd I could not recommend them to the protection of any other person, than your self, who both for your Abi∣lity and Zeal, have given such am∣ple demonstrations to the World in what relates to the affairs of the East-Indies; that, as your Judgment, by the consent of all sides, is unquesti∣onable, so these Travellers have all the reason imaginable to promise themselves due Encouragement from your generous inclinations. Before I conclude; I cannot pass by in silence, and apply with some small alterations here, the words Mr. Rennefort makes use of in respect of the French East-India Company; that since our pre∣sent
East-India Company is establish∣ed by the consent of the representa∣tives of the whole Nation, under the protection of his present Majesty, who by his most Glorious Actions, has made himself both Admired and Redoubted in far distant Countries, we have all the reason to hope, that under the Direction of such Persons, who have an equal share of Experi∣ence, Conduct and Honour, they may in time, at least equalize, if not out-vie the rest of the European Na∣tions that have established themselves in the East-Indies. Which is the hearty wish of him, who subscribes himself, Sir, Your Humble Servant, J. C. Med. D.
THE PREEACE TO THE READER. THE ensuing Treatise, falling by chance into my hands; after a full perusal of it, I thought it highly worth my care of making it appear in the World under an English Garb, at a time, when our Nation has a very near concern in Foreign Affairs, and its Genius seems more than ever bent upon the improvement of its Knowledge,
in relation to Foreign Countries. I lay this down as a general meaning, which I suppose few will contradict, that as those who want the conveniency of sa∣tisfying their curiosity by travelling a∣broad themselves, (especially in far di∣stant Countries) cannot in any way bet∣ter supply this defect, than by applying themselves to such Authors, as by a long experience having had the opportunity of informing themselves concerning the true constitution of these-Countries, are in all probability, the most proper Persons to an∣swer their end, as having at their own expence, endeavoured to improve the ge∣neral knowledge of Mankind. It cannot be denied, but that in our time, there have appeared more Books of this kind abroad, than perhaps all the Ages before us can produce; and that the French in particular have been more liberal in furnishing us with the Relations of their Travels, than any other Nation: But not to deviate from the truth, it
must be also confess'd, That as to what relates to their Voyages to the Indies, they are for the most part confin'd to the Description of some particular Country or other, whereas the ensuing Treatise gives a view of a great part of that vast Country, comprehended under the Name of the East-Indies. It may also be ob∣served, that many of our Modern Au∣thors, in their Descriptions of these far distant Countries, have affected a way of surprising rather than instructing their Readers; they represent both the Climate of the Indies and its products, as the effects of a quite different, if not contra∣ry principle of Nature, from what we find in our parts, whereas it may be suf∣ficiently evident, to all such as will con∣sider the whole without prejudice, that Nature performs its operations in all parts of the World, according to its pri∣mitive Fundamental Laws, that the Heats and Colds of these several Cli∣mates differ only in degrees, and that
the Monsters of Africa or the Indies, are no more surprising to the Inhabitants of these parts, than the Beasts that are commonly seen and bred among us are to the Europeans. Most of these Authors seem to have been seized with an itch of pleasing their Readers, and of creating in them an Opinion of their own more than ordinary Ability, and insight into the Manners and Customs of those Nations they have treated of, which has made them dispose their Treatises into large Volumes by many Digressions, artificial Reflections, and sometimes in∣ventions of their own, such as they thought most suitable to the genious of such as they intended to please. I don't in the least question, but that those who will peruse the ensuing Account, will soon be convinced, that Monsieur Dil∣lon its Author, (though a Man of a more than ordinary Capacity and Learning) has throughout the whole Treatise acted with more Sincerity than Artifice, and
to make use of his own Words in his Pre∣face. That, tho' after a stay of Ten Years in the Indies, he was by an un∣foreseen Accident obliged to return to France much sooner than he ex∣pected, whereby he was prevented of making some particular Observa∣tions, which might have been suffi∣ciently diverting to the Reader; and that therefore, if this Relation might not be equally pleasing to all who affect Novelties beyond Truths, and are taken with Voluminous pieces; nevertheless, he could assure them, that as his intention had been to re∣duce the whole into as small a com∣pass as the nature of the thing would admit of, without entangling him∣self in the Relation of many strange Adventures, which he could not but Judge to be nauseous to persons of a solid Judgment, so he had taken all the imaginable care not to insert any thing but what was in all re∣spects
consonant to Truth, and what he had not by hearsay and up∣on the Credit of others, but by his own Experience, during his stay in the Indies. I cannot pass by in silence, that the Appendix concerning the Distem∣pers of the Indies, ought to be look'd up∣on as a singular piece, if it be considered how little that is Authentick there is ex∣tant upon that Subject, and that Monsieur Dellon, being a Doctor of Physick, his profession entitles him to have had a better insight into it, than most other Travellers could pretend to. That nothing might be wanting, which in all probability could give the better satisfaction to the publick, I judged it not unadvisable, to add by way of Supplement, some matters relating to the Indies, taken out of Monsieur de Rennefort's History of the East-Indies, which having a near affinity to many things related by Monsieur Dellon, I thought might much illustrate some matters, which questionless for brevity's sake he thought
fit to pass by in silence; some others there are, which not being come to Monsieur Dellon's knowledge, (as about Mon∣sieur de la Hay's expedition against the Isle of St. Thomas, and his Transacti∣ons in the Isle of Madagascar,) I be∣lieved would be no ungrateful Addition to render the whole the more compleat; e∣specially when I made due reflection upon the Character of Monsieur de Rennefort, who having been intrusted for a conside∣rable time with the management of Affairs in the Indies, by the French East-In∣dia Company, might claim the same Au∣thority with Monsieur Dellon; but I will not enlarge my self any further upon the merits of my Author, being sufficiently convinced that as his last Chapter, which contains a project for the improvement of the French East-India Company, shews him to be a person of a more than ordinary Capacity and Experience in the Indian Affairs, so the whole Book will be in all probability accepted of by the unbiass'd
and judicious Reader, if not, as the most ample and perfect in all its parts, at least as the most Sincere and extensive for its bulk, as representing in a small compass a short view of many of the most considera∣ble parts of those vast Countries, compre∣hended under the Name of the East-In∣dies.
THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS. PART I. CHAP. I. OUR Departure out of France, and Arrival at Cape Verd. Page 1 CHAP. II. Of Cape Verd, the Isle of Gorea, and its Inhabi∣tants. 3
CHAP. III. A Description of the Isle of Bourbon, otherwise called Mascareigne. 7 CHAP. IV. Of the Tortoises, and some other living Creatures of the Island of Mascareigne. 11 CHAP. V. A Description of the Isle Dauphine, called other∣wise Madagascar. 14 CHAP. VI. Of the Products and Commerce of this Island. 16 CHAP. VII. Of the Inhabitants of the Isle Dauphine or Mada∣gascar. 17 CHAP. VIII. Of the Religion, Manners, and Customs of the Inha∣biants of this Island. 21 CHAP. IX. Of their Feasts. 23 CHAP. X. Of Locusts, Crocodiles, and Camelions. 25 CHAP. XI. A Voyage to Galamboule, the Isle of St. Maurice, and the Isle of St. Mary. 28 CHAP. XII. Of the Bay of Antongill and our return to Fort-Dauphine. 31 CHAP. XIII. Our departure from Madagascar to the Indies, of the Bay of St. Austin, and the Isle of Don John. 34
CHAP. XIV. Our arrival at Suratte, with a Description of that City and its Traffick. 37 CHAP. XV. A further Description of the City of Suratte, with the adjacent Country. 40 CHAP. XVI. Of their different Religions. 43 CHAP. XVII. How the Indian Women burn themselves with the Dead Carcasses of their Husbands, and how that Custom was introduced. 47 CHAP. XVIII. Of the Temples and Habits of the Indians. 51 CHAP. XIX. Our Departure from Suratte for the Coast of Ma∣labar; a Description of Rajapour. 55 CHAP. XX. What further happened during our Voyage to the Coast of Malabar; a Discription of Mirscou, of Visapour, and Batiepatan. 57 CHAP. XXI. Of the Coast of Malabar, the Kings of Cananor and Samorin, and the Products of these Coun∣tries. 61 CHAP. XXII. Of the two Fruits, called the Jacque and the Man∣go's. 65 CHAP. XXIII. Of Pepper, Cardamum, Cinnamon and Bethel. 66
CHAP. XXIV. Of the Elephant, and some other Animals of the Coast of Malabar. 71 CAAP. XXV. Of the Tiger and some other Creatures of Mala∣bar. 77 CHAP. XXVI. Of some other Animals of that Coast; of the Jack∣call; of the Boufler; of the Civet Cat and Ape. 81 CHAP. XXVII. Of the Gaselet and some other Animals of Ma∣labar. 84 CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Inhabitants of the Coast of Malabar, how divided into several Tribes, and their Manners and Customs. 91 CHAP. XXIX. Of the Nahers or Gentlemen. 94 CHAP. XXX. Of some other Customs of the Malabars, especi∣ally in respect of the difference of their Qua∣lity. 97 CHAP. XXXI. A further Account of their Laws, and some other Customs. 100 CHAP. XXXII. Of their Marriages, how they derive their Pedi∣gree, and some other Customs of the Mala∣bars. 104 CHAP. XXXIII. Of their Habits, Houses, and manner of li∣ving. 106
CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Riches of their Pagan Temples. 108 CHAP. XXXV. Of their Idols and Processions. 111 CHAP. XXXVI. Of their Arms and Combats. 112 CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Mahometans inhabiting on the Coast of Malabar, and the Malabar Corsairs. 115 CHAP. XXXVIII. The French Settlement at Tilery; of Cananor, the Maldive Islands, and Tremapatan. 117 CHAP. XXXIX. Our departure from Baticpatan, with a Description of Tilcery. 120 CHAP. XL. A Voyage of the Sieur de Flacour to the Kingdom of Samorin. 123 CHAP. XLI. New Troubles at Tilcery. 126 CHAP. XLII. The arrival of some Vessels. 128 CHAP. XLIII. Our departure from Tilcery. 130
THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS. PART II. CHAP. I. OUR Journey to Tanor, with a Description of Mealy, Bargara, and Cota. Pag. 138 CHAP. II. A Description of Calicut, and the English Factory there. 140 CHAP. III. A Description of the Kingdom and City of Tanor 143 CHAP. IV. Our Departure from Tanor, and a Description of Chali. 145 CHAP. V. Our Journey to Batiepatan, and the English Facto∣ry there. 147 CHAP. VI. The Return of the Sieur de Flacour, and the Com∣modities brought from Sirinpatan. 149
CHAP. VII. Our Departure from Tilcery; a Description of Mangalor, and the Kingdom of Canara. 151 CHAP. VIII. Our Departure from Mangalor, and Meeting with Monsieur de la Haye. 155 CHAP. IX. Our Arrival at Goa, with a Description of the Ri∣ver and Forts of Goa. 157 CHAP. X. Description of the City of Goa, with an Account of the Charitable Society. 160 CHAP. XI. Of the Inhabitants of Goa. 163 CHAP. XII. Concerning our stay at Goa. 167 CHAP. XIII. Our Departure from Goa. 168 CHAP. XIV. Our Arrival at Suratte, and of the Ship called The Holy Ghost. 171 CHAP. XV. Of the Death of Mr. Blot and his Funeral. 173 CHAP. XVI. Of the City of Bandar Abassy, or Gameron, and of Ormus. 176 CHAP. XVII. Our Departure from Gameron. 179 CHAP. XVIII. Our Departure from Suratte, a Description of Da∣wan, and the Fort of St. Jerome. 182 CHAP. XIX. Concerning our stay at Daman. 185 CHAP. XX. Description of Trapor. 187 CHAP. XXI. Return to Daman. 190 CHAP. XXII. Departure from Daman, a Description of the City of Bassaim. 192
CHAP. XXIII. My Departure out of the Indies. 194 CHAP. XXIV. Our Arrival on the Coast of Brasil, and its De∣scription. 197 CHAP. XXV. A further Account of the Commodities and Pro∣ducts of Brasil. 198 CHAP. XXVI. Of the Inhabitants of Brasil, and particularly of the Portugueses. 200 CHAP. XXVII. A Description of the City and Port of the Bay All-Saints. 20 CHAP. XXVIII. The Manners and Customs of the Inhabitants Brasil▪ 20 CHAP. XXIX. Our Departure from Brasil; a Description of the Isle of Ferdnand de Narogna; of the Isles of Ter∣cera, and St. Michael. 20 CHAP. XXX. The pursuit of our Voyage, and our arrival at Lis∣bon in Portugal. 21 CHAP. XXXI. Of the Port and River of Lisbon; the Fort of C∣scais, with two other Forts. 21 CHAP. XXXII. A Description of the City of Lisbon. 21 CHAP. XXXIII. My departure from Lisbon, and return into France▪ 21
THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS OF THE Treatise relating to the Distempers pecu∣liar to the Eastern Countries. CHAP. I. OF Vomiting, and how best prevented at Sea. 223 CHAP. II. Of the Scurvy, called by the French, the Land Evil; its Causes, Symptoms, and Cure. 230 CHAP. III. Of the Colicks of Madagascar, their Causes, Sym∣ptoms, and Cures. 230 CHAP. IV. Of the Venereal Distemper, in the Isle Dauphine, and how cured by the Negroes. 231 CHAP. V. Of the Distempers of the Indies, and first of their Feavers, and how cured by the Pandites, or Pagan Physicians. 232
CHAP. VI. Of the Distemper called by the Indians, Mordechi, and in what manner its Cure is performed. 237 CHAP. VII. Of the Bloody Flux, and the Erroneous Practice of the Pandites in respect of this Distemper. 239 CHAP. VIII. Of the Distemper'd Persons, call'd by the Portu∣gueses, Esfalfados, and how best to be cured. 242 CHAP. IX. Of the Small-Pox, and the barbarous usage of such as are afflicted with them among the Malabars. 243 CHAP. X. Of the Bitings of the Adders, and the marvellous Effects of the true Adder-stone. 244 CHAP. XI. Of the Distemper called by the Portugueses, Bicho; its several Kinds and Cures. 246
THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS OF THE Supplement. CHAP. I. A Description of the Isle of St. Hellens. 3 CHAP. II. Description of the Isle of Teneriffe, and its Pro∣ducts. 5 CHAP. III. Description of the Cities of Fernambouque, and Olinda on the Coast of Brasil. 7 CHAP. IV. f the Isle of Ceylon, and the Forts the Dutch are Possess'd of in that Island, with a Description of the Cities of Portugal, Colombo, and Battacalo. 9 CHAP. V. Description of the City of Cochin, and how the Dutch made themselves Masters of this King∣dom. 11
CHAP. VI. Some Particulars concerning the Cape of Good H of the Dutch Fort at Table-Bay, and of the Saldaigne. CHAP. VII. Of the Arrival of the Sieur de la Hay, Vicero the East-Indies for the most Christian King the Isles of Madegascar and Mascarcigne. CHAP. VIII. The taking and loss of the Isle of St. Thomas by Sieur de la Hay. CHAP. IX. Of the City of Suratte, its Inhabitants, T and what's else Remarkable thereabouts CHAP. X. Of the Empire and Riches of the Great Mogul CHAP. XI. Of the Musk, and from whence it comes. CHAP. XII. Containing some propositions made by the Sie Rennefort, for the improvement of the F East-India-Company, and the resetling themselves in the Isle of Madagascar.
A VOYAGE TO THE EAST-INDIES. By Mr. Dellon, M. D. PART I. CHAP. I. Our Departure out of France. ALL Mankind have a certain Natural pro∣pensity to Curiosity, but Young people have commonly a greater Inclination to satisfie their own Fancies, taken up for the most part with Novelties, than those who are arrived to a ripe Age. For my part having always been
inflamed with a most ardent desire of Travelling, after I had finished the course of my Studies, I left Paris with no other resolution than to leave France, and by the Conversation with Foreigners to make my self acquainted with their Genius and Manners. Being informed that the Royal East-India Com∣pany was Equipping some Ships at Port-Royal, I directed my course thither, and entred my self in∣to their Service; in a Ship of 400 Tuns, cal∣led the Strong, Commanded by Captain Merchand, and left that Harbour within 14 days after, in the Company of the Golden-Eagle. But we had scarce been a few Hours under Sail, when a Calm ob∣liged us to come to an Anchor, near the Isle of Groy, about 2 Leagues from the French Shoar, where we remain'd till the next Morning, when with a fresh Gale of North-East Wind, we soon lost sight of our Native Shoar. The first inconveniency I was sensible of in this Voyage, was, my being Sea-Sick, as well as all the rest, who were most acquainted before with the Watery Element, but a little time cured us of that Distemper. For 8 days together we saw no∣thing but the Sea and the Skies, when at last our Sentries discovered 4 Sails to the Windward of us, and we being at that time engaged in a War with Spain, our Captain was getting every thing ready, in case there should be any occasion of en∣gaging the Enemy; ordering the Golden-Eagle, who was a nimbler Sailer than we, to endeavour to come up with them first: But having soon discovered them to be French Ships, bound for Newfoundland, we continu'd our Voyage without any further hinderance; till some days after, when a most furious Tempest arose, which lasted near 18 Hours, put us into no small distress; scarce had we escaped that danger, but we were thrown in∣to another, no less dangerous than the former▪ For our Ship Sprung a Leak, and then fell in such a vast quantity of Water, that both our Pumps
not being sufficient to exhaust it, it was thought most advisable, to make, together with the Golden-Eagle, the best of our way to the French Coast. Whilst we were just upon the point of putting it in execution, the Leak was by good Fortune dis∣covered, and soon stopped, so that we spent the remainder of the day in making good Cheer for Joy of having escaped so imminent a danger. The next Morning by break of day, we came in sight of a very large Ship, and the Golden-Eagle being advanced within Canon-Shot, gave her the Signal of Striking; but finding her not to comply imme∣diately with our desire, we put out the White Flag, when she instantly lower'd her Top Sail. This was a Ship belonging to Diep, which was bound to Senegal, where they Trade in Ivory, Feathers and Gold-Dust; the Captain's Name was Le Moyne, and having thus continued our Voyage together, we left him near the Mouth of the River Niger, directing our Course to Cape Verd, where we Ar∣rived in 6 Weeks, after our first departure out of France. CHAP. II. Of Cape Verd. THIS is a part of Africa,Cape Verd. Situate at about 14 Degrees North Latitude; it has a pretty large Bay, but no safe Riding for Ships, as ha∣ving no shelter against the violence of the Winds, and it is so dangerous Landing, all round the Bay, that many Chaloups have been lost at their ap∣proach near the Shoar. The Hollanders Inhabited at that time a small Island,The Island of Goea▪ at a little distance from it, which has had almost as many Masters
as have thought it worth their while to take Pos∣session of it; it being of so little Defence, that the Dutch seem only to keep it, because no body Disputes with them about the Propriety of a place, which being very Barren, is destitute of eve∣ry thing requisite for the necessity and conveni∣ency of human Life, except what they are sup∣ply'd with from Cape Verd. The people Inhabiting Cape Verd,Inhabi∣tants of Cape Verd. are of a most dreadful Aspect, much beyond what the rest of the Africans are; the Women are as ugly as the Men; the first carry their Children upon their Backs, and suckle them over their Shoulders. They are much addicted to hunting, and as lascivious as they are ugly, prostituting themselves in publick to Strangers. The Africans are for the most part Mahometans, but besides this, they use many super∣stitious Ceremonies, which have not the least Af∣finity with those prescrib'd in the Alcoran. They are generally very obliging to such Strangers as chance to Land on their Coast; but Stealing is so common a practice with them, that one is ob∣liged to be constantly upon one's guard. They Live for the most part upon what they catch when they go a Hunting, and their Bread is made of Millet, they having no great store of Rice or Wheat. But I will not pretend to enlarge my self here upon their manner of living, others having suffi∣ciently acquitted themselves as to this part before me; and, as I have taken a resolution to deal with the utmost sincerity in all respects, so I will confess ingeniously, that I had not sufficient opportunity to inform my self fully concerning all matters relating to this people, we not staying here any longer than was absolutely requisite, for the providing us with necessary refreshments. For after a stay of 12 days, the Wind being fa∣vourable, we weighed Anchor, and put again to Sea, but before we lost sight of the Shoar, we were becalmed for some days, during which time,
we diverted our selves with Fishing, but especi∣ally with catching of Requins, (which the Portu∣gueses call Tuberos) of whom we took a consi∣derable number,The Fish called Re∣quin. only to have the satisfaction of selling them; they being seldom made use of, but in case of the greatest extremity, because their Flesh is extreamly hard and scarce digestible. There are some of them of that bigness as to be able to swallow a Man; the Females bear their Young ones in their Bellies, without the least ap∣pearance of any Spawn; I have found a dozen Young ones at a time, which being cut out of the Bellies of the Old ones, were a Foot and half long, and much better to Eat than the great ones. There are also several other sorts of Fish catch'd betwixt the two Tropicks, and among others those call'd by the Portugueses,Bonites. Bonites, a very de∣licious Fish, and one of the best in those Seas. The flying Fish are to be met with here in great numbers,Flying-Fish. resembling both in shape and bigness our Herrings, their Wings being not unlike to those of a Flittermouse. They cannot make use of them unless they be wet, which makes them continually plunge themselves in the Water. It is the most surprizing thing in the World to see them in so prodigious numbers, if it be consi∣der'd that they are surrounded in both the Ele∣ments by their Enemies, who gives them but lit∣tle rest, whereever they meet with them; for the Birds continually persecute them in the Air, and when they seek for refuge in the Water, the Bonites, who have a great antipathy against them, devour them; so that whereever they are, they are never secure against their Enemies. We pass'd the Equinoctial Line about 3 Weeks after our departure from Cape Verd, and about a Month after the Tropick of Capricorn. Hitherto we had met with no considerable dis∣aster, during our whole Voyage; but now the Golden-Eagle being destitute of fresh Water, we
were fain to share ours with her, and the next following Night were separated from one another by stress of Weather. But the worst of all was, that our Ship sprung 3 days after another Leak, which let in the Water in such a quantity, as to make us sufficiently sensible of our imminent dan∣ger, of being inevitably lost, we being at too great a distance from any Shoar, to entertain the least hopes of escaping the danger; but we had once more the good Fortune to find out the Leak, and by applying speedy and effectual Remedies against the evil, that a few Hours before threat∣ned our destruction, the hopes of Life began to resettle our disturbed Spirits, which the fear of our approaching cruel Fate and the constant fa∣tigues had almost robb'd us of before. But we were for a considerable time afterwards pestered by contrary Winds, so that we did not come within sight of the Isle Dauphin, (called by the Portugueses, St. Laurence, and by the Natives, Ma∣dagascar,) under the 26th Degree of the Southern Latitude, till 7 Weeks after we had pass'd the Tropick of Capricorn, on the West-side, which did not a little surprize our Pilates, who believed to have been on the East side of it. We were put to no small trouble, and endur'd great fatigues, before we could double the Southern Cape of this Island, by reason of the contrary Winds. It was then that Distempers began to reign among our Ships Crew, two thirds of them being disabled by the Scurvy; this is that so much dreaded Sea-plague, which the French Sea-Men call the Evil of the Land, because it is from thence alone they expect the cure of this dreadful Distemper. There were very few of the whole Ships Crew, who had not their share of it, and this joyned with the continual fatigues, occasioned by the fury of contrary Winds, put us almost in despair, as be∣ing bereaved of all hopes of reaching the Shoar, if Providence had not delivered us again by Mi∣racle. For the Wind wheeling about, all upon a
sudden, we came 3 Weeks after we had first dis∣covered the Shoar of Madagascar, in sight of the Isle of Burbon, (otherwise called Mascareigne,) ha∣ving not lost above 3 of our whole Crew, yet we were 4 days longer before we could reach the Shoar, where we cast our Anchors, directly op∣posite to one of the French Plantations, called St. Paul, Situate on the West-side of the Island; the first thing we had to do was to take care of our Sick Men, who were brought on Shoar, where we lost 2 more of our Men, one being Drowned, and the other expiring so soon as he was set on Shoar. CHAP. III. Of the Isle of Burbon, otherwise called Mascareigne. THO' I am sufficiently sensible that several o∣thers before have given a particular Descrip∣tion of this Island; I will nevertheless relate here, what I have been an eye witness of, pursuant to my intention. This Island is Situate under the 21st Degree of Southern Latitude;The Isle of Burbon described. 150 Leagues distant from the Isle Dauphine. Its Circuit is of about 22 French Leagues, and its figure almost circular. The French have settled themselves there for above these 40 Years, and there are not the least Foot∣steps to be found of any people having Inhabited this Island before that time. What the Ancients have been perswaded about the Torrid Zone to be Uninhabitable, is sufficiently contradicted by the experience of our Modern Travellers; the Air
being not so excessive hot, as has been imagined, in those parts, because the heats occasion'd by the near approach of the Sun, are allayed by the cool Rains that fall in the Night-time. It never Rains here but towards the end of April, or the be∣ginning of March; about which time, the Hurri∣canes being so frequent on this Coast, Ships can∣not approach, much less ride at Anchor, with∣out great danger; the Island being destitute of safe Harbours. From the time of the first Estab∣lishment of the French in this Island, 'till our Ar∣rival, there has not been one instance, that Tra∣vellers who came to this Island were ever troubled with any Distempers; on the contrary, 'tis very rare but such as are afflicted with different Diseases, are restored to their Health in a little time;Is Health∣ful. four∣score of our Ships Crew can verifie this by their own Experience, they having all been recovered in 10 or 12 days. This Island is watered by a great many small Rivers, abounding in Fish to that degree, that if you intend to wade through them, (which you may do for the most part with ease,) you must provide your self with a good Stick to lean upon, for fear of being carried a∣way by the vast number and swiftness of the Fish, which you may catch at pleasure with your Hands, without any Lines or Hooks. The French call the Northern Coast of this Island, the Burnt Country, because that in the Night-time there constantly issues Fire out of the Ground, which tho' it vanishes in the Day-time, yet ren∣ders these Plains quite Barren,Its Fertili∣ty and Fruits. and unfit for use. But on the opposite side, there is a great Tract of Ground, which the French call the Beautiful Country; this having been Cultivated with great Industry, produces several sorts of Fruits, Grain, and Herbs in abundance. Here you have most excellent Water-Melons, which the Indians call Patequas, and the Portugueses Balancias; they exceed our European Melons in bigness, their peel is greener, they're much tenderer,
nothing in the World is more proper to quench ones Thirst, they being of a most agreeable re∣sh, and you may eat as much of them as you please, without the least danger to your ealth. The Bananas or Indian Figs,Bananas or Indian Figs. are no less plenti∣l here, and of a most delicious Taste. The Tree stalk on which they grow is different from ours; seldom grows above 8 or 10 Foot high, with∣out any Branches; quite on the Top of the Trunk, ere sprouts out a single bunch or cluster, of the ickness of a Man's Arm, and about 3 Foot long, und which the Bananas hang like Grapes. The ruit differs as well in Colour, as in Taste and gness. The least of these Figs are about 3 In∣es long, and 2 in circumference, the biggest are ar a Foot long; their Skin grows yellow as they ipen, and nevertheless some of them remain al∣ways Green; their Peel is pretty thick, not very ose to the Pulp, which is very White, and of an dmirable Taste, and the Tree bears this Fruit all Year round. The Ananas don't grow so plentifully,The Ana∣nas. but are uch finer than the Bananas; they are of an Oval gure, coming near in bigness to our Melons, their Colour inclining to yellow, and their Skin is ot unlike to the Pine-Apple; on the Top of the ruit grows a certain Green knot, resembling in ape a Coronet, which together with its excel∣lent flavour, has given it the name of the King of Fruits; it is very hot, consequently dangerous to e eaten in great quantities, but when it is used, it eaten with Wine and Sugar; it produces no eed, being propagated, by cutting off the small prouts, which come forth at the bottom of the talk, which by Transplanting grow to the height of an Artichoak; bear but once, and but one sin∣gle Fruit at a time. The Banana Tree is Transplan∣ed in the same manner.
There are many sorts of other Fruits to be found in this Island, too many to be inserted here. The first Colony that was erected here by the French is called St. Paul; it is Situate on the Weste Shoar of the Isle, near a great Lake, not above Hundred Paces distant from the Sea. This Lak affords great store of most excellent Fish, and Water is very wholsome and good to Drink. often as the Hurricanes rage upon these Coas the Sea commonly swells to that degree, as to verflow the Ground, which divides this Lake fro the Sea, and consequently mixes its Salt Wat with the Fresh of the Lake; but as these Hurrcanes are seldom of any long continuance, so Water soon recovers its former sweetness. It is not determined hitherto, who were first that brought Hogs and Goats into this Islan but it is most certain,Hogs and Goats. that they are found here great numbers; the French are always provide with Dogs bred up for that purpose, who cat them without much difficulty, especially the Hogs who are very Wild. It is not above five Twenty or Thirty Years, since Oxen and Co were first Transported from the Isle of Dau∣phine to Mascareigne, which makes them to be as pretty scarce.
CHAP. IV. Of the Tortoises, and some other Living Creatures of this Island. THE Tortoises are of two different Kinds, to wit, the Land and Sea Tortoises. The Land Tor∣toisesLand Tor∣toises. are so numerous in this Island, that you cancarce avoid meeting with them, where-ever you o; their Flesh is accounted very good, coming Taste next to Veal; out of their Livers they an Oyl▪ which, for want of better, some∣imes serves for Salleting. The Sea Tortoises are somewhat rarer than the others;Sea Tor∣toises. they never come on Shoar but in the Night-time, on the West side of the Island, where the Colony of St. Paul. They take great care o cover their Eggs deep in the Sand, for fear of he Wild Boars, who are very greedy after them. Those that go out to catch them,How catch'd▪ watch their op∣portunity, as they are coming out of the Sea, and finding them upon the Sand, they turn them up∣on their Backs, by putting a Stick under the Bel∣y; But the Land Tortoises being not altogether s;o flat as the others, soon get upon their Feet a∣gain. There are some of both kinds, of a pro∣digious bigness, but they are of a different Taste; The Flesh of the Sea Tortoises is look'd upon as a sovereign Remedy against the Scurvy. There have been 800 Eggs found at a time in a Tortoise, every one as big as a Goose Egg▪ some ready to be aid others without Shells; they don't come near our Pullets Eggs in goodness. Nevertheless, these Tortoises stand sometimes in no small stead to Ships
that come that way, because they may be kept a∣live on Board for two Months, by only waterin of them every day with Sea Water. There are also in the Isle of Burbon, good sto of Pidgeons, Turtles, and Partridges, and numbers of other Birds,Birds of this Island. but especially Parro which are so Tame as to be catch'd with a Man Hand, or at the most, one may knock them dow with a Stick at pleasure. The only Bird which shyer than the rest, and is generally kill'd by th Fusee, is that called Flamand. It is as big as Young Turkey, but his Neck and Legs 4 or 5 Foot long; and being not to be catch without a great deal of trouble, is look'd upo here as a rarety. The Sparrows are no bigger in the Isle of Mas∣careigne, than in other parts, but they are excessive∣ly troublesome to the Country, by their prodigi∣ous numbers; for, whereever they come they con∣sume the Seeds lately Sowed, and the Houses are as much pestered with them here, as we are with Flies; for being quite spent by the heat of th Sun, they seek for shelter in the Houses, whe they fall in the pots and dishes, and often their Wings in the Fire. There is also a kind of Flitter-mice in this I∣sland, almost as big as Pullets; they are Eaten by the Indians but not by the French. For the rest,Salubrity of this Island. there is neither Serpent, nor Scor∣pion, or any other reptiles or venomous Insects to be found in this Island, the goodness of it being such, as to be quite contrary to these Crea∣tures, as it has been found by several Experiments which the French have made upon Rats. After we had sufficiently refresh'd our selves here, our Ships Crew being all very well restored to Health, and our Ship provided with good Provisi∣ons, we set Sail with a fair Wind on the 22d day of September, from Mascareigne, and without much difficulty gained the Isle Dauphin, on the 29th day of the same Month. Being at the sight of 24
Degrees and some Minutes, we were not a little a∣aid of passing Fort Dauphin in the Night-time, be∣cause that the Current which always runs to the uth, and the North-East Winds, which are so equent on the Coast, will not let you get out a∣in without great trouble, if you are once got der the Wind. We therefore cast our Anchor sight of the point of Itapere, and the next day 11 a Clock in the Forenoon, entred the Bay Dauphine, where we met with the Golden-Eagle, hich was Arrived there 15 days before us, ha∣ving suffered and lost more Men than we, even fter her Arrival at Madagascar, the Air being not ear so wholsome here as in the Isle of Masca∣reigne: We found them very busie in refitting the Ships, which together with the Mary, was design'd to rry Monsieur de Faye, Director of the East-India Company, to the Indies, where he afterwards Died, Suratte. They were extreamly overjoyed at the ght of us, having given us over for lost, and ac∣cordingly we were received with all the demon∣rations of joy. Whilst we were here, there Arri∣ed the Ship called St. Jean, from the East-Indies, Commanded by Monsieur de Lopi, Nephew of Monsieur de Mondevergue, who was the King's Lieutenant-General in the Isle of Madagascar. He rdered our Ship also to be Careen'd, and to be re∣tted, for the prosecuting our Voyage, which was xecuted with so much diligence, that those Ships et Sail together for the Indies, whilst I with some ew continued for some time longer in this Island.
CHAP. V. Of the Isle Dauphine or Madagascar. MAdagascar, the Isle Dauphine, and St. Lauren are Names belonging to one and the Island.A general Description of this Island. The first it has received from its Nativ the second from the French, and the last from Portugueses, who first discovered it on St. L∣rence's day. Its Length extends from the right to the 27 Degree of Southern Latitude. It is the largest Island in the whole World, at least as far as is disco∣vered hitherto, being 750 French Leagues in Co∣pass. The Climate, considering its Situation, pretty Temperate; the ordinary Food of the In∣habitants is Rice, besides which, there is goo store of Bananas, Ananas, Cocos, Oranges, Lim and other sorts of Fruits. There are many Ri∣vers, both small and great, in this Island, and great many fine Lakes, which are extreamly Com∣modious, and supply the want of Rivers in som places, during the dry Season of the Year. Thei chief Commodity is Oxen,Their Oxen. they are of an ex∣traordinary Bigness, and have a great bunch weigh∣ing sometimes 30 pounds, on the Top of thei Necks; it is all Fat, and is counted the daintie piece of the whole Ox. The Air of Madagascar, tho' it be pretty Tem∣perate,The Air of Madagas∣car. yet is it not very wholsome. That par where Fort Dauphine lies, is somewhat better tha all the rest. A great many Distempers are con∣tracted by the Commerce of Foreigners with th Negroes; these must be followed over Rivers an Mountains, without the conveniency of Shipping
or other Carriage; so that what with these fa∣tigues and the heat of the Climate, most Foreigners subject to most dangerous Diseases; those that Sick are carried to Fort Dauphine, where there a Hospital Erected for that purpose; but the evers which reign here are so Malignant and ontageous, that a great many of them Die daily, notwithstanding which, the Hospital is generally fill'd up with Sick persons. The Inhabitants of Madagascar, make use of two of Boats,Their Boats. as well at Sea as in the River; the sort are called Canoes or Canots, and the others rogues. These last are made out of Planks joy∣d,The Piro∣gues. or rather sowed together, by the help of cer∣in Ropes made of the Bark of certain Trees, ithout Nails, Hemp, Pitch, Tar, or any other ; notwithstanding which, they will con∣in a Hundred Men at a time; but they must be cautious in balancing of them, because they very apt to overturn. Those they make use of for most part when they go out a Fishing. The Canots are made out of one large piece of imber,Canots. hollowed out with Knives, which is the Instrument the Blacks make use of in their Workmanship; it is easie to be conceived that this of Gondola, is no less apt to overturn than Pirogues, notwithstanding which, the Negroes oss with them Rivers of a great breadth, and sometimes in them upon the Sea. I have seen of them of that bigness as to contain 100 ersons, besides 60 Baskets of Rice, weighing each pound weight.
CHAP. VI. Of their Commerce. THE Commodities which are vended by Fo∣reigners to the Inhabitants of Madagascar,Commodi∣ties to be Truck'd in Madagas∣car. painted Callicoes, and Linen Cloaths, Cornelia Bracelets, and Necklaces of Silver, Copper, Tin; Iron is of great esteem among them, be∣cause they have none in the whole Island:  above all the rest, Aqua vitae, which they call , and signifies as much as burning Wine; the they truck for Wine, Beef, Fruits, Honey, which they have great store,) and sometimes Gold. It was the hopes of discovering some con∣siderable Gold-Mines in those parts, which not a little contribute towards the Establishme of this Company; but hitherto all their endea∣vours have been frustrated; for, their chief Go∣vernours, (whom they call Rohandrians,) being jea∣lous of the Design of the French, have several time under pretence of several Engagements by way Alliance, and otherwise drawn the French into remote places, where in lieu of discovering to the their Gold-Mines, they have been Massacred these Savages. The reiterated instances of thes Tragical Accidents, having debar'd the rest from advancing too far into the Country in quest after these imaginary Gold-Mines, it remains uncertai to this day, whether there be Originally any Gol to be found in Madagascar, or not; but it is mos probable, that what Gold the Africans have, is con∣veyed to them by the Commerce with the Inha∣bitants of the Continent.
Near the Fort Dauphin Topazes and Amethysts are found, which formerly were in great esteem among the French, inhabiting the Island; but experience has convinced them that they are of no great value. CHAP VII. The Inhabitants of Madagascar. THE Inhabitants of this Island are for the gene∣rality Black, Treacherous, Savage and Crue. They wear their Hair very long: There are also a reat many of a yellowish Complexion, and some pproaching to White, the last of which have much etter Features in their Faces, than the rest. At the time of the first arrival of the French in this Island,Whites in this Island▪ they found a considerable number of the in∣habitants of the same Complexion with the Europe∣ns, but they could never be instructed concerning heir first Origin; thus far is certain, that they had cquired to themselves so great an Authority, as be respected among the Negroes as their Kings, heir Words were a Law to the People, who where heir Slaves, and paid them Obedience without . The arrival of the French, and the advantage the egroes observed in their Fire-Arms, first inspired em with the thoughts by the help of these Stran∣ers to endeavour to shake off the Yoak, which they hemselves had imposed upon their Necks. For hich purpose, being encouraged by the favour of ese new Comers, they began by degrees to sup∣ess the excessive power of these Tyrants; and ese seeing themselves in danger of being dispossess'd a power they had enjoy'd so long without con∣ul, and being reduced to despair, were not spar∣ing
to employ all their Artifices and treasonable Practices, to rid their hands of these unwellcome Guests; till at last it came to an open Rupture, when the French soon extirpated the whole race of these Tyrannical Leaders,Are extir∣pated. there being nothing left of them now, but the slender Remnants of a few Women who were saved out of compassion to their Sex. The Isle Dauphine is near as populous as France; they have no Cities, but a vast number of Villages at a small distance from one another; their Houses are all of Wood, the Doors so low, that a Child of twelve years can scarce enter without bending his Body; they make use neither of Windows nor Chimneys, and their Houses are covered with leaves or a certain kind of Straw,Their man∣ner of li∣ving. which will keep out the Rain for ten or twelve years, without being mend∣ed; but if a Fire happens to light among these Houses, it makes great havock. Their Houshold Stuff consists in no more than a few Baskets, where∣in they put their cloaths; if they don't like their dwelling places, they remove their Houses without much difficulty, some of them frequently changing their Habitations. Both Men and Women go bare-headed,Their Ap∣parel. and let their Hair grow to a great length. The men sel∣dom wear any thing else but a piece of Cotton or Silk, of the breadth of half an Ell, and an Ell and a half long; this they wind round their Waste, one end of it coming betwixt their Legs. The Women wear a kind of narrow Wast-coasts, scarce covering their Breasts, but the Sleeves reach down to their Wrists; for the rest, they have a piece of stuff which they wind round their middle, and from thence reaches down to their Heels. The poorer sort cloath themselves with a stuff made out of the Bark of Trees, which reaches no further than the Knees; because it should be no impediment to them in their daily Employment. Both Men and Women take equal Pride in Brace∣lets and Necklaces; they walk all Bare-footed; they
Anoint their Bodies with a certain stinking Grease, which together with their Natural Ugliness, ren∣ders them the nastiest People in the Universe. They make use of no other Beds than Mats spread upon Planks, a piece of Wood or Stone serves them for a good Bolster. The Rohundrians (their chief Governours or pet∣ty Princes) cause themselves to be carried in a kind of a Litter, upon the Shoulders of four Slaves; this they call in their Language Tacon, and their Wo∣men of Quality are carried in the same manner, as are also the Frenchmen here of any Fashion, espe∣cially when they Travel. They are much addicted to War,Are War∣like. and very faith∣ful to their Rohundrians. All the riches of these pet∣ty Kings consist in the great number of their Oxen and Slaves; they are embroil'd in continual Quar∣rels with their Neighbours, which commonly end in bloody Wars among themselves; the vanquish'd are most cruelly treated by the Conquerors, who spare neither Sex nor Age, but sacrifice all to their Vengeance; if you ask them the reason of their Cruelties, why they should carry their Vengeance so far, as not to spare the innocent Babes, whom they tear from their Mothers Breasts, to dash out their Brains against the Rocks, they give you for answer, That to spare them, would be to preserve in them their most irreconcilable Enemies, who one day, might be in a Capacity, to revenge upon their heads, the Cruelties exercised against their Pa∣rents,Revenge∣ful. which sufficiently Testifies, that they are ve∣ry Revengeful, and never forgive an Injury. Their Arms they call Zagaye,Their Arms. and is a kind of a Dart, the point of which being piked with a poi∣soned Iron, they throw with a great deal of Skill and Activity; they also make use of Half-pikes, and some of them have Bucklers made of a very hard Wood; they Fight always on Foot, the first Horse that ever was seen in this Island, having been brought out of the Indies, by order of Monsieur Mondevergue.
During our stay at▪ Fort Dauphine, we were enga∣ged in a War with one of the most Potent Lords of the whole Island, whose Name was Rasaf: He brought about Fourteen Thousand Men into the Field, whereas the whole strength of the French con∣sisted only in an Hundred and Forty Frenchmen, and Three Hundred Negroes, who had espoused the French Interest. They were Commanded by Mon∣sieur de Charmagouz, who carrying along with him a Led-horse, the poor Negroes were so surprized at the sight of this Creature, that they paid it the same respect as to its Master. The French met the Madagascarians, Command∣ded by Rasaf in Person, in a great Plain, which by reason of the inequality of their Number, being very advantageous for Rasaf,The French rout the Islanders. he marched upon the French, with a great deal of Bravery, but being warmly received by the French Fire-locks, they were soon repulsed and put to Flight; their Prince used all possible means to Rally his Subjects, but these be∣ing terrified by the surprize of the French Fire-Arms, would not return to the charge, except some few who were near his Person; with these he re∣newed the Combat, endeavouring to dispute the Victory with the French, till he lost both the Battle and his Life, leaving a Booty of Thirty Thousand Oxen, and a vast number of Slaves to the Conque∣rors, who sent them to Fort Dauphine; some of them died by the way, tired with the Fatigues of there Engagement, and the tediousness of the Journey; the rest were shared among the Victors. This prosperous Success put all the petty Kings of the whole Island into such a Consternation, that dreading the Fate of Rasaf, and being become wiser by his Misfortune, endeavoured by all means pos∣sible, to purchase the Friendship of the French Na∣tion; some of them came in Person to do Homage to Monsieur de Mondevergue, and such as lived at a greater distance, sent their Ambassadors to perform the same in their Master's Name. But very few performed their promise, some among them being
so perfidious as to make use of the same Arms which they had received as presents at the time of their being with Monsieur de Mondevergue, against the French themselves; but they were soon Chastised for their Insolence, and the misfortunes attending their Rebellions, fell at last upon their own heads. CHAP. VIII. Of their Religion. THere are so few foot-steps of Religion to be seen among the Inhabitants of the Isle of Ma∣dagascar, that it might admit of a Question; Whe∣ther they have any or not?Their Sa∣crifices. They have neither Churches nor Priests, the Rohundrians are the only Persons, who observe some religious Ceremonies, and that but very seldom, and upon extraordinary occasions: At certain times they Sacrifice an Ox, but as all the Subjects are Slaves, so no body but the Prince is to perform the Sacrifice. It is a General received Custom among them, to Carbonade their Faces and Arms; but as they are altogether stupid and ignorant, acting without any rational motive, I have never been able to discover the real intention of this Custom, whether it pro∣ceeded out of a motion of Piety, or that they look'd upon it as conducing to their Health, or whether they thus Martyrized their Bodies for Ornaments sake. The most intelligible among them, confess that there is an infinite Sovereign Being, which Being all Goodness has the direction of all Human Affairs; nevertheless being perverted by an incorrigible ob∣stinacy,Adore the Devil. they say, That they see no reason why we should direct our Prayers to him, who cannot do Evil, but that we ought to reserve all our Venerati∣on
and Vows for the Daemon, who has power to Torment us. They don't believe the immortality of the Soul, and consequently making no account of a future State, they improve this to their best ad∣vantage, giving themselves over to all manner of Debaucheries; from whence it comes, that such a∣mong them as have been by the Missionaries con∣verted to the Christian Faith, finding the Rules of Christianity too strict, and not suitable to their former course of life, commonly return also to their former Libertinism, as it has been sufficiently con∣firmed by experience; for of three Thousand that had been Baptized before our arrival, there were scarce twenty that used to frequent our Church. It cannot be denied, but that some of the French, by their manner of living, shew'd but a very ill ex∣ample to these new Converts; for some of them live so scandalous a life, that they were forbid the use of the Sacrament, and to stand only in the Church porch, during Divine Service. But this Penance which was intended as a proper remedy to correct their Libertinism, had almost proved the oc∣casion of a Schism; for these Libertines having met with a Priest of their own Kidney, they set up a Chapel for their own use, where they exercised Divine Worship in spite of the Commands of their Superiours to the Contrary, till at last the said Cha∣pel was ordered to be burnt. Among some of the Madagascarians they observe not any Rules in their Marriages,Their Mar∣riages. they copulate to∣gether without the least Engagement or promise on either side, and leave one another as freely again as they met at first. The quite contrary is practised in the Countries of Galamboule and Antongil, where they are so far from being common, that they keep the Women very close, and if they are convicted of Adultery, they are punish'd with Death. In other places where they are more Barbarous, they with∣out the least regard to the nearness of Blood, com∣mit the most abominable incests at pleasure.
I will not determine here, whether the Women of Madagascar are subject to the same pains as our European Women in Child-bed; but thus much is certain, that no sooner are they delivered, but lea∣ving the Child upon a Mat, they go straight-ways to the next River to Wash themselves, neither take they any further care of the Child, but only to give it now and then the Teat. They have certain days which they solemnize with Dancing to certain Instruments, made after their way, besides which they eat at an excessive rate. Their Songs are not composed to any certain Tune, as it is Customary among other Nations, but every one Sings as he pleases; one Voice begins, the rest follow and make up a Chorus as well as they can, endeavouring to make their Gesticulations bear some proportion to their Song and small Tim∣brels; all which together, makes a confused, but sometimes not so very disagreeable a Noise. CHAP. IX. Of their Feasts, THe common Food of the Inhabitants of this Island Dauphine or Madagascar, is Rice boil'd with Salt and Water, which serves them instead of Bread; not but that the Ground will bring forth good Wheat, but the laziness of those, who should cultivate it, deprives them of the advantage of this so useful Commodity.They are great Ea∣ters. They are all in general vast Eaters; nevertheless if a Famine happens, they are able to endure it with a prodigious Constancy, as when on the other hand they are at liberty to eat their fill, six of them will eat a good Ox at a Meal.
In their Feasts they observe the following method; in the middle of the Assembly, which lie all round about upon the Ground, they set a good quantity of boiled Rice; then they lay a whole Ox, (or sometimes two or three, according to the num∣ber of the Guests) extended upon his Hide, which serves instead of a Dish; every one cuts a good piece for himself where he pleases, which having put upon a Wooden Stick, he holds it a little to the Fire, and so devours it before it be half roasted. There is good store of Grapes in this Island, but they make seldom any Wine of them; nay, the Ne∣groes will scarce touch them to eat; for before the French came into the Isle, they look'd upon them as Poison. They make their Drink out of Honey, which they call Tenteb, and their Wine Chictenteb, which signifies as much as Honey Wine,Hydro∣mel. or as we call it, Hydromel: The French rarely use any other, and prefer it before Wine. In each Village there is a large publick Hall, o∣pen on all sides, covered only on the Roof, where they put upon any Solemn occasion, a great Vessel with this Hydromel, containing three or four Hogs-heads, according to the Number of People inhabi∣ting the Village, and the Rohundrian having order∣ed a proportionable quantity of Beef and Rice to be brought thither, he himself follows in Person, and thus entertains his Subjects from Morning till Night.
CHAP. X. Of Locusts Crocodiles and Camelions. THere is scarce any body so ignorant, but what knows, how God Almighty in former ges made use of Locusts to afflict the Aegyptians, d to reduce Pharaoh to Obedience; the same Pro∣dence does also to this day, send this Plague at rtain times among the Inhabitants of Madagascar, here they sometimes are to be seen in such prodi∣ous Numbers, that they lay that part of the Coun∣y, were they pass, quite desolate, and occasion ch a Famine, that the Cattle die for want of od, it being not the custom of the Negroes, to lay any thing for future use. I was once my self an ye-witness of such a dreadful inundation, which ppening in the Month of February, began at six Clock in the Morning, and continued till Noon, ere was such an infinite Number of them, as that ey fill'd the whole Air, and quite darkned the Sky▪ et notwithstanding, that it was a very serene and ear day, these few Hours were sufficient to de∣roy all the Fruits of the Earth. They are no gger than in France, but they fly much further; ey are driven along by the Wind, and it is a good ance if the Wind happens to blow them towards Sea, where they commonly find their Graves the Salt Water; some are of Opinion, that they re carried hither from the Continent of Africa, but cannot agree with this Opinion, by reason of the vast istance of the African Coast from the Isle of Mada∣gascar. The Negroes eat them, to revenge them∣elves, as they say, upon their Carcasses, for the Evils they make them endure; and I have seen some
French eat them, with as good an Appetite, as Blacks, who all affirm, that they are of a very goo taste. There are a great number of Crocodiles in Lakes and Rivers of this Island; the Inhabitan call them Jacaret,Crododiles. which renders the passages b Water very dangerous, because they will atta the People in their Canots; to prevent which, Negroes make a great Noise as they are passing Lakes, which keeps them at a distance. This an Amphibious Animal, as well as the Tortoise, does not differ from the Lizard, but only in . There are some of thirty or fourty Foot lon at the least Noise, they make the best of their towards the Water, where they shelter themselve▪ We once kill'd one in the Indies, where they are frequent as in Madagascar. At our approach, look'd steadfastly upon us, neither would he from the place, till we discharged our Fuzee at which wounded him under the Scales, as good lu would have it, for their Scales are inpenetrable; he found himself Wounded, he run from making not the least stop, till after he had run fo paces, his Spirits beginning to fail, he stood making a most terrible Noise with his Jaws, the dermost of which is unmoveable; at last we d∣patch'd him, and Prince Onitri, of whom we sha have occasion to speak hereafter, ordered him be fetcht from thence. Experience has sufficiently convinced us, th what has been related concerning the Crocodil how they draw the Passengers into the Snare, in o∣der to surprize and devour them, is a meer as is also what has been invented concerning th Spittle, which they leave behind them: As soon they are got a shoar, their natural Courage, Act∣vity and Strength leaves them. Of this, we saw an instance in a young Frenc man, who Washing himself one day in a certai Lake, called the Sweet Lake, was all on a sudden surprized and attack'd by a Crocodile, who seiz
him by the Leg. Notwithstanding the painfulness f his Wound, he did not loose Courage, but re∣collecting himself as well as he could, he watch'd is opportunity so well as to take hold of the Crocodile's upper Jaw, which being a long move∣ble he dragg'd him thus, with an incredible re∣olution, to the Shoar of the Lake. He had re∣eiv'd 6 Wounds in this Engagement with the Crocodile, and lost abundance of Blood, but was y the help of proper Remedies afterwards per∣fectly restored. That which indeed most contri∣buted towards the obtaining this Victory, was, hat this Crocodile was none of the biggest. The Negroes consider the Crocodile no other∣wise than a Devil,Croco∣diles in great esteem with the Ne∣groes. they Swear by him when they ntend to assever any thing for a real Truth. f there be any Contest betwixt two Parties, they ppear on the Shoar of a Lake or River; he that s to confirm the Truth of his Affirmation by Oath, plunges himself into the River, Conjures and rays the Jacaret, to be Arbitrators betwixt him and his Enemy, and to decide their Quarrel; o let him Live if he speaks Truth, and to devour him instantly if he affirms any thing contrary to it. And this they make use of for a Tryal of the Guilt or Innocency of him who thus commits himself to the decision of the Crocodile in the Wa∣ter. Before I conclude this Chapter, I must say some∣thing concerning the Camelion.Cameli∣on. This is a little Creature, not unlike a Lizard, but its Back some∣what rounder and higher, and its Head not so broad. Its Skin is so transparent, that it receives and reflects the same Colour with those things upon which it is found; among all other Colours the Black makes the most lively impression upon it; but it retains neither any longer than it is near the same thing, from whence it had derived its Colour. As I had often heard it affirm'd positively for Truth, that it lived upon nothing but the Air, I
had the Curiosity to open several of them, which I found full of Flies,Live upon Flies. from whence I conj∣cture, that these are their ordinary Food and No∣rishment. CHAP. XI. A Voyage to Galamboule. DUring our stay at Fort Dauphine, there Arrive several Ships from the Indies, laden with Pro∣visions, which came very opportunely to supply our present Necessities, occasion'd by the last Inu∣dations of the Locusts. Monsieur de Mondevergue, being at that time pre∣paring to return into France, he order'd a Ship lately come from Suratte, to be got ready, in or∣der to send it to Galamboule, and some Islands in those parts, to fetch him what Necessaries he had occasion for, and to bring away such French as were in Garrison in several little Forts in those parts, which were very chargeable to the East-In∣dia Company, without any prospect of Advanta∣ges. Abundance of Sick were also Shipp'd on Board the Vessel, to be carried to the Isle of Bur∣bon, for the recovery of their Health, with whom I embark'd, in the Ship called the Crown, Com∣manded by Captain Lovet, and set Sail in the be∣ginning of April. The difficulty we met with at our going out of the Bay Dauphine, was a sure presage of the Mis∣fortunes that befell us afterwards, in our passage from Madagascar to Mascareigne, which we could not accomplish till after a most troublesome and tedious Voyage of 30 Days; whereas, with a fair Gale it may be performed in five: abundance of our
Sick Men died, in the mean while, we lost our ain Top-Mast, by the fury of the Tempest, were reduced to that extremity for want of ovisions, that we had nothing left,Stinting in the Ship. but a small antity of Rice and Water to feed upon. The cause of these Disasters being in a great mea∣re attributed to the ill Conduct of the Captain, ere arose a Mutiny in the Ship, so that we had ough to do to prevent the Sea-Men from throw∣g him over Board. At last after a great many igues and dangers, we came within sight of Isle of St. Maurice,Isle of St. Maurice. Inhabited by the Dutch, about 25 Leagues distant to the East, from Isle of Burbon, being much of the same big∣ess and fertility. The next day follwing we cast Anchor near St. , where such of the Sick as had escaped with me ter so troublesome a Voyage, were set on Shoar, and ter we had taken in fresh Provisions, we set Sail Galamboule. Our Pilot was a Drunken Dutch Man, who having mistaken his Course, we found our selves fallen off too far to the North,Arrive at Galam∣boule. so that e did not Arrive at Galamboule, till the fourth of . This part of the Isle Dauphine, or Madagascar, Situate under 15 Degrees and 50 Minutes of Southern Latitude, 15 Leagues distant from the Isle of St. Mary, where we had one of these Forts, which were to be Abandoned by order from the Company. We shew'd them the Orders of Mon∣sieur de Mondevergue, in order to get themselves ready for their departure, against our return; and the next day set Sail for the Isle of St. Mary, where we shew'd them the same orders we had left at Galamboule. The Isle of St. Mary is Situate under the fifteenth Degree of Southern Latitude,Isle of St. Mary. its Compass is of a∣bout 4 Leagues, and 2 Leagues distant from the Isle of Madagascar. It is a very fruitful Island, and well peopled, it produces abundance of Am∣er-grease, which the Inhabitants mix with their
Tobacco, when they Smoak, besides that, they a considerable quantity to the French. But Air is here very unwholsome, by reason of continual Rains, that fall all the Year round. Thi Island contains a prodigious number of Apes, different kinds and shape, which are very michievous; One of our Sea-Men had the misfortu to be convinced of it by woeful Experience. Fo having a great Inclination to Taste some of Oranges, which the Negroes call Vorgases, he we into an Adjacent Wood, to satisfie his Appetite but scarce was he advanced a few paces within Wood, when he was furiously attack'd by the Animals, who took from him his Fusee, teari him with their paws, in a most dreadful manner, stuck so close to him, that his Comrades who hear∣ing him cry out most pitifully, came to his relief had enough to do to rescue him from the fury o these dangerous Creatures. Having dispatch'd our Business at St. Mary's we directed our Course towards Antongil. At the Entrance of the Bay, we were in most immine danger of having been lost, and dash'd to pieces against a great Rock, which by reason of a very thick Fog, we did not discover, till we were come within Musket-Shot of it, when by good chance the Sun having favoured us with a glance, we were made sensible of our danger, and immedi∣ately cast Anchor near one of the small Islands in the Bay.
CHAP. XII. f the Bay of Antongil, and our return to Fort Dauphine. THE Bay of Antongil,Description of the Bay of Anton∣gil. is one of the most con∣siderable in the whole World, for its bigness, firmness of its bottom, and the secure station Ships, which are sheltered here against the most iolent Tempests; besides that the fertility of the rcumjacent Country, renders it one of the most onvenient places for Ships to furnish themselves with all manner of Refreshments. The Bay is 15 Leagues long, at its Entrance 3 broad, in the iddle 9, and so encreases gradually towards the hoar. It is able to contain a great number of Ships, and comprehends within its Circuit several mall Islands, among which, the most considerable s called Maroca; Near this Island most of the Ships come to an Anchor, as being sheltred against the Winds from all sides. The South and East Winds are most favourable to further the En∣trance of Ships into this Bay; but on the other hand, they are directly opposite to those who are to come out; so that these Winds being very frequent here, you may enter without much diffi∣culty in a few Hours, but it will require often∣times some Months before you can get out again. They are as much pestered here with continual Rains, as they are at the Isle of St. Mary's, neither is the Air much better; the people hereabouts Live like the rest of the Inhabitants of Madagas∣car; but that their Religion comes somewhat nea∣rer to Mahometism; the Men are here Jealous of
their Wives, even to a degree of Madness, and punish Adultery with Death: They never eat a∣ny Swines-Flesh, and have such an Aversion to this Creature, that if one chances to Die, they Bu∣ry it very deep under Ground, least they should be defiled by the smell, as they pass by. They esteem Gold and Silver, no more than they do Tin and Copper. We catch'd here abundance of Wild-Fowl, and reckoning the Commodities we Truckt with them, at the rate they Cost us in France, we did not pay for a good Fowl above one Penny. After we had got on Board as much as we had occasion for at present, we doubled the uttermost Cape of the Bay, in order to our return to St. Mary's, where we also continu'd no longer, than was absolutely requisite to Embark those we came to fetch away. Some that were Married in the Country, chose rather to stay behind, than to leave their Wives,Leave St. Mary's. which the Captain would not take on Board; and the next day after we set Sail from the Island, we came to an Anchor in the Road of Galamboule, where there is always a high Sea, let the Weather be never so fair. After we had Embark'd all the French that were to go along with us, we blew up the Fort, at the sight of which, and the Embarkment of the Canon, the Negroes dreading the Cruelties of the Neighbour∣ing Mountainers, their irreconcilable Enemies, af∣ter our Departure, broke out into most horrible outcries, and gave us all the possible Demonstra∣tions of their utmost Despair. Their miserable Condition moving us to Compassion, we took as many of them as our Ship would hold, on Board of us, endeavouring to comfort the rest with some Presents, and the hopes of a speedy return, in or∣der to deliver them out of the Hands of their E∣nemies. Thus we quitted this dangerous Port,Leaves Galam∣boule. on the Twenty first of June, with a very favourable Gale, so that on the Twenty sixth of the same Month,
we were within sight of the point of Itapere, which is only 3 Leagues distant from Fort Dau∣phine. The Pilots frequenting these Coasts, are always very careful to come to an Anchor towards Night, near this Point, and to stay till Day-light, the better to avoid the Rocks that are at the Entrance of the Bay Dauphine; but our Pilot being fool∣hardy, continu'd his Course all the Night, so that at break of Day, beside the danger we had esca∣ped, of being lost upon the Shelves and Rocks, we found our selves a great way below the Bay. The worst of all was, that being encouraged by the hopes of a speedy Passage, we had not ma∣naged our Provisions to the best Advantage, so that having nothing left, but a small quantity of Rice, we began to consult what was most expe∣dient to be done in this present emergency; then it was at last resolved to approach the Shoar, and to Land all those whom we had brought along with us from St. Mary's and Galamboule. Pursu∣ant to this Resolution, we came to an Anchor in the Bay of Galleons, which received its Name from some Portuguese Galleons that were lost near this place. This Bay being not above 3 Leagues from Fort Dauphine, we only stay'd for Day-light, that we might with the more conveniency disembark our Men; where on a sudden, a fresh Gale ari∣sing from the West, we immediately set Sail, and after some small difficulties, which we easily sur∣mounted, entred the so much desired Fort about Noon, on the 5th of August. So soon as we found our selves in a place of se∣curity, the whole Ships Crew made their Com∣plaints against the Captain, who being immedi∣ately dispossess'd, Monsieur Lambety, who had for∣merly Commanded the Ship, was put in his place.
CHAP. XIII. Our Departure from Madagascar to the Indies. THE New Captain received immediate Or∣ders to have his Ship refitted, and to prepare every thing for his Voyage to the Indies, whither he was to go in Company with the Mazarine Fri∣gat, and a Hoy called the St. John. The Season being very far advanced, we got every thing in readiness with the utmost diligence; so that all the three Ships being in a Sailing posture by the 12th of August, we doubled the most Sou∣thern Cape of the Isle Dauphine, with a North-East Wind, blowing a fresh Gale; the Mazarine Fri∣gat being an Old Ship, lost her Main Top-Mast, and her Main-Yard, of which Accidents we were quickly advertised in our Ship; but our Orders being to make the best of our way to Suratte, we did not stay for the rest, but pursued our Voyage alone. The Wind proved as favourable to us as we could have wish'd,Bay of St. Austin. so that making use of all our Sails, we pass'd in sight of the Bay of St. Au∣stin, a good Port belonging to the Isle of Mada∣gascar, Situate on the West side of the Island, un∣der the five and Twentieth Degree of Southern Latitude; from whence we steer'd our Course to the Isle of Don John,Isle of Don John. where we intended to re∣fresh our selves. The Portugueses have given the Island this Name, after him who was the first dis∣coverer of it. It is Situate betwixt the Continent of Africa and the Isle of Madagascar, near 3 or 4 other Islands, the most considerable of which,
is called Majota. We were scarce come within sight of it, when being becalmed, the violence of the Current drove us upon the Rocks, which sur∣rounded this Island, where we must have infalli∣bly perished, if the Calm had continued a little longer; but there arising a Gale, we continued our Voyage, without pursuing our design of re∣freshing our selves, for feat of a new Acci∣dent. We passed pretty near the Isle of Socotora,Isle of So∣cotora Situ∣ate not far from the Red-Sea; from whence we have the best Aloes. Here we were again becalmed for some days, which being followed by a furious Tempest, carried away our Main Top-Mast. Thus we pursued our Voyage without any remar∣kable Accident, till the 18th of September, where we met with the St. John Hoy, on the Indian Coast; We were parted from her the first day of our Voyage, and being in want of Provisions, she fur∣nished us with some, and so we continued our Voyage together to Suratte. The Indian Shoar about Suratte being very low, we were very careful in sounding frequently the depths; notwithstanding which precaution, we passed over, the Sand Banks lying betwixt Diu and Daman, be∣longing to the Portugueses, of which we shall have occasion to speak hereafter, from the 18th to the 20th of September, being misguided by the unskil∣fulness of our Pilot; Our Vessels being but very small and not heavy Laden, we escaped this dan∣ger, without receiving the least damage. Towards Night, we discovered the Ships riding at Anchor in the Road of Suratte, before we could discover the Land; and, as the late danger we had so narrowly escaped, made us act with more cir∣cumspection, we cast Anchor till break of Day. The 21st we Arrived in the Road, about two Leagues distant from the Rivers Mouth,Arrive in the Road of Suratte. and about 5 from the City of Suratte; We sent immediately several Chaloups to give notice of our Arrival.
But scarce had we lost sight of them, but a violent Tempest arising from the West, we did not ima∣gine otherwise, but that they must infallibly be lost, before they could reach the Shoar. The fu∣ry of the Winds encreasing every Minute, we cast out all our Anchors, they being the only hopes we had left, without which we must have been cast upon the Sand, and destroyed immediately, this Hurricane being one of those the Indians call the Elephant,A Hurri∣cane. by reason of its violence. We had at last once more the good fortune to escape this danger, the Winds having abated their fury; and to add to our good fortune, all our Messengers Arrived safely at Suratte, to the no small astonishment of all that beheld them. Mon∣sieur Carva, immediately sent us some Provisions, Pilts, and Sea-Men, to assist us in making the River, but they did not come on Board of us till the 23d. The St. John Hoy having been driven in the last Storm upon a Sand Bank, had also the good fortune to get clear by the help of the Tyde. With the assistance of those sent us from Suratte, we made the River, which however by reason of the swiftness of the Current we did not enter with∣out much difficulty,Arrive near the City of Suratte. but at last Arrived safely near the Garden of the Company, which is not above a quarter of a League on this side of the City of Suratte. The Vessel in which I came, was immediately ordered to be Careened, and being freighted for Masusipatan, departed towards the end of Novem∣ber; the St. John returned to the Isle Dauphine, and the Mazarine Frigat, which Arrived not till a considerable time after, being an Old Ship, and no longer able to endure the Sea, was broke to pieces. The Ship called the Crown; which had brought me to Suratte, being as I told before, ordered to go to Masusipatan, a City upon the Coast of Cor∣mandel,
I left her, expecting further Orders at Suratte; so that pursuant to my design, I will give an exact account of what I found most remarkable in that City. CHAP. XIV. Of the City of Suratte. THE City is Situate under the one and Twen∣tieth Degree of North Latitude, and is one of the most considerable Ports in the Empire of the Great Mogul. It is very large and populous, Built upon the Banks of a fair River, which runs under its Walls, and about 3 Leagues from thence dis∣embogues into the Sea. When I Arrived near the City, the Gates were not shut up; the Inhabi∣tants were obliged for their Security to a neigh∣bouring Prince called Sevagi, who by his frequent Incursions has caused them to surround their City with a good Wall, and to be constantly upon their Guard. The Sand Banks which are at the Entrance of this River, are very uncertain, being by the violence of the Current frequently transpo∣sed from one place to another, so that they are rarely to be met withal two Years together in the same place, which renders the passage of Ships both very troublesome and dangerous. The Streets of Suratte are handsome enough, but they have this inconvenience,Streets of Suratte. that they are ve∣ry dusty during the dry Season, which the Indians call their Summer, tho' all the time the Sun is at the greatest distance from them. To remedy this, they continually water the Streets, especially in those parts where the better sort Inhabit. The Hou∣ses
are here but one Story high, those of the com∣mon people are covered with Tiles; but people of Fashions Houses are flat at Top, with Terrace Walks, made with a certain sort of Plaster; which appears as beautiful as White Marble, and keeps out the Rain, they have only a little rising in the middle, for the better convenience of conveying the Water into the Streets; abundance of people pass whole Nights upon these Terraces, to enjoy the benefit of the cool Air. All Houses of people of any Fashion, have their Gardens surrounded with fine Arbours,Their Gar∣dens. bearing Grapes twice a Year. Besides which, they have great store of all sorts of Flowers, but especially those they call Mougrin, which being not unlike our Jassamin Flowers, are in great request among the Indians. They have also certain Trees bearing Flowers, which open at Sun-Rising, and fall off at Sun-Set; and others of which the Flowers open at Sun-Set, and decay at Sun-rising; and the whole Year being but one continued Spring Season in this Climate, furnishes them always with all sorts of Fruits and Flowers. People of Quality, nay, even those of an Inferi∣our Rank, have their Bathing places, which being made all of Stone, are extreamly neat. They make use of them partly upon the account of their Religion, partly to allay the violence of the heat of the Climate. The French, English, and Dutch, Inhabit the best Houses in Suratte, those of the Armenians are no less Sumptuous, and all of them are very pleasantly Seated. Suratte is a place of great Commerce; Their Diamonds are brought thither out of the Kingdom of Golconda,Their Com∣merce. which is Tributary to the Great-Mogul; the Pearls are fish'd near the Cape of Comoria, and in several places of the Persian Golf; Amber-greae is brought from the Coast beyond the Cape of Good-Hope, as Musk and Civet come out of China, the last of which, is taken from a certain Creature
bearing the same Name. There is besides this at Suratte, a great Trade in Silk, and Gold and Sil∣ver brocados, in the finest Cottons in the World, in Indico and all sorts of Druggs, which are the products either of the Indies or Arabia. Their Spi∣ces they have from the Indies, Malaca furnishes them with Nutmegs, Macasar with Clove-Gilly-flowers, the Isle of Ceilon with Cinnamon, all the Coast of Malabar with Pepper; so that there is no∣thing so precious or rare, but the Ware-Houses of Suratte are sufficiently provided with it. The Governour of the whole Province,The Gover∣nour's Court. which is of a very large extent, has his Residence in this City; He keeps a very Splendid Court, is atten∣ded by a strong Guard, Consisting of several Com∣panies both Horse and Foot; when he goes abroad, he is carried by an Elephant, upon whose Neck, is fastned a Tent, big enough to contain 12 or more persons, according to the bigness of the Beast. Sometimes he is carried in a Palanquin, which is a certain sort of a Bed, covered with very rich Ta∣pestry, carried by 4 Men, which being much easier than our Sedans, are used by most people of Fashi∣on, at Suratte. For you may hire 4 such Chair-Men for 20 Livers per Month, without being ob∣lig'd to provide them with Victuals, unless you go into the Country. Those that cannot afford a Pa∣lanquin, go on Horse-back, and the Indians have very Fine Horses, which are brought thither out of Arabia. The Place of the Governour of Suratte is not Hereditary, and is seldom continued for above 4 or 5 Years to the same Person. On the West side of the City,The Castle. there is an Old Castle, surrounded with a very deep Ditch. There is always a strong Garrison kept here, under its own Governour, who has no dependance on him of the City. All the Europeans keep some Canons near their Houses, wherewith they defend themselves against the Insolency of the Rabble, when they are in a Mutiny, which happens very often among so ma∣ny
Barbarous Nations. They have a great many publick Bagnio's,Their Bag∣nio's. and Hot-Houses at Suratte, be∣sides which, there are some others for the use of such as would Bath in private; in the first, you pay no Money, being Erected for the publick good. CHAP. XV. A further Description of Suratte. ABout a quarter of a League from Suratte, there is a great Tancke or Cistern, made of Free-Stone. It was Built by a Rich Banjan, and is of a great Circumference; you go into it by a fair pair of Stairs, and in the middle you see a little Temple Consecrated to their Gods, unto whom, they offer their Prayers, after they have Bathed themselves. The Walks leading to it are very fine∣ly Planted with Trees, and are look'd upon as the most pleasant of the whole Country. There are also about Suratte,Publick Gardens. publick Gardens, which being very neatly kept, want nothing that may recreate the Eye, and are of free access for every Bo∣dy. The Banjans Inhabiting Suratte, are indeed the Richest, and have the chief management of the Traffick throughout the Indies; nevertheless, the Moors or Mahometans live in much more splendor. If a person of Quality happens to pass through the City, upon any Solemn occasion, he has his Trum∣pets before him, which being 8 or 10 Foot long, and proportionable in bigness, make a pleasant and Warlike Harmony. After the Example of these, Foreigners who bear any considerable Office have the Arms of the
Princes or Common-wealths, whom they serve, carried before them, and have likewise their Trum∣pets, which attend them where ever they go. At about a League distant from the City, there is a Village which is inhabited only by Persians or Parsis,A Village inhabited by Persi∣ans. who adore the Sun and Fire; hither the In∣habitants of Suratte come frequently to drink Palm-Wine, which they call Tary. It is a most delicious sort of Liquor; how it is made, I shall have occa∣sion to mention hereafter. All round the City is a fair, champagne and fertile Country; they Sow to∣wards the end of September, when the rainy Season is over, abundance of Wheat, which they reap in January. The Air of Suratte is very good; it is never cold here, and the heats are pretty tolerable. The Port of Sovaly is about four Leagues to the North-West,Harbour of Suratte. this is the place where all Foreign Ships come to Anchor, but they can scarce abide there longer than from October till May, the rest of the Year being very dangerous for Ships, by rea∣son of the frequent Tempests and changeableness of the Winds. There are a great many fair Villages round the Harbours, among which Sovaly has com∣municated its Name to the Port, is the most consi∣derable. Here most of the European Companies have their Ware-houses and Offices, which they a∣dorn with the Arms of their Principals to whom they belong. The Great Mogul's Subjects are not permitted to enter the Port or Sovaly, for fear they should defraud him of the Customs, none but the Europeans enjoy this Privilege. These draw to this Village great number of Banjans, Moors and Persi∣ans, who during the time, that the European Vessels tarry in this Port, set up their Booths, which be∣ing put in good order, and divided into seve∣ral Streets, make up a kind of a moveable Village, where they sell every thing, which may be useful to the Foreign Mariners. There hapned some years before my arrival, an unlucky accident to a Frenchman in this Port, which had been likely to
have proved of very ill consequence. A Mahome∣tan came on board a French Vessel to cheapen some things, and amongst the rest, asked them, whether they had any Pistols to sell? Several pair having been shew'd him, he went to discharge one of them out of a Window in the Cabin, but he, who was the Seller, finding him very unexpert in handling of Fire-arms, took one and discharged it himself; but the Pistol being charged with three Bullets, he unfortunately shot a young Child which was play∣ing a shoar, through the Breast, of which it died instantly. The news of this unfortunate accident was soon spread, not only through the Village, but in Suratte it self, where the Rabble began to be mu∣tinous, and to declare publickly, that they would not rest satisfied, till they had Sacrificed all the French in Suratte, and had revenged the Death of the Child upon a Nation, who made killing and slaying their Pass-time; so that for several days together, no Frenchman durst stir out of the Doors. At last, the Person, who by his carelessness had been the occasi∣on of this unfortunate accident, having by some of his Friends convinced them of his innocence, the matter was accommodated, and the Tumult ceased. For it hapned, that the Child that was killed, be∣longed to Pagan Parents, so that they were appeas∣ed by the means of a Sum of Money, under condi∣tion, that the who had committed the Fact, should not be permitted to come ashoar, but to return into Europe, by the same Vessel that had brought him thither. If this Child had been a Mahometan, he would not have come off at so easie a rate, but would have been in no small danger of his Life, it being an indispensable Law, and always religiously observed among the Mahometans, that if a Foreign∣er, but especially a Christian, kills a Musulman (a name which all the Mahometans assume, signify∣ing as much as a true Believer) he must expiate the crime by his Death.
CHAP. XVI. Of their different Religions. TO give an exact account here of all the Sects of the Indians, would be too tedious, if not quite impossible. The Christian Faith was first planted in those parts by St. Thomas, and that Apo∣stle sealed the truth of the Gospel which he had Preached to these Infidels with his Blood. On the Coast of Cormandel it is preserved in its purity to this day; and before these People entred into com∣merce with the Portuguese, they only made use of the Gospel of St. Matthew in those Eastern parts;Christians in the In∣dies. but after the rest were Communicated to them, they were not a little surprized, that so many great and powerful Nations, were enlightned by the Go∣spel, and adored the Name of Jesus Christ, as well as themselves: It is true, there is some difference in the ceremonial part, but the substance of their Religion is the same with ours. The Portugueses who have sufficiently testified their Zeal for the propagating of the Christian Do∣ctrine, have made considerable progresses in the In∣dies, towards the Establishment of Christianity; no∣thing can be more compleat than their Churches and Monasteries, but their Zeal is involved in no small difficulties, which obstructs their pious En∣deavours. The severity of the Inquisition establish'd in all places under the obedience of the King of Portugal,Inquisition. Holy by its Name, but so terrible in its Conse∣quences, serves for nothing else than to abalienate the Infidels from the Christian Church.
Though the Christians are not allowed the pub∣lick Exercise of their Religion, in the Territories▪ under the jurisdiction of the Mahometans, neverthe∣less they are not debarr'd from Worshipping Go in private. There are certain private Convents, such a one the French Capuchins have at Suratte; but they are forbidden under pain of Death to teach any thing to the Mahometans, which may induce them to embrace the Christian Faith, and if a Mahomet be suspected to have received the least tincture of Christianity, he is Condemned to the Flames, un∣less he will save his life by a publick Profession of Mahometism. There are at Suratte a great Number of Armenia Christians, of the Greek Church, who have their Churches, as well as the Roman Catholicks, the Eng∣lish, Dutch, and other European Nations; but the Sect of Mahomet is the most prodominant in the Indies, and other parts of Asia, both for its number and strength. The Great Mogul himself, is a Ma∣hometan, and most of his Subject, follow his Foot∣steps. There is also in the Indies another sort of People,Parsis in the Indies. called Parsis or Perse, descended from the race of the Antient Persians, who being forced out of their Native Country by the first Mahometans, endea∣voured to preserve their lives from the rage of their Enemies by flight. They were toss'd upon the Sea, for a considerable time, and many of them being lost in their Voyage, three of their Vessels came to the Indian shoar, whereof the first set up themselves near Suratte, the second at Dieu, and the third at Gandavy, a Town betwixt Suratte and Daman. They are neither very Numerous nor Rich, one of the fundamental Rules of their Faith is, not to wear a∣ny other Arms but a little Knife; they respect and adore the Sun, and the Firelike Deities, and they look upon it as a great crime to extinguish a Candle, or at least they must do it by a sudden Agitation of the Candle, if they would not have it burn any longer. Their Lamps and Fire-places are their
ltars; they neither Interr nor burn their Dead; ey make certain Cisterns in the Ground, covered ith an Iron Grate, where they expose their dead orps to the Rays of the Sun. Though all those who don't receive Baptism, may numbred among the Pagans, and that the Parsis such in effect; nevertheless, the Indians, by rea∣on of the plurality of their Gods, may most pro∣erly be comprehended under that Name; such be∣g their ridiculous Superstition, as to extend to adoration of Adders, Serpents, and other Crea∣res. All the Pagans have a great Veneration for Apes and Oxen; they are divided into several Races, Fa∣ilies and Seats, which the Portugueses comprehend nder the Name of Casta. The chiefest and most considerable among them ,The Bra∣mans. that of the Bramans, or Bragmans; these are Priests, who by an indispensible Rule, are tied to Eat nothing that has or may have enjoyed life, and o live upon Fruits, Pulse, and Milk Meats, nor o drink any strong Liquor. They are so rigorous n their Fasts, as to eat but once in three days; they are respected by all the rest as their Superiours; they are forbidden the use of Arms, and dare not kill either Man nor Beast, though in their own Defence; they receive the offerings of the People made to their Gods. The poorer sort appear in the Morning near the Banks of Rivers, where they pray for such as come there to wash and purifie themselves; which done, they touch their Fore-heads with a little Bo∣lus or some other Colour, which they perswade the People to have a vertue of preserving them that day against any sinister Accident, in recompence of which they receive the Alms of the People, wherewith they maintain their Families. The Banjans are the next in order,The Ban∣jans. but they are not permitted to enter their Temples, unless it be to bring their Offerings to the Idol. As for their manner of living, they observe very near the same Rules as the Bramans; they are chiefly employed in
managing the Traffick of the Indies, and are more expert at it, than the rest of the Indians. Both the Bramans and Banjans follow the opinion of Pyth∣goras, concerning the transmigration of the Soul, be∣lieving that so soon as the Soul leaves the Body, it is transplanted into another; for which reason it i that they neither kill, nor permit to be kill'd, any living Creature: And some are so simple, as to di∣stribute daily, certain quantities of Bread to their Dogs, because, say they, it may please the Gods, to transplant one day their Souls into more noble Bodies. There is besides these an infinite number of other Sects among the Pagans, each Profession maintain∣ing a particular Race; But they are not all ty'd to the same austerity of Life. Some of them will eat Fish, others all sorts of Meat, except Beef. There is a certain Gang of them,Mendi∣cants in the Indies. who making a shew of Poverty, spend all their days in Begging, and as they are much respected where ever they come, so they rather command than beg Alms. They flock in great numbers about the Country, especially near their Temples, they are very insolent, and let their Hair grow very long, to distinguish themselves from the other Pagans, who shave them∣selves all over, unless it be a lock, which they leave on the top of the Head as a Mark of their Religion. Those who let their Hair grow thus long, make use of a certain Pill, which makes the Hair grow both very thick and long. I have seen some of them wear their Hair near two Fathoms long. There are some who call themselves Faquirs;Certain Vo∣taries in the Indies. these make a Vow to remain for several Years together in their Temples, either Standing, Sitting, their Arms a-Cross, or lifted up, or in any other posture they pitch upon, without changing their Station; and for fear, that in their sleep, they should alter their Posture, and consequently break their Vow, they cause themselves to be tied in the same Posture they have chosen, and thus continue till the time of their Vow be expired; during which, those that
ave the oversight over the Temple, take care to feed hem, their Joints being by the length of time ren∣red quite useless and inflexible, they remain for e∣er after, either straight or crooked, according to Posture they put themselves in at the first en∣rance of the Temple, in order to perform their Vow. The greatest part of the Pagans Subject, to the Great Mogul, burn their Dead, and there are but ew Nations in all the Indies, who interr them after he example of the Europeans. CHAP. XVII. How the Indian Women burn themselves with the dead Carcasses of their Husbands. THE Indian Histories affirm, That in former A∣ges these Countries being Governed by Pagan Princes, the Women often grown weary of their Husbands, made a common practice of ridding their hands of them by Poison.How this Custom was introduced. The many tragical in∣stances of this Nature, did oblige at last those Princes who were not always exempt from the cruel designs of the Women, to make a Law, that all Women of what Age and Quality soever, should be burnt with the dead Carcasses of their Husbands. To give the better colour to this cruel Decree, it was back'd by the specious pretext of Religion, promising a large share of Enjoyment to those unfortunate Creatures, in the other World. Besides, that the Bramans paid them very near the same reverence as to their Dei∣ties, by which vain glory the crafty Priests having gained upon the Weakness of their Sex, they fre∣quently chose to make a vertue of necessity, and by
a voluntary Act, to render their Deaths more glo∣rious. Many Ages after the Mahometans being become Masters of the greatest part of the Indies, were for abolishing this dreadful Custom of forcing People to be their own Executioners; for which reason it was ordained, that none should be constrained to Sacrifice themselves at their Husbands Funerals, but that they should be left to their liberty, either to sur∣vive or die with them. The Governours are in Person to examine such of the Pagan Women as offer themselves to be Burnt; they are to endeavour by all fair means and perswa∣sions, to divert them from their designs, and if they persist in their Resolution, they are obliged to give their consent, but withall to keep them under a strict Guard, for fear, that if they should happen to change their mind, they may not be rescued out of their hands. They look upon this as a very ne∣cessary precaution, the better to oblige them to re∣flect seriously upon what they undertake, before they enter upon so fatal a Resolution; for there have not been wanting instances of those, who at first courted and demanded Death from the Governours with an undaunted Courage, who have been start∣led and trembled at the sight of the Funeral Pile, and too late repented themselves of their rash Vows. The Ceremony is performed in the following manner:How the Ceremony is perform∣ed. The Corps of the deceased Husband is car∣ried to the place where it is to be consumed by Fire, the Inhabitants of Surat perform it commonly at a Leagues distance from the City up the River, in a certain place, called Soulpara, where there is one of the most famous Temples of the whole Province, it being their Custom upon such an occasion, to be as near a Temple and the Water as they can; then the Widow is brought thither in Triumph on Horse Back, most magnificently attired with a Garland of Flowers about her Head; she is surrounded by se∣veral that play upon Musical Instruments, and fol∣lowed by her Kindred and Friends, who Dance and
Sing for joy, to have such a Heroine in their Fami∣ly, or to be allyed to her by Friendship. Some∣times they are carried by Water; when the dead Corps is laid in the Boat, so as that the Widow, who is seated upon a Chair, may set her Feet a∣gainst it. Being arrived at the place, the dead Corps is laid upon the Bank of the River, where the Widow washes it; which done, it is carried into a little Hut of seven or eight foot square, made for that purpose of very dry Wood, covered with Reed, dip'd in Oil, Rosin and Brimstone, to render it the more Combustible; it has a little Door through which the dead Body being conveyed into the place, the Widow comes out of the Water, and thus wet, takes several rounds about the Funeral Pile, which done, she embraces her Children, if she have any, and the rest of her Kindred or Friends there present, among whom having distributed what precious moveables she has about her, they are removed at a further distance, for fear their Tears should disturb her.How they burn them∣selves. Thus prepared she enters the fatal place, where she is to sacrifice her self, and being seated upon a heap of Straw, mix'd with Brimstone, near the dead Carcass of her Husband, a Braman exhorts her to constancy, comforting her with the hopes of being soon reunited with her own better half; then he gives her a Torch in one hand, and some leaves of a Book in which he has been reading before in the other, if her heart don't fail her, she sets the Pile on fire her self, but if she be not courageous enough to do it, the Braman after being come out, and shut∣ting the door behind him, does her this last office, whilst the Spectators sing certain Songs to the Ho∣nour and Praise of the Lady, who thus happily has made her self a Sacrifice. The first time that I was an Eye-witness of this Tragical Ceremony, I took most particular notice of all Passages and Circumstances that attend it; she that sacrificed her self, did not appear to be above twenty Years of Age; she look'd upon her Funeral▪
Pile with a very setled▪ Countenance, shewing not the least marks of sorrow at her approaching ate; she with her own hands set fire to the combustible matter that surrounded her; I was very near the Pile, so that I could exactly see her lift up her de∣ceased Husband's Head, and press her Cheeks to his, which done, she pulled her Veil over her Face, and died without the least appearance of regret. Some time after, I saw such another Spectacle. She that was to be sacrificed, was not quite so young as the former, and had press'd the Execution of her Vow with a great deal of Resolution, which how∣ever began to fail her at that very time when she stood most in need of it; for, scarce was she en∣closed within the Funeral Pile, but she strove by all means possible to get out, but the Braman immedi∣ately set fire to the Combustible Materials, and thus forced her to undergo that cruel fate, which she had sought for with so much eagerness. So soon as the Bodies are consumed by the Fire, their Ashes are thrown into the next River, and the Families of those Women who thus have sacrificed themselves, are in great esteem ever after among the Indians. In those places where the Pagans are absolute Ma∣sters, this Law is put in Execution with the utmost severity, the Women that don't voluntarily offer themselves to be sacrificed, being constrained by force, to satisfie the cruel Law of their Native Country. But what is the most surprising of all, is, That sometimes Men very far advanced in Years, marry young Creatures of seven or eight years of Age, and these notwithstanding the innocence and tender∣ness of their Age, are forced to conform themselves to the barbarous custom of their Country, if their Husbands die before them. There are some Kingdoms in the Indies, where these Sacrifices are performed in a different manner. They dig a deep hole in the Ground, wherein they lay the dead Corps; they make a great Fire round about it, for three days consecutively; the Widow is led
round about it, covered with a certain Veil, made out of the Leaves of the Banana-Tree, and after having taken her turns and bid farewell to all her Friends, She throws her self into the Fire, where She is consumed to Ashes. Others dig a Grave,Several ways of Sa∣crificing themselves. wherein they Bury the Dead Carcass of the Husband, and the Widow being laid a-top of him, they throw so much Earth upon them as covers her Body quite up to the Neck; then the Braman approaches, and after ha∣ving imparted to the poor Victim his Consolations and Blessing, he Strangles her, and then covers them all over with Earth. The King of Maudre has seldom less than 3 or 400 Wives, who are all obliged to be Sacrificed, whenever he comes to Die. There is another more Barbarous Custom ob∣served at the Funeral Obsequies of the Princes of the Race of Sevagi; for, all the Officers of his Houshold (which amount to a considerable num∣ber,) are Burnt with their Dead Corps; the same is observed in several of the other petty Kingdoms of the Indies. CHAP. XVIII. Of the Temples and Habits of the Indians. AS the Indians are very different in their Religi∣ons, so their Temples have but little resem∣blance to one another. The Mahometans at Suratte, have most Magnificent Mosques.Mosques. There are above 200 of them in that City, but some are but small, and indifferently Built. They abhorr Images, and
have only one hollow place in their Mosques, to∣wards the side of Mecha. And because the Ma∣hometans who are very Zealous in their Superstiti∣ous Worship, have not always the opportunity of visiting their principal Mosques, they have e∣rected every where some small edifices, which contain no more than a Cistern or great Basin to purifie themselves, and a hole in the Wall, where to make their Ejaculations; all these are intitled with the Name of a Mosque, and in this Sence must be taken, what we hear related concerning the vast number of Mosques in the City of Grand-Cairo, and other Cities where the Mahometan Reli∣gion is predominant. According to the Institution of the Alcoran, the Friday is their Sunday, which Day, being set apart for the Exercise of their Devotion, they there offer up their Prayers and Alms. The Temples of the Pagans are without the Ci∣ties,Pagan Temples. tho' some of the Richer sort have them also in their Dwelling-Houses, they are commonly very large and Magnificent; all days are alike to them, and the Offerings they make to their Gods consist always in things that are inanimate. The Parsis,The Parsis. who, as we said before, adore the Sun and Fire, have neither Altars nor any other places appointed for the Exercise of their Devotion. The Image of the Sun, was formerly their Idol, but e∣ver since they live under the jurisdiction of the Great Mogul, they are forbidden to adore it, and if some among them continue this Worship, they must do it in private, and with a great deal of circumspection for fear of being discovered. All the Subjects of the Great Mogul wear Tur∣bans,Habit of the Indi∣ans. tho' somewhat distinguished in folding ac∣cording to the difference of their Religion. The Mahometans and Parsis, never Shave their Beards. The Men wear a certain kind of Vests, not un∣like to our loose Coats, the Sleeves are very strait, but withal so long as to be laid in a great many pleats upon the Arm. They make use of a kind
of Drawers or Breeches, very strait, not open be∣fore, and reaching down to their Heels; the Pa∣gans wear over these a thin Petticoat. Stockings are not used in the Indies, and their Shooes are flat∣soled like our Slippers. The Indian Women are very careful of their Hair,Mahome∣tan Women. which generally is very fine and long. Their Habit is but little different from the Men, unless it be in their Head Attire, which is made of a Crepine of Lawn. They are very curious and neat in their Apparel, and always perfumed with the richest Essences of the Indies. The never ap∣pear in publick with their Faces uncovered, the Mahometans being naturally addicted to Jealousie, to so excessive a degree, as to be mistrustful upon the least occasion; of which I will give you an instance, which may sufficiently verifie this asser∣tion, to all who are not thoroughly acquainted with their Inclinations. The Governour of Suratte tenderly loved one of his Wives,Jealousie of the Maho∣metans. by reason of her extraordinary Beauty, wherein she exceeded all the rest. Being sometimes obliged to be absent from her, he was very desirous to have her Picture drawn, and un∣derstanding that there was a certain young Picture-drawer belonging to the French East-India Compa∣ny, at Suratte, who was a very good Artist, he sent to the President of that Company to desire him to let him speak with the young Man. They be∣ing ready to oblige him in so reasonable a request, sent the young Painter to him, to whom he spoke concerning his intention, promising to reward him plentifully for his pains. The French Man retur∣ned his Compliment, telling him, That he should be very Proud of employing his Pencil in the drawing the Picture of so Excellent a Person, without any hopes of further Rewards; Then reply'd the Indian, go to Work as soon as you please, and make use of your utmost Skill to do it to perfection. I will, answer'd the Pain∣ter, but you must take care to have me brought into the presence of the Person, whose Picture I am to draw.
How, said the Governor, interrupting his Discourse angrily, would you pretend to have a Sight of my Wife! And how is it possible for me to draw her Picture with∣out seeing her, answer'd the Painter. Away with you, reply'd the jealous Indian, you have no business here, if you cannot draw her Picture without seeing her; I will rather deny my self the satisfaction of having her Picture, than that she should be exposed to the Sight of any Man Living. By this you may see to what an excess of folly the Mahometans carry their Jea∣lousie; notwithstanding which, the Women don't want ingenuity and dexterity to please themselves upon certain occasions, in spite of all the care and watchfulness of their Jealous Husbands. The Women of the Parsis, and other Pagans, wear nothing else but close Bodice fastned behind,Pagan Women. the Sleeves reaching only to the Elbow: For the rest they make use of a piece of Stuff, either of Cotton or Silk, according to their Quality, which they wind about their middle. They are general∣ly very handsome, much addicted to Venery, un∣less it be those of the Banjans, who are something more Modest. They affect a great deal of Mag∣nificence in their Jewels, and besides their Neckla∣ces and Bracelets, wear on their Feet Golden-Rings hollow within, and fill'd with Gravel or any other thing that will make a noise. Their Heads are a∣dorned with small Golden Coronets, richly beset with Precious Stones. They have holes in their Ears, in which they wear their Pendants, and in their Nostrils, which are bored through, they hang Gold and Silver Plates, of that bigness as almost to cover their Faces. They are very clear Limb'd, and well proportion'd; the richer sort Bath them∣selves every day at home, the rest abroad in the Rivers, where you meet with some of them from Sun-rising till late at Night; where the Bramans are employed to Pray for them, and to take care of their Cloaths; I mean those, which they put on after they have wash'd themselves; for they go with their Cloaths into the River, and afterwards
change them; which they do with so much dexte∣rity, that the standers by, tho' never so attentive and quick-sighted, cannot see the least thing which favours of immodesty; They are very Religious in observing their Ancient Laws and Customs, but withall, extreamly addicted to Voluptuousness. After 3 Months stay at Suratte, I Embark'd in the Port of Sonaly, on Board a Vessel called the Mary, which in Company of another Vessel called the Strong, was going to Batiepatan, to take in there the rest of her Cargo in Spices. CHAP. XIX. Our Departure from Suratte for Malabar. WE set Sail from the Port of Sonaly the 6th of January, with a very favourable Wind, which thus continued till our Arrival at Rajapour, where we left the Strong, and continued our Voyage to Mirscou, and some other places in the Indies, of which we shall have occasion to speak anon; but because I have been at other times at Rajapour, I will here insert what I found most worth taking notice of, in this place. It is Situate in the Territories of Sevagi,Description of Raja∣pour. a fa∣mous Rebel, who for a considerable time has been in Wars with the Great Mogul, and the King of Visapour his Liege Lord. It lies exactly under the 17th Degree of North Latitude, on the Coast of Malabar, about 20 Leagues North from Goa; and you come to it by a River, which runs with a very gentle Current. Near the Mouth of it on the right side of the Shoar, you see a small Village, Inha∣bited only by Fisher-Men, and 4 Leagues beyond it
is the City of Rajapour, which has Communicated its Name to the said River. You may go up with a Vessel of 100 Tuns, as far as to a small Island, which is about half way betwixt the City and the Mouth of the River; afterwards you make use of Chaloups and Barges, to carry the Merchandice to the City, where the River is so shallow that at low Water it is fordable in some places. The English had here formerly a Factory, but the Indians have dislodged them from thence. The French Company has not many years ago got a Settlement there, where they have a fine House and Garden, near a great Cistern, from whence, arises a Spring of Hot-Water,Natural Bath of Rajapour. not inferiour in ver∣tue to any in Europe. The Adjacent Mountains and Forests are full of Apes, which are much re∣verenced by the Pagans, Inhabiting the Territo∣ries of Sevagi, no body being permitted to kill them, without running the Hazard of his Life. The chief Commodities at Rajapour, are Saltperer and Callicoes, but especially Pepper, which grows thereabouts in great quantity. This Sevagi is a very Potent Prince,Prince Se∣vagi. who has managed his Affairs with so much Prudence as to have Establish'd himself, in spite of his Potent E∣nemies, in all the Territories, Situate betwixt Su∣ratte and Goa, unless it be some few Sea-Ports, belonging to the Portuguese. He has made him∣self so dreadful to his Neighbours, as to have made the City of Goa it self Tremble at his Ap∣proach, and has several times made those of Su∣ratte feel the direful effects of his Fury, by Plun∣dering all the Country round about, and carrying away great Riches, without sparing either Mosques or the Pagan Temples. But it has been observed of him, that he always used a great deal of mode∣ration towards the Europeans, perhaps for fear of being called to a severe account by their Princi∣pals▪ which Motive might induce him to shew favourable to them, without which, it have been no difficult matter for him to
have Plundered their Houses, like those of the In∣dians. In the Year 1671. he made such an inroad into the Territories of Suratte, when he made so terrible a havock in the circumjacent places, that the damage could not be repair'd for many Years after. All his Strong holds are Built among the Mountains; His Subjects are Pagans▪ like himself. But he Tolerates all Religions, and is look'd up∣on as one of the most Politick Princes in those parts. The Strong being entred the River of Rajapour, met there with another French Ship called the Gol∣den-Eagle, which was Arrived there but a few days before, coming from Achem, the Capital of the Isle of Sumatra, and the ordinary Residence of their Queen, the Island being Governed by Women. Before she touch'd at Achem, she had been at Ma∣susipatan, a City belonging to the Kingdom of Golconda, on the Coast of Coromandel, from whence come the best Painted Indian Callicoes, the Co∣lour of which, is as lasting as the Stuff it self, with∣out losing any thing of its Beauty. The French East-India Company have their Factors in all those places. CHAP. XX. What further happened during our Voyage to Malabar. AS we continued our Course towards Malabar, we passed within sight of the Forts Situate at the Entrance of the River of Goa, whereof we shall speak hereafter, and came before Mirscou, on the 14th, where we cast Anchor the same day, near the Mouth of the River.
Mirscou is a City of the Kingdom of Visapour,Mirscou described. about 18 Leagues South of Goa, where the French Company has their Ware-Houses for Pepper. The Climate here is very agreeable and Fertile; the first place you meet with after you are entred the River, is the Town and Castle of Mirscou; it is of a considerable bigness, surrounded with a deep Moat, and the Castle is provided with a good Ar∣tillery. He that was then Governour of the place, was a Persian by Birth, who's Name being Cjab∣della, treated us with all imaginable Civility. For no sooner had he been advertised of our Arrival, but he came to visit our Captain, and before his departure invited us all to Supper, tho' it was not as yet Dinner-time; he was so much delighted with our Company, that he oblig'd us to go along with him, so that we followed him to his Palace, some in Palanquins, the rest on Horse-back, with his Guards before us, under the sound of the Haut-boys and Trumpets. As soon as we were come within the Castle,An Indian Feast. we were brought into a spacious Room hang'd all o∣ver with the richest Tapestries, where we were seated round about him upon Cushions made of the same stuff. Scarce had our Interpreters begun to Compliment the Governour in our behalf, when we saw come into the Room a Band of Women Dancers, which he had ordred to appear there for our Diversion; these Women make profession of Dan∣cing and Singing, having no other Employment to get a livelihood. They Dance with an extraordi∣nary activity, and an exact observance of the Ca∣dence, but their Gestures are not very modest, they are generally well shaped, and appear very sump∣tuous in their Apparel. This Ball which lasted the greatest part of the Day, was diverting enough to us, by reason of the Novelty of the Spectacle; but we were extreamly fatigued by the long continu∣ance of the shew, because we had not so much as broke our fast before we came out, so that we had much rather had a more substantial Entertainment,
than that, which only served to divert our Eyes, and all this time was not so entertaining to us, as a good dish of Meat would have been. Night ap∣proaching at last, we saw the Flambeau's brought in, which put us in hopes, that Supper-time was drawing near, especially when we saw our selves conducted into the inner Court; but instead of Ta∣bles, we saw the old sport of Dancing renewed▪ and this being over, we were entertained with an ar∣tificial Fire-work, which lasted till ten a Clock at Night, and almost put us quite out of Patience. At last we were conducted to the place where we were to Sup, the Table being laid upon the Ground (according to the custom, as well of that, as other Eastern Countries) under a very magnificent Cupo∣lo. There was served up variety of most excellent Meats, of which our hungry Stomacks would not give us leave to distinguish the true relish; our Drink was Fimonade, which was brought in great porcelain Vessels, out of which we took the Li∣quor with Spoons into small Glasses, of which eve∣ry one present had one for his own use. The se∣cond course was made up of the best Fruits of the Indies and preserves, and the Feast being conclu∣ded with the old Dancing sport, we did not take our leave from the Governour till very late, who caused us to be reconducted by his Guards and Trumpets to the House belonging to the French Company. The next day we prayed him to come on board our Ship, which lay in the Road. He came ac∣cording to our Invitation, giving presents to every Man in particular that had Supped with him. He was received under the discharge of our Cannon, and was entertained the whole day on board our Ship. At his departure, we offered Him and his Officers some presents (more valuable than his) in the Name of the French East-India Company, which he accepted; and went home as well satisfied with our Entertainment, as we were with the many Ci∣vilities he had shewn us the day before.
The King of Visapour is one of the most Potent in the Indies,King of Visapour. but is tributary to the Great Mogul; he makes profession of the Mahometan Religion, but most of his Subjects are Pagans. We parted from before Mirscou the nineteenth of January, five days after our Arrival, and the two and twentieth of the same Month, arrived at Batie∣patan, where meeting with good store of Pepper, our Vessel got her full Cargo. Batiepatan is a Town belonging to the Kingdom of Cananor,Description of Batie∣patan. on the East of Malabar, situate under eleven Degrees, and forty five Minutes of North Latitude. The Town it self is of a very large ex∣tent, not above a League distant from the Sea-side, and is inhabited for the most part by rich Mer∣chants, who are all Mahometans. At a small distance from the Town, is the King's Palace, surrounded by a great many Pagan Tem∣ples, very magnificently built; and it was near this place the Governour had assigned a settlement to the French at that time, till they could pitch up∣on another place, which might be more suitable to their purpose. The Ship called the Strong, arriving some days after ours, they were both dispatch'd with all pos∣sible speed, and accordingly set sail on the first of February towards the Isle Dauphine, from whence they were to carry Monsieur Mondevergue into France.
CHAP. XXI. Of Malabar. WHen we speak of the Coast of Malabar, we commonly comprehend that large tract of Ground, which extends from Suratte, as far as to Cape Comorin; but to distinguish it the more ex∣actly from other adjacent Countries, belonging to the Indies, we will fix its beginning at the Mount of Eli, situate under the twelfth degree of North La∣titude, this being the place, where the People begin to assume the Name of Malabars or Malavars. Its extent all along the Coast is of above two hun∣dred Leagues in length,The extent of Mala∣bar. being divided into several Kingdoms, the Princes whereof are generally Pa∣gans. Most of these petty Kings possess but small Territories; nevertheless they are independent, and not tributary to any other Prince. The most powerful of them all is the King of Cananor,King of Cananor. being dreaded and respected by all the rest; he is called Cotitri, a name belonging to all the Kings of Cananor. The King of Samorin,King of Samorin. though his Territories are much larger than the formers, yet is look'd upon as much inferiour in Strength. Their manner of Living, Religion and Customs are the same, so that what we relate of the Kingdom of Cananor, may be applied to all the rest of the Malabars. The Air is very good all over the Country, which is one of the most fertile in all Asia; they reap Rice twice a Year, and have good store of most excellent Fruits, but quite different from those in Europe.
Though it be evident that the Cocoe is none of the most delicious Fruit of the Indies, nevertheless its usefulness being so universal, it deserves to be mentioned here, and we will insert a particu∣lar Description of the Tree that bears so useful a Fruit. The Malabars call it Tencar, which signifies as much as straight, as having no Branches, though the Tree it self be sometimes thirty or forty foot high, seldom exceeding three foot in compass. The Wood is spongy, and consequently useless for Build∣ing, unless it be when it grows very old, when it becomes much more solid.Cocoe-Tree described. The roots of it are ma∣ny, spreading almost above ground, notwithstand∣ing which, the Tree out-braves the utmost fury of Winds, it being very rare to see them trn up even by the most violent Hurricanes. Towards the top there sprouts out about a douzen leaves of ten foot long each, and one and an half broad, being divi∣ded in the middle like those of the Date-tree; when they are dryed, they serve instead of Tiles to cover Houses withall; out of their finest Threads they make very fine Mats. Tents and Huts of the cour∣ser Branches. The middle part of the leaf serves for Fuel. Their number is always the same; for so soon as one falls, another grows in its stead. On the ve∣ry top of the Tree there sprouts out a very large Bud, not unlike a Cabbage or Cawly-flower, but much larger and finer than ours, enough to serve ten People for a Meal; but, because the Tree dies soon after the Fruit is gathered, they commonly cut down the Tree near the Root, when they intend to make use of it. Betwixt the top and the leaves come forth abundance of young Sprigs, about the thickness of a Man's Arm; these they cut, from whence destills a Liquor of a white Colour, and a sweet and delicious taste, which the Tieves (such among the Malabars, as apply themselves to Husbandry) come to gather Mornings and Even∣ings in certain Vessels fastned to the end of the Sprigs,Palm-Tree Wine. from whence flows the said Liquor.
This is the Wine of the Country, called by them Houry, or Tary; it is so strong as to inebriate a Man like our Wines;Vinegar and Bran∣dy. in few hours it contracts a sharpness, and in one Day and Night turns quite Sowre, when it is used instead of Vinegar, they having no other throughout the Indies. They also make of it a kind of Aqua Vitae or Brandy, which by repeated Destillations becomes excessive strong. If you put this Liquor as soon as it is drawn from the Quick-tree, into a Basin with a small quantity of Lime, it becomes as sweet as Honey, which they make use of for Preserves, and if it be boiled for some time, it becomes Sugar, not quite so good as that which is drawn from Canes, but which is nevertherless much used among the common Peo∣ple of Malabar; the Natives call it Jagara, and the Portuguese Jagre. As long as the Tary destills out of the Sprigs, the Tree bears no Fruit, but if you let them grow, there come forth great Bunches, which produce the Cocoes hanging in Clusters, to the num∣ber of ten or twelve. Their skin is very tender at first,Cocoes. and easie to be slit, from whence flows a very clear and fresh Li∣quor, of a very agreeable taste; some of them will afford not much above a pint of Liquor, whereas o∣thers give near a Gallon. This Liquor is by degrees converted into a solid substance, which is very soft and white, and then the Malabars call the Cocoes Elenir, and the Portu∣guese Lagne. Afterwards the moisture being all con∣sumed, the Fruit becomes hard, and its taste is not unlike our Hasle Nuts. They are so well known in those parts, that it would be superfluous to give a particular account here, to what use they are put in Europe, since they are brought thither from all parts in so great quantities, that they are no more look'd upon now a days as a rarity, but are esteem∣ed meerly for their Natural and intrinsick good∣ness. The Tree brings forth Fruit three times a year; some are as big as a Man's Head, and because they
are beaten down by the least Wind, it is dangerous to walk under these Trees when the Fruit is come to perfection. They make out of the outward Husk, when dri∣ed, a kind of Hemp, the threads of which serve to make strong Cordage and Cables, for the biggest Ships; and as there is a prodigious quantity of this Fruit all over the Indies, so besides what is consum'd by the Natives, and what is exported by Foreigners; they burn abundance of it, to make Charcoals for the use of the Goldsmiths and others. The Indian Cooks season their Meats with a cer∣tain Liquor which they get out of the Cocoes by scra∣ping it, and the poorer sort extract an Oyl of it, which they both Eat and Burn in their Lamps. They fatten their Poultry and Hogs with the rem∣nants out of which the Oil has been pressed, and so the poor sometimes make Bread of it.Indian Paper. The Pith of the Tree is White, and as fine as any Paper, for which use it is much sought after by persons of Qua∣lity. Considering the extraordinary benefit reap'd from this Tree, he may well be look'd upon as one of the most precious in the Universe, though he be none of the rarest. What has been related by some, to wit, That they make Ships that cross the Seas without any thing but what the Cocoe affords, though it seems to savour of a Romance, is nevertheless thus far true; that they may equip a good large Barge with Masts, Sails, (which are made out of the leaves) and Cor∣dage loaden with the products of the Tree and Fruits of the Cocoes. There are besides this two other kinds of Palm-trees; the first bears that sort of Dates, which ne∣ver come to maturity in the Indies; the Tree is not above eight or ten foot high, without Branches, and bears its leaves on the top, much like the Cocoe-tree, but they are not near so large. They bore a hole in the Arm of the Tree, from whence by the help of a Pipe, they draw a certain Liquor not unlike the Tary, we have mention'd before. The Inhabi∣tants
call it Nary, and it serves them to make Vine∣gar of and Aqua Vitae, but no Sugar. The other kind is the Wild Palm-tree;Two other sorts of Palm-Trees. its fruit is good for nothing; they call it Trafuli; but the Li∣quor which they draw out of it, is not inferiour to that of the Cocoes. The Tree exceeds the other in Big∣ness, and its leaves are so large, as that four of them serve for a Coverlid to a Bed of five foot long; they make of them Umbrella's, or as the Portuguese call them, Sombarios, which are very useful both against the Rain, and heat of the Sun. CHAP XXII. Of the two Fruits called the Jacque and the Mangos. THE Jacque is of so prodigious a bigness, that one of them is sometimes a good Burthen for a Man; though the Tree seldom exceeds our Ap∣ple-trees in Bulk. Its leaves are not unlike to the Laurel, but something larger: The Fruit is fastned to the Stemm, because the Branches are not strong enough to bear it; it buds out at first sight most like Moss, is of a green Colour, till it comes to ma∣turity; its Skin is most like that of the Anana's; it is pretty thick but soft, and may easily be cut with a Knife, provided you dip it first in Oil, or any o∣ther oleaginous substance, which prevents the Gumm from sticking to it. The Fruit is divided within by many partitions, containing a certain sub∣stance not unlike our Plums, and of the bigness of an ordinary Pullet's Egg; there are sometimes two hundred of them, the Pulp that surrounds it, is a∣bout an inch thick, of a Yellow Colour, and tastes almost like our best Melons. In the very midst of
the Fruit, there appears something not unlike our Chesnuts, which being the Seed of the Jacque, is never eaten; and the whole substance it self is ve∣ry unwholesome, unless you drink a good quan∣tity of Water after it. The Mangos is a much more excellent Fruit,The Man∣gos. resembling our Nectarins; they are of different co∣lours, to wit, Red, White and Green, when they are Ripe. Some are of the bigness of an Egg, some bigger than our largest Pears; their Skin is pretty hard, but the Pulp soft; they are to be met with all over the Indies, but are much better in some places than in others, those on the coast of Malabar are of the worst sort. About Suratte and Daman, they are indifferently good, but the best are in the Isle of Goa; they are not ripe till September, they are most excellent preserved whilst they are Green; they also pickle them with Vinegar; the Tree is of the bigness of our Wallnut-tree, and the Wood very fit for all sorts of Joyners Work. CHAP. XXIII. Of Pepper, Cardamon, Cinnamon and Bethel. THE Shrub which bears the Pepper is always planted near other great Trees, which keep it upright; its leaves are very like the Ivy, whose smell is as biting to the Nostrils, as the Fruit is to the Tongue. The Pepper sprouts forth in small Bunches; its colour is Green at first, but turns Red when it comes to Maturity, and after it has been dry'd in the Sun, appears such as we see it in Eu∣rope. There is but one kind, the difference betwixt the Black and White (according to the opinion of the vulgar) being nothing else, but that the first re∣tains
its native husk, whereas the other is peeled, which they do by thrashing it with small sticks be∣fore it be quite dry, or after it is dryed, by soaking it for a little while in Water, and then rub off the outward peel; by which means, every body that has black Pepper, may soon convert it into White, if he will take the trouble to do it. The Indians preserve it with Sugar whilst it is Green,Pepper pre∣served. and make also a Pickle of it with Vinegar, which they call Achar, a name they give to all their Pickles made with Vinegar. The Pepper grows in a great many places, but no where in such abundance as from Rajapour, as far as to Cape Comorin; the largest sort comes from Visapour and Canara; the Pepper that grows on the Coast of Malabar, that is from Mount Eli, to the most Southern part of the Coast, is not so big as the other, but it multiplies faster, and most Nati∣ons furnish themselves with Pepper in those parts, to transport it into their respective Countries. The Cardamom grows in the Kingdom of Cananor near a certain Mountain,Cardamom. about six or seven Leagues distant from the Sea-side, this being the only place in the whole World where it grows; this spot of Ground produces a vast yearly revenue to the own∣ers. They need neither Sow nor Plant it, all the pains they are obliged to take, is, to burn the Herbs after the rainy Season is over, which grow there a∣bouts; the Ashes of which produce the Carda∣mom. It is transported from hence all over the Indies in∣to Persia and Arabia, the Inhabitants of these Coun∣tries never relishing their Rice well, unless it be sea∣son'd with the Cardamom, so that the greatest part of it is consumed in the East, the rest is bought up by the Europeans, who chiefly make use of it in Phy∣sick: It is three times as dear as the Pepper. There also grows Cinnamon on this Coast,Cinnamon. but does not come in goodness near to that which the Isle of Ceylon produces, which the Hollanders former∣ly took from the Pertuguese.
The Leaves which by the Malabars are called Betle,The Leaves of Bethel. by the Portuguese Bethel, and the other In∣dians Panthle, ought not to be pass'd by in si∣lence in this place. They grow on Shrubs like the Pepper, and are not unlike the Ivy Leaves as well as the others; but they have a pleasant aro∣matick flavour, their natural Colour being Green. They whiten them without the least prejudice to their native vertue, by laying them in Wooden Casks, made out of the Bananas Tree, and by sprinkling them with Water once a day. They never chew them without the Areque; this is a small Fruit,Areque. very like our Green Wall-Nuts, which they lay in water to make the Peel rotten. The Areque has a very offensive smell, whilst it is fresh, but being dried, retains nothing of its ill scent; it is a little biting upon the Tongue, and promotes Spitting. The Chaw made of the Bethel they prepare thus:Indian Chaw. They take about the quantity of a Pea of Chalk or Lime, which they put among 3 or 4 Leaves of Bethel, and mix with it a fourth part of an Are∣que Nut, which they will use together, and chaw it at pleasure. There are some of the Indians, who add to it a few Grains of Cardamom, a small quantity of Cloves and Cinnamon, which gives it a very agreeable taste. The Tree which produces the Areque, grows straight, without Branches, on∣ly a few Leaves on the Top; the Wood is tolera∣bly good for Building, but most us'd for Masts of Barges, they being not strong enough for large Ves∣sels. The Chaw being thus prepared, fortifies the Sto∣mach, promotes Digestion, and leaves a good smell behind it, moistens the Mouth, and dyes the Spit∣tle and Lips red; from whence without Questi∣on is arisen this vulgar error, that some have affir∣med it makes the Gums Bleed. It is a great Specifick against the Stone, as I my self have Experienc'd several times, when I pre∣scribed
it to some of my Acquaintance in that case. And what may serve as a confirmation of what I have asserted as to this particular, it is to be observed that in those places, where it is frequent∣ly used; I never met with any body that was Afflicted with this Distemper. Before a Man is used to this Chaw, it will cause a Dizziness, occasioned by the Areque, but this may in a great measure be prevented, by well cleansing the said Fruit, from a certain white sub∣stance, which is within it. The Europeans who have for some time lived in the Indies, are gene∣rally as fond of this Chaw as the Indians them∣selves; and the Leaves of the Bethel as common as they are, are nevertheless in great esteem, as well among Persons of the first Rank, as the meanest Peasants. If you pay a Visit to any body here, the first thing which is presented is a Roll of this Chaw; if you should let a Friend go out of your House without it, he would take it as a gross Af∣front, and so it would be look'd upon on the other hand, if he should refuse to accept it; neverthe∣less, no body is oblig'd to take it upon the spot, the Asiaticks in general being very jealous of one another, and extreamly fearful of Poyson. There is a certain Tree all over the Indies, but more especially in Malabar, which grows to a con∣siderable height, its Leaves are like those of the Laurel, or at least very little different; it bears a whitish Flower of a very good scent; out of the Stem distills a Gum, which is very useful for Ships; but what is particularly remarkable in this Tree, is, that its Branches after they are grown up to some height, turn downwards again to the Ground, where as soon as they touch they take root, and in process of time, grow equal in bulk to the first Stem. If the Inhabitants did not prevent the spread∣ing of this Tree by continually cutting down its Bran∣ches, one Tree would in time be sufficient to spread it self all over the Country.
Malabar abounds in almost all the same sorts of Pulse we have in these parts, besides which, it has some peculiar to it self; among these are certain Beans of four Fingers long,Large Peans. the Cod containing in length a foot and half. They come very quickly to maturity, are of no good taste, and only used by the poorer sort. They are never seen in Gardens, unless it be to cover and shadow their Arbours or Summer-Houses. Besides which, they have on both sides of their Walks, Hedge-rows of a certain Shrub, which spreads and twists it self in a little time to admiration; it is very full of Leaves, resembling those of the Garden Burnet, and bears a great quantity of Flowers, of a right Red Colour, not unlike the Jessa∣mine Flowers, but having not the least scent, serve only to please the Eye. They begin to blow at Sun-rising, and fall off at Sun-set. Notwithstan∣ding which, these Hedges never want Flowers the whole Year round, without the trouble of Sowing or Planting them after the first time, because they scatter certain Grains upon the Ground, which im∣mediately taking root, furnish the Hedge with an immediate supply of new Shrubs and Flowers. The Malabars are not such great admirers of Flowers as the Indians, who are subject to the Great Mogul, and tho' their Country is not destitute of these materials, from whence they draw their essences in the Indies, yet their Women seldom make use of any thing else than the Oil drawn from the Co∣coes, they not being inclined so much to the va∣nity of perfumes, as the rest of the Indian Wo∣men.
CHAP. XXIV. Of the Elephant and some other Animals of Malabar. THE Birds which are found in Malabar, are the same which you meet with in other parts of the Indies. Perroquets or Perrots, of all sizes and Colours, are here in great numbers; they catch them with Nets, sometimes 200 at a time, but the Indians never take any pains to teach them to Speak, as we do in Europe. They do abound in all sorts of Wild fowl, which they take with a great deal of ease, unless it be the Wild-Peacock, which is very difficult to be catch'd, which makes him to be look'd upon as a rarity, not only for the Tail, but also for his Fea∣thers, which are in great esteem among all the A∣siaticks; they make Umbrella's, Shrines, and Fans of them, for persons of Quality, which they adorn with Gold, and Precious Stones. They have also good store of Tame-Fowl. The Elephant ought to hold the first rank among the Beasts which are to be found on the Coast of Malabar,Elephant. tho' it be brought thither from other parts of the Indies. It is the biggest among all the Terrestrial Creatures, the Head is not proportiona∣ble in bigness to the Body, its Ears are in shape not unlike to the Wings of a Flitter-Mouse; Its Legs round and thick, and of an equal bigness, but is not destitute of Joynts. He makes use of his Snout to take hold of any thing that is offered him, this he can draw in or extend at pleasure, and where-ever he lays hold with it, no Man alive is
able to wrest it from him against his will; he will handle a Cimetar with the same dexterity as if he had the use of Hands; this Trunk or Snout, is hollow within, so that when the Elephant drinks, he draws the Water through it into his Mouth. I have seen them returning from the River side, when some of them had kept in their Trunks near a Pailful of Water, which they would spout into the Faces of such persons as they bore a grudge to; no Creature alive is more intelligible, nor has a greater memory than the Elephant, of which I have been sufficiently convinced, upon several occasions. Each City in the Indies entertains a certain num∣ber of young Fellows, who's Business it is to sweep their Houses and Streets. A Boy of about 12 or 13 Years of Age, who belonged to those employ∣ed in this drudgery in the City of Suratte, having swept together some excrements, and seeing an Elephant coming that way, took up as many of them as he could hold in both his Hands, and threw it directly at the Elephant's Eyes, who went on his way without showing the least sign of re∣sentment. But several days after, meeting the same Boy in a narrow Street, he took hold of him with his Trunk round the Waste, and so tost him above 100 times at a great heighth in the Air, to the no small surprize of all that beheld it; I did not imagine otherwise, but that it would have cost the Boy his Life; but after some time we were agreeably surprized to find that the Elephant only intended to put him into a fright, in retal∣liation for the Affront he had received from him some days before; for, after he had thus sported with him, as long as he thought convenient, he laid him gently again in the same place where he had taken him up, and without more ado went his way. A certain Portuguese Vice-Roy, had an Elephant of an extraordinary Bigness, which he being resol∣ved to Present to the King, he ordered he should
be Embark'd in the first Vessel, that was to go for Lisbon. He that had the oversight of the Elephant, being unwilling to leave his Native Country, used in the mean while to tell the Elephant in the same terms as one should speak to a Man, That they were going to Transport him into a Country where he must expect to undergo all the Slavery and Hardship that could be imagined; which had made such a lively impression upon the Elephant, that all the Art of Mankind, could not get him into the Vessel, which was to Transport him, se∣veral having lost their Lives by his fury, who at∣tempted to force him into the Ship; the Vice-Roy being advertized of what had passed, and not doubting but that this Trick had been put upon him by the Manager of the Elephant, had him brought into his presence, and threatned him with Death, if within a limited time, he did not take care to have the Elephant conveyed into the Ship; the Fellow dreading the Vice-Roy's Anger, was obliged to change his Lesson, and to tell the Ele∣phant, that he was to be Presented to a great Prince, where he was to lead a very easie Life, which had such an influence upon this Creature, that they afterwards Embark'd him without the least resi∣stance. There is scarce any Person of Quality in the In∣dies but what has some Elephants;Usefulness of the Ele∣phant. their Kings make use of them when they are engaged in War, they employ them in carrying their Canon and Soldiers; I have seen some of the Indian Gover∣nors going into the Country for their divertise∣ment, upon the Back of an Elephant, where they had fixed very large and Magnificent Tents, divided into 2 or 3 Apartments, to wit, one for the Men, and the other for the Women, and the third for a Table provided with variety of eatables. They adorn them with fine Coverings, not un∣like in fashion to our Horse-Cloaths; I have seen some of them which took up no less than 100 Yards of Cloath apiece; and yet these were made
for Elephants that are not of the biggest size; for, I can affirm it for Truth, because I have been an eye witness of it, that there are some much larger; which may be easily discovered by their Teeth. For those of the Elephants on the Coast of Mala∣bar, seldom exceed 3 or 4 Foot in length, and may be carried without much difficulty by one Man;Elephant's Teeth. whereas the Elephant's Teeth of Bombaza and Mosambigue, two places in Africa, are general∣ly above 10 Foot long, and of such a bigness, that two Men can scarce lift them from the Ground. Abundance of these Teeth are brought to the Indies, each Elephant has no more than two of them, which furnish us as well as other parts of the World with what we call Ivory. After I had by my own Experience been suffici∣ently instructed concerning the nature of the E∣lephant, I could not but admire with what Im∣pudence some have forged their Fables concern∣ing the Elephant's having no joynts in their Legs,Fables con∣cerning the Elephant. how they could never lie down, and if by mischance he happened to fall, he could never rise again; that when he takes his natural rest, he leans against a Tree, and that the only way to catch him is to saw the Trunk of the Tree, which he is observed to make his Sleeping-place, that so he may fall down together with the Tree; but these are meer Inventions of those who Travel no farther than within the compass of their own homes; for, who∣ever has been in any part of Asia must needs be con∣vinced to the contrary. The Elephant lies down without any great trou∣ble, he bends his Knee as often as his Master mounts on the Back of him, and Sleeps in the same posture as a Horse. They catch him in the following manner:How he is catch'd. when they know the way he commonly takes, they dig a hole or ditch, which they cover slightly with Branches, with some Earth a-top of it, where the Elephant is drawn into the Snare; for the bulk of
his Body being such, as to prevent his turning and lifting himself as in so narrow a Compass, he is catch'd by those who have laid the Trap. The African Negroes eat his Flesh, and I have heard it affirm'd for Truth, that his Snout is very delicious meat; but generally they are kill'd for their Teeth sake, tho' they also sometimes fall out of themselves. The Hyde rightly dress'd, is of such thickness, that they are proof against a Musket-ball; abun∣dance of the young ones are brought up and Tamed, and are generally catch'd as they run astray, after they have lost the old ones by one accident or ano∣ther. Notwithstanding the prodigious Bulk of this Animal, it Swims extreamly well, and goes a great pace; besides which, it is as Courageous as it is Strong, and does great Service to the Indian Kings in their Wars. During my abode in the Indies, there was a cer∣tain Governor, who being willing to give an ex∣traordinary piece of diversion to some persons of Quality, caused an Elephant and Tyger to be brought into a kind of an Amphitheatre, erected for that purpose, to try their Strength and Activi∣ty, against one another; the Tyger is a very nim∣ble Creature, but much inferiour in Bulk to the Elephant; his chief Strength lies in his Claws and Teeth, of which he gave a sufficient proof to his Enemy;Combat be∣twixt an Elephant and Tyger. for sometimes he was upon his Back, sometimes under his Belly, where he left very Bloody marks of his furious Attempts; the Ele∣phant on the other hand, used his Snout with a great deal of dexterity, tossing the Tyger at a great distance, and endeavouring to trample him under his Feet, whilst the other tore his Skin in every part where he could lay hold with his Claws or Teeth. Their fury did not end till with the loss of their Lives, they continuing the Combat till the Elephant pressing with utmost violence upon the Tyger, and the other fastning with his Claws to his Belly, they disputed the Victory, till both re∣main'd dead upon the Spot.
Those who manage the Elephant are by the Ma∣labars called Cornac; they sit upon the neck of the Beast, where they hold themselves without the help of a Bridle; they have always two sticks with Iron Hooks at the end, one bigger than the other; the small one they use instead of a Spur, wherewith they strike the Elephant over the Head, to make him go as they please; so that you seldom see any of these Beasts without a Wound on their Heads. The other they make use of to keep the Elephant back, and to make him stop when he is furious, and when the little one is insufficient. I have seen some Elephants belonging to some of the Malabar Princes get loose, who destroy every thing they meet in their way, tear up Trees, and pull down the Peasants Cottages (which indeed in those parts, must not be imagined to be so well built as ours) forcing the inhabitants to leave their dwelling places, and to seek for shelter in the ad∣jacent Towns; thus have I several times seen a con∣siderable number of Country People come to our Habitations, who dreading the fury of these Ani∣mals, had been forced to abandon their Houses. The Kings of the Malabars frequently employ their Elephants to chastise their rebellious Subjects, by letting them loose into their Grounds, where they destroy not only all the Fruits of the Earth, but also the biggest Trees, there being not wanting instances, that a large Elephant has torn up a Co∣coe-tree. The Merchants in the Indies hire Elephants to draw their Vessels and Barges a shoar, when they are to be refitted; and, as the Indian Princes keep th to shew their magnificence, so the Bramans make use of them on their great Feasts, when they carry the Statues of their Idol, there being certain Temples, which entertain a set number of Ele∣phants meerly for that purpose.
CHAP. XXV. Of the Tiger, and some other Creatures of Malabar. IN Malabar the Tigers are found in greater num∣bers than in any other part of the Indies. Of these Creatures so famous for their Cruelties,Several sorts of Tigers. there are three sorts, distinguished only by their different sizes. The first is not much bigger than a large Cat; of this kind I saw one, which was kept in the House of the French East-India Company, in the Kingdom of Cananor, which was brought thither from Mir∣scou, and when he cry'd, made as much noise as an Ox. They fed him commonly with Flesh, and if they threw him some Rice, he was so cunning as to draw back as far as the Chain would give him leave when he would watch his opportunity to snatch up the Pullets and Ducks that came to feed upon the Rice; at last our Tiger found means one time to break his Chain, and to give us the Slip. I was one of the foremost who pursued him, but got nothing for my pains, but a Wound, which he gave me with his Claws in the right hand, and so he got into the open Fields, where we were not a∣ble to overtake him. The second kind is as big as a good Mutton,The second kind. or a slender Calf; these as they are most common, so they do the most mischief among the Cattle, and are therefore most closely pursued. The Princes in those parts to encourage their Subjects to destroy these mischievous Creatures, give always a Bracelet of Gold to any Man that kills one of those Tigers, which present is look'd upon in the Indies
as a Badge of Honour, not unlike to our Knight∣hood, no body being allowed to wear a Golden Bracelet here, without being authorized to it by the King of that Country, whose subject he is. I was acquainted with an Indian, who alone kill'd one of these Tigers, without receiving the least hurt, and had no other Arms but his Shield and Ci∣metar. The English residing at Batiepatan,A Tiger kills three English. had not the same good fortune with a Tiger which used to come now and then into their Grounds in the Night-time. For having made great Havock all round their Habitations for a considerable time, they took a resolution to watch his coming; for which pur∣pose, having provided themselves with Fire-arms, they met and wounded him with a Ball out of a Fu∣zee, but the Wound not proving mortal, the Ti∣ger fell in among them with such a Fury, that he killed two or three of them, and got away. I was once my self in no small danger of having been surprized by this cruel Animal, not long af∣ter my arrival in Malabar. The excessive heat of the Season, made me very desirous to lay abroad very often, having three great Dogs near me for my Guard. One Night I was all on a sudden awaken∣ed by their Cries, and seeing them fly away as fast as they could from a certain Animal, that pur∣sued them with great Eagerness; I called for help, and some of our Domesticks being come with ligh∣ted Torches to my assistance, we found two of the Dogs, which were returned to the place where they had left me, but the third was missing; we look'd all about as far as we could, but in vain, not being able to learn any tidings of our Dog till the next day, when we found his Bones scattered at two hundred paces from the House. This adventure served me for a warning, not to expose my self thus for the future, by lying abroad all Night. The Tiger of the third kind is near as big as a Horse,The third kind of Ti∣gers. the Portuguese call it the Royal Tiger. I never saw any of them alive, but have seen several of their
Skins which were big enough to cover a Bed of six foot long; they are only found towards the North of Goa, where it is therefore extreamly dangerous Tra∣veling alone, or without being well provided with good Fire-arms. I was acquainted with a certain Gentleman, a Portuguese by Birth, whose name was John de Liquiera, living at Daman: He had a Country House near the said City, whither two Friends of his being come to give him a Visit, he would needs divert them with Hunting the wild Boar; going out early in the Morning, in a Calash, each with a Fuzee, they met with one of these Royal Tigers, and seeing him at some distance, they agreed it would be best to let fly at him, which John de Liquiera did with so much dexterity,A remark∣able Histo∣ry of a Ti∣ger. that he dropt down immediately, with∣out the least appearance of life; it is easie to be conceived that they were extreamly rejoyced at their Victory, which they had gained at so cheap a rate, and being in a solitary place, not far from Liquiera's Country House, they resolved to leave their Prey, (which is esteemed a great rarity by rea∣son of the Beauty of the Skin) till they had broke their Fast. But afterwards returning to the place, they were not a little surprized when they found neither the Tiger nor any tract of Blood; so that John de Liquiera against the advice of his Friends, getting out of the Calash into the adjacent Bushes, found the Tiger there wallowing in his own Blood; but the enraged Animal, as if it had been sensible of the approach of him who had given him his mor∣tal Wound,A Portu∣guese in danger of being torn in pieces by a Tiger. flew upon him with so much fury, that he threw him immediately upon the Ground, and fell a tearing his Flesh, where ever he fixed his Claws. His other two Friends, who had follow'd him at some distance, were at the greatest incerti∣tude what to do in this extremity, they wanting Arms to come to a close Engagement with the Tiger▪ to rescue their Friend, and they durst not make use of their Fire-arms for fear of killing him instead of the cruel Beast; their only hopes was, that the Tiger
would be soon disabled by the loss of Blood, which flowed like a stream out of his Wound; but per∣ceiving his fierceness rather increase than abate, they resolved to venture all, and advancing as near as they thought convenient, one of them shot the Ti∣ger with his Fuzee, so as that he drop'd down dead upon the spot. They ran immediately to the assistance of their Friend, whom they found with his Face downwards, and his back and sides torn in so miserable a manner, that it was the most tragical Spectacle that ever was seen; they made a shift to carry him to his own House, where having laid him upon a Bed, they found his Wounds in so desperate a condition, that they expected every moment, when he would breath his last. Whilst they were in this confusion, no body knowing what to resolve on, one of the Pagan Slaves belonging to this Gentleman, having been informed of his Master's misfortune, came into the Room, and told them, That if they would leave him to his care, he would certainly save him. There was scarce any body who made any great reflections upon what the Slave had assured them; but looking upon their Friends case as desperate, they accepted his offer: And the Slave went immediately to apply his remedy, which was made of the juice of certain Herbs mix'd with Milk,Marvellous cure. by the help of which he in time restored his Master to perfect Health, or∣dering him all the while, nothing else for his Dyet, but Bread and Milk; a cure so miraculous, as scarce will find credit in these parts. This same Gentleman, who has given me the Relation with his own Mouth, which he him∣self is scarce able to make without horror, preserves to this day the Skin of this Tiger, which being a∣bove six foot long, serves him as a lasting remem∣brance of this dreadful Adventure. To avoid the Tigers in the Night-time, nothing is more proper than to keep a Candle or some other Light near one, which they avoid to come near▪ But in the Day-time you must be provided with
good Fire-arms, or a Bow, to let fly at him, be∣fore he comes too near you; but you must be sure of your hits, for if you do not wound him mortally, he becomes more furious, and you will be in great danger of being torn in pieces; wherefore if ou be not an excellent Marks-man, the best way is  dis∣charge your Gun into the Air, the noise of which will frighten, and make him turn his back to you. The Skins of these three several sorts of Tigers, are very near the same, as to their colour, their Beauty makes them much esteemed, they use them in the Indies to cover their Beds and Palanquins, and in Europe are look'd upon as a great variety. Formerly our great Warriors used to adorn their Horses with them, it being one of the finest Furs in the World. CHAP. XXVI. Of some other Animals; of the Jaccal; of the Buffler; of the Civet Cat and Ape. THE Jaccal or Adive is about the bigness of a middle siezed Dog, resembling a Fox to∣wards the Tail, but has a Face not unlike a Wolf; they are sometimes tamed and entertained at home among other Domestick Animals. When they are Wild, they hide themselves under Ground in the Day-time, and never come abroad but in the Night, when they look out for Pray. They commonly appear in Troops, fall upon Children to devour them, and sometimes frighten Travellers that are unprovided with Arms; they howl in a most dole∣ful manner, not unlike the cries of a great many Children of different Ages mix'd together. They
are at perpetual War with the Dogs, who are al∣ways at their heels, if they appear near their dwell∣ing places. They are generally the forerunner of the Tigers, who never devour them, but make use of them as their Setting Dogs, to draw the House Dogs into the Snare; wherefore the Indian Peasants, who are not ignorant of the cunning of the Tiger, when they hear the Adive cry, take care to keep their Dogs close at home, for fear of the Tiger. It is an insignificant Creature, and quite useless, and therefore deserves not our further Description. The Buffler is larger than an ordinary Ox,The Buffler. but much of the same shape, only that his Head is some∣thing longer and flatter; his Eyes, which are al∣most White, much larger; his Horns, also flat and sometimes ten foot long; his Legs very short and thick. It is an ugly Creature to look on, having scarce any Hair. He goes very slow, but will carry a great Burthen. You may see them feed in herds like the Cows, and they give good store of Milk, whereof they make Butter and Cheese. Their flesh is tolerably good, but not so delicious as Beef; they swim excellently well, and pass without much dif∣ficulty the largest Rivers; the wild Bufflers are dan∣gerous Creatures, they often tear or crush to pieces; in the Woods they are not so much to be dreaded as in the Plains, because their large Horns are apt to entangle in the Branches of the Trees, which gives those who are surprized by them, time to escape the danger. Their hides are put to many uses, the In∣dians make Pitchers of them to keep their Water or other Liquors in. Those on the Coast of Malabar are for the most part wild, and Strangers have liber∣ty to hunt and kill them at pleasure for their own use. There are here abundance of Civet Cats;vit Cat. this is a small Creature very like our Cats, only that its Nose is something sharper, and its Claws not so dan∣gerous; the Perfume which it produces is engendred in a small opening, which is under its Tail; it ap∣pears not unlike a Grease, and is taken out from
thence by little and little at a time, and is replenish∣ed according as the Civet Cat is well or ill fed. They drive a great trade in this Commodity at Ca∣licut, but it is seldom to be got unfalsified, unless one have the opportunity of taking it out ones self. Malabar has also Apes,Apes. but not in such abun∣dance as in some other parts of the Indies; they are no where in so great numbers as in the Territories of the Prince Sevagi, and in Canara. The Eastern Pagans look upon the Ape no other∣wise than as a rational Creature, and believe that they can speak as well as the rest of Mankind, but that they forbear to make use of their Tongue, be∣cause they would avoid those toils and hardships, which Men endure. Some of the Indian Pagans reverence them like Deities,Are reve∣renced by the Indi∣ans. erect Statues, and consecrate certain days which are celebrated by Sacrifices made to them; in the Territories of all the Indian Princes that are Pagans, it is forbidden by pain of death to kill them. It is a common thing to see them assemble and appear in the Fields in great Companies, where they will watch their opportunity to set upon the Country Women, as they are going to Market, and if not assisted by the Country Men, take away from them their Eatables. The Females always keep their young ones close in their Arms, whom they will not part with upon any occasion whatso∣ever, so that one may see them tip from one Tree to another, with their young ones, as nimbly as if they were alone. They will make great havock a∣mong the Fruits of the Earth, but especially they are great Lovers of Rice, and of the Tari, which they will Drink out of the Vessels that are fastned to the Cocoes. This Creature being always in motion, appears at first sight to be very timorous, notwithstanding which it is very fierce, and gives sometimes very evident signs of a most undaunted courage.
One of my Acquaintance being abroad a Hun∣ting, in the Kingdom of Cananor, had seated him∣self under a Tree to eat some Comfits he had in his Pocket; a very large Ape sat watching him all the while upon the same Tree, to see whether he would not leave something behind him, but be∣ing discovered by the Gentleman as he rose out of his place, he Shot him with his Fusee in the Bel∣ly; the Ape without stirring from the place, or showing the least sign of fear, tore the Wound open with his Fingers, took hold of one of his Guts, and so drew them out very leisurely, till he dropt down dead upon the Ground. CHAP. XXVII. Of some other Animals of Malabar. OXEN are only employed in the East-Indies to Cultivate the Ground, and the Pagans pay them too much reverence to kill and to eat them. There is abundance of Wild Boars in Malabar, and the Nahers, (Gentlemen of Malabar,) make it their chief diversion to Hunt them; they all eat Pork here, unless it be the Bramans, and Nam∣bouris. They have also good store of Mutton and Roe-bucks. They go also frequently abroad to Hunt the Gase∣let; this is a Creature extreamly like a Stag, but that its Horns are plain, and its Body something less; they take them with Nets, which is the ge∣neral way of Hunting in the Indies. There are no Rabbets in this Country, but Hares in abundance; they are not eaten by the Inhabitants, and when they catch them, they sell them to the Europeans.
There are very few places in the World but where Adders are to be met with, but those of the Indies, and especially of the Coast of Malabar, having something extraordinary beyond the rest, deserve particularly to be taken notice of here. I had heard so many surprising things of them be∣fore I came into this Country, that I look'd upon them for the most part as Fables, contrived on purpose by Travellers, to deceive the credulous people; but I have since been convinced by my own Experience; nothing being more certain than what I am going to relate concerning the Adders on the Coast of Malabar. Some of them are not above an Inch thick, but 5 or 6 Feet long, and of a Greenish Colour, so that they are not easily to be discerned in the Grass and Bushes,Adders in Malabar. where they lie lurking to seize upon such as pass by, and commonly endeavour to fa∣sten either on their Eyes, Noses, or Ears. They don't Communicate their Poyson by making an impression with their Teeth, but they have a little Bladder full of a very subtil Poyson under their Necks, from whence issues that venomous substance, which in spite of all the best Antidotes, always proves Mortal, and that in less than an Hours time. These Adders being so very frequent and difficult to be discovered in these parts, all persons of any Fashi∣on when they Travel, cause their Servants to go before them at a certain distance, who with little rods beat the Bushes, the better to discover those dangerous Insects. I knew an Indian who being a Christian, Tra∣velled with a Pagan Indian from Basarto Batiepatan, to visit one of their Pagan Temples; but whilst they were upon the Road, one of these Green Ad∣ders all upon a sudden fastned upon the Pagan In∣dian's Nose, and creeping into his right Nostril, got out through the left, where she remain'd till the poor Fellow fell down Dead upon the Spot. There is another kind of Adders in Malabar, called by the Indians Nalle bambou, that is to say,
the good Adder; and by the Portugueses Cobra capel, because it has a Skin of the breadth of a Hand hanging over▪ its Head of divers Colours, as if it were enamell'd, as all the rest of the Body is of a very lively and agreeable Colour. The bite of this Adder is not accounted so dangerous as the former, for tho' it often proves Mortal, yet its fatal consequences are sometimes prevented by pro∣per Antidotes. One cannot but be surprized at the most stupid ignorance and blindness of those Pagans, who pay a most profound reverence to all sorts of Reptils, but especially to the Adders; their Statues ma∣king up the chief Ornaments of their Temples. They are blinded to such a degree of superstition in regard of these Creatures, that it is impossible to undeceive them, and to make them open their Eyes.Superstition of the In∣dians con∣cerning Adders. For if an Adder appear in a House, they first Address their Prayers to her, and if these don't prevail, they endeavour to draw her away from the House, by offering of it Food without Doors; and if the Adder notwithstang this will not quit the House, they are so far from at∣tempting to dislodge her by any violent means, that they daily apply their Rhetorick and Addres∣ses to her, no otherwise than if she were a ratio∣nal Creature. A Secretary belonging to a certain Prince in those parts, was at the time whilst I was in the Country, wounded by one of these Adders; She was 8 Foot long, and of the thickness of a Man's Arm; this accident happening in the Country, the Secreta∣ry's Servant took the Adder, which they enclosed in an Earthen Vessel, and brought her up to Court; a Convocation of the Bramans being held, they u∣nanimously addressed their Prayers to the Adder, intreating her in the most respectful manner that could be, to spare the Life of the wounded Secre∣tary, as being a person of great Ability in his Sta∣tion, and consequently very useful to his Prince, who threatned to burn the Adder, if She did not
take care to keep his Secretary alive; but this Adder being very stubborn as it seems, their Prayers and threats proved equally ineffectual; for the Se∣cretary being destitute in the Country of proper Antidotes, died in a few days, to the no small re∣gret of his Prince; notwithstanding which, being perswaded by the Bramans, that his Favourite must needs have committed some secret and erroneous Crime against their God, who had thought fit to punish him thus. In expiation of his Crimes, he ordered the Adder to be carried out of his Palace, where she was put in the Grass, with a great deal of Ceremony, the Prince and all his Courtiers ha∣ving paid her a great deal of respect, and ta∣ken their formal leave of this Deity. There are a great many among the Indians so over superstitious in their Zeal as to carry every day a certain quantity of Milk abroad, for the nourishment of these Deities, that they may not be obliged to seek for their Food, at or near their Houses. But if the ignorance of these poor people de∣serves pity, the imposture of the ramans, (their Priests▪) ought to be detested by all the World. There are among them some very well skilled in Astrology, who have received some Tincture of Learning, and are exactly well versed in the Hi∣story of the Indian Nations, and who consequently cannot be supposed to believe themselves, what they impose upon the Vulgar; I have often en∣tred in Discourse with them upon that Subject, and more especially with one who was my fami∣liar Acquaintance, whom I used to upbraid with their impostures, and in what abominable a man∣ner they misemployed that talent, wherewith they were intrusted by God; in thus grosly imposing upon the credulity of an ignorant people by their fabulous inventions, barely in hopes of gaining some reputation, and a slender share of worldly interest. He was so far from being moved or con∣vinced with what I alledged to him, that on the
contrary he persisted in justifying their proceed∣ings, and had folly enough to endeavour to per∣swade me of the verity of their Doctrine by the following History. One of the Principal Bra∣mans, belonging to one of the most famous Tem∣ples among the Malabars, being very solicitous to exhort his Auditors to Devotion, proposed to them the erecting a Statue of Gold of an Adder, with 12 Eggs of the same substance, which being to be effected by a voluntary Contribution, and the Sta∣tue to be placed in a certain place within the Tem∣ple, where it was to be Adored, he told them that the same Statue in 6 Weeks time would not only be turn'd into a live Adder of the same bigness, but also hatch out of the 12 Eggs, so many young ones, that would in time all become Protectors of the said Temple. His proposition being received with a general▪ consent, they con∣tributed towards the erecting of the said Statue with such a chearfulness, that it was soon brought to perfection, and carried in great State by the Bramans, followed by the joyful Acclamations of a vast number of people to the Temple, where it was set up in a place assigned for that purpose, which was shut up close by the principal Braman, till the 6 Weeks were expired; when having a∣gain assembled the people, he went at the Head of them to the same place where they had left the Statue lock'd up before; and not finding the least Remnants either of the Golden Adder, or the 12 Eggs, they unanimously concluded that they were all turn'd into Living Adders. The Miracle was followed by an universal Acclamation of the peo∣ple, each of them striving to out-do the other, in giving the most evident Demonstrations of Joy for having been the happy Instruments of the pro∣duction of those new Deities. Tho' I could scarce forbear Laughing at the foo∣lishness of this contrivance, yet the impudence wherewith it was related by the Braman put me into such a Passion, that I gave him sufficiently to
understand that I was not to be imposed upon by such Tricks; but he was so brazen faced as to per∣sist in his former assurance, so that I was forced to leave him to his own obstinacy. But tho' the Pagans have imposed upon them∣selves this as an unalterable Law, not to kill an Ad∣der, the Christians and Mahometans are not obliged to the same rule in the Indies, where you often meet with them in your Dwelling Houses; nay, I have several times found them lurking under the Beds. What Antidote is most effectual to be made use of against the Poyson of this Creature, I shall have occasion to speak more at large hereaf∣ter. The Adders of the largest size, are near 20 Foot long, and of so vast a thickness, that they are able to swallow a Man; but they are less dangerous than the rest, because they are sooner discovered, and consequently easier to be avoided. Besides, that they are scarce ever to be met with, unless it be in desarts; and, if they are sometimes seen near great Towns or on the Banks or Shoar of the Sea or Rivers, it is commonly after some great inun∣dation of the latter, whereby they are sometimes carried near to the abovementioned places; I ne∣ver saw any of them but what were Dead, which appear'd no otherwise than a Trunk of a large Tree lying upon the Ground. I heard once a Christian who had been former∣ly a Pagan, relate a very remarkable History of one of these Adders:A Remar∣kable Hi∣story of an Adder. It seems it was in Harvest-time, and certain Country people being gone into the Field to reap Rice, had left no body at home but a Sick Child; which being got without doors, had laid it self asleep, near the House, upon some Leaves, where it thus continu'd till Night; all the Domesticks being then returned from reaping, heard some out-cries of the Child, which, being weary of the fatigues they had undergone in the Field, they did not much regard, as believing them to proceed from the illness of the Child; but whilst
Supper was getting ready, some of them having in the mean while observing the Child to continue its Cries, in a most lamentable manner, ran out towards the place, where they found it almost swallowed up by one of those Adders; one half of the Child being within the Body of this venomous Creature: It is easie to be imagined in what a Consternation so unfortunate an accident put the whole Family, but especially the Parents, who did not know by what means to preserve the Child from present Death; being afraid that if they shou'd do any thing to exasperate this Creature, it would at once devour the Child; after several propositions made by the beholders of so Tragi∣cal a Spectacle equally dangerous in the execution of it, they resolved to try whether they could with a good Cimetar cut the Adder asunder in the mid∣dle, which was executed accordingly, with a great deal of dexterity. But this venomous Creature was so strong lived, as not to die immediately af∣ter it was cut in pieces, so that it closed up the unfortunate Child within the one half of his Body, where it was soon venom'd so as that it dy'd in a few Minutes after the Serpent. One Evening we heard a Jaccal or Adive, cry near our Habitation, which notwithstanding the Barking of all the Dogs round about us, we per∣ceived to approach nearer and nearer; whereup∣on, the Servants being got abroad with lighted Torches, made up towards the place, where they heard the Jaccal cry, whom they found very near devoured, by one of these Adders, who had que∣stionless surprized him asleep; our Servants kill'd both of them, and the Adder tho' not above 10 Foot long, yet was of such a thickness as to be able to swallow so large a Creature as the Jaccal. Malabar produces Crocodiles of all sorts and sizes, and here it was that I had my share in killing one, as I have related before.
CHAP. XXVIII. Of the people of Malabar, and their Customs. THE Inhabitants of Malabar are generally well shaped, all of them Black, or at least very Brown, but are not near so ugly as the Africans. They let their Hair grow to a great length; they don't want natural Ingenuity, but very rarely im∣prove it by any useful Arts or Sciences. They are very Treacherous, breach of Faith being their daily practice. The Mahometans are accounted the most perfidious, but the Pagans so closely fol∣low their foot-steps in this point, that they almost out-do their Masters. The last of these two are the off-spring of the Ancient Natives of the Country, and consequent∣ly exceed the others in number. They are distin∣guished into several Degrees, or Tribes. The first is that of the Princes;Several Tribes a∣mong the Malabars. the second of the Nam∣bouris, or their chief Priests; the Bramans or com∣mon Priests are of the third, and the Nahers, or the Gentlemen of the fourth Rank. These as they are by their Birth-right intitled to the prerogative of bearing Arms, so they are not allowed to inter∣meddle with Traffick, which if they do, they for∣feit their Gentility, as they do likewise if they change their Religion. Those whom they call Tives, apply themselves to Husbandry and gathering the Tary, or Palm-Tree-Wine, these are also suffered to bear Arms, but this is only by permission. The Moconas or Fisher-Men are all obliged to live near the Sea-Shoar,
and not permitted to follow any other Employ∣ment, they are not suffered to bear Arms, even not in case of the greatest extremity. The Mainats or whiteners of Linen, the Weavers, and those that make it their Employment to draw it, are divided into so many different Degrees or Tribes. The vilest and most contemptible of all are the Pouliats, being despised by the rest, and living in a manner like vagabonds in most wretched Huts, made of the Leaves of the Palm-Tree; their whole Employment is to watch in the Fields, where the Rice grows. It is look'd upon as scandalous to have any Conversation with them, nay, even to approach them, and if any of the other Tribes happen to speak to them unless it be at 10 or 12 Yards distance, they are obliged to purifie them∣selves before they come into any other Compa∣ny. If a Nambouri, Braman, or a Naher meets with a∣ny of those Pouliats upon the Road, they command them at first sight, to get out of the way, which if they do not obey in an instant, they let fly at them with their Muskets or Arrows, and kill them at pleasure, provided it be not in some Sanctified or Privileged place. If a Naher or Gentleman has a mind to make trial of his Arms, he may shew his dexterity upon one of those unfortunate wret∣ches, without any regard to Age or Sex, or fear∣ing to be called to an account for it. This vile Generation being subject to so many disasters, it is no wonder if they don't propagate so fast as the rest of the Indians; their condition being look'd upon so mean as not to be permitted to wear any kind of Stuffs or Linen, but only to cover some part of their Bodies with Leaves. They eat fre∣quently Carrion, nay, even Insects, and what makes them above all others abominable to the Pagan In∣dians, is, that they eat Beef, which died a natural Death. They are so despisable as that no Presents, neither for their Gods, or their Princes, are ac∣cepted of from them, unless it be Gold or Silver;
but they are obliged to lay it down at a great di∣stance, and retire immediately from the place, when the Nahers, who are the Guards of the Prince's Person, come and take it up, talking to them at a distance, and giving them what answer is to be made, without allowing them to approach within 20 Paces near to them. They are often fined in very great Sums; and because it may seem strange how they that are banish'd from all civil Society, and have no way to improve themselves, should be in a capacity to pay them; it is to be observed, that the Malabars are so foolishly Superstitious, as to Bury most of their Gold and Silver with them after their Death, and it is look'd upon as a Crime to Rob the Dead. But the Pouliats frequently watch their opportunity to find out these hidden Treasures, and to convert them to their own use; which makes them to be considered among the Malabars, as Sorcerers, and an infamous Generati∣on, guilty of the most inormous Crimes; for which reason it is, that upon the least suspicion they are accused and condemned to Death. But the other Tribes are not used with so much rigour, they be∣ing not to be Convicted even in evil cases, with∣out very substantial Evidence. It is a fundamental Law among the Malabars, as well as most other Nations of the Indies, which they look upon as unalterable and never to be neglected, to wit, That no body can rise beyond the degree of his Tribe, wherein he is Born, and let his Riches be never so great, neither he nor his Posterity can exclude themselves from that Tribe, or change their Condition.
CHAP. XXIX. Of the Nahers. THE Nahers are the Gentlemen of the Contry▪ and may easily be distinguish'd from the rest by their civil Demeanour and Conversation, as well as by their Birth. There is a most ancient Custom, which time has establish'd for a Law in all the Kingdoms on the Coast of Malabar; that all Strangers or others, who are not Pagans, are ob∣liged never to Travel without a Guard of one or more of these Nahers; this being an indispensible necessity laid upon Travellers; because these Prin∣ces never take cognisance of any violences offered them, if they Travel without these Guards. If they are to Travel from one Kingdom to another, the Nahers of the place where they are, take care to procure them out of the other Kingdoms, whi∣ther they intend to go, some who are to conduct them. To every one of these Nahers you pay eight Tares per diem, which amounts to half a Fanon. The Fanon is a small piece of Gold worth 16 Tares; and the Tare is a small Silver Coin worth about a half-penny. Each Naher has not above 4 Tares a day, when he keeps Guard in a House, but when he Travels he has double pay. These Nahers have this most excellent quality, that they never betray or abandon such Travellers as they Guard upon the Road. If a Man happen to lose his Life, whilst he is under their protecti∣on, they will not survive him, but undergo the same fate; if they should do otherwise, they would be look'd upon as Cowards.
I have received a relation from very good Hands, which well deserves to be inserted here: Two Rich Portuguese Merchants Travelling along the Malabar Coast, from the Northern to the Southern parts, were pursuant to the Custom of the Coun∣try Conducted by several Nahers, through the King∣dom of Cananor; but coming to the Borders of the Kingdom of Samorin, were provided with new Guards, to protect them in their Journey through that Kingdom. But these perfidious wretches be∣ing inticed by the great quantity of Gold and Jewels these Merchants carried with them, Mas∣sacred them, and having robbed them of all their Precious Moveables, retired to another Kingdom, in hopes to find shelter there against the severity of the Law. After the first, to whose care they were committed, were returned to their homes, the News of the Murther soon spread over the Country, their Dead Carcasses having soon after the Fact was commited, been discovered by some others Travelling on the same Road; they were examined concerning their Conduct, and having given an exact Account, to whose care they had left these Merchants, these Ruffians Names were soon known, and consequently they were appre∣hended, and sent to their Native Country, to re∣ceive condign Punishment. Some part of the Trea∣sure which they had taken from the Portuguese Merchants being found upon them, when they were seized, was a convincing proof of their Guilt, wherefore being Condemned to Death, their Wives and nearest Kindred appear'd at the place of Ex∣ecution, telling them, That since they had Commit∣ted a Fact tending so much to the Dishonour of their Family, they ought to be the Executioners, and so dis∣patch'd them out of the way. There is another thing worth observing of these Nahers; That Travellers who are Conducted by a good number of these Guards, are often expo∣sed to more danger, than if they were guided by one of their Children; it being the custom of the
Indian Robbers, never to hurt any Children or such as are not able to defend themselves; but never to spare any that are provided with Arms for their Defence. When these Children of the Nahers Travel in∣to the Country, they are only provided with a twisted Stick of a Foot and a half long, with a handle a-top most like our Daggers or Bagonets; but in lieu of being sharp at the end, it is as thick at the bottom as a Fist; and this kind of Stick they make use of till they come to the Age ap∣pointed for their bearing of Arms. No body but the Sons of the Nahers are permitted to wear such a Stick, by which they are distinguish'd from the rest, and when they thus Travel, they are not allowed above three half-pence a day apiece. But though this be the securest way of Travel∣ling, none but the Poorer sort make use of them, because that Travellers are commonly respected in this Country according to the number of Guards, which attend them from one place to ano∣ther.
CHAP. XXX. Of some other Customs of the Malabars. THose of a higher Rank are obliged to have no commerce with the inferiour Tribes, especial∣ly in respect of Eating and Drinking, in which point they are so scrupulous, as not to permit their Victuals to be dressed by those of an inferiour Rank, but rather, if possible, by one of a more noble De∣gree;Nicety of the Indi∣ans in re∣spect of their Qua∣lity. nay, such is their nicety, as not to make use of the same Wells, where those of an inferiour con∣dition fetch their Water. The same precaution is observed in respect of their Lakes, where they pu∣rifie themselves, the Rivers being only common to all without distinction. They are no less Ceremoni∣ous in their Houses, where if any of a lower Rank happen to enter, the Braman is sent for, to take a∣way the infection by certain Ceremonies used for that purpose. But above all, they observe this Rule with the greatest exactness in the World, when they con∣tract any Alliances by Marriages; nay, they are even debar'd from having commerce with a Woman of an inferiour Degree. Thus a Man may marry a Woman of the same Quality with himself, or at most of the next Degree under his, but not of a su∣periour Degree; if any of either Sex are convicted of having transgressed in this point, they are punish∣ed with Death, except the Females of the Race of the Nambouri's and Bramans, who have this particu∣lar privilege belonging to them, That, if they are surprized in any thing of this Nature, they are to be left to the Prince's disposal, who sells them for as they are generally the handsomest
amongst the Malabars, so Foreigners are very eager to purchase them at a dear rate. Of this I saw an instance at Cananor, where a Por∣tuguese Captain, who lately had lost his Ship at Sea, to comfort himself for his loss, bought a handsome Indian, the Daughter of a Braman, who had been surprized in the very act with a Tive or Country∣man. He happening to pass by our Habitation with his pretty Slave, we entertained them with the best we had, and asking the Indian Lady some Questions concerning her adventures, she at first would give us no answer; but at last bursting out into Tears, she told us, That after the death of her Mother, she lived with an Uncle of hers, who used to send her frequently with some other young Maids of the same Quality into the Field to look after his Grounds; where having seen this young Tive, she began to feel at first some tender sentiments for his Person, but considering the inequality of their Extraction, check'd her inclinations for some time, till the young Countryman being become sensible of her Passion, did by degrees so strongly insinuate himself into her Affection, that in spite of all the ri∣gour of the Law, he became absolute Master of her Heart, so that she resolved to admit him privately into her Uncle's House, which was done according∣ly to her utter destruction, they having been so un∣fortunate, as to be surprized the very first time, where the poor Tive was sacrificed immediately be∣fore her Eyes to the revenge of her Family, and she conducted to the Prince, who according to the cu∣stom of the Country, had sold her to the Portuguese Captain. The Tears wherewith she accompanied her Nar∣ration sufficiently testified the tenderness she had for the unfortunate young Peasant, so that there was not one of the whole Company, who did not shew a great deal of Compassion for this unfortunate Crea∣ture. But the Portuguese, who, like all the rest of that Nation, was of a very jealous Nature, not ap∣proving of our tenderness for his handsome Slave,
would not allow her to stay any longer near our Company, but having ordered her to be conducted to another place, he caused her to be Baptized, when she lived with him, where I have several times afterwards had the opportunity to see her. If a Man of an inferiour degree,Severe pu∣nishment a∣mong the Malabars. be accused of ha∣ving received a favour from a Lady of a Rank su∣periour to his, they conduct him loaden with Fet∣ters on Hand and Feet to the Prince, where he is put to death; but what is the worst of all, is, That the death of the Criminal alone is look'd upon as in∣sufficient to expiate the Crime; for the three next ensuing days, after the Execution, the nearest kin∣dred of the Lady, have free liberty to kill all such Relations as they meet with, of him who has enjoy∣ed the Lady, without any distinction of Age or Sex, but this does not extend any further than in the same district or jurisdiction, where the fault has been com∣mitted. The Nahers have a power to exercise this cruel∣ty upon such occasions against the Tives and Cheres or Weavers, as these have the same power over the Mokcona's or Fishermen, and these again over the Pouliats. The Nambouri's and Bramans are not al∣lowed to kill any body, so that their authority extends no further in this point, than to deliver up these poor victims to the Slaughter. This custom is the most cruel in the whole World, and would be altogether insupportable, were it not that they commonly keep these Criminals for the space of eight days alive, whereby their nearest Relations, who stand in fear of their Enemies, have sufficient leisure given them to get out of the way, till after the expiration of the three days allotted by the Law, for revenging the affront put upon the Family.
CHAP. XXXI. A further Account of their Customs. THey don't look upon it as a Crime to kill a Pouliat,Murther not punish∣ed with death. neither is any body to be call'd to an account for it; nay, they very rarely punish mur∣ther with death, though committed upon persons of a more eminent Rank. The Law takes no cog∣nisance of this point, so as to regulate the satisfacti∣on on to be given for the Murther, leaving the whole to the discretion of the Kindred of the murthered Person, who revenge his death at pleasure. But in case of any Robbery committed,Robbery se∣verely pu∣nish'd. they are the severest people in the World, they having ge∣nerally such an abhorrence to this Vice, as scarce to spare any body that has but stoln a Bunch of Pepper, or to the value of it, but he pays for it with his life. They have no close or barricado'd Prisons in Ma∣labar, their Criminals are but slenderly guarded, they are only Ioaden with Fetters, which are ne∣ver taken off till they are either Discharged or Ex∣ecuted. All causes both Civil and Criminal are pleaded before the Prince, where both parties produce their Evidences; if the accusation appear so doubtful as not to be decided according to the Evidence produ∣ced, the accused may clear themselves by an Oath which is performed in the following manner. They cause a piece of Iron,Manner of taking the Oath by the Mala∣bars. not unlike an hat∣chet to be made red hot in the presence of him who is to prove his innocence, which done, they lay up∣on his Hand a leaf of the Bananas Tree, and a top of that the hot Iron, which he is not to throw upon
the Ground, till after the redness be gone; after which, one who has the oversight over the Prince's Laundry, standing by with a Napkin dipp'd in water made of Rice, wraps it about his Hand, and after having tied round about it a certain Cord or Ribband, the Prince Seals it up with his Signet: Three days after the Hand is opened, and if there be no marks of any hurt done by the Hot Iron, he is declared innocent; but if there appear any impression made by the heat of the Iron, he is look'd upon as a Perjur'd Person, and Punish'd accordingly. It is the Prince in Person, who is always to pro∣nounce Sentence, from whence there lies no Ap∣peal; and if the Criminal be Condemn'd to Death, it is Executed immediately upon the Spot, only leading him without the Precinct of the Royal Pa∣lace. As the Indians in these parts look upon it as the most glorious Action they can do, to Obey their Prince without reserve, they have no occasion to employ common Executioners upon such like occasions, but the Nahers belonging to the Prince's Guards are the most forward to execute his Orders against these miserable Wretches; nay, nothing is more common, than if the Crime be very heinous, for the next Kindred of the Criminal, to strive who shall be the first that shall give the fatal blow to his Kinsman, to expiate as they say, the indignity he has put upon the Family. Their common way of putting Criminals to Death, is▪ by running a Lance quite through their Bodies, after which, they cut them into Quarters, which are hang'd upon Trees. In each Kingdom among the Malabars, there are several Princely Families, which are altogether descended and make up one Royal Line, superi∣our in Rank to all the rest. It is a general Custom in all the States of the Malabars, that after the De∣cease of the King, the most Ancient of all the Princes succeeds without the least opposition from
the rest, so that a young Sovereign is the grea∣test rarity that can be seen among the Mala∣bars. The first thing the New King does after his ele∣vation to the Throne,Their right of Successi∣on. is, to chuse one from a∣mong his own Subjects, whom he believes to be most understanding and fittest for so high a Trust, for his Lieutenant-General, who's Business is to take upon him, the chief management of all Af∣fairs of Moment. This is the highest dignity in the State, and though it be always exposed to Sail, yet does the King reserve to himself the Pre∣rogative of choosing out of the Pretenders, such a one as he likes best, and whom he thinks most deserving, without any regard to his Birth or Qua∣lity; so that a Naher or Chati, being invested with this Dignity, will make himself to be obeyed by the Princes themselves; tho' it happens also very often that this Office is conferred upon Persons of Eminent Quality. All their Acts and Letters Pa∣tents are written with a kind of an Iron Pen, upon the Leaves of the Wild Palm-Tree. The King being fully satisfied in the Zeal and Prudence of his Chief Minister of State, leaves the whole management of Affairs to his Conduct, and for the most part Lives in a retired place, but with a great deal of Magnificence. This Governor General manages altogether the whole Treasury; it is he that makes Peace and War, without being obliged to Communicate with any Body, unless it be with the King himself, if, by reason of his great Age, he be not incapable of taking cognisance of publick Affairs; He remains always standing in the King's Presence, permits not any of his Cour∣tiers or Guards to enter his Bed-Chamber, and ne∣ver speaks to him, without laying his Hand up∣on his Mouth. He must be very careful in not neglecting the least punctilio of these Ceremonies, a fault of this nature not being to be repaired, un∣less with the loss of his Office, the King always reserving to himself the liberty of discharging his
primier Minister from his place, when he pleases, which however is very rarely seen in those parts, where they act with a great deal of circumspecti∣on, in a matter of so great consequence. When the King of Cananor goes abroad, he is either carried upon the Back of an Elephant,How their Kings and Princes ap∣pear in publick. or else in a Palanquin, being Adorned with a Crown of Massive Gold upon his Head, made not unlike a Ducal Bonnet. This Crown weighs something above 200 Guineas in Gold, and is always given by the New Governor-General, immediately after his Elevation to that Dignity, the Crown of the last Deceased King being to be reposited in the Treasury of the chief Pagod or Pagan Temple. The King is surrounded by his Guards composed out of the Nahers, under the sound of Drums and Trumpets, and other Warlike Instruments. Some Officers of his Court march at some distance be∣fore the Guards, whose Business is to make way, and to cry the King is coming. All the Princes if they go abroad by themselves, as also the Prin∣cesses are served with the same Magnificence; If the Governour or Chief Minister of State be a Prince, he goes abroad in the same Pomp, in re∣spect of his high extraction, not of the dignity of his Office. But if he be not of the Royal Fami∣ly, he is only attended by his Guards, without the sounding of any Instruments of War, neither is he preceeded by any Officers who clear the way before him.
CHAP. XXXII. Of some other Customs of the Malabars. IT is sufficiently known that in all Political Con∣stitutions Princes are considered as the Heads of the Government, but among these Pagans their Kings are (in all matters relating to Religion,) sub∣ject to the Nambouri's and Bramans. Before I speak of their Marriages,How they derive their Pedigree. it is to be ob∣served, that the Children of the Malabars derive their Pedigree from their Mothers, and that conse∣quently they are counted to be of the same Race, not of that of their Father's, the reason of which, we shall have occasion to mention anon. Princesses are Married here to the Nambouri's, or Bramans,What Rules they observe in their Marriages. and the Children begotten betwixt them are Princes, and lawful Successors of the Crown, each in their Rank. But, as there is not a sufficient number of Princesses to furnish all the Nambouri's, and Bramans with Wives, so they are allowed to Marry Women of the same Rank with themselves, and the Children begotten betwixt them are either Nambouri's or Bramans, according to the Quality of their Mothers. The Princes Marry the Daughters of the Nahers, but never any Princesses, and the Children begot∣ten betwixt them belong to the Race of the Nahers, and not of the Princes. The Nahers are obliged to Marry one of the same Quality, or almost of the next degree to themselves, to wit, of the Minats or Cheti. The rest of the several Lines have the same liberty, to Marry one of their own Rank, or one degree be∣low
themselves, but, as we said before, the Wo∣men must not debase themselves in the least de∣gree in their Marriage, under pain of Death. The Malabar Princes, the Nambouri's and Bramans, as also the chiefest among the Nahers, have com∣monly but one Wife, and they endeavour by all obliging means in the World to engage them to be faithful to them, and not to look out for ano∣ther Husband, which is not in their power to pre∣vent by any other than gentle means, this liberty being allowed to the Malabar Women, provided they don't Marry below themselves. For the Pa∣gan Women in these parts (contrary to what is practised among the Mahometans,) enjoy according to the Custom of their Country this Prerogative, to Marry as many Husbands as they please; and what is the most surprizing, is, that all this is done without the least disorder or Jealousie; for, the Man when he comes to pay his Duty to his Lady leaves his Arms at the Chamber-door, as a sure sign to the rest, that the place is taken up, and that they must stay his leisure before they can en∣ter. Their Marriage-engagements are only during pleasure, and when they are satisfied with one a∣nother, they part as freely as they met. The or∣dinary present which the New Married Men make to their Wives, is, a piece of Linen Cloth, where∣with to cover themselves. It is from this Custom of Marrying so many Husbands, and to abandon them at pleasure, that their Children owe their Pedigree to their Mo∣thers, it being impossible to know their true Fa∣thers; neither are the Sons here considered as the next Heirs, but the Nephews, but they must be the Sister's Sons. The Mahometans tho' they keep a most watch∣ful Eye over their Wives, nevertheless do they ob∣serve this Custom, in respect of Succession or Inhe∣ritance, all over Malabar.
They Marry their Daughters for the most part at 12 Years of Age, and there are abundance a∣mong them who bear Children before that Age, tho' they are generally but very small, which may perhaps be Attributed to their being Married at so tender an Age. Widwives are unknown in these parts, those of a more advanced Age supply this defect in a Country where they are Delivered with much ease, in Comparison to what is done in Europe. For the Malabar as well as the African Women, are no sooner Deliver'd, but they wash themselves, and take no further care of their Babes, than to give them Suck. The Malabar Women are for the generality well shap'd, and not ill Featured, but the little ones are in greater esteem than the tall ones; the privi∣lege of Marrying so many Husbands as they please, exempts them from that most cruel Custom of burn∣ing themselves with the Dead Carcasses of their Husbands, to which the rest of the Indian Women are Subject. CHAP. XXXIII. Of their Habits and Houses. AS to their Habits, there is scarce any difference betwixt the Men and the Women in Mala∣bar; they wear their Hair, which is Black, ve∣ry long, and go Naked as far as the middle; even the Princes themselves, who, if they sometimes make use of a small Vest, always leave it open be∣fore. They wear about their Middle a piece of Cloth, which comes down as low as their Knees, and never make use of Shooes or Stockings.
In other Countries Ladies of Quality endeavour to out-vie one another by their rich Gold and Silver Stuffs; but the quite contrary is practised among the Malabars, where these Stuffs are not worn but by the meaner sort, the Ladies of the Nahers and all the rest of a Superiour Rank wear∣ing nothing but fine White Callico. The richer sort wear Girdles of Gold, and Bracelets of Silver or Horn, in which, they take all most particular Pride. The Women never adorn themselves with any Jewels, unless it be a Ring. Both Men and Wo∣men have holes in their Ears, which are so long, that they hang down quite to their Shoulders; because they are so careful in continually enlarg∣ing the holes, that you may thrust a Fist into them, which is occasioned by the weight of the Pendants, who sometimes exceed two Ounces; some of them wear Golden Chains, but these being the pe∣culiar marks of the King's favour, are never be∣stow'd but upon such as have signalized themselves by some remarkable Action. All the Malabars Shave their Beards close, except some few, that wear Mustachio's. Their Houses are commonly made of Earth, and instead of Tiles they cover them with the Leaves of the Cocoe-Tree, it being a great rarity here to see a House of Stone or Brick. Their Furniture consists in some Baskets and a few Earthen Pots and Dishes; their Cups are of the same matter, and their Kings themselves make use of them as the European Princes do of Gold and Silver Vessels. They have no other Light at Nights, but what their Lamps furnish them with, which are sup∣ply'd by the Oyl drawn from the Cocoes; when they eat, they always turn their Back to the Light. As they are never sensible of Cold here, so they don't make use of Chimneys, but what Fire they have occasion for, to dress their Victuals, is made without Doors. Wheat being a scarce Commodi∣ty in this part of the Indies, they make use only of Rice instead of it. Their Dishes are dressed
without Sauces, and consequently very unsavory; their Beds are nothing else but Deal Boards, which the Richer sort cover with Tapestry suitable to their Quality, and the Poor only with Mats. There is no Villages to be seen all over Malabar, every one has his separate Habitation, and inclosure in the Country; and, it is impossible for all of them to live near the River side, and that it is a constant Custom among them, not to make use of their Neighbour's Water, there is no House so inconsidera∣ble but what has a Well of its own. CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Riches of their Pagan Temples. THEIR Pagan Temples are most Magnificent, being generally covered with Copper, and sometimes with Silver. There is always a Basin near the Temple, proportionable in bigness to the largeness of the Temple, where the Pagans purifie themselves before they approach their Idols. The number of the Bramans is regulated according to the Revenues belonging to the Temple. Every day there is a certain quantity of Rice allotted for the use of the Poor that live near it, as also for the benefit of such Strangers as pass by that way, let them be of what Religion they will; the Pagans having only this Prerogative to enter within the Temple, whereas, the others are obliged to remain without Doors, under certain Barracks made for that purpose, where they may Sleep, if Night surprize them in their Journey. Besides the ordinary Revenue of these Pagan Temples, the people bring every day their Of∣ferings,
which are given to the Bramans, who are to offer it to the Idols. And as these Offerings don't consist in any thing that has Life, so they are most commonly Rice, Butter, Fruits, Preserves, Gold, or Silver; the two last are but rarely offered, and the rest serve the Bramans for the Maintenance of their Families, they having no more to do than to bring forth their empty Dishes to these ignorant people, who think it a Crime to believe otherwise, than what they have offered to have been consu∣med by the Idols. Some of the richest Temples have large Terri∣tories belonging to them, from whence, they draw their yearly Revenues; and if any one happen to spill Blood in these Grounds, tho' in his own de∣fence,Preroga∣tive of their Sacred pla∣ces. and upon the most Innocent occasion in the World, the Crime is unpardonable, and he that commits it is punish'd with Death, without the least respect to his Merits or Quality; nay, they use so much Rigour in this point, that if any one saves himself by flight, the next a-kin to him must pay for it with his Life, to expiate, as they say, the hainousness of the Crime committed against the Ma∣jesty of the Gods. Of this I saw an instance, during my stay in these parts: Two Nahers passing through the Burrough or Market-Town of Batiepatan, and seeing a Rich Mer∣chant, who was a Mahometan, receive a considera∣ble Summ of Money in Ducats, took a resolution to lie in wait for him at a certain place, through which he was to pass, to kill him, and seize the Money for their own use. Accordingly they fol∣lowed him at some distance, till they overtook him at a certain place, which they believed to be be∣yond the Precinct of the Territories belonging to the Temple of Batiepatan, where they run him through in several places, till they had killed him, and so retired to Calicut, under the Jurisdiction of the King of Samorin. The Dead Carcass of the Mahometan Merchant having been soon after found, the Bramans were consulted, and being come to the
place, they declared that he that had committed the Murther, had defiled the Holy Ground of their Idol, the place being within the Territories (which are of a very large extent,) belonging to the Tem∣ple. Complaints being made hereof to Prince O∣nitri, he caused an exact enquiry to be made af∣ter the Malefactor's Names and place of Abode, who being two Brothers, they were Summon'd to make their Appearance before the Prince, but be∣ing no where to be found, they were Condemn'd to Death, as if they had been present; and to ex∣piate the Crime, an Unkle of theirs, so far advan∣ced in Years, as not to be able to walk, without lean∣ing upon some Body, was carried before Prince O∣nitri, who examin'd him concerning the Fact and the Flight of his Nephews; he answered, that he was ignorant both of the causes and manner of the Flight of his Nephews, but this availed but little; for the Prince told him that he would give him 8 Days to find out his Nephews, and if in the mean time he did not bring them forth, he should be proceeded against as a Criminal. The poor Old Man did what he could to save his Life, but in vain, so that the next day after the prefixed term was expired, he was Condemn'd to Die, and not∣withstanding his Old Age, his Innocence, and the Intercession of his Friends, was immediately execu∣ted.
CHAP. XXXV. Of their Idols. BEsides that these Pagans Worship many Idols, which have no resemblance to any thing in the World; there are several kinds of living Creatures, whom they adore, but the most profound respect they pay to the Sun and Moon. As at the new Moon, they make great rejoycings, so when she is Eclipsed, they appear abroad, making most hor∣rible out-cries, whereby, as they say, they frighten away the Dragon, who then endeavours to devour the Moon. They use the same Veneration to their Kings, as they do to their Gods, and they Reve∣rence old Age to so high a Degree, that even the most Potent and Richest of the Nahers, will not sit down before those that are considerably older than themselves, though their Enemies. They count their time by the Moon, notwith∣standing which, their Festivals are not fixed to certain days, this depending meerly on the Capri∣cio of the Bramans. These Priests are very ex∣act in their Fasts, and upon any Solemn Day, they call together such as live within a reasonable di∣stance of the Temple, from whence they bring forth the Idol, and having placed it upon an Elephant very righly Harnassed,Their Pro∣cessions. they carry it about in tri∣umph, at the sight of which, the People to shew their utmost Veneration, prostrate themselves up∣on the Ground. The Elephant is surrounded by a good number of the Nahers, who having each a Fan tied to a long Cane in their hands, drive a∣way the Flies; which, as the Bramans say, would else be troublesome to their Gods, but in effect, be∣cause
they would not incommode themselves. Whilst the People make a confused Noise with divers In∣struments, and their joyful Acclamations, one of the Bramans, with a two edged Cymetar in his hand, having some small Bells hanging at the han∣dle, runs round about the Elephant, and after a thousand ridiculous and extravagant Postures, which are look'd upon by the People as Mysterious, he wounds himself in the Head, offering his Blood as a Sacrifice to the Idol, which is as little known to him, as it is sensible of his extravagant impo∣stures. Thus after having taken their Rounds through such places as were appointed for that days Solem∣nity, they carry the Idol back to the Temple in the same manner, as it was brought out before. They have also several other Ceremonies, which being a∣bominable to relate, we will pass by in silence. They burn the dead Bodies of their Princes, of the Nambouri's, the Bramans, and the Nahers, but all the rest of an inferiour Rank, are interred. CHAP. XXXVI. Of their Arms. ALL the Malabars in general,Are very dexterous at their Arms. who are capable of bearing Arms, use them with great Dexteri∣ty; they take particular care to instruct their Chil∣dren in those Exercises, and scarce are they able to walk upwright, but they are furnished with Bows and Arrows, which they make use of to shoot at the Birds. They are so very careful in this point, that in each Kingdom there are maintained certain Aca∣demies at the King's Charge, where the young People are trained up in their Exercise of Arms.
The Indians are furnished with the materials for their Arms from abroad, but they make them al∣ways themselves for their own use. Their Musquets are very light, though they are six foot long, and there is no Naher, but he always carries a mould about him for his Ball. They don't lay the But-end of their Musquets to their Shoul∣ders, but on their Cheeks, when they are going to give fire,Their Arms. and are most excellent Marks-men. They make use also of a Lance, a Cymetar, and the Bow; of the last of which they are masters to such a De∣gree, that I have seen them frequently shoot two Arrows immediately one after another into the Air, with so much Dexterity, that the second hit the first. Their Bows are six foot long, their Arrows three; the Iron at the point about three inches broad, and eight long: They do not carry them in a Quiver as they do at Suratte, where they are not near so big, but they hold always seven or eight of them ready in their hands. Besides this, they have fastned to their sides with an iron Hook a sort of a large Knife or Bagonet, of about half a foot broad, and a foot and a half long; this they make use of when they come to a close Engagement. Those who wear Cymetars make use of Bucklers; all of them wear their Arms without Scabbards or any other Coverts, for which reason they are very careful to keep them neat and bright. The young People frequently perform their Ex∣ercises of Arms in the presence of the Prince, or be∣fore some others of the most eminent rank in the Kingdom. Those who have a more than ordinary esteem of their skill in the exercise of Weapons,Their Com∣bats. invite People of Quality at certain times appointed for that pur∣pose, to be judges of their Ability in the feats of Arms, when the prize is given to such as behave themselves best. Being animated by a double mo∣tive of honour and interest, they attack one another in these Combats, with so much vigour, that it
most commonly costs the lives of several young fel∣lows. If their happen to be a Family quarrel betwixt the Nahers,Family quarrels how decid∣ed. they choose one or more of their vassels of a mean condition on each side, who being well Fed and Educated for that purpose, are appointed by joint consent to decide the Quarrel. Time and place being agreed on by the parties concerned, the Prince appears there with his whole Court, in whose presence these Gladiators being armed only with certain Knives or Bagonets, invented and used only for this purpose, fight naked till by the death of one party or the other, the quarrel be decided in favour of the Conqueror, who very often does not long survive the Victory. The Malabars are generally very patient, and not easily put in a Passion; Besides which it ought to be mentioned to their Honour, that they never revenge themselves by any clandestine means, but give themselves due satisfaction by the most ho∣nourable ways that possibly can be, the use of poi∣son being not so much as known among them. When they go abroad into the Wars, they march without observing the least order, without making any account of Rank or File. They fight barely out of a point of Honour, or at the most for a lit∣tle Pillage, these Kings being most infected with the Ambition of enlarging their Territories, it brings a general received Custom among the Mala∣bar Princes, to restore to one another, as soon as the Peace is concluded, all that they have taken during the War.
CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Mahometans in Malabar. THE Mahometans in Malabar owe their off∣spring to such Foreigners of their Religion, as formerly have settled themselves in those parts for the conveniency of Commerce. For few of the Pagans, but especially the Nahers, never apply themselves to it, which is the reason, that most of the Commodities imported, or exported, pass thro' the hands of Strangers. The Villages or places in∣habited by these Foreign Merchants, are called in the Malabar Tongue, Basars, which is as much as to say, a Market-place. The most considerable of these trading places are generally seated on the Sea∣shoar, or near the mouth of some River or another, for the more conveniency of the Foreign Mer∣chants, who are for the most part Europeans. The Mahometans dwelling in those parts are a vile and treacherous sort of People, abundance of them live upon Piracy, and attack all Ships they meet, with∣out any difference,Malabar Corsairs. provided they think them not able to resist them; but what makes them most dreaded, is, That they use their Slaves with a most barbarous cruelty. Their Vessels resemble in shape our Gallies, and are generally manned with five or six hundred men; they call them Paros, and run with them all along the Indian Coast, even as far as the Red Sea. They very rarely attack any Eu∣ropean Vessels, especially if they be of any defence, and if they happen to take any, it is commonly done by surprize, seldom by open force.
If these Corsairs render the Indian Seas some∣what troublesome, it is very safe travelling by Land, especially, if you be conducted by some Nahers, as you travel from one Town to another; for robbing upon the High-way and Stealing, is most severely punish'd, whereas Pirating is look'd upon as a free Exercise, the Kings in those parts not taking Cognisance of what is transacted upon the open Sea, where they are perswaded the weakest ought to submit to the strongest. These Corsairs pay the tenth of what Booty they take, either in Money or Slaves to the Prince, under whose Juris∣diction they live; upon the Seas nothing is exemp∣ted from their attempts, they attacking all they meet, without any respect of Religion or Nation, or ha∣ving the least regard to any passes, though given by such Lords or Princes as they stand in awe of. If their next Neighbours or their best Friends chance to fall into their hands at Sea, they spare them no more, than if they were the greatest stran∣gers in the World, but load them with Irons till they have paid their Ransom. These Pirats are more ignorant and barbarous than the other Maho∣metans, they are distinguished from the Pagans on∣ly by their Beards, Turbants and Vests. If they happen to take any Mahometans or Pa∣gans, they only strip them of all they find, but seldom make them Slaves, unless it be a person from whom they expect an extraordinary Ransom. The Christians are treated with more severity, and are sure to die in Slavery, unless they be either ran∣somed, or else embrace Mahometanism, when they are much respected, and commonly are made Cap∣tain of their Paros. At their first going abroad with one of those Ves∣sels, their chiefest aim is to initiate the new Vessel with the Blood of the first Christian Slave they take. But among all the Europeans,The Portu∣gueses are their decla∣red Ene∣mies. the Portuguese most frequently receive the bloody Marks of their most barbarous cruelty; for which reason it is, that they are declared Enemies to these Corsairs, and if they
meet with any of them, they carry them for the most part to Goa, where they put them in Chains in their Galleys, or else keep them in Irons in the Casal de Polvera, which signifies the Powder-House, from whence, there is seldom any Redemption; These Barbarians being naturally so covetous as scarce ever to attempt the Redemption of their Friends out of Slavery, unless it be sometimes a Captain of their Paros, which however is scarce ever granted by the Portuguese, who in requital of the Cruelties exercised by them against their Country-Men, rather choose to let them Die in Bondage, than to make the advantage of their ran∣som. The Mahometans living among the Malabars, are obliged to Accommodate themselves in all respects to their Laws and Customs, unless it be in such matters as are directly opposite to their Religion; tho' the Mahometans in those parts are more Jea∣lous to fill their Coffers, and in frequenting the best Market-Town, than their Mosques. CHAP. XXXVIII. The French Settlement at Tilcery. WE being seated at Batiepatan, in a place where we wanted all manner of conveniency, by reason of its distance from the Sea-side, as soon as the two Ships called the Mary, and the Strong, had set Sail in order to their return into France, we made our Applications to Prince Onitri, to assign us another more Commodious place for our Ha∣bitations, which having soon been granted by the means of some Presents, he himself settled us in a
place called Tatichere, (afterwards by us named Til∣cery,) being part of his own Estate, Situate about 4 Leagues to the South of Batiepatan,Cananor. and 3 of Ca∣nanor. The last of these two places is Situate at 11 De∣grees, and 40 Minutes North Latitude, in the most Fertile and Beautiful part of the whole King∣dom. Its Port is very fair and Commodious, du∣ring the Summer Season, but dangerous in Winter. It was in this place the Portuguese first settled them∣selves after their first discovery of the Indies. There is to this day to be seen a strong Tower Built of Stone; which they had brought along with them from Portugal; it is environ'd with a very good high Wall, whereupon are Mounted above 100 pieces of Cannon; they soon after Built a very handsome Town just by the Fort, and made them∣selves so considerable in those parts, that they were a Terror to all the Indians round about them. Ca∣nanor is destitute of the conveniency of a River, but this is supplied by a small Bay, where there is very Commodious Landing. The Dutch having afterwards got a settlement here under the protection of the King of Cananor, the Inhabitants craved their assistance against the encroachments made upon them by the Portugueses; and these glad of so favourable an opportunity of ridding their hands of their Rival's being assisted by the Nahers of the Country,Portu∣gueses bea∣ten out by the Dutch. beat the Portugueses after a most vigorous resistance, out of their strong hold, rased the City, and kept the Fort for their own use. On the South side there is a very large Market-Town, Inhabited by Mahometan Merchants, who live there under the jurisdiction of a person of Qua∣lity of their own Religion, who is nevertheless de∣pendant from the King and his Chief Minister. He that was there Governour all my time, was called Atitaja, and was King of several of the Maldive Islands.
These Islands are very Healthful and Fertile,The Mal∣dive Islands. where by reason of their great Traffick, you may be furnish'd with every thing the Indies afford. They make use of neither Waggons, nor Coaches, but instead of them use Elephants, Horses, and their Pa∣lanquins. 'Tis here that those Canas, which we call Bam∣bou's, grow in great quantities. They are when they come to perfection, as thick as a Man's Thigh, and 20 or 30 Foot long; whilst they are very young and tender they cut them and pickle them in Vinegar. They slit them before they are dry, to make Palanquins of them, but when they are come to full perfection, they are sold at the rate of 200 Crowns apiece. Since the departure of the Portugueses from Ca∣nanor, the Dutch are become as grievous to the In∣habitants as the Portuguese, and if their Pride was insupportable to the Indians, the insolence of the others is no less troublesome to them, so that in all likelihood they would be forward enough to lend a helping hand, to such as would attempt to drive the Hollanders from thence. At a League distance from Cananor, as you Tra∣vel towards the South, you pass through a Town called Carla, Inhabited by Tives and Cheti's, where are made the best Callicoes, which retain the Name of that place for their goodness sake. A League further towards the South, you come to Tremapatan,Trema∣patan. or as the Malabars call it, Talmorte, being a very considerable Market-Town, Inhabi∣ted by Mahometan Merchants. And hard by upon a Hill, you see a Fort or Castle belonging to the King, where there is no Garrison, tho' when the Princes come that way, they always there take up their Lodgings. There runs a very fair River on one side of the Basar, or Market-Place, which falls into the Sea not above 100 Paces below it. This River is very broad, but so shal∣low, that a Ship of above 100 Tuns cannot enter it without great hazard. At its Entrance, (at a
League's distance from the Shoar,) are abundance of Rocks, and a small Island without any Inhabi∣tants, where there is however very good Hunting; besides which, it serves very often for a shelter to such Vessels as in Tempestuous Weather cannot make the River; there are no Corsairs at Trema∣patan, but those who Cruise this way from the Neighbouring Coasts, frequently lie perdue under this Island, and wait for such ships as they intend to surprize at their going into, or coming out of the River. CHAP. XXXIX. Our Departure from Batiepatan. BEfore I say any thing more of Tilcery, you must know that the Sieur de Flacour and de la Terine, being gone with the Prince Onitri, to take posses∣sion of the place assigned for our new Settlement; I staid behind at Batiepatan, to take care of the Transportation of our Moveables and Effects, to our new Habitations, in such Vessels as were ap∣pointed for that purpose, under the Convoy of a certain number of Nahers. We passed the Fort of Cananor, and the Town of Carla, without meeting with any Pirates, but as we made towards Tremapatan, we perceived one to appear from behind the abovementioned Island, making the best of his way towards us. Those that knew them by the Bulk and Shape of their Vessel, assuring me that they were Pirates, I to a∣void the danger of meeting with them, ordered our Vessels to get into a small River thereabouts, and leaving them to be guarded by the Nahers, I
Travell'd my self by Land, under the Conduct of two of these Nahers to Tilcery, where I met with the Ship called the City of Marseille, Commanded by Captain Perotin, who was formerly Lieutenant in the same Ship, which carried me out of France, as far as the Fort Dauphine, in the Isle of Mada∣gascar. Having told the Captain how our Ship was beset in a small adjacent River, by a Pirate, he sent out an Armed Chaloup, with 20 Men, and 4 Patarero's, who, in sight of the Pirate, car∣ried off our Vessels, without the least obsta∣cle. The Ship the City of Marseille, having immedi∣ately received her Cargo of Pepper, Cardamom, and Cinnamon, was sent away into Persia, leaving with us the Reverend Father Gabriel de Chinon, a Capuchin, who by the Order of the Reverend Fa∣ther Ambrosius de Previlly, of the same Order, and Superiour of the Missionaries in the Indies, was sent in Quality of a Missionary, to the Coast of Malabar. That part which Prince Onitri had given,Tilcery. or ra∣ther Sold us for our Settlement, is Situate at 11 Degrees and a half North Latitude, a League distant from Tremapatan, 3 Leagues from Cananor, and 4 from Batiepatan to the South. There is a House Built according to the Indian Fashion, of Wood and Earth, upon a rising Ground, in the midst of an Orchard, containing betwixt 2 and 300 Co∣coe-Trees; and something lower there is a large inclosure full of Cocoe and other Fruit-Trees, surrounded with a small Ditch. To the Land side, there is a small Market-Town, Inhabited by Ma∣hometans, who have there a Mosque, which is pi∣tifully Built and as pitifully maintain'd, where the Mahometans say their Prayers. On the Sea-Shoar there are several Habitations of the Moncovas, or Pagan Fisher-Men, and all round about it are ve∣ry fair Grounds belonging to some of the Richest Nahers of the Country.
Tilcery it self,Tilcery. as I have told you before, belonged to the Prince Onitri, who Sold it to the Royal French East-India Company, there being not another such a convenient place for their purpose in the whole Kingdom. No sooner were the French put in possession of the place, but they caused a House with Commo∣dious Watch-Houses for their Merchandizes to be Built out of such Materials as the Country affor∣ded, all which, they fortified with all possible di∣ligence, to serve them for a defence against any surprize. About the same time Father Gabriel, whom we mentioned before, fell very dangerously ill of a Dysentery, and being of Opinion, that the Indian Physicians might be better Skill'd in the Distem∣pers of their own Country, he sent for a Paudite, (thus they call their Physicians,) who, notwith∣standing the violence of the Symptoms, which to me were no good Presages, promised to Cure him in 3 days time, and in part he made good his Word, for having given him a certain Medicine, which, as far as I could judge was a Composition of Opium, (by the Indians called Amphion,) of Oyl, and of Jagra, or Sugar of the Cocoes, of which, he was to take a Spoonful every Night and Mor∣ning, he put an end to his Distemper and Life on the 27th of June. By the loss of so good a Man, we were deprived of the greatest Spiritual Com∣fort we so much stood in need of in a Barbarous Country, Inhabited by Idolaters, but as we were forced to submit to Providence, so the Memory of a person highly venerable for his Age, and other rare Endowments, which begot a great respect in the Mahometans and Pagans, ought always to be Sa∣cred among his Friends. The better to secure our selves and the Effects of the East-India Company at Tilcery, we were ob∣liged for a considerable time to entertain 50 Na∣hers in our Service, there passing scarce a day but that we were Alarm'd by the Neighbouring Indi∣ans,
who having conceived a Jealousie at our Buil∣dings and Fortifications, openly threatned to take the first opportunity to cut our Throats; which obliged us to make our Application to Prince O∣nitri, and to desire his Protection; but he being at that time not at leisure to come in Person, the Neighbouring Indians would not permit their Workmen to assist us in finishing our Settlement; at last after various obstacles to be surmounted, and great Intreaties, Prince Onitri appearing among us, and declaring that he would Protect us against all that should dare to oppose us, he caused several of those who had been most troublesome to us, to be severely chastised, which put such a Terror a∣mong the rest, that they did not disturb us for some time after; especially when they saw that Prince Onitri tarried thereabouts for full 6 Months, the better to keep these mutinous people in awe by his presence. CHAP. XL. A Voyage of the Sieur de Flacour, into the Kingdom of Samorin. THE Dutch who are in continual Broils with one or other of these Indian Princes,War be∣twixt the Dutch and Samo∣rins. did about the same time renew the War with the King of Samorin, being the most Potent among all the Ma∣labar Princes. For some time the War was carri∣ed on without any considerable advantage on both sides, till the Dutch having got the better of the Indians, made a great havock where-ever they came, demolishing their Towns, and pillaging their Temples, and at last laid Siege to a certain
Castle called Batacota, or Trianvaca Catota Batacota. The Fortress being very strong and of no small consequence, and the Samorins having provided the place with every thing necessary for its defence, stood it out bravely at first against the Dutch; but their heavy Artillery having disheartned the Nahers, who defended the place, and the King ha∣ving sought in vain for Succours among his Neigh∣bours, who durst not break with the Dutch, judged it most advisable to have recourse to the Europeans. The Portugueses were not in a condition to assist him, neither was he perhaps willing to give them an opportunity of re-settling themselves in his Do∣minions; wherefore he made his Application to us, desiring our Assistance against his Enemies. 'Tis true, the War was not then declared be∣twixt France and Holland, but considering that this crafty Nation had all along thwarted our Designs in the Indies, we resolved to embrace the party of the King of Samorin. For which reason the Sieurs de Flacour and de Co∣che, were sent thither from Tilcery, with full power to conclude an Alliance with that King. They were received with all imaginable Demonstrations of Joy and respect,The French side with the Samo∣rins. and the King of Samorin among other Articles, granted to the French East-India Company, a tract of Ground in his Kingdom, called Aticote, with all its dependencies, and the Sovereignty it self, for the more convenient set∣tlement of our Company. This place is not far distant from Cochin, near a River capable of bear∣ing Vessels of a moderate Bulk. The Dutch having got scent of the Treaty con∣cluded betwixt us and the Indians, Attack'd the place more furiously than before, and the Prince putting all his hopes in the French relief; the more to encourage them to hasten to his assistance, promised to put the Castle into their Hands as soon as re∣lieved, which he caused to be Published near the Enemy's Camp. But these were so far from being frightned at it, that they push'd on their Attacks
so vigorously, that the Sieur de Flacour who was constituted Governour of the Fort, after a brave Defence found means to get out of the place; and the Nahers discouraged by his departure, soon delivered it to the Hollanders, who caused it to be Demolished. The King of Samorin finding himself incapable to sustain alone the Burthen of the War,Peace be∣twixt the Dutch and Samorins. and be∣ing disappointed in his hopes of a powerful suc∣cour from Suratte, propos'd certain Articles of Peace to the Dutch, which being accepted of by them, the Peace was Concluded; and the Sieur de Flacour returned to Tilcery, having in vain en∣deavoured to serve a Prince who had given him many Demonstrations of his good will, and favou∣rable inclinations to our Nation. But as the King had been forced by an unavoi∣dable necessity to clap up this Peace with the Hol∣landers, so all his thoughts were bent upon re∣venging himself against them, as soon as the French succours promised by their East-India Company, should Arrive in those parts. For which reason, he desir'd the Sieur de Flacour to leave the Sieur de Coche with him, who accordingly staid at his Court in expectation of the succours promised by the East-India Company.
CHAP. XLI. New Troubles arisen at Tilcery. IN the mean time our Enemies, who by the pre∣sence and threats of Prince Onitri, had for some time been kept in awe, being afresh encouraged by his absence, began to be very troublesome to us. The worst of all was that we did not only stand in fear of the Neighbouring Nahers, and other Pa∣gans, but the Corsairs of Bargara and Cognaly, also threatned to come and Plunder us, and if they found any resistance, to cut us to pieces. For which reason we were forced to entertain a good number of Nahers, and to put our selves in a posture of Defence, as much as possibly we could, with a resolution, rather to sacrifice our Lives, than to submit to an intolerable Slavery among these Bar∣barians. Some time after the departure of the Sieur de Fla∣cour for Samorin, there appearing a Vessel to the South of our Shoar, with a White Flag, we also set up ours, and an Ensign of theirs being sent on Shoar, satisfied us, that it was the St. Francis, a Ship belonging to our Company, Commanded by Captain Vimont, having on Board the Sieur Pi∣lavene, a Merchant of Paris, who was sent into the Indies in Quality of a Director. This Vessel was Bound for Suratte, and after its departure out of France, having met with no Disaster till after she had doubled the Cape of Good-Hope, was At∣tack'd by so furious a Tempest, that she lost her Masts and some of her Ships Crew, and became ve∣ry Leaky, which obliged the Chief Officers there to
make a Vow, that if they happened to escape so imminent a danger, they would go to pay their De∣votions before the Corps of St. Francis Xavier, at the place where it is deposited at Goa. After the Hur∣ricane was abated, they refreshed themselves at Ba∣tavia, the Capital City of the Isle of Java, belong∣ing to the Hollanders, the biggest of all they are Masters of in the Indies. Having provided them∣selves there with what necessaries they wanted, they were steering their course towards Goa, to discharge their Vow, and from thence to continue their Voy∣age to Suratte. This Ship did not continue above four and twen∣ty Hours in our Road, in which time we took care to send them on Board all manner of refreshments; and the French Officers on board her, having under∣stood, how we were kept in continual fear by the Indians, presented us with some Cymetars, Mus∣quets and Gun-powder, besides a quantity of Bran∣dy. The sight of this Vessel, and the Arms which they sent us wrought no small effect for our safety, which we improved to our best advantage, by gi∣ving it out among them, that we expected daily more ships with Arms, Men and Ammunition from France, which struck such a terror into our Enemies, that they proved less troublesome afterwards. The Sieur Deshayes Embarked in the Ship called the St. Francis, having for some time before desired to be dismissed, the Air of Malabar not being very agree∣able to his Constitution. After the Sieur de Flacour's return from the King of Samorin's Court, we gave Notice to the Dutch, re∣siding at Cananor, of the donation made to us by that Prince, which they regarded as little as did those inhabiting Cochin.
CHAP. XLII. The Arrival of several Vessels. A Little after, the Ship called the City of Bour∣deaux, which came from Suratte, and was bound for Mascate,Mascate. a City of Arabia in the Persian Gulph, arrived in the road of Tilcery. The Portu∣gueses had formerly settled themselves in that Port, and for their security, built a new strong Fort, but the Arabians chased them from thence, since which time the French have settled a Factory there. One Mr. Petit was Commander of the Vessel, he staid but a little while in our Road, and sailed di∣rectly to Mangalor, to load some Rice there. Be∣fore his departure, he assured us, That the Sieur de Caron, Director General of the French East India Company in the Indies, being at his departure rea∣dy to sail for Bantam, would certainly in a little time pass by our way; upon which, having prepa∣red every thing for his Reception, we placed con∣stantly some Sentinels to observe whether any Ships appeared towards the North; but having for some time used our endeavours in vain, we began to i∣magine that we had been mis-informed, when one morning there came in sight of us the Ship called the St. Paul, which was soon after followed by the Vulture, and the St. Francis, in the last of which was the Sieur de Caron, who was going to settle a French Factory at Bantam, not far from Batavia, and ha∣ving taken an exact account of the true State of Affairs at Tilcery, he pursued his Voyage to Ban∣tam.
Prince Onitri having before received intelligence of his arrival, came to pay him a visit, but he came a little two late, the Sieur de Caron who was unwill∣ing to let slip the opportunity of improving the ad∣vantage of a fair Gale, being already under sa at his Arrival. The Sieur de Caron however had sent his excuses to the Prince with some presents, who sent a Messenger after him in a Chaloup, who re∣paid the Complement and regaled him with some refreshments. We had for a considerable time before laid a de∣sign to settle a French Factory at Sirinpatan, called by the Malabars, Padenote, which being communi∣cated to the Sieur de Caron, before his Departure from Tilcery, he ordered immediately the Sieur de Flacour to take a Journey thither. He chose me for his Companion, and notwithstanding the rainy Sea∣son which continues for six Months together on the Coast of Malabar, resolved to undertake the Journey without any further delay. I did all I could to represent to him the inconveniency of travelling at this Season, when the Roads by the overflowing of the Rivers were perhaps rendred unpassable, de∣siring him to delay his Journey for some little time, but he persisted in his former Resolution, tell∣ing me, That having but five and twenty Leagues to travel, we should in all probability find the Roads not so difficult to pass, as I imagined.
CHAP. XLIII. Our departure from Tilcery. ACcordingly we set out from Tilcery, about the middle of June, being conducted by some Guides, and guarded by several Nahers. Our whole Equipage consisted in no more than a Shirt and a pair of Drawers; on our Feet we wore a kind of Sandals, and to keep off the Rain, we were each of us provided with an Umbrello, made out of the leaves of Palm-trees. The first days Journey proved extreamly trouble∣some, being obliged to march all day long through the Waters that had over flown the Roads, which in some places came to our middle, so that we were not able to travel above two Leagues the whole day; at Night we took up our Lodgings which were sor∣ry enough, in a small Market-Town, where we dryed our Cloths without much difficulty, they be∣ing all of Callicoe. Thus after a miserable Nights Lodging, we continued our Journey the next Morn∣ing, when we were refreshed with a small interval of fair Weather, which however lasted but a few hours. As we were marching through the Waters, we were extreamly pestered with Horse Leaches, which fastned themselves in great numbers to our Legs, and fatigued us to that degree, that being quite spent by Noon, we were forced to take up our Quarters at the Habitations of some Mahometans. In the afternoon the Sieur de Flacour paid a visite to the Naher, who though a Subject of the King of Cananor, was Lord of the place, and without whose consent we could not pass, which we easily obtained by the means of a present. The next day
we found the Road some-what better than we had done hitherto, but another misfortune abated much of our satisfaction; for after we had travelled near four hours, we found our selves, being misled by the ignorance of our Guides, near the same place from whence we set out in the Morning. An un∣seasonable anger would have stood us but in little stead with those, who had us at their Mercy, and in whom we were obliged to confide as our Con∣ductors, so that patience was the best remedy we could prescribe our selves, and thus we continued our Journey in hopes of better luck. But we found our selves soon deceived in our expectation, for we had not travelled far, when the Rains began to be more violent than ever, besides that we travelled all over stony Grounds full of deep and large Ditches, which we were forced to pass over small Planks or pieces of Trees laid a cross. Armed with Patience, and an unshaken Resolution to overcome all Obstacles, we at last came to a Market-Town, in∣habited by Mahometans, situated near a River which runs by Cognaly. We were kindly received by the Inhabitants, and the great Rains and pass'd fatigues, obliged us to rest there for one day. But, what we had suffered hitherto, was all it seems nothing in comparison of what we were like∣ly to undergoe for the future; the Dangers and Fa∣tigues which were represented to us by these Ma∣hometans, made so lively an impression upon me, that I earnestly requested the Sieur de Flacour not to go further, and though every one there present was of my Opinion, and gave himself fresh assurances of the dangers and troubles he must undergo, he stood firm in his resolution, to prosecute his Journey, in order to dispatch his business before the return of the Sieur de Caron. As for my part, I being not under any further obligation, than to bear the Sieur de Flacour Com∣pany, I thought it rashness to expose my life to dan∣ger without any prospect of doing good; so that I resolved to quit the Sieur de Flacour, and to take the
conveniency of a small River, which discharges it self not far from hence into the Sea. According to this resolution, I hired a Canoe or Boat, refusing to accept of the Fire-arms that were offered me, because I did not imagine I should have any occasion for them, being in hopes to reach and lodge that Night at Bargara, in the House of Couleas Marcal, a rich Mahometan Merchant, and famous Pirate in those parts, with whom I had some Busi∣ness. I passed without any hindrance, (having only the Master and his Boy in my Company) by Cotta or Cognaly, a Market-Town, from whence the most famous Pirate in those Seas, whose Lord∣ship it is, derives his Name; and thus being gently conveyed by the current, I thought my self out of all danger, as being near Bargara, when some Pirates who had discovered me from far of, were making towards me with their Boat. As I was not igno∣rant, that all what these Barbarians lay hold on up∣on the Water, they look upon as their own; we made the best of our way to the shoar, but scarce had we reach'd the Bank, when we perceived the Pirates at the heels of us, which so terrified both the Master of the Boat, and his Boy, who carried my Portmantle, that they look'd for their safety in the switness of their heels, leaving me to the mer∣cy of those Robbers, who pursued me closely, till they overtook me. I now began to repent my self of having refused the fire-locks that were offered me, one of which would have been a sufficient defence against a couple of cowardly Rovers, who had no other Arms,The Author taken by a Malabar . but their Lances. Finding me with∣out any Arms, they soon knock'd me down, and seeing there were no Witness of the violence offer∣ed to me by Land, they forc'd me into their Boat, and carried me back to Cognaly. As I was the first of our Nation who had the misfortune to fall into their hands, so I was conducted before their Chief∣tain, who used his utmost endeavours to extort from me a Summ of Money for my Ransom; but having answered him that I had none to give, he asked me
for what reason I had quitted the Sieur de Flacour, and whether in his return he was to pass that way through his Lordship; I told him, that I was not able to give him an account, upon which he or∣dered the Irons to be brought in, which were laid close by me, so that I expected every moment to be loaden with Irons. But as good fortune would have it, this Chieftain had heard something of the late alliance concluded betwixt us and the King of Samorin, whose Subject he was, which consideration together with the ut∣most severity, used against such as commit Robbe∣ries on Land, or in a River, had so good an effect upon him, that he ordered the Irons to be taken a∣way, and when I expected it least, turned the civi∣lest man in the World, offering me his House and every thing else for my conveniency. But as I was eager to see my self at Liberty,Is  at li∣berty. so I returned him thanks for his offers, desiring him to give me leave to go streight to Bargara, pretending that I had business of great moment to transact there that Night. He having granted my request, and ordered a Vessel to be got ready, he presented me in the mean while with some sweet Meats▪ of which I took a few for Decency's sake, but did not eat any of them for fear of Poison, though at the same time it must be confessed, that Poison is less known among the Malabars, than any other Nation. After I had taken my leave of the Pirate, I en∣tred the Vessel which was to carry me to Bargara, where I was no sooner arrived, but I met with the same Canoe, which had left me before in the lurch, the Master pretending that he had stay'd for me there in hopes of my coming. But what rejoyced me most was, That a certain Fisherman told me, that there was very lately a Frenchman arrived in this Market-Town. You may imagine, that I made all the hast I could to find him out, and meeting with my old Friend the Sieur de la Serine the Elder, who was lately returned from Calicut, this happy
meeting was no small comfort to me, for what I had suffered during this troublesome Journey, of which and the last adventure, I gave him an exact relation. He having already settled matters with the Cor∣sair who is Lord of Bargara, we travelled the next day together to Tilcery, which being not above three Leagues from thence, we arrived there before Noon. There was scarce any body but was sur∣prized at my sudden return, but at the same time, approved of my Resolution, of not exposing my self to the hazards of so dangerous a Journey, with∣out an absolute necessity. The End of the first Part.
AN ACCOUNT OF A VOYAGE TO THE EAST-INDIES. Dedicated to the Bishop of MEAƲX. By Mr. DELLON, M. D. Translated from the French. PART II. LONDON, Printed for D. Browne, at the Black-Swan, without Temple-Bar; A. Roper, at the Black-Boy in Fleet-Street; and T. Leigh, at the Peacock in Fleet-Street, 1698.
A VOYAGE TO THE EAST-INDIES. PART II. CHAP. I. Our Journey to Tanor. THE Sieur de la Serine had bought a consi∣derable quantity of Pepper at Calicut and Tanor, which being to be weighed and put in Bales against the arrival of our Ships, he and I set out from Tilcery for these two places, which lie to the South of Tilcery. The first Town we came to in our Journey,Mealy. is called Mealy▪ it has a small Market-place, but is inhabited by Tives. The River upon which
it is built, will bear Vessels of good Burthen, and there is always a good number of them to be seen near the Town, which are freighted here with the products of the circumjacent Country, which is one of the most fertile in the World. Bargara is about two Leagues distant from Mealy;Bargara. it is one of the most considerable Market-towns in those parts, whether in respect of its commerce, or of the riches of its inhabitants, who are most Pi∣rates: It is destitute of a River, so that both the Corsairs and Merchants are obliged to let their Pa∣ros and Vessels▪ run ashoar on the Sea-side, when they want careening, or that they cannot hold out against the violence of the Hurricanes. Bargara lies upon the utmost Borders of the Kingdom of Ca∣nanor; a certain Naher is Lord of the place, who, though a subject to the King, yet enjoys the prero∣gative of receiving the tribute pay'd both by the Inhabitants and Strangers. Not far from Bargara, there is a small Gulph made by the River Cognaly, a place very commodious for the Neighbouring Corsairs. About half a League from Bargara, there is a Market-town, or Basar, which the Malabars call Cota, or Cognaly; the first signifies in their Language as much as a Fort, the second is the Name of the Corsair, who is Lord of the place. Cota is a Peninsule of a very difficult access,Cota. even in that part where it is adjoined to the Land, by rea∣son of the deep pits occasion'd by the overflowing of the Sea. The River bears Vessels of three hun∣dred Tuns, but is very dangerous at the Entrance, not far from whence there is a small Island, which serves for a shelter in tempestuous Weather, both to the Merchant Men and Paros. The Lord of Cognaly is a famous Corsair in these parts;The Lord of Cognaly. he seldom has less than ten or twelve Paros out at Sea, each being manned with five or six hun∣dred of his Subjects, who are most of them of the same Employment, and as they are commonly very Rich, so they are intolerably Proud and Insolent.
Some years ago they revolted against the King of Samorin, their Sovereign, who finding himself alone not strong enough to reduce these Rebels to Obedience, sought for aid by the Portugueses. These having sent to his assistance a Fleet, he Besieged them by Land, as they did by Sea, but with very ill success; for the Portuguese Ships having most of them been tost by a Tempest, the King was for∣ced to withdraw his Army, not without great loss, without being able to reduce the Corsairs to their Devoir. But the next year proved less favoura∣ble to them; for the Portugueses being resolved to revenge the Affront received the year before, made a Descent,Is carried to Goa, and Stoned to Death. routed them, and took their Chieftain Prisoner, whom they led loaden with Chains to Goa, where the populace being highly incensed a∣gainst these Barbarians, on account of the Cruel∣ties exercised by them upon their Country-Men, and other Europeans, he was stoned to Death by the Boys. One of his Nephews after having submitted him∣self to the King of Samorin, succeeded him both in his Estate and Employment, who has ever since continued to Cruise upon the Merchant Ships with such success, that he is dreaded all over the In∣dies. The Fort which has given the Name to the Ba∣sar, or Market-Town, is Built at a small distance from it, on the utmost confines of the Kingdom of Samorin. From thence they count it seven Leagues to Calicut, where you meet with nothing but 3 or 4 small Towns, so inconsiderable as not to deserve to be mentioned here.
CHAP. II. Of Calicut. CAlicut,Calicut or Coi-Cota. is in the Malabar Tongue called Coi-Cota, deriving its Name from two different Words, the first whereof signifies as much as a Cock, and the last a Fort; because, as it is related among the Malabars, the Kingdom of Samorin was in former Ages of no greater extent than you might hear a Cock Crow. And tho' this Kingdom be considerably augmented since, yet the City of Calicut, (the principal of the Country,) retains the same Name to this day. It is Situated under the Eleventh Degree of North Latitude, about 11 Leagues distant from Tilcery. Formerly it was the Chief place of Commerce of all the Indies, and though it be much declined from its Ancient lustre, yet its Inhabitants are generally very Rich, and most of them Merchants. This was the place where the Portugueses first set foot on Shoar, after their first Discovery of the East-Indies. Their King who at that time kept his Residence in that City, received them with a great deal of kind∣ness and respect, granting them a considerable set∣tlement in his Territories, but they were so far from making a suitable return to his Civilities, that they began to Lord it both over him and his Subjects, so that the King thought himself obliged to rid his Hands of these bold Guests; whom the Samorins drove out of their Territories, and never suffered them to re-settle there since. All about Calicut there are very low Grounds, subject to frequent Inundations, there being scarce
a year but some part or other of this Kingdom is laid under Water, by the overflowing of the Ri∣vers. The Fort which the Portugueses formerly had Built at a good distance from the Shoar, may now be seen 2 Leagues deep in the Sea, above half under Water,The Portu∣guese Fort. so that you may frequently see small Vessels pass betwixt that and the Shoar. These Inundations are ceased by the strong South West Winds, which blow on that Coast continually, from May till September. Whilst I was there I was an eye-witness of the Disaster that befel the Eng∣lish, whose Habitations, which had not been Built many Years before, were entirely swallowed up by the Waters. The frequent mischiefs occasioned by these Inun∣dations, has been one of the main reasons why the Foreign Trade has in a great measure removed from Calicut to Goa, which City, has laid the foun∣dation of its greatness upon the Ruins of that of Calicut. Goa is the most considerable City of all the East-Indies, in the Possession of the Portugueses, who wallowing in Riches, by reason of the vast Com∣merce of the Foreign Merchant's Trafficking in the East-Indies, grew at last so insolent and insup∣portable to them, that they Transported their Ef∣fects and Traffick to Suratte, which is now the chief Trading place of all the Indies. Calicut, is notwithstanding all this, accounted a very good Market-Town, having 4 or 5 large and hand∣some Streets; besides, the Suburbs, which are In∣habited by Fishermen and Tives, all which joy∣ned together make up a City of a pretty large Bulk. Since the Kings of Samorin have removed their Court to another place, there resides here a Go∣vernour (whom they call Bajador,) in the Royal Palace, where there is as yet to be seen a very large Bell, and some Brass Cannon, which were brought thither, after they had chased the Portu∣gueses out of their Fort.
Among the Sands of the Shoar there is good store of Gold Dust,Gold Dust. which is very fine, and every Body has the freedom to gather it at pleasure; the biggest piece that ere I saw, was not worth above 15 Pence, and commonly they are not worth above 4 or 5 Pence apiece, abundance of people get a livelihood by it; and with consent of the Governour (which is to be purchased by a certain set Price, for the main∣tenance of 100 Poor people,) you may have as much Sand as you please, carried to your Dwel∣ling-places, in order to separate it with the most conveniency. It is a considerable time since the English have been settled at Calicut;English Factory. but their Habitations ha∣ving been ruined, (as we said before,) by the over∣flowing of the Waters; they Built another House in a rising and consequently less dangerous piece of Ground. As in those far distant places the Euro∣peans, tho' of different Nations, pay a great deal of Civility to one another upon all occasions, and as it would have been look'd upon by them as an Affront, if we had not stopp'd at their Habitation as we pass'd that way, we took up our Lodgings with the English, who Entertain'd us with all the Civility imaginable, and we staid with them much longer than we at first intended, by reason that a Paros of the Cosairs waited for our coming out of the Port to surprize us. Having staid for some time in hopes of his go∣ing out of the Road, his Obstinacy at last over∣came our Patience, and being resolved to run the hazard, we rowed out of the Port in the middle of the Day, but kept near the Shoar, in order to Land if they should come to Attack us. But as these Cowardly Barbarians seldom Attack any but whom they believe either not to dare or to be able to cope with them, our resolute Behaviour put them to a stand, so that imagining us to be stron∣ger than we were, they had not the Courage to come near us. But this was not the only danger that threat∣ned us, for we had not gone much further when espy∣ing
another Vessel riding at a good distance from us near the Shoar, put us into a great consternation; our Nahers and Mariners having assured us that it was without the least doubt a Corsair Ship, we entered upon a Consultation what to do at this emergen∣cy, whether it were not the safest way for us to get a-shoar, and stay there till the Corsair had quitted the Road, or for us to go straightways on Foot to Tanor, and let our Vessel take the conveniency of the Night to escape the Pirate. But there being no Houses at any reasonable distance from the Shoar, we did not think fit to put this Project in executi∣on, but setting the best face we could upon the mat∣ter, rowed as near the Shoar as we could in the same manner as we had done before; and thus with our Arms ready to receive the Pirate, if he should come to Attack us, we pass'd unmolested be∣twixt him and the Shoar, and Arrived safely the same Evening at Tanor. CHAP. III. Of Tanor. TAnor is the principal Town of a petty Kingdom, which has given it its Name; it is 5 Leagues distant to the South from Calicut. It wants the con∣veniency of a River, the Ships that are bound to this place being obliged to ride in the Road where there is tolerable good riding, but only in the Sum∣mer. The Inhabitants of the place are Mahometan Merchants, who, most of them are very Rich. On the very Sea side there are two small Towns Inhabited by Fisher-Men, whereof those of one are Christians, those of the other Pagans. Near the first of these two you see a small Church standing
in a Church-Yard, where stands a very high Cross. The King of Tanor keeps his Court at about a League's distance from thence, his Mahometan and Pagan Subjects living under the Jurisdiction of a Governour of his, who has not the least Authority over the Christians, who are under the Government of him that has the oversight over the abovementi∣oned Church, which has long since been in the pos∣session of the Jesuits, who from time to time send hither their Missionaries, to labour in the Conversi∣on of these Idolatrous people to the Christian Faith. He that was there at the time when I passed that way, was called Matthias Fernandez, who having lived there for these 7 or 8 Years together, is per∣fectly well versed in the Language of the Country. Tho' the whole Kingdom of Tanor be not above 8 or 10 Leagues long, and as many broad, yet is their King as Absolute as any in Malabar, not being Tributary to any other. He has always kept a very strict Alliance with the Portugueses, and these have been as careful to maintain a constant good under∣standing with him.King of Tanor is an Enemy to the Dutch. The differences which were then betwixt us and the Hollanders, being risen to that pitch, that we expected nothing else but to come quickly to an open Rupture, and this Prince having always been a Mortal Enemy of the Dutch, we endeavour'd by all means possible to gain his good Will, for which purpose we made him some Presents in the name of the French East-India Com∣pany. All the Territories belonging to the King of Ta∣nor, are extreamly Fertile, the Air is very whol∣some, there is great plenty of Fish and extraordi∣nary good Hunting. The ordinary Food of the In∣habitants is for the most part Fish, unless it be some persons much advanced in Years, who eat Fowl and sometimes a Kid, Beef being look'd upon by these as well as the other Pagans as a forbidden Fruit. After we had dispatched our Business at Tanor, we Travelled by Land to Calicut, whither we had sent our Almadre or small Vessel before us.
CHAP. IV. Our Departure from Tanor. WE did not set out till pretty late from Tanor, which was the reason we could not Travel farther that Night than to Chali,Chali. two Leagues di∣stant from Tanor, where we lay that Night. This is a Market-Town belonging to the King of Samo∣rin, where besides the Merchants there live a good number of Tives. It lies on a River capable of bearing Ships of 100 Tuns Burthen, but is so pestered with Pirates, that it is not very safe for Merchant-Men to enter here. We being lodged at a Tive's House, we had the opportunity of see∣ing them perform one of these ridiculous Cere∣monies used among the Pagans, for the Recovery of their Kindred, in case of any dangerous Sick∣ness. A Nephew of our Host much Beloved by him, was fallen dangerously ill of a Fever, and in spite of all the Remedies that were used by his Unkle, (who had left nothing unattempted which might conduce to the Recovery of his Health,) was by the violence of his Distemper reduced to that Con∣dition, that his Life was despaired of. All other Remedies having proved ineffectual, he had re∣course to the Mysterious Superstition of his Reli∣gion, and having sent for the Bramans belonging to the next Temple, to try their Skill with the Patient, they sent one of their Number, who began the Ceremony with crying silence to the Compa∣ny.
After this he ordered a large Wooden Bowl to be brought to him, which was laid all over the bot∣tom with Leaves; into this he put some fresh Co∣coes, some dry'd, some Bananas, some Jagre, or Sugar of the Cocoes, some boil'd Rice, and some broil'd Fish, besides a good cup full of Tary, or Palm-tree Wine. The Braman put in every thing with his own hand, muttering out certain Words, and making most extravagant and ridiculous Po∣stures. Round the great Bowl he stuck many Wax Candles lighted, and betwixt each of them a stick of the same thickness tied all round about with Flow∣ers. Then the Braman fell to his Prayers, which being ended, he called to one of the Standers by, who gave him one of the lighted Wax Candles, which he put in his Mouth. This was no sooner done, but he appeared to be all in a Rapture, ma∣king most strange Postures and Faces, this being the very nick of time, when they believe him to be in∣spired, and look upon what he pronounces, as O∣racles, whether the Patient be to live or die. How∣ever it was, this Devil happened to be none of the most skilful; for he foretold that the young Man should recover his Health, which proved quite con∣trary, for he died in a few days after. We went the next day from Chali, and arrived the day following early at Calicut, where we found the English busie in removing after the late inunda∣tion; we travelled a league beyond it the same day, where we lodged that Night, and the next follow∣ing at Bargara, from whence we returned the next day to Calicut.
CHAP. V. Our Journey to Batiepatan. HAving received the wellcome News,English Ships ar∣rived at Batiepa∣tan. that the English Ships, which the English East-India Company sends every year to the Coast of Malabar to fetch Pepper, were safely arrived at Batiepatan; I resolved with another Friend of mine to go thi∣ther, to learn if possible some News out of Europe, and from Suratte; we entred the River of Batiepa∣tan before Noon, and came up as high as the Eng∣lish House by that time they were just going to Din∣ner. The English Factory of Batiepatan, is above a League and a half from the Sea-side, built upon a rising Ground just on the very River-side, which will not bear any Ships of Burthen. The English Commissary, and the Captains there present, enter∣tained us very handsomely, so that we staid there all the rest of the day; our Mariners having in the mean while refreshed themselves, and fearing if we staid any longer, we should be hard put to it with drinking; we parted at Night, and came safely the next Morning to Tilcery, where, in a few days after, the English return'd us the visit. But as these diversions were but very rare among us, so I began to be weary of this kind of Life, which had made me write several times to the Di∣rectors of our East-India Company, to desire them to remove me from Tilcery, being fully resolved to leave it without their permission, if in a little time I did not receive a favourable answer. In the mean while we took another Journey to Tanor, where we heard the news of the death of
the young Tive, of whom I spoke before, to have been cured by the Braman. We only stay'd here for a few days, when having dispatch'd our business, we return'd to Tilcery by Sea. As it is very dangerous to coast it along the shoar, by reason of the great number of the Corsairs, that are watching thereabouts for pray, we put out to Sea, where they are not so frequent. But scarce had we sail'd a League, when we were on a sudden over whelmed with such an infinite number of Fish, as big as our Mackerel, which threw themselves in∣to our Vessel, that the diversion we took at it at first sight, not long after turned into fear of being sunk by their weight. We were fain to set all hands to work to throw them out as fast as possibly we could, which however would have stood us but in little stead, if we had not avoided the danger, by making towards the shoar with all speed we could. Having rid our selves thus of our unwelcome Guests, trou∣blesome only by their number we put to Sea again a second time, and arrived at Calicut about Mid∣night. We entertained the next day the English with all their Domesticks, and our selves with some of the Fish that were come into our Vessel the day before; besides which, our Ships Crew sold whole Baskets full of them to the Inhabitants. We did not stay here above two days, and having sent back our Vessel to Tanor, we travelled back by Land to Tilcery.
CHAP. VI. The Return of the Sieur de Flacour. THE Sieur de Flacour returning from Sirinpatan towards the end of November, gave us an exact account of the Danger and Fatigues he had under∣gone after I had left him upon his Journey, which had taken him up five and thirty days, though he had not above thirty Leagues to Travel. Besides which he had been in danger of being drowned by the violence of the Currents of those Rivers which he had been forced to pass, having lost several of his Company by these Disasters. But the good success of his Negotiation, having made him a full amends for the troubles he had suffered, he remem∣bred the past dangers with a greal deal of Satisfa∣ction. The Commodities brought from Sirinpatan are the finest Callicoes,Commodi∣ties brought from Sirin∣patan. Sandal Wood, which grows in such a quantity there abouts, that the Kings and other great Men make use of it in their Buildings. There is also in that Country, good store of a Na∣tive Salt Petre, which is bought very cheap and wants but little refining. The Sieur de Flacour shewed us some patterns of these Callicoes, half as fine again as those of Suratte for the same price. We were busied the remaining part of this year in buying up of Pepper, to be ready at hand a∣gainst the arrival of our Vessels, which were ex∣pected daily to come into our Road; and in the be∣ginning of January, the Ship called the Providence, arrived to take in part of her Cargo in that Com∣modity. The Captains name was Mr. Petit, who
had not above seven Frenchmen on Board, the rest of his Ships Crew being all Mahometans. He in∣form'd us of the arrival of the Sieur de Blot, Dire∣ctor of the French East-India Company in those parts, and that he had sent his Orders to the Sieur de la Serine to quit Malabar, and to return to Suratte. I was not a little out of Humour to find that I had not been mentioned by him, but as all the Gentlemen that had any Command here, were my particular Friends, so I obtain'd without much difficulty their consent of going in the same Ship with the Sieur de Serine, being resolved not to spend the best part of my younger days, nor to confine my curiosity to this remote corner of the Indies. The Sieur de Flacour was the very person who was unwilling to lose my Company, and to stay be∣hind alone; but being convinced of the necessity of my departure, I prepared my self to go along with the above mentioned Captain Petit, so soon as he should return from Tanor and Calicut, whither he was sailed to take in such Commodities, as we had bought up before. In the mean while,One of the Kings Ships arrives. one of the Kings Ships, car∣rying sixty pieces of Cannon, commanded by Cap∣tain du Clos, came to an Anchor in our Road. He was come out in Company with two Pinks. They were to join the Sieur de la Haye, who was come out of France a year before them, having on board a good Summ to pay the Troops in the service of the East-India Company. They being separated from one another, some days before by stress of Wea¦ther, the Captain was at an uncertainty whether the Pinks were behind or before him, and perceiv∣ing our White Flag, they came to an Anchor in the Road, but did not stay longer than four and twenty hours, during which they were provided with all manner of refreshments. The King's Ship was scarce got out of sight, being not above four hours under Sail, when Captain de Petit return'd with his Ship from Calicut, and we were getting every thing ready to set sail the next day.
The same day towards Evening, we perceived a small Vessel which was making towards our Road, and sent out her Chaloup, which did not come till late at Night on Board the Province. There was in the Chaloup a Lieutenant belonging to one of the Pinks, which had been separated from the King's Ship, commanded by Captain de Clos, and the Lieutenant having been informed, that we were to set Sail the next Morning by break of day, did not go ashoar, and at parting it was agreed, that we should weigh our Anchors together, of which we were to adver∣tise one another by a certain Signal agreed on be∣twixt us, which was the discharging of a Can∣non. CHAP. VII. Our departure from Tilcery. IT was on the 20th. day of January, early in the Morning, when having given the Signal to the Captain of the Pink, we weighed Anchor at the same time, and with a favourable Gale, blowing from the Land, put to Sea, and safely passed the Bar of Batiepatan, where we were to take in some Sand or Wood, which the Sieur de Flacour had sent thither for that purpose. We were fain to stay here two days, and when we were just ready to set sail, we discovered a large Vessel which our Mahome∣tan Seamen assured us to be one of the Indian Cor∣sairs, who infest these Coasts. Having got every thing ready, we made all the sail after him we could, ordering our Pink to enclose him on one side, whilst we did the same on the o∣ther. But after we had chased him for some hours, we lost sight of him, he being a nimbler Saile that we.
Some of us went afterwards on Board the Pink, where they were much rejoyced to hear news of the King's Ship, we spoke of before, in hopes they should soon meet with her on these Coasts. We kept all Day long out at Sea, but towards Night constantly approached nearer the Shoar, to take the advantage of the Wind, which blows from the Shoar always after Midnight; in three days we came with∣in sight of Mangalor, where we intended to refresh our selves for a little time. With much ado,They are in danger of being lost. we got safely into the Road of Mangalor, by Eight a-Clock at Night, but the Pink did not come to an Anchor there till the next Morn∣ing; for fear of sticking upon the Sands, if they should come in the Night-time, as we did, who trusting to the skill of our Mariners, who pretend∣ed to be well acquainted with that port, were in great danger of being lost; for having put our selves in the Night into a Chaloup, in order to go on shoar, we miss'd the Passage, which is the only way, through which one may safely enter the Ri∣ver. We expected every moment to have been split upon the Rocks, which lay hidden just under the surface of the Water, but at last we had the good luck to escape and get safely on shoar. The Pink came to Anchor the next morning just by our ship, and the Officers being all met the next day on shoar, we pass'd that and the next following day in what diversion the place would afford, and we should scarce have parted so soon, if the Sieur de Barbot, Commander of the Pink, had not been in so much hast, being impatient to join the French Fleet, commanded by Monsieur de la Haye. Mangalor is one of the most considerable places in the Kingdom of Canara,Mangalor deprived. eighteen leagues distant from Batiepatan. It has a most excellent Road for ships to Anchor in, and whilst the Rains last, the ships may enter the River without any hazard, it being all that time very deap and broad; the most danger is at its entrance, by reason of the Sand-banks which cannot well be passed without a great hazard,
unless at Spring-Tydes. The Town is Situate up∣on a rising Ground, inhabited by Pagans and Ma∣hometan Merchants; and near it you see the Fa∣ctory of the Portugueses which they call in their Language Feituria. Formerly all the Forts which are near the ports of the Kingdom of Canara, belonged to the Portu∣gueses, but the Canarins as well as most of the other Indian People, thinking their Pride insupportable, took their opportunity, whilst they were engaged in a War with the Hollanders, to drive them from thence. The Portugueses,Portu∣gueses chased out of Canara▪ who knew the importance of these places, after the Peace concluded betwixt them and the Dutch, have left no stone unturned to regain from the Canarins these places; for which pur∣pose they sent a Fleet on that coast, which ruin'd the commerce of that Kingdom to that degree, that it was reduced to the utmost misery, which obliged the King of Canara to sue for Peace to Lewis de Men∣doza, then Vice-roy of the Indies for the King of Portugal, offering the restitution of the two most considerable Forts of Mangalor and Barcalor. The Portugueses accepted the conditions, but thinking it two chargeable to entertain two strong Garrisons at such a distance, they were contented with erect∣ing new Factories in these places, reserving to them∣selves half the profits of all the customs paid from goods, exported or imported in these two Ports. The subjects of the King of Canara,The King∣dom of Ca∣nara. are for the most part Pagans, the rest are Mahometans: They don't follow the Laws and Customs of the Malabars, especially in what relates to the differences and de∣grees of their Tribes; they are seldom without be∣ing engaged in a War with the Neighbouring Ma∣labars, where the Canarins commonly are worsted. They live in most respects according to the Laws and Customs of the Pagan Indians, who are subjects of the Great Mogul, the King of Canara being his Tributary.
The Canarins are of a Tawny Complexion, and middle sized, wear their Hair long, and Cloath themselves not unlike the Indians of Suratte. They are most of them very good Soldiers, and most expert in Mining, besides that they don't Fight so disorderly as the Malabars, but they are not so brave, being more addicted to Commerce, for which reason, you meet with them in all parts of the Indies, to vend their Commodities. The manner of Solemnizing their Feasts being the most extravagant in the World,Their Feasts. deserves to be taken notice of here: At these Solemnities they carry their Idols in Triumph, being placed in a Wagon, adorned on all sides with Flowers. But what is the most surprizing, is, that there are se∣veral sharp crooked Iron hooks fastned to the Wheels upon which these poor Superstitious wret∣ches throw themselves, and thus to signalize their Zeal, cause themselves to be turn'd round with the Wheels till they are cut to pieces. Others lie sprawling upon the Ground, on pur∣pose to be crushed to pieces by the force of the Wheels and the weight of the Waggon, which pas∣ses over their Bodies. All which is done out of a vain belief they have that by thus Sacrificing them∣selves for the Honour of their Gods, they shall en∣joy the bliss of Immortality hereafter. The manner of Executing their Criminals,How they Execute their Cri∣minals. as it is very Cruel, so it ought not to be pass'd by in si∣lence: They strip them quite Naked, and thus tied Hand and Feet, expose them upon the Sands to the Sun, where they die a most miserable and ling∣ring Death, being consumed by degrees by the vi∣olent heat of the Sun and the Flies. And for fear that the place where they are laid should grow cool and afford them some intervals in their Mise∣ry, they take care to remove them frequently, till such time they expire amidst the most cruel Tor∣ments. The Air of Canara is very pure and sufficiently pleasant, and the Country tho' not of a very great
extent, extreamly Fertile, this part of the Country furnishing all Europe with Rice, besides which there are great quantities of Rice exported from hence to Achem, Bantam, Socotora, Moqua, Mascate, Balsora, Mosa∣mbique, Bombase, and to several other places in the Indies. CHAP. VIII. Our Departure from Mangalor. WE set Sail from Mangalor the next day after the Pink, Commanded by the Sieur the Barbot, and after we had Sailed 24 Hours, passed in sight of Barcalor, but did not enter the Port, being resolved to come to an Anchor that Night, if possible, in the Road of Mirscou. Immediately after our Arrival, we went to pay our respects to the Governour Cojabdalle, of whom we have had occasion to speak before, who, since we saw him last, had been involved in great Trou∣bles. He had been accused of Extorsions, and o∣ther Malversation, whereupon, having been Sum∣mon'd to appear before his Prince, he was Con∣demn'd to a Prison, where he suffered great hard∣ships for some time; but having at last found means to justifie himself against these Aspersions, the King his Master had restored him to all his Offices and Dignities he enjoyed before his Dis∣grace. The discontent occasioned by his late Trou∣bles might easily have been read in his Face, when we saw him, notwithstanding which, he received us with a great deal of Civility; telling us, that it was a great dissatisfaction to him to see our East-India Company to Abandon the place where he was Governour, and to see them transport it to any Port where he had no Authority, and conse∣quently
was not in a Capacity to serve them. We return'd him Thanks for his Kindness, with assu∣rance, that we were not without hopes of return∣ing thither in a little time, and to settle the con∣cerns of the Company upon a more solid founda∣tion than before, under his Government; at which, he was extreamly pleased, and writ a Letter to the Directors of our Company at Suratte, to In∣vite them to Mirscou, with great promises of all the assistance he was able to give them. After two days stay, we set Sail again from Mirscou, and the next Morning early discovered a Squadron of 13 Ships,They meet with Mon∣sieur de la Haye. which proved to be the French Squadron, Commanded by Monsieur de la Haye, of which we have made mention before. The Admiral with another Ship coming up with us, informed our Captain that the Sieur de Caron, one of the Directors of our Company in the Indies, was on Board one of these Vessels, he went in a Chaloup to pay him a Visit, and after his return, told us, that the French Squadron was bound to the South, and that there was a discourse among them of creating Factories for the French East-India Com∣pany, in the Isle of Ceylon; so we left them, Steer∣ing our Course towards Goa. We came the same Night within sight of the Forts, which are at the Entrance of the River of Goa, but being not very well acquainted with the Coast, which is accounted very dangerous, we did not come to an Anchor till early in the Morning the next day, being the last of January.
CHAP. IX. Our Arrival at Goa. THE City of Goa is Situate under the 15th De∣gree of North Latitude; it formerly belong∣ed to the King of Visapour, but is now in the pos∣session of the Portuguese. The River of Goa is one of the finest in the whole World, no Ships of what Burthen soever, but may go up without the least danger to the City. This River is as it were divided into two Bran∣ches,The River of Goa. Isle of Goa. by an Isle called Goa, which has given its Name to the City, which is Built upon it. The Isle is of an Oval Figure, about 7 Leagues in Circuit; the most narrow point of the Island ex∣tends it self into the open Sea; Parallel with the two Capes of the Continent, which makes a dou∣ble Harbour equally Commodious for Vessels on either side. The Southern point of the Continent is called by the Portugueses, Cabo de Rama, where they have a strong Fort,Fort Mour∣mougon. called Fort de Mourmougon, which being always provided with a good Garrison, and Artillery proportionable to defend the Entrance of the Harbour on that side. On the utmost point of the Island, which sepa∣rates the two Harbours, there is another Fort which has taken its Name from a Monastery of the Re∣collects, (a sort of Franciscan Friars,) who have De∣dicated their Church to the Virgin Mary, and is by the Portuguese called Nossa Senhora Docaba.
On the Northern Cape of the Continent lies the Fort of Agoada,Fort of A∣goada. so called, because there is most ex∣cellent Water thereabouts, which furnishes all Ships that come into that Port. The Fort of Agoada is the most considerable, both for its strength and bigness, this being the most convenient Harbour of the two for Anchorage, where Ships cannot pass the Chanel but within Cannon Shot of the Fort, as they are either go∣ing or coming from Goa. The Governours of Goa have here a House so Magnificently Built that it would pass for a fine Palace, even in Europe, where they divert themselves frequently. About 3 Leagues from the City there are seve∣ral other lesser Forts, where they keep no Garri∣sons, and on both sides of the Shoar you see abun∣dance of fine Country Houses, belonging to the In∣habitants of Goa, and several very large and stately Villages, by the Portugueses called Aldea's; the vast number of Gardens which are seen near the City being the whole Year round, stored with se∣veral sorts of Fruits, Flowers, and Leaves, afford a very pleasant prospect. There is about a League from the City of Goa, a very large Village or Aldea called Pangim, sur∣passing in Beauty many goodly Cities, where per∣sons of Quality have their Palaces, to shelter them∣selves here against the heats of the Sun; and the Gardens being in all respects suitable to the Gran∣deur of the edifices, appear very surprizing to Strangers. Half way betwixt Pangim and Goa, is the Church called Notra Senhora de Ribaudar, concerning which the Portugueses relate the following History. A Portuguese Ship from Lisbon, being come as far as the Cape of Good-Hope, was there surprized towards Night by a most violent Tempest, so that the Mariners expected nothing but Death every Moment, but the next Morning by break of day, they found their Ship riding at Anchor in the Ri∣ver of Goa, just opposite to the place, where in
Memory of the Miracle, the abovementioned Church is Built on the River side. To perpetuate the Me∣mory of so surprizing an Adventure there is a Ship Painted upon the Church-Door, and upon the ve∣ry Banks of the River are to be seen 2 large Cros∣ses made of Stone, which they say are of the same length with the Ship, that performed this Mira∣culous Voyage, which without question was the nimblest Sailer that ever was known, since she Sailed 2000 Leagues in one Night. La Casa de Polvera, or the Powder-House, is with∣out the City, where they keep their Criminals Con∣demned to Imprisonment; which is also the Prison of all such Malabar Pirates as they take at Sea. All such Vessels as come to Goa, betwixt the 20th day of May and the last of August are ob∣liged to enter the River by the Southern Channel, where lies the Fort of Mourmougon, no body being permitted to pass during that time, through the North Channels, near the Fort of Agoada, which however is open for all the rest of the Year. Those Ships that Arrive at Goa in a proper Sea∣son of what bulk soever, may without the least danger go up as high as the City, and ride at ano∣ther just before the Vice-Roy's Palace.
CHAP. X. Of the City of Goa. THIS City was once one of the most flourish∣ing of all the Indies, but has lost much of its former greatness in the last War betwixt the Por∣tugueses and Dutch. It is the most considerable the Portugueses are Masters of in all the Eastern parts; being the Residence of their Vice-Roy of the Indies, and where they keep their highest Court of Justice. One half of it is Built upon an ascent upon the very Bank of the River, the other part lies in a bottom, where the heat is very excessive, which makes the Inhabitants retire into the circumjacent Country Villages, during the violence of the Hot Season.Description of the City of Goa. For the rest, the Market-places and Streets of Goa are very fine; it is surrounded with a Wall, but of little Strength, the Avenues tending to the City being so well guarded, as not to stand in need of any other Works to defend it against any Attempts of an Enemy. The High Court of Ju∣stice is kept in the Vice-Roy's Palace; this Court is by the Portugueses called Ralacam; and it is to this Court that all the other Subaltern Courts of Goa, and other parts of the Indies, under the Ju∣risdiction of the Portugueses may bring their Ap∣peals. The Houses of Goa are generally very hand∣somely Built,Houses of Goa. but somewhat Dark at their Win∣dows, being made out of certain Oister-shells very thin cut. The Cathedral is Dedicated to St. Catharine, and is a vast Structure, but rudely Built. Next to it
is the Arch-Bishop's Palace, and the Bishops, or rather the great Vicar's House, who is not inferi∣our to any Bishop, and is called by the Portugueses Bispo d'Anelt. Not far from this you see the Prison, called Ati∣ouvar, where no body is Committed but upon the account of Ecclesiastical concerns. Just opposite to the Cathedral in a great Square, stands that Famous House, whose very Name makes many thousands Tremble in those parts; this is the Court of Inquisition, called by the Por∣tugueses, Santa Casaou Casa d'o santo Officio. There is also a Nunnery in the City, where the Nuns live with a great deal of Austerity, without making use of the same liberty as they do in Por∣tugal; and it is to their Capacity and that of the holy Inquisition, the Portugueses own themselves chiefly indebted for the great affluence of their Fortunes, and other conveniencies they enjoy at Goa. Besides their Parish Churches, there are many Mo∣nasteries of several Orders. The Jesuits have here 3 fine Churches, in one of which, the Corps of St. Francis Xavier is deposited; besides which, they have 3 most Magnificent Houses, each of them be∣ing fit for the reception of a King, with abundance of the best Lands round the City, from whence they draw a vast yearly Revenue. All their Chur∣ches are very finely Built, but the Hospital exceeds the rest. The Church of the Thotins, tho' not the most Magnificent, yet is the neatest and most regular of all the Churches in Goa; this Church is De∣dicated to Nossa Sen Hora de Divina Providentia. The Church called de Misericordia, has nothing remarkable beyond the rest,The Chari∣table Socie∣ty. but the Society for whose sake this Church has been erected and has derived its Name, deserves particularly to be taken notice of here. This Society is by the Portugueses called Irman∣dal de Misericordia, and its Members Irmaous da
Misericordia; the chief Citizens of Goa, and per∣sons of the best Quality, not excepting the Vice-Roy himself, are Ambitious of being Members of this Fraternity, who Celebrate two great Feasts every Year. The Holy-Thursday, because on that day our Sa∣viour gave to the World the most evident proof of his Humiliation, when he wash'd the Feet of the Apostles; and the other is Celebrated on the day when the Virgin Mary came to visit her Cousin; this last is performed with more Solemnity than the first, and as they go in Procession, they wear a kind of Black Surplice. The next day after the last Feast, the whole Society meets,Officers be∣longing to this Society. when they choose their Officers. First they have a Prior, whom they call Prouve∣dor; formerly none but Noblemen were chosen to that Dignity, but of late the Rich Merchants are chosen as well as the Noblemen. All the Con∣tributions here are made for the Advantage of the Poor, and there is scarce a Prouvedor, who at the Years end does not contribute 20000 Livres of his own. Besides the Prouvedor, there is a Treasurer and Steward; a Prouvedor or Overseer of the Pri∣soners, all which, are chosen out of the Members of this Society. The Treasurer disposes of the Alms among the Poor, as the Overseer of the Pri∣soners sollicites their Business in causes both Civil and Criminal, and often procures their Pardon. The Prouvedor General's Office is to manage the Business of the whole Society, to assist underhand Widows, Orphans, and all others that are in a low Condition. The Members of this Society are ob∣liged to visit the Poor and Sick, as also the Priso∣ners, to Bury the Dead, to assist Criminals when they go to Execution, and to give them what Comfort they can even to the last Gasp, and to cause Masses to be said for them after they have suffered the Law. They choose every Year new Officers, by which means, every one of the Mem∣bers is in a probability of bearing his share, and
tho' all these Offices are chargeable, there's very few but what are very eager after them. Charity is the whole foundation of this Noble and most Glorious Society; and there is scarce a City, no not a Burrough of note, under the Juris∣diction of the Portugueses, but what has a Church Dedicated to the same use, with some Revenues to be applied to the same purpose with this Society, tho' for the rest they have no dependance on one ano∣ther. CHAP. XI. Of the Inhabitants of Goa. THE Inhabitants of Goa may conveniently be divided into several kinds: The first are the true Portugueses, whom they call Reinots; the se∣cond are the Mestices,Several sorts of In∣habitants in Goa. begotten betwixt a Portuguese and an Indian Woman, or a Negroe, the last of these too much exceed the others in number. There are besides this abundance of Indians, who having Abandon'd their Superstitious Idolatry, are turn'd Roman Catholicks. The Slaves they call Cafres, who are most Indians. There are also at Goa some Mahometans and Banyans, who are tolerated by the Portugueses, by reason of the advantages they re∣ceive from them, by way of Commerce. They enjoy the same Freedom with the rest, but are not permitted to make publick profession of their Religion, which if they do, they are put under the Inquisition, and are treated like Christian Apo∣states. Persons of Quality are carried in Palanquins by their Slaves, and seldom are seen on Horse-back,
unless it be upon extraordinary occasions, as to Conduct the Vice-Roy into the Country, or to as∣sist at the running of the Ring, or Bull-fight∣ings. The Slaves at Goa not wanting conveniency to Desert their Masters,Slaves at Goa. and to shelter themselves in the Adjacent Provinces, where they are out of their reach, makes them not to be treated so harsh∣ly as in some other parts, which makes these Bar∣barians very unruly and insolent. They frequent∣ly Rob on the High-ways, and tho' they are not permitted to wear any thing else about them but a Cane, yet they commonly knock Passengers on the Head before they Rob them. A certain Gentleman coming one day alone from his Country-House, near Goa, was set upon by one of these Negroe Slaves, who threatned to knock his Brains out if he did not immediately sur∣render his Money and Cloaths. The Portuguese had a Sword and Dagger by his side, but the other having surprized him unawares, and holding up his Cane ready to strike if he made the least moti∣on, he found himself not in a condition to put himself in a posture of defence, without most im∣minent danger of being killed. And finding no other remedy than to surrender, he cunningly, but in a careless manner, let drop some of his Money, and whilst the Slave was busie in taking it up, took this opportunity to draw his Dagger where∣with he dispatched him presently. It would be superfluous to enlarge here upon the Manners and Customs of the Portugueses, they be∣ing too well known in these parts to deserve a parti∣cular Description. There are very few but what are sufficiently sensible that the Portugueses in general have these three Qualities belonging to them:Genius of the Portu∣gueses. To be Zealous to the highest degree of Superstition; to be Amorous to a degree of Madness, and Jealous beyond all reason. Neither will it appear strange, if the Ladies of Goa are as tractable and obliging to handsome Men, as those of Lisbon. 'Tis true,
they are watch'd as narrowly as is possible to be done, but they seldom want wit to deceive their Keepers, when they are resolved to taste of the for∣bidden Fruit; and they are the most revengeful Creatures in the World, if they happen to be dis∣appointed in their Expectation. I cannot but remember a certain Amorous In∣trigue which hapned at the same time when I was at Goa.Ladies of Goa. It seems a Lady of this City, had cast her Eyes upon a certain young English Gentleman, who was at that time at Goa, about some Business concerning their East-India Company. Her Heart being easily susceptible of Love, the very first sight of this Stranger, had made so lively an impression upon it, that she could not rest satisfied till she had sent one of her Female Slaves, (no novice in the procuring Trade,) to desire the English Man to give her a visit; the Slave sufficiently acquitted her self of her Charge, telling the Young Gentleman, that he had the best opportunity in the World, of taking his Satisfaction, her Lady's Husband be∣ing abroad, so that the English Man overcome by her intreaties and perswasions, promised to come at the appointed time, at which she being over∣joyed returned to her Mistress to bring her the welcome News that her Gallant would certainly be with her according to her appointment. The Lady being one of those that cannot bear delays without much impatience, made the poor Slave stand Sentry two Hours before the appoin∣ted time, to receive her Lover, and Conduct him to her Apartment. But whether it was that the English Man dreading the Jealousie of the Portu∣gueses, did not think it worth his while to venture his Life for a chance bit, or that some other rea∣son hindred him, he did not make his personal ap∣pearance, according to his promise; so that the poor Slave after she had kept her post till Mid∣night, return'd disconsolate to her Mistress, who being put beyond all Patience, by reason of her disappointment, revenged her self upon the Slave,
whose Back paid for all; and she would certain∣ly have felt the most direful effects of her fury, if she had not promised she would go the next Morning to find out the English Man, to upbraid him with the breach of his Word, and not to leave him till she had engaged him to comply with her desires. The Negroe Slave as it happened had the good Fortune to meet with the English Man, unto whom, she related in a most ample manner how she had been treated by her Mistress, occasioned by his neglect or breach of Word, most earnestly intrea∣ting him only to afford her Mistress the favour of one visit, without which, she would be in danger of being torn to pieces by this passionate body. He promised, out of Complaisance, to come very shortly to pay her a visit, but perform'd his promise no better than the first time, being obliged to leave Goa in a few days after. The Portugueses and Mestices wear their Cloaths in the Indies after the same manner as they do in Portugal, except that they use no Stockings, their Breeches reaching down to their Ankles, the bet∣ter to defend themselves against the burning Heat of that Climate. But the Goa Ladies Dress is different from that of the Ladies of Lisbon.Their Dress. They wear a kind of half Smocks, of the clearest and finest Muslin, which serves more to keep them from being incom∣moded by the Flies, than to cover their Bodies. They don't reach below the Waste, and their Sleeves come quite down to their Wrists. Their Petticoats are of fine White Callicoe, scarce co∣vering half their Legs, over which, when they go abroad, they wear according to their Quality, some Silk pieces of Stuff, which they wind twice round them, and reaches down below their Ankles; they don't wear Stockings no more than the Men, and instead of Shooes make use of Slippers. They are generally carried abroad in Palanquins, and ne∣ver appear at Church without a Veil, which co∣vers
their Face and some part of their Bodies; they are debarr'd the Conversation of Men, unless it be now and then with their nearest Relations. There is a great number of Clergy-Men in Goa, but there are more Negroe Priests than the Portu∣gueses among them, they wear long Cassocks, and to all outward appearance live a very regular Life. Every Monastery has its House belonging to it, where they dispose of their Slaves; and I have seen the Friars, during the excessive heat of the Season, Cloath themselves in Taffata of the same Colour, the Monks wear in Europe according to the Institution of their respective Orders. CHAP. XII. Concerning our stay at Goa. THere are in the River of Goa many very pleasant and most fruitful small Islands, and on the Shoar of the Continent, (being under the Jurisdiction of the Sevagi, whom we have mentioned before,) a most curious Fountain surrounded on all sides with Trees, whither the Ladies of Goa go in gilt Boats to divert themselves in the cool of the E∣vening. The first thing we did after our Arrival at Goa, was to visit Father Cornelius de St. Cyprian, Prior of the discalceated Carmelites, who being our Coun∣try-Man shewed us all the Respect and Civility in the World; the day after we went to see Mr. Martin a rich French Merchant, with whom we stay'd three days; and who among other diversions, shew'd us the Fountain I spake of before, where the Ladies of Goa pass their Evenings; as we came
thither we found the places round about it taken up with several Companies of the fair Sex, so that we were obliged to follow the custom of the Country, and out of respect to the Ladies to re∣main at some distance till they were gone. Mr. Martin had caused above 20 of the Indian Women Dancers to be conducted thither, who shew'd their Activity by the light of several Tor∣ches, and diverted us to our no small satisfaction a great part of the Night; several of them being very handsome and extraordinary well shap'd, some of our Company entred with them in close Conversation, and Mr. Martin having thus enter∣tain'd us very handsomely, we took our Leave of him, and spent the next day in setling our Business in order to our Departure from Goa. CHAP. XIII. Our Departure from Goa. THE Wind being not very favourable to us as we Sailed out of the Harbour of Goa, we could scarce reach that day within sight of Beta∣geurta, a place Situate about 8 Leagues to the North of Goa, and under the jurisdiction of the Prince Sevagi; our intention was to have touch'd at Rajapour, but not being able to go thither with∣out much loss of time, we were obliged to go a∣shoar at Achara, a place likewise belonging to the Prince Sevagi, to take in fresh Provisions. But as we were within a League of the Shoar, we discovered 6 stout Vessels, which we believing to belong to the Port of Achara, the Sieurs Petit, de la Serine, and my self went with our Chaloup Man∣ned
only with 7 Mahometans, and an Interpreter, to take a full view of them; but scarce were we come within Cannon Shot, when we perceived them to be 6 Malabar Corsairs, who could have no less than 1500 Men on Board. Our Sea-Men being all Mahometans,They are in danger of being taken by the Cor∣sairs. had less reason to be frighted at the danger that threatned us than we, who being Christians, could not expect the least Mercy from these Barbarians, notwith∣standing which, they would have leap'd overboard to save themselves with Swiming, if we had not forced them with our Swords in hand to row to the Shoar, this being the only means to escape the danger into which we had thrown our selves by our own imprudence and foolhardiness. The Sea-Men seeing us so resolute ply'd their Oars so wa∣rily that in a very small time they brought us without the reach of their Cannon, so that we got safely a-shoar, without having received the least damage. No sooner were we got a-shoar, but we were informed that the same Corsairs had just before ta∣ken a Hoy belonging to the French East-India Com∣pany, valued at 2000 l. Sterling, which they ha∣ving sold to the Governour of Achara, we saw the Vessel lying afterwards in the River. Tho' the Prince Sevagi, the Lord of this Port, was absolutely in our Interest, yet all our Sea-Men being Mahometans, except only three French Men, we were very uneasie about our Ship, for fear it should fall into the Hands of these Corsairs. Mr. Petit the Captain had more reason to be concerned than all the rest, he having left his Ship to go a∣shoar in a place where he had no concerns on the account of the Company; and to add to our af∣fliction, the Wind being quite contrary, we could not get back again to the Ship. In this extremity, the Captain took a resolution suitable to the emergency of our Affairs, which did not admit of any delay; for which reason he got into a small Canoe, or Fisher-Boat, and leaving
us a shoar, was by two Fishermen happily con∣ducted to his Ship. We had no sooner received this well-come news, but we found means to insinuate into those that li∣ved near the Sea-side, that we were come hither on purpose to ransom the Vessel, these Corsairs had ta∣ken before; that we had sent our Captain on board to attack these Pirates, and that we having five and twenty Guns ready mounted, and 150 men on Board, did not question but to give shortly a very good account of them. This Rhodomontado succeeded beyond expectati∣on; for some of the Corsairs having been informed of what we had related to the inhabitants, and seeing our Ship to be in a readiness to set sail, they were so frightned thereat, that they set up all the sail they could, and making the best of their way to∣wards the South, left a free passage for our Ship to enter the port of Achara. After we had dispatch'd our business in this place, we set sail from thence with a fair and fresh gale, which brought us the same day to the Entrance of the River of Rajapour, of which I will say no more here, having had occasion to speak of it be∣fore. We set sail again the next day, and were scarce a League from the shoar, when to the North of us we discovered a Vessel, with the white Flag; she proved to be the Vulture, belonging to the French East-India Company, being ordered in her return to France, to touch at Bantam, whither she was to carry my Lord Bishop of Heliopolis, who was going to Siam; but was, much against his Will, detained by the Spaniards in the Philippin Islands, and from thence conducted into Spain, from whence he tra∣velled through Italy into France; as may be seen in the Relation Printed by order of the Fathers Missi∣onaries. We all went to pay our respect to this Prelate, and on St. Matthew's day heard Mass on board of him. The Winds proving very contrary, all the
rest of our Yoyage to Suratte, which is not above four∣score Leagues from Rajapour, we were above a month before we reached that Port, where we ar∣rived the 20th. day of March. CHAP. XIV. The arrival of the Ship called the Holy Ghost. THE next day after our arrival in the Road of Suratte, we received orders to enter the Port of Sovaly; and I having no occasion to stay on board, went a shoar and paid my respects to our Directors, the Sieurs de Blot, and Baron. Soon after the Ship called the Holy Ghost, burthen 600 Tuns, commanded by Captain le Rokd, came to an Anchor in the Road of Suratte; she had on board the Sieur de Goeron, Director General of the French East-India Company, and his Son, and had been near nine Months in her passage from France, having been droven by tempestuous Weather a∣mong the Maldive Islands, from whence few Ships escape. The Scurvy was got so desperately among the whole Ships Crew, that they had scarce hands e∣nough left to manage the Sails. So soon as the Di∣rectors were advertised of her arrival, they furnish∣ed her with skillful Pilates, which conducted her into the Port of Sovaly. The sick Mariners being brought on shoar, were committed to my care, and what with the help of the Land-Air, and other pro∣per Remedies, very few of them but what recover∣ed in a little time.
Orders being come in the mean while from the Directors, to get every thing in readiness for her Voyage to Bantam, as also for the Parl, which be∣ing a Ship of less Burthen, and loaden with Wheat and Soap, did set sail on the beginning of May, and the Ship called the St. Francis, being sent before in April to the Persian Coast, I had orders sent me, to get my self in readiness to go in the Ship the Holy Ghost. We were just ready to set sail, ex∣pecting only our last dispatches, when our Ship, notwithstanding she was but lately built, sprung a leak, and drew abundance of Water, so that she was forc'd to be unloaden, and being judged unfit for so great a Voyage, all her Cannon was taken out, and ordered to be laid up in order to be re∣fitted, but as she was entring the River, she struck upon the Sands, and was staved to pieces in less than four and twenty Hours. The loss of so fine a Ship put us all out of hu∣mour, and the Directors being willing to save some of her Rigging, several were imployed for that pur∣pose, but to no effect, some of them being drown∣ed in the attempt.
CHAP. XV. Of the Death of Mr. Blot. I Staid as long as the rainy Season lasted at Surat∣te, where there happened at that time some differences betwixt the Directors, which however did not hinder us from taking our pleasure our selves, as well as we could; but it was not long be∣fore our Jollity was turn'd into Grief, by the sudden death of the Sieur de Blot, one of the most conside∣rable Persons of our Nation in those parts, who be∣ing seized with a violent Fever, died after nine days sickness. According to the custom of the Europeans in the Indies,Mr. de Blot's Fu∣neral. we invited all the chief Men of the English and Dutch to the Funeral, who appeared there with all their attendance, as did also abundance of other Merchants, both Armenians and Mahometans. All the Frnch there present were in Mourning, some on Horse-back, some in Palanquins, who ac∣companied the Corps, which was carried in a Mourning Coach to the Church-Yard, belonging to the French, which was at a Miles distance from the City. The Rains being more violent than usual this Winter Season, were followed by most terrible in∣undations, which caused the Rivers to swell to an extraordinary degree, so that abundance of Ships were forced from their Anchors by the violence of the Current, some of them run a Ground, others were staved to pieces. A Ship belonging to the Great Mogul was forced with only one Man in her out of the River, and was never heard of since: Another Ship of 1800 Tuns belonging to the
same Prince, was carried by the violence of the Wa∣ters so far upon the Land, that after the Waters were: sunk, she was found a League from the River side. Much about the same time we received intelli∣gence,Mr. de la Haye makes a descent at St. Tho∣mas. That the Sieur de la Haye had touch'd in the Isle of Ceylon, in order to establish a French Fa∣ctory there; but having been disappointed in his design, he was sailed from thence to St. Thomas in the Kingdom of Golconda, to furnish himself with ne∣cessary Provisions; but some of his Men who were sent on shoar for that purpose, having been very ill treated by the Inhabitants, he had landed his Forces and taken their Capital City, which he deended with great Bravery against all the Indian Forces thereabouts, that he laid Seige to the place. This surprising News would scarce have found credit a∣mong us, if it had not been confirmed by several Letters. About the beginning of October, the Sieur Fer∣manel who was Captain of the Ship called the St. James, received orders to get every thing ready for his departure, and I being commanded to go on board the same Ship, we departed from Suratte without knowing whither we were bound, our orders being sealed up and not to be opened till we were twenty Leagues at Sea of off Suratte. It was our Opinion, that the French Directors having received secret intelligence, that we were come to a rupture with Holland, and knowing our selves much inferiour in strength to them in the Indies, they were afraid; for the Ship called the St. Francis, which being of no small consequence to the Company they had ordered our Ship, to convoy her in her return to Suratte. The orders being opened at the appointed place, we found our selves to have been pretty near the Mark, for we were commanded to stop and search all such Ships as we met, that were weaker than we, and to take all the Dutch Ships we could.
The Winds proved very changeable, notwith∣standing which, our Voyage proved pretty success∣ful. We came within sight of the Cape of Rasal∣gate, situate on the South-side of the entrance into the Persian Gulph, and after we had doubled the Cape,The City of Mascate. we sailed all along the Arabian Coast, and passed in sight of the City of Mascate, very consi∣derable for its most advantageous Situation. Here it was that the Portugueses had formerly a strong Fort, which being judged impregnable, made them Masters of the whole Persian Gulph; this so advantageous place the Portugueses lost by the avariciousness of him who commanded in the Fort, who having sold the Provisions laid up for the use of the Garrison, to the Arabians at an excessive price, in hopes of receiving fresh supplies in a little time; the King of the Country took hold of this oppor∣tunity, streightly Besieged the place, and forced the Portugueses to surrender at Discretion. The Portu∣gueses remain ever since at Enmity with these Arabi∣ans, but have hitherto not been able to recover the Fort. From hence we coasted it along to the Cape of Mosandan, where the Gulph begins to be so straight, that the Land appears on both sides. Not far from this Cape we discovered a Vessel, after which, pur∣suant to our orders, we made all the sail we could to come up with her. But finding that she avoid∣ed our Company, we gave her a Cannon Ball, and put up our Flag, when the Captain came on board of us, and shew'd us his Pass from the French East-India Company, by which it appear'd that she be∣longed to some Merchants of Suratte. We came afterwards in sight of the Isle of Are∣que, and it being a misty Morning, we took it for that of Ormus; but we were soon undeceived as we came nearer, and passed betwixt the two Islands of Areque and Cevichemiche, near the last of which we were forced to come to an Anchor, by reason of a tempest that surprised us hereabouts. This proved a most terrible Night to us, the Tempest being so
violent as to put us in fear of losing our Anchors, which if it had happened, we must have infallibly split against the Rocks. No sooner did day appear, but we left this dan∣gerous place, and came to an Anchor in the Road of Baudar Abasty, otherwise called Gameron, where we found the St. Francis riding at Anchor, she ha∣ving been there but two days before us; she came last from Bassora, a City of Arabia, Situate upon the River Euphrates, and was taken by the Turks in the Year 1669. CHAP. XVI. Of Gameron, and of Ormus. BAudar Abasty is a City belonging to the King of Persia,The City of Gameron. having received its name from their King Shach Abas, who caused this City to be Re∣paired and Beautified. It was formerly called Ga∣meron, and is Situate under the twenty seventh degree of North Latitude; it is one of the largest and best peopled Cities in those parts, where there is always a great concourse of Merchants, as well Persians as Foreigners Most of the Indian Ships touch in this Port, it being look'd upon as the staple of such In∣dian Commodities as are consumed in Persia; their Houses are built two Stories high, being flat and Tarrassed on the top with Summer Houses, the better to enjoy the benefit of the fresh Air. The Streets are here very narrow, and their Market-places not extraordinary large. People of Quality divert themselves in their Country Houses built a∣mong the Mountains, from April to September, du∣ring which time, few others but Merchants, and
those depending on them, are to be seen in the City. The Situation of this place is such, as to contri∣bute not a little to the inconveniencies occasioned by the excessive heats. For just without the Walls of the City, to the East, there are several high Rocky Hills, from whence the burning rage of the Sun reflecting upon the City and the Port,Its Situati∣on. makes the heats almost insupportable. Besides which, the hot South Winds lay so continually upon the Port, which choaks up the Foreign Mariners not used to the Climate, abundance of whom die very sud∣denly. Upon these Hills there are vast quantities of the Roses, we call Roses of Jericho, which open as soon as they are put in Water, and shut again as soon as taken out. The Mountains of Arabia lie on the o∣ther side of the Gulph, which is not above eight Leagues broad hereabouts. There is not one fountain in this great City; some Wells they have, but the Water is brackish: So that they fetch all their fresh Water at a Leagues distance from the Town. They have a certain kind of Earthen Vessels, in which they keep their Wa∣ter as cool as if it had been lately drawn from the Spring. The Ground about Baudar Abasty is very Sandy, and consequently not very fruitful, but some Leagues from thence, there grows most excellent Wine, which they call Chiras Wine. They use also another sort of White Wine, which is made in the Isle of Quichemiche, where the Grapes are without Stones. Several of the European Nations have their Fa∣ctories at Gameron, this City being a free Port for all Foreigners to Trade in. The Persians are all Mahometans, and so is their Prince, but as there are abundance of Pagans also in Persia, they allow them the free Exercise of their Religion in their Temples, and their publick Bath∣ing places. I met near this place with some of these
Trees, of which I have spoken before, to wit, that they turn their Branches down-ward, and when they touch the Ground, they take root immediate∣ly: I saw here one of this kind, under which 6000 Men might have been placed with good conveni∣ency. I also met with a Pagan, whose hair was a∣bove fifteen foot long, he was one of that Sect they call Faquirs. I must confess, I did not stay long enough at Ga∣meron, to make particular observations concerning all their Manners and Customs; but thus much I took notice of,Inhabitants of Game∣ron. That the Men are generally very Civil and Complaisant, and the Women as Amo∣rous as they are Handsome. They are not very scrupulous in granting a favour to Strangers, many of them looking upon it as a meer piece of Gallan∣try. About three Leagues distant from the Continent of Gameron, are three Islands: The first and the big∣gest of all extends it self all along the Coast to the North of Congo, a place about fifteen Leagues di∣stant from Gameron, where the Portugueses share the Customs with the Persians. The first of these Islands is called Quichemiche.Quiche∣miche. The second is called Areque,Areque. situate more to the South, being uninhabited by reason of the lowness of the Grounds. It has not above three Leagues in compass. We were in no small danger of being cast away, as we passed betwixt these two Islands, as we were going to Baudar Abasty. The Island of Ormus is not above a Mile distant from Areque to the South.Ormus. This Isle is much of the same bigness with the former, but the Grounds are not so low. Here are whole Mountains of Salt, which by reason of their Whiteness, are seen at a great distance at Sea. The ground is quite unfit to produce any thing for the conveniency or sustenance of Mankind, neither does it afford any fresh Water, which they are obliged to carry thither from the Con∣tinent, and to keep it in Cisterns.
The Portugueses built formerly in this Island a ve∣ry strong Fort, which remains entire to this day, with all its Artillery. They were droven from thence by the Persians, with the assistance of the English, who in recompence of this piece of service, had granted them the one moity of all the Customs of Baudar Abasty, by the Persian King. The Portu∣gueses nevertheless enjoy the freedom of the Port, as well as other Foreigners. Formerly they used to fish for and catch very fine Pearls, betwixt this I∣sland and the Continent, but at present they catch most small ones, and those not very often. CHAP. XVII. Our Departure from Gameron. WE having no other business in Persia, than to convoy the St. Francis from thence to Surat∣te; we staid no longer at Baudar Abasty, than was necessary for the Officers of the Ships to dispatch their Affairs. We therefore set sail out of the Road of Gameron, on the 10th. day of December, but the Winds almost chopping about every moment in the Persian Gulph, it was not without a great deal of trouble we got out of the Gulph. Some days after we discovered four sails of Ships, which we believing to be Hollanders, put us under some apprehensions of danger, for which reason, we made a Merchant Man, belonging to Suratte, lead the Van to get what intelligence they could of them; but our fear was groundless, these four ships proving to be French, and were commanded by the Sieurs le Road, Tovillaast and Jonhere; the fourth being a Merchant Man of Suratte, had a
Dutch Captain, who formerly had been in the ser∣vice of our Company as a Pilot. We would have detained him as our Prisoner, but shewing us his Pass, and a Discharge from the Directors of the Company, we let him pass without any further mo∣lestation. The Directors of the French East-India Company at Suratte, being sensible of what conse∣quence the Ship the St. Francis was to our Compa∣ny, had sent these three Ships to join us, with or∣ders to sail all together to the Port of Bombay, to a∣void falling into the Hands of the Dutch Fleet, which they had intelligence to be out at Sea, com∣ing from Ceylon to Suratte. There happened some difference betwixt the two Captains of the St. Francis, and of the St. Paul, the last of these two carrying her Flag on the main Mast, with orders from the Directors, for the other to take down his so soon as they were joined; which the Captain of the St. Francis, who had carried the Flag all along, being unwilling to comply with, they came to very high Words: But there being an ab∣solute necessity of obeying the Orders of their Ma∣sters, the matter went no further. Though we were continually pestered with con∣trary Winds, yet did we on the Sixth of January, pass within sight of Diu, where there is a Portuguese Colony, which had been some years before pilla∣ged by the Arabians. For some days after, the Wind blowing a favourable Gale from the North-east, we came within sight of the shoar near Bassaim on the tenth. Just at the Entrance of the Port of Bombay, there lies a Rock, which stretching a Mile deep into the Sea, makes this passage very dangerous; for which reason we sent for some Pilots, who conducted us very safely on the 12th. into the Harbour, which is one of the safest in the World, provided you are well acquainted with the Situation of the place, to avoid the Rocks. It was not many years ago in the possession of the Portugueses,Bombay. who surrendred it to the English at
the time of the marriage betwixt the King of Eng∣land, with the Infanta of Portugal. The English have since that time built there a ve∣ry fine Fort, where the President of their East In∣dia Company commonly keeps his Residence. They have also laid the Foundation of a City, where they grant Liberty to all strangers of what Religion or Nation soever to settle themselves, and exempt them from all manner of Taxes for the first twenty years. We were treated here with abundance of Civility, which we in part attributed to the good understand∣ing there was at that time betwixt those two Nati∣ons. We sent notice of our arrival at Bombay, to our Directors at Suratte, and having received orders from them to set sail without any further delay for that Port, we weighed Anchor and left Bombay the 30th. of January, and in two days after came in the Road of Suratte. We found there the St. John of Bayonne, and another Vessel commanded by the Si∣eur de Guille; they both belonged to the Sieur de la Haye. They were together with the St. James, bound for St. Thomas, whither they were to carry the Sieur Baron, who with some Forces was going to the relief of the abovementioned Sieur de la Haye, who was Besieged by the forces of the King of Gol∣conda, in the City he had taken from them before. After my return from Persia to Suratte, I received Letters from my Father out of France; the bearer of them was one Mr. Care a Clergy-man, who being obliged to go streightways to St. Thomas, to carry certain Instructions to Mr. la Haye, from the East-India Company out of France, from whence he was come with all the expedition imaginable by Land, he had left them with the Sieur Petit, who was to deliver them to me. The Sieur Baron was no sooner gone for St. Tho∣mas, but the Sieur Greton began to get his Equipage in readiness, in order for his departure into Persia, whither he was to go in the quality of an Ambassa∣dor. Accordingly he set sail out of the road of Su∣ratte,
on the 20th day of February, notwithstand∣ing it was noised about the Town that the Dutch Fleet had been seen on that Coast. But before his departure, having obtained permission from him to go whither I thought most convenient my self, I disposed every thing to quit Suratte with the first opportunity, to satisfie my Curiosity in some other parts of the Indies. CHAP. XVIII. My Departure from Suratte. MY chief design was to visit after my departure from Suratte, all the places in the possession of the Portugueses on that Coast as far as Goa, and from thence to Travel into the Country of Benga∣la. And as I was sufficiently sensible of what con∣sequence it was to a Stranger Travelling in those parts, to be provided with good recommendations from persons of Note, I Address'd my self to the Reverend Father Ambrose de Previlly, a Capuchin, who accordingly gave me a Letter of recommen∣dation to Father John de Forsecap, Rector of the College of Jesuits in the City of Daman, whither I was to go first of all. He was so kind as not only to recommend me to him in person, but also earnestly to desire him to favour me with his re∣commendatory Letters to such places as I should have occasion to visit hereafter. After I had taken my farewel of all my Friends at Suratte,Leaves Suratte. I set out from thence on the 3d day of March. I Travell'd by Land in a Calash, drawn according to the Indian Fashion, by 2 Oxen, with∣out any other Company but my Guide. We laid
that Night at a House which stood all alone, where we had pretty good Accommodation. The next day we came to Gandivi, where, notwith∣standing I was provided with a Pass, I was stopp'd by the Guard of the Town, who detain'd my Goods; but having made my Complaints to the Governour, he ordered them to let me pass with∣out any further hindrance; so that early the next Morning I pursued my Journey to the River of Daman, where my Guide left me. I passed the River the same Night, and being not ignorant of the Portuguese Tongue, I was in a capacity to pro∣vide for my self a Lodging, which I took up at a certain Indian's House, who being turn'd Christian, made it his Business to Lodge Foreign Travellers. The House was all of Straw,Comes to Daman. and the Chamber where I was to Sleep, open on the Top, the better to enjoy the benefit of the fresh Air. Our Host's Employment was to mke Aqu Vitae of the , and his House was adjoyning to the very Walls of the City, of which I will give you a short Descrip∣tion here, before we go further. This City was Built by the Portugueses, of Da∣man. who re∣main in possession of it to this day; it is about 20 Leagues from Suratte, and 80 from Goa; it is not very large, but strong and neatly kept; the Streets are not Paved, but very straight and regu∣lar. The Houses are all handsome Buildings, and the Churches very Magnificent, especially the Pa∣rish Church, and the Chappel of the Charitable So∣ciety. Besides which, there are 4 others belonging to the Jesuits, to the Jacobin, and Austin Friar, and to the Recollects. The Inhabitants of Daman are look'd upon as the best Horse-Men in the Indies▪It Inhab∣tans. they having once defended themselves with great bravery against an Army of the Great Mogul, consisting of 40000 Men, who had Besieged the place. This Govern∣ment is one of the most considerable the Portugueses are Masters of in these parts: He that was Gover∣nour there at that time, was one Manuel Furtado de
Mendoza, a Bastard Cousin German of the Portu∣guese Vice-Roy. The River washes the Walls of the City, where there is a very safe Harbour for Ships, unless it hap∣pen sometimes that by the violence of the Current, occasion'd by the overflowing of the Waters, they are sometimes forced from their Anchors, if they be not carefully look'd after. The City lies not above a good Cannon Shot from the Sea side, and on the opposite Shoar of the River is the Fort of St. Jerom,The Fort of St. Jerom. which is a great addition to the Strength and defence of Daman; for which reason it is, that the Portugueses are more careful of this Fort, than of any other they are Masters of in the Indies, they not allowing any Negroes to be received among the Soldiers of the Garrison, which always consists of 400 Men at least. Every one of these are obliged to lie eve∣ry Night within the Fort, and if any one chances to do otherwise, without special leave from the Go∣vernour, (who never grants it but upon extraor∣dinary occasions,) they lose their Pay for that day, for the first offence, and the second time they are Cashier'd. The Governour of this Fort has no dependance on the Governour of the City; they are never above 3 Years in the same post, a Cu∣stom observed by the Portugueses with all the rest of their Governours. The Air about Daman is very pleasant, and the principal Inhabitants of the City pass the greatest part of the Year at their Country Houses.
CHAP. XIX. Concerning our stay at Daman. NOT long before my Arrival at Daman, the Sieur de St. James, Son of a French Physician, and another young French Man, were Married there. The last of these two had Married the Ba∣stard Sister of a Lady of Quality, called Donna Pe∣tronilla de la Cerda, who, after she was a Widow, had Married a person of the first Rank among the Portugueses. The Sieur de St. James had Married the Daughter of this Lady, whose Name being Don∣na Rosa de Mello, was in all respects answerable to her Youth and Beauty. I having heard much talk of them at Suratte, I thought my self under an indispensible obligati∣on to pay them a visit. But the first thing I did was to deliver my recommendation to the Rector of the Jesuit College, who receiv'd me with all the Civility imaginable, and conducted me to the Governour, who after he had treated me according to his Quality, proposed to me to stay at Daman, where there was at that time no other Physician, but some Pagan Indians, whose Practice consisting only in a few Receipts, they apply them indiffe∣rently to all Patients. I return'd his Compliment, desiring some time to consider of the matter; and the Rector of the Jesuits observing my inclination to Travelling to be more prevailing with me than the Prospect of present advantages, urged me to accept of the Governour's offers, assuring me, that he would make use of all his interests for my fur∣ther advantage. The next following day I paid a visit to my two Country-Men, of whom I spoke just now,
they were overjoyed to see me, and Treated me with a most Magnificent Collation; in the mean while, the Sieur de St. James had spoke in my be∣half, to his Mother-in-law, to desire her permissi∣on to let me Lodge in their House, which she ha∣ving easily granted, they had without my know∣ledge sent for my Trunks, so that when after some Hours stay, I was going to take my leave, they intreated me to accept of their House, which at their reiterated intreaties I could not refuse to my two generous Country-Men. I was not ignorant of the Custom of the Portu∣gueses, with whom you can scarce meet with suffici∣ent circumspection, in respect of the fair Sex, I did not as yet mention one word concerning their Ladies; but the next day they were the first that mentioned and proposed a visit to them; I seem'd to be careless in the matter, and having spent the greatest part of the day in visiting some of my Patients in the City, at my return towards Night, they introduced me to them in their Apartments, where I entertained them with the same freedom as we do in France, whereat they seem'd not at all displeased. They did ask me many Questions, which I answered as well as I could, and Donna Pe∣tronilla Addressing her Discourse to me, above the rest, we did not part till late at Night. I did not fail afterwards to visit them at least once a day, and Petronilla treated me always with more than ordinary Civility. She was of about 39 years of Age, notwithstanding which, she had sufficient Charms, being of a very pleasing Aspect, of an admirable Shape, delicately featured and a∣greeable in all respects; she had a very lively Eye, and her Humour was the sweetest and most Com∣plaisant in the World. We diverted our selves to∣gether for some Hours every Night, and I must con∣fess that I never passed three Weeks more pleasantly than these, in all my life time.
CHAP. XX. Of Trapor. DOnna Petronilla's Seat was at Trapor, she being only come to Daman about some particular Business; she was to be at home with her Hus∣band before Easter, and desired me to conduct her Home, being not above 10 Leagues from Daman. Having first asked the Governour's Leave, I ac∣cepted of their kind offer, and Travelled with their whole Family towards Trapor. On the Mon∣day of the Holy Week we laid at a place called Danou, a Lordship belonging to the Eldest Son of Donna Petronilla; near to this is the Mountain called the Picque of Danou, resembling in shape a Sugar Loaf; which lying betwixt Suratte and Bas∣saim, serves for a guide to the Ships that Sail near this Coast; there is here a small River which bears no Ships of any Burthen but only some small Craft. Donna Petronilla's Husband met us at Danou, and received me with all imaginable Civility, and the Wednesday following we came to Trapor or Ta∣rapour. This is a small City Built on the Sea side, half ways betwixt Daman and Bassaim, belonging to the Portugueses, who have here a Deputy Gover∣nour, depending on the Governour of Daman. The Inhabitants here are very Rich, tho' the Ri∣ver be so shallow as not to be Navigable, unless by small Ships. There is but one Parish Church, one Chapel belonging to the Charitable Society, and a Church belonging to the Jacobin-Friars. On the Friday in the Afternoon we heard a Sermon of
the Passion of Christ, and the Priest made many pauses, the more passionately, as I suppose, to re∣present the Mystery of the matter he was treating of. The Women sit in a Gallery by themselves at Church, and have Curtains drawn before them, to avoid their being seen by the Men; but if they are not seen they make themselves to be un∣derstood by their knocking their Breasts, by their Sighs and Groans, which they send forth as often as the Priest says any thing that moves Compassion. Nevertheless, there are many among them, who make but ill use of this Holy-day, and under the cloak of this affected Zeal, carry on their Intrigues. After Sermon we saw the Procession,Procession at Trapor. which was preceded by several Penitents, who having their Faces covered, and their Backs naked, did whip them∣selves with so much eagerness, that the Blood fol∣lowed the lash. After these came the Inhabitants of the place, each with a lighted Torch in his Hand, and then the Priests. Immediately after them was carried the Image, representing our Sa∣viour's descending from the Cross, which being surrounded with about 20 young Negroes Mask'd and arm'd with Lances, with a Captain at the head of them, and several Drums and Trumpets, made alltogether a very strange Spectacle. For, after they had taken a round in the City, the Cru∣cifix was Solemnly Interr'd in a Sepulchre prepa∣red for that purpose; and I must confess that this Ceremony, which in other places, where the whole is transacted with more decency, inspires the peo∣ple with Devotion, did appear so ridiculous among the Portugueses in those parts, that I could scarce forbear Laughing my self. I went again to Church on Saturday, where I saw nothing worth particular Observation. But on Easter-Sunday, after I had been present at the Cere∣mony, when the Holy Sacrament was carried from the Jacobin to the Parish Church, I heard there a Sermon, which being the oddest I ever heard in my Life, I cannot forbear mentioning some passages of
it here: The Priest being come into the Pulpit, and having made the Sign of the Cross;A pleasant Sermon. Gen∣tlemen, (said he,) you cannot be ignorant, that for three particular reasons we always have a Sermon on Easter-Sunday. The first is to wish a Merry Feast to the Congregation; the second to put you in mind of my Easter Eggs; and the third, to tell you a Merry Tale to make you Laugh. Not to recede from my former Custom, and to give you all due satisfaction as to the first point, I wish you all Merry Easter Holy-days; as to the second, I can assure you, that if you will be pleased to send me some Easter Eggs I will not refuse them. And as to what concerns the third, I will only tell you, that I met yesterday our Fatgutted Gregory, and what do you think I said to him? I asked him whether he would al∣ways act the Person of Pilate in the Passion of our Saviour. With this he left the Pulpit, with∣out as much as imparting the Benediction to his Au∣ditors, who Laugh'd out aloud, that you might have heard them at a considerable distance. I passed the Easter Holy-days with a great deal of satisfaction, which with the constant intreaties of my Friends to stay me for some time longer, would have been a sufficient motive for me not to quit a place, where I received daily new proofs of their Affection towards me, if I had not been engaged upon my part to the Governour, to return to Da∣man after the Holy-days were over.
CHAP. XXI. My return to Daman. BEfore Donna Petronilla went to Trapor, she had done me the favour to introduce me into the Acquaintance of Father John de St. Michael, Supe∣riour of the Jacobins, and at my departure, she was so generous as to give me a Letter of Recommen∣dation, wherein, she desir'd him to serve me in eve∣ry thing that might be in his power. I had left my Trunks and other moveables with him, when we departed for Trapor, so that I was obliged to make my first visit to him, and to fetch away my Trunks; but the Father had the goodness to engage me to stay with him, till such time as I had taken a reso∣lution whether I would settle at Daman, and if not, till I should have taken a full view of all the Town, to satisfie my Curiosity. I remain'd with him thus 14 or 15 days, being at a great uncertainty what to resolve upon, till at last being overcome by the Civilities and intrea∣ties of the Governour, and the Prayers of the In∣habitants, who made me very advantageous offers, I thought I ought not to refuse the kindness of my Friends, who shew'd themselves the most Zealous promoters of my concerns. Accordingly I left the Convent, and having set∣tled my self in a House of my own, I chose some few Friends among the rest of the Inhabitants, with whom I might divert my self at seasonable
times, when I was at leisure from my Practice, which needs must happen very often in a little place, where I could visit a good number of Patients in a few Hours. There was at that time a certain Lady of great Quality, called Senhora Francisca Sereira, living at Daman, and one of her Daughters falling ill of a violent and most dangerous Fever, I was call'd to her, and had the good fortune to recover her, which so deeply engaged the Lady in my interest, that I cannot sufficiently acknowledge her genero∣sity, and must confess that she was one main in∣strument in making me stay so long at Daman as I did. For tho' I must confess that I received all the kind usage I could expect from the Inhabitants of this place, yet the natural propensity I had to Tra∣velling, and to make curious and new. Observati∣ons abroad over-balancing all other Considerati∣ons, I did at last resolve to leave Daman. Pursuant to this resolution, I took the conveniency of the Portuguese Fleet, which goes every year to Cambe∣ja. This Fleet being under the Command of Jo∣seph de Mello, Arrives at Daman towards the latter end of December, and was to be ready to Sail for Goa towards the beginning of January.
CHAP. XXII. Our departure from Daman. ALL my Friends at Daman having in vain en∣deavoured to detain me longer, I took at last my leave of them, and embark'd my self upon one of the Galleots belonging to the above mentioned Fleet. We set sail on the first day of January for Bassaim, where we were to stay for the Galleots, which were behind at Cambeja. We arrived at Bassaim the next day in the After∣noon, when I, to satisfie my curiosity, went into the Town, where I met with the Sieur de Segvine∣au, a French Physician, who formerly came with me in the same Ship from Madagascar to Suratte, and be∣ing since that time Married and settled in this place, gave me all the real demonstrations of a most sin∣cere Friendship. The City of Bassaim lies twenty Leagues South of Daman,The City of Bassaim. and is about four times longer. Their Churches here are very Rich, and most magnifi∣cently Built, their private Houses very neat and Commodious, the Market places very large and handsome, and the Streets very clean and regular: It is surrounded with a Wall, but the Fortifications are but slight. The greatest conveniency belonging to this City, is the River which washes its very Walls, and is a safe Harbour for Ships of the greatest Burthen at all Seasons, which draws thither the Merchants from all parts,Its Harbour. and renders the City one of the most considerable the Portugueses are masters of in the Indies. There live more Gentry in and about this place,Inhabi∣tants. than at Goa, from whence comes the Portuguese Pro∣verb, Fidalgos de Bassaim, that is to say, Gentlemen
of Bassaim, the Grounds hereabouts are extreamly fertile, and produce great store of Rice. Just without the Gates of the City is that famous Church called by the Portugueses, Nossa senhora de re∣medio, which being formerly a noted Pagan Tem∣ple, is since turned into a Christian Church, where due Reverence is paid to the true God. Upon the great Altar is to be seen the miraculous Image of the Holy Virgin. They relate that a Thief having cast his Eyes upon the rich Crown she wears upon her Head,An Indian Miracle. had hid himself in the Church, with an intention to steal it as soon as the Church should be shut up. Accordingly the Villain approaching the Image, was going to take off the Crown, but by a most sur∣prizing Miracle, both the Robber and Crown be∣came immoveable in the same instant, in which po∣sture he was found so soon as the Church doors were opened. There is a part of the Fore-head, (which they say is the place where he fix'd his Thumb) which at a distance, shines as bright as a Star, and as you draw nearer and nearer, it disappears by degrees, so that when you come to touch it, you find nothing extraordinary in the matter. This Image is in such Veneration in those parts, that not alone the Christians, but also the Maho∣metans and Pagans make their Vows to it, before they undertake any thing of Moment, and as these Vows commonly consist in some offerings or other, this Church has gathered vast Riches. We staid at Bassaim about five or six days, and then set sail for Goa, where we arrived on the four∣teenth day of January towards Night. I went on shoar the next day, and by the advantageous offers made by my Friends, was prevailed upon to stay near three whole Years in this great City, of which I have given you a Description before. After this, some Affairs of moment happening, which required my presence in my Native Country, I was obliged to quit the Indies, in order to my spee∣dy return into Europe. I took therefore the conve∣niency
of a Portuguese Galeon, which being ready to set sail for Lisbon, I (with the permission of the Governour) embark'd my self in the said Vessel towards the latter end of January. CHAP. XXIII. My departure out of the Indies. THE ship which was to carry me to Lisbon, was called the San Pedre de Ratel, of above 1500 Tuns, commanded by Captain Simon de Sou∣sa. It was the seven and twentieth day of January, when we sailed from the Bar of Goa, towards Lis∣bon. So soon as we were got under sail, the Captain de∣sired to speak with me, and having told me, that being sensible of my Capacity he had not taken with him any Chirurgeons, but only a Barber to Trim and let Blood upon occasion, and therefore he hoped I would not refuse the offer he would make me, to take care of the Ship as a Physician, and that I should be honourably rewarded for my pains. I return'd him thanks for his good Opinion, and having accepted his offer, I was considered in the quality of the Physician of the Ship. We went on with a favourable Gale, till we came under the Equinoctial Line, where we were becalmed for a few days, when the Winds proving again to our satisfaction, we continued our Voyage with all the imaginable success, till we came under the thirteenth degree of Southern Latitude. There it was that the Winds began to change continually, but as it did not blow hard, so we advanced some∣thing every day in our Voyage.
We passed a great way to the East of the Isle Dauphin, and towards the end of the Month of March came to the height of the Cape of Good Hope, where our Pilots had a mind to sound the Coast, for their better Instruction, when they should hap∣pen to come this way another time; the Wind be∣ing then in the East, and consequently very fair for us, blew very briskly in the beginning of the Holy Week, and on the Holy Wednesday grew so violent, that we were forced to take in'most all our sails, and to make use only of- our fore-mast Sail. The Sea runs so terribly high, that our ship was tossed most violently; notwithstanding which, we continued our course, knowing-our selves to be far enough from the shoar, to stand in fear of any sinister acci∣dent from thence. But on Thursday Morning, the Wind chop'd about to the West,Are over∣taken by a violent Storm. and blew so ter∣ribly, that we began to be afraid of our Ship, which though one of the strongest that ever I saw, let in so much Water, that two Pumps were scarce able to throw it out as fast as it came in. We chan∣ged our course and run it before the Wind, which continued with so much violence, that even the most expert and most courageous of our Seamen be∣gan to be afraid; but after a Storm which lasted four and twenty Hours, the Wind veering about to the East, we altered a second time our Course, and with a moderate Gale stood it in towards the Cape, which we discovered on the Holy Saturday early in the Morning. We were again becalmed for some days, till the next day after the Holy Days, when with a North East Wind we doubled the Cape of Good Hope, but were not within sight of it, being afraid of being becalmed again if we did not keep out at Sea. We saw hereabouts several wracks of Ships which we believed to have been lost in the late Tempest. Towards Night we discovered a Vessel, which steered a quite contrary course to us; but as they are constantly upon their Guard at Sea, our Captain or∣dered every thing to be got in readiness, if there
should be any occasion of Engaging an Enemy; but the next Morning at break of day, we found them at so great a distance from us, that we had all the reason to believe, there would be no occasion for fighting at this time. In the mean while,Are trou∣bled with the Scurvy. we had a worse Enemy within our own Ship; this was that pernicious Evil, the Scurvy, which in the month of April, began to make a great havock among our Ships Crew, and notwithstanding all our Precautions, kill'd us some of our Men every day: To add to our Affliction we were often becalmed, till at last a favourable Gale arising, we made towards the Coast of Brasil, where we were to touch in our Voyage, so that on the 19th. day of May, we discovered the shoar of Brasil, near the Bay of All-Saints. Some Fishermen who were out at Sea, having discovered our Vessel, came on board of us about Noon, who undertook to conduct us safely into the Road, but had almost lost our Ship, she striking upon the Sands, but as good fortune would have it, so slightly, that it drew us into no further ill con∣sequences. But we had all the reason in the World to thank Providence for our delivery, a Ship of the same bulk with ours having been lost in the same place some years before, so that scarce a Man escap∣ed with life, of a thousand that belonged to the Ship. But the advantage of a very fair Day and Wind, joined with the indefatigable care of our Mariners, made us by God's Providence escape the danger, which threatned no less than our Destructi∣on. Being got clear of the Sands, we came to an Anchor at a good distance from thence, and the next day being the 20th. of May, entered the Port and cast Anchor before the Town, which bears the same name with the Bay. We had lost five and twenty of our Men in our Voyage from Goa, and had above 300 more on board, so terribly afflicted with the Scurvy, that if we had been detained but never so little a while longer at Sea, most of them would in∣fallibly have died.
CHAP. XXIV. Our Arrival in Brasil, and its Description. DUring my stay in Brasil, I got intimately ac∣quainted with a certain Merchant, a Spaniard by Birth, but who having lived for a considerable time in those parts, gave me an exact account of the whole state of affairs of this Country, and shew'd me much kindness in all other respects. I am not ignorant, that several others before me have given us an account of Brasil, nevertheless I will in∣sert shortly what observations I have made here. Brasil is Situate on the Eastern Coast of America,A Descrip∣tion of Bar∣sil. where the Portugueses, (who where the first and sole discoverers of it) have built several Towns and crea∣ted Colonies, which now, after a long and vigo∣rous War with the Dutch, who disputed with them the possession of it, they enjoy quietly. The Coun∣try is very pleasant, the Air tolerably good and temperate, by reason of the frequent Rains, which in a great measure, allay the heat of the Sun. The Ground here produces abundance of Fruits with∣out being cultivated; such as Citrons, Lemons, O∣ranges, Ananas, Bananas, and several others. There are also Grapes in Brasil, but not in such plenty as in Europe. They have prodigious quantities of Canes, which turn to a mighty account, if the inhabitants did im∣prove them to the best advantage, and knew how to vend them abroad. From Brasil comes most excellent Tobacco, and here it is that they have stoe of those Water Melons, which surpass all other knds in goodness. The Grounds of Brasil will not pro∣duce
any Garlick or Onions. They are obliged to be furnished with them from Portugal. They have also abundance of Coco's in Brasil, but they coming not near in bigness to those in the East-Indies, they make Tobacco and other Boxes of them, some of them being so small as scarce to be fit for Beads. They don't draw any Tary from the Coco-trees in Brasil, as they do in the East-Indies, neither make they any Suchar of it, or Aqua Vitae, because their Canes furnish them sufficiently with the first, and the latter they are supplied with from Portugal. CHAP. XXV. A further account of Brasil. BEsides the Brasil Wood there are several other sorts of Trees in this Country,Commodi∣ties of Bra∣sil. quite unknown to us in Europe, among which is the chiefest, the Tree from whence destills that Balsom, we sur∣name of Peru: The Wood is made use of for Cabi∣net Work for Ladies of Quality, because they have a most sweet Scent, and Perfume any thing that is enclosed within them. In the Southern Parts of the Coast,Produces no Wheat. they have very good Wheat, but near the Bay of All-Saints, there grows none, and most other parts of Brasil are deprived of the advantage of this so useful a Commodity. They give two reasons for it; first, because, say they, the Ground is not fit for it; and secondly, which I look upon to be the better of the two, because that they are pestered hereabouts with such prodigious numbers of Ants, that they consume the Grains before they take root. Prillet and Rice grows in all parts of Brasil, but the ordinary Food of the Brasilians is the flower
of Mandioc, which the French call Cassave, and the Portuguese, Farina de Rao. This Mandioc root is pro∣pagated by cutting of it in pieces, and putting them into the Ground where they grow to a considerable bigness; they are very White, and if they are eaten unprepared, they prove often mortal. They take away their venomous quality by steeping them in Water, till they are soft, when they take them out, and let them dry; this they repeat several times, and so often, till they think them to be sufficiently cured of their ill Quality, when they make flower of it, almost as course in outward appearance as Gun∣powder, which at the best is but insipid and ve∣ry heavy, causing obstructions in such as are not u∣sed to eat it. They make Cakes out of this Flower, which they call Bejous, they are of somewhat a bet∣ter taste than the common Bread, but retain the same ill quality. They are furnished with Wheat from Rio de Ja∣neiro, and with good Flower from Portugal, so that they are not absolutely destitute of wheaten Bread in this Bay, but it is somewhat dearer here than in other places. They have also sufficient store of Oil, Wine, Linen Cloaths, Stuffs, and all o∣ther Commodities requisite for the Conveniency and Necessity of Human Life, which are imported there from Europe. Their own Grounds furnish them sufficiently with Flesh, Poultry and Fish, and Fruits and Sweet-meats are very cheap here. But Brasil is not without its great inconvenien∣cies; they are always pestered with a certain kind of Vermin, or small Worms, of which I shall have occasion to say more hereafter in the Appendix of this Relation, which treats of the Distmper in those parts: Besides this, the Ants of all sorts, but especially that kind which is of a reddish Colour, and bigger than the rest, are a continual Plague to them; for they cover the Grounds where-ever they light in such prodigious heaps, that at a distance you would take them for a little Village. Neither are the Cities free from this Plague. These Crea∣tures
are at continual War with the Rats and Snakes, who notwithstanding the advantage of their strength, in comparison of these little Creatures, yet are al∣ways worsted by their infinite number. CHAP. XXVI. Of the Inhabitants of Brasil. NOT to entangle my self here in a tedious di∣gression, and distinction of the Inhabitants of this Country; I will only tell you in a few words, That the Native Brasilians are to this day, Idola∣ters; That they are much addicted to Witchcraft, or at least are reputed so to be; they are very super∣stitious, have neither Temples nor Feasts, and adore the Devil. Their Hair they wear of a great length, their Complexion is swarthy, they go Naked, are naturally Brave and Nimble, and never forgive an Injury. Their Arms are only a few Arrows, which instead of Iron, are provided with a bone of a Fish at the end; and if any of them make use of Iron, they are such as have got it by the conversa∣tion with the Europeans. They are not unskilful in Husbandry, but are more addicted to Hunting and Fishing. They eat all sorts of Flesh, and as they never lay up any Provisions for future use, so they endure Famine upon an occasion with an unparallell'd constancy. They are naturally Warlike, and al∣ways at Wars with one another; such of their Enemies as they take Prisoners, they Fetter, and publickly kill them,Brasilians eat their dead Friends. and so eat them. They don't even interr their dead Friends, but devour them, e∣ven sometimes before the breath is out of their Bo∣dies. For if they judge their Friends past all
hopes of recovery, they kill them for fear they should grow lean before they die; and because they would husband their Dead Friends to the best advantage, they dry their Bones, which they beat to Powder, and make up in a kind of a pap, and so eat it. When the Europeans upbraid them with their Cruelties, they return us for answer, that we are a Company of impious wretches, who suffer our Friends and Parents to be consumed in the Earth by the Vermine, when we might with more reason afford them our Belly for their Burying-place. The Portugueses in Brasil,The Portu∣gueses in Brasil. live here for the most part after the same manner as they do in other pla∣ces, where they have settled their Colonies. They have very good Forts in several parts of the Coun∣try. They compel the Neighbouring Brasilians to o∣bey them, and are so well provided in their Gar∣risons as not to stand in fear either of the Brasilians or Europeans, in case they should come to Attack them. Whenever any of the Portugueses have the mis∣fortune to fall into the hands of the Wild Brasili∣ans, whether by the chance of War, or any other mishap, they receive the same treatment as we have mentioned before; and these on the other hand retaliate upon such, as they become Masters of, the Cruelties committed against their Coun∣try-Men, and in lieu of one Death, make them to undergo what is a thousand times worse, I mean, the most cruel Slavery in the World; all what is left for the Brasilians to do in this case is either vo∣luntarily to submit to the Portugueses, or, if they find themselves not strong enough to resist them, to fly and shelter themselves in more remote Coun∣tries. The Portugueses prompted by an Ambition to ex∣tend their borders, send constantly abroad their Parties, who by degrees, as they Conquer these Barbarians, curb them by some Forts, which they Build in their new Conquests. Whilst I was there, I was credibly informed that they had extended
their Conquests above 80 Leagues deep into the Country. They are very careful in instructing the Brasilians, both Free and Slaves in the princi∣ples of the Christian Religion; and there are some among the Portugueses who have Married these Bar∣barian Women, who tho' otherwise of a good Com∣plexion and handsome enough, yet in their Beha∣viour sufficiently shew the remnants of that Bar∣barous Blood from whence they drew their off∣spring, and by which they are easily distinguish'd from the Portuguese Women. The vast number of Slaves used by the Portu∣gueses in Brasil,The Slave∣ry in Bra∣sil. and the Hardship wherewith they are treated, not having a sufficient allowance for their sustenance, and being to be Punished in a most severe manner for the least fault, proves the occasion of great disorders and outrages, which are committed by the Slaves, both in City and Coun∣try. They are for the most part Negroes, brought thither from Angola, and the Guinea Coast, their chief Employment being to work in making of Sugars, and Planting of Tobacco. They are brought to Market in whole Droves, where they are Bought and Sold no otherwise than we do our Cattle. Those who have great Plantations have several hun∣dreds of them at a time, who are under the tuiti∣on of certain Commissaries, who are sometimes more cruel than their Masters. Those who have no Grounds of their own, give their Slaves leave to work where they can, provided they pay them a certain Tax Monthly or Weekly. Those who work in their Master's Ground being used with so much severity, if they fail to perform their Task, and the rest being commonly overtasked by their Covetous Masters, this makes them Rob and Steal where-ever they come in the Country, and being reduced to despair, they often revenge themselves upon others for the Torments they are forced to endure at home. If these Vagabond Slaves render the High-ways in the Country very dangerous, it is no less trou∣blesome
to walk the Streets at Night in the Cities; where, notwithstanding all the precautions, and the severe Punishments inflicted upon all such as are Convicted of these Crimes, they commit frequent Robberies in the Streets. CHAP. XXVII. Of the City and Port of the Bay of All-Saints. THE Bay of All-Saints,The Bay of All Saints. is Situate under the 15th Degree of Southern Latitude, the Port from whence the Adjacent City has derived its Name, is one of the largest and most Commodi∣ous in the whole Ocean. There are a few Sand Banks at one side of the Entrance of the Harbour, but these are not so dangerous, but that they may be easily avoided, provided you have a Pilot who is well acquainted with the Coast and the Harbour. The Entrance and the bottom of the Harbour lie directly East and West, so that you need but turn never so little Northwards, where you may cast Anchor just before the City, and when you are once got betwixt the two Capes, you are out of all danger, there being very good Anchorage all over the Bay, which is so large, as to be able to contain several thousands of stout Ships. The Bay is surrounded with very high Lands, which afford a very pleasant prospect to the Sea-side, they are irrigated with several small Rivers, which loose themselves thereabouts before they reach the Sea-side.
Whalefishing is their constant employment in this Bay from June to September;Whales how taken. there are very few so ignorant, but what know that this prodi∣gious Creature is taken by the help of a Dart tied to a strong Cord. The Fishermen Cruise about the Bay in their Boats, to watch the coming of the Whale; so soon as she finds her self Wounded by the Dart, she flies away, and the Fishermen fol∣low her at a distance, letting the Cord go after her, till such time that being quite spent by the loss of Bloud she dies, and Swims upon the surface of the Water. Then they draw her to the Shoar, at high Tides, and cut her to pieces. The Oil which is drawn from this Fish, is much used in Lamps all over Brasil, and the Negroes and some of the poorer sort eat the substance of the Fish with a good Appetite. After you are come about 2 Leagues within the Bay, you see the City, which directly faces its Entrance, just before you, where you may safely ride at Anchor, at about half a League's distance from the Shoar.The City of All Saints. The City it self is Built upon a high Mountain, stretching on both sides of it, from whence it comes, that most of the Streets lie upon an ascent. It is the largest the Portugueses are Masters of in Brasil, and the residence of the Governour in chief of the Brasil Coast. 'Tis true, the Governor of the City has no Authority over the rest, yet is he considered as the chief, because he takes place of all the rest. It was strongly discoursed whilst I was in Brasil, that there was to be sent thither a Vice-Roy, with the same Prerogative and Authority as the Vice-Roy of the Indies residing at Goa▪ and they also expected a Bishop out of Portugal to fill up that See, which had been rack'd for several  ∣fore; and they were of Opinion th  ∣vernment of Brasil should happen
into a Vice-Royalty, this Church would also be made a Metropolitan Church. There is a kind of Parliament,Parliament of Brasil. or High Court of Judicature in Brasil, whose Jurisdiction extends over all that Coast; but their Power is limited, ther lying an Appeal from them in all Criminal Causes to Lisbon, and in Civil Causes, if the mat∣ter in Contest exceeds the value of 100 l. Ster∣ling. The City it self is very large and Populous, their Churches are very Magnificent, as is likewise the Palace of the Governour, which is Built on the very top of the Mountain, where the Parliament also dispatch their Business. The Houses are ge∣nerally very well Built, there being a great con∣course of all Nations here, who are drawn hi∣ther by reason of the great conveniency of the Port and Trade, this being the Staple of all sorts of Commodities to be met with in these parts.
CHAP. XXVIII. The Manners and Customs of the Inha∣bitants. I Am not very well assured whether Debauchery is so common all over Brasil, as it is at the Bay of All-Saints, where even Women who pretend to a reasonable share of Reputation, look upon it as a piece of Gallantry to dress up their Female Slaves in their own Cloaths,Are very Debauch'd. to give them the bet∣ter opportunity of vending their hidden Commo∣dities at a dearer rate; from whence it may easily be concluded, that there is scarce any other place where Debauchery has got such an ascendant as here. The Women are generally great Admirers of all Strangers, but especially of the French; the worst is that they are not so acceptable to the Men, who being naturally Jealous to a degree of Madness, this infirmity of theirs proves sometimes the occa∣sion of great mischiefs, as may appear out of the following relation. A Young French Man who practised Physick in Brasil, was sent for to a Lady that was very ill; this Lady being Young, Handsome, and Rich, the Young Physician made use of his best Skill to recover her as soon as possible he could. He had the good Fortune not only to restore her to her Health in a little time, but also to insinuate him∣self by his constant attendance, into the Affection both of the Mother and Daughter, so that soon af∣ter he was Privately Married to the Young Lady, tho' with the consent of the Mother.
Some Enemies of the Young French Man who envy'd his good Fortune, took an opportunity to set a certain Gentleman, who had Married his Wife's Eldest Sister against him, representing to him, how unbecoming and little suitable it would be to his Quality, to have a Brother-in-law that was no more than a Chirurgeon, tho' he had assumed the Title of a Doctor of Physick, and who perhaps besides all this might be a Heretick. The Gen∣tleman, who had more Wealth than good Sence, being over-perswaded by these Malicious Fellows, began to exclaim in the presence of the rest of their Relations, against the indignity put upon the whole Family by so scandalous a Match, not for∣getting any thing which he thought might exaspe∣rate them against this New Brother-in-law; but finding them not to agree with him in their Sen∣timents, he came one Night with a select number of Ruffians into the City, where they found means to get into the House of his Sister-in-law, and to cut to pieces a certain Young Man, who bearing some resemblance to the Young French Man they sought for, and who had saved himself by flight, pay'd dearly for it by the mistake of these Villains, who took the flight after they had satisfy'd their re∣venge, as they believed, for fear of being taken in the Fact by the Neighbouring Inhabitants, who were drawn thither by the most lamentable out∣cries of the Women. This Bloudy Action being come to the Judge's-Ears, he ordered some Guards to be put in the Young French Man's House, to prevent a second Attempt, which they were resolved to make, as soon as they had got notice that they had missed their aim. The Young French Man finding himself thus in danger of being Assassinated, took a resolution to leave Brasil, and to go to Lisbon, which he did ac∣cordingly, never appearing abroad without a good Guard, till his departure; when I was afterwards in Lisbon, I understood that he was Petitioning the
King, to grant him his Warrant for the bringing over his Wife with all her Effects from Brasil to Lisbon. CHAP. XXIX. Our departure from Brasil. THE Grand Fleet which goes every Year from Lisbon to the several places on the Coast of Brasil, arrived there in the Month of June. The Admi∣ral being to convoy some Ships to Rio de Janeiro, went thither in person, whilst we were getting eve∣ry thing ready against his return, which we did not expect to be till towards the end of August. Be∣ing ready loaden and provided with all necessaries for our Voyage, we only staid till the Ships that were come in with the Admiral could take in some fresh Provisions, and so set sail together from the Bay of All-Saints on the 3d. day of September in the Morn∣ing, being in all thirty Sail, two and twenty of this Fleet being bound for Lisbon, the rest, being eight for Oporto. We were scarce well out at Sea, when the Winds turned contrary the very first day, and thus conti∣nued for near a Month after, so that we were not able to double the Cape of St. Austin till towards the end of September. The Vessels bound to Oporto being the nimblest Sailers of the whole Fleet, left us here abouts, in hopes to reach the Portuguese Coast before us, but they paid dear for their haste, the Algerines having taken two of them, as we were informed after∣wards at Lisbon.
The Wind veering about at the height of the Cape of St. Austin, proved pretty favourable to us till we came to Cape Verd. Much about the same time it was we got sight of the Isle called Ferdnand de Narogna,The Isle of Ferdnand de Narog∣na. having borrowed its name from the person, who first discovered it. Formerly all the Ships that passed this way, used to provide them∣selves with fresh Water in this Island, if they had occasion for any. But some strangers having left some of their Dogs behind them, these are multi∣plied and become wild to that degree, that there is no coming on shoar in that Island now a days. As we came within ten degrees of the line, the Wind began to be very changeable, and proved soon after quite contrary to us, but it blowing a pretty even Gale, we advanced by little and little, till a most dreadful Tempest arising, drove us till under the 26th. Degree, where a great many of our Ships lost their Masts and Sails. But after having weathered it out,Isle of Ter∣cera. we at last came in sight of the Isle of Tercera, belonging to the Por∣tugueses, where they kept their King Prisoner for a considerable time, and in all likelihood he would have ended there his days, if they had not been afraid that he might find means to get from thence. It was on the twenty first of November, that we got sight of this Island, and if the Seas had not run so high, we would have gone a shoar to refresh our selves; but as there is never a Port in the whole Island, and that there is no safe Anchoring in the Road,Isle of St. Michael. we continued our course, and on the three and twentieth, came in sight of the Isle of St. Mi∣chael, where abouts we staid all that Night near the Cape. The next Morning all our Ships sent their Chaloups a shoar to fetch some fresh Provisions, but did not come to an Anchor, that they might be in readiness to put to Sea upon all occasions, the Hur∣ricanes being so frequent here at this Season, that there is no safe riding for Ships. The Isles of St. Michael, Tercera, and some other adjacent Islands, belong to the Portugueses, they are
very fertile, affording great store of very good Wheat, which being from thence for the most part transported to Portugal, they may well be called the Granaries of that Kingdom. Our Chaloups being returned on the four and twentieth at Night, we set sail with a North West Wind, which did not last long, for all on a sudden the Wind chop'd about to the East,Are over∣taken by a most dread∣ful Tempest. and from thence to the South with such violence, that this tempest appear'd to me the most terrible that ever I saw in my life. It continued thus for ten days to∣gether in so dreadful a manner, as is scarce to be ex∣pressed; our Ship began to draw Water on all sides, and we saw before our Eyes nothing less than our approaching death. We made all the signals of di∣stress to the rest by day, and by setting up our lights by night, but in vain, the horrid darkness, but above all the violence of the Tempest, had disper∣sed all our Ships, so that we found our selves alone, having lost all our sails, except our Fore-mast sail. We had nothing left to hope for, and therefore be∣took our selves to Prayers, and the whole ships crew made their Vows to the Blessed Virgin, under whose protection we at last escaped the danger. In the mean while, every thing was in such a confusion, as is easier to be imagined than to be expressed; the Waves which rise as high as Mountains, beating continually over the Ship, which we thought would have been swallowed up every moment in the bot∣tomless Abyss. The approaching day rendred every thing much more supportable, but the dread∣full darkness of the Nights put us under such appre∣hensions of approaching death, that we were al∣ways despairing of ever seeing day again. An ac∣cident which befell us the last Night, was the most terrible of all, which put even the most couragious into despair. It is to be known, that we had some Top-masts and Yards in the Ship to make use of upon occasion, which were so well fastned upon the Deck, that they had not stirred hitherto. Our two Chaloups were
placed a top of them, one within the other, and in the smallest of the two, there were some hogs, which we had brought from Brasil, to make pre∣sents of them in Portugal, they being of an extraor∣dinary size. The most violent tossing of the Ship, for so many days together, had at last either loosen∣ed or broke the Ropes, which had fastned all these things together, so that the Masts, Yards and Cha∣lops rowling from one side to the other, accor∣ding to the motion of the Ship, and being thrown against her sides, we did not imagine otherwise but that she had been staved to pieces; there was not one in the Ship, but what was uttering forth his last Prayers, expecting every moment to be the last of his life. We had Passengers and Mariners on Board of us of several different Nations, each of them offering their Vows and Moans in a different Language; this made the most doleful noise that ever was heard, which together with the darkness of the Night, made every thing appear more dreadful than it was; no body daring to go upon the deck for fear of being crushed to pieces, as we found the Hogs to be afterwards. At last, Day-light began to appear, the most wellcome that ever was seen, and our Mari∣ners taking new Courage with the approaching light, fastned the Chaloups and Masts again; and scarce were a few hours past, but the sky began to clear up, the Sun rejoyced us with its most delight∣ful Rays, the Winds began to abate their Fury, and we saw our selves soon freed from the apprehension of danger.
CHAP. XXX. The pursuit of our Voyage, and our Arrival at Lisbon. AFter we had spent some time in putting things in order, and stopping the leaks occasioned by the late Tempest, we were cruising up and down, often changing our course, to try whether we could meet with any of our Ships, that were separated from us in the last Storm; but meeting with no Vessel that could give us the least account of them, we thought it our best way to direct our course to∣wards the Port of Lisbon. On the Eleventh of December towards Evening, our Sentinels discovered a stout Ship making up towards us; which we believing to be an Algerine, we were getting every thing in readiness for a vi∣gorous defence, in case we should be attacked by these Corsairs. We continued in this Posture, the approaching Night having robbed us of the sa∣tisfaction to be rightly informed, whether this Ship were an Enemy or not; as she put out her Lights all the Night long, so we did the same, to give them to understand, that we were not a∣fraid of them. Thus we kept in sight of one a∣nother till next Morning, and each of us having done the best we could to come up with one a∣ther, we soon found our mistake, the Ship pro∣ving to be one of our Fleet, that had lost our Company.
Thus we sailed in Company together all that day, and the next following being the Thirteenth of the same Month came in sight of the Por∣guese shoar, and towards Night advanced pretty near to the River, but could not enter it, by reason of the contrary Winds, we cruised up and down at its Entrance, till the Fourteenth, without coming to an Anchor, when being join∣ed by the rest of the Fleet, that were separa∣ted from us in the last Storm, except two, that came in two days after us: We entred the Port on the Fifteenth in the Morning, with a satisfaction much easier to be felt, than to be expressed. We came to an Anchor just oppo∣site to the King's Palace, who did us the Ho∣nour to be a Spectator of our Entrance from a Balcony, both sides of the River being lined with an infinite number of People, who by their Joyfull Acclamations, gave us sufficient de∣monstrations of the Joy they conceived at our happy Arrival in the Port of Lisbon.
CHAP. XXXI. Of the Port of Lisbon. I Stay'd six whole Months at Lisbon, to satisfie my Curiosity in taking a full view of this large and Beautiful City. I had the honour to be acquain∣ted with the Sieur Fabre, chief Physician to the Queen of Portugal, who is in great esteem not on∣ly with this Princess, but also among all the Gran∣dees of the Kingdom. He was so obliging as to offer me his House, and I must freely acknow∣ledge, that I received during my stay in this City, so many kindnesses and obligations from his hands, that the only way left me to repay them, is to confess ingeniously that they are so many as to put me into despair of ever being able to retaliate them, unless it be by a perpetual acknowledge∣ment. I am not ignorant that Lisbon is much frequen∣ted by Strangers, and that such as have not had the opportunity to go thither in person, may easily be instructed concerning this great City, out of se∣veral Books that treat of it in particular, never∣theless. I hope it may not be unacceptable, if I say something here as it were en passant, of a City, where I stay'd six whole Months. The River Tagus,The River of Lisbon. by the Portugueses called Tejo, is very famous both for its largeness, and the Gold which is drawn out of its Sands. It waters several goodly Provinces, and runs directly under the Walls of the City of Lisbon, where is one of the best Harbours in the World.
This River is Situate under the 39th and 40th Degrees of North Latitude. Its Entrance is to be seen far off at Sea by the Mountain called by the Portugueses La Roqua. As you pass the Bar you must be very careful to avoid the Sand Banks that are on the South side. Before you come up to the City of Lisbon, you see the strong Fort and Town of Cascais.The Fort of Cascais. This place is about 5 Leagues distant from the Capital City, is always provided with a good Garrison, and has a Port capable of containing Ships of a great Bulk, but they don't ride very safely here, if the Wind blows hard at West or South West. Cascais is dignified with the Title of a Marquisate, belonging to one of the greatest Lords of the King∣dom. Near this place is the Bar of Lisbon, where it is dangerous passing, if you are not provided with a good Pilot, abundance of Ships having been lost here for want of such guides as were well acquainted with this passage. About two Leagues beyond Cascais there are two Forts;Two other Forts. one whereof is Built upon Piles in the midst of the River; the Portugueses call it a Torre de Bougio; the other is the Fort of St. Gian, or St. Julian; both these Forts are provided with good Garrisons and a good Artillery, all the Ships that either enter or go out of the Port of Lisbon, being obliged to pass within the reach of their Can∣non. Half ways betwixt these two Forts and the City is the Castle of Belem or Bethlehem. It is Built in the River, which is but narrow in this place. This Castle is as carefully guarded as the rest, and here it is that the Officers of the Custom-House visit all the Ships, going out of the Port, to see whe∣ther they are discharged at the Custom-House, be∣fore they come away. Near this Castle upon the very Banks of the Ri∣ver, there is a very large Town, where the Shps as they are going out are forced to come to an Anchor, to stay for their last discharge from the
Officers of the Custom-House within the Adjacent Castle. It is a very Populous place, and affords all manner of refreshment to such Ships as come there to an Anchor. There is in this place a Convent belonging to the Bernardin Friars, one of the finest in the whole Kingdom. It is called Bethlehem, (having given its Name to the Adjacent Castle, and the Town it self) being Consecrated to the Memory of the Birth of our Saviour Jesus Christ. It was Foun∣ded by Don Manuel, King of Portugal, under whose Reign the East-Indies were first discovered by the Portugueses. In the Church are to be seen several Tombs, and very Magnificent Mausolaeum's of the Kings and Queens of Portugal. On the other side of the River directly opposite to the Convent of Bethlehem, you see a very large Structure, where such Ships as come from any places suspected to be infected with the Plague, are obliged to unload their Goods, and to keep their Quarantain all along the River side. Betwixt Bethlehem and the City, you see very pleasant Coun∣try Houses, which afford a very delightful Prospect to such as pass along the River. CHAP. XXXII. Of the City of Lisbon. THE City of Lisbon is the ordinary Residence of the Kings of Portugal,City of Lisbon. is one of the finest and richest Cities in all Europe, which affords eve∣ry thing that is most rare and precious in Foreign Countries. It contains 7 Hills within the Precinct of its Walls, on one of these Hills is Built the Castle. There are abundance of fine Churches in
this City, among which, that of the Jacobin Fri∣ars excels all the rest. In one of the Chapels of this Church is an Altar,Its Chur∣ches. where a Crucifix of an inestimable value of Relieve, is enclosed in an Iron Grate, with the Wound in our Saviour's Side; it is daily exposed to publick view, there being constantly kept 6 white Wax Candles, and 7 Lamps burning before it. The great Chapel belonging to the Cathedral is also a most magnificent Structure. In a Convent called a Madre de Deos, there is to be seen the Handkerchief of our Saviour Jesus Christ, which most precious Relick is shew'd to the people every Holy Friday in the After∣noon. The Streets of Lisbon are generally very narrow, there being very few but such as have been lately Built, which are passable for Coaches, and I sup∣pose it is upon this account that Chairs and Lit∣ters are so much used in this City. The Royal Palace is Built upon the very Bank of the River. The grand Place-Royal faces this Castle, called by the Portugueses, Tereriro de Paco, where they run at the Ring, and keep their Bull-fightings. There are in Lisbon several good Market-places, and other large and fine Squares; abundance of stately Buildings, and a great number of Fountains, which are to be seen all over the City, and serve both for an Ornament to the City, and for the con∣veniency of the Inhabitants. The Portugueses are very cautious in following the French Fashion in their Dresses. The Portuguese Women are very little, but well shap'd. Ladies of Quality appear abroad with their Faces unco∣vered, the rest wear Veils, but they have a way of opening them, when they have a Mind to be seen.
CHAP. XXXIII. My Departure from Lisbon and return into France. AFter I had made the best Observations I could concerning every thing I thought worth taking notice of in Lisbon, I took Shipping in a Vessel, which was bound to Bayonne in France. We weighed Anchor from before the Castle of Bethlehem on the 22d of July, and the next day got out to Sea; but the Wind turning about, and it blowing very hard all the following Night, our Mizen Mast Split, so that we were forced to make towards the Shoar to refit. We came to an Anchor the next day in the Port of Cascais, where the Sieur Du Casso, an Inhabitant of Bajonne and I went a-shoar, we continued there till the 28th of the same Month, when we took Shipping again, and got out at Sea a second time. But the Wind Steering about soon after we were fain to keep at a great distance from the Shoar; so we doubled the Cape of Finistre the 4th of August, and Sailed along the Coast of Spain till the 15th of the same Month, when we got sight of our Native Shoar, and at the same time of a Vessel that was making all the Sail she could towards us. We having no more than 25 Men, and 6 Guns on Board, we thought it our best way to change our Course; but whilst we were flying from our supposed Enemy, we soon got sight of another, which made us alter our Resolution, and to pursue
our former course, which we did accordingly, but so near the Shoar, that we might have an opportu∣nity of running our Vessel on Shoar, if we should be constrained so to do. Thus we Sailed all the Night, surrounded with terrible apprehensions both of the danger of the Shoar and our Enemies, but by Day-light seeing but one of the Ships that were in pursuit of us the day before, and finding our selves not far off of the River of Bayonne, we made all the sails we could, and happily entred it the same Night. Thus after 10 Years Absence, and a Thousand dangers and fatigues, the necessary con∣sequences of long Voyages, I had the satisfaction to set once more foot on Shoar, the 16th day of August, in my Native Country, France. The End of the Second Part.
A TREATISE OF THE DISTEMPERS Relating in Particular to the Eastern Countries, AND Such other DISEASES as commonly happen in the VOYAGES into those PARTS, with their proper REMEDIES. By M. C. D. D. E. M. Translated from the French. LONDON, Printed for D. Browne, at the Black-Swan, without Temple-Bar; A. Roper, at the Black-Boy; and T. Leigh, at the Peacock, both in Fleet-Street, 1698.
OF THE DISTEMPERS Peculiar to the Eastern-Countries, AND THEIR REMEDIES. CHAP. I. Of Vomiting. VOmiting is the first inconveniency Travel∣lors are afflicted with at Sea, it is caused partly by the motion of the Ship, partly by the change of the Air. Vomiting as common as it is, is sometimes not without danger. I have seen some people of a ten∣der Constitution weakned by it to that degree, that
they were in no small danger of their Life, by the great loss of Spirits. Others I have seen, who for 3 or 4 Months together have not been able to stir out of their Beds. To prevent in some measure the violent Vomit∣ting at Sea, it is very convenient to take 2 or 3 proper Purges, a little before you go to Sea, espe∣cially if you have not lived very regularly before. When you are at Sea, you may mitigate the vio∣lence of it, if you keep your self quiet betwixt Decks, for the first 4 or 5 days of your Voyage, but not to abstain from Eating and Drinking, tho' you should bring it up again immediately after; for, if you Vomit with a full Stomach, you don't strain so violently as you do when it is empty, when violent Vomitings cause often very dange∣rous Haemorrhagies. It is of great moment, to feed at first upon no∣thing but what is of very easie Digestion and good nourishment, to drink but little Wine, and to ab∣stain as much as possible can be from Brandy or Aqua vitae, it having been found by Experience that strong Liquors are so far from fortifying the Stomach upon this occasion, that they are rather very hurtful.
CHAP. II. Of the Scurvy, call'd by the French, The Land-Evil. THE Scurvy, call'd by the French Mariners, the Land Evil, is the most dangerous and trou∣blesome of all those Distempers, which are inci∣dent to those that undertake great Voyages; it being not only contagious, but also scarce ever to be cur'd till you get ashoar. The general Causes of this Distemper are,Causes of the Scurvy  Sea. the Sea Air, the Salt Provision, both which cause great alterations in the Blood; Melancholy, occasioned by the tediousness, and other Inconveniencies of long Voyages; Thirst, the common Companion of those who are to pass into the Eastern-Parts, and that commonly at such a time when they stand most in need of Refreshment. And last of all, the Nastiness of the Mariners, who seldom keep themselves clean and neat. For which reason it is, that the Officers, and o∣thers above the common Rank on board these Ships, are not so much subject to the Scurvy as the common Sea-men, because they are better provided with change of Linen, and feed upon such things as are of a better Digestion and Nou∣rishment. The first Symptoms of the Scurvy, appear most commonly in the Mouth and Gums, which swell, grow black, and emit a very ill Scent, so that you are obliged to make very deep Incisions, and some∣times to take away a considerable quantity of cor∣rupted Flesh and Matter, which not only loosens
the Teeth, but also often makes them fall out. This Distemper discovers it self also frequently by certain black Spots,Its Sym∣ptoms and Signs. which appear upon the Arms, Legs and Thighs, and last of all over the whole Body; and it is to be observed, that, the broader these Spots are, and nearer the Heart, the more dangerous is the Distemper. This Corruption of the Gums, and the breaking out into Blotches is commonly preceded, or im∣mediately follow'd by a nauseousness in the Sto∣mach, a Laziness by fainting and swooning Fits, pains in the Head, Arms and Legs, and a Loose∣ness, but seldom by any Fever, I having often observed, that the Pulse commonly appears very little declining from its natural State and Mo∣tion. The Blood being (for Reasons above-alledged) rendred thick and terrestrious, do's not circulate freely in the lesser Vessels, which are spread in the Gums, the extremities of our Bodies, and all over our Skin; so that its motion ceasing in those parts, they are depriv'd of their usual supply of Spirits; what wonder is it if the coagulated Blood go's into a Corruption, from whence proceed those Tumors and Blotches; And as the said Cor∣ruption is augmented in proportion, and commu∣nicated to other parts, the circulation of the Blood is by degrees also obstructed in the larger Vessels; from whence proceed those violent Symptoms, but especially those frequent Swoonings, which are commonly the fore-runners of Death. To prevent this Evil so destructive to Mariners,Precaution against the Scurvy. the Officers, to whose management the Ship is committed; ought, before their Embarquement to take effectual care that their Ships be Victuall'd with good and sound Provision, that the Biscuits be not mouldy, or the Victuals tainted, which is too frequently practised, to the great detriment of the whole Ships-Crew, when either the Cap∣tain dares not contradict those who have the Victu∣alling of the Ship, or when out of covetousness
he shares with others the Profits arising by this Malversation. When they are out at Sea, the Officers belong∣ing to the Ship ought to be very careful to have her kept  neat and clean, to cause her to be well swept, and wash'd with Sea-Water every day, and to be sprink'd and sweetn'd two or three times a Week with good strong Vinegar, which purifies the Air, and renders it more subtil and thin. Each particular Person on board the Ship ought, as far as is possible, provide himself with the Juice of Citrons, Limons, Ros solis, preserv'd and dry'd Fruits, but especially with good Store of Prunes; to abstain as much as can be, from all sorts of Meat, which are in the least tainted, from Salt-Flesh and Fish, unless they be well fresh'd out; to feed much upon Rice, Barley and Prunes, drink Wine mix'd with Water, and not to abstain from drinking if you be thirsty, unless it be in case of the highest necessity; to change frequently your Linen, and to wash often your Mouths and the whole Body, to cleanse it from all the Filth and ill Scents, which are engendred by the continual Sweats, and which hindring the insensible Transpi∣ration, do not a little contribute towards the pro∣duction of the Scurvy. But if a body be already seiz'd with this pernici∣ous Disease, which will soon appear by the swel∣ling and blackness of the Gums, no time ought to be neglected to stop the progress of this Evil, which in a little time will spread all over the Bo∣dy. If it be in a plethorick and vigorous Body, it will not be amiss to lett a little Blood, to facili∣tate the circulation of the Blood; but this ought not to be done in great quantity, for fear of im∣pairing the Patient's Spirits, who in this Distem∣per stands in need of all his strength to support him against his Enemy.
Some days after,Remedies against the rvy. you may make use of a gentle Purge, but above all, you ought frequently to apply Clysters, if you have conveniency to do it▪ but this is sometimes not to be put in practice, by reason of the scarcity of fresh Water on board these Ships. The next thing you have to do is to mix some good Vinegar, or Juice of Limons or Citrons with some Salt, wherewith you must carefully wash your Mouth, and rub your Gums till they bleed, which being nothing but the gross and terrestrious part of the Blood setl'd in these parts, ought to be remov'd by these means. If the Scurvy appears in its true colours, I mea by the black Blotches upon your Arms, Legs and Thighs, you must often wash them with warm Sea-Water, and rub them soundly till they sma again. If you catch any of your Sea-Hogs, sure to bathe them well with their Blood, having been found by experience that it has a spe∣cifick Quality against this Evil, at least to stop its progress, which is as much as can be expect to be done at Sea, it being impossible entirely eradicate this Distemper, unless it be on sho where those who have been seiz'd with it at are commonly Cur'd, and recover their forme Health in a little time, oftentimes without any other Remedies, unless they be brought so before they have the good fortune to reach Land, as to want strength and spirits to overcom the frequent Swoonings, and other violent Sym∣ptoms, which are often occasioned by the chng of the Air. But if inspite of all the Remedies the Distem∣per increases, and the Heart begins to be infect by the malignant Vapours that are convey'd ∣her from the corrupted parts, you must have course to such Cordials as are commonly prescrib in those Cases, and of which there is always a suf∣ficient provision made, for Ships that are to go up∣on such long Voyages. But above all things,
heed, as soon as the Scurvy appears, to abstain from any thing that is Salted, and if you have no fresh Meat and Fish, feed, as I said before, up∣on Rice and Barley, and I can assure you, that if you follow this Rule, by being thus careful in your Diet, and to drink only a little Wine mix'd with Water; this alone, I say, will stand you in more stead to hinder the further progress of this Evil, than all the Cordials are able to do, if you don't abstain from Salt Diet, and such other Victuals as are not easily digestible and of ill Nou∣rishment. It is of great help to those who are afflicted vvith this Distemper, to go on shoar in a hot Country, or in the Summer Season, but, if you happen to come to an Anchor in a cold Climate, you must take care not to expose them to the cold Air, but to keep them up close and very vvarm, Svveating being very beneficial, and much conducing to the Cure of this Evil, especially if back'd by a good Diet, such as are all sorts of Meats of a kind Di∣gestion and good Nourishment. It is very proper, when they are upon re∣covery to lett them Blood, to purge, and to bathe them in luke-warm Water; but above all, not to neglect to give them Clysters, which make up a great part of the Cure.
CHAP. III. Of the Colicks of Madagascar. SUch of our Ships-Crew as were used to drink Wine, and could not meet with any in the Isle Dauphine, used frequently to debauch them∣selves in Brandy and Aqua vitae,Their Cause. which with the heat of the Climate, and the violent motion they used in travelling up and down the Isle, putting the bilious Humor into a ferment, prov'd the cause of these violent Colicks, which used frequent∣ly to seize upon those who were given to Drunk∣enness; whereas those who led a sober Life, scarce ever felt the effects of this Evil, or if they did, it was not with near so much violence as the rest. These Colicks are accompanied with very vio∣lent Symptoms;Symptoms. they are never without a Fever, you observe a great alteration in the Pulse, and the Patient is often troubled with a stoppage of the Urine. The tormenting Pains cause frequent Con∣vulsions and Palsies in several parts of the Body, which continue sometimes after the Colick is pass'd. To cure this Disease,Cue▪ I always order'd them to be let Blood in the Foot; next to which, I used to have some Anodine Clysters apply'd, and often repeated, besides Fomentations, and bathing the inferior part of the Body up to the Navel with lukewarm Water. But above all, you must have recourse to the Pills of Laudanum, without which the Patients will have but little rest. For, it is to be observ'd, that the choierick Humour being setled betwixt the Tunicks of the Intestines, you must be very careful of irritating them by strong Remedies; wherefore it is most advisable to ab∣stain
from all sorts of Purges, even those that perfect their Operation very gently, I having been convinc'd by experience, that they cannot be made use of without danger, as long as the pain of the Colick continues. The Negro's in those Parts, whose Bodies are accustom'd and inur'd to the heat of the Climate, and who consequently travel with less fatigue and trouble; and, who having no Aqua vitae of their own, but only such as we used now and then to treat them withal, and consequently not being in a capacity to drink it to any excess, and that but seldom, were seldom afflicted with this Di∣stemper, or if they sometimes were, the Cure was much easier with them than with the Frenchmen. CHAP. IV. Of the Venereal Distemper in the Isle Dauphine▪ THis Distemper is as common, and appears with the same Symptoms among the French∣men living in those Parts, as among the Negro's, they being equally given to Debauchery. The Europeans commonly make use of their own Chi∣rurgeons, who cure them in the same manner, as is usual among us. The Negro's are never so careful as to cure them∣selves, when they see the fore-runners of this Evil (which is needless to be named here) to appear, they never trouble themselves to be cur'd, till the whole mass of Blood being infectd with the malignan∣y of the Distemper, its symptoms appear so ter∣rible, that they think it no longer time to delay the Cure.
Mercury and Guaiacum are unknown to them; if the Distemper have not taken too deep root, they only purge themselves, and sweat frequently▪ But if it be inveterate, they take a broad red hot Iron, which they thus apply to the bottom of their Feet,How the Negro's cure the French-Pox. which producing an Ulcer, they let it run for thirty or forty days, keeping an exact Di∣et, by which means they pretend to evacuate the malignant Humour. But as these people are ex∣treamly debauch'd, and consequently seldom with∣out some Symptoms of this Distemper; it is hard to be judged whether they are perfectly cur'd by this cruel Remedy or not. CHAP. V. Of the Distempers of the Indies, and first of their Fevers. MAlignant Fevers are not frequent in the In∣dies, but the simple continual Fevers are much in vogue. Among the intermitting Fevers, the Tertians and double Tertians are the most com∣mon; and as their Cure is very difficult in those Parts,Italian Physicians. so they prove often mortal. The Pagan Physicians, whom they call Pandites, are a sort of People without Learning or any Knowledge or insight into Anatomy. All their Skill is confin'd to a certain number of Receipts, which they have receiv'd by Tradition from their Ancestors; these they apply promiscuously, with∣out making the least Alteration, as often as they meet with a Patient aflicted with the same Di∣stemper, against which their Receipt was intend∣ed,
without making the least reflection upon the different Age, Sex, Constitution, o Strength of their Patients. They are very timorous, and ra∣ther will let a Patient perish than run the hazard of a Remedy, which, as they believe, not being sufficiently approved by experience, appears doubtful to them, though they judge the Di∣stemper to be mortal, or incurable without it. Nevertheless it is observable, that by their long experience they have made such Observations con∣cerning certain Distempers peculiar to those Countries, that they practise with better success than the most learned foreign Physicians, who up∣on certain occasions must follow their footsteps, if they expect to succeed in their Cures in this Climate. They never allow their Patients afflicted with any kind of Fever in the Indies, neither Meat, neither Eggs or Broath, this would be as much as the Patient's life is worth, if they should give them any of these things. They allow them no other Drink but fair Water, and for the rest for their sustenance, they give them a Cange, which is made in the following manner. They beat about half a Pound of Rice in two or three quarts of Water, which they boil so long, till the Rice be well broken, which is commonly done in an hours time. Then they strain it thro' a Linen-Cloth, and squeeze it well to draw out all the goodness from the Rice; of this they give a Spoonful at a time, four or five times a day to the Patient, making it always warm, and putting a little Salt into it, to make it the more savory. I shall have occasion to tell you anon, upon what occasion they put Pepper into this Cange. This Cange besides that it nourishes well,The Cange of the In∣dians. serves also to squench the Thirst; I must confess I prefer this much before our Jelly-Broaths, it coming much nearer to the Diets prescribed us by the an∣tient Physicians in these cases, than what is used
now a-days in France, rather by the connivance than the approbation of the Physicians. For, is it not very strange to see a sick body to take more Nourishment, whilst he is sick, than perhaps he used to do when he was in Health? It being beyond all question, that Jelly-broath taken perhaps seven or eight times a day, and new-laid Eggs, which we give our Patients, contain more Nourishment, and produce a greater quantity of pure Chyle than a moderate quantity of Bread and Meat, which is the ordinary Food of People, when they are in good Health. Besides this, the Cange has also this Excellency, that it causes no aversion in the Patient, which is the general Inconveniency in these strong Broths, which being taken with so much Repugnancy, can scarce be supposed to produce any good effect. If it be a continual Fever, they allow them no∣thing else but Cange; but if it be a Tertian Ague, they allow them betwixt the Fits, to eat a little Bread and Sweet-Meats; But no kind of Meat or Eggs, unless it be after the Ague has entirely left them, and that there is no fear of a Relapse. Letting of Blood is much used among the In∣dians,Letting of Blood and Cupping. and that with good Success; the Pandites, being by long Experience, convinc'd of the use∣fulness of this Remedy, will sometimes let Blood twenty times one after another, without the least Reluctancy to be observ'd in the Patient, who never grumble here at what their Physicians do, but are exactly observant to their Orders, much beyond what is practised in most Parts of Europe, where the Patients, their Friends, and the Nurses propose their own Remedies, before the Physici∣an's Prescriptions. They let blood most commonly in the Foot with extraordinary good Success; and I have made this Observation, not only in the Indies, but also in all other places which I have visited in my Tra∣vels, as well as in France, that there are few Di∣stempers, where the letting of Blood in the Foot
proves not more successful than when done in the Arm. The Indians prescribe Cupping and Leeches in those Distempers, where they don't think it pro∣per to let blood. Clysters are also much in use among them, they are composed of Senna, Cassia and Tamarinds, and so are their Purges, which have the same ef∣fect only by two different ways; they mix with them some Sirups of Simples, to wit: of Cicho∣ry, Roses, Limons and Maidenhair. Chymical Preparations are unknown to the Pandites; they are surprised when they see us Fo∣reigners to produce such Evacuations as we do▪ by the help of such small quantities of Physick. The Pandites perceiving the Urine of the Pa∣tient that is afflicted with a Fever to be white, they judge it to proceed from a cold Cause, with∣out having the least respect to the Delirium and other Symptoms, which are the ordinary signs of this Urine. For which purpose they put Pepper in the Cange, which they apply to the Patient's Head, to warm the Brains, which, they say, are too cold; and for the same reason it is, that they will not let blood in such a case, before they find the Urine to be of a high Colour. I have made it my particular Observation, that of all those that ever I saw, who were seiz'd with a Delirium before they were let blood, and whose Urines appear'd thus white in the beginning, very few escaped with life, unless, by good fortune they happen'd to light into the hands of some European Physicians, who are better acquainted with the true cause of this Distemper and its Symptoms; of which, I cannot forbear to give you an instance. I liv'd at Daman for several Months, where, inspite of all the Pandites there, who were very envious at me, I was employd as a Physician in all the best Families. I had some time before had
under my Cure the eldest Daughter of a certain Lady of the best Quality in that place, in which I had succeeded so well, that I receiv'd all the ac∣knowledgment imaginable from her hands. Ne∣vertheless, one of her younger Daughters being fal'n dangerously ill of a continual Fever with a Delirium; the Lady, upon the perswasion of a certain Pandite, who had been a Physician to the Family a great while, made use of his Prescripti∣ons, without letting me know any thing of the matter; But finding her Child grow worse and worse, she sent to me unknown to the Pagan Physician, desiring my advice concerning her Daughter. It was the ninth Day, when I was call'd to her, and finding her Urine of a whitish colour, and the Fever very high with a violent Delirium, I drew from thence far different Indi∣cations to what the Pandite had done; and having remonstrated to her Mother the danger of her Daughter, who was not above seven years of age, I order'd her to be let blood immediately. The Indian Physician hapning to come in the same moment, maintain'd in my presence, that the Fever proceeding from a cold Cause, the young Lady would infallibly die if she were let blood; but I laugh'd at the weakness of his Argument, and my Advice prevailing with the Childs Friends, she was let blood, and I took from her head the Pepper mixt with the Cange, of which there was near half a pound, very finely beaten upon the Childs head; I let her, in all, five or six times blood, after which the Fever left her, and I con∣summated the Cure by giving her 2 or 3 Purga∣tions, contrary to the expectation of the Pagan Physician, who thought her death to have been infallible.
CHAP. VI. Of the Distemper call'd, The Indians Mordechi. THe Distemper call'd by the Indians, Morde∣chi, is properly no more, than an Indige∣stion, very frequent among the Indians, whose Stomachs by reason of the violence of the Heats, and the continual Sweats, are very weak, and consequently apt to be surfeited; so that some∣times this Distemper, as slight as it appears at first sight, is very dangerous, and kills People in a few hours time, if they are not assisted with proper Remedies. Excess in eating and drinking,Its causes and Signs. especially of such things as are not of an easie Digestion, espe∣cially at Night is the ordinary Cause of this Di∣stemper. Its signs are, sudden Heat, pains in the Head, want of rest, with a Fever, Delirium, Vo∣miting and Looseness; the Pulse is strong and un∣even▪ the Urine sometimes red, sometimes white, but always clear; These signs are not always ap∣parent in one and the same Subject, but this Di∣stemper being very acute, and making quick dis∣patch, it is not advisable to stay till all of them appear, but by some of them it is easie to guess at the rest. The first and chief Remedy to be apply'd to those whom they imagine to be seiz'd with the Mordechi is,The Cure. to burn their Feet; This they do with a red hot Iron of the thickness of a common Roasting-Spit, wherewith they touch the Feet
of the Patient cross the Ankles, in that part where it is most callous, and hold it close to the place, till the Patient begin to cry out, and signifie there∣by that he begins to be sensible of the Pain, when it is taken away immediately; which done, they take a Slipper or some such thing, and give two or three good Stroaks upon the place, where the Iron has toucht, which prevents the rising of a Blister, without any further Application. This manner of burning with an Iron, as ter∣rible as it appears at first sight, does not any con∣siderable to the place where it is apply'd; and I have seen some walk as freely immediately after, as if they had not been touch'd with any thing. It is certain that this Remedy stops the violence of the Mordechi, and oftentimes cures all its Sym∣ptoms in an instant; and if it happen that the Fever continue some time after, it never proves dangerous, and is easie to be cur'd by ordinary Remedies. It is also in these Fevers, that the Indians put a∣bundance of Pepper in the Cange, which they give both inwardly to the Patients, and apply it out∣wardly to their Heads, as we have mention'd it before. And generally speaking, it is only by these means and burning under the Feet, they cure this Distemper, without letting Blood, which would infallibly prove mortal, if it were made use of in the beginning of this Distemper. Neither do they prescribe any Purgations (if there be occasion for any) till after the most violent Symptoms are ceased, and that there is no further appearance of a Fever. I don't in the least question, but that abundance of People will look upon this Cure, which is perform'd by burning the Feet, as ridiculous, and not fit to be taken notice of, considering there seems to be so very slender a relation betwixt the Remedy and the Distemper, for which it is put in use. I cannot deny, but that at my first coming into the Indies, I was of the same opinion, till
being convinc'd of the truth of it by experience, I have since that time put it in practice as well up∣on my self, as a great many others, never with∣out good success, when all other Remedies, which I had apply'd to some, in hopes to remove the cause of this Distemper have proved in∣effectual. CHAP. VII. Of the Bloody-Flux. DYsenteries of all kinds are contagious, not easie to be cur'd, dangerous, and very of∣ten mortal, not only in the Indies, but more fre∣quently on Ship-board. The Indians are no less subject to this Distem∣per than the Europeans; but the latter are not so easie to be cur'd as the first, by reason of their Debaucheries in Wine and Aqua vitae, which is not so common among the Eastern Nations. If the Dysentery has a Fever for its Companion (which indeed it is seldom without) the Pandites give to the Patients of their Cange, and some Rice very thick boil'd, but without Salt; this they mix with an equal quantity of curded sowre Milk, which they praise as the most sovereign Remedy in the Universe against this Distemper; But I must confess that I never saw it made use of, but it prov'd fatal; they let blood in this Distemper and repeat it frequently; But they don't make use of any Purgations, nay not so much as of any Anodyne Clysters, which they say, would encrease the Evil, but in lieu of them they make use of Astringents; which as they sometimes stop the Flux, without removing the Cause; so the Patients by the violence of the Torments, are put
under most intolerable Inquietudes, resting nei∣ther day nor night; To obviate this, they give them Opium very plentifully, and that without the least Preparation, sometimes ten Grains for one Dose. It can't be deny'd but that the Indians, being accustomed to the use of Opium, they can bear a much greater Quantity than the Europeans; ne∣vertheless I can testifie it, I know very few that have been cur'd by their Opium, as little as by their other Remedies they make use of in this case. But if this method commonly proves pernici∣ous to the Indians, it was certainly fatal to such Europeans as trusted themselves to the manage∣ment of these Pagan Physicians; and I do protest to you, that I never saw any European who was afflicted with the Dysentery, but what died un∣der their Hands. I am apt to believe, that those who rightly under stand the pernicious quality of Opium, will give cre∣dit to what I say; and it was Chiefly upon this ac∣count that I could never be prevail'd upon to fol∣low the Method of these Pagan Physicians in this case; I was rather contented that they should call in those Pandites, and take their Remedies from their own hands, without my Approbation. Thus it hapn'd to a certain religious Person, who during my stay on the Coast of Malabar, being taken dangerously ill of a Dysentery with a Fever, and finding that the Remedies which I had prescrib'd did not produce the desir'd effect, he asked my consent to call in a Pandite, which be∣ing done accordingly, he prescribed the good Fa∣ther five or six Doses of Opium, mixt with Oil and Jagre, or Suchar of the Coco's, by which means he sent the Patient to the other World. It was no small dissatisfaction to me, to find, that all the Remedies I apply'd in this case, did not answer the desir'd Effect, which raised in me an extraordinary desire, of finding out such a me∣thod, as might effectually answer my expectation▪
I had observed among the Portugueses, that they prescribed only Cange, Rice, Bread, and Chaly-beat-water in the Bloody-Flux, and that, after some gentle Purgations, they made use of Astrin∣gent Medicines, entirely rejecting the use of the Curds and of Opium of the Pandites. This Method I must confess, as it appears more reasonable, so I thought it must be more secure than that used by the Indians. But this not giving me all the Satisfaction I could wish for in this case, I got at last, by good fortune, acquainted with a certain Person, who having liv'd for many years together in the Indies, taught me a certain Preparation, which is as easily taken as prepared, by the help of which, and certain Rules to be observed in the manage∣ment of the Diet, I have cur'd a great many Per∣sons in the Indies, on Ship-board, and in France, after my return from the Indies. It is not to be deny'd, but that the Flux may proceed from different Causes, and that therefore there ought to be a suitable Change to be observ'd, both in relation to the Remedy and Diet, but this being no difficult task for a Physician, who understands the true nature and cause of a Di∣stemper; I am well assur'd, that, provided, the Patient be not too far gone, it never fails to cure any Dysentery of what nature soever.
CHAP. I. Of the Distemper'd Persons, call'd by the Portugeses, Esfalfados. YOU meet frequently in the Indies, with a sort of sick People, call'd by the Portugeses, Es∣falfados; they are such as have wasted all their natural Strength and Vigour, by the accesses of Debauchery with Women; which frequently hap∣pns in a Climate, whereby the continual Sweats, occasioned by the excessive heats, there is a con∣stant Dissipation of our Spirits; which is evident in the Indians, whose Bodies being accustomed to the Climate, are seldom subject to this Distemper, tho' it must be also confess'd that they are much more moderate in this point than the Portugeses. The cause of this Distemper is, what I have al∣ledged just now; Its signs are, great Droughts, Heats, Inquietudes, a continual Fever, with a nauseous smel in the Stomach; The Pulse beats uneven, sometimes very high, and by and by so low as to be scae discernable; Their Urine is red but clear. This being a common Distemper in those parts, which if treated like other Fevers, would doubt∣less prove fatal. A Physician therefore when call'd to a Paient, ought to act with a great deal of circumspection, for fear of committing a mis∣take, not to be repair'd afterwards, by all his Skill; For which reason he ought very strictly to exa∣mine his Patient concerning his former course of Life, especially if it be a young body, who per∣haps is unwilling to discover his Faults in the pre∣ence
of his Friends, or Parents. For this Fever, without duly pondering all the circumstances, may eceive the most expert Physician, I having known Examples of those that died of this Distemper, because they were but once let blood. The chief Indication of the whole Cure con∣ists in restoring the decayed strength and spirits of the Patient, which is best to be done by giving him Meats of an easie Digestion, and of good Nourishment; as good Jelly Broths, New-laid Eggs, and other Meats prepared with all sorts of good Gravies. Let them drink good Wine, mix'd ess or more with Water, according as they were used to drink it, when they were in health; but let them by no means drink common Water or Barley Water, for fear that the abovementioned Di∣et should augment the Fever, it being so far from it, that it will certainly remove it. CHAP. IX. Of the Small-Pox. IN the Indies they know no other Plague or In∣fectious Distemper besides the Small-Pox; they are as contagious there as in Europe, and tho' one might suppose them to be less dangerous in a Cli∣mate, where the Pores of our Bodies being always open, consequently facilitate the Expulsion of the venomous Matter, they make worse havock here than in Europe, by the unsk ilfulness of the Pan∣dites, who being ignorant of the true way of assisting Nature in her efforts by proper Remedies, let her be oppress'd by the weight of the Ditem∣per▪
These Pagan Physicians used to be extreaml scandaliz'd when they saw us let blood and orde Clysters before the cruption of the Small-Pox and tho' they found the success for the most par answerable to the intention, for which they wer put in practise, yet they could not overcome their own obstinacy so far as to follow our footsteps. The Malabars use those infected with this Di∣stemper more cruelly than any others of th Eastern-Nations. For they are not contented to let them lie alone without giving them the least attendance or any other manner of assistance, fear of an infection; but they won't even thm in their Houses, but expose them at a good distance from their dwelling-places, under some Tree or another. All the cae they take of them is to bring them every day some Cange, whic they leave near them, without taking the least Care whether they take it or not; For they can't be perswaded to touch any body that is afcted with the Small-Pox, for fear of catching them, till they are fully restor'd to Halth, which is the reason (as it is easie to be judged) that they prove so fatal among them. CHAP. X. Of the Bitings of the Adders. AMong the several kinds of Adders, which are to be found in the Indies, some are of so per∣nicious a nature, that, whenever they infect any Person, he dies in an instant, without the least hope of relief. Of this kind are the green ones, of which I have spoke before, when I treated of the Coast of Malabar. The Poyson which issues
from the rest, being not altogether of so quick an operation, give one sometimes leisure to obviate the Evil by proper Antidotes. They make use in the Indies, of a certain Stone, which they say, is found in the Heads of some Adders, and for that reason is call'd by the Portu∣geses,The Ad¦der-sto Pedra de Cobre, or Adders Stone. This they apply to the place where the Adder has fixed her Poyson, where the Stone fastens it self, with∣out any other help, and having suck'd in as much of the Poyson, as it is able to contain, it falls off; Then they put it in Milk, where having dischag'd the Poyson it had attracted before, it is apply'd afresh in the same manner, as before, till such time that it will not fasten no longer, which is an evi∣dent sign, that the Poyson is removed, and the Danger past. It is observable, that when this Stone is put in Milk to discharge the Poyson, the Milk appears as if Excrements had been put into it, and of several Colours. I have been frequently an eye-witness of the stupendious effects of this Stone; but the worst is, that it is a great Rarity to meet with a good one, there being abundance of Counterfeit ones, who have not the same Vertue. If it therefore happen that any one be bitten by an Adder, and you have not any of these true Stone, at hand, the best way is to have that part where the Wound is, scarified, and by the help of Cups to draw as much Blood from thence as you can; afterwards apply to the place such Re∣medies, as have a peculiar Vertue to attract Poy∣son, from the Center of the Body to it Circum∣ference. For which purpose it is convenient, to keep the Wound open for a considerable time, to use Juice of Citrons or Limons, in every thing you eat, drink Wine, and take inwardly the true Powder of Vipers, provided it may be had una∣dulterated. These are, in my Opinion, the most proper Antidotes to be made use of, upon such an occasion.
The Poyson of these pernicious Creatures being so volatile, and of so subtil a nature, as to be soon conveyed to the Heart, many times before it is possible to apply proper Antidotes, a great many die miserably for want of present Conveni∣ency to obviate the Evil, before it siezes their Vi∣tals. It is upon this score, that we have seen some of the Indians, who were sensible of their present danger on such an occasion, cut off themselves im∣mediately that Member which they knew to be infected by the Poyson. Of this I remember an instance in a certain Naher, during my stay at Tilcery. This Gentleman being a little overcome by the Tary or Palm-tree Wine, found one of these small green Adders, (the most pernicious kind of all) which he took by the Tail, and play'd with her so long, till she found means to bite him in the Fin∣ger. The Naher, notwithstanding he was in drink, being sensible of the present danger of loosing his Life, kill'd the Adder, and in an in∣stant cut off his Finger. CHAP. IV. Of the Distemper, call'd by the Por∣tugeses, Bicho. THE Word Bicho, signifies in the Portugese Language as much as an Earth-worm, or a small Creature; besides which the Portugueses use it for three several sorts of Distempers, peculiar to the Inhabitants of the Coast of Brasil. The first is occasioned by a certain kind of a Worm, long and pretty thick, which being en∣gendred in the Legs, causes most cruel Pains, af∣terwards
very sordid Ulcers, and last of all, an incurable Gangrene, if you don't prevent it in time; by opening the Skin where it lies, from whence you may draw out the Worm by winding of it gradually round a large Needle or small Sticks, but very gently, for fear of tearing the Worm in pieces, in which case you must make a large Incision, to take out the remaining part; The Worm being remov'd, you may apply com∣mon Detergents to the Ulcer, and afterwards Ci∣catrise it, after the ordinary way. The Bicho of the second kind is a Worm, but so small, as it is impossible to be seen by the most clear-sighted. They are in great quantities in rui∣ned Houses, as well as new Buildings, and among Excrements and Dust. They enter insensibly thro' the Pores of the Skin, especially in the Feet, insinuate themselves betwixt the Flesh and Skin, and will sometimes settle under the Nails. The Negro's and Brasilians, who go bare-footed, are often troubled with them, and the Europeans, tho' they commonly wear Shoo's and Stockins, are not always free from this Mischance. These small Worms, don't cause any immediate Pain; on the contrary, it is a great while before you are sensible of them, un∣less you carefully look upon your feet every day. But they soon increase in your Skin, and in four∣teen or fifteen days time, grow as big as a Pea, and do easily discover themselves by their black Colour. The safest way is, to take them out as soon as you are sensible of them; for the longer they remain in the Skin, the more difficult they are to be taken out; and, if they are there long enough, they will cause a Corruption, which pro∣duces such malignant Ulcers, that I have seen of∣tentimes Negro's, to have the Flesh of their Feet corrupted in so miserable a manner, that the bare Bones appear'd. It is next to an impossibility to avoid catching of these Worms: The only way is to take care not to
let them settle long in the Skin; for if they be taken in time, they are not attended with any considerable ill consequences. If they have caused any Corruption or Ulcers, they may be cur'd after the common way, after you have taken out the Worms, or have kill'd them with Tobacco-pow∣der. Besides this, the Portugeses, living on the Coast of Brasil, are pester'd with another Distem∣per, which they call Bicho; This is an Inflama∣tion in the Fundamental, which as it is very com∣mon, so it is no less dangerous in this Country; Heat-aches and Burning-heats in the affected part, being the constant companions of these Inflama∣tions, which are often not without a Fever; and if neglected, produce in a few days time very malignant Ulcers, from whence this Distemper has gotten the name Bicho. Such as keep these parts clean by washing them often with fair Water only, are less subject to this Evil, than such as do otherwise. As soon as you find your self siez'd by this Distemper, bath it oftentimes a day with a Decoction made of Li∣mons, and mix with it a little Salt. You may al∣so put with good success Slices of Limons within your Fundament, which often cures the Distem∣per without any more ado, if you take it in the beginning. But if it be already gone into a Cor∣ruption, they used to dilate some Gun-powder with a sufficient quantity of Rose or Plantain-Water, in which Liniment they dip some Linen-Rags, which they put in the Fundament, not neg∣lecting to bath it before with the Decoction of Li∣mons. Special care is to be taken, that if a Fever appear in this case, not to let blood, it having been found by Experience, that it has always prov'd prejudicial. It is much more safe to keep constant to Anodyne and Detersive Clysters, ac∣cording as the Corruption or Inflammation is more or less, and to conclude the whole Cure with a gentle Purge. FINIS.
A Supplement TO THE Sieur DELLONE's RELATION of his VOYAGE TO THE East-Indies. Taken out of the Sieur De Rennefort's HISTORY of the EAST-INDIES. CONTAINING A short Account of the Isle of St. Helens; Of the Isle of Teneriffe; Of the Isle of Ceylon; Of the Cape of Good-Hope; The Isle of Madagascar: And some other Matters, having a near Re∣lation to the former TREATISE. London, Printed for A. Roper, at the Black-Boy, over against St. Dunstan's Church, Fleet-street, and D. Brown, at the Black-Swan and Bible, without Temple-Bar. 1698.
A Supplement TO THE Sieur DELLONE's VOYAGE TO THE East-Indies, &c. CHAP. I. Of the Isle of St▪ Helens. THE Isle of St. Helens is situate under the Torrid Zone, at sixteen degrees of Southern Latitude, having but one Landing-place, to wit, In that Part where the English have their Fort. Its Circumference is of about five Leagues, being surrounded with unaccessible Rocks; You enter, or rather climb up to the Island, just near the Fort, by many Steps, near a Mile high, from whence a Soldier had broke his Neck, a few Weeks before, as he was going up, this being the only
Person that died there in six years before; The Air was extreamly wholesome here, the heat of the Sun being allay'd by the continual Dews and small Rains. It is a very fruitful Island, affording good store of Pease, Beans, Reddishes, Turneps, Cabbages, Aana's, Banana's, Citrons, Oranges, Melons and Pomegranates. The English told us, that Vines would not thrive in this Island. There is also a podigious Quantity of Rats, who consume all the Wheat and Rice that is sow'd. They have great plenty of Rabbits. They have several times transported some Horses thither, but they grew so wild in a little time, that they would let no body come near them; and if they were pursu'd and driven into a Corner, they would rather precipi∣tate themselves from the Rocks that surround the Island, into the Sea, than suffer themselves to be catch'd. There are also good Patridges, and some other sorts of wild Fowl; so that they enjoy here all the Conveniencies of Human Life, were it not for these Rats, which being their only redoubta∣ble Enemies, the English endeavour by all means possible, to extirpate from this Island, which be∣longs to the English East-India Company. The Inhabitants live upon Biscuit, Oil, and Salt-Beef, besides what their own Grounds furnish them with∣al. Most of them have their settled Habitations in the Island, and only come at certain times, in their turns, to do duty in the Fort. This Island affords a very delightful Prospect at a great distance at Sea, by reason of the vast height of the Rocks, which appearing at nine or ten Leagues distance, seem to out-brave the force of the whole Ocean.
CHAP. II. A Description of the Isle of Teneriffe. THE Isle of Teneriffe is about eighteen Leagues long, and ten broad. The Principal Fort, which lies under the eight and twentieth degree, has four Bastions, which commands the adjacent Town, call'd Vera Cruz, where is the safest Land∣ing in the whole Island. Towards the North on the Sea-side, there are three other small Forts, and on the South-side an∣other Fort, built in the nature of a Castle with round Towers. Betwixt the Sea-side and the Town, there are two small Forts, which defend the Passage that leads to the City. There are in the place three Monasteries, belonging to the Ja∣cobines, Carmelites and Austin Friars, as many Nunneries, and a Cathedral very handsomly built. About two Leagues from Lagona, there issues out of a Mountain a very large Spring, on both sides of which are very high Trees, who by the thickness of their Leaves, keep the Sun-beams from heating the Water, which is extreamly cool near the Spring. The circumjacent Hills were stor'd with Orange, Citron, and Pomegranate Trees, the Fruits of which cover'd the Grounds where they stood, on the foot of the Mountain, is seen a very pleasant Wilderness, near one side of which, the Water of the Spring fell from the descent of the Hill, with a pleasing noise, and gathering below in a Channel, run with an easie current for a League and a half thro' the adjacent Plains. From hence it was by a large Aqueduct,
about half a League in length, conved till within two hundred Paces distance of , which was furnished with fresh Water by very large Cisterns with Cocks for the use of the Inhabitants. There is also near the City a Hill a small Lake, surrounded with other Hills, where the Cattle belonging to the Inhabitants are furnished with Water. The People of Quality in the Isle of Teneriffe, are very obliging; But the Vulgar, are here, as all over Spain, very proud and lazy, there being scarce a Handycrafts-Fellow, but what has his great Sword on his side, whether at home or a∣broad; and will rather starve at home, or at the best rather be contented with Pulse and Roots, than to go to fetch it from abroad, there being great store of Wild-Fowl here. The Women wear Veils, but have a way of squinting through it with one eye. Their Wheat is not unlike the Turkey Wheat.The Pro∣ducts of Teneriffe. Malvasier Wine they have in great plenty. A whole Pipe cost commonly not above twenty Du∣cats. They pay seventeen Reals for Custom when it is exported, so that in all it does not amount to above fourscore and nine French Livers; A Pipe containing four hundred and fourscore pints of Pa∣ris measure, which is above a hundred English Gallons▪ They have here great plenty of Money, for which reason your Foreign Merchants Trade hither, with very great advantage. The chief Commodities to be vended here, are, Swords, Pistols, Knives, Combs, Cloths, Clokes, Black and Grey, Broad Hats, Ribons and Linen-Cloaths. Just opposite to Santa Cruz, there is another Harbour, which they call La Rota, the rest of this Island being environ'd by unaccessable Rocks. The Famous Picque of Teneriffe, which is two Leagues distant from Lgona, is 47812 Feet high▪ The top of it is never without Snow.
CHAP▪ III. Of the Cities of Fernamboucq and Olinde on the Coast of Brasil. THE City of Fernamboucq is built upon a Point of Land, having on one side the Ocean, and on the other a small branch of the Sea, which they call the River Sallee.The City of Fer∣namboucq. Its figure is Circular, con∣taining not above three hundred edifices, which de∣serve the name of well built houses, the rest being rather cottages, not above one story high. The Parish-Church stands in the Center of the Town. There is a small Island, which being separated by the abovementioned Branch of the Sea, from the City, is joyned to it by a long narrow Bridge sustained by forty five Arches, whereof some are of Stone, the rest of Wood, the last are built for the conveniency of the Tide, and the first to serve as a solid foundation of the whole Fabrick. It is called St. Anthony's Island, it contains about a hun∣dred Houses, besides three Monastries; one belong∣ing to the Recollects, which is a fine structure, the other to the Jefuits, and the third to the French Capucines. There is all along the Coast of Brasil a vast tract of Rocky Mountains, which run all along the Sou∣thern Coast of America even as far as the Streights of Magellan being above seven hundred Leagues in length; They are called the Recif in their Lan∣guage. This Congeries of Mountains has its large Bre∣ches in several paces, which most of them make
convenient Harbours, as all Fernamboq, which is counted one of the best Ports in all America. At the entrance of this Port, you see two very strong Forts,Forts near Fernam∣bouq. one of which is built upon some of the Rocks of the Recif, lying Perpendicular with the surface of the Water at High-Tide. Just on the point of Land, upon which is the City of Fermambouq, opposite to that of the Re∣cif is a Fort-Royal, Surrounded with very strong Pallisadoes. Two other Forts are Erected on the Land side, for the defence of the City, one of which lies on the West, the other on the South side of the Town. About a League and a half North from Fernam∣bouq,The City of Olinda. is the City of Olinda, formerly a very hand∣some City, approaching in bigness to the City of Orleans in France before it was ruined by the Hol∣landers. It was built upon four Hills, which af∣ford a very delightful prospect. There are as yet remaining a few goodly Houses, but the ruins of the old ones are sufficient testimonies of its former lustre. The remains upon one of these Hills stand∣ing to this day the house belonging to the Jesuits, which has cost a Hundred thousand Pounds build∣ing. Besides which, there are several other Mo∣nasteries belonging to the Benedictines, Capuchines, the Carmelites and Grey-Friars.
CHAP. IV. Of the Isle of Ceylon, and the Forts the Dutch are Possess'd of in that Island. THE Hollanders have several Colonies in the Isle of Ceylon, among which the Cities of Portugal and Colombo are the chiefest.The City of Portugal. Portugal lies in a very convenient Bay, about three Leagues di∣stant from a very high Mountain which appears at Sea in the shape of a Pique, like that of Teneriffe, and serve as a guide to the Mariners. Near the City is a very regular Fort, which defends the en∣trance of the Harbour. To the South of Portugal, betwixt that City and Colombo, there is another goodly Plantation upon an Eminence near the Sea-side, called Barberin. About twenty Leagues distant from Portugal is the City of Colombo; it's situate in a very fair plain, near the Sea-shore,The City of Colombo. being surrounded with a vast number of fine Trees, which afford a very delight∣ful Prospect. Just by is a very large Castle very considerable for its strength. Besides which they are Masters of Negombo and Japhnepatan, two very considerable Cities, and have Fortified all the We∣stern, Nothern and Southern Coasts of this Island; as for the Eastern parts, they have, as it seems, neg∣lected them, because thereabouts grows but little Cinnamon. The Portugueses had formerly in their Possession several Forts in this Island, which the Dutch have taken from them, and Demolished them. The
two choicest were called Tinkemale and Battecalo, situate betwixt the seventh and eighth Degree of Northern Latitude. The Last of these two is situate upon a River disemboguing in a very fair Bay,Battecalo. where there is ve∣ry safe riding at Anchor for Ships, who may with∣out any danger enter the River which is both very large and deep. On the point of this Bay there might be built a Fort, which would lie very con∣venient to Command the Bay. I am well assured that the King of Ceylon would be willing enough to bestow this tract of ground upon a Foreign Prince, in case they would assist him against the Dutch, who export the Cinnamon in prodigious Quantities, without paying any Cu∣stoms, under pretence that they having been at great Expences to deliver that Island from the Por∣tugueses, they ought to keep such Cities and Forts as they have taken from the Portugueses, and (which by virtue of a Treaty made with the King of Cey∣lon they were to deliver into his hands) in their possession as a pledge for their money till it be repaid, and that in the mean while they take the Cinnamon on discount of the interest. There might easily a correspondence be setled betwixt Battecalo and the City of Candie, the Re∣sidence of the King of Ceylon, being situate in the very Center of the Island, about two days journey from Battecalo, and as many from Colombo. Not far from the City of Candie, towards the side of Battecalo, there is a very fine Wood of Cin∣namon Trees, which hitherto has escaped both the hands of the Portugueses and Dutch, as being so near the Residence of the King. But it is most probable that the Dutch do not think it worth their while to put themselves to the charge, of sending a considerable Force at such a distance, the We∣stern parts alone abounding so much with Cinna∣mon, that from thence all the World may be fur∣nished sufficiently. The King of Ceylon has several times offer'd thi
Wood to Sale to any foreign power that would urnish him with a good Sum of Money, he being one of the richest, because the Dutch are Masters of the best Commodities of his Country, which hey take away without paying any thing for it. This Cinnamon Trade might very well turn to ac∣ount here, if it were put into the hands of the French, whereas now the Hollanders Monopolize his Commodity, which is no where to be found, but in the Isle of Ceylon. Tho there are not a few, who are of opinion, that the Dutch would not put themselves to such excessive Expences, unless they had some other prospect in view beyond the Cin∣namon Trade. CHAP. V. A Description of the City of Cochin. THE City of Cochin was formerly a very large City, but the Hollanders having burnt down all the Suburbs and one half of the City, have enclosed the same now with a very regular Fortification, containing Nine Bastions, whereof seven are on the Land-side, two upon the River. There is still remaining a very strong Tower built formerly by the Portugueses, which serves as a Ca∣stle to the City. There is an Artillery of three hundred Pieces of Cannon,The City of Cochin. as well of Iron as Brass in Cochin, a hun∣dred whereof are ready mounted upon the Basti∣ons. The Garrison is seldom above three hundred strong, composed of Dutch Soldiers, which consi∣dering the large compass of the Fortifications is but a slender defence, in a place where it may well be questioned, whether the Inhabitants are altoge∣ther
at their devotion, considering that the Indians, the Mestices and Portuguese Roman Catholicks, who without doubt would be willing enough to shake off the yoak, are six to one of the Dutch. There is still a titular King, a native of the Country at Cochin, in whose name all publick bu∣sinesses are transacted, these people having so strong an inclination to a Monarchical Government that it is impossible, to rase out the impression they have received from their Ancestors concerning the Roy∣al Authority. The Dutch took Cochin from the Portugueses in the year 1662, and perceiving that the King, that then was, shewed more Inclination for their Ene∣mies, than for them, they found means to put him to death with three of his next kindred. Two Brothers had the good fortune to escape their hands. The Eldest retir'd to Carnopoly, about four days journey distant from Cochin, and his Brother sought for refuge at Goa among the Portugueses, who gave him an allowance of four hundred Livers a Month. The Eldest, whose name was Godolme, was the rightfull Heir of the Kingdom, but the Prince to whom he was fled for shelter was not in a condi∣tion to reestablish him in his Throne, neither could the Portugueses pretend to restore him, who had embraced their Protection,How the utch be∣cme  of Cochin. unless they could re-take Cochin, and drive the Hollanders from thence, which they were not in a condition to attempt, these Princes were fain to quit their claim. To satisfie the common People, the Dutch East-India-Company gave one Montavy the Title of King of Cochin, whom they gave an allowance of a Crown a day, wherewith he was fain to live as contented as he could in his Palace near Cochin. The Streets of this City are very large and hand∣some, the Houses built of stone after the Portuguese Fashion, with fair Balconies. At the end of each of the Capital Streets are cross Streets, and in the Center of the City a very large Market place, the ordinary Rendezvous of the Garrison.
Of twenty three Churches which were built by the Portugueses, there is no more than one left in the hands of the Roman Catholicks, belonging to the Grey-Friars. The high Altars and all the Chappel are finely gilt, and beautified with Pictures. The Convent which was designed for forty Friars, runs to ruin, there being but one left now of all the rest, who most of them took refuge at Goa. This Church faces a very large Square, on the other side of which is the Governour's house built at the end of an Alley of Coco Trees, planted by the Dutch, since their being Masters of the City. The Church which formerly belong'd to the Je∣suits is now dedicated to the Divine Service of the Dutch Inhabitants, but that which bore the Name of St. Peter's-Church is turned into a Magazine. Towards the Sea side, are to be seen the ruins of that Famous Church called Nostra senhora dela sa∣vida, and nearer to the Fortifications, the Foun∣dation of one designed to be much bigger than the other. The rest are entirely demolished, and the Dutch have employed the stones of these Churches as of the best houses, towards making up their For∣tifications, which are fac'd with a kind of a red stone, extreamly hard, which they fetch from a neighbouring Rock. In the time of the Portugueses, there were two very stately Fountains in the City which have been ruined by the Dutch, who make now use of Well Water only, which is here pretty good. Every thing is Sold here at an extraordinary cheap rate; you buy a tolerable good Cow for a Crown, a good Hog for half a Crown, a Goose for four Pence, and a Pullet for two Pence, Rice and very good white Bread at the rate of a Penny▪ per Pound.
CHAP. VI. Some Particulars concerning the Cape of Good-Hope; of the Dutch Fort at Table-Bay, and of the Bay of Saldaigne. THE Inhabitants near the Cape of Good-Hope, call'd in their Language Cafres, or Hauten∣tottes,Inhabitants near the Cape of Good-Hope. are all black, both Men and Women go naked, only covering their privy Parts, with a piece of an Oxes-hide. It is very rare to meet here with a Savage who has above one Testicle, which is always the left, the right being taken out soon after they are born, this Ceremony being used among them, as Circumcision is among the Mahometans. The Chiefest among them wear a kind of a little Cloak, made out of the Skin of Beasts. They look upon Blackness as a great Perfection, and happy is he who is Master of a good old black earthen Pot or Frying-pan, the out-side of which serves them to blacken their Faces; which afterwards they beautifie, (tho' in a most barba∣rous manner) by making deep impressions in it with their Nails, in which they put Brick-dust. Their common Food is the Entrails of Beast. You seldom meet any of them, without good store of raw Tripe about them of all sorts of Beasts, which they look upon as the best Dainty. They all lead a Vagabond life, roving up and down in the Fields in the day-time, towards night
they retire to the Mountains or Forests, where they have their Huts, covered with the Hides of Beasts▪ near which they keep Fires all night long. There are not the least footsteps of Religion to be found among them, unless that they seem to shew a particular respect to the Fire, when the Sun dos not app. It is next to an impossibility to ima∣gine the barbariy of this Nation, and how little tion their manner of living has to the Customs of other Nations, who have received the least tincture of Civil Society. Table-Bay is near twelve Leagues in Compass,Table-Bay. the Country round about being extreamly fertile and beautiful. There is very safe riding at An∣chor here for Ships, which lying under a high Shoar, are on all sides protected against the vio∣lence of the Winds. Our Ships rid here at six Fathoms depth. Nevertheless is this Bay at certain Seasons pe∣ster'd with Hurricanes, which they call Raphales, and prove sometimes dangerous, to such Ships as are surprised by them in the Bay. The Dutch had formerly a Fort here of four Bastions,The Dutch Fort. which defended the entrance of the Bay; it was very strong, being well pallisado'd with a deep Ditch round about it, well provided with Cannon which commanded the Road; The Commander in chief, and the Factor general used to live within this Fort, but since they have built another Royal Fort of five Bastions, being all fac'd with square Stone, the other has been de∣molished, and the Seat of the Governour, and some other of their principal Men has been trans∣planted likewise from thence to this place. About two Leagues from the Sea-side, there is a very fine and richly furnished▪ House belonging to the Dutch East-India Company,Dutch East-India House. with a very fair Garden belonging to it, where you might see all sorts of Herbs and Pulse, and among the rest Cabbages of a prodigious bigness. Here were Olive-trees full of Olives, very fine Apples of
divers kinds, Bon Chretien Pears, Orange and Chesnut-trees,Very good Grapes. all of them either in Blossom, or stock'd with Fruits. About two Acres of Ground were enclosed, and planted with Vines, and the Grapes did not want above a fortnight or three Weeks to come to perfection. We met with a few Bunches in this Vineyard, which being pretty ripe, we tasted of them, but could not give an exact Judgment of their goodness; but those who had drunk of the Wine made out of these Grapes, assured us, that both in taste and goodness, it came near to the Rhenish Wine. All round about this House,Dutch Plantati∣ons. and from thence quite down to the Sea-side, we saw nothing but Dutch Plantations, the owners whereof held their Lands from the Dutch East-India Company, pay∣ing only some small yearly Quit-Rent; besides which, they were under an obligation to furnish the Company with a certain Quantity of Wheat at such a price as they should judge reasonable, and to truck the Products of their Grounds for such European Commodities as they stood in need of, and are imported there by the Dutch East-In∣dia Company. They are also forbidden to buy any thing from the Natives of the Country, for ready Money, because they should not diminish their ready Cash; but this precaution seems su∣perfluous, because these Savages will truck a Mut∣ton or Cow for a piece of roul'd Tobacco of the same length as the Beast.Bay of Sal∣daigne. The Bay of Saldaigne having been founded, and visited by Orders from the Commander in Chief of the Dutch-Fort at Table-Bay, they reported that there was very good Anchorage there, and great store of Fish; that on shoar they had seen Fallow-Deer, and multitudes of wild Fowl and Rabbits. That the Sea-Wolves, being thereabouts to be catch'd in great numbers, might prove a pro∣fitable Commodity by reason of their Skin, and the Oil that is drawn from their Flesh. They could not get sight of any of the Savages there. That
the worst inconveniency seems to be the difficulty there was of getting fresh Water, there being but one small Spring near the place, where they could come to an Anchor, all the rest being six Leagues distant from thence; and that there was scarce any Wood thereabouts.Islands in the Bay. They found and visited five Islands within the Bay, among which, as they judged, two might be fit to be cultivated, and to be stock'd with In∣habitants and Cattle, provided there could be found or digg'd Springs of sweet Water. The other three were so barren, as to be only a proper receptacle for Cormorants and other birds of Prey. CHAP. VII. Of the arrival of the Sieur de la Haye, Vice-Roy of the East-Indies, for the most Christian King in the Isle of Madagascar, and Mascareigne. THE Sieur De la Haye, of whom frequent men∣tion has been made in the foregoing Treatise, being constituted Viceroy of the East-Indies by His most Christian Majesty,rives a Madagas∣car. came to an An∣chor with ten of the King's Ships, near Fort Dau∣phin in the Isle of Madagascar, towards the latter end of November. On the fourth of December, a Throne being placed near the Gate of the Fort Dauphin, the Sieurs de Greteloup, Lieutenant Ge∣neral in the East-Indies, De la Rationere Marshal de Camp, and the Sieurs de Charmagou and la Case, with the rest of the Marine Officers, having taken their respective Places, the Sieur de la Haye's Pa∣tent being read in their presence, by virtue of which, he was Constituted Vice-Roy over the In∣dies.
in the King of France's Name, with a full Power to administer Justice, and exercise all other Acts belonging to the Government in all places under the King's Jurisdiction (even not except∣ed the Ecclesiasticks) all there present took the Oath of Allegiance to the King, and that of Fidelity to the Sieur de la Haye.Is acknow∣ledged as Vice-Roy. This done, he caused immediately a General Amnesty to be pu∣blished, in which were alo included the Natives of the Country, promising absolute Pardon for all what was past, and exhorting all His Majesty's Subjects in those Parts, to leave the Service of Foreigners, and return into the Pay of the French East-India Company, under pain of Death. Then arising from the Throne, he constituted the Sieur de Charmagou, Lieutenant-General in the King's Name, and the Sieur de la Case, Major of the Island, of which he took possession in the King's Name, into whose hands the East-India Company had resign'd it, by reason of the mismanagement of their Agents and Officers. The Sieur de la Haye, whose Authority was not limited as the former Governours had been, who could not undertake any thing of moment with∣out the approbation of the Directors and the Council, being resolved to bring under the King's Obedience the Neighbouring places, proposed to the Sieurs de Charmagou, and de la Case, to attack Remousaye, who being the next Neighbour to the French, had refused to do Homage to him. He had hitherto been an Ally of the French, but having lately married his Daughter to Rami∣lange, their mortal Enemy, the Sieur de la Haye thought it most advisable to thwart the Design of this new Alliance by an open Rupture. For which purpose, having demanded from them all the Arms they formerly had received from the French, and such Fire-locks as they had lately bought from a Dutch Ship, they sent word, that they were resolved not to part with their Arms, as long as they had any Life left them.
The Sieur de la Haye, having got together a Body of seven hundred French, and six hundred Madagascarians, besieged Remousaye in his Village, who behaved himself with great Bravery, and re∣pulsed the French with considerable Loss in several Attacks;Attacks the Na∣tives with∣out Success And finding himself not in a Condition to resist the Fury of his Enemies, he found means to make an honourable Retreat to a place where he could not be pursu'd but with a great deal of difficulty. The most are of opinion, that the ill Success of this Enterprise was to be attributed to the Jealou∣sie there was betwixt the Sieur de la Haye, and the Sieur de Charmagou, the last of which not brook∣ing the Affront of being Commanded in a place, where he had been Chief before, without question rendred the whole Design abortive. The Sieur de la Haye, having been convinc'd by experience that all his Industry, Policy, and absolute Power stood him in little stead in a place, where there was a Faction of a contrary Interest, who directed all their Actions for a far different End from his Intentions, he thought it most ad∣visable, to leave the management of this Island to those, who had contracted a habit of command∣ing there, long before his arrival in those Parts. For which purpose, having call'd together all his Officers and others that were come along with him from France, he ordered them to embarque on board the Ship under his Command, with whom he set sail for the Isle of Mascareigne. Thus was the Isle of Madagascar,Leaves Madagas∣car. about which they had made such glorious Projects in France, entirely abandoned by the King's Forces, and not long after by the Company, there being scarce any left of the French Nation, but a few of the most antient French Inhabitants, and some Missioners, who resolving to stay behind, were afterwards, for the most part massacred by the Natives, few of them escaping into France.
The Sieur de la Haye came to an Anchor near the Isle of Mascareigne,Comes to an Anchor in the Isle of Masca∣reigne. directly opposite to the French Plantation, call'd St. Denis, on the first of May, and tarried there till towards the latter end of June following. In the mean while he caused the General Amnesty and other Declarations which he had brought with him from France, to be publi∣shed, among which, there being one against spoil∣ing the Game, under pain of Death, he ordered a certain French Gentleman, who had been catch'd a Hunting, to be ty'd to a Tree, in order, as it was supposed, to have him shot to death. But judg∣ing the terror of Death to be a sufficient Pu∣nishment for his Crime, he order'd the Fusileers that were to do the Execution, to discharge their Fusees without Ball, which being done according∣ly, the poor Gentleman was sav'd for that time; but it seems Death had appear'd to him in so ter∣rible a shape, that he had frightned him out of his Life, he dying a few hours after he was taken from the Tree. The Sieur de la Haye finding his presence no further necessary in Mascareigne took on board of his own Ship, the Sieur de Renaud, who had commanded there in Chief before, and having committed the whole Management of Affairs to one Hure, a Creature of his own, he set sail for Suratte.
CHAP. VIII. The Taking and Loss of St. Thomas by the Sieur de la Haye. THE Sieur de la Haye, after some stay at Su∣ratte, set sail with the Ships under his Com∣mand to the Coast of Cormandel, and to the Isle of Ceylon.Attacks St. Thomas. Coming near St. Thomas under pretence of some Robberies and other Enormities committed against the French, but in effect to make himself Master of a Place, which might serve for a safe Retreat to those of his Nation, living in those parts, he made a descent in the Isle of St. Thomas, and soon made himself Master of the principal City,Takes it. belonging to the Mahometans. They being resolved to draw out the Thorn, that stuck so close in their flesh, and which they were not without reason afraid, would soon be con∣verted into an impregnable Fort, if they gave him leisure to effect it, they soon after attack'd, and closely besieg'd him with all the Forces of the whole Island, in hopes to recover their Loss; But the Sieur de la Haye, who knew the Impor∣tance of the Place, being resolv'd not to part with it upon easie Terms, defended himself with so much bravery, that the Infidels gain'd but little ground; Thus having endur'd the Siege with an unparallell'd bravery for the space of two years, and being reduc'd to the last Extremity for want of Provisions,Loses it again. he was at last forced to capitulate, and return'd from thence in a Dutch Ship, to France, where he afterwards behaved himself with great bravery upon several occasions, and
being made Lieutenant-General, was kill'd in an Engagement near Thionville. CHAP. IX. Of the City of Suratte, its Inhabitants, Traffick, and what else is remarkable thereabouts. THE City of Suratte in the Kingdom of Gusu∣ratte,Its bigness under the Jurisdiction of the Great Mo∣gul, comes in bigness near to Roan in France; its Inhabitants are Indians, some of whom are Ma∣hometans, some Pagans. Besides which there are Persians,Inhabitants Arabians, Turks, Armenians, French, English, Portugueses, Dutch and several other Eu∣ropean Nations, who have setled themselves here for the conveniency of Commerce. There are a∣mong the other several Sects of the Pagans, some who call themselves Persis, who being descended from the race of the Ancient Persians, that were driven from their native Country by the Mahome∣tans, do in Imitation of their Ancestors, Adore the Fire to this day. The Pagan Priests or Doctors are called Bramans,The Bra∣man. some among them pretend to some knowledge in Philosophy. They are clad in Cotton of a light reddish colour, but so full of slashes and cuts that they appear half naked▪ We saw one march at a cer∣tain time thus through the streets, who being fol∣lowed by a great number of Women, some among them who seemed to be more devout than the rest, woud run before him, and kneeling down take
hold of his Privy parts to cure them, as we were informed, of their Barrenness. The Banjans are Pagans who apply themselves chefly to trade. The City of Suratte is Surrounded with a strong Brick Wall twelve foot thick, each Gate being de∣fended by two Towers.Houses of Suratte. The Houses of the com∣mon People, are built only with Canes and Bran∣ches of the Palm Tree; Those of the Richer sort are of Wood and stone, but at the best not above two stories high, flat on the top with Terrasses, ad∣orned with flowers and water-works, for the bet∣ter conveniency and diversion of its Iahabitants, e∣specially among the Mahometans. Their Houses have very few windows towards the streets, most of them looking into the Court, they being extra∣vagantly jealous of their Wives, for fear they should be too much taken with strangers, of whom there is here always a great number of all Nations. They are no less careful of their Treasure, for which purpose they have, as they have in Persia, se∣cret deep wells, which being covered very artifici∣ally with large stones, and strengthned with thick Iron Bars, they hide in them all their most precious movables, over which they put their Beds, and make them their ordinary sleeping places. At one end of the City of Suratte upon the very Banks of the River called Tapty,The Castle of Suratte. you see a very fair Castle with four large Towers of Free-stone, with a broad Ditch always full of Water. It has a very good Garrison, no body being permitted to enter it but those belonging to the Garrison. Every hour in the day and night, they sound the Trumpet. The Governour has no dependance on the Gover∣nour of the City, and never remains in the same station above three years, when he is re-called by the Great Mogul. They are so careful in prevent∣ing any body from approaching near the Castle, that they keep constant Centries at fifty paces di∣stance round about it, for that purpose. The Prince Sevagi, who has several times attack'd and
Plundered the City of Suratte, could never make himself Master of this Castle. The chief Secretary,The Civil Officers at Suratte. who depends immediaey on the Great Mogul, and is entrusted with all the Registers and Accounts of what is imported at Su∣ratte, of which he sends from time to time Copies to Court, is the next in Dignity to the two Gover∣nours to wit of the City and Castle. There is also a Mufti, whose Office is to take cognisance of all Religious concerns; A Cadi for the interpretation of the Law; A Judge Criminal, who is invested with an Authority to punish Criminals, nevertheless under this limitation, not to inflict a Capital pu∣nishment upon any without giving an Account of the nature of the Crime to the Great Mogul, and receiving his approbation. When he appears abroad he is surrounded by his Archers well Armed▪ he is Captain of the night Watch and Patroles round the City, every Night from nine till three in the Morning. He ought to be responsible for all Robberies committed within the Precincts of this great City, but it is very rare∣ly known that he gives satisfaction for any, very few of the Inhabitants daring to encounter him up∣on such an occasion. The Provost who is to take care of the Circumjacent Country on the same ac∣count, is also liable to make satisfaction for all Rob∣beries committed upon the High-ways, but he so closely follows the footsteps of the Judge Crimi∣nal in this point, that he seldom makes any repa∣ration to the losers. The Mahometans all keep their Heads shaved, but the Pagans look upon their hair as their chief Ornament.The Dress of the In∣dians. All the Subjects of the Great Mogul of what Religion soever, wear Turbants and Wast-coats not unlike our Cassocks over their shirts. The Mahometans make use of streight Drawers, which reach down to their Ancles, the Pagans wear a kind of a Petticoat; neither of them trouble them∣selves about Shooes or Stockings, unless that some of them wear Sandals not unlike our Slippers,
which, among the richer sort, are finely embroi∣dered with Gold. When they go abroad they wrap about them a kind of a Toilet in the nature of a Cloak; some of which are very rich, and amount to a great price. The Mahometan Women wear very fine Wast-coats under their Shifts, which are made of Mus∣lin, and reach only to the Wast; round which they wrap a piece of Stuff, which comes down quite to their Feet, one corner of it turning up∣wards all along the Back, over the Head. Some of these Ladies, who are of a freer Car∣riage than the rest, make use of the same Dress with the Men, except that their Smock-Sleeves, come but just to the Elbow, their Arms be∣ing for the rest adorn'd with Bracelets of Dia∣monds, and Gold, and Silver Locks, and Chains, which they also wear round their Ankle-bones; they seldom walk without Pattins, because they judge it a great advantage to appear tall. They have Holes both in their Ears and Nostrils, in which they put Rings. They wear also many of them on their Fingers, and among the rest, one with a small Looking-glass in it, which serves them to contemplate themselves. The Pagan Women go with their Faces unco∣vered; but the Mahometans never without a Vail. The Indian Women are generally very neat, but especially in their Hair, which are always very fine, and dress'd with rich Perfumes. The Pagan Women, but especially among the Parsis, are much more careless in their Dress than the Mahometans, but they exceed them in the richness of their Jewels, their Necklaces, and Bracelets; they wear also a kind of Cornets upon their Heads, are for the most part very handsom, and extraordinary agreeable in Conversation, which is so Charming, that they seem to be made for the enjoyment of Love. I don't know any place where Heremophro∣dites are more common,Heremo∣phradites. than at Suratte, they are
obliged to wear besides their Female Dress, a Tur∣bant, for distinction's sake. All the Burying-places are without the Walls of Suratte; Those belonging to the French, English, and Dutch, are surrounded with Brick-Walls; The Mahometans have their Sepulchres in an open Field without any enclosure, and are sometimes in form of a Pyramide,Their Se∣pulchres. sometimes of a Cupola, made of Plaister or Brick; the worst sort being of a square figure of Stone, not unlike those which are near Arles and Nismes in France. The Pagan Clergymen have their separate Bu∣rying-places, their dead Carcasses being not to be burnt, no more than those of Children, that die under two years of Age. The rest of the Pagan-Indians are burnt after their Decease, after they have been well wash'd in the River Tapty, which they look upon as sacred. Such Wives as do not burn themselves with their deceased Husbands, are not regarded among the Pagan-Indians, because they have betray'd their weakness in shunning Death; wherefore they always remain Widows, unless they renounce their Religion, and turn either Christians or Ma∣hometans. The Parsis neither burn, neither interr their dead Bodies;The Parsis. they lay them upon an Iron-Grate, and thus expose them to the Sun, till their Flesh being consum'd, the Bones fall through the Grate into the Hole that is underneath the Grate. These Parsis have no Temples, every Fire-place being their Altar, where they pay their Devotion. The Mahometans have several goodly Mosques in Suratte, besides which they have many others in the circumjacent places, which, tho' entitled with the names of Mosques, are no more than so many Arches with a ole in them towards the side of Mecha, and a small Cistern near it, for the Conveniency of bathing.
The Pagan Temples are all without the City; tho' some of the richer sort, by the powerful In∣tercession of good Presents, obtain leave to have private ones in their Houses; It is in these Tem∣ples they exercise their Devotion, where they a∣dore and bring their Offerings to their idols, which sometime, resemble some living Creatures, but for the most part are very strange and ridi∣culous Postures, the Offerings serve for the main∣tainance of the Bramans. Without one of the Gates of Suratte,A large Cistern near Su∣ratte. there is a great Tanke or Cistern of sixteen Angles, con∣taining in compass two thousand Paces; it is pav'd at the bottom with Freestone, having at e∣very Angle, a pair of Stairs to go down into it, except three which are reserv'd for watering-pla∣ces. This Cistern is during the rainy Season, fill'd with Water, which being conveyed thither by a Canal, formerly supply'd the whole City with Water, till of late years, the Inhabitants are more commodiously furnished with it from five very large and fine Wells. In the very center of this Cistern is a magnificent Structure of Freestone, whither you must go to in a Boat. On the same side of the City, where this Ci∣stern is, but at some miles distance, is the Prin∣cesses Garden, so call'd, because it belongs to the Sister of the Great Mogul; it has several fine Chap∣pels, beautified with Walks on both sides. About a Musket shot from thence,The sacred Tree. is to be seen that Tree, call'd by the Pagan Indians, The sacred Tree, of such a bigness, that its Branches spread two hundred and fifty Paces round. The Bani∣ans have a particular Veneration for this Tree, and adorn it with Banners; under its shadow is a Pagan Temple, resembling a Grotto, dedicated to a certain Idol, which they call, The Mother of Mankind. At the Gate, there is constantly at∣tending a Braman▪ who receives the Offerings, and marks the Fore-heads of such as come to pay their Devotion, with a red Stroke.
All round about Suratte are many large Wells, of about 36 Foot Diameter, for the conveniency of Passengers to squench their Thirst, provided with very commodious Steps. They draw the Water out of these Cisterns or Wells in great quan∣tities, by Oxen,How they water their Grounds. who perform this service by the help of certain Wheels; The Water being after∣wards by small Channels or Ditches, conveyed all over the neighbouring Grounds, renders them ve∣ry fertile, so that they bear Wheat, notwithstand∣ing the violence of the heat of the Climate; and it seems not improbable, that the like Invention might be put in practise in the Isle of Madagascar, with the same advantage. The delicious Gardens about this City,Gard near S∣ratte. are the most delightful in the World, affording among other Fruits of all sorts, great store of Grapes, nevertheless they don't make any Wine here, be∣cause both the Mahometans and Pagans, rather ad∣mire the Tary, or Palm-tree Wine, which is al∣together like the same which is drawn at Cape-Verd. All the Ships coming to Suratte out of the Ter∣ritories belonging to the Great Mogul, as all other Mahometan or Indian Vessels enter over the Bar of the River Tapty, six Leagues from Suratte, as all the European and other Christian Vessels come to an Anchor in the Port of Sovaly, at five Leagues distance from the City. All Ships are visited by the Commissioner-General of the Custom-house, assisted by his inferior Officers; you pay two and one half per Cent. for all coin'd Silver or Gold, the Mahometans and Indians pay five per Cent. Custom for all Merchandises, but the Christians no more than four per Cent. As you go from Sovaly by Land to Suratte,The Port of Sovaly. you cross a most delicious Champion Country, where there is great plenty of good Pastorage, till you come to a Ferry-boat, which transports you to the other side of the River. There are scarce any Houses at Sovaly, unless a few for the conveniency
of foreign Seamen: Besides which, there are here three great Factories, to wit: of the French, En∣glish and Dutch East-India Companies, each of which are distinguished by their Banners of their respective Nations, which are to be seen on the top of their Houses. But when any European Ships arrive in this Port, the Persians, Indians, Armenians and Turks, plant here their Tents or Booths in such numbers, as to give it the resem∣blance of a very handsom Fair. The City of Suratte may well be accounted the Staple of the Indies and all Asia, and may con∣tend for the Superiority for its Commerce, with any City in the World. For, here they trade with Pearls, Diamonds, Ambergreese, Civet, Musk, Gold, Silk, Stuffs, Calicoes, Spices, Indigo, and in short, all the Commodities, which, are brought thither from all parts of the World. CHAP. X. Of the Empire and Riches of the Great Mogul. THE Empire of the Great Mogul, call'd o∣therwise Indosthan, is bordered on the East and West, by the Rivers Indus and Ganges, the Mountains of Zayatay on the North, and the Great Indian Peninsula, as far as Cape Camroin to the South. All the petty Kings and Princes of this Peninsula, from Suratte, as far as Cananor, are tri∣butary to him. The City of Agra is the Capital of all Indosthan,The City of Agr and the largest and most populous in all the Indies; it is situate under the 20th degree. The Castle of
Agra is but at some distance from the fair River Camroin, betwixt which and the Castle, there are certain places appointed for the exercising of Troops, for the Combats of Elephants, and for such other Sports as the Great Mogul does divert himself with at certain times. Within the Precinct of this Castle is the Royal Palace,Its Castle. which has three distinct Courts, each of them embellished with fine Portico's and Galleries richly gilt, where the Omrats or Lords, the Offi∣cers of the Court and of the Guards, have their Lodgings. Behind this there are several other most magni∣ficent Pallaces, which are very pleasantly situated near the River side. To be short, Agra infinite∣ly exceeds Suratte, its Market-places, Mosques, Temples, Tombs, Gardens and Bagnio's, being much more magnificent in all respects. The Great Mogul does not at present keep his Residence at Agra,Where the Great Mo∣gul keeps his Resi∣dence. but at Dely, four Leagues fur∣ther from Suratte than Agra. He there keeps his Court, which for its magnificence exceeds all o∣thers in those Parts; his Palace is half a League in compass, where is to be seen his Throne, so Fa∣mous in the Indian Histories, being composed of what is most valuable and precious in the Indies, which ever since the Reign of the Great Tamerlain, has been deputed by his Successors, to the present Great Mogul Auren Zebe, (who deduces his Pedi∣gree from that Great Warrior) for the beautifying of this Throne, to render it the most accomplish∣ed in the World. The Great Mogul wears upon his Arm a Diamond, of an inestimable Value, being as big as a Pullets Egg. This Diamond was stoln out of the Diamond-Mines belonging to the King of Bisnagar,Diamond-Mines. betwixt Tonguin and Pegu, where every day are 20000 Men at work. The King reserves all the best Di∣amonds for his own Uses, which are not to be sold. The best of those we have in Europe, being only look'd upon as inconsiderable, are sold to the Eu∣ropean
Merchants. Such Diamonds as are abroad, and exceed the common sizes are all stoln, as the above-mentioned Diamond was, belonging to the Great Mogul, which weighs two hundred four∣score and ten Mangetins, each Mangetin being five Grains. The Great Mogul sets aside every day two hours for publick Audiences, and dispensing of Justice to his Subjects, in the presence of the Great Lords of his Court, who stand by with their Hands cross their Stomachs. His standing Forces are al∣ways three hundred thousand Horses, of which fifty thousand are his Guards. The rest are divi∣ded in the several Garrisons, under the Jurisdicti∣on of their particular Governours, who never have above ten thousand Men under their Com∣mand, and are to assemble upon the first Sum∣mons from the Great Mogul, at the Rendezvouz, were he sometimes Musters all his Forces, consist∣ing of 30000 Horse. Their Infantry is very in∣considerable. At the Great Mogul's Court (as indeed in all o∣thers in the Indies) nothing is to be done without Money; The best and most accepable Comple∣ment you can make to the Courtiers here, is, to bring your Presents along with you, when you are admitted into their presence. There is no Nation but what is welcome to them, provided they make use of the Gold Key, which in∣deed, opens a free Passage to all, in most Courts in Europe. The Arms used by the Subjects of the Great Mogul, are; Swords, Ponyards, Bows and Ar∣rows, Javellins and Pistols. The Infantry is pro∣vided with Piques and Muskets. They also make use of Armours and Head-pieces. Before ever the Great Moguls kept their Court at Agra or Dely, their Residence were at Lahor, under the 30th degree of North Latitude. Be∣sides the Ruins of a large and magnificent City, the Royal Palace remains entire to this day.
All the way betwixt Agra and Lahor (which is above a hundred and fifty Leagues) the Country is planted with Trees near the Road side, which appears like one Ally of so many Leagues. Besides the Provinces of Gusuratte, Agra, Dely and Lahor, the Great Mogul has sixteen more under his Jurisdiction, each of which may pass very well for a Kingdom. The Province of Cachenjire ex∣cels all the rest for its pleasant Situation, but as to its Revenues, it is less considerable than any of the rest: The whole yearly Revenue of the Great Mogul, amounts to three hundred and fifty Mil∣lions of Livres per Annum. In the Territories of the Great Mogul, there are Elephants, Rhinoceros's, Camels, Dromedaries, Bouflers, Horses, Mules; Mutton, Rabbits, Hogs, Lions, Tigers, Leopards, Panthers, Dogs, Apes; all sorts of Birds of Prey, Peacocks, Pullets, Pidgeons, Patridges, Parrots, and all sorts of wild Fowl. The Grounds are generally fertile; the Men are very dextrous and ingenious at any thing they undertake, and the Women very hand∣some and complaisant. The Cities are for the most part, very pleasantly situated, their Market places and Squares very convenient, their Gardens and Buildings most magnificent; especially their publick Structures, which are erected either by their Princes or rich Merchants, who generally are of the Race of the Banians. The whole Country is full of publick Inns for the conveniency of Foreigners and other Travellers, where they may be accom∣modated with every thing, that a plentiful Coun∣try can afford for the conveniency of Mankind.
CHAP. XI. Of the Musk, and from whence it comes. THE Musck which is sold at Suratte is brought thither from Tonquin and Bengalle, from whence it is Transported into Europe; they put it up in Leaden Boxes, notwithstanding which it loses a third part in weight:The King∣dom of Betton. But its true Origine is neither in Tonquin nor Bengalle, but in the King∣dom of Betton. This Kingdom is under the 42th Degree, about 300 Leagues North from the Mouth of the River Ganges, which disembogues into the Sea of Bengalle, being surrounded on all sides with unaccessible Rocks. The King of this Country, whom they call Geudonfrain, is a Soveraign Prince, who has no dependency on the Great Mogul or any other King, living always in Tranquility, by rea∣son of these high Mountains, which serve them as a Bulwork against any Attempts of the Enemies. The Inhabitants are all of a white Complexion, very tall, have large and flat Noses, and for the rest, are a very simple People. They seldom Tra∣vel beyond the compass of their own Country, un∣less it be a few among them who Trade to China, but they never come within the Territories of the Great Mogul, and they suffer but very few of his Subjects to Trade among them. It is the general Opinion, that this Country of Betton is the only in the World which produces the Creature that furnishes us with that Perfume called Musk. It is Transported from thence through the King∣dom of Bengalle, into the Country of the Great
Mogul, into Persia, the Red Sea, Turkey, and Eu∣rope. And on the Eastern-side, into Tartary, China, and Japan. The Creature that bears the Musk is not unlike a She-Goat; The Inhabitants catch them a Hunt∣ing,How they Catch this Creature. and shoot them with Arrows. Sometimes they dig Holes and thus catch them in the Trap. They have also another way of entangling them in Nets, and so knock them on the head; For they fasten very large Nets round the Woods where they know them to resort in whole Troops; which done, they make a noise with a certain Instrument, called by the Inhabitants, Gomene, which having a sound most like our Bells, these Creatures are thus frightned and catch'd in the Nets. Both Males and Females have betwixt the Flesh and Skin, just under the Navel▪ a certain Bag or Bladder of a Semicirculer Figure, one part being joined to the Flesh, which being full of an Un∣ctious Substance, is sometimes bigger and plumper, sometimes less and flatter; These Substance is these that we call Musk. Great care must be taken in gathering this Per∣fume not to break the Bladder or Vessel that con∣tains it,How Musk is gathered▪ for fear of loosing part of so precious a Commodity. To prevent which, they commonly cut some small part of the Flesh where it adjoins to it, out with the Bag, which, after it becomes dry, is easily separated from it, when it appears like a Ball and one entire Bag, if it be otherwise, they suppose it to be Adulterated. They have a way of sewing up the Slit so artificially, that it is very difficult to be discerned.
CHAP. XII. Some Propositions made by the Sieur de Rennefort for the Improve∣ment of the French East-India Company. HAving already shew'd the true Causes, which in all Human Probability ruin'd the Trade of our East-India Company in the Isle of Mada∣gascar, and entirely lost us these Colonies, which were of such consequence to us, I think it my Duty to propose some means by which this Com∣pany may be settled upon a more firm Foundation and promise it self better success for the fu∣ture. First of all,East and West-In∣dia Com∣panies to be join'd. I lay this down as a Fundamental Rule, That both the East and West-India Compa∣nies are to be join'd into one, that so being but one and the same▪ both their Stock and Forces may be united, and consequently be rendred more Power∣ful, the better to defend themselves against the At∣tempts of their Ennemies, who being Envious at their Success, will not in all likelihood meet with the same Advantage against them when they find them to act with united Counsels and Purses, than they might if their Interests are separated. All of what Degree soever should have free admittance to this Company: I would have some of the Prelacy, many of the Nobility and Magi∣stracy, have considerable Shares in it. For the rest, They should endeavour to make such as have
had onsiderable Commands both by Sea and Land, the richest Merchants and Citizens of Paris, Roan, Lyons, and the other chief Cities of the Kingdom, Members of this Society. There ought to be distinct Offices settled, one for the Management of the Political Part, the other for Traffick; each of them under the Dirction of a President and Commissioners, who being Men of Sense, and such as have been in the Indies be∣fore, ought to have their Voices, and take Cogni∣zance of all Matters relating to their respective Offices of the Company, who ought to provide them with a competent yearly Salary. The Lords of the first, and of the most Illustrious Families of France should be constituted Generalissimo's, one for the East, the other for the West-Indies. These ought to derive their Authority, and full Power to Com∣mand in Chief from the King, without controul, in all such Places as are Dependent from the said Company, and all the Directors, and other Agents, who are entrusted with the Management of Affairs in Persia, both the Indies, China, and Japan; and finally, all such Officers as have any Commissions on account of the said Company, beyond the Bor∣ders of Europe, ought to receive their Orders from these Generalissimo's. The Persons chosen for the discharge of so great a Trust,What Gene∣rals are to be chosen. ought to be such as have signalized them∣selves by their great Actions, and are Endowed with Moderation, Justice, Constancy, Valour, Piety, and such other Qualifications as are requi∣site for the discharging their Office, in a station of so much consequence to the whole Nation. Persons of a Noble Extraction and equally Qua∣lified with such Endowments, when strengthened with so great a Character, are most suitable to the Genius of the French Nation, who living under the Jurisdiction of a great and vertuous Prince at home, don't without Reluctancy submit to the Commands of others, who have scarce any title to their Greatness, than perhaps bare chance, and are
more beholding for it to Fortune than their own Merits. We ought in this Point to follow the footsteps of the Portugueses, who have found their Viceroy's in the Indies, (who are always chosen out of the Noblest Families of Portugal) prove very advantageous to their Affairs. I would have the Sea-Captains to be chosen for that Service, of betwixt 35 and 45 years of Age; If they be much older, their frequent Trials and Hazards of the Seas, makes them more timerous than they ought to be; whereas young People are more daring, and consequently much more proper to undertake those Hazards which must needs at∣tend new Discoveries and unknown Countries. I take it for granted, that there are few places in those parts, were this Company strengthned and established under the Protection of Lewis the Great, may not establish themselves, either by the Consent of the Inhabitants or force of Arms; wherefore I judge it advisable to establish Colonies on the African Coast, about 600 Leagues distant from one another at farthest, and among the rest to take care that one may be settled as near as possibly can be near the Cape of Good Hope; Some there must also be established in America, but especially on the Coast of Brasil. It would also be very conve∣nient to make our selves Masters of one of the Islands under the Torrid Zone, near the African Coast; where care must be taken to build a good Fort for the security and conveniency of such as from time to time should be sent thither from France, the better to inure them by degrees to the Sea-Air and the Hot Climate. All these Places will be of great service at one time or other to the French Ships in their Voyages to the East-Indies, it being unquestionable, that one of the main Inconveniencies in those long Voyages, proceeds from the want of convenient Harbouring where to refresh themselves; and to seek for a place of Retreat among Strangers is ve∣ry chargeable, and seldom granted but under very
strict Limitations, and consequently ought not to be relied upon, nor to be made use of but in case of necessity. These places will also afford another considerable advantage, which is, that such Persons that have lived there for sometime, may be carried with much better prospect to the Indies, than these, who but lately were brought out of Europe, foras∣much as they being already accustomed to the heats of the Climate, their constitution must needs be more agreeable to the Climate of the Indies. I would advise to carry to the Indies no other but Secular Priests, the rest being generally Ambitious and too much addicted to their own Interests, and always intermeddling with State-Affairs, and such other Matters as have not the least affinity with the Character they ought to bear in the World. I would have this Company take this for a Maxim in their Colonies: One Nation, one Reli∣gion. The Dutch mixed with the French, and the Hugonots with the Catholicks, did never live in a good Union. We are obliged for this to the Pie∣ty of Lewis le Grand, that in France there is now but one, and that the true antient Religion; nei∣ther see I the least reason, why the French should have any occasion to make use of strangers in their Colonies in the Indies. I am well assured that the French are alone in a capacity to live under what Climate soever; They Inhabit a Country surround∣ed by the Spaniards, Portugeses, English and Dutch, who have establshed themselves under the Torrid-Zone, in the Indies, and in America. To give the French their due; there is not a more Civiliz'd Nation in the World, their Manners and Conversation being look'd upon as most agree∣able to Introduce themselves in all places. Besides which they are very Populous, Brave and Daring, which makes them have an easie access wherever they come▪ I appeal to experience, the kind Re∣ception they met with in the Empire of the Great
Mogul, of Calicut, Siam, and other places in the Indies, of late years, are so many convincing de∣monstrations, that these Princes received them in their Territores with a more than ordinary satis∣faction. Care ought to be taken that some Persons may be sent into Japan, to undeceive that Prince, con∣cerning the wrongful opinion the Japoneses are preposess'd with in prejudice of the Catholick Reli∣gion. And all opportunities ought to be courted to get footing in this, as well as the Chinese Empire. But it ought to be observed, that the persons in∣trusted with these Negotiations in these two Em∣pires, as well as in the other parts of the Indies, ought to be men of Experience and Authority: These, as well as all other publick Affairs of Con∣sequence, ought not to be left to the management of Merchants; as it is in Holland, where Merchants have a great share in managing Affairs of state, and the Courts of Justice, and consequently are better qualified for such business than those of France. Care ought to be taken that from time to time, Envoy's may be sent to those parts, who may re∣lieve one another; and that they may be provided with good Yearly Salleries which must be paid them exactly, without being pinch'd in their Al∣lowances by those who have the management of the Treasury in their hands. For if Persons in such a Station find themselves neglected, they will be sure to lose no opportunity to retrieve themselves at any rate. It is also absolutely necessary for the Company, to have a Certain City both in the East and West-Indies, which lying, as near as can be, in the Center of the French Colonies, must be the residence of the Generalissimo's, each in his respective place. The Cities ought to be of an Advantagious situati∣tion, both in respect of their Fortifications and the conveniency of their Harbours. The Isle of Madegascar ought to be considered as the chief place of Retreat for such Ships of the
Company as Sail to the East-Indies. I am abso∣lutely of opinion, that the first project made in France concerning that Island, ought not to be laid aside, but is to be pursued to all its intents and purposes. For besides that, it is not for the Ho∣nour of France thus to abandon an Enterprise, which they look'd upon as so advantagious to the Nation; The situation of this Island, its Products and Riches▪ are sufficient Invitations for us to e∣stablish our Colonies among them. It ought to be taken into Consideration, that this Island lies betwixt the two Indies, there is as good a Road near Fort-Dauphine, and in the Bay of Antogil. Beef there is in such plenty, that we have taken forty Thousand Oxen at a time, after we had defeated one of their Grands. Wild-Fowl, Fish, Fruits, Grapes, Honey and Wax it produces in great abundance, and the very Mountains bring forth good store of Rice. Their Waters are excel∣lently good, and the Ground is very Rich and Fruitful. There is not the least question, but that if the Grounds were carefully cultivated they would produce very good Wheat, and the Grapes might be brought to maturity. But if it were o∣therwise, Wheat may be easily Transported thither from Suratte, from the Coast of Malabar and Co∣romandet, where it is very Cheap. The defect of good Wine might be easily supplyed from the Ca∣nary Islands, where it costs not above four Pence a Pint, and a Pint considering its strength, will go further than a Quart of French Wine; besides that, this Wine gows better by keeping, it being much finer after it has lain four years, than it was at the first. It would also be no difficult matter to transport thither of our Grave Wine, Persian and Goat Wines, and as much Brandy as they have oc∣casion. There is scarce any Commodity which the Euro∣peans are Masters of in Africa, America▪ and Asia, but what you meet with in the Isle of Madagascar▪ They have Pepper, a sort of Nutmegs, and Clove-Trees,
all sorts of Gums,Riches of Madags∣car. Spices, Sugar, To∣bacco, precious Stones, Silver and Gold. I cannot be persuaded, that what the Natives tell us is true; to wit, that what Gold they have, was brought into the Island by some Ships which Casu∣ally came near that shoar, whereof some perished thereabouts; there being scarce a Man or Woman so mean, but what have some Golden Ornaments about them; not to mention here the Treasures hoarded up by their Grands, which they never touch but in case of the greatest extremity; and seems to be a convincing argument, that there are some Gold Mines in this Island. The Sieur de la Case was not ignorant of this ad∣vantage, and Monsieur de la Milleray, was so well convinced of the Riches and true Value of the Products of this Island, that he would never part with his right, while he lived. The Sieur de Caron got once into his possessi∣on a piece of Amber-Greese, weighing Eighteen-Ounces. There is a Prodigious quantity of Silk and Cotton in the Island, and yet these are the chief Commodities, which are brought out of the Territories of the Great Mogul, and of fourteen o∣ther Kings, his Tributaries, who all must be court∣ed by great Presents to allow the Exportation of these Commodities. As for the Air of Madagascar, it is very whole∣some and pure, witness those of its Inhabitants who arrive to a great age, it being common a∣mong them to see some of a Hundred and Twenty years of Age. It cannot be deny'd, but that it has not proved so agreeable to the Frenh constituti∣on, but if the matter be duly weighed, it will ap∣pear, that this proceeded more from the change of Diet, and from their carlesness in not keeping their Stomachs warm, than from any other cause; For I have made this observation, that those born under a cold Climate, if transported into those parts, ought not to neglect that point, as they ten∣der their health and lives.
There is one objection to be made, to wit: That several other Nations, who have taken a▪ view of the Isle of Madagascar, never shew'd any Inclination to Pant their Colonies here; But this I think derogates nothing from the true value which ought to be put upon this Island. For it is possible,Why other Nations never set∣led in this Island. that these Nations who are less powerful than the French, being before settled in many o∣ther places, found themselves not in a capacity to Conquer an Island, which is the biggest in the whole World. The Portugueses have their Settlements in the In∣dies, and the Ports of China. The Dutch in the Isle of Ceylon, and the Molucees, and in short in all o∣ther places in the Indies, where the Portugueses had established themselves before. The English have their Forts on the Malabar Coast, at Coroman∣del, and several other places in the Indies, where they Traffick with less charge and inconveniency, than in a place which they were first to be possess'd or by force of Arms. The re-estabishment of the French in the Isle of Madagascar, ought to be committed to the ma∣nagement of a Person, who by his Merits and long Experience has acquired a great Reputation abroad; This being a point of that icety, and such a na∣ture, where one man by his Conduct may be able to do more than a thousand others who act with∣out prudence. The first thing the French have to do after their Landing, is to re-fortifie the Fort Dauphine, which they ought to look upon as the Capital of their Colonies here, and must be the residence of the Governour, by reason of the temperature of the air, and its convenient situation, which is on the Point of Madagascar. The Conquest of this Island is not so difficult as some have Imagined, the Grands, (or Lords) of the Country, being divided among themselves by so many different Interests, that the most Power∣ful
among them is not in a capacity to bring one hundred part of the Inhabitants  Arms. Their Arms having no comparison to ours, they are so frightened at our Fire-locks, that we have seen 160 Frenchmen Force one third part of the Isle to do homage to them. Dian Manangve, who be∣ing one of their Principal Lords, and the only per∣son that had got an insight into the French Affairs, is now dead; and their Rebllion chiefly carried on by his advice against the French, ought to serve them as a precaution for the future, not to admit any of their Grands into their Councils, and to let them have any knowledge in the Military Art. The Madagascarians are naturally jealous of their Liberty, Rebelous, Mistrustful, and Re∣vengeful, seldom forgetting an injury. It will be therefore the Duty of a Governour to take such measures as may be most effectual to curb their In∣solency, and especially so to clip their wings for time to come, as to put them beyond all probabi∣lity, to execute their vengeance and cruelties upon their Conquerers. FINIS.
