D562 12259899 57838
A DECLARATION By Direction of the COMMITTEE AT YORKE, TO Their deluded and oppressed Countrey-men. ALSO The Letters, with the Propositions and Articles sent to the Earle of Newcastle, upon which he entred this County, and his Answer thereunto. With Observations thereupon. Printed at Yorke by Tho. Broad. 1645.
A Declaration by the Committee at York, to their deluded and oppressed Countrey-men. WHen the Royall presence and the traine of a num∣ber of Malignant Nobili∣ty was lately among you, when Courtly, curious, and cunningly penned Language was written, and uttered in your hearing, when you saw so many of the Gentry of this County your Neigh∣bours and Land-lords flock to Yorke, and adhere to, and assist the conspirators and contrivers of that opposition and force a∣gainst the Parliament of England, which since hath broken forth, and been manife∣sted to all the Kingdome. It is no great wonder though the Common sort were
deceived and came up in such flockes to Heworth-Moore to doe service to the gol∣den Idoll. But do but look a few years be∣yond that, and you may see severall op∣pressions upon the Subject by all manner of Monopolies and Extortions of money; Lawes trodden under foot, Justice set to sale in every Court, from the highest Bench in Westminster-hall, to the Sessions and Commission of Sowers in the Coun∣trey. The purity of the Protestant Reli∣gion stained with Popish, Arminian, and other new invented Doctrines, and that by Authority, and out of Pulpits; and the true Worship of God turned into apish and popish inventions of men: Popery grew fast and received favour, and the true Protestant Ministers suppressed and disgraced. And Parliaments (which were the proper and onely remedy to help all this, and the rest of the diseases in the po∣liticke body) not onely abandoned, but by Proclamation declared a high crime, for any one to say there should be a Parlia∣ment
called, and there was none in foure∣teene yeares; in which time the distempers of the Kingdom by such misguidance grew so deadly, especially by the Scotish Army raised in defence of that Nation, and brought into this to prevent inroades in∣to their owne, by the forces raised by in∣stigation of the Prelaticall party, that in the end this Soveraigne Parliament was summoned by due course of Law, and so established as never Parliament was be∣fore, by the highest confirmation this Kingdome can give, and not to be dissol∣ved against their wills, unlesse by the sword of Traytors. When this Parlia∣ment had sitten a while, and had beene courted by granting severall convenient Lawes to sweeten the bitternesse was past: This bridle of Tyranny and soveraigne purge of the Common-wealth, & Churches Maladies, could no longer be indured, by the Prelaticall and Malignant party, and that which no Jesuiticall craft could dis∣solve, is resolved upon, the Sword must,
and after many bitter reviling words from York in Declarations and Answers against the Parliament, (of which the Law sayes, No man ought to thinke dishonourably) With∣in this unhappy County, (and by it) which will be an infamy to the Actors for ever, notwithstanding all the applawces for it by the Court, as they had many; the first allowed Arms were taken up, and the Commands of Parliament disobeyed, and their Messengers and Officers with Scorne abused, and the Judgement of that most Honourable Court which is the eye and reason of the Common-wealth in the question of the Militia contemned, and the opinions of private men admired and advanced, which the Lawes of this King∣dome never appointed, nor is of any value. When the King by the assistance of the Malignant Gentry of this County whose names are hereafter mentioned, had in order to these opinions of flattering aspi∣ring Lawyers about the Throne, of which it never wanted, more (then a good ma∣ny)
had seised upon the Militia of this County, the King with some of that Militia departs into the other neighbour Counties to doe the like, and by the same Gentry the first Illegall and unjust Asses∣ment of eight thousand pound is put upon the Countrey to maintaine some part of that Militia left behind, to suppresse the Lawes, and the rest of the Gentry, who o∣beyed the Judgement and Direction of the Parliament; but this was opposed as a thing against Law, so much bragged on, should be the square of Government, and an oppression which made but way for a greater, as in short time it proved, rising from 8000. to 30000 l. by month, and af∣terwards to 80. thousand l. per mensem. When these Gentlemens unlawfull pow∣ers assembled at Yorke could not defend such their unjust proceedings, nor their persons from the Justice of the Parliament, nor the forces raised to suppress these tres∣passes and trayterous acts against the State and Law, they conspire to call into the
County the Earle of Newcastle, then un∣der censure of Parliament for High-trea∣son, and a Semi-papian and an Athisticall person, as was more declared afterward by that horrid crew he brought in with him, and they presse him by arguments of Service to the King and his own Honour to come to their assistance, which was in truth to protect themselves against the Justice of the Parliament. Newcastle enter∣taines the motion, upon termes of horri∣ble oppression to the Countrey, and to serve the Queene. And these oppressours of their Countrey agree to all, and espe∣cially to that Proposition about the Queene, and promise any further contri∣bution to that good service. And by a second Letter, magnifie the Earle of New∣castle for his entertaining the invitation, and make vows of honour and obedience to his Lordship, and tell of their distresses for Loyalty to the King, when they are about traiterously to destroy both the Law, and the Parliament, the fountain and
bulwarke both of Law and Justice, and consequently the Kingdome, and so to make him a King of bruites and not reaso∣nable men. This Lord thus courted, checks at one Article, omitted, which was the maine one to inrich his Popish Tyrannical Officers and Minions with a full pay; and if that be granted, then his little Lord∣ship is in a huge disposition to be really the faithfull Servant of these complotters and enemies to the State, as he afterwards proved, being the Leader, (Judas like) to these betrayers of Christ and his Cause, but are since fallen backward to the ground as that Band of men did. At the Rendition of Pomfret Castle there was found the Originall Letters by which this bargaine was made with the Earle of New∣castle by the Conspiratours to sell their Countrey, and all that was of worth in it to that Popish Commander and Army: which Letters being shewed to the Com∣mitees for that County attending at York, and by them duely considered of, it was
agreed and thought fit that those Letters should be Printed, and a Declaration up∣on them, that posterity might see who had been the chief destroyers of their Country. The Letters are these being examined by some of the Committee appointed for that pur∣pose, and the Originalls remaine in safe hands to be seene by any man that shall desire it. My Lord, IT is the desire of us, and the most of the Gen∣try of this County to crave assistance from your Lordship in this time of Mr. Hotham's infesting the Countrey; which favour we shall alwayes acknowledge from your Lordship, and we are the bolder in this businesse, because we know it to be a great Service to his Majesty, by the preservation of this County, and will be much to your Honour, to preserve in peace and safety. My Lord, Your Lordship most humble Servants. York, Sept. 26. 1642. Savile▪ George Wentwoth
William Savile Tho. Gower, Vi. Co. Henry Slingsby Peter Middleton Iohn Key. Iobn Ramsden Fardinando Leigh Iohn Mallery Francis Nevill. Tho. Ingram Iohn Goodricke. Richard Hutton. William Ingram. Robert Rockley Noble Gentlemen, I Have received from you a Letter of invita∣tion by the hands of Sir Mar. Langdale, and Mr. Aldburgh, and shall (for the esteeme and affection I beare in generall to the Country, being my native Countrey, and in particular to many of you to whom I have the Honour to be knowne) be ready to contribute my best aid and assistance in that worke, since it is likely to conduce to his Majesties Service, and peace and quiet of all his good Subjects, and to con∣clude this agreement, I have sent you inclosed certaine Propositions, which by way of Arti∣cles should be drawne, and signed and saled by you, and as many more as you shall ingage in
that worke, which I shall expect from you be∣fore I march. And so presenting my Service to you all, I remaine, Newcastle, Sep. 30. 1642. Your most faithfull Servant, W. N. To the Right Honourable, and my Noble friends the Nobilitie and Gentrie now assembled at York for his Majesties present service. Propositions in answer to your Letter of Invitation. FIrst, that I have all your consents and promises that the Army be paid whi∣lest they are in that County. That an Assessement be laid upon the Countrey to enable you for that underta∣king, and that if money be not gotten in time, that I may have free Billet for the Souldiers, for which Billet you are to in∣gage your selves to the Quarters, and that the Officers be paid according to his Ma∣jesties present establishment, out of that Assesment.
That there be some of the Gentry of that Country appointed as a Committee, enabled by the rest of the Gentry, to agree and conclude of such further Propositions as may happen to be necessary for this Service, and not here mentioned, and to march along with the Army, whose coun∣cell and assistance from time to time I am resolved to use. That I have assurance that all manner of Provisions fit for an Army, be prepared and brought to the Army the first day it enters. That since this Army was levied, a pur∣pose to guard her Majesties person, that it shall not be held a breach of any engage∣ment betwixt us, if I retire with such numbers, as I shall thinke fit for that ser∣vice. W. N. My Lord, WEE have received from your Lord∣ship an Answer to our Letters of
Invitation, (Noble as your selfe) which shall we hope make you the Master of such a worke of Honour, as besides your great Service it will be to his Majesty, shall both enoble your selfe farther and oblige us. We have signed and sent unto your Lord∣ship, Articles proportionable to your Lordships desire (as we conceive,) besides a particular power to those Gentlemen now with you, more fully to declare our selves. My Lord, beleeve this, That wee suffer here no distresses, but for our Loyal∣ty to the King, and your Lordships favour to us will equally oblige both; therefore, Good my Lord, make all possible speed to march hither, or to send some force be∣fore, lest a little delay make all our en∣deavours fruitlesse; and in the generall, beleeve that their is nothing in the power of us, or of this County, which shall not faithfully serve you, and more you cannot expect from, My Lord, Your most faithfull and humble Servants.
H. Cumberland Savile Tho. Gower, Vi. co. William Savile Henry Griffith Henry Slingesby Edward Stanhope. Iohn Key John Mallery Ferdinando Leigh William Ingilby John Ramsden George Wentworth Conyers Darcy Robert Strickland. William Wentworth. Ingram Hopton. Iohn Goodricke. William Wentworth. John Batty. Richard Hutton Francis Monckton Robert Rockley W. Thornton The Answer of the Nobility and Gentry of Yorkshire, assembled at York for His Ma∣jesties Service to the Propositions sent un∣to them by the Right Honourable the Earle of Newcastle. 1. THat your Lordship shall have our consents and promises, the Army which your Lordship shall bring with you into this County for the defence thereof, shall be paid by this County.
2. There is an Assessement of eight thousand pounds already laid upon this County, which shall be levied as soone as by your Lordships assistance we are ena∣bled to doe it, and that till money be got∣ten in, your Souldiers shall have free bil∣let, for which we will engage our selves to the Quarters; and for the payment of your Officers for the Army, it is referred to the Committee for this County, who have Instructions and power to treat and con∣clude with your Lordship in that particu∣lar. 3. There shall be a Committee of some of the Gentry of the County appointed, and enabled by the rest to agree, and con∣clude of such further Propositions as may happen to be necessary for this service, not here mentioned, and to march along with your Lordships Army, whose councell and assistance wee desire your Lordship may use, the names of which Committee wee send your Lordship herewithall, who are appointed to attend you at Newcastle, and
to march along with your Army, when you enter into the County. 4. That assoone as we have notice of your Lordships march, we will use all possi∣ble means to bring to your Army all such provisions, as this Countrey can afford. 5. We are tender of the safety of her Majesties person, that we shall not onely consent to your Lordships performance of that service, but will also contribute our utmost endeavours to assist your Lordship therein. 6. Lastly, we have appointed our Com∣mittee to be, Sir Edward Osborne, Baronet, Sir Marmaduke Langdale Knight▪ Francis Tindall and Richard Aldburgh Esquires, and given them Instructions and power to treat with your Lordship and to conclude in such particulars as may further conduce to this Service, or in these Propositions admit a doubtfull interpretation, H. Cumberland Savile Tho. Gower, Vi. co. George Wentworth Conyers Darey Robert Strickland.
William Savile Henry Griffith Henry Slingesby Edward Stanhope Iohn Key John Mallery Ferdinando Leigh William Ingilby John Ramsden Iohn Savile. William Wentworth. Ingram Hopton. Iohn Goodricke William Wentworth. John Batty. Richard Hutton Francis Monckton Robert Rockley Francis Nevill. Walter Haukesworth. My Lords and Gentlemen, I am to give you many thankes for your fa∣vourable Letter by Mr. Aldburgh, and the signing so far my desired Articles, which had no other end, then the better to enable me to serve you. And I beseech you give me as I intend faithfully to serve you, so to deale clearly and freely with you, which I hold a du∣ty; The truth is, I am very sorry you pleas'd to leave out the Article for the Officers pay, or coldly refer'd it to your Committee, being the principall thing in all the Articles, for you know the Souldier is encouraged with nothing
but money, or hopes of it, and truely yesternight when I was going to bed, there came Collonels and Lievtenant-Col. and said, they heard you had left it out, and for their parts, that they must thinke, that if you were so cantious not to grant it is paper, before we came in, they doub∣ted very much of it in money, when they were there, and that the workman was worthy of his hire, and such like discontented words; so the truth is, rather then not come cheerfully to serve you, I will not come at all, for I see before-hand I shall either disband with a Mutinie, or fall of plundering without distinction, either of which would be destructive to me: and besides, I hold my self free, since my Articles are not sign'd for I never understood any of those Articles to be referr'd to the Committee, but such things as we could not remember, and the present occasion of∣fer'd. Could I pay them, or his Majesties you should not have had such an Article, but since that cannot be, ou will pardon me in telling you how I am capable to serve you▪ and how not, and so I rest in a huge disposition to be really Newcastle, Oct. 30. 1642. Your most faithfull Servant, W. N.
Observation. IT is plaine out of the first Letter that these Gentlemen began with a false In∣sinuation, to terme themselves the most of the Gentry of Yorkeshire, who are not the fourth part of them. In it they call Captaine Hothams coming to Doncaster, which was by command of the Parliament of England to assist the Lord Fairfax to set up the Militia, (an infesting the Country) They invite Athists, Papists, and who ever will to come to joyne with them, the bet∣ter to enable them to oppose the resolu∣tions of the Parliament, and call it great Service to the King and preservation of the Country, which was the ruine of the Country that bred them, and more service to the Pope then the King. That Lord so invited, yeelds presently to that bait they call Honour, but inthralls them with Ar∣ticles to oppresse the Country by Assesse∣ments which no Law warrants, by Free-quarter which the knowne Lawes forbid to be taken without Authority of Parlia∣ment,
and they pawne their cred poore County shall pay for all, and did. They are carefull to guard her Ma∣jesties person, who had no care for the five Members of Parliament. They tel that Lord, he shall be Master (as they hope) of a work of Honour, &c. which was to burn Bradford, much of Yorke, and numbers of other houses; to rob, plunder, and impri∣son the well-affected of the County. They would have his Lordship beleeve they suf∣fer no distresse but for loyalty to the King, which was but a sconce for their own pro∣tection from the Justice of Parliament▪ In the second Letter, They tell that Lord his favour to them shall oblige the King, and promise there is nothing in the Coun∣ty shall not faithfully serve him, so he will serve their turns, and in a great part they performe it; their bodies, their estates, their wives, their daughters, were his ser∣vants, and his servants servants too: nay, their consciences, the Gospell, and true Ministers of it were made to serve that Pa∣pisticall
crew. The proud Haman, because he had all things but one granted him, by their Articles, (which was his Officers pay) that not granted or coldly referred to a Committee, without this also hee lightly values all the rest, and will not come to their assistance. Thus Country∣men you see how you and all yours, what ever is deare to any of you, hath beene bought and sold by these Gentlemen, who in stead of peace and preservation to the Countrey, have brought in War, Bloud∣shed and ruine upon it; and in stead of Ho∣nour to his Lordship, both he and they like blazing comets are gone out in a stinch, which will last for ever. It was thought fit to publish in Print one Let∣ter more, found in the same place, which is the proper hand writing of Cap. John Htham, written to the Enemy when he was the pro∣fest servant to the Parliament, Hear the Let∣ter. My Noble Lord, I have found out a way to doe his Majesty reall Service, and
to be your Servant without scandall; for I confesse nothing went hard, but that I could not come in to your Lordship in such a condition as befitted him that you esteem worthy your friendship. I shall de∣sire you would by this Bearer send me a safe conduct for forme sake, not that I de∣sire or care for it: if you could write me but a word what my L. Fairfax hath done, I could make great advantage of it in this businesse, for I thinke you will see such a considerable party brought to the King, as hath not beene yet; all which he is to thank you for. I shall add no more because I shall wait on you so soon, but to desire the countenance of your good opinion, to Lincolne, Aprill 15. 1643 Your most affectionate servant, John Hotham. By this secret contrived treason of his against the Common-wealth, and for which he suffered death is more discovered, and that righteous sentence cleared and ratified. FINIS.
