H1318A 12171958 55447
A BRIEF CHRONICLE OF All the chief Actions so fatally falling out in these three Kingdoms; viz. England, Scotland & Ireland, From the year, 1640. to this present twentieth of November, 1661. CONTAINING The unhappy Breaches, sad Divisions, the great Battels fought, number of men, with the Eminent Persons of Honor and note slain, with several Debates and Treaties. ALSO, The happy Escape by a Wonderful delive∣verance of His Majestie at Worcester, more fully expressed then hitherto: with His Majesties happy return, together with what passages of note hapned to this present November, 1661. The like exact account hath not as yet been printed. LONDON: Printed for William Lee, at the Turks-Head in Fleetstreet. 1662.
TO THE READER. Courteous Reader, This useful Manual which hath been so long de∣sired, now offers it self to your hands, the English Iliads in a nut-shel, being comprized in such an Epitomy and Abridgement; yet with so much perspicuity, faithfulness and truth, as would be allowance enough for a reasonable volumn. Even same small and minute actions, where (like little wires that give motion to the grand Engine) they had to the main design, are here registred, with a most ex∣act Chronology of their time; but as to passages of greater moment, the actions of the Field, Leagures, Stratagems, storming of Towns and Castles, they have roomy place here, without that bustle they made in the Kingdoms. And that the memory of those Noble and Valiant Per∣sons who fell, and who survived this fatal War, might be orderly transmitted to posterity, we have also inserted them in their several stations of Command, Life and Death, the irreparable loss of whom fell chiefly on the Roy∣al and justest side.
Abundance of English blood hath been shed profusely in several Quarrels, both at home and abroad before, but never such a slaughter as this, so that it passeth easie Arithmetick, which causeth that the gross of the num∣bers slain, is as much (of the multitude) as could be re∣covered. But behold the greatest misery of this War, the issue of it when it was past, was ten times worse then the War it self, like the Viper, that expires in the production of many: The Medusa of War, brought forth a Hydra of Peace, in a Serpentine Commonwealth, and Democrati∣cal Anarchy, we had lost what was pretended to be fought for, as soon as we had done fighting: such our fury, such our strange fate. This obliged the Collector of this Chronicle to proceed in the tracing of those (till then) untrodden steps of Government, through all the changes and variations during the Usurpation; wherein you shall finde all the most considerable passages and remarks of State, of the War and Treaties abroad with Forreign Princes and Commonwealths, particularly set down, so conform to the Originals, that herein you will have the pleasure to see all over again, which with sorrow you so lately under∣went, with the happy restitution of His Majestic, and other passages deduced to this present day. Olim haec meminisse juvabit. Thine, W. Lee. Novemb 18. 1661.
A Brief CHRONICLE OF THE Civil Wars OF England, Scotland, and Ireland, From 1640. to the end of the Year, 1661. NO higher or greater cause can be assigned for this war (setting aside the sins of all Times and Nations, to which the Justice of Heaven is sel∣dom long a Debtor) but the fate and cata∣strophe of Kingdoms and Monarchies, which do at certain periods of time taste of that vicissitude and mutability, to which other sublunary things are more frequently subjected. The secondary causes of it, are so many and so uncertain,
so variously reported and beleeved, that it would spend the paper allotted to this Epitome in ascertaining them; therefore to contain and keep within the limits of this designment, something onely stall be said of them that was obvious to every eye, not favouring of partiality or affection . Many disorders and irregularies there were in the State no doubt contracted through a long and lazy peace bolstred up with an universal trade which procured a general wealth, the patent of wantonness; the excess of National riches being but as the burden which the A carries, and mistakes for provender; people being onely the better enabled to sustain the future misery with their present plenty. These conceived abuses in the menage of the State, like ill Humors, where they finde an equal resistance, or over power of Nature, sunck and descended upon the Ecclesiastical regiment too impotent to sustain those general assaults which were given it. The first complaint of the people was male-administration and delinquency of some about the King; this terrified but a few, though it reached the life of that incomparable Statesman the Earl of Strafford; some others dreading more the popular fury then their objected crimes, withdrawing and absenting themselves from the present storm impending. After the Earl of Strafford was beheaded at Tower hill (the King being forced to assent to the Bill for his execution) all things un a main withunany stop to the ensuing breach and confusion. The Axe had but tasted of that blood, of which it soon after glutted it self, all persons of all rank; and conditions, King, Lords, Bishops, Knights, Gentlemen, Ministers, Mechanicks, suffering under its edge. A remarkable thing, the paralle of it being no where in our English Chronicles, but so that blood of Straffords was at last expiated,  will be seen in the series of our late unhappy troubles. When this fatal business was over, then began the cry, No Bishops, no Bishops, who were at last by an Act of Parliament ex∣torted from the King devoyded and barred from sitting and vo∣ting in the House of Lords, or exercising any remporal Juris∣diction; to this the Parliament were the better induced, and the more strongly inclined from several complaints made to them, which were before famous through the Nation, of their haid and barbarous usage of several Ministers and others, for the bu∣siness of non-conformancy: Amongst the rest the case of Mr.
Pryn, Mr. Burton, Dr. Bastick were very notorious. These men at this time in the beginning of our troubles were brought from their prisons in distant remote parts of England, in triumph to London, and soon after most of the Bishop; committed to the Tower, under no less then a charge of High Treason, which being not to be evidenced, most of them were after some time dismissed upon bail, onely the Archbishop of Canterbury and Bishop of Ely were reserved to their Justice. Many honest Patriots there were no doubt of that party which inclined to the clipping and abridging the power of the Hierarchy which they so unhappily mistook, the importunities of the people made others, otherwise principled to swim with the stream; but no sooner this Fit was over, but we were eised all over with the disease of a Civil War. The King had been so affronted with the daily tumults which those for Justice against Straford, and No Bishops brought with them, & had so often moved for the prevention and remedy there∣of, in vain, that having certain intelligence who the Grandees were that abetted those riotous Assemblies, and also had had a hand in the Scorch Troubles, whose untoward issue and con∣clusion lay heavy upon his heart, he resolved to seise them in the Parliament-house, and so bring them to a speedy Trial. This was attempted by the King, but the birds were flown, notice being given the House of Common by one Langrish, a Servant of the Queens, of the Kings coming thither to demand the Five Members: But the business ended not so, the House vote it a breach of priviledge, and complain o evil Counsellors about the Kings person, who not able or willing longer to en∣dure those indignities oftered daily at his Court gates, leaves Whitehal, and departs from Hampton Court, and soon after the Five Members return to their places in the House, guarded thither in much bravery by the Trained Bands by water. This added fuel to the fire, that was now ready to flame; nor could another combustion in the sister Kingdom of Ireland, which broke forth in October some two moneths before give them caution to look to this at home. The manner of the breaking forth, and the discovery of that Irish Rebellion was as followeth.
Anno Domini, 1641. ON the 23. day of October, 1641. that horrid Rebellion broke forth there, that day they intended to seize the Castle of Dublin, the Irish being every where else risen and in arms, but the design was discovered by one Owen Conally, an Irish Gentleman by birth and family, but a retainer to Sir Iohn Clotworthy, who being acquainted with the plot by one of the Rebells leaping over a set of pales, whether he pretended to go and ease himself, escaped by the favour of a dark night, ran away, and informed the Lord Justice Parsons with the whole design. Upon this discovery the Lord Mack Gutre, October and one Mr. Mac Mahon were seised in Dublin, the Town, though in a most ter∣rible fright, was presently put into a posture of defence. Ad∣vice was sent thorowout the Kingdom of Ireland of the Rebel∣lion, but all too late, for it was universal, and no part of the Kingdom where they were not risen; so that a Proclamation against them, and all raising of Arms, was the best present re∣medy. Notwithstanding the Rebels under the command of Sir Phe∣lim Oneal as General, Novem. seize all Vlster except the Castle of Enes∣kelin, sparing for a while the Scotch Plantations there; but growing so numerous, that they dreaded not any supplies from the vicinity of Scotland, they at last force them, plunder them, and garrison the cheil places of strength. Sir Phelim Oneale taketh Dundalk, Decem. and publisheth his Decla∣ration, called, The Declaration of the Catholique Confederate Sub∣jects of his Majesties Kingdome of Ireland, suft with many shews of their Religion and Loyalty as could be; and which is notable, asserting that they did it to remove that Tyranny put upon their consciences, in imitation of their fellow-subjects of Scotland, who got a priviledge by that course. Presently after they besieged Tredah, odah eged but after several en∣counters betwixt the besieged, their relief being de∣feated at Gillington-bridge, by reason of a mutiny amongst them and the Rebels: The Town was at last freed by a strong assistance and supply sent them from Dublin, under the command of Sir Henry Titchburn, who soon after, upon the dislodgement of the Enemy from the Town, F▪ relleved followed him, overtook him, and routed him, recovering Dundalk again by storm, putting all to the sword, while Oneale hardly escaped over the river, and so fled.
Leave we this Kingdom in a forlorn, miserable condition, and cast an eye homeward. Jan. 10. T Kng remo∣veth from the parlia∣ment. The King was departed from Hampton Court, thence in company with his Queen and his Daughter the Princess of Aurange to Dover to see them shipped for Hol∣land; he returned streight to Greenwich, from thence ha∣ving the Prince in his company to Theoballs. Still the difference widened more and more according as he removed from London, to which he was importunately desired to return by both Houses by the members thereof who continued sitting; though the Grandees of the Faction were well contented with what di∣stance he kept from them, as rendring their pretended jealou∣sies and fears more and more credible to the deluded people. From Thoballs the misundestandings still increasing betwixt the King and his Two Houses, he removed Northward, first to Royston, thence to Newmarket, and in conclusion to York, ha∣ving received and answered several messages from the Parlia∣ment by the way. The principal difference between the King and them was the Militia, this was disputed betwixt them, the King claiming it as an unseparable right of the Crown, and the Houses urging the management of it for present satisfaction and safety, and had thereupon nominated Officers, which designation the King disallowed, and now the rupture was visible. Anno Domoni 1642. THe Gentry and the Generality of the County of York, proffer to raise a Guard from amongst themselves for the Kings person; March. The King at York in the mean time, the Parliament desire him that the Magazine might be removed from Hull; at which the King being displeased, goes from York, and demands the said Town, stores, and Magazines therein, to be delivered to him, which the Governour, Sir Iohn Hotham, presenting himself on his knees upon the walls, refused to do, save, that if the King with some small retinue would enter, Exclu∣ded H April. he freely might. This affront very much neled his Majesty, so that he did very sharply complain of it to the Parliament, but they rather justified Sir Iohn Hotham, then gave the King any satisfaction, which made him attempt, for his Honour sake, something against the Town by force, in which enterprise some twenty of the Kings Guards were killed, and so he retreated to
Beverley; where he found a very great addition of Gentlemen from all parts of the Kingdom, who with their duty, presented him their service. In the mean while the Parliament was intent on the business of leavying Arms, May though several Patriots of both Houses did what they could to perswade to an accommodation, amongst whom Sir Benjamin Rudyard was one of the chief, who all along war∣ned them of the miseries of a Civil War, and what a shame it would be to them in after times, and so consequently to all Par∣liaments, if when the King had condescended so far they should proceed to the effusion of blood upon so unnecessary a quarrel; he dyed soon after the first blood was drawn; and that speech of his on his death-bed is very remarkable, Mr. Pym and Mr, Hamden (saith he) the Grandees of the then Faction) told me, That they thought the King so ll-beloved by his Subjects, that he could never be able to raise an Army to oppose them, which mistake of theirs cost many thousand live. Nom the Militia was on foot, June, the militia set on foot. every where the Parliaments Cause had the precedency of affection, their Ordinances being obeyed like Acts; wherefore the King prohibited by Procla∣mation any Levies, Musters, or of his Subjects any where in England, without his command and seton foot his Commission of Array; which the Parliament likewise inhibit to be obeyed any where, but neither of them signified any thing to those that were bent and inclined to each Cause; so that the preparations for War both of Men, Horse, Money and Arms went on very fast, especially on the Parliament; side at London, where all per∣sons of all ages and Sexes contributed so excessively to the fur∣therance of the War, that the sum which it amounted unto is almost incredible. This money was borrowed upon the credit of the PVBLICK FAITH, a name much adored then, and as much contemned and hated now. The King finding how the pulse of these distracted King∣dom; July did beat, giving symptomes of some violent disease and distemper approaching, redoubled His instances to the Houses for peace, adjuring them to prevent that bloodshed now so threatning and imminent, and they regest the like entreaties and obtestation upon him (but not bating an ace, or receding a tittle from their first Demands) so that there was no hopes or likelihood of a Pacification. His Majesty therefore having called the Gentry of York to∣gether
at a Rendezvous, protested his unwillingness, as well as unprovidedness for a War, desiring (if he should be there∣unto compelled) their assistance in the maintenance of His most just Cause, and then departed for Lincolnshire to Newark whe∣ther he had sent before his Letters Mandatory to my Lord Wil∣loughby of Parham, charging him to desist from raising levy∣ing opexercising any forces within that County, by vertue of his Commission from the Parliament, wherein nevertheless he had proceeded. Here the King convened the Gentlemen of this County, and made to them the like protestations, and having received some small Supplies returned back again to York. At the same time the Parliament were listing men apace, appointed their General, and the Superior Officers of the Army. At York the King made the Marquess of Hertford Lieutenant General of the Western Counties, intending forthwith himself to set upon Hull (a place he had designed once to have made a magazine for Ireland to reduce those Rebells, which he had often declared to the two Houses, but they would by no means consent to it) but upon deliberate advice he pass by t, onely making one attempt near it, to shew his just indignation, and to sa∣tisfie his Honor, where e lost unhappily some twenty men, and marched directly into Nottinghamshire. About the beginning of August he came to Nottingham Town, August, the Kin sets up his Stan∣dard at Notting∣ham. and on the tenth of the same Moneth, published his Royal Pro∣clamation, commanding and enjoyning all his Subjects to the Northward of Trent and twenty miles Southward, to Rendezvous at Nottingham the 23. of that instant, where he, according to the purpose of his Proclamation, set up his Standard, where ap∣peared 5 or 6000 mn. After a view and Muster of these Royal Volunteers, the King proceeded to the nomination of a General, who was the Right Honourable the Earl of Lindsey, August General formerly for the Rohil Expedition; and the Parliament made Robert Earl of Essex, their Captain General, the Earl of Bedford General of the Horse, Essex about this time departed from London in great state and magnificence. The King leaves Nottinghamshire and marched into Stafford∣shire, Sept. th King  Shrews∣bury. thence into Leicestershire, caressing the Gentry all the way he went, so into the Confines of Wales, and sate down at last in Shresbury, where he much increased his strength; where∣upon the Earl of Essex was ordered to advance towards the King, and hinder his new Leavies, having then Commission to rescue
the King out of the hands of his evil Councellors. He marched therefore from S. Albans into Northampton, being strong, to the number of 14000 men. Portsmouth was now taken by Sir Iohn Merrick, Ports∣mouth taken, Aug. 2. having first surprized Southsea Castle, and held for the Parliament: Coo. Goring being forced to yield it, the Town being commanded by that Castle, before the Marquess of Hertford could come to the relief of it, being then besieged in Sherburn by the Earl of Bedford; Goring, according to agreement, passing for the present over into France. The Earl of Essex advanceth into Worcestershire, A skir∣mish in Worce∣stershire while the Army staid still at Shrewsbury, expecting forces out of South∣wales; to prevent the conjunction of whom, Essex sent a party of horse under the command of Colonel Sands, betwixt whom, and Prince Rupert, and the Lord Byron, happened a smart in∣counter in the lanes neer Worcester City, where at first the Par∣liament Army had the better, but Prince Rupert falling in the Rear, forced them to leave their design: Colonel Sands was desperately wounded, his Major Douglass was killed, with the loss of threescore men, nevertheless, Essex hastily advancing, the Cavaliers quitted Worcester, which was Garrison'd for the Par∣liament. While the Earl of Essex staid here about setling the Militia, the King passed directly away from Shrewsbury, where he had coyned money out of the Plate freely brought him by the Gen∣try, to London, having got the start of Essex, who thereupon doubled his hast after him; the King therefore resolved to fight him, and staid at Keynton, whether next morning came the Es∣sexians. Sunday the 23 of Octob. Octo 23. Edg-hill Fight. being the same day twelvemoneth, the Irish Rebellion broke forth, both Armies met at the bottom of Edge-hill, from which the Kings forces descended to the fight. The Earl of Linsey commanded the main body, Prince Rupert commanded the right wing, the left was commanded by the Lord Wilmot. Of the Parliaments side, the Earl of Essex command∣ed the battel, Sir Iames Ramsey the left wing of horse, and Sir William Balfour, and Sir Philip Stapleton the left. Prince Rupert suddenly overthrew the left wing of horse under Ramsey, but o∣vercharging, and following the pursuit too far, Essex seeing the Kings foot destitute on that side, charged furiously, where the General Lindsey fighting with a half pike in his hand afoot, was
wounded (of which he presently died) and taken, and his Son the Lord Willoughby coming to his rescue, was taken with him; The Standard-bearer also, Sir Edmund Varney (so valiantly the Parliamentarians prest upon the Kings foot) was killed, and the Standard seized, but freed again by Sir Iohn Smith, who was Knighted under it, and it committed to his defence. Here was al∣so killed the Noble Lord Aubigney, with sundry other inferiour Officers. On the Parliaments side were slain the Lord S. Iohn of Bletso, who died presently of his wounds, being offered in ex∣change for the Lord Willoughby, and Col. Tho. Essex newly come from Worcester. The number of the slain on both sides was very neer equal, in the whole amounting to neer 5000 men, and the victory remained as equal betwixt them, the Earl of Essex lodg∣ing that night (which parted the fray) upon the field where they fought, and the King ascending the hill from whence he came down that morning, keeping great fires all the night. The Earl of Essex next day marched towards Coventry, and the King by Ayno, where his Army refreshed themselves, to Banbury, which was presently delivered to him, and so to Ox∣ford. The King marched from Oxford, Novem. where by the way to Lon∣don, came Commissioners from the Parliament, rendring Propo∣sitions, and desiring that during the Treaty, the Kings Army should march no neerer this way, to spin time, while Essex could recruit his Army; therefore the King advanced from Clebrook, and came to Brainford, Nov. 1 Bram∣for Fight. where part of the Parliaments Army, be∣ing the Regiments of Col. Hollis, Hambden, and the L. Brooks, for a while maintained themselves stoutly, but being over-pow∣er'd, some were driven into the river, and there drowned, and 300 slain, and as many taken prisoners. This brought a general consternation upon the City of London, all shops were shut up, and all the Regiments, both Trained-Bands and Auxiliary were drawn out, so that the Earl of Essex had a most compleat and numerous Army o a sudden. Hereupon the King present∣ly marched away, fearing to be incompassed by the Parliamen∣tarians, over Kingston-bridge (which he broke down, to stop the pursuit Essex made after him) to Reading, and so to Oxford, where he took up his Winter quarters. The Cities of Winchester and Chichester delivered to the Par∣liament, Decem Marlborough to the King, and my Lord Hopton prevail∣ed against the Earl or Stamford; several Townes taken
for the King in the West, others for the Parliament in the North. Cyrencester had been Garrisoned by the Parliament Forces of Glocester, Ciren∣cester stoemed Febr. 1. March being the midway betwixt that City and Oxford, upon this place Prince Rupert had a design, though his march that way was given out for the regaining of Shudly Castle, out of which Col. Massey had smothered the Cavaleirs with wet hay, for after he had passed some ten miles beyond Cirencester he suddenly returned back, and surprising the Guards, within two hours time became Master of the place, puting the Earl of Stamfords Regiment to the sword, who made a stout oppositi∣on, taking 1100 prisoners, and 8000 Arms, and other provisi∣ons for war, it being newly made a Magazeen. From thence the Prince came before Glocester, summoned the Town and de∣parted. The Lord Brooks and Northampton were in Arms against each other in the Counties of Warwick and Stafford, My Lord Brook killed at. Litch∣field. where several small skirmishes had been between them, at last in March the Lord Brook came and besieiged Litchfield Close, garrisoned by the King, and as he was viewing the approaches to it out of a window in the Town, a single bullet from the Close shot him in the head through the eye, of which he fell down dead, ne∣vertheless the siege was continued, and the Close delivered to the Parliamentarians. In the North the Queen landed at Bridlington Bay with some supplies of money and Arms for the King, and with her, Lieut. Gen. King, she was conveyed to York, and afterwards met the King at Edge-hill where the fight had been. And so ended this year with the surrender at Malmsbury to the Parliament again, and the defeat of the Lord Fairfax, who was chief of the Parli∣aments forces in the North of 'Bramham, by the Earls of New∣castle and Cumberland. Scarborough delivered to the King by Brown Bushel. Anno Domini, 1643. PRince Rupert having coasted the Country from Glocester into Wales, May Litchfie etaken y the King. returned back by Litchfield, intending to reduce it again, he had not long lain before it, but he compelled the Garrison to surrender: To the releif hereof Sir Iohn Gell, and Sir William 'Brereton, having gathered a considerable strength
marched; these were met by part of Prince Ruperts forces, and some under the command of the valiant Earl of Northampton, TheE of Noth∣mprton slain. where the said releif was defeated, Sir Iohn Gell routed, though the victory cost dear, through the loss of that brave Earl, who refusing quarter was killed by a private Souldier. After General Essex had recruited his Army with new sup∣plies, April 6 Reading besieged the first thing he attempted was the siege of Reding, which being manfully defended by Sir Arthur Aston till he received a wound on his head by the falling of a brick-bat, and the re∣leif brought by the King himself from Oxford being worsted at Caversham-Bridge, after ten days siege was yeilded by Col. Fielding (then substituted Governor) to the Parliament. In the North things went something equaller then before on the Parliaments side, May Sir Thomas Fairfax had defeated the Kings Forces under the Marquess of Newcastle at Wakefield, and hoy∣ed up the sinking interest of that Cause. Monmouth likewise was taken by the Parliaments Forces, as also Worder Castle; but in the West the King prevailed, my Lord Hopton com∣manded there, 16 Stratton fight. being a valiant and expert Royalist, for the Parliament the Earl of Stamford, and Colonel Chidleigh, these opposite Forces met the 16. of May in Stratton-field, where the Parliamets foot stood stifly to the business, but the Horse either through treachery or cowardize, not seconding or re∣leiving their Foot, an entire Victory fell to the Cavaleers, some 1500 of the Parliamentarians being slain and taken priso∣ners, but do of great account lost on either side. Chidleigh af∣terwards came over to the King; and my Lord Hopton was made for this good service Baron of Stratton. Now the Parliament flew high in their Consultations at home, the Grandees working upon the sober part of the Parliament, that this action of the Queens, in bringing over Arms, Money and other provisions for the assistance of the King, was a dan∣gerous, destructive business, wound up the anger of the Two Houses to such a pitch that the Queen was proclaimed Traytor, and at the same time, down went all the Crosses throughout England, particularly the third of this moneth, Cheapside-cros was demolished. After this beginning of Reformation, June. The Co¦venant taken. the Parliament took the Solemn League and Covenant at Westminster; this was first framed in Scotland, and was generally taken by them in the year 1639. the main drift of it was against the Episcopal
Dignity, and was now for the mutual endearment of the two Nations (assistance being promised the Parliament from Scotland) pressed upon all in England, where the Parliaments power was paramount, being taken throughout London the fifth of this moneth. The Earl of Essex advanceth from Reading to Tame, where a general sickness seized upon the Army: during their quar∣tering thereabout: Hambden killed. Prince Rupert fell into part of their quar∣ters, but the Essexians taking the Alarum, and drawing out, the business came to a fight in Chalgrave field, where Co∣lonel Hambden was mortally wounded. It was observeable, that in this place the said Colonel Hambden first listed and trained his men in the beginning of the war. The Lord Keeper Littleton having fled with the Great Seal to Oxford, according to the Kings Command, the Parlia∣ment voted a new Great Seal to be made. The Parliament to redress their affairs in the West, July. had made Sir William Waller Major General of those Counties, and had sent him down with a well-furnished Army to meet the Kings Army under my Lord Hopton, who having clear∣ed Devonshire, after Strafton fight marched Eastward, where in Somersetshire Sir William had taken Taunton and Brdgewater. Lands∣down Fight. July 5. Both these Armies met at Landsdown neer Bath, Iuly the fifth. The Cavaliers were less in number, but supplyed that with va∣lour; the fight began about three in the afternoon, and was maintained till neer the same time next morning. Here my Lord Hoptons powder was blown up, by which he was hurt himself, and was compelled for want of it to quit the field, and shelter his Army in the Devices; of his side were lost in this fight about a thousand: The persons of quality slain, were Sir Bevil Greenvile, Mr. Leak, my Lord Denicourts son, Mr. Barker, Mr. Lower, and other Gentlemen: The loss of private souldiers was as great on Sir Williams side, but no per∣sons of extraordinary note. Upon my Lord Hoptons taking into the Devices, Sir William Waller presently pursued him, and cooped him up, whereupon a Messenger was dispatcht to the King, to inform him of the desperate condition my Lord was in, if not timely relieved. Prince Maurice, the Earl of Carnvan, and my Lord Wilmo, were sent presently with a party of fifteen hundred horse, who
made such expedition, that on the thirteenth of Iuly, by break of day, July they presented themselves alike to besiegers and the besieged (to whom they gave a signal of their relief) upon a rising ground, and presently in an entire body charged Sir Williams Army, being received by Sir Arthur Hazelrigs Cura∣ziers at first; but they being broken, the Fortune of the day soon fell to the Royallists: The Parliaments Foot, after a lit∣tle execution done upon them, (the besieged also being ready to fall upon them) laid down their Arms, and submitted: Sir William Waller, and Sir Arthur, with much difficulty, and greater speed, escaped, and came throughout to London with the bad news. Here were slain neer a thousand men, four thou∣sand taken, four brass Guns, twenty eight Colours of Foot, and nine Cornets. This loss soon reduced Bristol into the Kings hands, being de∣livered by Colonel Fiennes after three dayes siege; July 27. Bristol surren∣dred. for which surrender he had like to have lost his head. These successes drew the King into the West, where Dorche∣ster, Portland, Weymouth, and Melcomb, submitted themselves: The like in the North, Exeter deliver∣ed. August. Beverley taken by the Earl of Newcastle, Bedford, Appleford, and Barnstable, surrendred; and after a little dispute before Exeter, and some Granadoes thrown in, and fi∣ring part of the Suburbs, the great Sconce being taken in storm, that City was delivered to Prince Maurice, and Sir Iohn Berkley made Governour. It was therefore concluded to set upon Glocester, 10 Gloce∣ster be∣sieged. being the only considerable place that held out for the Parliament in the West, and lay very inconvenient, hindring the intercourse betwixt Wales and the Kings Countryes; the King therefore the tenth of August came himself from Oxford in person before it with a Royal Army, (while it was hardly imaginable where the Parliament could raise another Army) and that done, to march for London, which proved a fatal mistake to the King, for if he had gone directly for London, there was no opposition in readiness against him, not any place to stay him. The King therefore summons Glocester, to which the Governor and Mayor return a negative answer; so the Guns were set on work, many attempts on both sides, Gloce∣ster re∣lieved. Sept. 8 till the besieged had little or no ammunition left them, when on the eighth of September, Essex having made up an Army with the Trained-Bands of London, and new raised men in the respective Militia's and
associated Counties, then entirely at the Parliaments devo∣tion, came to the releif of it, having been encountred at Stow in the Would by several parties of Horse under Prince Rupert, but he could not be stopt from advancing. Being come within five miles of Glocester, upon the brim of a steep hill he dis∣charged two pieces of Canon, as a signal of their releif, which was answered by the Town, whereupon the King drew off from before the siege, and marched hastily away, intending to intercept Essex from returning, his men being almost wearied, and tired out with their hard march and weather. But Essex ha∣ving releived the Town, with all manner of provision, direct∣ed his march back again, and falling into Cirencester, from whence the King dislodged the day before, and had lest some baggage behinde him, Auborn Chase sight. Sept. 19. took 400 prisoners, and the next day matched toward; Newbery, and by the way was attaqued in Au∣born Chase, by several Squadrons of the Kings Horse; here was killed that French Marquess Mous. De la Vejuville, having beha∣ved himself valiantly. The next day the King possest himself of Newberry, the place Essex aimed at, Newb. irst fight Sept. 20. so that both Armies met hre, and began the fight early in the morning; abundance of resolution and valour, was manifested on both sides, but especially the Trained Bands of London, performed far beyond releif. Prince Rupert was re∣pelled and beaten back to the right wing of the Kings Army, but returned again to the charge with greater fury. This Bat∣tel, like Edge-hill was dubious as to the success, but something more bloody. The Kings General here was the Lord Ruthen, made lately Earl of Brentford. On the Kings side were slain near 2500 men, among whom were the Earl of Carnarven, who had done the King special service, the Earl of Sunderland, and the learned Lord Faulkland very near the Kings person, with Col. Constable. Of the Parliaments side, not any of note slain, save Col. Tucker, and some few Officers, the number of their slain being near 3500 men. After the fight was over in the field, a party of Horse under the command of Col. Hurrie followed the Parliament Army in the Lanes toward Reading, and put them into some disorder, but the body facing about they were repelled back again with loss: And so the Parliamentarians to Reading, the Trained Bands to London, whether soon followed the General, and the King returned to Oxford. This moneth the King pressed by his Protestant Subjects of
Ireland, who were not able to subsist longer under the war, conclude a Cessation with the Irish Rebels, and in November following received a Supply of 3000 men of his Protestant Ar∣my which landed in Wales, Novemb under the command of Sir Michael Ernely, the renowned Col. Monk (now Duke of Albemarle) and others, which being by Prince Ruperts order divided into other Regiments were made unserviceable; pat of them, with the said Colonel being being surprised at Nantwich, by Sir Tho∣mas Fairfax. Mr. Pym a great stickler of the Faction, Decemb 8. and the onely Gran∣dee of the times died. Hawarden, Arundel and Beeston Castles rendred to the King, Graston House taken by the Parliament, and Arundel in the next Month taken again by Sir William Waller. Now according to stipulation and Compact, January the Scots enter England with an Army of 2000 in maintenance and purstiance of the end of the Covenant, against this invasion the King protested as a Rebellion, and sent the Marquess Hamilton pri∣soner to Pendennis, as having deceived the trust the King put in him, he all along suggesting that the Scots would never at∣tempt such a thing, and yet maintaining correspondencies with the cheif of that Cabal. Several Towns and Castles lost and taken by both parties. Anno Domini, 1644. SIR William Waller after his reducement of Arundel Castle, Mar. 29 Char∣rington Fight. marched to finde out my Lord Hopton, to cry quits with him for his defeat at Roundway Down, both Armies were near one another a good space, for my Lord hovered about Win∣chester and those parts; at Brandon Heath near Alesford, Hopton was drawn up (having a little before in his intended march to the releif of Arundel beaten Col. Norton into Chichester, who endeavoured to impede him) and stood ready to receive Sir William, who had taken the advantage of a hill, from which the Cavaliers with fury beat him and drove him to another, where under the shelter of some buhes and trees, he so galled the Kings Horse that they were forced in disorder to retreat on their foot. There was a hollow betwixt both Bodies which each endeavouring to gain, many men found it for their graves on both sides. My Lord Hopton therefore seeing the slaughter
that was made, and likely to continue upon his men, timely drew off his Artillery and Canon, towards Winchester, and then wheeling about marched for Basing; and so presently to Ox∣ford: In this fight was killed on the Kings part, that valiant per∣son Iohn Lord Stuart, second Brother to the Duke of Richmond, who died at Abbington of his wounds received: Here Sir Iohn-Smith, Col. Sandys, Col. Scot, and Col. Manwaring, with di∣vers other persons of quality wounded, among whom was Sir Edward Stawell, eldest son to Sir Iohn, and Sir Henry. now Lord Bard, besides private souldiers above 1400. Of the Parliaments side few men of note, killed about 900 common souldiers; Co∣lonel Dolbier wounded, and Colonel Thompsons leg shot off by a Canon buller. The Earl of Essex, April. and Waller, (who had followed my Lord Hopton to Basing) and there shewed a mind or besieging the House, now joyned their Armies together, amounting to a very great strength, with intention to set upon the King at Oxford; wherefore the Queen was sent away with a sufficient Convoy to Exeter; in the mean time Essex plunders Abbington, and makes a Garrison of it afterwards. The King, in the mean while, marcheth with his Army from Oxford to Worcester, which caused the two Parliament Generals to divide their forces again; Waller was to go after the King, April. as they termed it, A King-catching, while Essex marched with another gallant Army into the West, which was totally lost from the Parliament. The King had but few forces about him, by reason that Prince Rupert was sent with the greatest part of the Army to the relief of York, then be∣sieged by the joynt power of three Armies, the Scots, Manche∣sters, and Fairfaxes. Prince Rupert in his way storms Bolton, and plunders it. The King having traversed his ground, une. came back again from Worcester, and Sir William Waller from out of the skirts of Glo∣cestershire, Cropr∣dy bridg∣ ight. une 29. was ready at his heels; so he overtook him neer Ban∣bury, at a place called Cropredy-Bridge, Waller drew up in Barta∣lia on a hill, expecting the advantage of the Kings pasting the Bridge, which the King adventuring to do, Waller descends from his Post, and fall, upon the Kings Rear beyond the Bridge, where he was so gallantly received by the Earls of Cleveland and Northampton, that he was quite routed, 600 kill'd, and 700 taken prisoners, his Train of Artillery, and many of his Officers, so that Sir William was forced to fly to have recourse o London for another recruit.
It was therefore resolved upon this defeat of Waller, Leisti∣thiel sur∣render. that the Kng should immediately follow the Earl of Essex, who was advanced so far, that the Queen who was delivered of the Princess Henrietta at Exeter, the sixteenth of Iune, in the moneth of Iuly, was fain to be gone from Exeter for fear of a siege, and carry the young Lady along with her into France, where she landed on the 25th at Brest in Britany. At the begin∣ning of August the King had overtaken the Earl of Essex at L∣stithel, his force, in so ill a condition through their long march, Aug. 5. The Earl of Essex vanquish¦ed in Cornwal and their want of necessaries which the Country people kept from them, that it was concluded an easie thing to conquer them: The King therefore resolved to coop them up, and keep all manner of provisions from them. After two or three daies league in this manner, the Parliament horse broke through the Kings Army by night; the General, and the Lord Roberts, at whose instance this expedition was undertaken, got by boat from Foy to Plymouth, and the foot being destitute, and desert∣ed by the horse, under the Command of Major General Skippon, came to a Capitulation, by which it was agreed, they should render their Ams, Ammunition, Artillery, and Stores, into the hands of the King, and have liberty, as many as would, to pass home, they engaging never more to bear Arms against the King; so that by this defeat the Parliament were quite undone in the West, as to present appearance. But though success crowned the King here, Fight. it failed him as much in the North, whether Prince Rupert was advanced, as was said before, for the relief of York: For upon notice of the Princes approach, having with him the bravest Army that ever was seen in England, both for number and persons, The Confederate Forces of Scotch and English drew of from be∣fore the City, and drew up into a fighting posture. On the  of Iuly, the Marquess of Newcastle & the Prince joyned their forces together: On the third both Armies met one another upon a great plain, called Marston-Moo; the Prince being General, commanded the right wing, General Goring, Sir Charles Lucas, and Col. Tillier, the main body, and my Lord of Newcastle the left wing, who had a stout Regiment of White-coats, called his Lambs. At the first onset the Prince totally routed the Scots, who were opposed to him, and out of desire of re∣venge for their unnatural siding with the Parliament of Eng∣land, pursued them so lar, that he came not back time enough to the assistance of his own: But most remarkable was the va∣lour
of the English under Manchester, led by Lievtenant Gene∣ral Cromwell, who being the Reserve of the Army, when the Prince was so far ingaged, fell in so impetuously with the Cu∣raziers, that they bore down all before them; the field was now almost cleared, the Scots and Fairfaxes men on one side being fled, and giving the day for lost, and the main body of the Kings being discomfited, and Prince Rupert just returned to see the overthrow, so that there was none standing in the field save only my Lord of Newcastles men, upon whose Lambs a terrible slaughter was committed, while they discharged the parts of valiant, expert and Loyal Subjects, refusing quarter, and cast∣ing themselves into rings, till there were very few of them left; and it had been a shame for the enemy to have killed such gal∣lant and brave persons. In conclusion, the Cromwellians pre∣vailed, killing of the King, Army 4000 men, and rather more prisoners: The slaughter that was on the Parliament; side was 5000, which fell most upon the Scots, on whom the Prince did fierce execution. The Fight being thus over, 000 killed at Marston loor, uly 16. York ieled o the Parlia∣ent. which was the bloodiest of all the Wars. Prince Rupert fled into Lancire, and so Westward, and the Marque of Newcastle, and the other Lord with him, took shipping at Newcastle, and departed the Kingdome, and soon after York ndred it self, by its Governour Sir Thomas Glenham, to the Parliament. During the Kings absence in the West, and the Princes in the North, Sir William Waller had recruited himself, and joyned with the forces of Col. Norton, and Col. Morley, who had drawn down before Basing, a house of the Marquess of Win∣chesters, garrison'd by him, and kept for the King, which be∣ing distressed, for want both of Ammunition and provision, was distressed by the enemy; many brave salleys they made, and a multitude of men they slew, so that it was afterwards called Bsting-House. Waller was resolved not to rise, cost what it would; at length relief was put into it, under the conduct of Col. Gage, nevertheless he persisted in the enterprise: Till af∣ter Newbery fight, iege of asing ised. the King marching that way, the forces left to block it up, rose and departed without it; a little before which Banbury siege was also raised by the said Col. Gage, afterwards made Governour of Oxford, and the Earl of Northampton. Hitherto the King seemed to have fortune inclineable to him, saving in that unfortunate business of Marston-Moor. Now the case began to be disputed, Essex had raised another Army, aided
also by Waller, and other forces, resolved to fight the King; so it came to another battel at the same place of Newbury; Nov. 21. Newbe∣ry second Fight. the Parliamentarians to revenge their disgrace at Lestithiel, the Ca∣valiers to repair their loss at Marston-Moor, it was a cruel fight, only no more were killed in this then in the former, what ad∣vantage was lay on Essexes side; few men of note were slain on either side, save Sir William S. Leger of the Kings, and a Colonel of Foot of the Parliaments. The Earl of Cleveland making good the Kings retreat, was taken prisoner, and had it not been for the darkness of the night, the King had hardly escaped them: Sir George Lisle performed here signal service for the King, and the Trained-Bands for the Parliament. Essex had clearly the field, and from thence marched to the siege of Dennington Ca∣stle, under whose walls the King had sheltered and drawn his Artillery. Somewhat before this Colonel Massey had defeated and slain Col. My, Colonel Massey defeats Myn, and takes Mon-mouth. and by intelligence with one Kirle, had surprized Monmouth Town, and had some other successes against Prince Ruperts parties, while he staid about Bristol, upon design of new Leavies. Dennington Castle was, as said before, but the King sending a considerable force to relieve it, the besiegers drew off, and marched away, to the great scandal of the Earl of Essex, and the Officers then in command under him. After this sad experience of one anothers strength, the Par∣liament sent Propositions to the King at Oxford, Decemb which begat the Treaty at xbridge, before the meeting whereof, the Par∣liament had executed Sir Iohn Hothum, and his Son, their first Champion, for endeavouring or designing to render Hull to the King, from which he had formerly shut him out: As also  Alexander Carew, for betraying his like trust of Pl  Fort. Also during the designment of a Treaty, the Com  ∣er-Book was abolished by Ordinance, and a Directo  in the room thereof; and for consummation of all, the  Bishop of Canterbury was beheaded likewise. Though the project of a Treaty was now in hand, yet never was the design of the War carried on more fiercely and subtilly. T my mo∣delled, and Gen Farfax declared The Independents now first appeared, the Army must be new modelled, another General, and other Officers, and no per∣sons, Members of the House, to have any Military Command, (only Cromwell got himself excepted) This design was not
nosed by the Presbyterians, who were convinced of some defi∣ciency in their old Commanders, so that Sir Thomas Fairfax was unanimously agreed upon for General, and under him all factious Secaries, and wild principled men obtained Command, whilest the former Officers were reduced to the condition of Reformad's, amongst whom, not long after, they cashiered Colonel Massey, Jan. 11. having shifted him from his Government of Glocester, to a Command in the Army. Alngdon had been garrison'd by Essex in his expedition into the West, Colonel Gage, the Governour of Oxford, had a de∣sign upon it, and in the attempt was killed at Cullam bridge. The thirtieth of Ianuary, that fatal day, began the aforesaid Treaty at , 30 Vxbridg ty. which continued some 23 daies in dispute, without any power of the Parliament Commissioners to con∣clude without them, and so ended on the 22 of Feb. The Parliament forces surprize Shrewsbury, but Col. Rossiter is defeated in Leicestershire, an active man for the Parliament, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale relieves Pontsral Castle, and de∣feat, the besiegers, twice superiour to him in number. About this time there was a kind of Faction in the King, Court at Oxford, and some alterations betwixt the partie, con∣cerning the Kings Councel, so that some Lords, Savil, Percy, and Andover, were confined, and the Parliament, that is, the Members of the same Houses at Westinster, who adhered to the King, who by the Kings Order were the year before con∣vened o Oxford, were so some reasons adjourned till the tenth of October, but that Parliament signified nothing. The House o Commons voted, that in their new Generals Commission, Mar. 2. the words, For Preservation of His Majesties Per∣son, should be left out, and accordingly they were so; and so ended the year 1644. the last of the King, felicity. Anno Domini, 1645. WE will begin this year, though we post-date the time, that we may recite all the exploits in Scotland toge∣ther, with the actions of the Renowned Marquess of Montross, appointed Governour of the Kingdome of Scotland. The year before he came into Scotland, attended only by three men, much ado he had to pass, the wayes being so strictly guarded, during the Scotch Army was in England: At his arrival in the Highland, being supplyed with a 1100 men from the Mar∣quess
of Antrim out of Ireland, and another addition under the Lord Kilpont, and the Earl of Perths son, he matched to find out the Army of the Covenantes, then gathered under the command of the Earl of Tullibarne, the Lords Elch and Drummond, consisting of a great force, into Perthshire, where at Tepper-Moor he obtained a great victory, his Souldier; for want of Arms and Ammunition making use of the stones, lying advantagiously on the fighting ground. Here he killed no less then 2000 men; whereupon Perth City opened its Gates to the Conquerour. To withstand and repress so dangerous an Enemy within the bowels of the Kingdome, another Army wa raised, and put under more expeienced Captains; in the mean while, Mon∣tross had fallen into Argyles Country, where he made miserable havock, intending utterly to break the spirits of that people, who were so surely ingaged to Argyles side. Here the Earl of Seaforth followed him with an Army, and the Marquess of Ao∣gyle had another of the other side; Montross therefore resolved to fight with one first, and so tell upon that party under Ar∣gyle, which he totally outed, killing 1500 on the place, the rest escaped, and so the Marquess of Montross, bent his way af∣ter the other Army, which he defeated at Brhin, being new∣ly put under the command of Colonel Hurry, afterwards offers battel to Bayly, who had another Army ready to fight him, but he waited for advantages; whereupon he marches after Hurry, who had reuited, Allene fight. and was pressing the Lord Gourdon (having taken Dun ice in his way) and at Alderne discomfits him killing 300 and dispersing the rest. He seeks out Baily, to whom was joyned the Earl of Lindsey, and at Alefod hills forced them to fight, utterly routed them, July 22. and obtained a remarkable victory; but that which lessened the triumph, was the death of the Lord Gourdon, one that was as the right hand of Montross, a very Loyal Right Noble Gentle∣man, being eldest son to the Marquess of Huntly. After this, he comes to S. Iohnstons, where he alarm'd the Parliament there sitting, and so into the Lowlands, where the Kirk had another Army in readiness, Kilsith Field. under the command of the afore∣said Baily. At a place called Kilsith, both Armies met, and a cruel battel it was, Aug 27. but in conclusion success and victory crowned Montrosses head, and almost 6000 men were slain in this fight, the pr∣suit being eagerly followed for a great way, and the Covenan∣ters
at first fighting very resolutely, but the fortune of Montross still prevailed. The Nobility now every where readily assist∣ing him, and the Towns and Cities declaring for him, so that that Kingdome which afforded men and assistance for the invasi∣on of another Kingdome, was not now able to defend it self. The Governour, so was Montross dignified, beng seized of all places almost of strength, even as far as Edinburgh, where some Royal prisoners were delivered him. The Estates of Scotland therefore send for Davd Leshley, while Montross expected for∣ces from the King under the Lord Dighy, which staid too long, and were afterwards defeated at Sherburn in Yorkshire. Upon the arrival of Leshley, most of the forces under Montross, not dreading an Enemy so soon out of England, were departed home; so that Leshley finding Montross in a very weak condition at Philips-Haugh, fell upon him before he could retreat, almost before his Scours could give him intelligence, and there routs him: He at first resolved to lose his life with the field, but be∣ing perswaded of better hopes, he resolutely charged through, and brought the flying remains of his Army safe into the High∣lands, where he began new Levies, but the fortune of the King failing every where, he was the next year ordered by the King then in the Scots custody to disband, and depart the Kingdom. And so we leave him, till a more unhappy revolution of time. The memory of this man had almost caused an Oblivion of some things done hee, during his great successes, for Sir Iohn Hotham and his Son, for intending the delivery of Hull, which they had so unhandsomely before denied to the King, were be∣headed; Vide speehes pages 5. as also Sir Alexander Carw, and at last the Right Re∣verend Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, for many pretended crimes of innovation and disaffection in matters of Religion, was exe∣cuted the tenth of Ianuary. These mens deaths happened in December and Ianuary, 1644. and are therefore here inserted. To begin therefore the year 1645. Dennington Castle was the very 25th of March delivered to the Parliament, which was counterpoised with a defeat given Col. Massey by Prince Rupert at Lidbury, April being surprized there, and his foot routed, his house consisting most of Officers, with himself hardly escaped to Glocester. At the same time, the Army being new modelled, Lievtenant General Cromwell was sent by Fairfax, to hinder a conjunction of forces at Oxford from Worcster, which he did, defeating the Queens Regiment, and afterwards took Bleching∣ton House by surrender, for which Col. Windbank was shot to death at Oxford.
Notwithstanding which interruption, the King matched from Oxford, May intending Northward, to recover what he had lost there, with a very compleat Army; and coming to Leicester, then garrison'd by Sir Robert Pye for the Parliament, after sm∣mons refused, 31 stormed it and took it, the Souldiers for a while plundring the Town, which had been the residence of a Parliament Committee from the beginning. In the mean while, June. General Fairfax was advanced from Lon∣don with his new modelled Army, and by Order of the Com∣mittee of both Kingdomes, had besieged Oxford, where he had received a notable salley, but upon news of the Kings success at Leicester, presently raised his siege, resolving to fight the King as soon as he could overtake him. The King was now in a dispute, whether he should march upon his first intendments Northward, or staying for some for∣ces out of the West under Colonel Goring, march for London. When he had notice of Fairfaxes advance after him, whom he thought to be taken up at Oxford; whereupon, by the ill late of things, the King was advised not to delay time, but even at midnight to dislodge from his quarters, whether Fairfax was neerly come, and the next morning to seek him out, and to give him battel. June 14 This happened to be at Naseby field, on Saturday Iune the 14. Naseby Fight. where at the first encounter the Kings Army had the best on't, his right wing of horse discomfiting and overthrowing the left wing of the Parliaments under Skippon, taking Ireton the Com∣missary General prisoner; but the left wing, consisting of Nor∣thern horse, under Sir Marmaduke Langdale, who were clear∣ly for the Kings going Northward to their own Country to re∣lieve Pomfret Castle, made no defence at all. The King was very couragious and active in this field, but the same over∣eagerness of Prince Rupert half lost the day, the foot being de∣stitute, after some slaughter, threw down their Ams, and were taken prisoners, to the number of four or five thousand; the Kings Coach, and in it his Cabinet, afterwards most disloy∣ally and dishonestly published to the world, with other Letters and papers; all his Artillery, Arms, Ammunition, bag and bag∣gage taken, himself hardly escaping to Leicester that night, and from thence to Ashby de la Zouch. After this battel, the Kings Cause and Arms visibly declined every where. Leicester regained by the Parliament upon surrender, Leices ake while the King made hast towards Wales, to the relief of Chester, and
there to form a new Army, but Poyntz, Middleton, and Brere∣ton. Rowlin Heah Fight. Sept. 24. rising from their siege, met him at Rowton Heath, where in the beginning (as usual) the King had the better; but the Par∣liament being supplyed with fresh forces, the King was van∣quished there also, and the right valiant Lord Bernard Stuart, Earl of Litchfield slain, with above six hundred more: Soon af∣ter followed the rendition of Chester, the King flying back to Oxford. The Sects had besieged Calise almost a year after Marston-Moor fight,June 28. now it was surrendred by Sir Thomas Glenham; but the like success they had not at Hereford, from whence they rose with disgrace, and came and sate dwn soon after before Newark. General Fairfax marched after Naseby fight into the West, leaving the King to pursue his ill fortunes, and took in Bridge∣water (having before defeated General Goring at Lamport, July 10. Lamport Fight. new∣ly raised from the siege at Taunton by Colonel Wellen, who re∣lieved the Governour Colonel Blake, though with some los∣ses) a also Bath and Sherburn, and sate down before Bristol, Broll everd Aug 1. which after a short siege was delivered by Prince Rupert upon Articles, and the said Prince, and his Brother, came soon after to Oatlands, in order to depart the Kingdome. Cromwell also came with a party to the reinforcing of the siege of Basing and by smothering of wet hay, ng House to me. Sept. 14. made his approa∣ches, and stormed it, taking the Marquess of Winchestr pri∣soner, with other Officers and Souldiers, to the number of 600 persons. Several House, Novem. Castles, and Towns, were dlvered to the Parliament, while the King kept close in Oxford: The Prince of Wales being sent West, and under the care of my Lord Hop∣ton, in company with my Lord Capel, and others, but General Fairfax following him into Cornwall, Hopton accepted of con∣ditions (afte the firing of Torrington, and the delivery of Lanceston, Saltash, Lizard, Dartmouth, Mount-Edge, Foy, all be∣ing qutted by him graatim) and disbanded, the Prnce taking sail from Pendennis Castle to the Isle of Scilly, and thence into France. Hereford was also about this time surprized by Colonel Birch, auary. Belvoir Castle taken, all places now submitting to the power and fortune of the Parliament; and for a conclusion, Exeter was now delivered by Sir Iohn Berkley, upon very honourable and advantagious articles, to the Lord Fairfax; and the Lord
Astley defeated at Stow in the Would, two thousand kill'd, and taken prisoners; and so ended this year, the next beginning with the same face of affairs, several surrenders being made to the Parliament. Anno Domini, 1646. AFter the delivery of Woodstock, it was not held safe for the King to continue longer in Oxford; April. but the siege approach∣ing to that City also, the King disguised, in the company, and as a servant to Colonel Iohn Ashburnham, with one Mr. Hudson a Minister, by virtue of a Pass from Cromwell, left Oxford, and soon after put himself upon the Scotch Army, then lying at the siege of Newark, who sent him away with their Guards to Newcastle, and soon after the Scotch Army followed him, upon surrender of that Garrison of Newark. The King being in their hands by their perswasions and de∣sires, and his own resolvedness for peace, gave Order to all his Governours to make such terms as were most suitable and conve∣nient for them, and deliver their respective Governments to the Parliament, that so the War might be at an end; whereupon, all the Garrisons in the Kings hands came to a capitulation, June 3, Septem. Ox∣ford, Tarringdon, Wallingford, Borstall-House, Ludlow, Litchfield-Close, Worcester, Ragland, Conway, Pendennis, and Scilly Isle sur∣rendred; at which time also died their former General, the Earl of Essex, and was most magnificently interred in Westmin∣ster Abbey. General Fairfax came in triumph to London, Novem. while the Trea∣ty was on foot betwixt the Parliament and the Scots at New∣castle concerning the delivery and disposal of the King. In fine, upon the price and payment of 200000 pound, the Scots perfidiously, after many disputes, whereby they affirmed it un∣lawful and dishonourable for them to do it, sold their Native Prince to his English Subjects, and so departed over Tweed into Scotland, according to agreement.
Anno Domini, 1647. THe English Commissioners, June. deputed thereto by the Parlia∣ment, having received the King from the Scots, brought him to Holmby-House, one of his Palaces in Northamptonshire, according to the stipulation and hypocritical salvo made, that the King should be treated honourably; but with no attendance of his own, either servants or Chaplains, and a Guard upon him perpetually, till in conclusion, Cromwell beginning his projected Soveraignty, by an Order from him, to which the General tacitly consented, The King was taken from the Com∣missioners, and removed by one Corner Ioyce from Holdenby to the Army, they pretending an extraordinary kindness to the King and his Patty, even to the deceiving of the King himself, by their Declarations and Protestations for Publick Liberty. In the mean while, the King is carried about from Holmby to Childersley, Newmarket, Royston, Hatfield, Windsor, in progress with the Army to Caversham, Maidenhead, to Latiner, to Stoke, to Oat∣lands, being treated with a far greater shew of honour then the Parliament allowed him, with much hopes and many promises of his speedy restitution: His Chaplains, and other persons, en∣gaged on his side, having free access to him, with the free exer∣cise of the Common-Prayer, &c. At last they bring him to Hampton-Court, where Propositions as bad as any they tendred, were offered to him again, but there for their unreasonableness being rejected by the King, he being informed of a plot to murther him by some of the Army, fled from Hampton-Court privately to the Isle of Wght, the said Colonel Ashburnham be∣ing with him in this disguize also, and rendred himself into the hands of Hamond, the Governour of the said Isle, who forth∣with certified the Parliament, and they presently vote, that no more Addresses should be made to the King, nor no Papers re∣ceived from him. While the Army were thus coasting the King about, fell out a tumult in the City of London, the Apprentices and Citizens flocking down to Westminster about the establishing of the Mi∣litia in the same hands it stood before the Army had interposed, and by their instance had made the Houses alter the persons na∣med the fourth of May, as being suspected favourers of the King: Whereupon the Lords readily assented to the impow∣ring those of the fourth of May, to act as before in the Mili∣tia;
and so after a little dispute, did the Common, some of the same multitude not consented with this, brought back the Speaker into his Chair, the House being risen, and compelled him and the Members back to the House, July 26. to vote, that the King should come to London to treat. After this tumult (which the King observes in his book to be justly retaliated upon them) the Speaker of the House of Commons, with some forty more, privately departed to the Army then at Windsor, complaining of the force; the other remaining, to the number of 140. meeting according to their adjournment, finding not the Speaker nor his Mace, chose another Speaker, as did the Lords also, their Speaker having withdrawn himself likewise to the Army. The Army seem to be highly incensed at these Riots of the Citizens, and take upon them the rectifying of those disorders, the fugitive members are entertained, and consultation is held between them whats fit to be done, while the Parliament sitting at Westminster, are advising about listing of forces, appointing Massey, Poyntz, and others, for General Officers, and recall those Members against whom the Army had exhibited a full charge. But the Army advanceth neer London, so that all these pre∣parations, and the stomach of the City soon were dashed, and new agreements made, their Fortifications and Works to be demolished, and the Army admitted to march through in tri∣umph; so the fugitive Members were reseated again with their Speaker, and all things put in the same bad state and condition they were before, and several Lords, the Lord Mayor, some Aldermen, and divers Citizens of great wealth and quality, are, the one committed to the Black Rod, and the other to the Tower, so that now all things passed in both Houses according to the disposition of the Army, the Parliament being wholly subservient to their designs, having made my Lord Fairfax Ge∣neralissimo, and Constable of the Tower of London. In Ireland, June after the Marquess of Ormond had delivered up by capitulation, the Government to Colonel Iones for the Par∣liament; the said Colonel marched out, and fought with the Lord Preston, but was forced to fly, being overpowred by him; but the business came to a second encounter, neer Trym, where the victory fell to Iones, killing 5470 foot souldiers, taking a very great booty, and a number of prisoners; and the Lord In∣chequin defeats another Army under the Lord Taaf, where were slain 4000 more of those Rebels; and Sir Charles Coot gave them
another defeat, so that most of the Towns were reduced, and the Rebellion neer extinguished: The Scots therefore were de∣sired to retreat with their forces out of Vlster. Anno Domini, 1648. BEgin we now with the 24th year, being the last of King Charles the First, 1648. wherein the King seemed as for∣midable in his interest, as ever he was from the beginning of the War. The Parliament was divided, and jealousies betwixt them and the Army encreased every day, Trading stopt so that on the ninth of April another tumult happened in London by the Apprentices, who seized the Gates, took a Drake from the Lord Mayors, and planted it at Ludgate, but the Army horse entring with their General at Aldersgate, marched to Leaden-Hall, and after a little skirmish dispersed them: Several Petiti∣ons for restitution of the King came from several Counties. But in Wales a stronger Insurrection broke out, Major Gene∣ral Laughorn, Fagans ight. say 8. formerly a great man for the Parliament, Colo∣nel Poyer, and Colonel Powell, of the same side, refuse to dis∣band, and presently seize upon Pembroke Castle, Tenby Castle, and declare for the King; Chepstow Castle is likewise taken by Sir Nicholas Kemish for the same side: Against these Colonel Horton is sent with three thousand men; Horton receives a brush, by falling with part of his men under Colonel Fleming into an Ambuscado: Whereupon Laughorn hearing of Cromwells ad∣vance also, resolved to fight Horton; so the business came to a fight at S. Fagons, where the Welsh being taken on a sudden, not intending to fight that day, were presently after the first on∣set routed, above five thousand of their eight being taken, a great many killed▪ and the rest sheltred in the two Castles afore∣said. Sir Iohn Owen was up in Arms in North-Wales, and had defeated the Sheriff opposing him, but was afterwards taken himself. Cromwell storms Tenby Castle, and takes it, and after a sbort resistance, Pembroke yielded upon discretion, as to the lives of those three Commanders, whereof one Colonel Poyer died by lot; and so Cromwell having quieted Wales, (Sir Nicho∣las Kemish being slain by the storming of Chepstow Castle which he had newly taken) marched into Lancashire to meet the Scotch Army, who under their General Duke Hamilton, having joyned with those English forces under Sir Marmaduke Langdale & Sir Philp Magrave, were advancing for London to restore the King. This Army consisted of 24000 men effective.
At the same time also the Kentishmen having seen and heard the usage their Neighbours of Surrey had for petitioning for peace, being some of them killed by the Army-guards in West∣minster Hall, resolved to ask or demand with their sword in their hands, that which the Surrey men had been refused. Maid∣stone Fight, June 2. They rose, to the number of ten thousand, and had designed the Duke of Richmond for their General, which upon his refusal, was conferred upon the Earl of Norwich. To suppress this ri∣sing, whether abundance of stout valiant young men resorted out of London, General Fairfax was sent in person, and to glose with the Londoners, the old Militia was again confirmed. At Maidstone, a part of the Kentishmen opposed themselves a∣gainst the General, maintaining the Bridge so resolutely, that it came to a very hot encounter, so that the General was forced to alight out of his Coach, and led in his men himself. After they had passed the Bridge, they were forced to fight every hedg before they came to the Town, where the fight was continued with the like gallantry, and had any relief come, it would have been a question whether it had not utterly routed the Parliament Upon this defeat, the other greater party that were at Roche∣ster, slipt away to Black-Heath, and from thence ferried and pas∣sed over into Essex and made their Head-quarter at Bow, but the City stirred not in favour of them, but a party of horse of the Army was sent thither, where after some light skirmishes, they removed further into Essex, where many Gentlemen joyned with them, my Lord Capel, June and others, and so to Colchester, whether the General presently after followed them. To second this, part of the Navy revolts also, and set ashore Col. The N¦vy re∣volt Rnsborough their Commander, and Pontefract Castle was surprized by Col. Morris; and now the Parliament having so many irons in the fire, null those Votes of non-Address to the King, and resolve of a Treaty as the best expedient. To further which purpose, the Prince of Wales having im∣barqued himself in the Reformation, came into the Downs with 25 Sail of Men of War, where he landed ome men, and had Deal and Sandwich Castles delivered him; but the E. of Warwick and Sir George Ayscue making into the Dows together, and the Prince lacking victual, Augu he set sail for Helvot Sluce (not being able to do any thing for his friends at Colchester) whether Warwick al∣so followed him. This was not all that was done for the King, for this very same time the Earl of Holland, the D. of Buckingham, his brother
the Lord Francis, July. Kingston Insurre∣ction. the Earl of Peterborough, and others, assem∣bled at Kingston, and declared for the King, being about a thou∣sand, and more hourly expected; but Sir Michael Livesey falling upon them suddenly; they were forced to leave the Town, lo∣sing that Noble Gentleman the Lord Francis, who refued quar∣ter, and so speeded to S. Neots in Bedfordshire, where Colonel Scroop fell upon them in their quarters, killed Colonel Dalbeir, and took the Earl of Holland prisoner, with some forty more, (the Duke and the Earl of Peterborough hardly escaping) and dispersed the whole party. The Scotch Army was advanced now as far as Preston in Lan∣cashire, reston ight. Aug. 17 where Lievtenant General Cromwell, being joyned with Major General Lambert, awaited them. At this time also Scar∣borough declares for the King, Sir Matthew Boynton being Go∣vernour there. August 17. both Armies faced one another, and within two hours time the Scots begin to flinch, so that the brunt of the fight fell upon the English, who sided with them. The Scots being ready to fly, the Parliament Army doubled their courage, and put them to the rout two several wayes. The next morning, being the 18th of August, the Scot, made a stand, and did some notable execution on the prers, but the Army coming up, they fled again, crying Mercy, Mercy, so that they might be heard five miles together an end; multitudes were killed, and more taken prisoners, being in number equivalent to the Army that vanquished them. Duke Hamilton fled first to Namptwich with three thousand horse, there the Country took five hundred of them, and thence to Vttoxeter in Staffordshire, where he was taken by my Lord Grey of Grooby: Monro escaped with part of the Scotch Horse to Berwick, and so into Scotland, but Middleton was taken by the way thither. After it was known which way Hamilton took, omwel st into tland Cromwell fol∣lowed after Monro into Scotland, and there begun intelligence with some of those Scots in tendency to his ater-design, and after they had cajoled one another, he departed into England, having received the thanks of the Committee of Estates for the service he had done their Nation. Upon the news of this defeat sent in by General Fairfax to the besieged in Colchester, a Councel of War was held what to do, lche.  lded. gust. it was once agreed, to make an eruption out, and attempt the whole Army beleaguring them; but this, through some su∣spition amongst the Souldiers of being deserted by their Offi∣cers in the action, was frustrated; whereupon it came to a resolve
of treating with the Enemy: and so it was concluded (the be∣sieged having eaten all their horses and the dogs in the Town) that the Officers should be left to discretion, the souldiers to have their lives, and the Town to pay 14000 l. to preserve it from plunder: Whereupon the Town being surrendred, Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle, were shot to death presently, and not long after the Lord Capel was beheaded by a sentence of the High Court of Justice. In the perplexity of these affairs, Treaty at the Isle of Wight. October. the Treaty was voted in the Isle of Wight, and accordingly effectually prosecuted, the King being in a kind of Regality in the said Isle, and so far had it proceeded, that in November the Parliament voted the Kings Concessions to be sufficient ground for them to proceed on to the settlement of the Kingdome, when the Army being now Lords and Masters through their late success, came and put a force upon the House of Commons, excluding above 140. and by the remnant of their faction in the House, unvoted these Votes, and the Army next remov'd the King from Wight to Hurst Castle, then to Winchester, then to Windsor, and so to Saint Iames, and last to the High Court of Justice, where after four times being at that detestable Bar, and refusing to own their Jurisdi∣ction, they pronounced the Sentence, and the order, place, and time of the execution was referred to Colonel Harrison, &c. who appoint Tuesday, Ian. 30. before Whitehall gates, in the open place, where accordingly that execrable murder was perpetra∣ted by the hands of a Vizarded Executioner, to the amazement of the whole world, and to the unexpressible sorrows of this Church and Kingdome. The Kings last words on the Scaffold, being the sum of the Life, Tryal, and Death of that most in∣comparable pious Prince, are here fully inserted, to serve for all.
scene of Charles' execution
I shall be very little heard of any body else, I shall therefore speak a word to you here: Indeed I could have held my peace very well, if I did not think, that holding my peace, would make som men think, that I did submit to the Guilt, as well as to the Punish∣ment: But I think it is my duty to God first, and then to my Country, to clear my self, both as an honest man, a good King, and a good Christian. I Shall begin first, with my Innocency; and, in trath, I think it not very needful for me to insist long upon this: For all the world knows, that I did never begin a War with the two Houses of Parliament; and I call God to witness, unto whom I must shortly make an account, that I did never intend to incroach upon their Pri∣viledges: They began upon me; it is the Militia they began upon: They confess the Militia was mine, but they thought it fit to have it from me. And to be short, if any body will look to the dates of Commissions, of their Commissions and mine, and likewise to the Declara∣tion, he will see clearly, that they began these unhappy Troubles, not I. So as far the guilt of these enor∣mous Crimes that are laid against me, I hope that God will clear me out. I will not (for I am in charity) and God forbid that I should, lay it upon the two Hou∣ses of Parliament, there is no necessity of either, I hope
they are free of this guilt; but I believe, that ill In∣struments between them and me, have been the chief cause of all this blood-shed: So that as I find my self clear of this, I hope (and pray God) that they may too; Yet for all this, God forbid, that I should be so ill a Christian, as not to say, that Gods Judgements are just upon me: Many times he doth pay Justice by an unjust Sentence, that is ordinary: I will only say this, That unjust Sentence that I suffered to take effect, is punished by an unjust Sentence upon me. So far I have said, to shew you, that I am an innocent man: Now to shew you, that I am a good Christian; I hope there is a good man that will bear me witness, that I have forgiven all the world, and even those in particular, that have been the chief causers of my death: Who they are, God knows, I do not desire to know, I pray God forgive them. But this is not all, my charity must go further, I wish that they may repent, for indeed they have committed a great sin in that particular; I pray God with S Stephen, that this be not laid to their charge: And withall, that they may take the right way to the peace of the Kingdome; for my charity commands me, not only to forgive particular men, but to endeavour to the last gasp, the peace of the King∣dome. So (Sirs) I do wish with all my soul: (I see there are some here that will carry it further:) that they endeavour the peace of the Kingdome. (Sirs) I must shew you, both how you are out of the way, and put you in a way. First, you are out of the way, for certainly all the wayes you ever had yet, as far as I could find by any thing, is in the way of Conquests: Certainly this is an ill way for Conquest, in my Opinion, is never just, except there he a just and good cause, either for matter of wrong, or a just title; and then if ye go beyond the first quarrel
that ye have: that makes it unjust at the end, that was just at first: for if there be only matter of Conquest, then it is a great robbery; as a Pyrate said to Alexander, That he was the great Robber himself, himself was but a petty Robber. And so, Sirs, I do think, for the way that you are in, you are much out of the way: Now, Sirs, to put you in the way, believe it you will never go right, nor God will never prosper you, until you give God his due, the King his due (that is, my Successor) and the peo∣ple their due; I am as much for them as any of you. You must give God his due, by regulating rightly his Church, according to the Scripture, (which is now out of order.) and to set you in a way particularly, now I cannot; but only this, A National Synod freely called, freely deba∣ting among themselves, must settle this: When every Opi∣nion is freely and clearly heard. For the King, indeed I will not, the Laws of the Land will clearly instruct you for that; therefore because it concerns mine own par∣ticular, I only give you a touch of it. For the People, tru∣ly I desire their liberty and freedome as much as any body whomsoever: But I must tell you, that their liberty and their freedome consist in having Government under those Laws, by which their lives and theirs may be most their own; it is not in having a share in the Government, that is nothing pertaining to them: A Subject and a Soveraign are clean different things; and therefore until you do that, I mean, that you put the people into that liberty, as I say, certainly they will never enjoy themselves. Sirs, it was for this that now I am hither come, for if I would have given way to an arbitrary way, for to have all Laws changed according to the power of the Sword, I need not have come here; and therefore I tell you (and I pray God it be not laid to your charge) that I am the
Martyr of the people. Introath Sirs, I shall not hold you any longer, I will only say this to you, that I could have desired some little time longer, because I would have put this, what I have said, in a little better order, and have had it a little better digested then I have done; and there∣fore I hope you will excuse me; I have delivered my Con∣science, I pray God you take those courses, that are best for the good of the Kingdome, and your own Salvation. After some Ejaculations, he laid down his Head upon the Block, and stretched out his hands (The Sgn)  had it severed from his body at one blow, by the Vizarded Executioner, who present∣ly held it up, and shewed it to the people: His Head and Trunk were afterwards coffined in Lead, and exposed to pub∣lick view at S. Iames's; till lastly, the Duke of Len, the Marquess of Hartford, the Earl of Southampton, and the Bishop of London, begged the Body to bury it, which they conducted to Windsor Chappel-Royal, and there interred it; with only this Inscption upon the Co; CHARLES, KING OF ENG∣LAND, MDC.XLVIII. After this most  murder, January. they declared themselves to be a Free State setting out a Proclamation wherein they de∣clare, tht no person hath Right to the Crown o England, a∣bolishing thereby the ingly overnment, and debarring of our Rightful Soveraign om any claim, &c. declaring him also a Traytor, with the rest of the Royal Issue; for refusing the publication of which the Lord Mayor Reynoldson was outed, imprisoned, and fined 2000 l. In March they proceed with their High Court of Justice, Vide speech page 3. newly modelled, and a new President, to the Tryal of these Noble persons they had in custody, about the last years risings, whereof Duke Hamilton, Vide speech page 32. Earl of Holland, Earl of Norwich, the Lord Capel, and Sir Iohn Owen, were condemned to be be∣headed; the Duke, and Holland, and Capel, were accordingly executed in the Palace-yard, the other two with much ado were pardoned. Pntfract Castle was now rendred to the Parliament by Colonel Morris, being the last Garrison for the King in Eng∣land. Now they had leisure to look towards Ireland, whether
Lievtenant General Cromwell was sent with an Army of 10000 men, Dublin freed, and the Marques of Or∣mond defeated which landed about this time at Dublin, where a little before, Colonel Iones the Governour having received a supply of 1000 men, had sallied out, and beaten my Lord of Ormond from off the siege, where he lay with 20000 and upwards, through the carelesness and treachery of the Guards: Here were slain to the number of three thousand, and five thousand ta∣ken prisoners; this proved the loss of all Ireland, which was then entirely for the King, save this City and London-Derry. Anno Domoni 1649. Cromwell upon his arrival, sets presently forward towards Tredah, whereinto the Lord Lievtenant Ormond had put a Gar∣rison of choice English, and some Irish; to this Town he gave three assaults, and was valiantly repulsed, but in conclusion of the third, the Town was entred and man, woman, and chil∣dren put to the sword for three daies in cold bloud, with the Governour himself, Sir Arthur Aston, a well experienced and valiant Captain. Anno Dom. 1649. and 1650. VPon this success Trim and Dundalk yielded themselves to him, August the Marquess of Ormond hovering neer him with his Army, but yet not daring to attempt any thing. Wexford was the next Town he attaqued, which by storm he took also, put∣ting all in arms to the sword; thence to Passage Fort, and so to Waterford, from whence he (considering the Winter ap∣proaching) drew off to quarters, having already possession of most of the Towns of Ireland, Limrick, Galloway, Clon∣mell, and Kilkenny excepted, which soon after were reduced by him and his Successor Ireton, and that Kingdome was whol∣ly brought in subjection to the Parliament. The next thing that busied the new Commonwealth, was the affairs of Scotland who had long before proclaimed the King, and were now treating with him; therefore they recalled home Lievtenant General Cromwell, whom upon Fairfaxes refusal of going against the Scots, they now advanced to be General: He came Iune the last to London, having landed at Bristol and was highly treated by the Parliament. Dorislaus that drew up the charge against the King, was killed at the Hague, in May last; and Ascham that was sent
on the same errand to the King of Spain, was killed also by some English men in his Inne at Supper; this did mightily in∣rage the new Commonwealth, that their Minsters could no where be protected. According to the conclusion of the Treaty between the King and his Subjects of Scotland, he took shipping at Schiveling in Holland, and landed, after some dangerous weather, safe in the Spey in Scotland, having narrowly mist some of the Parlia∣ments Frigots, that lay in wait for him. Cromwell therefore expedited his march, and entred Scotland with a well-appoint∣ed Army of 18000 men, against which invasion the Scot; did very much expostulate, and more fiercely prepared to defend themselves. The English Army therefore, Iuly 22. advanced from Berwick into Scotland, uly 22. the Scotch Army lying incamped in the fields about Muscleorough, strongly intrenched, divers skirmishes past, and it was wet weather, which very much incommodated the English; nevertheless they take two houses by storm, and both Armies then faced one another, the great Guns playing on both sides, but the Scots declined the Engagement, which the English perceiving, marched back to Dunbar, and in a corn field, half a mile from the Sea, in a low ground, lodged there Septemb. 1. whether the Scots drew and incamped in the high ground above it, making sure of a victory; but Cromwells for∣ces charging resolutely to gain the pass, and having mastred it, the whole Army on a sudden fell upon the Scots, and after an hours dispute, though inferiour in number, routed them, kil∣ling 4000. and taking 10000 prisoners, 200 Cornets and Co∣lours, 27 Field-pieces, 10000 Arms, and three Lords: These Colours, with those taken at Preston, were afterwards set up in Westminster Hall, as also those of Worcester thereafter. The Scot; quit Leith and Edinborough, which are possessed by the English, who advance to Sterling, and fortifie Lnl thgow. Several encounters, and parleys were between Cromwell, and Colonel Ker, and Straughan, for the Kirk alone; in one where∣of Ker was defeated, and taken prisoner; and by the other Straughan was brought over to side with the English. Edinbo∣rough Castle had been long besieged and undermined, but at last the treacherous Governour Dundasse delivered it upon Articles. Colonel Eusebius Andrews, uary. Sir Henry Hide, were beheaded about this time, and Doctor Lewen hanged about the matters of the King, who was soon after crowned King of Scotland at
Schoon, where they had news of another loss, the rendition of Hume and Timtallon Castle. While the Army in Scotland made this progress, another war was breeding at home betwixt the Dutch and us: S. Iohns had been sent Ambassador thither, and had been very highly affronted; upon his return an Act was made, prohibiting and impeding the liberty and freedome of the Dutch at Sea, which they not brooking, the business came to be decided by blows. Anno Dom. 1651. BLackness Castle was taken by Colonel Monk, and at the same time the Presbyterian Plot, laid by Mr. Love, &c. for a rising in Lancashire, where M. G. Harrison had order to attend, was discovered, for which the said Love, and one Mr. Gibbons, were beheaded at Tower-hill, August 22. The Scots had raised another Army, whereof the King was General: This Army was compounded of Cavaliers and Pres∣byters, being in all 21000 men; with these the King marched from Sterling to Torwood, and there regularly incamped; thi∣ther came Cromwell, hoping to draw them out to fight, but could not, only he stormed Calendar House in their view: Ne∣vertheless, in the interim, Colonel Overton, by boats, had passed par of the Army from Leh into Fife, who being seconded by a greater force under Major General Lambert, the Scots being alarum'd at this unexpected invasion, send down Sir Iohn Brown to drive them out; whereupon a bloudy fight ensued, but the victory fell to the English, neer 1500 Scots were slain, and 1000. with Sir Iohn, taken prisoners. After the Army thus was landed on Fifes fide, and had given the Kings forces a defeat, it was advised the King should pre∣sently desert Scotland, (the English having now shipt most of their men over, and so given the King the advantage of two daies march from Sterling) and by the way of Carlisle speedily march for England, which was accordingly put in execution; and after a very troublesome march, some opposition being made at Warrington Bridge by Major General Harrison, (since ex∣ecuted, and there worsted) on the 22 of August, having marched three hundred miles in three weeks time he arrived at Worce∣ster with his Army, consisting of 11000 foot, most whereof were Highlanders, and 3000 horse, made up with some additi∣onal English, under the now Right Honourable Earl of Shrews∣lury,
Colonel Howard, and other Knights and Gentlemen, who had escaped with the Earl of Derby thither, after the defeat gi∣ven the said Earl by Colonel Lilburn at Wigan. After the King had rested his Army a while at Worcester, and summoned in the neighbouring Counties to a rendezvouze, in order to a conjuncture; upon which some small appearance was made (the Rebels drawing neer to attaque the City) the King betook himself to make some fortifications, such as time would permit, at Vpton bridge, and about the Town. By the beginning of September, Cromwells whole Army, after a sufficient refreshment, and additional forces of the Militia, which were speedily raised in every County, presented himself on every side of the City; the number of them consisted of very neer 50000 men well armed; the first places attaqued was Vpton Bridge, which Colonel, now Sir Edward Massey, stoutly defended, till being over-powred, and himself wounded, he was forced to retreat, and leave the enemy free passage. Wednesday the third of September, the Enemy resolved to fall on, which they did at several places, first at Powick bridge, whether the King himself in person went, and beat back the Brigade assigned to that post; but being necessitated to go back into the City to give other Orders, his forces lacking Ammu∣nition, were forced to give way, and make a disorderly retreat into Worcester. Presently upon this, the Enemy charged furi∣ously upon another part, where his Majesty himself in person gave notble proof of his valour, Duke Hamilton receiving a shot hard by him, of which lie afterwards died; but fresh sup∣plyes coming in every minute, and the slaughter falling upon the new raised men (Cromwell reserving his Veteranes for the last) the King quit the field: (Some impute it to David Les∣leyes not coming with his horse to his succour in time) and drew within the walls: But the Rebel pursued their success, and ha∣ving cast up a sudden battery, compelled the Fort-Royal to sur∣render, while another part of the Army entred at another place, and fell in mediately to the plundeing o the City: By fix of the clock the whole Town was gained, and the street; fill'd with blood, a great slaughter being made that unfortunate day. Between six and seven a clock, in the dusk of the evening, the King, accompanied with the chief of his Nobility, and some sixty horse, departed Northward out of S. Martins gate: Having rid a little way, and upon consultation held what to do
in that distress of affairs, the Earl of Derby advised the King to fly to a house called Bosabell, where he himself had sound se∣curity in his flight from Wigan aforesaid: To that intent, one Mr. Giffard, an Inhabitant thereabouts, was called for, who with the assistance of one Mr. Walker, formerly a Scoutmaster in the ings Army, with some difficulty, (the King riding all the night) brought him to a place called the Wite-Ladies, a mile bvnd Boscabell, to avoid suspition of staying there. At their coming to White-Ladies on break of day. Thursday Septemb. 4. one George Pendrill, the youngest brother of the four, being awakened with the loud noyse they made at the gates, and hearing distinctly Mr. Gffards voice calling him, ran down in hi shirt and opened the door; whereupon the King and th Noblemn presently entred the house, the Kings horse being brought into the Hall, where another consultation was held what should be done for the safety of the Kings person in this exigence: At last it was concluded, that this George should go presently to Tong, and enquire what news, or whether any parties were stiring or no; and in the mean while one Martin was sent by Colonel Rosanrck, by order of the Earl of Derby, for William Pendrill, the eldest Brother, who presently came, and there met his Brother George, who had brought Richard by Mr. Giffards order along with him, and informed the King, that the coast was yet clear. Whereupon all dispatch was made to get the King out before any further danger; the King hair was first out off by my Lord Wilmot, then rounded by William Pendrill; and at the same tme Richard had, by direction from Mr. Giffard, fetcht his bst cloaths, being a jump and breeches of green course cloth, and a Doe-kin leather doublet, the hat was borrowed of Hum∣phrey Pendrill the Miller, being an old grey one that turned up its brims; the shirt, which in that Country language they call an Harden, or Noggen-shirt, a kind of linnen that is made of the coursest of the hemp, was had of the aforesaid Martin, George Pendrill lent the band, and William Creswell the shoes, which the King having presently unstript himself of his own cloaths, did quickly put on: His uft-coat, and linnen doubler, and a grey pair of breeches, which he wore before, he gave into his brothers hands, who forthwith buried them under ground, where they lay five weeks before they durst take them up again. The Jewels off his arm he gave to one of Lords then departing.
Straightwith William Pendrill was brought to the King by the Earl of Derby, and the care and preservation of his most Sacred Majesty committed to his charge, and the rest of the Brothers (the Earl himself would have staid, but there was no underta∣king security for them both) so presently the Lords took their heavy leave, and departed, every one shifting for himself. The Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Derby, Lord Talbot, the Earl of Lauderdale, and the rest of that party, being overtaken at New∣port, in their march Northward, and routed: the Duke escaped, and found a hiding place at a friends of his Family in Shropshire; the rest were taken (the Earl of Derby most inhumanely and un∣justly beheaded at Bolton, with Sir Timothy Fetherston-Haugh, and some others elsewhere) and imprisoned; only the Lord Wlmot (since deceaed, during the Kings Exile abroad) staid behind, and wa by Iohn Pendrill, through many difficulties, and tryals o several places, conveyed safely to Mr. Whitgreas at Mosely. Now the King and his company being departed, having ta∣ken a Woodbill into his hand, went out with Richard into the adjoyning wood, called Spring Coppice. William departed home, and George and Humphrey went out to scout, and lay hovering about the woods to hear or see if any approached that way. You must note here, that these Brothers had taken into their assistance one Frances Yates, their Sisters Husband, who was al∣so with the King in the wood, they being by profession wood∣cutters: But the King had not been an hour in the wood, be∣fore a party of horse, in pursuit of him, was come to White-Ladies, and had enquired, and sound out by some of the Inha∣bitants, that the King with a party had been there, as they sup∣posed, but they affirmed directly, that he was gone away with all speed from thence in the said company Northwards. Upon which words, spurr'd on by the expectat on & greediness of their prey, supposing the King and his Lords were all together, they made no stay, or further inquisition or search (save only in the house) and rode away as fast as they could possible. This the King was informed of by his two aforesaid Scots, who strag∣led for intelligence neer the village. This Thursday the King continued all day in the wood, upon the ground, Richard Pendrill being constantly with him, and sometimes the other three: It proved to be a very rainy day, and the King was wet with the showers; thereupon Francis Yates his wife came into the wood, on whom the King at first
lookt something dubiously, yet resolutely askt her, whether she could be faithful to a distressed Cavalier: To which she reply∣ed, Sir, I will die rather then discover you: She brought with her a blanket to keep the King dry, and his first meat he eat there, viz. a mess of milk, eggs, and sugar, in a black earthen cup, which the King guessed to be milk and apples, and said he loved it very well. After he had drank some, and eat some in a Pewter spoon, he gave the rest to George, and bid him eat it, for it was very good. There was nothing of moment passed this day in Court, but only his Majesty exchanged his Wood∣bill for Francis Yates his Broom-hook, being something lighter. The King was hardly brought to fashion himself to their gate, or to bend his streight body down to his feet, the lan∣guage in his stay and passing to Worcester, he could tune pretty well; most of the day was spent in conforming him to their words, till about five a clock that evening, the King with his gallant Retinue of Richard, Humphry, George, and Francis Yates, left the wood, and betook himself to Richards little house, where he went under the name of William Iones, a Woodcutter, newly come thither for work. At his coming, the good wife for his entertainment at supper, was preparing a Fricass of Ba∣con and Eggs, and while that was doing, the King held on his knees their Daughter Nan: He eat very little, ruminating and pausing on his intended passage into Wales. After supper ended, the Mother of the Pendrills came and kneeled, and took her leave of the King; so did the rest of his poor mean attendants, only Richard went along with the King, to conduct and guide him, it being then dark, and the way troublesome. Their intended journey was to Mr. Wolfes of Madely, some 5 miles distant from White-Ladies, of whom the King had a good character from his servant Richard. By the way they were put to a fright at a Mill-water, by a Miller that had taken into his protection some of the same undone party, so that Richard was forced to wade through, and the King to follow him by the atling musick of his leather breeches. It was late at night before they got to Madely; wherefore Richard very confidently knockt at Mr. Wolfes door, which his Daughter opening, he desired to be let in, telling her the King was with him: So they both entred, till Mr. Wolfe came and welcomed the King, who though wearied, and his feet ex∣tremely
sore, yet held it not convenient (of which Opinion Mr. Wolfe was also) to lodge in the house. Here he was in∣formed (which was his main business) that there was no pas∣sage to be had over Severn into Wales, the river being so guard∣ed and watched, that there was no attempting of it without extreme hazard and peril. After some other discourses of the like tendency, the King was conveyed to an Heyloft, where he and Richard reposed themselves (though the Kings sore feet ve∣ry much troubled him) that night, and next day, being Fri∣day, and on that night, the same hour they arrived, they set for∣ward to Boscabell, having had provision, and some money from the said Mr. Wolfe, his Daughter also bringing the King into his way some two miles, and then she returned. At his coming to Boscabell, the King was so wearied, his feer being blistered with travelling in such course and stiff accoutre∣ments as he had on his legs, and lying in them, that he was scarce able to stand or go, which Will. wife perceiving, she stript off his stockings, and cut the blisters, and washed his feet, which gave the King some ease. The same time Colonel Carelos, one that made good the Kings Rear at Worcester, and gave the King time to escape, ha∣ving seen the last man killed in that lamentable fight, was also come to Boscabell, a refuge he had used before, where the King met him, the Colonel most humbly and joyfully welcoming him to that most sure retreat. After a short conference together, it was judged by them both, as the probablest means of security, that the King should betake him∣self again to the wood: Accordingly, Saturday the sixth of Septem∣ber, in the morning, they went into the wood together, the Colonel leading the way to that so much now celebrated Oak, where before he had been lodged himself: William Pendrill brought a Ladder, by which they got up into the boughs and branches of the tree, which were very thick, and well spread, and full of leaves, so that it was not possible for any to see through them. When they were both up, William brought them up two Pillows to lye upon, where the Arms and branches were thickest; and the King being over-wearied with his journey and sore travel, waxed very heavy, with a propensity to sleep. The Colonel to ease his Maje∣sty the best he could, desired him to lay his head in his lap, and rest the other parts of his body on the pillow, which the King did; and after he had taken a good sleep (while William and his wife Joan went peaking up and down with anxious thoughts gathering of
stcks with a Nut-hook) awaked very hungry, and wished for some victuals: That desire was soon satisfied, the Colonel pulling out of his pocket a good lunchion of bread and cheese, which Joan had gi∣ven him for provant that day, and had wrapt it up in a clean ln∣nen cloth, of which the King fed very heartily, and was well plea∣sed with it, and highly commended his good fare: Some other pittance of relief in drink he had also, which was put up to him in a bottle by a long book-stick. The King intended not long to stay at Boscabell; therefore Richard was sent to one Mr. Manwaring, an acquaintance of Co∣lonel Caelos at Woller Hampton, some three miles from Boscabell, with some instructions, and to enquire if he knew not o any se∣curity for one of the Kings ruined party, Mr. Manwaring re∣turned, that himself could not, but would enquire if a friend of his, naming Mr. Whitgrea could: So Richard returned, and brought with him some wine, and other refreshments from the Town. Neither was Humphrey idle or unimployed, but was sent a∣broad to lay out for intelligence, which the eailier to come by, he was sent to one Captain Broadwayes of Shesual, a Cap∣tain of the new raised Militia, under pretence of paying his Mistresses money for a man that was taxed upon her for that ser∣vice: While he was thre, a Parliament Colonel came in to understand of Broadwayes, what further discovery was made at White-Ladies since the time the King escaped; to which Broad∣wayes answered, he could say nothing more to it, but there was one of that place below, that might perhaps give him bet∣ter satisfaction. Humphrey was called and examined, but he re∣solutely denied any knowledge whether the King went other∣wayes then Northward; but that party being taken, and the King not among them, made the Colonel believe he staid be∣hind, and therefore told him there was a proffer of a thousand pound to any that would discover him, and did thereupon ear∣nestly press Humphrey about the business; but all was in vain, there was no prevailing upon his conscience and duty. The news of this afterwards something amused the King, but the Colonel told the King there was no danger in it, for upon his life they should prove constant and faithful to his Majesty At night, the King and the Colonel came down from the Tree, by the same Ladder they gat up, and was brought into Boscabell garden, where he sate in the Bower of it, and drank part of the wine which Richard brought from Woller Hampton,
till 'twas very late. But the King was hungry again, and his appetite then served him for a joynt of Mutton, though hi Dame Ioan (so the King then called his Host) had provided him a dish of Chickens: To which William replyed, that truly he had none, and to go to the Market would be very suspectful, for they used not to buy such cheer, but if his Majesty would have some, he would make bold, and borrow one of Mr. Staun∣tons: to whose Sheepcote he and the Colonel presently went and fetched one, and brought it home into the Cellar, where the Colonel stabb'd it with his dagger, and both of them drest it as well as they could, and brought the King up a Hind-quarter of it, which the King presently sliced part of into Scotch Col∣lops, and the Colonel and he fryed betwixt them; which plea∣sant passage yielded a merrier dispute afterward in France, when it was questioned which of the two was the Cook or the Scul∣lion. The next day being Sunday, Iohn came to Boscabell from my Lord Wilmot, having been sent before to White-Ladies, but mist of the King, by reason of his being at Madely then, to ac∣quaint the King with the conveniency of Mr. Whitgreavs house, there being such a secret place in it betwixt two walls, that a safer could not be imagined: Upon this news it was resolved, that the King on Sunday night late should go to Mosely, to the said Mr. Whtigreavs, and the Colonel to shift for himself: All that day being Sunday, the King kept himself in the secret place where he lay that night, having been much discommodated through the shortness of it. As soon as the appointed hour was come, Humphrey the Miller was ready with his horse that should carry the King, for none other with safety and conveni∣ence could he had. This was a kind of War-horse, that had carried many a load of provision, meal, and such like; but now there was put on him a bridle and a saddle that had outworn its tree and irons. The horse standing at the door, the King came out, intend∣ing to have none along with him but Iohn; but the other five brothers insisting on the danger of his going so ill attended, so many stragling souldiers lying up and down the Country, he a∣greed to have them all along with him, and so took his farewell of Colonel Carelos, who very disconsolately parted from him. The King being mounted, the six Brethren guarding him behind, and before, and on each side, Humphrey leading the
horse, they began their journey: The way wa something dir∣ty, and every where the horse blundering, caused the King to suspect falling, and to bid Humphrey have a care; to which he returned, that his horse had carried many a heavy weight before, but never the price of three Kingdomes; and therefore he might be excused by reason of his extraordinary burden, When they came within a mile of the house, they made fast the horse, and came the foot-way through the fields thither: be∣fore the King went into the house, he took his leave of all of them but Iohn, they upon their knees crying and praying for his safety and preservation. As they were departing, the King called them back, and said, I am so full of care, that I do for∣get what I do; but here is my hand (giving it them to kiss) if God bless me, I will remember all another day. A promise his Majesty hath most graciously perfopmed. When he came into the house, with none but Iohn, he was most submisly and cordially welcomed by Mr. Whitgreave, who presently conducted him to my Lord Wilmot, in the secret place, who with infinite gladness ell down and imbraced his knees, The first thing they did, was to shist his Majesty, by taking off that course shirt, and putting on a er, and changing his stock∣ings and shoes: Next they consulted about his Majesties manner of escape out of England; whereupon Col. Lane was propound∣ed as a very fit and necessary instrument in that business, and a∣greed on, and accordingly transacted, as before designed by my Lord Wilmot, which was, that the never-to-be-forgotten Lady Iane Lane, under some preence of visiting her Sister, and other affairs in Bristoll, should gt a Pass for her Man and her self, and that the King should be the Man, and ride before her. This was concluded on and done, Mrs. Lane sending some Spring-water, in which Wallnuts had been boiled to discolour his hands and face, and other parts open to view; and on Thurs∣day night, the eleventh of September, Colonel Lane came with her, all things fit for his Majesties journey being provided, to a field adjoyning to Mr. Whitgreaves house, where the King was mounted before her, and from thence they immedi∣ately set forward, having directions given to know the Coun∣try, and recommendations also to the Allies, friends and acquain∣tance of her Family, if any sinister rancounter should put them to tryal. At one Town in their journey they met with a Troop of horse, but the Captain perceiving they rid double, command∣ed
the Troop to open to the right and left, and so past them. Being come to Bristoll, they endeavoured to get a passage thereabouts for France, his Majesty being Nobly and secretly entertained at the house of Mr. Norton (at Leigh hard by Bri∣stoll) since Knighted for his loyalty; but it not succeeding there, and my Lord Wilmot being come to Bristoll, it was a∣greed to go for Salisbury, where the King had entertainment by the Relations of Sir Edward Nicholas, his Majestics Secretary. Here Colonel Gunter fortunately came to know the King, by whose conveyance the King was brought sale into Sussex, to the habitation of this Noble Gentleman, and a Bark bb means procured for fifty pound, to transport two Gentlemen, upon ac∣count of a quarrel and Duel lately fought, into France: The Master not knowing otherwise, while at Sea, who safely and dutifully landed them at Deep in Normandy; from whence the King went immediately to Paris, where he was welcomed by that Court, but most joyfully received by our Queen his Mo∣ther, and the Duke, and that most affectionate Uncle of his Majesties, the late deceased Duke of Orleans, of famous me∣mory. De Bello ducit Pax laeta Triumphos.
Anno Domini, 1652. AFer this defeat, Scotland is with little difficulty (Gene∣ral Mon seizing most of the Scotch Presbyterian Nobility at Ellas, where they were in Councel) reduced to the obedi∣ence of the Parliament; Garrisons were placed every where, and four Citradels most impregnably fortified at Leith, S. Iohn∣stons, Ayre, and Innerness; so that the total Conquest of that Nation was by the English then accomplished, and so far forth secured for ever. This Triumph swelled the new State to other great enterpri∣zes; the Dutch had stood upon some punctilio of honour with them, as being the junior state; and for their relation to the Prince of Aurange, their General, were suspected (though ma∣ny variations in that compass) of adherance to the King his Bro∣ther-in-law, the said Prince being lately dead. For these rea∣sons, the Parliament published an Act (by them made) for the incouragement of Navigation, the most advantagious and plea∣sing to the English Marriners, and as hurtful and displeasant to the Hollander, forbidding any goods to be exported from any place, but what were of the growth and manufacture thereof in any other vessels but their own, and English, which totally excluded the Hollander, saving some petty Merchandises of Linen, Maderas, &c. The States of Holland hereupon arm, and set forth a Fleet of ships under Admiral Van-Trump, who meeting with our Fleet at the Downs, in the beginning of May, under Bourn, who was soon relieved by General Blake, the Flag being refused by the Dutch; the fight began, and continued about four houres till night, the success lighting on the English. This attempt made by the Dutch, highly exasperated the then State, who were used to the excesses and uncoutroulments of Fortune, so that the Ambassadors here could not allay their fu∣ry, but departed home. Sir George Ascue, one of the Parliaments Captains over a Squadron of ships, being about Plymouth, met with a Sail of fifty Dutch Men of War, and by night, after some conflict, part∣ed equally from them. General Blake roving about the Downs, met with the French Fleet, then bound for the relief of Dunkirk, besieged by the Spaniard, which he took altogether, and thereupon that Town
was rendred to the Arch-Duke Leopold. On the 28 of September, Sept. 28. the English met the Dutch Fleet at a place called the Kentish-Knock, where some of the greatest English ships struck on the Sands, but getting off again, they so fiercely plyed the Dutch, that they were forced to fly, sa∣ving themselves from a greater loss then the disabling of some six ship;, whereof the Rear-Admiral was one. This was recom∣pensed by the Dutch, who took a Man of War in the Strats, by Porto-Longone. On the twentieth of December, Decemb 20. Van-Trump with a new rig∣ged Fleet came again to the Downs with 100 Men of War, and Fireships, where Blake unhappily with a small number met them, and was forced to sail for it, being much indangered himself: Here were lost the Garland and Bonadventure, and two other Merchants Ships, besides the Vanguard and Victory very much shattered. The Dutch crowed upon this Victory, and with a numeros Fleet of Merchant-men sailed to Rochel, Feb. 18. giving out, that they would sweep the Seas of the English; but at their return the English met them at Portland, and gave them such a re-encoun∣ter, that after three daies fight (very terrible) the Dutch fled, nine Men of War being taken, and fifty Merchant-men, much slaughter on both sides, but the most on the conquered: Van-Trump to Calice, and thence to the Weilings; the English to Do∣ver, and so to Ports. This a second time was repaid us, by an overthrow given us in the Straits, where five of our Ships being not longer to be protected by the Duke of Florence, coming out of Legorn, were over-powred by a Dutch Fleet of 24 Soil, and the Leo∣pard, and another Bonaventure taken, with other damages to the Levant Trade. But such was their great preparations at home, that the Par∣liament minded nothing else, waving all publick businesses from the King of France, concerning the Ships taken at Dun∣kirk, and another message from Bourdaux, and for a while de∣ferring the Portugal Embassador, who came to offer restitution. And yet in the height of this grand design, an unexpected, or at least an unwardable blow quite undid them and their designs, leaving them, as became, the laughter and scorn of the Nation, while their General having turned them out, and dissolved them, made himself, after a short intervall of time, the Su∣preme Magistrate.
Anno Domini, 1653. FOr on the twentieth of April, April. 1653. Cromwell suddenly and forcibly turns out the Parliament, who had for four years, and as much as from Ianuary to April this year, since they murthered the King, tyrannized over the three Nations. After this violation of that violencing Parliament, July 4. Cromwell and his Officers call a new Representative, and erect a new Councel of State, wherein not one man of (but only such as were revolters from) the Commonwealth were admitted. By the FACE of this new erected Councel, a Convention is as∣sembled of 120. who did nothing but folly and mischief against Church and people, particularly by their lawless act of Mar∣riages, and vote against Tythes, and then the cunninger part of them reassigned their Trust and Power to the same hand that gave it, having made an Act also for a Tax, according to the old mode of 120000 pound per mensem. By this shift of power, Decemb 12. Cromwell was, as they and he said, invested with the Supreme Authority, it being devolved unto him by the late resignation; and therefore a new device of Go∣vernment was now projected, which was contained in an In∣strument consisting of 42 Articles; whereby he is made Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and solemnly in∣stalled before the Lord Mayor of London, on the sixteenth of the same moneth. This was pretended to be drawn out of Magna Charta; but what need we say of it? Some struglings there were about the beginning of the new year in Scotland and Ireland; in the first for life, the other of death, the Scotch hoping to recover themselves, and the Irish at the lst gasp, all places and persons being neer reduced to the Usurper,. During this intermission of Government in England, yet there was no vacancy of War betwixt us and the Hollanders, who sensible of their own weakness, and the new Protectors troubles, in his ambitious aspiring designs, sent over Embassa∣dors to treat. While they were here, the Fleets of both States being prepared, and out at Sea, happened two dismal encoun∣ters; the first on the 23 of Iuly, (the Dutch having before con∣veyed one Fleet out towards the East and West, France, Spain, and the Levant, about by Scotland; and conveyed two Fleetshome, one from the Baltick and Northern Sea from Prussia, and an∣other
that came about from France, Levant, &c.) which conti∣nued for three daies fighting and flying; in the first whereof General Dean was slain with a Canon bullet hard by General Monck (so Providence distinguished betwixt a King-Murderer and a King-Restorer) and the two next, in seizing and entring several ships in the pursuit, until such time as they got into the Weylings, having lost seventeen Men of War, whereof eleven taken and six sunk, and many prisoners taken; and which was worst, the Coast of Holland was so blockt up, that no ships could safely arrive in their harbours, nor no joyning of one part of the Fleet (then a rigging new, to remedy this over∣throw) with another. All preparations were therefore made by the Hollander, to recover not only their credit, but their livelihood and subsi∣stance, which was to drive the English from the coast; and Ge∣neral Van-Trump having fitted himself with the choice of his Country, both for men and ships, resolved for to effect it; whereupon on the second of Iuly he sailed from the Weylings, and soon after joyned with a Fleet from the Texel, at the sight of which Fleets the English weighed, and on the 23 in the af∣ternoon, part of the English under General Monk, then Admi∣ral, charged through them; the next day the whole Fleet came up, but being blustrous weather could not ingage, but on Sa∣turday both Fleets fell to it, and made an end, the Dutch be∣ing worsted, and miserably shattered, thirty six ships taken, burnt, and sunk, the rest escaping into the Texel, from whence were lately some of them equipped. This was the parting blow of that War, the Dutch Ambas∣sadors concluding a peace presently, which was transacted by Oliver, and concluded by him, for the facilitating his vaster designs at home, this adding reputation to his future underta∣kings; and so the quarrel for the Dominion of the Seas ended. This War so ended, with such honourable success and advan∣tage, Cromwell having, as before is said, the power resigned into his hands, took upon him to act as chief Magistrate, urg'd thereto by the Army and the well-affected people, and installed himself, as before, at Westminster the sixteenth day of December, Lord Protector of the three Nations. Being also now proclaimed by his Councel, with the stile a∣foresaid, endeavours were used every where to countenance it with Addresses, but the main one, was the invitation of the City for him to dine at Grocers Hall, which they sumptuously
performed, and he ambitiously enough received, Knighting the Mayor for the Cities kindness. But kindness would yield no money, therefore cruelty must; a plot against the Protectors life by one Colonel Iohn Gerrard, Mr. Fox Mr. Vowel, and others, who not being chargeable by the Laws for any such attempts, were brought before a High Court of Justice, and Colonel Gerrard and Mr. Vowel con∣demned, and severally executed; with Gerrard was executed Don Pontaleon, the Portugal Ambassadors Brother, who had made a Riot in the New-Exchange, and slain a Gentleman, to whose rescue this Noble Gerrard very bravely ventured, and yet their fate was one. General Middleton lands in Scotland, with some supplyes from the King; whereupon Glencarn and Seasort joyn with him, and put a new face upon the Kings business there; but in conclusion all came to nothing, the Earl of Middleton being defeated at Longherry, who had marched through all the Highlands after him, and there overtook and worsted him, Middleton himself escaping, and the Earl of Glencarn, and the Lords of the Roy∣al Party, coming in upon conditions, till all was quieted in that Kingdome. Anno Domini, 1654. King Charles the Second about this time departed the King∣dome of France, upon intimation of a Treaty then on foot be∣twixt that Crown and the Protector, whom soon followed his Brother the Duke of York; and the Duke of Glocester, being tempted to turn Papist, was fought out of the Jesuites Colledg by the Marquess of Ormond, according to the command of the King his Brother. Now according to the Instrument of Government, Cromwel called his first Triennial Parliament, which had sit but just five lunary moneths, spent in debating the aforesaid Instrument, and Cromwells Authority, when Cromwell came, sent for the House to the Painted Chamber, and dissolved it with a very tedous and deceitful speech. Now another plot, after this dissolution of the Parliament, which ended with much publick discontent, and therefore was thought a very fit juncture for such a business, was found out, and discovered from abroad by one Manning, one of the Secre∣taries to the King then at Colen: The first eruption of this ge∣neral
design was at Salisbury, on the sixteenth of March, of some three hundred men, under the command of Sir Ioseph Wagstaff, in chief, and Colonel Penruddok, and Grves, consisting al∣together o men of quality and condition: These proceeded Westward, where at Blandford they proclaimed the King, but Oliver knowing the plot before hand, had sent some horse that way, who forthwith pursued them, they bending towards Devonshire, where at Southmolton they were surprized in their quarters, Wagstaff escaped, but Penruddock and Groves, though after quarter promised by Colonel Vnton Crook, who took them, with some twenty more, were beheaded and executed  several places. Another party at the same time surprized the Town of Shrews∣bury, and endeavoured to take the Castle, but were discovered, and so failed of their enterprise: The like rising also in Mont∣gomeryshre, in Sherwood Forrest in Nottinghamhire, and in Yorkshire and Northumberland, so that though it was laid gene∣rally through the Nation, yet by the treachery of that Man∣ning, the design was frstrated, which soon brought after it a trick called Decimation of the Cavaliers Estates for their old and this new (so termed) Delinquency. The Protector had feared himself, Decemb as he thought, pretty fast in his new Usurpation, he had concluded a League with the Dutch, and Whitlock had made another for him with the Swede, and now the French had also entred into the like Confederation, prevening the Spnard, the first design whereof proved to be an attempt upon the King of Spains West-Indies, advised by Cardinal Mazarine, and vigorously put in execution by the Protector; for on the nineteenth of December, a well-appoint∣ed Fleet set sail from Portsmouth to the Barbadoes, where, and not before, the General, had order to open their Commissions, (Venables for the Land, and Pen for the Sea forces) no bo∣dy certainly knowing their design, an occasion of much mis∣chief afterwards to the expedition, neither Commanders nor Souldiers being sufficiently provided for so long a service with necessaries. On the 29th of Ianuary, the whole Fleet, except the Cha∣rity, where the horses and other provisions were put aboard, arrived at Anchor in Carlisle Bay at the Barbadoes, and landed their men, where having made up the three thousand they brought with them from England, to the number of eight thou∣sand, March with Planters from the adjacent Isles, the 31 of March
they set sail from the Barbadoes, and six daies after, at S. Christo∣phers, took in thirteen hundred men more (Voluntiers) and from thence on the thirteenth of April arrived at S. Domingo. Here a Councel of War was called, and it was determined, that Gen Venables should land with seven thousand men, and three daies provision, ten or twelve leagues Westward to the Town, the Army being vey joyfl, and expecting nothing less then heaps of gold; accordingly they landed, but then a Proclamati∣on was made, that no man should touch or plunder to his own use any plate, money, &c. which so deaded their hearts, that what with that, and the incommodiousness and thirst they suf∣fered in that hot passage, being forced to drink their own U∣rine, they were so disheartned and dismayed, that at the very first encounter of the Enemy their courage failed them, and an inconsiderable Enemy made great execution on them. Anno Domini, 1655. This first succesless combat struck a panick fear through the whole Army, so that they began to grow afraid of the rustling of the leafs of those thick woods they wandred in; but at last up they came to a Fort neer S. Domingo, where having made ready their Mortar Guns to play upon it, orders were given for the dismounting and hiding of them, and the next day with all hast the Army reimbarqued again, having neither provision, nor any thing else fit for their long return to Windward for Bar∣badnes; May and therefore it was resolved, that they should steer di∣rectly before the wind to Iamaica, where they arrived on the eighteenth of May, and meeting no opposition landed, and possest themselves of the chiefest Town; whereupon ensued a Treaty betwixt the Spanish Governour and the General, which spun out time, till the Inhabitants had conveyed away their best goods and cattel; and soon after this worthy adventure, the two Generals returned into England, and for shew-sake were clapt up in the Tower by the Protector, and presently again released. But great was the mortality of this expedition, scarce one in four surviving; and the same misery befell them that were af∣terwards sent thither, being two thousand stout old Souldiers, under the several commands of Colonel Humphreys, and Liev∣tenant Colonel Brayn, who was sent last to command in chief in that new-gained Island. But what honour was lost here, was something compensated
by the valour of General Blake, who at the same time that this Fleet went for the West-Indies, was sent with another into the Straits to repress the violence of the Pyrates of Algiers, who had so infested those Seas, that commerce was not free for any Nation: Therefore having anchored before Algiers, he de∣manded restitution, and had a civil answer, from thence to his satisfaction; thence he arrived at Tunis, demanding as before; to which the Dye or Vice-King returned answer, that there were the Castles and Ships of the Grand Seignior, that he might do his worst, they were not to be scared with his Fleet: where∣upon a Councel of War being called, it was resolved, to at∣taque the Castles and Port of Ferino, wherein lay nine Frigats of War, and to burn them, which accordingly, and in despight of all their Ordnance and Castles they effected, with a very small loss: The news hereof was carried to the Grand Seignior, to the glory of the English Nation. About this time a massacre was committed in Piedmont on the Protestants there (many say not for Religion, but Rebell on) and vast sums of money were raised by a Declaration of the Protectors, resenting their miserable estate, most part of which came into his own purse at the Conclusion; yet while he was taking money in one hand for the Christians accompt, he had another open for the Jewish, who about this time had offered large sums for their readmistion into this Kingdome, this could not be done without an odium, and yet the Protector kept what he had in hand as earnest from them. The next design was a Turkish one, having erected the of∣fice and power of Major Generals, equal to Bashaws, for the several Counties, but they being upstarts, and something eclip∣sing his own entire greatness, he soon after laid them aside, (but never totally abrogated them) having made use of them to levy his new extortion of Decimation. A War now was declared betwixt the Spaniard and the Pro∣rector, who sent the two Generals, Blake, (and Montague new made one) to block up the Port at Cadiz, and to way-lay the Plate-Fleet in its return from the Indies (nothing was omitted to get money, which the people of England would not part with to him) while the French peace was then proclaimed, which had been agreed on, as before. Before Cadiz, the En∣glish lay, hoping to draw the Spaniards out, but he would not stir, imagining the English must remove for fresh water home∣ward, but that was found neerer there, at Wyers Bay in Portu∣gal,
whether the Generals being gone for the aforesaid pur∣pose, leaving Rear-Admiral Stayner to have an eye upon the Coast, and port of Cadiz, he crusing up and down, espied a Fleet making thitherwards, whereupon being to Leeward, he made all the possible speed he could to get up to them, they supposing his Squadron to be but Fishermen, and having recei∣ved false intelligence the day before, that the English were de∣parted, and presently ingaged: The Spaniards were eight tall Galeons, he but three that fought; viz. the Speaker, the Bridge∣water, and the Plymouth; the fight was soon over; of the Spa∣nish two were taken, two burnt, one sunk, two ran ashore, and one escaped: In one of those that was taken great riches were found, both in Plate and in Cocheneal, but in the other little save hides: For this Victory a Thanksgiving day was ordered, and much rejoycing at Whtehall. Anno Domini, 1656. Nevertheless this money would not serve turn, and therefore the Protector resolved to put it to tryal what he could do by a Parliament, hoping this success, and his reputation abroad, might have begot a dread and reverence upon the people, so that he summons a Parliament by his own Writ, to be held at Westminster the 17th of September; where finding the Election, not answering his intendments, many of the late Assembly be∣ing returned again for this, he imposeth a recognition of his Authority to be taken by every Member, before he should sit in the House; and thereupon excludes far the major part. Others also, offended at this manner of proceeding, voluntarily absented themselves, and retired into their respective Counties; so that having packt this Convention according to his mind, the rem∣nant chose Sir Thomas Widdrington Speaker, and fell to work, e∣nacting several things for the Protector first, for security of his person and dignity, which had lately been attempted by one Syndercomb (and for which he was convicted and condemned at the Kings Bench Bar, then called the Upper bench, and was supposed to prevent his execution, to have poysoned himself the night before in the Tower, from whence he was drawn na∣ked at a horse tail, and burned under the Scaffold at Tower-hill, and a stake drove through him) and the next, the life of the Cause, for raising of money to maintain the War against Spain, and for continuing Tonnage and Poundage; another was, an
Act for preventing buildings in and about London, a whole years Revenue to be paid for all such houses as had been built upon new foundations since the year 1620. and an Act confirming and continuing the Excise: But the chiefest of all was, a device call∣ed, The humble Petition and Advice, wherein Cromwell was en∣treated to be King, but his ambition durst not venture upon it, as things yet stood, so he was contented to be installed again Lord Protector, June. by the Authority of Parliament, which was wanting before, and that solemnly and very stately was soon after cele∣brated, and the Parliament adjounred. Anno Domini, 1657. Leave we the Protector awhile, and return to General Blake on the Coast of Span, where finding nothing to do, being in∣formed that the Plate-Fleet was arrived in the Canary Islands, and unladen, he resolved to sail thither, and fire the Galeons in the Harbour of Sancta Cruz, which with much bravery, though with as much danger and hazard, on the 20th of April, was attempted first by Sir Richard Stayner, and seconded by the whole Fleet, so that in four hours space they fired sixteen ships, and slew many hundred Spaniards on board and on shore, losing only, some 50 slain, and 120 wounded. For this exploit the General had a Diamond, nigh worth five hundred pound sent him, and Captain Stayner was Knighted by Oliver, but since the King, out of respect to his merit, hath confirmed him a Knight. On the 19th of April a conspiracy was found out of the Fifth Monarchists; at a house in Shoreditch, several Arms and Co∣lours were taken; as lkewise Major General Harrison, Colonel Rich, Vice-Admiral Lawson, Venner, and others of that party were secured; it came to nothing then, but burst out dangerous∣ly since. This Summer the Protector, according to compact and a∣greement with the French, had sent over some forces to joyn with the French King against the Spaniard in Flanders: These, under the Command of Commissary General Reynolds, landed in Picardy, and about the end of October, the French and he came and sit down before Mardike, a Fort neer Dunkirk, and of concernment to the taking of Dunkirk it self: This place, after a short siege, was rendred, and by the French put into the English hands, and so the French betook themselves to their
winter-quarters, while the Spaniard, under the leading of the Duke of York, attempted by storm in the night time to regain it from the English, but were valiantly repulsed. General Blake returning home from hi Triumphs over the Spaniard, died on Shipboard, in sight of English Land; and General Reynolds returning out of Flanders to England, was cast away in the Goodwin Sands, and with him Colonel White, and o∣thers. By one of the clauses of the humble Petition and Advice, it was declared, that the Parliament should consist of two Hou∣ses; therefore Cromwell, during the adjournment, fill'd up the number of that Other House, that was its name, consisting of sixty two persons, most of them Officers of the Army, and his neer Relations, most of them of mean extraction: These ne∣vertheless, at the expiring of the prorogation appeared, and took their places in the House of Lords, according as the anti∣ent custome was, whether the Protector came and sent for the House of Commons, where he made a canting speech to them, but the Commons returning to their House, having admitted all their Members, would neither own the new Lords, nor him that made them so, but fell into high disputes about the Go∣vernment; so that Cromwell seeing how the game was likely to go, came, and in a great ury within ten daies after their resit∣ting, dissolved them. Anno Domini, 1658. After the dissolution of this Parliament, as of course, and according to custome another plot was discovered, and this was clearly of Cromwells own making; the City was to be fi∣red, and a general insurrection and massacre of the well-affect∣ed: Vide Speech In this snare were taken Sir Henry Slingsby, Doctor Hewet, and Master, now Sir Thomas Woodcock, Iohn now Lord Viscount Mordant, and others of meaner rank, as Colonel Ashton, Tho∣mas Bettley, Edmond Stacy, and others; Sir Henry Slingsby and Doctor Hewet, were beheaded at Tower-hill, and the three last hang'd and quartered in the streets of London. Dunkirk, June. after a gallant defence, and a field battel, in at∣tempting the relief, where the English had the honour, and the French and English the victory of the day, was on the 25th of Iune delivered to the United Forces, and by the French King put into the English hands; Lockhart, formerly Ambassador in
France, and then General of the English, being made Gover∣nour thereof. Now it pleased God suddenly after this tyranny and cruelty, committed on those innocent persons above-named, to call this Protector to an account, who lingring some time with an ague and a pain in his intestines, on the third day of September, his great fortunate day, breathed out hs last, his death being ushered by a most terrible wind, and the coming of a Whale up the River of Thames, of twenty yards long. Thus ended that wretched Politique. After Oliver Protector war dead, his Son Richard, according to an Article in the Instrument o Government, by which he was to declare his Successor, was by his Fathers Councel pro∣claimed Lord Protector of these three Nations, with the usual solemnities, and accordingly owned by several addresses from most parts of the Kingdome, but drawn and subscribed by some particular persons of the times, who obtruded them upon the rest. He was courted also by the French, Swedish, Dutch Am∣bassadors, who all condoled him for his Fathers death. After a little respit of time, Richard was advised to call a Parliament, the Courtiers thinking, that what with the Army and the Lawyers, they should make their party good for the Protector in the House of Commons, being sure of their other House of Peers, and in the mean time took care for his Fathers Funerals; which were solemnized in most ample manner, above the expences usual to any of our Kings deceased, November 23. 1658. The Parliament being convened on the 27th of Ianuary, the Protector and his new Lords gave them a meeting in the Lords House, where he made a speech to them, which was seconded by the Keeper Fiennes, and so departed to Whitehall, the Lords keeping their seats, and the major part of the House of Com∣mons, not vouchsafing audience, betook themselves to their own house, and elected Challoner Chute for their Speaker. The Parliament being in some measure, fuller then it used, by reason of Knights and Burgesses from Scotland and Ireland, began with the old Trade of questioning the power. In con∣clusion, the debate came to this result, that they would recog∣nize the Lord Protector, but so that nothing should be binding, till all other Acts to be prepared by the Parliament should likewise pass and be confirmed: For the other House also, that no stop might be put to the great design of setling the King∣dome,
which was then aimed at, and that question of owning them being but a baulk to their proceeding, they resolved to transact with them for this Parliament as a House of Peers, not excluding the right of other the Peers of England. The Protector, at the instance of the King of Sweden, had rigg'd forth a Fleet for the Sound, which being ready to set sail, the Parliament ordered that for this time the Protector should have the mannagement of the Militia in this expedition, reserving to themselves the Supreme right thereto; that Fleet, after six moneths time, returned back again, re infecta. Now the debates flew high in the House of Commons, tend∣ing to the lessening the power of the Sword, which was grown so exorbitant; therefore the Army being sensible whereto such consultations would finally tend, resolved to break up the Par∣liament; and accordingly, having secured the Protector, made him sign a Commission to Fiennes to dissolve it, which accord∣ingly was done, though the House of Commons, to prevent it, adjourned themselves for three daies; but then out came a Proclamation, forced likewise from the Protector, whereby he declared that Parliament to be absolutely dissolved. Now the Army, and some of the tail of the Parliament which were turned out by Oliver in 1653. joyn their heads toge∣ther, and so make way for their free Commonwealth again. Ri∣chard Protector is laid aside, the Officers of the Army playing some eight daies with the Government, and then resigning it to those men, who very readily imbraced the motion, and met May 7. in the House the Old Speaker, and some forty more making up a Quorum, and forthwith published a Declaration, how that by the wonderful Providence and goodness of God they were restored, which to most seemed the saddest judge∣ment could befall the Nation. Presently they fall to their old trade of squeezing money, and providing sure for themselves against any more attempts of the Army, leisurely purging out those that had been active with Oliver against them, but by all means refuse to admit those Members that by the like force were formerly secluded in 1648. They depose the Protector, and make him sign a Resignation, yet promising him the yearly allowance of 10000 l. per annum, and the payment of his debts, so that they thought themselves now cock-sure, levying money by taxes before hand, to gratifie the Army, for the peoples love they never expected, and then settle the Militia in confiding hands.
Anno Domini, 1659. But this then exclusion of their Members, and taxes, and the fear of other pressures, the Nation having had too late and long experience of their Government, so stomacked the peo∣ple, that designs were every where laid to turn them out of their new acquired Authority: But the most powerfullest attempt against them was in Cheshire, Sir Geo∣ ooth feated  20. under Sir George Booh, with whom there rose to the number of 4000 or 5000 men, and most of the Gentlemen of that County. Against these, Major General Lam∣bert, then highly in favour with the Rump, so it was com∣monly called, was sent with an Army, which with addition; out of Ireland, very neer equalled that number: At a place called Northwich, a small skirmish happened between them, some four∣teen killed and wounded; whereupon those under Sir George Booth fled, and Chester was delivered; with some other holds newly possest by the Cheshire men to Lambert, and Zanchy, whom he left behind him to reduce them, while he himself passed through Lancashire to his house at Craven, where with his Officers plotted the dissolution of the Rump, which ac∣cordingly upon his coming up to London, was put in execution, October the 11th; and now the Army had the sole power in their hands again. Lambert hereupon, for we must suppose he is the Agent for his own ambition, though also agreed upon by Fleetwood, and the rest of the Officers, erect a Committee of Safery of some thirty of the most eminent amongst them, into whose hands they devolve the Supreme Authority. But the Members o the Rump resolve not to be baffled so, Sir Arthur Hazelrig in December possest himself of Portsmouth, and General Monk in Scotland declares his unsatisfiedness in these proceedings of the Army at London, so that while Lam∣bert was ingaged in the North, and attending the issue of a Treaty with General Monk there, the Members return from Portsmouth to London, through the division they had wrought in the Army, the way they chalked out to their own ruine. The Lord Fairfax was also risen with a sufficient force, re∣straining Lamberts men from free quarter; so that lacking mo∣ney, and news arrived of the Parliaments sitting at Westminster, he comes back to London, whither immediately followed him General Monk, having been courted all along his march by the
Gentlemen of all the Counties of England for a free Parlia∣ment. At his coming to the Parliament, he declared the sense of the Countryes through which he passed, but nothing less was minded by them then a new or free Parliament; but this, and other his actions, rendred him very suspitious to them, nor was any man assured of his intentions. To try him therefore, the Rump having been denied moneys by the City, and therefore offended with them; to ruine both, by their express Command, the General was sent with his Army into the City, pulled down their Gates and Portcullises, seized several Citizens at the Guildhall, and sent them to the Tower; this seemed to portend some dreadful conclusion: But in the interim, the Rump voted, that the Government of the Army should rest in five persons, making the General one of those; which procedure of theirs, presently drew the Curtain to the Scene and design ensuing. Anno Dom. 1660. For now the General having rendezvcuzd his Army in Fins∣bury fields, acquainted his Officers with the necessity of intro∣ducing the secluded Members ever since 1648. into the Parlia∣ment, in order to the well-settlement of the Nations, to which they assented, and forthwith the whole Army marched into Lon∣don, where upon the joyful news of this miraculous turn, (ex∣pecting nothing but massacres and plunderings) they were most welcomely entertained, nothing being thought too good for these Guests, whom they little before more then suspected for their Enemies. This was Saturday the of February in the afternoon, so that at night the Town was all of a blaze, every door having a bonfire, where all the contumely and disgrace that could be done a perdite and hated sort of men, by burning, roasting, and frying of all manner of Rumps of Creatures, was most spiteful∣ly performed, their Speaker getting home with much danger to his house in Chancery-lane. A fortnights time the General let them alone, minding them only of their dissolution, which time they spent in making qua∣lifications for the Members to serve in the ensuing Parliament, which were so many, and so strict and unreasonable, that the General delayed no longer, but on Munday, having convened the aforesaid secluded Members at Whitehall, went with them
to the Parliament House, and there put them in, to the confu∣sion and astonishment of the Rumpers, many of whom for∣bore to sit thereafter in company with them, as knowing what would ensue, The said Members being thus setled, addrest themselves im∣mediately to the settlement, &c. making the General Captain General of all the Forces in the three Kingdomes, and nulling some former destructive Votes, and establishing a Militia of well-affected and loyal persons in the several Countie of Eng∣land, and then according to the contract and compromise with the General, on the day of March, dissolved that long and fatal Parliament, having ordered Writs to issue out for a new one to sit down at Westminster the 25th of April next the year 1661. In this interval, the Government was lodged in a Councel of State, who persisted in the same wayes for a settlement, leaving the Top-stone to be laid by the Free Parliament, a term unusual to our Ancestors, but to this Generation a delightful novelty, after so many forces and violences upon so many in so few years. Colonel Lambert, at the instance of the General, had by the Rump been sent to the Tower, from whence now he broke and escaped, and came to Edge-ll, where was in∣tended a great Rendezvouz of the Phanatick part of the Ar∣my then male-contented with the proceedings; but his design failed of the expected assistance, Colonel Ingoldsby being sent in pursuit of him, and dispersing his small party at the same place, from whence he was brought to London, and committed a safer prisoner to the Tower aforesaid. On the 25th of April the Parliament convened in both Hou∣ses, to whom a week after their sitting came a Letter from the Kings Majesty, with another to the General, and one to the City of I widon, brought by Iohn Lord Viscount Mordant, and Sir Iohn Greenvile, now Earl of Bath, which were all with due humility and gladness received, and a Vote passed in Parlia∣ment, that their most humble thanks should be presented, by Commissioners appointed to attend his Majesty then at the Hague for his gracious Letters, and he should be desired to re∣turn with all convenient speed to the exercise of his Kingly Government; and Sir Thomas Clarges was first dispatcht by the General on the same Errand, where at Court he was very much welcomed. Tuesday the eighth of May, the King was proclaimed with
all the magnificences usual, but with the unusual and extraor∣dinary joy of the people, who made great bonfires that night, and seemed as it were to be in a kind of extasie: On the 25th the King landed from Holland, being attended by a gallant Fleet, commanded by the Earl of Sandwich at , where the Genral met him (the Sea, and Heaven, and Earth, ung with the peals of Ordinance) and so to Canterbury, to Rochester, and on the 29 day, being Tuesday, his most auspicious Birth∣day, triumphantly and peaceably entred his Royal City of Lon∣don, where the acclamations and shoutings were so loud and hearty, that it is impossible to eccho or express them, to the great pleasure, and yet disturbance of the King, who about six in the evening came to his Palace at Whitehal, where in the Banquetting House both Houses attended him. All the way the way through the City, the General rode bareheaded next before his Majestie, his two Brothers, York and oncester riding of each side covered. After a short congratulation, the King being weary, went to his Bed-chamber, where he supped, and so to his rest, having come 27 miles that day, besides his going through London; and within two days after, his Royal Brethren having taken their places in the House of Lords, came to the Parliament, where he made a Speech, earnestly pressing the Act of Free pardon and indempnity, which he had pro∣mised in his Declaration from Dreda. The next thing he did, was the emitting a Proclamation, re∣quiring all those who had a hand in the execrable murther of his Father, to render themselves within such a time, which some obeyed, the rest fled; those that came in, were (by the Act of Pardon, which came out soon after with some other) respited, till another Parliament should determine of them ei∣ther to life or death: This was in favour for their endring themselves. On the day of August, dyed the most noble and ac∣complisht Prince Henry Duke of Gloucester of the Small Fox, at Whitehal, to the very great sorrow of the whole Kingdom, be∣ing a Prince of singular vertues and endowments. In October, 1661. they, with the rest that were apprehend∣ed for the said , were severally arraigned at the Sessions House in the Old-Bailey, before Sir Orlando  where after Tryal, they were all found guilty, and convicted of High-Treason, for compassing, contriving and bringing about the death of the King; for which 26 of them  sentence to
be drawn, hanged, and quartered, sixteen of them, who ren∣dred themselves according to the aforesaid Proclamation, were respited till the Parliament should by an Act determine of them; but the other ten: viz. Mojor General Harrison, Iohn Carew, Iohn Cook, the Sollicitor to the pretended Cour o Justice, Hugh Peter  Thomas Scot, Gregory Clement, Iohn Iones, Adrian Scroop, Francis Haker, and Daniel Axel, were executed according to the sentence, eight of them at Charing ross, and the two last at Tybur; their Heads set upon Westminster-Hall and London-Bridge, and their quarter upon the Gate of London. In December the King dissolved the Parliament, which he honored with the Epithere of The Healing Parliament; and on the 24 of December dyed also that most illustrious Princess of . His Majesties Sister, of the same disease which snatch away her Brother the Duke o Gloucester, to the extreme grief of the King, he Queen Mother, and the whole Court. The Queen Mother had come over some while before, with her Daughter the Lady , and now prepared for her depathed, feating the disease might run in the blood, the young Princess being not very well, and accordingly the King in company with them, to bring them to the water side, came to Portsmouth in the Christmast time, and thence the Ladies took shipping for While the King was but this short while absent, hapned that desperae Rebellion and Insurrection in the City of Lon∣don, by the Fifth Monarchists, at two sundry times on the ninth of Ianuary at night, being Sunday; where they alarmed the City, marched through the gates, threatning to take down their Masters, those Regiide; quarters, killing some four men, and sosclked till Wednesday morning next at which time they  again, and resolutely fought with the Trained Bands, and a Squadron of the Life guard of Horse, in Wood∣st  their ground till they were surrounded, and  they began to retreat but still in order: There were killed  some eighteen, and they killed as many. Venner a Wine Cooper, who was their Leader, was taken, and twenty more,  of which were executed with him at seueral places in London, being convicted of High-Treason for levy∣ing war against the King. On Ianuary 30. 1660. the bodies of Oliver Cromwel, , and Hinry Ireton, were removed from their Interments,
in Westminster Abbey, and hanged at Tyburn, and there buried, their heads set upon Westminster-Hall. In Michaelmas Term this year, there was a call of fourteen Sergeants at Law, and the Courts at Westminster were filed with Judges; the names of which most Grave and Honorable Per∣sons are as followeth, Sir Robert Foster, Lord chief Justice of England, Sir Thomas Mullet, Sir Thomas Twsden, Sir Wadham Windham of the Kings Bench, Sir Orlando Bridgeman Lord chief Justice, Sir Robert Hyde, Sir Samuel Brown, Sir Thomas Tyryl, in the Common Pleas, Sir Matthew , Sir Edward Atkins, Sir Christopher Turner, Barons of the Exchequer. Anno Dom. 1661. HIs Majestie at His dissolution of the Parliament, having promised to call another with all convenient expedition; issued out Writs for the election thereof, and appointed the eighth of May for their sitting down at Westminster; where they accordingly convened, and ratified several Acts made by the preceding Parliament, which being not summoned by the Kings Writ, was not by Law held sufficient; the Act of Oblivion was first confirmed, being very much urged and pressed by the King, as the foundation of a sure and lasting settlement. At the opening of the Parliament, the King acquainted them with His resolution, of marrying Donna Catharina, the Infanta of Portugal, which they very joyfully received, by a Vote passed to that purpose in both Houes: There likewise passed an Act in repeal of that 1 Carol. 17. against the Civil Power of Bishops, thereby debarring them from their Privi∣ledges as Peers, which by this Repeal are to be restored fully unto them; with many other Acts of Publique concernment, and then adjourned till the November 20. instant. The Right Honorable the Earl of Sandwich, having sailed with a Fleet of men of War to the Coasts of Barbary, to con∣firm the League between those Pyrates and this Nation, came to an Anchor at Algeir, where he entred into a Treaty with the Governor of that Port, which not succeeding, the Fleet weighed and stood into the Harbour; where after the had fired some ships, and done some execution on shore, he came out a∣gain, having received some little loss both of men and rigging.
From thence he set sail towards the Coast of Spain, leaving Vice Admiral Lawson to guard the said Port. By a Commission from the King, the Right Honorable the Earl of Peterburgh was made General for the expedition to Tan∣ger, a strong place and Fortress of the Portugals, on the streights of Gibralar; and Forces are now ready to imbark in company with that Fleet which is going to bring home her Majestie the Queen from Lisbon. About this time hapned a fray, or conflict on Tower-hill, at the Reception of the Swedish Ambassador, betwixt the French and Spanish Ambassadors Coaches for Praecedency, where seven or eight were killed, and the French worsted: This so highly in∣censed the French King, that he sent to Madrid to demand sa∣tisfaction, but received none; so that upon, this and some other janglings, there is now a kinde of a petty Hostility between them. During this clash, the Prince of Spain, dyed, and to the King of France was born a Daulphin, Christned by the name of Lewes Tos Saints, because he was born on All-Saints Day. October. Col. Lambert, Sir Henry Vane, Sir Hadress Waller, Col. Cobbet, were sent away from the Tower, to several remote places, for their own preservation, as well as security of the peace, and divers others secured upon account of a Plot, a Narrative whereof cannot be given yet, not in this piece, which hath attained its conclusion. FINIS.
