M27C 12367944 60465
To the Honourable the Commons of England in Parliament Assembled: Is humbly Represented to You a short View, or Abstract of several Letters, which I happened to look o'er, some time since; which Letters were sent from John Dutton Colt Esq late Collector of His Majesty's Customs of this Port of Bristol, Directed to Daniel Ballard his Clerk, then Manager of that Revenue in his Absence. WHICH Letters consist of his being Concern'd in Trade and Shipping, contrary to Act of Parliament, and the diligent Care he took in disposing of the Narrow and Clipt Money, whether for the In∣terest of the Government, or his own, Your Honours will be the best Judges. December the 4th, 1693. A Receipt for 10 l. towards paying a Second Expence for the Ship Betty Privateer, Received by Capt. Earl, of Daniel Ballard, upon Ac∣count of the forementioned Collector. The 7th of December, 1693. As to the Betty Privateer, you must pay my Share till she can Sayl. Another of the same Month. I am glad the Privateer is Sayled. February the 24th 91/4. Let me hear how things go on: I am sorry there is any Loss at the Glass-House, but that must be as well as others: I should be glad to hear you had Custom enough for your Bottles; the Betty Privateer got well and quick. April the 10th, 1694. Go to Capt. Earl; give him my Service, and desire to know what he hath done for the Owners towards defraying of our Great Charge. I desire to know what he hath done: I hope some good for Us, which I desire to know, and what the Privateer is to do farther. April the 14th, 1694. If the Joseph, or any Ship Arrives where Mr. Carey is concern'd in, let me know; I mean by Mr. Carey, that any Ship he is concern'd in; Immediately give me Notice. November 17, 1694. If any Money should be drawn upon you to pay by Mr. Knight, or any other hand, for the Officers or Soldiers that Quarter in Bristol, pay none till you acquaint me, or that they do agree to allow for such Return 3d per Pound; this I will have, if you pay any upon Return, for the Soldiers Use and Quarters. November the 22th, 1694. I shall send down Capias's very suddenly a∣gainst all the Merchants to take them all up, and hold them to Special Bayl; therefore Ac∣quaint Mr. Carey, Mr. Alderman Pope, and o∣ther Friends, for 'twill not be in my Power to serve them any longer. Once more I desire you to speak to Mr. Carey, Mr. Pope, and other Friends. The last of January, 1694. Mr. Alderman Pope must pay all, but deliver the inclosed; but say nothing of it. See what he says to you about my Money; Read Alder∣man Pope's Letter inclosed; Seal it, and take his Answer and send it to me. March 10th, 1694. Bring up all the Bonds due to the King; al∣so those Bonds of Stancome and Wheeler; as to that Bond of Mr. Carey's, given the last Year, leave that in the Iron Chest. March 30, 1695. I hope Mr. Baker has paid Mr. Hall of Stur∣bridge for the Clay, and if not, let it be done forthwith, Mr. Gray asking me for it. I hope the Act for Glass Bottles will take place, and the Cole; if so 'twill be a great Advan∣tage to Us, because the Glass Houses here and Mark this. elsewhere that have Cole Water born, must and will lay down, since they cannot work so Cheap as us; we shall have the Inland Trade much to our selves, therefore rest satisfied with as many Bottles as you can at present. May the 2d. 96. Remember after the fourth of May, to buy bad Silver by the Ounce, or else 3 s. or 4 s. in the Pound for broad Money the People will give; Be sure cull out all the broad Money, and keep it till I come home to order it, not letting any body know it; Mind what I now say to you, I mean People will give bad Silver and small Clipt for broad Money, as they do here 20 s. bad Clipt for 16 s. broad and passable Money. Another. My Service to Mr. Bayly; you may acquaint him, if he hath any bad Silver Money, now is the time to be rid of it. October the 29th, 1696. We have made a Vote that Clipt Money and Hammer'd Silver Money shall go by Weight at 5 s. 2d. by the Ounce betwixt Man and Man, and in Taxes and at the Mint, for 5 s. 8 d. by the Ounce, as now; therefore keep this to your self, and get what Weighty Hammer'd Mo∣ney you can, which we may make the 8 d. Advantage of; Mind this. These Letters, with many others, were de∣liver'd into the Hands of Esq Henly of this City; with a Note under the hand of Jo. Elbridg his own Writing, containing a Particu∣lar of several Sums of bad and Clipt Money, paid into the King's Receipt by the foremention∣ed Collector John Dutton Colt and others; which Note will lead Your Honours to a farther Enquiry into the many Frauds and Concealments of this place. This I do for the Interest of the Government, and Service of my Country, as will appear, if duly and strictly Examined into, which is left to Your Honours Great Wisdom.   l. s. d. The said John Dutton Colt is Debtor 43519 19 3½ Creditor 30851 14 6¼ The Ballance 12668 4 9¼   43519 19 3½   l. s. d. Memorandum, A Privy Seal appears to Discharge 2000 l. of the abovesaid Ballance. So there remains due to the King from the said John Dutton Colt, to Ballance 10668 4 9¾ Your Honours most faithfulHumble ServantG. M. Bristol Jan. 3d. 1699/700
