T3412A 12222211 56438
Twenty New QVERIES Proposed to all true ENGLISH-MEN, CONCERNING The Unreasonable & Insupportable Burthen, lying heavy upon the Shoulders of this Groaning Na∣tion; Occasioned by the Illegal and Traiterous Usurpation of a late De∣ceased Tyrant, who Jehu-like carryed both Law, Religion, and Tyranny in His SCABBARD. Likewise, the Epidemical Disease of this Rolling and Schismatical Age, unmasked; And all Weather-Cocks, King-fishers, New-fangled Usurpers, Upstart-Law-destroyers, and Abominable Parliament-Breakers, discovered; In the Case and Recital of such de∣vouring Caterpillars, who thirst after nothing more then the swallowing up of the Peoples antient Rights and Liberties, to perpetuate the Nations still in Misery and Oppressions. By One of the few English-men that are left in England. Printed in the Year, 1659.
Twenty New QUERIES BETWEEN Jest and Earnest, &c. OR, Democritus turned States-Man. I. WHether it be not convenient, that the doctrine of Copernicus, who held, That the World turns round, should be established by Act of Parliament, which our late Changes, Alterations, and Revolutions, in part have verified; and that Tycho Brache, with the Gang of the contrary Opinion be adjudged Heterodoxal; and that from henceforth it be enacted, That what persons soever do profess, pub∣lish, or hold forth any other Tenent contrary thereunto, be adjudged Ana∣thema, Maranatha, and that publick thanks be given to Vincent Wing, for the great pains he took in the composure of that excellent piece called Harmonicon Coeleste? II. Whereas it is humbly conceived fit by Machiavil and his Pupils, That all the Gangrened Members of the body Politick be cut off, lest putri∣faction of the whole should ensue. It is therefore worthy the conside∣ration, Whether it be not expedient to imploy an Ambassadour to the man in the Moon, to procure habitations for our new Courtiers, (greater
Antipodes to the present Government, than the old constant Cavaliers:) And for the better effecting thereof, it is deem'd necessary, that the great Clerk Doctor Wilkins, Warden of Wadham Colledge in Oxon, in regard he hath the greatest knowledge in that new Plantation, be desired with all speed, to provide his winged Chariot for their convenient carriage, and that he undertake the imployment of a Coachman to conduct them thither? III. But if that design fail, Whether it be not expedient to ship them all Oceana, and that Mr. Harrington our famous modern Columbus discoverer of that floting Terra incognita, be desired to be the Pilot to conduct them thither, who for his pains deserves to be made Knight of the Sunne, and that in a grateful remembrance of his good service, it should alwayes be called after his name, (viz.) Harringtonia? IV. Whether it be not convenient, or rather necessary, to call all persons to an account that have any way contributed their assistance for the establish∣ing of e late deceased Tyrant as chief Magistrate of this Commonwealth? And whether any person, or persons, who have any way abetted him, and endeavoured to confirm him in his Tyranny, or Acted under him in any places of Trust, Power, or sate in any Parliament, or Convention summoned by his Writ; be fit to be intrusted with any Office in the Common-wealth as 'tis now settled? V. Whether it be not a great Contempt of the Law enacted by this Par∣liament, that made it Treason for any one person to aime at the sole Go∣vernment of this Commonwealth, to suffer such person to go unpished, in despight of the said Law; and whether it be not prudonce to have such person brought to condign punishment, that hath transgressed that Law, to terrifie others for the future, for making the like attempt? VI. Whether those Apostate Officers of the Army, that were Active, and grand Instruments in suspending and disturbing this Session of Parlia∣ment, as well as secluding, imprisoning, and injustly detracting seve∣ral Members of the same Parliament before, that were eminent Asser∣tors of the Peoples Liberties, against Tyranny and Oppression, conscien∣tious propagators of the Gospel, and establishers of the Fundamentall, municipal Law of the Land, and valiant Champions of the [true Old Cause;] And by their Declaration of Aug. 22. Anno Dom. 1653, as al∣so
by a Pasquil call'd the true state o the Common-wealth, Anno 1654. declared this Session of Parliament to be actually and finally dissolved from being any more a Parliament, (by an extraordinary providence) but also branded the members therof ignominiously for a corrupt party, carrying on their own ends, o perpetuate themselves as Supream Autho∣rity, never answering the ends which God and his People expected from them, exercising Arbitrary power, and swallowing up the antient Liber∣ties of the people, and to perpetuate their miseries, vexations, and oppres∣sions, through the multitude of unnecessary Laws, and Ordinances, con∣cerning their own particular interest, as they there at large remonstra∣ted, be fit persons to have any imployment either Military or Civil with∣in this Common-wealth? VII. Whether a Weather-cock, a King-fisher, a plyant Willow, a piece of Wax capable of all Impressions, a Time-Server, a Persian still sacrificing to the Rising Sun, a Lord President under the late Tyrant, of his High Court of Injustice, a man that hath made Justice quick sighted, and re∣deemed it from blindness, be a fit keeper of the Common-wealths con∣scence? VIII. Whether a hot brain'd Parrot, that multiplies words without matter, a new Courtier, an Apostate from his first Principles, and the Good Old Cause, as appeares by a Speech he made in the last Parliament, in the behalf of R. C. be fit to be restored to his place of Atturney General for South-Wales. IX. Whether Pride and arrogancy, one who is of yesterday, and knowes nothing, a Clark, or Barrister of nine years standing, in his heart a Quaker, yesterday a Protectorian, this day a Republican, to morrow what you please; a favourer of levelisme, and one that is not constant in a∣ny thing but inconstancy (save onely in the opinion that there are no witches, nor can deserve death, though an Act of Parliament be made to that end) be fit to be a Judge in Wales. X. Whether a Debaucher of both the Protectors, an oppressor of his Country, a persecutor of the Godly, one that sacreligiously robbed Gods House, to build himself sumptuous Pallaces, and hath purcha∣sed 5000 l. per annum, who never fought nor drew a Sword in anger, be
fit to sit in that venerable assembly of the Common-wealths representa∣tives; or whether it be not fitter for him to be rejected, and his estate sold to pay just publique debts? XI. Whether it be lawful for an ignorant Scribler to vent his pettish hu∣mor, malice, and reproaches against those persons, who in the Seat of Ju∣dicature have behaved themselves upright, just, and honest, and done the Common-wealth singular good service during both the late Protectors Government? XII. Whether, Levellers, Dippers, Independants, Presbyterians, Jesuites, Donatists, Manachees, Pelagians, Enthusiasts, Schismaticks, Hereticks, Hypocrites, Devils incarnate; yea, whatever the present power will have them to be, of any Religion, of all Religions, of none at all; the true Orthodox and learned Divines Ordaels; Knaves, fools, yea favourers of their brethren, learned in the same faculties; and Telenus house of Cor∣rection in a Mercurial new found Land; Befit persons to be entrusted with the power over the Consciences of honest and religious men; And whether some of them, that are so well acquainted with the mysterious Art of Bribery and Symony; And such Simon Magus, as by the knack of Regi∣stry hath encreased his estate from a Parsonage of 100 l. per annum, to 1200 l. per annum, land of inheritance, ought not in justice and prudence be called to an account, and their Estates acquired by the ruins of the Church, and several poor Ministers, be sold towards the payment of ar∣rears due to the poor banckrupted common Souldiers, that suffer hunger and want, while such enjoy the streams of Tagus in their Coffers. XIII. Whether it be not a matter of dangerous consequence to permit, a crop-Eard Pettifogger, a reviler of the Saints, a constant opposer of pow∣ers, an unwearied Scribler, a Demoniack, possessed with a legion of hel∣lish Fiends, the Spirit of contradiction to publish a scandalous libel against the Good Old Cause, and the defenders thereof in such a juncture of time, wherein most Spirits are factious, and apt to take fire? like tinder at the least spark of encouragement dropping from a fiery pen. XIV. Whether a Plagiarius, a Demetrius, a Gaoler of our liberties, and one who in the last assembly was in a probability to suffer for his unparallel'd Crimes, be fit to be trusted with the command of the most impor∣tant
place of the Nation, and whether it be not necessary to expose him to the sword of Justice, who hath so much abused the sword of the Common-wealth. XV. Whether it will not be wisdom to look back to the occasion of the late blou∣dy and unhappy War, and gradually to the prosecutions thereof, and the end that was proposed at the beginning: and when the continuance of the medium enduring to that end was everted? And then to return to the place where pas∣sion captivated Reason, and there to build a happy Government upon the Basis of the true Old Cause, according to the first Principles that were owned by all good People? XVI. Whether it be not the purest and safest kind of Free State, to have a Free Parliament erected annually, or twice a year as it was before the Conquest, and after many years; without restraint on the wills of the free People of the Nation; which Parliament may constitute and erect a Senate that shall act according, and subject to the Law of the Land, in the interval of Parliament, and so to be elected from year to year by each Parliament; which Parlia∣ment being the free people of Englands Representatives, ought not to be re∣strained, or curb'd by any sort of Court-Convention, or Councel enjoy∣ing Co-ordinate power; for that will be, to abolish the grand inconvenience of one negative voice so much braid against, and to set up a monstrous Hydra of Negatives, (for great care ought to be taken to preserve unity in a Re∣publick, which lieth most obnoxious to popular commotions, and factions) [the Epidemical Disease of this Schismatical Age;] And further, that such men may be elected for Representatives in Parliament Councils, and Senats, as be wise, honest, prudent, and Religious; and not Factious Sectaries, or such as wear both Law, Equity, Reason, and Religion in their Scabards, and Father all their prodigious wilful and exorbirant actions on Providence? XVII. Whether the Armies Declaration, and Seclusion of the Parliament in 1653. were an absolute Dissolution of that Session, and whether the people making new Elections by virtue of O. P. his Writ, and also most of the Members of the said Parliament owning the said Elections to be legal by their endeavours to be elected, and sitting by vertue of such Election, was a Confirmation thereof, And moreover whether they can be remitted to their antient Right, by getting possession without the concurrence of an antient Remediable Right, which is absolutely necessary to work a Remitter. XVIII. Whether it consists with Policy & National prudence to keep such a lawless Army on foot, who are carryed away with a Whirl-wind or Tempest of Ambiti∣on, and walk Antipodes to all setled and peaceable Government, and are ready
Instruments for any insolent Apostate, or tyrannical Dictator, that will equal them in pretences of Religion (yet denying the power thereof,) and like Pom∣pey, will make it his design by secret Engines, to cast the State into an absolute Anarchy and confusion, that the State might cast it self into his Armies, in ne∣cessity for a Protection, and so the Soveraign power be east on him, who pro∣bably hath neither Reason nor Law on his side, save only to make good the saying of Solon, who when Croesus shewed him his Treasury of Gold, said to him, (that if another came that had better Iron) he would be quickly master of his Gold. XIX. Whether it be not safer and more agreeable to the present Government of this Commonwealth; and all other free States, where due course of Law is ad∣mitted for recovery of Rights, or deciding of meum and tuum, and liberty of Subjects favoured, which we have with great expence of blood so long fought for, to raise the Militia in each County, under the command of prudent and religious men, that have interest in their Country, and are concern'd in the welfare of the Commonwealth, and not meer hirelings, that will be apt to take any impression, to the disturbance of the publike peace, for their own pri∣vate ends, and will make their swords Patronize intolerable rapine? XX. Since the Apostles call Religion (out reasonable service to God) insommch as the very ceremonies, and figures of the old Law were full of reason and signi∣fication, but more especially the Christian Faith under the Gospel; as in all things, so in this, deserveth to be highly magnified; holding forth the Golden Mediocrity in this point, between the Law of the Heathen, and the Law of Ma∣humet, which have embraced the two extreams, (for the first had no constant beliefe or confession, but left altogether to the liberty of professours; and the last on the other side interdicteth all arguments about the matter, and enjoyn∣eth unity in the manner of the profession of Religion, the one having the very face of errour, the other, of imposture, whereas the faith doth both admit, and reject Disputations and professions with difference;) Whether then it be not requisite to settle such a Religion in this Nation, as may consist with the Apo∣stles words, and such a Mediocrity that we be neither tyed on the one hand to Mahumetan unity of accidental Discipline, or manner of worship, nor on the other hand be left to a Heathenish Liberty both in the Articles and Principles of Religion, and also in the substantial matter of belief, and decent manner of discipline and confession, since such boundless liberty is the mother of all Sects, Heresies, and Atheism (which this Age abounds with, though vail'd under the specious garments of tender conscience, who are enemies to all setled Govern∣ment, whether Monarchy or Oligarchy) except their heretical opinions be favoured, and themselves mounted to the Zenith of Preferment, and Stem of Government, which is hop'd will never be, though highly at present en∣deavoured. FINIS.
