B3096 E315_17 99861240 113371
TO THE GODLY READER. IT was well said by a Learned man;Rauleighs Preface to the Hi∣story of the World. That there is nothing more to be admired more to be la∣mented; then the private contentions, passio∣nate disputes; the personall hatred, and the perpetuall warre, massacres and murther for Religion, mongst Christians; the discourse whereof hath so opied the world, that it hath well near drivn the practice out of it: and therefore it may be thought, that to enter any further into disputes about Religion, may be but to adde ewell to that fire that burnes hot
enough. But knowing our Saviours prediction to be true, that he came not to bring Peace on the Earth but a sword, and that five shall be in one house, divided three against two, and two against three, and knoing with what deceivablenesse of unrighteousnesse the mysterie of iniquitie hath a long time wrought, as in other points, so in this of Paedobaptisme. I have adventured (though unwillingly) as being conscious of mine own inabilities in a great measure (rather then the Truth should suffer) to defend the true baptisme of Jesus Christ, against the Innovation (to say no more) of Infants Baptisme: Be∣ing really perswaded in mine own conscience, and I trust from cleer light, that it is one of the greatest over sights for disordering Chur∣ches, that ever came into the Christian world; and untill it be rooted up, there is little hope that Church-Government will come into a right order, hw confident soever some men may be of their Reforma∣tions. Let it not be dreamed pride or sawcinesse in me, to give my ad∣vice; which I assure thee Reader, love to the Truth moves me to speak, which is this: That Christians condiscend one to another; Let the Presbyter, and nicknamed Independent, or Congregationall, con∣sent to the nicknamed Anabaptist, or Antipaedobaptist; in explo∣ding Infant baptism: and let the Independent, whether the meer Sepa∣rate or Antipaedobaptist, yeeld to the Presbyter, in giving more power to the Elders, to prevent tumults and breaches; (but let it be onely in the respective Congregations.) Let the Presbiter yeeld to the Independent, in changing the matter of Churches from mixt multi∣tudes, to visible Saints; that the World and the Church may be seve∣red: Without every of which, I am doubtfull of the Churches attain∣ment to Scripture perfection in Reformation. But if every side, out of a confident tenaciousnesse of their own opinions, shall out of pride or conscience, be loth to comply: What kinde of unitie, will be the like liest bond to binde us all together? Whether the Unity of Verity, or the Unity of Authority, or the Unity of Perswasion, or the Unity of necessity, or the Unity of the Covenant, or the Unity of Charity? Not the Unity
of Verity, because one man thinks this to be a truth, and another thinks that, according to the severall light they receive; yet Truth can be but on one side. Not the Unity of Authority, that the Magistrate setting down one uniform practice, shall command all manner of persons to comply there∣to; for were any such practice attempted, should persons yeeld to it, it would make many grosse hypocrites, in the highest degree of hypo∣crisie; and should they not yeeld to it, the Magistrate must fall to per∣secuting many a precious Saint of God, who with their lives and purses have helpt to defend the life and power of the Magistrate, or else expose himself to contempt and shame, in not daring to punish the violation of his commands or else ashamed hereof. Nor can an Unity of perswasion be hoped for, seeing both in Presse, in Pulpit, all sides have endeavoured to perswade one another, to little or no effect. Nor can an Vnity of necessity do any thing to unite all, because the presbiter, independent, and Antipaedobaptist are all in like danger of the common enemy, should the adversary prevaile; for tyes of necessity usu∣ally bind no longer then one side hath need of another. Nor can any unity of Covenant do it, for not to speak of the forcednesse of it in many places, wherein J feare too many may say as the heathen did, Iuravi lingua mentem injuratam gero I swore with my tongue but not with my heart, because heresy, schisme, innovations, &c. Are ex∣pounded by the consciences of the Covenanter; so that what is heresie, schisme, innovation, in one mans conscience; is counted orthodoxe, charitable, and anciently Apostolicall, in the conscience of another: Therefore though the Covenant may tye us together, against the com∣mon Enemy, yet can it not tye us together among our selves. What then remains as a most firm bond, to tye all the Godly party together, but only the Vnity of Charitie? Which is, that conscientious men, be left to that light which GOD shall re∣veale unto them; each of them having a loving affection to all those that fear the LORD, however differing in judgment: and the rather, in that the number of the truly godly is but few;
so that they need not to grieve one anothers spirits: And as in this present distresse, one godly party had need of another, without either of which party, the whole had doubtlesse sunk; So no man knowes how soon they may have need of one another hereafter: Many seemingly, few sincerely, adhering to the Godly party. Reader, J pray thee take in good part this Rejoynder to Mr. Blake his Reply, wherein I trust thou wilt finde what is materiall therein, to be answe∣red; as the shortnesse f time wherein I was imployd about it, would permit. So desiring thy prayers for the propagation of the Truth. J rest; Thine, in the Bond of the SPIRIT: CH: BLACKWOOD.
A sober Rejoynder to a Book written by Mr. THOMAS BLAKE; INTITULED, Jnfants Baptisme freed from Antichristianisme. Which was written in way of Reply, to a Book; called, The Storming of Antichrist. MR. BLAKE, in his Preface to the Reader, and all along his whole Treatise, having many hard speeches; compounded of revilings, and scoffs, as Pag. 20. 21. &c. Which the Lord in mercy forgive: To which once for all I answer; I have not so learned Christ, and shall therefore in this whole Trea∣tise, passe by his revilings, and answer his Reply. First, Mr. BLAKE is offended at the Title of my former Book, because I stiled it; The storming of Antichrist in his two Garisons, viz. Compul∣sion of Conscience, and Infants baptisme: Now that compulsion of Con∣science is one of Antichrists Garisons, see Apoc. 13.15. The Beast causeth, that as many as would not worship the Image of the Beast, should be killed. As Nebuchadnezzr did Dan. 3.6. Also, vers. 16.17. And he causeth all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to rceive a Mark in their right hands, or in their fore-heads, and that no man might buy or sll, save hee that had the Mark, or the Name of the Beast, or the number of his names. See whether this be not the Garison of Antichrist. For when the power of Antichrist (signified by the Beast that came out of the Sea) began to be slighted, the second Beast that came out of the Earth, had power to give
life to the image of the Beast, by this compulsion. Now why I called Infants Baptisme another Garison of Antichrist? Was, because I conceive it an in-let of Antichristian doctrines, as a false matter of a Church, &c. And because its point-blank against the Commission of Christ, Matth. 28. And because it hath been stablished by so many decrees of Anti∣christ; and because it enters persons into Church-state, after the way of An∣tichrist. Now these doctrines of compulsion of Conscience and Infants Bap∣tisme, being set upon on all sides by so many powerfull Scriptures, might be said properly to be stormed by the same; as a Garison is said to be stormed, when it is assailed on all sides, though it be not taken. The second thing Mr. BLAKE excepts against is; That I make a compul∣sion of Conscience by Magistrates, which must be Antichrists bane, to be Antichrists last refuge. Answ. I suppose Antichrist had never any harm by a forced uniformity, for your places for compulsion; as Esa. 49.23. and Apoc. 17.12.16. Let the Reader peruse an answer, Storm. of Antichrist, pag. 31.33. part. 1. But to answer further to Apoc. 17. Whereas Mr. BLAKE charges me for this Assertion, viz. That the compulsion of the Whore by eating her flesh, and burning her with fire, was not done by penall Lawes, but onely by force of armes. I bring these reasons, why the Whore shall be destroyed in that manner; that is, by force of Armes. 1 Because she shall be utterly burnt with fire: Now Magistrates execu∣ting Civill and not military power, use to punish the Offenders, but not to burn places where the Offenders are: See this Apoc. 18.8. She shall be utterly burnt with fire. 2. Because in one hour, so great riches as was in Babylon is come to naught. Apoc. 18.17. Which can be no otherwise, but by the souldiers burning and plundering. 3. Because Apoc. 18.21. Babylon fals like a stone thrown into the Sea, which can be found no more; so the Roman Babylon shall be thrown down and found no more: which can be no otherwise (the circumstances of this Chapter, and the two former considered) then by Warre. 4. Because there shall be such a desolation in her; As appeares, Apoc. 18.22. That there shall no more be heard the voice of Musitians in her: Nor any Crafts-man, of whatsoever craft he be, nor the sound of a Mil-stone shall be heard any more at all in her, nor the light of a candle shall shine no more in her, nor the voice of the Bridegroom or of the Bride, shall be heard no more in her: Now this totall desolation cannot come in any show of likeli∣hood, from the command of the Magistrate in his judiciall sentencing of Ba∣bylon, but from the Military force of armes.
Obj. But you will say, how can this war with Babilon come, if it be unlawfull to compell persons in point of religion? Ans. These armies that shall destroy Rome, shall be only defendants, Babilon and her Champions shall give the first blow; so that though it be not lawfull for us to invade the Religion of others, yet is it law∣full to defend our own against those that would rob us of it, and now that Babilons armyes strikes the first blow, appeares Apoc. 17.14. These shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them; the Romish party opposing the Protestant partye, I suppose the Protes∣tante may defend themselves. This same warr I suppose is begun and will not come to an end, till the ruine of Babilon come to passe, in which all the Roman Princes will be ingaged on one side, and all the Protestant Princes on the other. Now that this fall of Babilon shall not be by the judiciall sentence of any Prince or Magistrate, but by the power of our armies ap∣peares Apoc. 17.16. Because her desolation comes not from any one Prince, but from ten princes together, which can be no otherwise then from the mixture of armies. See vers. 16. And the ten hornes which thou sawest upon the beast, these shall hate the whore, and shall make her de∣solate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burne her with fire. But lest any man should say, what shall become of their popish Cityes and territories, you may see Apoc. 16.19. In the powring out of the 7th. viol, where its said: The great City was divided into three parts and the Cities of the Nations fell, and great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fiercenesse of his wrath. Now whereas Mr. Blake demands, whether this force of Armes a∣gainst the whore of Babylon be an act of Iustice, or cruelty, and infers; if it be just where Kings and states have a power military, they may not be denyed a power civill. Ans. The just execution of military, power so of civill, which Magistrates have against this whore as a spirituall strumpet, is not because of her spirituall whordome, or because the Magistrate hath power to compell any person to any kind of Religion; but because the whore gave the first onset, to take away the religion of those that have mi∣litary power in their hands. For, Quer. Whether every person be not freely born to the choyse of what religion seemeth true to him, and may defend himselfe against invaders thereof, as he may do against the invasion of his estate, liberties, &c. though it be not lawfull for him to invade another mans religion? To conclude, Is it not highest cruelty to force mens consciences or pra∣ctices in point of religion (for the distinction now is, the conscience can∣not be compelled, but the practise may, or else the person punished by
banishment,Helw. Mistery Iniquity. imprisonmēt, &c.) I say is it not highest cruelty to force mens consciences in their religion, seeing it they erre, they must pay the price of their transgression with the losse of their soules. Is it not most equall saith one, that men should chuse their religion themselves, seeing they only must stand themselves before the Iudgment seat of God, to answer for themselves; when it will bee no excuse for them to say we were compelled or commanded to bee of this religion by the King, or by them that had authority. Mr. Fox having spoken of the convertion of Ethelbert King of Kent, by Austin and his company, who was converted to God, and baptized in the 36. year of his reign, the words of the history are these, viz. After the King was thus converted, innumerable others dayly came in and were adjoyn∣ed to the Church of Christ, whom the King did specially embrace, but did com∣pell none, for so he had learned, that the faith and service of Christ, ought to be voluntary and not co-acted. Haec ille, Acts and monuments, vol. 1. Pag. 150. 7. Edition. Neither was this doctrine unheard of in the ancient Church, seeing Lactantius lib. 5.Vide Sculpt. Analis. Pater. de justitia, speaks fully, chap. 19. The persecutors of the Church commit an unexpiable evill, both that they kill themselves by serving devills, and also suffer not God to be worshipped of others, these soule-killers falsely pretend, that they provide for Christians, and that they would call them back to a right mind, for they ought not to do it by violence and torments, but by reason and exhortations. For religion cannot be compelled, Christians are ready to hear; religion is not to be defended by killing but by dy∣ing, not by cruelty but by patience, not by wickednesse but by faith; also in the 20. chap. he saith, the Pagans destroy their Gods, by compelling the unwilling to sacrifice, for they distrust the power of their Gods: lastly, these Pagans do nei∣ther do a benefit to the Gods to which they compelled Christians to sacrifice, nor to them whom they compell: not to them whom they compell, because it is not a benefit which is brought into one that refuseth; not to the Gods, because it is not a sacrifice, which is offered unwillingly. Lastly, whereas divers learned men in books and pulpits, render us odi∣ous, and so incense the magistrates against us: I shall desire all men, but specially Magistrates, to consider this as a former method of satans; wit∣nesse these instructions given by Pope Adrian to Cheregatus his legate, touching his proceedings in the dyet of Norinberg, how and by what perswasions, to incense the Princes against Luther. 1. You shall declare the greefe of our heart for the prospering of Lu∣thers sect, to see so many souls, redeemed with Christs blood, to be turned from the true religion. 2. The infamy of the Nation, viz. of the Germans.
3. Their own honour, which will be stained if they be not like their progenitours, some whereof led Iohn Hus to the fire. 4. That Luther condemns to hell, all their progenitors that died in the Romish faith. 5. To consider the end whereto the Lutherans tend, which is, under pretence of repressing the usurped Ecclesiasticall power as tirannicall, to infring and breake in peeces the secular state. 6. To consider the fruits which follow of that sect; as slanders, sediti∣ons, dissentions, blasphemies, murthers, scoffings, &c. 7. That the Princes should consider, that Luther useth the same way of seducing, that Mahomet did; who permitted liberty of those things which flesh desired, as to have many wives, and to put away those they had if they listed; so Luther to draw away Nuns, Monkes, and Priests that are lascivious, permits unto them that they may marry. I list not to provoke by making too close applications, onely I shall desire, (that whereas these and such like waies are taken, to render odi∣ous those that are no lesse the servants of God then Luther was, and that by aspersing of them and their doctrines, as Luther here was charged,) that the Magistrates imitate the Lord, Gen. 18.21. Because the cry of Sodome is great, I will go down and see, whether they have done altogether ac∣cording to the cry which is some unto me. It will be well, if Magistrates enquire whether the Antipaedobaptists, so cryed out of, be such persons as they are defamed; if it be enough to accuse, who can be innocent? It was in time of Pagan Emperors, that the name of Christian, was crime e∣nough. Tert. Apol. usque ad gentes. Let it not be so amongst those that seem to professe the name of Christ; if sundry pamphletters that accuse, can prove us guilty of what they accuse, currat lex fiat justitia But if they cause∣lesly irritate Magistrates against us, because we will not prostitute our consciences to creatures, nor practise against our own principles, I trust God will consider the cause of the poorer For Mr. Blakes exception at this passage in my former book, Part 1. Pag. 32. Little did the Holy-Ghost (using such a similitude of love and kindnesse) think, that men would pervert it to violence or constraint. And to this I answer, the fault for any thing I know, was the printers not knowing their was such a word in the originall Copie. 2. It might have past by an anthropopathy, as God is said to grieve re∣pent; But had it been a reall oversight, the book going hastily to the Presse, necessity then compelling, ingenuity might have taught you what my meaning was, and that I had no thoughts to limit Gods omniscience. For your conclusion in your Preface, that your care hath been to render
my arguments to the Reader in the full strength; I appeal not to you, who are a party, and therefore not fit to be a judge; but to the understanding and consciences of those, who have read my former booke; whether you have so done, let the Reader compare the bookes, and he will easily see the contrary. Having spoken to your Preface, I proceed to your Treatise. Against my first Argument, viz. The baptisme of Christ is dipping; The baptisme of Infants, is not dipping; therefore, the baptisme of Infants is not the baptisme of Christ. To the Major now: Except, viz. That the baptisme of Christ is dipping, you being to prove  to signifie to wash, from my own acknow∣ledgement out of the Greeke Lexicon. Ans. I cite the Lexicographer, only to show his partiality; in that he brings so many authorityes from the Greekes, that knew the true use of the word, that it signifies to dipp; but brings so little authority that it sig∣nifies to wash; and none at all that it signifies to sprinkle. And I do marvell, Pag. 3. That you alledge from the Septuagint on 2. Reg 5. As if they did use the word dipping and washing promiscusly; no plainer place can be brought against you. Farther, Pag. 3, 4, 5. Whereas I say they were baptized of Iohn into Iordan, , Mark 19. You bring Mr. Cookes Search, Pag. 5. to show, that this signifies in, as well as into; and so there was no necessi∣ty of the application of the person to the water. Ans. In those places, all or most by you cited, and also with words sig∣nifying motion (as this doth) it signifies, to, or into, as your own authori∣tyes, Mat 13.33. Shee hid it into 3. Pecks of meale; there was no apply∣cation of the meale to the leven, but of the leven to the meale: so Mat. 10.9. Possesse not money in, or into your purses; their was no application of the purse to the money, but of the mony into the purse. For your answer to Iohn 3.33. Iohn was baptizing in Aenon near to Sa∣lim, because there were many waters there; you answer, that many wa∣ters were requisite, not in respect of dipping, but that Iohns disciples might be imployed in baptizing, as well as Iohn himselfe. Ans. We must take your bare word for this, for you cannot pro∣duce any place that Iohns disciple baptized at all, much lesse that they bap∣tized at Aenon, or had any Commission so to do. Nay, Iohn 3.26. Iohns Disciples thought it a strange presumption, to think that any one should baptize, save Iohn himselfe; therefore sure they did not baptize. For that which you call a criticisme of ascending and descending, from Acts 8.38.39.
Answ. The light is not more cleerer, then that the proposition signifies (into) that Philip and the Eunuch went into the water; and therefore vers. 39. Its said, they came out of the water. Next Mr. Blake Pag. 6. Goes about to nullifie the proportion, which the Holy-Ghost makes, as if it were made by me; when I say, dipping sig∣nifies death and buriall with Christ, and rising up above the water, resur∣rection with Christ. Answ. Peruse Rom. 6.3.4. & Coll. 2.12. And see whether the Holy-Ghost set not before your eyes the same proportion; and read ex positors upon the same, as Paraeus, &c. Must we allow your proportions from cir∣cumcising of Infants to prove baptisme of Infants, without any propor∣tion so made by God; and will you not allow this proportion, so cleerly made by the Apostle, as appeares in the word, , Rom. 6.5. And whereas you seeme to retort the argument drawn from proporti∣on, making a proportion betwixt sprinkliag in water, and the blood of sprinkling; that speakes better things then that of Abell, Pag. 6. Answ. Your selfe confesse herein, you attempt only a humane propor∣tion, without divine institution, Pag. 6. But had you not said so much, it would have appeared; because the Apostle alludes only to the sprinklings in the Law, and against which and not baptismall water, he opposes the blood of sprinklings, and the sprinkling from an evill conscience, as the Antitype thereof. Pag. 7. Next Mr. Blake seemes to nullifie my Answers, to Mark. 7.8. Where the Pharisees held the baptisme of Pots, which washing, I affirmed was by dipping, yea totall dippings; for persons use to wash them all over. Mr. Blake saith, its no satisfaction of the objection, unlesse I could prove we ne∣ver wash otherwise then by dipping. Answ. Its the intrution of all manner of persons, when they wash any vessell, one way or other, to dipp it, or should they power any water up∣on it, it were vertually the same. Further, whereas you desire me P. 7. sincerely to speake my thoughts, whether I beleeve that the Pharisees, as oft as they came from market, plunged themselves over head and eares, before they eat any meat. Answ. I marvell you should desire me so vehemently, to declare my selfe in so triviall a matter, but to answer; I beleeve so oft as they came from market, they plunged or dipt their hands, though not themselves o∣ver head and eares; which if they did, that is all I would deduce from that Scripture. And whereas you charge me, P. 7. As if I should necessarily imply the word to baptize, to signify to dipp over head and eares: I never main∣tain'd
any such thing; but the ground of totall dipping which I bring is. 1. Because the Holy-Ghost speakes of much water. Iohn 3.23. Whereas a little water is enough for sprinkling, 2. Because we read of Iohns and Philips applying of the subject to the water, not of the water to the sub∣ject, Mark. 1.9. Acts. 8.38.39.3. Because Paul tels us of burying with Christ in baptisme. Rom. 6.4. Col. 2.12. Now the word baptisme signifying dipping, (no adversary being able to deny this) how can there be a buriall therein, unlesse we be under the water, as Persons dying are said to be buried, not when they lye dead in their winding-sheet; but when they are covered over with earth. After p. 8. Mr. Blk comes to bring arguments, against the necessity of dipping: As first, Pharisaicall washings were not always dippings, but Pharisaicall washings are baptismes. Ergo, Baptisme is not always dip∣ping. Answ. We may deny the proposition; as it doth not appeare but all their washings were dippings, or that which did amount to the sme, what doth hinder but that they might dippe their beds? which Mr. Blake brings to oppose it; He knoweth not the forme and manner of the Jewish beds; it may be they might use hammocks, as they use in hot Countryes, which might soon be taken down and dipt, and hung up a∣gain. The thing having no weight ile passe it over. 2. Arg. Legall purifications are not alwayes dipping, but legall purifi∣cations are baptismes. Ergo, baptisme is not alwayes dipping. Answ. I deny the assumption, legall purifications are not called bap∣tismes, neither bring you any place to prove it; but were they, it fol∣lowes not but baptisme might be dipping. 3. Arg. If the way of baptisme were only dipping, then the baptizer must put the baptized over bead into the water, and after a space receive them up againe; but we find no such thing in Iohn to Christ, or in Philip to the Eunuch. Answ. We find them both going into the water, with the administra∣tors; and we find the Apostle speaking of a buriall, not onely in the death of Christ, but a buriall with him in baptisme, and arising againe, Rom. 6.4. Col. 2.12. which is equivalent with putting the baptized over the head into the water. Arg. If Scripture way of baptizing were thus to dipp, then the bapti∣zer and ba∣tized must both put off their garments, but among all mul∣titudes baptized, there is not one word of unclothing, nor yet the putting on of garments after baptisme. Answ. What hurt can follow, If both change garments either be∣fore
or after, may they not do it so that there be not the least appearance of evill? 2. Though there be nothing spoken directly of their changing garments, yet without doubt they did. Had it not been a kinde of tempting his Fa∣ther, for Christ when he came out of Jordan, not to have chang'd his clothes? Or the Eunuch, when he came out of the waters? Its not likely a man of that quality that he was of, would go along the way with wet clothes; as he came out of the water. But for your speech, Pag. 8. viz Therefore those that have put a kinde of necessitie upon Dipping, have spoken much of being received naked into Bap∣tisme. I suppose it would trouble you much to name one such in the world: Search your heart, whether this and such like speeches, come not from, you to breed an hatred in people towards us, rather then out of conscience of for∣tifying your Argument, where you alledge it? for our parts, we abhor those things in our worship, which are not so much as named among the Hea∣then. 4. Arg. It was the Apostles way, to baptize Disciples as soon as they were become converts; the same day, yea the same hour; as in the Jaylour, Lydia, &c. But conversion of Disciples sometimes must necessarily happen, when there was no season for dipping; the element of water being over cold. Answ. 1. Suppose the coldest time that can come, yet know I not the same would prove destructive to any persons for so little time as they are in the water. 2. In case of weaknesse of body, when its truly, and not pretended; such persons, if they did scruple of receiving it, otherwise then in Rivers and Ponds, they might put off their baptisme till the season were more mode∣rate; because God will have mercy, before any other sacrifice. 5. Arg. The number of Converts was so numerous, 3000, 5000, in one day, that there was no possibility of baptisme in that manner. Answ. Why not as well as by sprinkling? The Dipping is as soon done (in a manner) as the sprinkling. 2. As the Disciples converted were many, so it's probable the Administrators were many; seeing that besides the Apostles, we read of others that baptized; as Philip the Deacon that baptized the Eunuch, & Ananias who baptized Paul. Arg. Sometimes the baptizers were in that condition, that they were unable for the work of baptizing; as Paul and Silas, when they had been af∣flicted with such stripes, that their convert was sain forthwith to wash them: And sometimes the baptized have not been in case to be dipt; as Paul when he was led into Damascus.
Answ. Paul and Silas notwithstanding their stripes, might baptize the Jaylour; especially, having washed their stripes. Besides, it was not neces∣sary that either of them should go so deep into the water, that the water should come as high as their wounds; or should it come so high, I suppose it would rather have been beneficiall, then hurtfull, to such an inflamation as usually arises from stripes. 2. If a person be in such a condition that he is not fit to be baptized, with∣out hazard of health; he may lawfully put it off, till he be able; And I sup∣pose, if Paul had felt his naturall strength to have been so impaired, that he could not have been safely baptized, he would have alledged the same to Ana∣nias, when he asked him why he taried from Baptisme? Acts 22.16. But finding sufficiencie of strength, he submitted. Now whereas Mr. Blake, Pag. 10. Accuseth us to joyn in Garison with Antichrist, in being so zealous for Dipping, as he saith the Papists are. Answ. I fear me, he and others that maintain Infants Baptisme, come nea∣rer the Popish party: Seeing by Infants Baptisme, there is one and the same admission of Membership into the Romish Church, and into sundry Prote∣stant Churches hereby. And whereas, Pag. 10. You conclude the Answer to my first Argument thus: Every Baptisme, which for the outward Rite is Dipping, Washing, or Sprinkling, is in that respect the Baptisme of Christ: But the baptisme of Infants, is either Dipping, Washing, or Sprinkling; Therefore the baptisme of Infants, is in that respect the Baptisme of Christ. To your Proposition: I acknowledge Dipping, and deny sprinkling; nei∣ther hath there been any thing alledged by you, to confirm it; and for Wash∣ing, such a washing as is by dipping, or application of the subject to the wa∣ter, I acknowledge to be baptisme: Otherwise, I doubt hereof. On the contrary, I argue thus; for the cleering of my former assumption, denied by you: viv. That the baptisme of Infants is dipping. The Baptisme of Christ, is Dipping and buriall therein; Rom. 6.4. Col. 2.12. The Baptisme of Infants is not Dipping, (or though it were) yet not bu∣riall therein: Therefore the Baptisme of Infants, is not the Baptisme of Christ. If any shall alledge against the assumption, that some Infants are buried; or that it would be very hazardous? Answ. I grant it hazardous, therefore it appeares they are not the subjects of baptisme; and though they be so dipt and buried, yet is their dipping and buriall nothing, became the persons that are to be buried, are such as have
saith of the operation of God, Col. 2.12. Which Infants have not, as Mr. Blake seemeth to confesse, by asserting the rationality of the 9. Page of my former book; wherein is proved, Infants have no faith; and no where in all his book asserting them to have faith, so far as I remember: see him, Pag. 23. 2. Suppose baptisme signifie dipping, washing, and sprinkling, the last whereof is denyed, the middlemost much questioned, and the first con∣fessed by both sides; now which of these significations would an impar∣tiall unprejudiced Reader, give to baptism, when he reades this phrase? Rom. 6.4. Therefore we are buried with him by baptisme, &c. And that phrase, Col. 2.12. Buried with him in baptisme, wherein also you are risen with him; would he reade it any otherwise then thus? buried with him in dipping, wherein also you are risen againe; yet for so reading and conceiving thereof, is there so much of the reproach and fury of man vented against divers of Gods Saints, especially when they shall practise accordingly. 3. Admit the word baptisme were a word of diverse significations, and should signify washing as well as dipping (for I affirme it never to signifie sprinkling) yet surely there is no doubtfulnesse in the signification of the words, Buried and risen. If the word baptisme do signifie washing as well as dipping (which yet could never plainely appeare to me) yet must there be a buriall in that washing, and ariseing againe therein? as ap∣peares, Rom. 6 4. Therefore we are buried with him by baptisme into death, also Col. 2.12. Buried with him in baptisme, wherein also you are risen againe, which buriall and riseing againe with him in washing, can be no other wayes then by dipping, yea by to tall dipping; which is enough to overthrow the practise of infants baptisme, commonly used. Obj. But we are said to be buried with Christ spiritually, therefore spirituall baptisme and not corporall is there meant. Answ. Outward or corporall baptisme is in both those places meant, in which corporall baptisme or washing, we are said to be buried and ri∣sen againe; appeares by these reasons. 1. That which is the likenesse of a spirituall baptisme, cannot be only a spirituall baptisme, but must be also a bodily: but the baptisme expres∣sed Rom. 6.4. Is a liknesse of a spirituall baptisme. Therefore a bodily al∣so, and not a spirituall baptisme only is meant. The proposition appeares from a received axiome; which is, no like is the same. The assumption appeares, Rom. 6.5. As we have been planted (viz. by baptisme) in the likenesse of his death, so shall we be also in the likenesse of his resurrection.
2. Where the signe baptisme or washing, and the thing signified, death and resurrection with Christ, are both exprest, there an outward baptisme must be meant as well as an inward. But so it is here, Rom. 6.4. We are buried with him by baptisme. The thing signified, or spirituall baptisme in these words, viz. Buried with him, the outward signe viz. by baptisme. Therefore bodily baptisme is here meant. 3. That which agrees with the Apostles scope, must needs be meant, but an outward baptisme as well as an inward, agrees with the Apostles scope, for the Apostle, vers 2. Had said they were dead to sin. How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? now he proves it, vers. 3. That they were dead to sin, because they were baptized, which is a signe of death to sin; which they could not have been, had they not been deemed dead to sin, therefore a corporall baptisme as well as a spirituall, or washing with the blood of Christ, is here meant. 4. If the paralel place, Colos. 2.12. Buried with him in baptisme, wherin also you are risen again, doth set forth an outward baptism as well as an inward, then bodily baptism is meant, as well as a spirituall washing in Christs blood. But the former is true, viz. Buried with him &c. , in baptism, , in which baptism or washing, you are risen a∣gaine; therefore corporall washing, as well as washing in Christs blood, is here meant. Now because this doctrine of dipping, savors so of Novel∣lisme; not to instance in histories, not without difficulty attainable; Peruse the book of Martyrs Edition. 7. Mr. Fox saith, Augustine and Paulinus baptized them in rivers, not in hallowed Fonts, as witnesseth Fabianus, Cap. 119.120. Acts and Mo∣numents, Part. 1. pag. 138. After speaking of Austin, he saith, he departed after he had baptized ten thousand Saxons or Angles, in the West river that is called Swale, besides Yorke, on a Christmas day. Where note by the way, Christian Reader, saith Mr. Fox, that whereas Austine bap∣tized then in rivers, it followed then there was no use of Fonts, for this story Mr. Fox cites Fabian. Acts and Monuments, Part 1. Pag. 154. After in the story of King Edwin, he hath this story; Paulinus having convicted Edwin the King, to the faith of Christ, and having baptized him; during the life of the said Edwin, which was six yeares more, Pauli∣nus christned continually in the rivers of Gwenye and Swala, in both pro∣vinces of Deira and Bernitia. Acts and Monuments, Part. 1. Pag. 156. Onely I cannot but cleere a place in Mr. Blake, Pag. 4. His words are; compare Revel. 19.13. with Esa. 63.3. And you will find there no such difference, but the word be , rendred in our translation dipped, Revel 19. To be no other in Esa. 63. Then be sprinkled. But
what ever the difference bee betweene them, though sprinkling be not at all baptizing, it makes little to your purpose; seeing those that dipp not Infants, do not yet use to sprinkle them; there is a middle way betwixt these two. Reply. The Reader may observe, Mr. Blake hath a defence for what he is going to say, whether it be true or false, his words are, there is no such difference. Why, if there be any difference betwixt these two sayings, and the Persons of whom they are spoken, is it not enough to disprove that you would prove by them, you bring these two places to prove dipping and sprinkling to be one, yet you your selfe acknowledge a dif∣ference betwixt them, in the thing for which you alledge them. Yea, as despairing of the proof, your own words conclude; but what ever the difference be, though sprinkling be not at all baptizing, &c. 2. But had you not confessed the same, we can easily prove it, Esa. 63.3. The words are there, Blood shall be besprinkled upon my garments; where the Prophet speakes of the victory, Christ gets against his enemies, after the manner of conquerors, who when they kill their enemies, the blood of the slaine is wont to besprinkle the conqueror. Hence Iunius reades it, inspersus est Sanguis cujusque robustissimi illorum vestamentis meis, but Revel. 19. Iohu speakes of Christ clothed with a vesture dipt in blood, which was no other then Christs own satisfaction, the righteous∣nesse of Saints; therefore there can be no parrellellisme betwixt these two places; not to show the difference of the learned tongues herein, the dif∣ference of the scope is enough to nullify what is said, to prove the word besprinkled, Esa. 63. And the word dipped, Apoc. 19. To be the same, it must be spoken of the same occasion, of the same time, of the same ac∣tion, of the same subject, in the same language. Now 1. The occasion was different, or Esa. 63.1.2.3. There are 2. questions propounded by the Church of the Iews, 1. The Church of the Iews seeing Christ revenging his enemies, askes who he is? verse. 1. 2. Why he was red in his apparell? to which the answer is given, vers. 3. 4, 5, 6. That the cause was the slaughter of his enemies. Now the occa∣sion Apoc. 19. Is of the victory Christ got over the beast and the false Prophet, from vers. 10. to the end of the Chapter. 2. The time is different, one was in the Prophet Esays time, the other was neare to the end of the world; as appeares by the order of the Apo∣calyptycall historye. Neither let any man say, this place of Esay, might be a Prophesy of the other in the Revelations; for in Esay 63. Theres no mention of Babilon, or any thing that can accord with this historie, in any seeming type.
3. Yea though it were the same occasion, and the same time, yet if in both Scriptures the same action were not mentioned, the argument of , dipped, in Revel. 19. And the word sprinkled, Isay 63. Would not follow to be the same, now that the action is not the same, appeares because there are no such questions propounded, Apoc. 19. As are propounded Isay 63. Nor no victory against the beast and false Pro∣phet, mentioned, Isay 63. As is mentioned Apoc. 19. With many other differences of the actions, which any man that looks both texts may see. If so beare allusion of a word in the new Testament, to a word or phrase in the old Testament, will serve to prove points; we may make every thing of any thing, and make Christian religion more doubtfull, then the oracles of Delphus. 4. Theres difference in the subject; Though the occasion, time, and action were the same, yet if the subject, viz. The enemies over which Christ triumphs be not the same, then it followes that sprinkled, Isa. 63.3. And dipped, Apoc. 19.13. Are not the same; but so it is that the enemies over which Christ triumphs, are far different; for when Christ triumphed over his enemyes, Isa. 63. He came out of Edom, and with dyed garments from Bosrah, vers 1. Which Bosrah was the Metropolit of Edom, Isa. 34.6. 1 Machab. 5.26. So that his victory was there (in the true history) got over the Edomites and Bofraites; but this victory Christ gets, Apo. 19.13. Was over the beast and alse Prophets in another part of the world, together with a many of Kings, & Princes, their confederates. Which being so cleere, not to trouble the reader in so plaine a case with more differences, it followes that sprinkled, Isa. 63.3. And dipped, Apoc. 19.13. Are not the same; but the allegation is a meer flourish, to deceive supeficiall understandings. If any aske why I have been so long upon so weake an argument. It is to undeceive those, who have been by diverse learned men (some whereof are of great note) been deceived in this particular, by the counterfeit Parrellellisme of these two places. Arg. 2. Mr. Blake, instead of taking away my answers to exceptions against Christs Commission, takes a long discourse out of his Book called, Birth priviledge; which is nothing, but , only instead of answering one , he inserts this long discourse, P. 11. 12. 13. out of which, all that I can deduce, is only 2. arguments against infants baptism. 1. Esay 49.22. Behold, I will lift y my hand to the Gentiles, and set up my Standard to the people; and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders: Therefore, Infants may be baptized. Answ. For the opening of this place at large, I refer the Reader to my for∣mer book, part. 1. pag. 31.
In a word, God promised the Jews, that though now in Captivitie their Land were desart, and their desolations great; yet the Inhabitants should be so many, that the land should be too strait for them, vers. 19.20. Hence, vers. 21. They fall to enquiry who hath begotten these? Seeing themselves were desolate and sorry Captives: To which the Lord answers, vers. 22. Thus saith the Lord, I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles: As if he should say, it shall be my Work. There shall sundry of the Gentiles come in to them as Prose∣lites, and not onely themselves, but they shall also bring their children in their armes, and upon their shoulders, with them; and so by multiplication of Proselytes, the Land in a short time became too strait for them. But what is this to the baptizing of Infants? But that the Prophet should speak of the rejection of the Jews, and the call of the Gentiles in their stead, as Mr. Blake would have it; it's both con∣trary to the tenor of Scriptures which affirm, that the Jews at their last con∣version, shall be taken into the Gentiles, not the Gentiles into the Jews. See Rom. 11.12.15. and contrary to the tenor of that place, which speakes of a bringing in many Gentiles to the godly Jewes. And what if the godly Gen∣tiles be so zealous, that rather then they will lose the benefit of Ordinances, by tarrying at home and looking to their infants, will take so much paines as carry them in their armes and shoulders unto them, what can hence be deduced for the sprinkling of Infants? And that this is the meaning of it, if there be any litterall sence therein, appears because the Prophet saith, I will set up my standard to the people, and they shall bring their sons, &c. which standard, is nothing but the preaching of the Gospell. Howbeit, I rather lean to Iuius, who acknowledges all these things to be spoken Allegorically, of the enlarge∣ment of the spirituall Kingdome of Christ; as the Prophets are wont to speake. Mr. Blake's next intermixed Argument is; 2. Ag. To belong to Christ, and be a Disciple of Christ, are both one; Matth. 10.42. compared with Mark. 9.42. Infants belong to Christ, there∣fore they are Disciples, p. 13. 16. Answ. To your proposition, I answer; First, its true of such Disciples as Christ spoke of, which were converted to the Faith, but not of others; nei∣ther Infants who are not yet enlightened, nor of Elect persons unborn, who belong to God in respect of Gods decree, yet cannot properly be called Disci∣ples; as not having any being: these to belong to Christ, and to be Disciples of Christ, are two severall things; the one, that is their belonging to Christ, is in present; the other, that is, their being Disciples, is in future: To this Mr. Blake gives a scoffe, instead of an answer, p. 16. 2. Children cannot be Disciples,See Mr. Den An to D. Fea P. 10. because they cannot take up Christ his crosse, Luk. 14.26. Now what Infant hath an habituall intention to take up Christ his crosse?
3. Disciples of Christ, they have a call into that state, either extraordinary, or ordinary. But what call have Infants in that state? 4. Infants cannot be Disciples, because they are not capable of learning rea∣son, much lesse deep things of Religion: Now Disciple in English is a scholler. 5. I will not speak of sundry badges of Disciples, whereby all men may know them; as Joh. 12.35. By this shall all men know ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another; and fruitfulnesse, Joh. 15.8. Herein is my father glo∣rified, that ye bear much fruit; so shall ye be my Disciples. So Joh. 8.31. If ye continue in my word, then are ye my Disciples indeed. Now how can love, fruitfulnesse, or continuance in Christs word, be ascribed to Infants? which they must be, if Infants were Disciples: As Mr. Blake would make us believe. But still Mr. Blake, lest he should seem to have said nothing, distinguishes— p. 18. that a Disciple is taken two wayes; 1. Strictly, for one that actually learnes. 2. Largely, for those that are taken into the number of those that do actu∣ally learn, though themselves do not; and in this order he would make us be∣lieve Infants to be Disciples, p. 18, 19, 20. Answ. 1. There are none are Schollers in Christs School, but do learn; and therefore the similitude from little ones being called Schollers, though they do not learn, is of no weight. 2. Christ cuts off that distinction of two sorts of Disciples, in requiring one sort of qualifications in all his Disciples, as was shown before; Luk. 14.26.27. Joh. 8.31.12.35. Whosoever will be Christs Disciple, must hate father and mother. Further, Mr. Blake goes about to weaken my answer to Mr. Marshals Ar∣gument, out of Acts 15.10. which was this; p. 17. All they upon whose necks the false Teachers would have put the yoke of Circumcision, are called Disciples: But they would have put this yoke upon Infants, therefore Infants are Disciples. Answ. Not to repeat my former answers, assailed by Mr. Blake, but not overcome, I answer: We deny the Proposition; All that can be deduced from this Text is, that they would have put a yoke upon the neck of all the Disciples; Not that all were Disciples upon whom they would have put this yoke, or that they would have put the yoke onely upon the Disciples. See this answere with cleer demonstrations for it, in Mr. Dens Answ. to Dr. Fearley, pag. 11. 12. Who hath spoken so fully to it, that I need not adde thereto. There are some other small exceptions, which Mr. BLAKE hath against my vindications of Christs Commission, which because they are not ma∣teriall, as p. 14. and p. 20. I will not insist upon, he having past over so many mat∣ters
of moment, alledged concerning Christs Commission, as the Reader may easily observe. Only the 5. exception he punisheth with very grievous stroakes, to make it an example to all the rest. The exception, word for word by me aledged, is thus. viz. Obj. Christ saith, baptize all nations, but Children are part of the nation, therefore they may be baptized. Answ. In the proposition, there is a fallacy of division, whereby one con∣joyned proposition, is divided into two pieces. As a certaine Athiest, that would prove out of Scripture, there was no God; for which he alledged, the 14. Psalme, vers 1. Where it is said, there is no God; but he left out the fore∣going words, the foole hath said in his heart. So here Christ saith, baptize all nations, but he conjoynes with it, make disciples all nations; which the ob∣jector here left out. Mr. Blake his answer hereto Pag. 21. This is the man that being reviled will not revile again, Athiest is the worst word a brother shall hear from him; but if here be any fallacy, it is none of the objectors sophistry, but of the stormers forgery; I challenge this daring champion, who so contumeliously slanders the Churches of Christ, for gari∣sons of Antichrist, and then so insolently insults over them, to produce the man that ever layd the weight of this conclusion; that Infants are to be bapti∣zed, upon this one observation, that they are part of the Nation. Reply. Nor do I charge any man so to have done; But your self know, that it is an usuall Argument brought for baptizing Infants; and therefore it stood me in hand to answer it: Yea, it is answered, that it is a fallacy of division, which you are not able to refute. And whereas you charge me, that what is rightly observed by the Objector (meaning I suppose your self) is falsely put toge∣ther by the Stormer, p. 21. Answ. I did not give it as an answer to any such Argument brought by your self, not remembring you had any such; but to an Argument I once heard brought in a populous Auditory. And therefore you do not fairly, in ma∣king persons believe that of me, which I never meant: And so much the ra∣ther, in that you accuse me of calling a brother Athiest, which never was in my thoughts, much lesse dropt from my pen. Yea, that I contumeliously slander the Churches of Christ, for Garisons of Antichrist; I abhor such speeches. Neither can Mr. BLAKE produce the least reviling speech in all my Book, and if he could, I doubt not but I should have heard of it. But for lack of such speeches, I may say of him, as the King of Israel said of the King of Syria, 2 Reg. 5.7. Consider I pray you and see, how he seeketh a quarrell against me.
The searcher of hearts knoweth, that in using this similitude, I never meant to charge either Mr. Blake, or any other man, with any reviling speech; but being a story I had formerly react, and cleerly demonstrative in this particular; I made use of it, not imagining any man could have beene so heated hereby, as Master BLAKE seemeth to bee. And whereas in conclusion he tells me, of such as would loose their God, rather then their jest, I suppose he cannot find nor jest, nor jeare in all the booke which he takes upon him to confute; and those that know my life, I appeale to, whether they know me to be given to any kind of jest∣ing, much lesse to prophane jesting. And therefore Mr. Blake is much mistaken, in saying that I slanderously and contumeliously traduced a brother (I suppose he meanes himselfe) in using such a comparison. If Michael durst not bring a rayling accusation against the devill, Iude 9. then farr be it from me to rayle upon any, that either are, or may be Saints of God; but of this perhaps enough and too much. Now to answer to your argument, with which you close up your an∣swer, Pag. 22. The disciples of Christ belonging vnto him and bearing his name, ought to be baptized. But Infants of Christian parents, belong to Christ, and beare his name in Scripture language; Therefore, Infants of Christian parents ought to be baptized. Answ. 1. In your proposition there is a contradiction in the adjunct, viz. the disciples of Christ belonging unto him, and bearing his name, ought to be baptized, to speak properly, they do not beare his name, till they be baptized. 2. To your assumption; Infants of Christian Parents in Scripture lan∣guage, belong to Christ. I have disproved before, that belonging to Christ, and being a Disciple of Christ, are two severall things; which were enough to overthrow your assumption. But I will deny your assumption in the 3. branches of it. As first, that Infants of Christian Parents, belonging to Christ; for they no otherwise belong unto him, then as God shall call them out of the world, Acts 2.39. And so do the Infants of wicked men. 2. A second branch, that Infants bear Christs name in Scripture-lan∣guage. Mr. BLAKE might have done well to have brought his Scripture to prove it; for I know no Scripture, that holds forth Infants of Christian parents, more then the Infants of wicked parents, to bear Christs name in Scripture-language; Oft doth God convert the children of wicked pa∣rents, when the Infants of godly parents growing up, prove wicked.
3. A third branch is, that they are disciples. Answ. None for the present are, for Christ hath no disciples but are learners, which infants are not; nor are they so qualified as Christs disciples are and ought to be: As was proved before. Contrarily, I argue: Those of whom there can no appearance be ad of their belonging to Christ, or of being his disciples, they ought not to be baptized into the faith of Christ, or profession thereof. But of no infants, there can ordinarily appearance be had of their belonging to Christ, or of being his disciples: Therefore, no infants ought to be baptized. The proposition is undoubted; The Assumption appeares, that there can no appearance be had of any infants belonging to Christ, in their infancie; for no infants of the holiest persons, appeare so; and some prove wicked: as appears in some infants of Abram, Isaac, David, Samuel, &c. No man can say for certainty, of any infant of any godly man; this infant belongs to Christ, or will be a disciple of Christ. Obj. But you will say, no more can you have certainty of their belonging to Christ, that make profession, seeing Magus, &c. were hypocrites. Answ. True, we cannot have a certainty of infallibility, but we have a cer∣tainty of precept, being bid to baptize those that are made disciples, Matth. 28.19. Also we have a certainty of evidence, by words and life; neither of which infants can give, and which charity reaches us to judge as truth. Also we have certainty of example, in that PHILIP baptized the Eunuch upon the confession of Christ his nature, knowing him to be a Proselyte of the Jewish Church, to be instructed in Christ his Offices; and it seems this pro∣fession or confession, was of all Christians at their baptisme, Heb. 10.23. As it is word for word in the Greek, viz. And having washed the body with pure water, let us hold fast the confession of the hope without wavering. What profession or confession was this? Surely that which was made at our baptisme, when we washed our bodies with pure water. Next, Mr. BLAKE comes to reason against my fourth and fifth Argument together, p. 22. viz. The baptisme of Christ requires faith and repentance, to the right receiving of it; but neither of these can be in infants, therefore in∣fants baptisme, cannot be Christs baptisme. To this Mr. BLAKE p. 23. distinguisheth and answereth, that want of faith and repentance is twofold: First privative, which he makes to be want of that grace in a subject capable of it, and by the precept of the Gospell called to it: Secondly Negative, where it is not (meaning faith, where Note, he acknowledges infants have not faith, as also in the next page. See p. 22. 23.)
Negative, where it is not, but not expected, nor the subject of capacitie to re∣ceive it: Now it is not meer negative want of faith, that makes uncapabale of baptisme, but privative; that is, the unbelief of a person of capacitie to believe. Reply. The Scripture requires justifying Faith in all, or that which is deemed equivalent thereto: viz. A profession thereof, which every Church and per∣son judges to be in truth, not being able to search the heart; See for this these places, Heb. 10.22. Mark. 16.15.16. Acts 8.37. Therefore where there is any kinde of want of it, the person so wanting it, and especially being known to want it, ought to be excluded from baptisme: Negative want of faith, and privative (if any such distinction can be herein, which I deny) though they may differ in degree of guilt, yet are they both alike, in that they hold forth a want of those absolute qualifications of faith and repentance, without which (at least in profession) we never finde baptism administred. Away with these frivolous distinctions, great is their guilt. Mr. Blake having acknowledged want of faith in infants: Yet after comes to be offended, for my calling the distinction of seminall and actuall faith, a vain distinction; seeing there is but one faith; Ephes. 4. And replyeth, though faith be but one, yet it may admit of a double consideration, in the root and in the fruit. Answ. The root of faith, is the habit which most properly is called faith, and the fruits are the acts of it; still there's but one faith. Again, Mr. Blake is offended, because I said the first seed of faith is illumi∣nation, of which infants are not capable; To which he replyes, the Spirit is the first seed. Answ. The spirit is the sower, illumination is the first seed. Then pag. 24. Mr. Blake tels us; It's the absurdity of our party, to main∣tain this Sacrament of baptisme is applied upon the ground of charity, and not certainty, upon hopes that the person is of capacity, not upon assurance. Answ. We do so, because we finde it so administred in Scripture; as we see in Magus, in charity they thought him to be a believer: And we have a certainty of charity herein to bear us out. But for a certainty of infallibility, upon which baptisme is to be applied to any person, the Scripture mentions no such; and had there been any such I doubt not but the Churches would have excluded Ananias and Saphyra, Magus, and many others, from baptisme: And if Mr. Blake, or any other Paedobaptists, know of any such certainty of infallibility, upon which to dispence the Ordinance of Baptisme, they do ill to dispence it to so many, as after prove wicked. Then Mr. Blake concludes with this Argument, p. 25. That want of faith and repentance, which debars from baptisme, excludes also from salvation:
But want of faith and repentance infants, excludes not from salvation; Therefore, the want of faith and repentance, debars not infants from bap∣tisme. Answ. We deny the proposition to be simply true in adult persons, unlesse it be finall; for present want of faith and repentance, may debar them from bap∣tisme, and yet they may be saved, believing after. Also it's not true in infants: infants being not of capable understanding neither to believe nor repent, may be excluded from Baptisme, and yet may be saved through Gods Election, or Christs satisfaction; Iacob was loved before he had done good or evill. Or through Gods future calling of them. Contrary, I argue: Such qualifications as Christ and his Apostles, set down for persons bapti∣zable, these ought onely to be observed. But Christ and the Apostles set down onely the qualifications of faith and repentance, for persons baptizable; Therefore, the qualifications of faith and repentance, ought onely to be ob∣served. The proposition is undoubted, for we are to hear Christ as the Prophet of his Church, Acts 3.22. And the Apostles as speaing from him, Ephes. 2.20. The Assumption is as sure, that neither Christ in his commission cyted by Matthew, or Mark, nor any other of the Apostles in their sermons, set down any other qualifications for baptisme, save faith and repentance; and it had been great unfaithfulnesse for them, to set down Ordinances for Christians, and left out qualifications for the persons that should have received them. The next Argument Mr. Blake sets upon, is this. The children of wrath are not to be sealed with the seal of grace; infants are such, Ergo. &c. To this Mr. Blake faith, a childe of wrath is to be considered two wayes: First, so by nature, originall corruption putting him into that condition. Se∣condly, so in his present state and condition, not translated and chang'd through Grace. Answ. Your distinction is no distinction; For what difference is there be∣twixt a childe of wrath not chang'd, and a childe of wrath put in that estate by originall corruption? The one is unchang'd, and so is the other. 2. Christ giving commission, that repentants and believers should be bapti∣zed; infants by nature impenitent and unbelieving, must needs be excluded. Next, Mr. Blake excepts against an objection I made, which was: But if infants as well as others, be children of wrath by nature, then they dying in their infancy must needs be damned. Answ. No: naturall delement with originall sin, doth not simply damn;
it shewes there is something in us deserves damnation; but it doth not appear from Scripture grounds, that any Person was damned for it alone. To this Mr. BLAKE answers, P. 27. The universall damning power of o∣riginall defilement, we can prove out of 1 Cor. 15.50. Iohn 3.3. Ephe. 2.3. Answ. That there is an universall damning power of originall defilement, is cleer, out of Romans 5.12. &c. In respect of merit we acknowledge, but not in respect of execution; for if there bee, good now tell me whether it be executed on your infants dying after baptisme in their infancy, before th be∣lieve, or whether your baptisme hath taken away this damning power or ori∣ginall defilement? If you assert the former, then you uncharitably affirm, your own infants dying after baptisme in their infancy, to be damned; if the latter, then you assert your baptisme, to take away the damning power of ori∣ginall defilement, and so joyn hands with the Papists. As Heterodox is that which Mr. BLAKE saith, p. 18. That the charity of the Paedobaptists (whereby they hold infants dying after baptisme in infan∣cy to be saved) is not grounded upon any conceived immunity in those in∣fants, from all damnable guilt, but on the title to that covenant, whereof cir∣cumcision was a signe and seal. Answ The supposition of the salvation of any person whatsoever, must be grounded upon an immunity from all manner of guilt; which cannot be up∣on any imaginary title to that covenant,Apoc. 21.27. whereof circumcision was a signe, but upon the presentment of the satisfaction of Christis death to the justice of God, for all manner of sin and guilt. My next Argument Mr. Blake sets upon, is out of Acts 8.10.12. where there is mention made of a whole City baptized, both men and women; there's no mention made of believers and their seed. To this Mr. Blake answers; the sex is in this place noted, and not the growth and age, as appeares in the distinct mention of both sexes, and the age and growth not mentioned at all. Reply. Is not the distinct age and growth mentioned, when they are said to be men and women? Are infants ever said to believe as these Samaritans did? Or called men and women, as these Samaritans were? Further, whereas p. 30. Mr. Blake saith, that this distinction of sex, in all probability, was to distinguish baptisme in this particular from circumcision; where the male was circumcised, not the female: But here, male and female, men and women, are both baptized. Reply. It is of far more probability, if not of direct certainty, that the Holy Ghost by this distinction of them, both by grace of faith, and statures of men and women, would denote unto us, that onely believing men and wo∣men, are fit subjects of baptisme, and not believers seed; none of which are mentioned.
Then Mr. Blake assaults my seventh Argument, from Acts 19. 2, 3, 4, 5. which is; Baptisme that wants faith in one of the persons of the Trinity, is insufficient. Infants at baptisme wants faith, not onely in one, but in every person of the Trinity; Therefore is insufficient. To this, Mr. Blake p. 31. saith, Faith is twofold: First, Explicite; as able to know a Trinity and Unity, and to distinguish it. Secondly, implicite; to know one Iehovah in Covenant with his Elect, and reconciled to them, though not knowing distinctly any Trinity of persons; to make baptisme insufficient in all, in whom this explicite knowledge is not found, is (I suppose) to nullifie the baptisme, almost of all whom Iohn baptized. Reply: Baptism may be deemed insufficient in all persons, who have not an explicit knowledg of the Trinity after Christs ascension: because the form of it, is in being baptized in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Now the from gives being. If a person then be ignorant of any of the subsistences (or as they are commonly called, persons in the Trinity) how can he be baptized a∣right? and though sometime persons were baptized in the name of the Lord Je∣sus, yet doubtlesse had those persons a knowledg of the Trinity. Yea, and Iohns Disciples also had the same knowledge; in that the Spirit descended visibly like a Dove upon Christ, at his baptisme, and a voice cried out; This is my be∣loved Sonne, in whom I am well pleased. Matth. 3.16, 17. Where Fa∣ther, Son, and Spirit, are all named. Its a prime principle, that souls be informed in the object of worship, espe∣cially, if they go so far as to take Christs badge on them by baptisme. Mr. Blake, p. 32, 33. counts it a singular opinion in me, in that I affirm the Particle They, twice mentioned in the 5. verse, to have reference to Lukes relation, of Pauls proceeding with these twelve disciples at Ephesus, and not to have reference to the hearers of Iohn Baptist. Reply. This is no singularity it me, for Cyprian long ago thought so much. Epist. ad Iubaian. 2. It seems not spoken of Iohns hearers, but of the twelve; because there's a period at the end of the 4. verse at these words; saying, They should believe on him that should come after them: that is, on Christ Isu. Here is a period, when it should onely have been a Colon, had it been spoken of Iohns hea∣rers. 3. If this had been meant of Iohns hearers, and not of the twelve Disci∣ples, then Paul should lay his hands on the twelve, and the Holy Ghost come upon them, vers. 6 before they were baptized into the Holy Ghost; which is not any thing credible. 4. It seems cleer by the continuation of the History; and it would trouble
a good Grammarian to give a reason, why the Pronoun They, should agree with Iohns hearers, rather then with the twelve. But my second reason, is that which swayes with me. I grant, if it can be evinced that it's spoken of JOHNS hearers, then the Argument is of no force: For to confirm which, Mr. BLAKE brings no Arguments from the Text. But if the contrary be evinced further, as others may see further demonstrations for it, more then is yet revealed, then the Argument is unanswerable. For Mr. BLAKE'S saying herein, vers. 5. hath a full relation to saying yea to JOHN's saying, vers. 4. And why not as well or better to PAUL's saying? vers. 4. Then said Pul — Whn they bard this, vers. 5. And for the agreement, it may be very fit, for vers. 2. he askt them, whether they had received the Holy Ghost? And the twelve answered; they had not heard whether there had been an Ho∣ly Ghost: He asks them, unto what then were ye baptized? And the twelve answered, vers. 3. into JOHNS baptisme: Then vers. 4. PAUL replied, that JOHN baptized with the baptism of repentance, &c. q.d. The scope of JOHNS baptisme, was to bring persons to believe Christ: And when they heard this that is the 12. they were baptized into the Name of the Lord JESUS, which may be put Synecdochically for all the Trinity: And when PAUL had laid his hands on them, the Holy Ghost came on them, vers. 6. as it did on the Samaritans, Act. 8.16, 17. as soon as ever they were baptized: I see not, but there may be a good agreement, betwixt all the parts of the Text. But of this enough. Next, Mr. BLAKE licks over my 8. Argument, which is this. The same conditions and qualifications, are required in persons baptizable in our dayes, as were in time of the Apostles. But to have put on Christ, to be baptized into Christs death, to have the heart sprinkled from an evill consci∣ence, to be buried and risen again with Christ, to have the answer of a good conscience, were the conditions then required; Ergo, such conditions and qualifcations are required in our dayes, . 34 Here Mr. BLAKE gives not any answer worth replyall, onely he saith, my slf acnowledged the benefit of salvation which infants have by Christ his death, and why may they not then be baptized into his death? Reply. I put it onely in a charitable supposition, for elsewhere I say, the Scripture reveals nothing of the salvation or damnation of infants. 2. Though dying infants (it's to be hoped) have benefit by Christs death, yet being no man knowes which of them will dye in infancy, nor which of them will grow up and prove godly or wicked, yea they all being without any profession of life or godlinee, yea without any such qualifications whatsoe∣ver; therefore we baptize them not, because no such unqualified persons, were bapized in the Apostles dayes, nor by Christs Commission; to the adherency of
which Commission and example, we are not yet informed that we trans∣gresse Next Mr. BLAKE, P. 35. Examines my 9 Argument, which is. That tenent which brings mischiefes to the Churches, and the con∣trary practise, benefits: the practzing of the one is unlawfull, and the con∣trary practise required. But the baptisme of Infants brings mischiefes to the Churches: And the delaying of baptisme till Persons believe, brings benefits; Therefore the practising of infants baptisme is unlawfull, and the con∣trary practise required. To the proposition Mr. BLAKE answers: the same lists of mischiefes which you heap up to make good your assumption, were undeniably in the Church of the Jews through circumcision of infants, as well as in the Churches of Christ, by their baptisme. Rpy. You should have added [n their infancy] to the word [bap∣tisme] or else you deceive the Reader, to make him think, that I think, that there are mischiefs in the Ordinances of God; as in a right baptis∣me, which I do not. Now granting your speech to be of infants baptisme, I deny there was any such mischeifes could b pretended against Circum∣sition. Did that confound the world and the Church together, when there was a command from God to circumcise every male? was that a ground-worke of traditions, which was done by a precise command from God? or could that fill the conscience with scruples, where there was a cleere command for it? Gen. 17. I might go through the rest of the particulars of the assumption which you urge, in answering to the proposition; but these are enough. P. 36. Mr. BLAKE saith, in further answer to the proposition, viz. You imagine no unl mischiefs to com to the Churches, by compulsion of conscience, yet that which you thus brand, in the old Testament, was the command of God, and pactised of renouned Princes, with singular approbation of the Holy Gost. Reply. I suppose this instance, doth not a whit prove the point in hand; we never find in the old Testament, any Magistrate, compelling a∣ny persons to this or that beliefe; or punishing him if he did no so b∣lieve, as the Magistrate would have; we only find him compelling those of the Jewish Church [himselfe being a Member thereof] to practise the things they did professedly believe; yet did not the Magistrate, bring in any proselites this way, nor compell any Town or City of any forreign nation, to imbrace their beliefe; as the Ammonites, Hittites, or the re∣mainder of those Nations that remained amongst them. That he did; I sup∣pose, he did by command from God.
In the new Testament, we find none compelling in point of beliefe, hat I know of, save the beast, Apoc. 13.15. Which causeth, that whoso∣ever would not worship the Image of the beast shoud be killed, and vrs. 16.17. Causeth all, small and great, rich and poore, bond and free, that he may give them (for so it is in the orginal) a mark in their right hand, or in their forhead, and that no man might buy or sell, unlesse he ave the mark. Besides, what Asa did in compelling the Jew a themselves to enter into Covenant with God, he had some Prophet to direct him herein; else could he not have done i, seeing there was no rue for any such thig in the law of Moses: without which how he could have ben exemped from will-worship, I cannot for the present understand, neither he nor any other King, compelled any Person to the Jewish religion, or to be present at their Sacrifices, or to be a member of the Jewish Church. And what if sundry Princes in the old Testament practised the same, yet was the Kingdome of Israel an earthly or worldly Kingdome, an earthly or worldly Temple, an earthly or worldly People, and the King an earth∣ly King, who in and over all that Kingdome, Temple, and People, could require only earthly bedience: but the Kingdome of Christ, now is an heavenly Kingdome, not of this world; his Temple, Tabernacle, House, People, all heavenly, and spirituall: and the King Christ Jesus, a King re∣quiring spiritual obedience; to whom obedience ought to be willing and cheerefull, not voluntary and forced. Nay, should the Magistrate by his power bring his people to truth, and they walke in an outward conformity to the trut, and y in the professi∣on thereof, in obedience to the Magistrates power, either for fear or love; shall they be saved? no they shall not, but they only whom the love of God constraines to obedience, shall be accepted: The Magistrate being then unable to make men offer acceptable sacrifices to God, will he (whe∣ther Persons will or no) make them bring unacceptable sacrifice to God? surely the Magistrate herein will not please God. It was not long since, that the Magistrates compelled men to kneele at the Sacrament, to bow at the name of Iesus, at the alter, with many other will worships; as crssing their Children, joyning in the service book, &c. Had the things been law∣full, they had been abominable to the Persons that did them, if in their consciences, they had been ulawfull. But the things being unlawfull, and the Magistrate compelling them too, did he not compell them to sin against their conscieces? and those that would preserve their conscien∣ces, and departed from evill, were they not made a prey and ruined? If the Magistrate have not power to rule the conscience, in the least things, which are in their own nature indifferent, Rom. 14.23. As to
command a man to eat meate, or weare clothes, of the lawfunesse where∣of he doubts; then hath he not power to command mens consciences in the greatest things, as the choyce of his religion. And if his magistrate or state have this power, then all foregoing and following magistraes have the same; then had Queene Mary power to compel her sbjects to go to Msse, and if they refused, she might burne them; and who knows what Magistrates in following times may produce, or what heir religion may bee? Neither let any man though at present sit∣ting t the ste, think that how ever things go he shall have his principles sasfied: for reflect but upon the Arian controvercy, in the course of hi∣story afer Constantines time; how men potent in state were in a moment degradd. Hw great a man was Cyprian, yet dyed a Marter, bcause he would not worship the Gods at the Magistrates command. Hyppotlitus as Puetius repr s, to be torne in peecs by horses. Was not Athansius Bishop of Alexri, having sffred many treacheryes of the Arrians, forced o fly to the mpror Costns, and after his death was driven away againe: was not Chrysostom Bshop of Constantinople, by the envie and calumny of Thophilu of Alxndria, banisht into Armenia, by the com∣mand of the Emperour cadius and not being at rest there, his enemies procured a further banishmēt, till they got his life at length in banishmen. These and many more lost lives and liberies, from the commands of Magi∣strates, who being in great degree, times turned against them in a moment. Are not the Marian dayes and Episcopall banishments fresh in our me∣mories, because we would no woship the Images that they set up. How often did they compell persons to ea the Lords supper with doubting consciences, nay against their consciences, and so made tem ea unwor∣thily, to their owne judgement, by kneeling, bowing; and being con∣strained to practise against conscience, in time lost all conscience. Truely can the Magistrate or State, prove that we may obey them in the things that they command in point of religion, without the ever∣lasting destruction of Soule and body then let us for ever be branded, if we refuse to obey, but if they cannot, that rule remaines everlasting, that we must obey; God rather then men: and so much the more as the Ma∣gistrate is set over us only as men, not as we are Christians, but onely by accident; the bond betwixt Magistrate and subiect being essentially civill; but religious, accidentally only. To conclude, with the word of a late writer, considering God is not pleased with unwilling worshippers, Christian societyes bettered, nor the worshippers themselves neither, but the plaine contrary in all three; the saying of the wise King of Poland (Stephen by name) seemeth approveable; that it is one of the three things
God hath kept in his own hands, to urge the conscience this way, and to cause a man to professe a religion, by working it first in his heart. Further, whereas Mr. BLAKE, Pag. 36. Distinguishes of inconve∣niencies, and makes a greater, and a lesse, and that the lesser may be borne to avoid greater. Reply. The allegation is not of inconveniencies, but of mischiefes, the particulars in the assumption, alledged are not only inconveniencies, but mischiefes; yea such, which so far as I apprehend (with submission to bet∣ter judgements) tend unavoidably to ruine the Churches, as will appear in examining the particulars. Mr. BLAKE Pag. 36. Excepts against the first mischiefe, viz. That Infants baptisme fils the Church with rotton members, to which he an∣swereth; Pag. 36. That he and his, find not by experience, rottennesse of members by our way prevented; and eagerly breakes out in charging heavily, not any person, but almost the whole, of some newformed con∣gregations. Reply. For secret rottonnesse, that is only knowne to God, for scanda-rottennesse I am perswaded it is a notorious untruth. Mr. BLAKE to the 2. Mischiefe viz. Paedobaptisme, confounds the world and the Church together; he saith, just nothing in effect, Pag. 37. To the 4. Mischiefe, wicked persons rest in their infants baptisme. Mr. BLAKE, so will they in their baptisme, received at the age of Magus. Reply. But do Persons rest in such sottish ignorance, and open prophane∣nesse in the one, as in the other? To the 5. viz. Infants baptisme is a nest-egge to traditions. Mr. PLAKE, Bellarm. When he is to deale against Anabaptists, can prove it from Scriytures. Reply. It is a knowne refuge for Papists, and popishly inclined, and cannot be denyed; for your saying, I quote Bellarmine, with as good a conscience, as Bellarmine wrote. Your office was to judge of the cause in hand, and not of the conscience of a person you know not, Rom. 14.4. Who art thou that judgest another mans Servant? To the 6. It fills the conscience with scruples; as some question, whe∣ther they were ever baptized? Mr. BLAKE to this saith, with as good reason as Paul might question whether he were circumcised, Pag. 39. Reply. Not so, for circumcision made a visible marke, which baptisme in infancie doth not. Mr. BLAKE, Pag. 40. is offended at this. But that which causeth most scruple, is about the formall cause that intights persons to baptisme: to
which he saith, God is one party in the Covenant, the Believer and his seed is the other; when the believer assents to the promise with a faith dogmaticall, so as to make profession, he and his are interessed in the priviledge, Pag, 40. No where hath God made a promise to be the God of believers and there seed, but promised so only to Abraham and his seed. Reply. Seeing you say God is one party in the Covenant, and the belie∣ver and his seed is the other; if you meane an inward covenant, or the Co∣venant of Grace, wherein Salvation is promised, and the Believer and his seed are one party in that; how come they to fall away? doth God fall from his promise, or the childe fall from Grace? If you meane only, an externall dispensation of this Covenant, and that though infants are not in the externall Covenan, yet they are in the exter∣nall dispensation of it; To this I answer, 1. Its a grosse errour, to thinke the signes of the new Covenant, viz. Baptisme and Supper, to be outward dispensations of the Covenant; this new Covenant is wholly an inward thing, lying betwixt the Trinity and a believing soule; there is but one way of dispensing this inward Cove∣nant, viz. the spirit of Christ applying the blood of Christ to the soule; and baptisme is a signe hereof. 2. There can be no outward dispensation of an uncertaine thing; now its uncertaine of any individuall infant, whether he be in the new cove∣nant. 3. As it was not being in Covenant gave right to circumcisiō for any exter∣nall dispensation of it, for Noah, Adam, Lot, & Abel, had the same covenant, yet was there no externall dispensation of it, for want of a command; so it is not being in Covenant makes a person a fit subject of Baptisme, but profession of life joyned with profession of words, Acts 8.37. Heb. 10.23. 4. Its no where said in the new Testament, that where parents are in Covenant with God, their children shall be in the externall dispensation of the same, much lesse is it said, where parents are only in externall dis∣pensation of the covenant, their children shall be in the same. Now whereas Mr. BLAKE seemes to make the formall cause of bap∣tisme, to be the Believers assenting to the promise, with a dogmaticall faith; so to make profession. Answ. If he understand profession of life and words, we assent thereto; and this being acknowledged to be the formall cause of the baptisme, doth wholly cut off Infants; and no other formall cause doth he assigne upon demand.
Mr. Blake, p. 41. Endeavoureth to excuse this mischief, that infants bap∣tisme makes no jar betwixt the doctrines laid down by the learned; making it a signe or seal of forgivenesse of sins, of ingrafture with Christ, and the pre∣sent dispensation of it to infants; of which we have no ground of their forgive∣nesse and ingrafture with Christ, seeing many, if not most, grow up and prove wicked. This, Mr. Blake excuseth by a distinction, p. 4.42. There is, saith he, in baptisme two parts; an outward, and an inward, and a double benefit proportionably answering: First outward, which is initiation into Church society. Secondly an inward benefit, which is the blood and spirit of Christ, with the fruits and effects both of justification and sanctification; of which infants are capable by the immediate work of God: And hence he thinketh, he takes of all jarring herein. Reply. The question is not about the parts and benefits of baptisme, but about the right of dispensation; Seeing that baptisme is a signe of forgivenesse of sins, whether it be well done to administer it to those, of whose forgivenesse of sins we have not the least ground to be perswaded. But whereas Mr. Blake seems to affirm, that baptisme is a signe of some externall thing, viz. Initiation into Church-societie, and infants are capable of that, in the perswasion of any administrator of baptisme, though he have no ground to think their sins par∣doned. Answ. The matter of Churches in Scripture being Saints; 1 Cor. 14.33. 1 Cor. 1.2. how can infants be capable of initiation into Church-societie? Especially, seeing the ground of all society with the Churches of Christ in fel∣low membership, is a presupposed communion that those persons have in Christ, and his death; whereupon they are taken into membership, to remem∣ber the said benefits. Therefore none ought to have the outward part in bap∣tisme, and so consequently no initiation into Church society, but they that up∣on some grounds are supposed to have the thing signified; which Infants cannot. Mr. Blake p. 42. setteth upon the 9th. mischief, viz. Infants baptisme produceth many absurdities: Ar first, it puts Infants in a state of remission of sins before calling. To which he answers, I had thought neither you nor we, had believed such an opus operatum in baptisme, as thus to work grace and remis∣sion of sins: It presupposes indeed a capacity (you would say a capability) of such grace in Infancy. Reply. But is it not absurd, to presuppose all infants in a state of remission of sins,rsu om∣ disputa∣onis inci∣t a defi∣io. as they do (or ought to do) that administer baptisme to Infants, which is so much more absurd, because the persons were never capable of any ex∣ternall calling. Hence, its necessary for me to set down what baptisme is; and will describe
it no otherwise, then the famousest Divines have done and do generally in their books; and I could wish Mr. Blake had done so. Baptisme is a signe of our fellowship with Christ, in his death, buriall, and resurrection, Rom. 6.3, 4. Col. 2.12. Of our putting on of Christ, Gal 3.27. Of remission of sns in his blood, Acts 22.16. And the answer of a good conscience issuing therefrom, 1 Pet. 3.21. That as the person is buried in wa∣ter, so the sins of that person are deemed to be buried in the death of Christ, Rom. 6, 3, 4. Col. 2.12. I wish Mr. Blake would define, or at least describe baptisme, it would cleer many controversies. 2. Absurdity, It makes them visible members of Christs Church, before calling; contrary to 1 Cor. 1.2. To this Mr. Blake saith, if you mean effectuall calling, according to pur∣pose, there are many such among your own baptized ons. Reply. The absurdity is, that they are made members, before any manner of calling appear to the Administrator or Church, which is contrary to Christs Commission, and Apostolicall practice, who first called persons to faith and repentance, Acts 2.38. and then after baptized them. 3. Absurdity, Paedobaptisme upholds a Nationall Church. Mr. Blake saith, tell me how there can be a nation of Disciples, and not a Nationall Church. Reply. It upholds a Nationall Church, because if that were taken away, a nationall Church would fall down, for it is hereby that all the Nations become (Pseudo-Christians, many of them) Christians, not from any Nationall multi∣plication of Disciples. In the old Testament, there was a Nationall Church, Deut. 16.16. all the Tribes of Israel were three times to appear at Jerusalem, there was an high Priest for the whole Nation, and sacrifices to be administred by him, Lev. 16.1. to 29. and with him other Priests and Elders, to whom appeales should be brought, Deut. 17.8. to 13. 4. Absurdity, by this Infant-baptisme, all are compelled to become Chri∣stians whether they will or no; to which Mr. Blake saith, compulsion is a∣gainst heart, and Infants themselves have no heart rising against their bap∣tisme, p. 43. Reply. If they have an heart-rising against Christianity, when they come to yeares of understanding, its enough to prove the vanity of Infants baptisme; for the people of Christ ought to be a willing people, Psal 110.3. And as at other times, so especially at their baptisme, Acts 2.41. 5. Absurdity, many by Infants baptisme, are received into communion of baptisme, who are excluded from communion in the supper; whereas the communion in baptisme, is one and the same. To this p. 44. Mr. Blake saith, what warrant to deny a baptized person the Lds Supper, who is qualified with knowledge, and manifests no scandall in his life.
Reply. Nay show what warrant, to deny any baptized person the Lords supper; if they were ignorant or scandalous, why did you baptie them? if there be a samenesse or communion in baptisme, and in the sup∣per, as you confesse; then those that are received to the one, ought to be to the other: is not baptisme as well as the supper, a signe of communion with Christ in his death, buriall, and resurrection; and consequently there is an absurdity (I might call it a prophanation) in infants baptisme, in that hereby thousands are received, who neither can, nor ought to be received to the supper. Some other absurdityes Mr. BLAKE reckons up, which because he gives to some of them no answer; as absurdity the 8. and to the rest no materiall answer, I will not spend time about them. Whereas I had alledged, that delaying of baptisme till persons believe, brings benefits: Storm of Antichrist, Page 22. As first, Hereby the matter of the Churches will be right, whiles none but Saints in profession will be admitted members, and without a right mat∣ter, there will never be a comfortable reformation: to which Mr. BLAKE saith. The experiment of the present and former age, hath found it far otherwise. Reply. Compare the matter of the Churche, throughout all the Pa∣rishes in England, where infants baptisme is received, with the matter of those Churches where it is ejected, and the experiment will appeare just as I have layd it downe. Against the 2. Benefit viz. That Persons being delayd, would be care∣full to get knowledge, that so they may partake of church priviledges, and without which, they cannot partake of them; and to addresse their lives according to the rule ef Christianity; Mr. BLAKE saith, that it would rather provoke them to despise knowledge, and persecute them, who against the free charter of heaven, aod prescription of all ages, deny them the right of priviledge. Reply. Though they have their infant baptisme, yet multitudes that have it do, both despise knowledge, and persecute the Saints of God, yea even those that members with them in the same Church: and they would do no more, if they were kept off from baptism. Against the 3. Benefit, viz. That Christians would have a more perfect understanding of baptisme, which being administred to infants, seemes be under a cloud: To this Mr. BLAKE saith, that this known, and were it not for the cloudes I draw over, it would be more cleere. Reply. When the Scripture maketh baptisme a signe of our fellowship
with Christ in his death, buriall, and resurrection, that as our bodyes are buried or washt in water, so our sinns are buried in Christs death, or washt in his blood. Rom. 6.3.4. Col. 2.12. 1 Pet. 3.21. Heb. 10.22. Now you shall make it a charter, whereby all infants of believers are christianised by their fathers Christianity; is not this a clouding of bap∣tisme, a signe of Covenant, holinesse of beleevers and their issue, Page 62. an hereditary priviledge of birth, conveyed from ancestors to posterity, Page 74. A holinesse which the parents transmits to the Child, the ances∣stor to posterity, Page 81. An intitlement to outward priviledges. Birth-Privil. Page 14. And elsewhere expressing it, as if it were a signe or seale of the Covenant wherein salvation is promised. Against the 5. Benefit, viz. Deferring of baptisme would take off Scru∣ples from Godly Ministers, who scruple the giving of the Lords supper to ungodly civill persons, and not without cause. Being, 1. They beare false witnesse to them, asserting the body of Christ to be given for them. 2. Give them a knife, wherewith they know they will out their own thoats, now if these should professe the faith in words, and not deny it in deeds, before they were baptized, by vertue of the same profession, they might be admitted to the supper, with out any more adoe. To this Mr. BLAKE saith, if the deliver of the Sacrament to any that unworthily receive it, rises to the guilt which your language expresses; all ministeriall dispensation of it, in a Church that is most right in the world, will prove the greatest of snares, Page 46. Reply. I know no tye from Christ, to bind Ministers so to give the bread and cup; muchlesse to use any such words, as to say the body or blood of Christ, which was given for thee M.N. And how so deliverig, it will arise to a lesse degree of guilt unto them, I should be glad to be in∣formed, we have no example of Christ or the Apostles, that so delivered the bread or wine; Christ only said, take, eat, 1 Cor. 11.23. Which they might do after the blessing, without any delivery of it to them: and in my apprehension. Ministers have a great snare in so delivering it, which is the greater, if they use such words, viz. The body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for them. For its possible for a person to have a Church right to Ordinances, and yet have no true union with Christ; yea, the Mi∣nister may greatly, suspect so much by him, and therefore cannot he comfortably say such words, viz. The body of our Lord, &c. For your saying, Paul was baptized by a Minister, it is rather presumed. then proved. Whereas Mr. BLAKE adds, Page 47. We read of single persons of fa∣miyes
of thousands, baptized upon the first profession to beleeve; we read not of one of them denyed, nor an interrogatory put to them, concerning their personall qualfication. R p y. We contend for no more but a profession of word and life, we meddle not with internall qualifications, knowne only to God; howbeit chariy teaches us to judge persons who make a godly profession, to be so inwardly qualified, till we know the contrary. Next, Mr. BLAKE sets upon my tenth Argument viz. That Infants bap∣tisme was taken up, upon unsound and erronous principles, as that it did wash away originall sin, which I proved from Origen. Mr. BLAKE to this saith: I pray did Origen speake by way of prophe∣sy, upon what ground baptisme of Infants, many yeares after his time should be received? In the nex page but one. You say some Christians out of worldly wisdome, and a wearinesse to suffer, you doubt not about the time of Austin, or a little befor, brought the baptisme of infants into the Church: now Origen was 200. yeares Austins ancient, I pray you lay your hand upon your heart, whether you contend not more for an opini∣on, then for truth. Origen with you is a competent witnesse, that baptis∣me of infnts was brought into the Church upon corrupt grounds, but he must be no witnesse, that it was at all in being in his time. Reply. I have layd my hand upon my heart, and assure you, hat I con∣tend oly for truth, for bptisme of infants bing in Oregens time. I grant it as a tradition, but what is this to your practc, who conend for it as a dvne birth-priviledges, and part of Christ possession, which he houlds in his heriag of infants, as in your title Page: I reconcile that seming contradition you would make, vz. That abou Austins time, or a little be∣fore, some would have gone abut to have brought it in by divine right, when in Origens time it was esteemed only a tradition. I cite corrupti∣ons comparatively, so long as they are acknowledged humane; but when once they come to b of divine right, is time then to oppose them I count it not to have been, till it was urged by divine right, yet you your selfe confesse, Page 51. That Austin saith The custome of the Church in the baptisme of infants, is by no meanes to be despised; and call it a tradition of the Apostles. It was but the other day we cast out unwritten traditi∣ons, and now must we ressume them, because we find them in some speeches of Augustin orEspec∣ally, seeing that origall of Origen is lost, and he translator confesseth, he added many things of his own; so hat Eramus, in his censures of his houe on eviticus, saith; a man cannot be certaine w eter he read Ruffinus or Origen; the learned puts his commntary on the Romans where he calls Infants bap∣tism a tradition, amongst his counterfeit works; as being much sophisticated by Ruffinus. M.S. of Mr. T. Origen, and yet whether the phrase of calling in∣fants
baptisme a tradition of the Apostles, hath not crept into the write∣ing of the fathers by the Romanists, I much question: seeing it is so like their tenent at this day; and for your authority of Austin, which you seem so much to magnifie, Lod. Vives, a man well skild in Austin, beleeves no such matter; for in his annotations upon the 27. Chap. of the first booke, de civ. Dei (as Mr. Den cites him against Dr. Featly) he hath these words, viz. That of old it was the custome to baptize unlesse they were of full age, and did desire baptisme in their owne persons, and did understand what it was to be baptized. Further, Mr. BLAKE P. 50. bringeth in 5. Benefits upon Infants bap∣tisme: as first, as soone as capacity serves, they are taught to know even by their baptism, to whom they belong, what master they are to serve, and in what scoole they are to be trained. Reply. How can this bee, seeing there is no visible signe to teach them, unlesse opinion or traditionary relation can so teach; and yet few have both of these, some not one; and if their infants baptisme teach them what master to serve, the greatest part of baptized persons are little bet∣tered hereby, in that assoone as they come to understanding, they chuse to serve the devill and their lust. For Mr. BLAKES 2d. Benifit, viz. A necessity is seen to get the know∣ledge of Christ, and walke in his wayes. Reply. Nay many persons can see no necessity of getting knowledge, being they are Christians already; and will your divinity teach you to baptize persons into a faith, they are ignorant of; and for the necessity of persons from their infant baptisme to walke in Christs wayes, we see the cleane contrary; in that multitudes whom you deeme baptized in infan∣cy, live such unholy lives, nay they being taken into covenant with their parents, and this Covenant being the Covenant of Grace, they are apt to be carelesse of holinesse, being they are from their infancy in Covenant. Mr. BLAKES 3d. Benefit is; A delight is wrought in those, in whose communion they are bred; being debard from society with Christians, it is the way to bring them to maligne them; but being taken into them, It must needs occasion delight in them. Reply. When God workes a new nature, then do we delight in the company of Christians, and this we do whether baptized or not; Associa∣tion with Christians, doth not simply breed delight, for Christ saith, five shall be divided in one house, three against two, and two against three; outward communion can never be delightfull, till there be first a com∣munion of spirits.
Mr. BLAKES fourth benefit is, the aggravation of their sin in the Mi∣nistery, by reason of the favour they receive from God, the society ino which they are incorporated, and the reall Covenant into which they are entred, in case their conversation answer not their profession. Reply. As deep aggravations may be against them, in case they go on in sin, and remain unbaptised, Eph. 2.12. sorely did John threaten unbaptized persons, Matth. 3.7. Mr. Blakes fifth benefit is; Parents see a strong engagement to bring them up for Christ, when they have dedicated them to him, and put them into the fellowship of those that are his Saints and members. Reply. The cursed condition wherein children are by nature, in that they are children of wrath, is engagement enough for godly parents to bring up their children for Christ, and those Parents upon whom this motive worketh not, nothing will work; that doth perswade so much, that nothing can seem to make an addition. Next, Mr. Blake pag. 52. comes to set upon my last argument, drawn from antiquity, wherein he goes about to weaken my authority, drawn from the ancient Fathers; As Iustin Martyr, Tertullian, &c. Where I shall de∣sire the Reader, onely to compare what I have written, with Mr. Blakes an∣swer thereto. And for his excuse of Mr. M. in that he alledged a spurious book of Iustin Martyrs, I suppose Mr. M. is of more conscience then to justi∣fie it, yet will Mr. Blake seem to face out Mr. M. his mistake. And whereas I desired a proof for Infants baptisme out of Iustin Martyr, Ireneus, Origen, Clemens Alexandrinus, or Tertullian, Mr. Blake hath nothing to say, say∣ing; That Origen called it a Tradition. I have plentifully proved the practice of believers, from the most ancient Fathers, Storm. of Antich. p. 27. part. 2. And there being nothing brought by Mr. Blake, nor any others truly, for the baptisme of Infants, I will not tyre my self or Reader, in a further producement of humane authority, having done it so largely in my former book, and the same remaining still unanswered for substance: As the Reader may see if he compare what I have there alledged, and Mr. Blake his answer thereto. By examining his Exceptions, the Treatise would swell too big.
A REPLY to the Second Part. INTITULED, A Vindication of the Birth-Priviledge. First, Mr. BLAKE makes a digressions, and contends from a small occasion to make a long discourse, to prove an universall visible Church: (and be∣ing offended with me, that I explode it as a Monster) he goes about to prove it by reasons. As first, the confession of the Churches called Anabaptists. Se∣condly, that many prticulars make up a generall; many particular men make up a multitude of men. Thirdly, in that God sets forth in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, 1 Cor 12.28. This is not each particular Church, but the Church universall. Fourthly, 1 Cor. 15.9. from the Apo∣stles speech, when he saith, He persecuted the Church of God: his spleen was not carried against one particular Church, but the whole Church. Fifthly, from 1 Cor. 10.32. Give no offence to the Church of God: no one particular Church is there deciphered, but under the notion of Church, universally all Churches. Reply. First, to your first: Its a wonder you will confirm your Posi∣tion, from the confession of Churches, or persons; elsewhere in your Book so stigmatized. But I suppose, the confession speakes of that spirituall Kingdome and Church Synechdochichally, onely as it is part of the body of Christ. 2. To your second, viz. That many particulars make up a generall, many particular men make up a multitude of men; therefore many visible Churches make up one visible Church. You may as well reason, many women make up one woman; and with more probability, many Ministers make up one Bi∣shop. To your third, 1 Cor. 12.28. God hath set forth in the Church, first A∣postles; that is, not in each particular Church, but the Church univer∣sall. Reply. Its a Sinechdoche of the species, the singular for the plurall, in the
Church, for in the Churches; So Eph. 3.21. Unto him be glory, in the Church. i. e. in the Churches. So Jam. 5.14. Let him send for the Elders of the Church. To your fourth, 1 Cor. 15.9. I persecuted the Church; which was not one particular Church, but the whole. Reply. PAUL meanes that part of the church, or of the body of Christ, which was here on earth, which is called , church, or a company cal∣led out, in opposition to them that were yet in the state of nature, weltring in sin. He speakes not of churches, as visible; of which the question is. To your fifth, 1 Cor. 10.32. Give no offence to the Church of God. The answer to the third and fourth may serve here: though there be some hypo∣crites, yet may they be said to be of the church, as a glasse eye, a woodden leg, or wen on the face, may be said to be the body. These things being so, and you declaring pag. 65. that you enter not upon the controversie concerning an universall church politicall, and yet maintain∣ing, that there is a church abstracted from all consideration of single congrega∣tions, that receives Ministeriall gifts, and such an universall church; into the priviledges of which, Believers are received. You disclaiming an universall church politicall, and no other church being possibly assigneable, save the company of Believers, from Adam to the end of the world; your church is a meer Chymera, or Monster, concerning which the Word is silent. Concerning Presbyters being called, the Church, if any such thing be (though divers of the learned oppose) it is only as they have a power from the Church, delegated to them, or representatively, as the Parliament are called the King∣dome, because they have the power of the kingdom cōmitted into their hands. Reasons why there is no Vniversall Church. 1. Because it must have an universall service and worship; That must be∣long to all, as the Jewish Altar and sacrifices; they must have universall Offi∣cers, as High-Priest, and Levite of old, and the Pope in these times to be the head thereof, and some universall Officer. 2. Because no man hath seen, nor can see such a church. 3. Were there any such universal visible church, then Christ should be the head of it; but Christ cannot be the head of it, because there should be many hypo∣crites therin; to whom Christ cannot be a head to convey influence of comfort. Further, whereas Mr. BLAKE avouched a covenant-holinesse, in his Birth Priviledge; I answered, there was no other covenant with the Gentiles now, but that which was to be covenanted before the world, viz. That eternall life should be by believing in Christ. Mr. BLAKE saith, though the covenant be but one, yet may there be se∣verall wayes of dispensations of it; it may be given to the Jewes, shadowed under earthly promises, outward types and shadowes, — This very cove∣nant was sealed in the Sacrament of the Jewes, held forth in these types, and
vailed in the promises of Canaan, and no covenant essentially, differing from this page 66. Rejoynd. The question is not about the dispensation of the covenant, which formerly was dispensed in types, and sacrifices, but new is dispen∣sed in the history, but about the covenant. The whole scope of both your bookes for the most part, is to prove another covenant, that is an inright∣ment to outward priviledges, which though you conceal the distincti∣on, yet any man may see your aym. If this covenant of grace were viewed in the Jewish types, and no other, then any covenant inrighting to out∣ward priviledges must needs fall downe. Mr. BLAKE. There must be a way of conveyance of this covenant to the Jews in their dayes, to the Gentles in these times, other wise there would be no covenant at all. God had no immediate intercourse with a∣ny people, to strike Covenant with them, his way of covenanting, is his Ordinances, these ordinances are therefore called the covenant, Rom. 9.4. As containing, and conveying the covenant; they are the outward part of the covenant, and right and title to this outward part of it, in the Church is hereditary, which your onenesse of covenant doth not overthrow. Rejoynder. Is a box that conveys a jewell, the outward part of the Iewel? is a conduit pipe that conveys the water, the outward part of the water? yes, with as good reason as the Ordinances of God, through which God conveys his covenant in Christs blood to the soul, are the outward part of this covenant of Christs blood conveyed to the soule; your saying, because the Ordinances convey the covenant, they are the outward part of the covenant, is a proposition that destroys it self, as if you should say, Arons pot, Ex. 16.33. which kept the Manna for the generations of Israel, was the outward part of the Manna. 2. Suppose Gods Ordinan∣ces, as Baptism, Supper, preaching of the word, were the outward part of the covenant, how doth it follow, that right and title hereto is hereditary, seeing that not only particular persons, but even from whole Churches these Ordinances have been removed; as Ephesus, from which the candle∣stick is so far removed, that I have been informed from a learned man, that was lately in Ephesus, that there is not so much as one therein that beares witnesse of the name of Christ. If Ordinances be hereditary, how came all the Easterne Christians to lose them, and Mahumitanisme come in their stead, except we should groundlesly and beyond belief, suppose that all those Christians dyed without heirs. For your saying, the Ordinances are called his Covenant, for which you cite, Rom. 9.4. To whom pertaines the Co∣venants; the Apostle sayes, Covenants not Covenant, by covenants are meant the tables of the covenant, by a metonimy, unlesse we understand
the two Covenants mentioned, Heb. 8.7.8. Heb. 9.1. Called a better and a worse, a first, and a second, or the renewings of that one Covenant of Grace, which was made to Abram, and renued to the severall Patriarks. Next, P. 67. Mr. BLAKE taxes me for saying, this incision in the root Abram, of us Gentiles in the Iewes stead, by a visible constitution, is meerly imaginary; his reason is, because then the Apostles dispute upon this subject should be imaginary; for that he speakes of the body of the Jews, and the body of the Gentiles called by the ordinances. Rejoynd. What can any such incision in the roote Abram by visible constitution bee, but imaginary? seeing only the naturall branches that had the signe of circumcision, were planted in him only by visible con∣stitution; and in taken thereof, they had a visible signe to be knowne by, viz. The cutting off the foreskin of the flesh. But we Gentiles are planted in him in a spirituall manner, as he is a spirituall Father, like unto God. To use the Apostles expression, Rom. 4. As we are part of the spirituall seed; for all the relation betwixt Abram and Gentiles is wholly inward, and spirituall, being he, as a common father, believed the promises for all believers. For your saying, the Apostle speaks of the body of the Jews, and the Body of the Gentiles, called by the Ordinances; I suppose you meane, all the Gentiles that hear the sound of the Ordinances; that these are planted in the roote Abram, in the Jews stead, I deny it for this reason; because Abrams Fathership to us Gentiles, is in respect of faith only, not in respect of any outward priviledges, see Rom. 4.11. Further, whereas I said, Abram stands as a roote two wayes, 1. Visi∣bly, to the Jews that discend of him. 2. Invisibly, to the believers among the Jews and Gentiles, Rom. 4.17. It is by vertue of this latter incision, that not the Gentiles, but the believers among the Gentiles, are grafted in. Mr. BLAKE to the former saith, Abram, Isaac, Iacob, Iesse, David, and all within the promise, by vertue of the Covenant made with them, are an holy root, and convey that Covenant holinesse, to all that are their branches. Abram is a first leading roote, P. 67. Rejoynd. If this were true, then abundance the Turkes wose pro∣genitours were christians, and in covenant with God, should have a Co∣uenant holinesse. 2. Abram alone, Rom. 11.16. (if any other roote besides Christ can be understood) is the roote; if the roote be holy, so are the branches; Its a grand errour to thinke every believer to bee invested in the same priviledge that Abram was, and that Abram was only the first leading roote; because it was alotted to Abram and to no other believer, to be a root or spirituall father of many Nations, Rom. 4.17.
To the Second, Mr. BLAKE saith, P. 67. The distinction of Gentiles ana believing Gentiles, might have been spared. Rejoynd. Not very well, seeing that the scope of your dispute, ayms at a covenant holinesse of a believing Nation, by which the infans of that Nation may be baptized; neither is it in any one Nation, but I suppose you would bring in all then nations where the name of Christ is in any pro∣fession, whether true or false: for Pag. 67. You tell us, that the body of the Gentiles called by the Ordinances, are planted into Abram, whereas not Gentiles, but belivers among the Gentiles, or called out from them, are Abrams seed, Apoc. 5.9. Thou hast redeemed us to God, by thy blood, out of every kinred, and tongue, and people, and Nation. For that place of, Rom. 11.16. Which you so much beat upon, it be∣longs only to the Jewes, and Abram in that relation, stands ingaged only as a roote, and first fruit, in that place unto the Jews, of whose con∣versition, in the end of the world, together with her sanctity, the Apostle prophesies. Mr. BLAK, P. 86. Abram is to be considered as a man, so he is a root to all discending from him, but no holy roote; so he was the roote of the Hagarens, Edomites, and all the line of Keturah. Rejoynd. Abram was as much a holy root to these, as he was to any Jew whatsoever (saving the promised seed) for these by command from God, were to be circumcised as well as any of Isaacs issue. Ishmael was circumcised, and so no doubt were his posterity, by command from God, so was Esau circumcised; we cannot thinke holy Isaac would have any of his seed uncircumcised, the like judge we of Ahram towards the Sons by Keturah. Mr. BLAKES 2. Abram is to be considered as a justified man, this Iustification is a personall priviledge, not communicable, nor discend∣able. Rejoynd. No man ever affirmed it, for we know the just must live by his own faith, yet that doth not hinder, but that root, Rom. 11.16 Be∣ing Christ (as I proved by divers reasons yet unanswered) believers may be grafted, and yet Abrams Iustification not desend; but should we say believers are grafted into Abram, in respect of participation, of that Son∣ship, and spirituall priviledges and promises, which he as a common fa∣ther received for all believers, what absurdity will follow therefrom? es∣pecially, seeing the Apostle seemeth to say so much, Rom. 11.20. Well, be∣cause of unbeliefe, they were broken off, and thou standest by faith, &c. Mr. Blake P. 68. 3. Abram is to be distinguisht as a professor of faith or worshipper of God, so he is a root or first fruit in this relation; the Co∣venant
made with Abram, Isaac, Iacob, intituled all their naturall seed, and all that professe the like faith, in that royall priviledge of Gods own peculiar people, all professors of the same truth; which Scripture stiles by the name of believers, to the end of the world, are within the Verge of this covenant, as receiving a priviledge communicable and discendable. Rejoynd. Then First, it intitled persons to be Gods peculiar people, when God had declared their rejection, as Ishmael, and Esau, and all the Hagga∣rens and Edomites, for these were Abrams naturall seed, and profest the same faith. 2. Where doth the Scripture prove your distinction, that Abram, Isaac, and Jacob, as professors of faith, and worshippers of God, intitles all their na∣turall seed in the priviledge of Gods peculiar people, if they do, then do they intitle the Jewes, that are now in a state of rejection, to be Gods peculiar peo∣ple, who are enemies to the truth of God: These are Scripturelesse dictates. 3. Then it intitled all the ten Tribes to be Gods peculiar people, not onely in the time of the Calve-worship, which lasted about 200. years; but after, when they were caried away by Salmanazar, and never returned. 4. If Abram, Isaac, and Jacob, as worshippers of God, could intitle all their naturall seed to be Gods peculiar people, then other godly men, wor∣shippers of God, can do the like; seeing there's no difference betwixt Isaac, and Jacob, and other godly men; and so all the posteritie of Believers (many whereof are infamously wicked) should be Gods peculiar people. For your Arguments to prove infallibly that Abram, Isaac, and Jacob, and not Christ Jesus, are the first fruits and lump, and their postetity and Belie∣vers to be the root and branches; how ever the thing should be, if it were granted that Abram were the first fruit and root, yet cannot we conclude, that Isaac, Jacob, and every godly man, are first fruits and lump; for the reasons aforesaid. But were it granted, that not onely Abram, but Isaac, and Jcob, and the Jewish Patriarks, were these first fruits and lump, (for there is not the least title in the 16. verse of the Gentiles) yee should it onely follow that their root and branches should be holy? That is, those Jewes that flowed from them, and yet not all them neither, but onely those that should be cal∣led home at the fulnesse of the Gentiles comming in, Rom. 11.26. And so all Israel shall be saved: which is nothing to make Believers of the Gentiles or their posterity holy. And whereas, vers. 17. the Apostle speakes of some of the branches being broken off, that is, of the unbelieving Jewes, and of the Gentiles that were wilde Olive trees, grafted in amongst those Jewes, that were not broken off, and that these Gentiles with the remnant of these godly Jewes, did partake of the root and fatnesse of the Olive tree. I suppose the Apostle speakes of an
ingrafture, not in respect of Jewish Ordinances or constitutions, for so the Gentiles were not grafted or planted in with the Jews, but the believing Jews were grafted in with the Gentiles, into the new Ordinances of Christ in the Gospell, in which they partook of the fatnesse of the Olive tree. For the Olive tree to be the Jewish Church, and the fatnesse of it to be the privi∣ledges thereof; is far from my belief. I rather think it was Christ, and the fatnesse the benefits that flow from Christ, and the rather, because vers. 20. Paul speaking of this ingrafture of this wilde Olive, saith; Thou standest by Faith. For Mr. BLAKE'S Arguments to prove that the root is not CHRIST: First, because this root and branch in the Text, can be severed; but Christ and his branches cannot be severed: Therefore root and branch is not here Christ. The contrary appears, Joh. 15.2. Every branch in me that beareth not fruit, he taketh away; there are branches that may be severed from Christ. Secondly, the root, is that of which the whole body of the Jews were bran∣ches, but that whole nation were never branches of Christ. Answ. They might be branches externally, and yet be broken off; Esa. 5.7. The Vineyard of the Lord of Hostes are the house of Israel, and the men of Iudah his pleasant plant. Thirdly, that is the root and first fruits, which renders them beloved, though for present enemies to the Gospell; but ABRAM, Isaac, and Iacob, renders them thus beloved, Rom. 11.28. Answ. David rendred many of his posterity beloved, yet was he neither root nor first fruits to them; as it is no necessary consequence to say, I am lo∣ved for such a mans sake to get credit, therefore he is a root or first fruits, to me, in communicating to me wealth: So its no consequence to say, the elect Jews are loved of God soul-savingly, occasioned by a kinde affection GOD bore to their godly progenitors; therefore I am loved for the same forefathers in outward priviledges, yea in outward priviledges of having any Infants bapti∣zed; when the Word speaks not a tittle hereof. Besides, this onely is spoken of the Jews. For my three Arguments, that by the first fruit and lump are meant Christ, let the Reader see whether Mr. Blake answer them. I will onely mention the second, because there is nothing materiall spoken to the first and third. Which is, the root and branches, the first fruit and lump, must be of the same kinde; but ABRAM and his posterity are not of the same kinde, his posterity being many of them wicked; but Christ and his body-mysticall are of the same kinde, having the same graces, &c. Mr. Blake. So it is here, all are of the same faith and profession, all are hand-fasted to one and the same GOD in Religion; this holinesse the Text
holds forth, is the same in ABRAM and his posterity. Rejoynd. The contrary appears, in that the ten Tribes so long approved the Calve-worship, and were so far corrupted, that Hos. 4.15. the Lord com∣mands, Though thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend. Yea further, the Jews are bid not to go to Gilgal, nor to come up to Beth-haven, which were the places where the Calves stood. Mr. Blake p. 71. complains, this Argument was not answered, viz. The grand Birth-Priviledge of the Jews was to be an holy Nation, but this honour to be an holy Nation, is given to believing Christians, 1 Pet. 2.9. Ther∣fore Christians in this Birth-Priviledge, are equall to the Nation of the Jews. Answ. To answer further, I deny your proposition; their grand priviledge was, to have the Oracles of God among them, Rom. 3.2. What advantage hath the Jew? Much every way; but chiefly, that unto them were commit∣ted the Oracles of God. Besides, to be an holy nation, was no absolute pri∣viledge, but onely a conditionall; See Exod. 19.5, 6. If ye will obey my voyce, ye shall be unto me a kingdome of Priests, and an holy nation; sometimes they did obey Gods voice, and then they were an holy nation; sometimes they did not, and then they were a prophane Nation, to whom it was then said, Hosea 1.9. Ye are not my people, and I am not your God. Secondly, to your assumption; viz. That the honour to be an holy Nation, is given to believing Christians. Answ. True, to such Christians as are a royall Priesthood, who are called out of darknesse to his marvellous light, 1 Pet. 2.9. which had now obtained mercy of God, vers. 10. to whom Christ is precious, vers. 7. These in re∣spect of the distinct Lawes, whereby they live under the government of their King, the Lord JESUS, seperate from the rest of the world, are said to be an holy Nation; doth it follow therefore that Christians have this as a Birth-priviledge? Or that they have this priviledge as the Jews had it, who some∣times had it, sometimes fell from it? No, the condition of this holy Nation, being the Elect of God, and united in CHRIST, is unchangeable. Far is it removed from Mr. Blakes scope, that would make us dream we are a Belie∣ving nation as the Jews were, though the far greater part are visibly prophane, and discended from persons, as visible wicked and prophane as themselves. When you see a Nation of Believing Christians, to whom CHRIST is pre∣cious, &c. called out of darknesse into Gods marvellous light, then you may have some ground to call us a holy Nation; but never so long as persons Christianity is a forced work, and their lives so vicious as they are. Therefore I exhort Mr. Blake to desist, from thinking, that because the mysticall body of CHRIST is an holy Nation, to draw the same priviledge to any Nation under heaven, unlesse he give us some rule, whereby we may know in∣fallibly,
when a Nation is a Believing Nation: These kind of doctrins tend to nothing, but to make wicked men dreame of a groundlesse peace. Next, Mr. BLAKE Page 72, 73. Bids me speake without tergiversati∣ons, where I place infants in regard of Covenant relation, whether Jews by Birth as the text speakes, or else with sinners of the Gentiles. Answ. Doth the Apostle speake a word of faederall holinesse in that place? the Apostle speakes in the person of himselfe, Peter and Barnabas, and all other Jews of what age or sex soever, if able to understand: we know that as well our selves, as the sinfull Gentiles stand need to be justified by Christ, and knowing the inability of any of our legall servi∣ces, priviledges, or workes whatsoever, to make us righteous, we be∣lieve in Christ, that we may be justified by the faith of Christ. And further, that neither Gentles nor Jews, should be compelled to observe the Law, because no person living could be justified otherwise then by faith in Christ, Rom. 3.919. He calls himselfe and the other Jews by nature, to difference them from proselites, who were only Jews in affec∣tion. Or an argument from the greater, if we that have had such privi∣ledges stand need of Christs righteousnesse, much more others, sinners of the Gentles, who never had Gods law as we have had, Psal. 147.20, 21. This is the scope of the place, as we may see, Gal. 2.15.16. Now to answer your question, where we place infants, whether with Iews by birth, or else with sinners of the Gentiles. Answ. 1. The Apostle speakes not one word there of Infants. 2. Con∣cerning infants state, the Scripture speakes not in what condition they are, and where the word hath not a tongue to speake, we must not have an eare to heare. 3. We place Iewes by birth, and sinners of the Gentiles, and infants, in one and the same condition, for so the Apostle places them at large in that disputation, Rom. 1. Also cap. 2. and cap. 3. When Iews and Geniles were one lifted up against another, he concludes, Rom. 3.9. What then are we better then they? no in no wise, for we have before proved, both Iews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin; and verse 19. Every mouth is stopped, and all the world becomes guilty before God, and verse 23. All have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God; and in this condition are infants of Iews and Geniles, as they come into the world, children of wrath, Ephes. 2.2. Howbeit God through his free grace, may, and it is well to be hoped, doth, save some or all of them, through the satisfaction of Christ, which may be effectuall without be∣lieving, to persons not in abled to believe Mr. Blake. There are but two Kingdomes, Familyes, Cityes, House∣holds, Gods and the devils; if Infants be not of Gods familie, Kingdome, Houshold, then are they of the devils.
Answ. The visible Church being meant, many are not of this King∣dome, who yet are not of the devills, a Iobe, Lot; and many are of the Kingdome of the visible Church, who re of Satans Kingdome, as Ma∣gus. Mr. Blakes Reply. Weedes may be in the Garden, flowers in the Com∣mons. Rej. Your reply is unsatisfactory. But further to the Argument I answer, First, many there be that are not of Gods Family or Houshold of the vi∣sible Church, that are not of Satans Kingdome, God having elected them, will in time call them home, Ephe. 2.12. There have been in all ages a company of elect, uncalled ones; who hath been of neither of these King∣domes: the Theif on the crosse, Rahab, Iam. 2.25. who believed in Ie∣richo; the three wise men that came to worship Christ, were of neither these Kingdomes. Answer. To Mr. Blakes additionall arguments, brought to confirme the Birth-priviledge, and covenant holinesse of believers and their issues, Page 74. 1. If Abraham be a father in respect of Covenant, both of the circum∣cised, and those of the uncircumcision; then it followes, that this out∣ward Covenant holinesse hereditary, and a priviledge of birth, convey∣ed from ancestors, to posterity. But Abram is thus a father, in respect of Covenant to the circumcised, and those of the uncircumcision, Rom. 4.9 10. Ergo, We deny the consequence. And first let us open the place, Rom. 4.9, 10. Paul having showed that all believers are justified, the same way that Abraham was justified, from vers 1. to verse 9. an objection might b mad, vers 9. Abrahams ex∣ample wa particular, and therefore we can draw no generall doctrine from it, to which the Apostle begins to answer, that Abram is not to be considered as a particular person, but as the father of all believers, whe∣ther circumcised or uncircumcised. But it might be objected, Abram was a circumcised person, what is that to us Gentile? To this the Apostle answers, ver. 10. Faith was reckoned to Abram for righteousnesse, how was it then reckoned? when he was in circumcision, or in uncircumcision, not in circumcision but in uncircumcision, q. d. Peruse the history, and you shall finde, Abram had righteousnesse impu∣ted to him, before ever he was circumcised, viz. Anno 86. Gen. 16.16. Compared with cap. 15.6. But he was circumcised Anno. 99. Gen. 17.24. and Rom. 4.11. Having received the signe of circumcision, the A∣postle showes what the use of circumcision was to him; which was two∣fold.
First, to be a seal of the righteousnesse of the faith which he had, yet being uncircumcised; the meaning is, whereas God had promised that righteousnesse should be imputed to all them that believe, though not circumcised, verse 11. And to them also that are circumcised, walking in the steps of Abrams faith, verse 12. the promise being made to Abram, as father of all this believing seed, verse 16. He received circumcision, as a signe of this paternity or father-hood-ship; that this righteousnesse should not only bee to himself, but to all his believing seed, whether Jews or Gentiles, and no other; verse 11 12, 13. So that if you aske why Abram received circumcision, a seale of the righteousnesse of faith, when as other Jews received it as an obligation to keep the law. Gal. 5.3. Or at most to obliege them to circumcision of heart, it was (observe this finall cause) that he might be the father of all them that believe, though they be not circumcised, that righteousnesse might be imputed unto them, and the father of circumcision to them, who are not of the circumcission only, but also walke in the steps of the faith of our father Abram, which he had, being yet uncircumcised. So that Circumcision was a seale of the righteousnesse which Abram had, not in Persona Propria, but in Persona Relativa, as any one may see, if he seriously peruse, verse 11. and verse 16. and 17, It sealed unto him, not his owne personall righteousnesse, which he had long before, but the righteousnesse of all believers, whether Jews or Gentiles, which was promised to him as a publike father, Gen. 17.5. compared with Rom. 4.17. This being premised, in answering to the Argument, we deny the con∣sequence, viz. That though Abram be a father in respect of Covenant, both of the circumcised and uncircumcised, yet it followes not, that ei∣ther there should be any outward Covenant holinesse, or that it should be heriditary, or any Birth-Priviledge, should be conveyed from Ances∣tours to posterity,Abram's a father  the unci¦cumcise  as well  the cir∣cumcise  not as u¦circu∣cised pe¦sons, but as uncir¦cumcise believe because Abrahams Father-hood is only in respect of be∣lieving, Rom. 4, 11.12, 16, 17. Not in respect of any outward Cove∣nant holinesse. Hence Rom. 4.13. The promise that he should be here of the World, was to Abram through the righteousnesse of faith, that Abrams Fa∣ther-hood, of which the Apostles here speakes, is onely in respect of believing, appeares further, verse 16. Therefore it is (viz. The promise of faith; that it might be by Grace, to the end, the promise might be sure to all the seed; not to that only which is of the law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the Father of us all. Secondly, Abraham is not a father in respect of Birth-Priviledges, con∣veyed from himselfe to others, by any lineall hereditation, and so from ancestors to Posterity; for his Father-hoodship was in respect of the inter∣nall
covenant stablished in the promised seed, Rom. 4. And therefore to argue, that because ABRAM was a father in respect of this internall covenant, there∣fore an outward covenant holines is hereditary from him, and a Birth-Priviledg conveyed from Ancestors to posterity, is a meer paralogisme; as if we should reason, such an one hath wealth from his father, therefore he hath health from him; which is a thing of another nature. If the naturall branches that came from ABRAMS loyns, have no lineall hereditation in the covenant of grace, by vertue of that promise, Gen. 17.7. for, Rom. 9.7. neither because they are the seed of ABRAM, are they all children, then much lesse have the natu∣rall posterity of other believers. Whereas Mr. Blake. p. 74. to prove the consequence of the foregoing Argu∣ment, saith; Its necessary to the being of a Father, to communicate being to posterity: If ABRAM be a father, not onely in respect of being in nature, but also of being in covenant, then as a father he doth communicate a cove∣nant, being not inward, which is communicable; but outward, which onely is hereditary, and discendable. Reply. To us Gentiles ABRAM is onely a father, in respect of being in co∣venant; hence Rom. 4.17. as it is written, I have made thee a father of many nations, like unto him (so it is in the Greek) whom he believed, even God, who quickeneth the dead. Here the Apostle sets down the Godlike proper∣ties and qualities of ABRAHAMS father-hood. First, it was not partiall, but universall; as God was father of all Nations, so was ABRAHAM a father like him whom he believed. Secondly, it was spirituall, not bodily; as God was the father of all believers, not by commixture of essence, but by spiri∣tuall adoption, so was ABRAMS fatherhood onely spicituall; ABRAM as a spirituall father to whom the promises were made, adopts after a sort all be∣lievers, into copartnership in the Covenant: But to imagine (besides these two properties of ABRAHAMS fatherhood, which are plainly set down by the A∣postle.) A third property, which is externall and discendable, is groundlesse and most uncertain. Mr. Blake his second Argument is; If there be an outward covenant, and holinesse of covenant relation (different from that which is inherent and qua∣litative) in the dayes of the Gospell, as there was in the time of the Law, then is there the same reason of an hereditary discent of covenant, now in the times of the Gospell, as in the times of the Law; but the former is true, Erg, the latter. Answ. First, to your assumption; There is but one covenant under the Gospell) the law whereof is writ in the hearts of the godly, Heb. 8.10, 11. Secondly, whereas you would p. 75. prove there is an outward holinesse or covenant relation, because there is an outward calling; Then first, visibly
wicked and prophane men should be holy, because they hve an out∣ward calling. I would faine know what holinesse there can be, in a people that are outwardly called, and do not inwardly answer: nay are they not esteemed more prophane then others? Pro. 1.24. Because I have called and ye have refused, &c. And declared not to be Christs sheepe, Iohn 10.27. My Sheepe, heare my voyce: but if you say they have an outward cal∣ling, because they do in some measure make profession of Christ, and take his badge upon them, though they are vicious Answ. This badge, by paedo bapisme they never consented to in their Infancy, and therefore no way can be said to answer to a call, no not Quod extra, and for any personall presence at ordinances when they come to understanding, if that can outwardly sanctfie them, then the Heathens may be sanctified, who in many places will come, and sit them out very demurely, as well as Christians. For your distinction of Terminuta quo, and terminus ad quem, in calling; I pray what is the terme from which all men are called? is it not from the state of nature? for your terminus ad quem, is not fellowship with Christ, or a state of reconciliation? is there any middle estate, whereunto you are wont to call your hearers? which distinction of yours, if it be true in calling as it is most true; then in vaine do you imagine a calling unto outward priviledges: and that this should give being to an outward holinesse, or a covenant relation. Thirdly, whereas Mr. Blake would prove his ssumption, viz. That there is an outward Covenant, and holinesse of relation, now in the times of the Gospel, as there was in the times of the law, because the titles of believers and Saint be of equall latitude and extent, which those of the old Testament, people of God, holy, beloved, P. 76. Answ. These titles are not of equall extent and latitude, for in the old Testament they were called, first the people of God, in respect of their se∣peration from Idolatrous worship, to the true God. But yet 2. though they were called a holy nation, yet was it only conditionally, Exo. 19.51.6. If ye will obey my voyce and indeede, and keepe my covenant, then shall ye bee unto me a holy Nation, q. d. No more of you then do really obey, shall be so accompted. Thirdly, but under the new Testament, they are called holy, because they are deemed to bee inherently holy. Hence to the word Saints, is joyned some other epithite evidencing an internall sanctification, Rom. 1.7. To those that be at Rome, beloved of God, called to be Saints, 1. Cor. 1.2. Sanctified in Christ Iesus, called to be saints, Ephe. 1.1. Saints which are at Ephesus, and faithfull in Christ Iesus, Phil. 1.1. To all the Saints in Christ Iesus, Col. 1.2. To the Saints and faithfull brethren in
Christ, which are at Coloss. Cor. 3.12. Put on therefore as the elect of God, holy, and beloved, &c. 1. Thes. 1.1. The Church of the Thessalo∣nians which is in God the father, and the Lord Iesus Christ, Heb. 3.1. Holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling. For your allegation from the corruptions that were in Corinth, and yet the Corinthians were called Saints, I answer; many of them were not thus overtaken, when he so intituled them: besides they being newly called out of heathenism, wherein they counted fornication a thing in∣different, and that the body was made for that, as the bellye was made for meates; they might be reall Saints, and yet commit great evills in darke times: and its very like they had amended all upon the Apostles warning; for in the second Epistle he chargeth little upon them (that I remember) that he had admonished them for in the former Epistle, save fornication; which they thought to be an indifferent thing, 1 Cor. 6.13. And which the Gentiles generally so thought, that the Apostles at Ie∣rusalem made one decree against it, Acts, 15. Yet doth the Apostles re∣prove them for divers other things. Fourthly, for Mr. BLAKE his fourth ground, to prove Covenant ho∣linesse, P. 77. in that the Sons of God tooke the daughters of men, Gen. 6.2. Answ. Why must this be an outward holinesse, rather then an inward? doth not true sanctification, rather denominate a son of God; or is this such a sin as cannot befall a sanctified person? Ioseph married the preist of On his daughter, Sampson married a Philistim, Adam was called a Son of God, yet had no such Covenant holinesse, Luke 3. vlt. Mr. BLAKE his 3. Argument is this. That holinesse which the roote necessarily transmits to the branch, the ancestor to posterity, must neces∣sarily be a Birth-Priviledge, and holinesse of discent heriditary. But there is such an holinesse in the dayes of the Gospel, which the roote necessarily transmits to the branch, the ancestor to posterity, Ergo, P. 77. Answ. Though I might wave this Argument, because Mr BLAKE seemeth not to urge it for me, but for others; yet I answer, there is no such holinesse which believers, as a roote transmit to their posterity for, they transmit to their posterities inward uncleannesse and pollution, witnesse David, who though the son of a good man, was shapen in ini∣quity, and in sin did his mother conceive him, Psal. 51.5. and Iob saith, Cap. 14.4. Not one man living whether he be believer or unbeliever, can bring a clean thing out of an unclean: and Christ tells Nichodemus, that which is born of the flesh is flesh, Iohn 3.6. And Paul though in the jewish
Cove∣nant and circumcised the 8. day, yet Ephe. 2 3. Saith of himselfe, that he was a Child of wrath by nature, in calling himselfe a Child of wrath by nature, he hath respect to his conception and Generation: now is it not absurd to thinke, that parents should convey to their seed an uni∣versall defilement both in soule and body, in every faculty and member, and yet convey an outward holinesse, which shall be heriditary, and not inherent; to use Mr. Blakes words, P. 77. & yet in the same page he saith, the same holinesse which is in the parent is transmitted to the infant, the same in kind and no other. So that it must be the same in kind, and inhe∣rent in the parent, and yet not in the infant; what uncertaintyes are here for the conscience? And whereas he produces, 1 Cor. 7.14. The unbelieving husband is sanc∣tified by the wife, &c. — Else were your children uncleane, now are they holy. And hence Mr. BLAKE concludes, holinesse cannot be meant a legitimation of issue, whereof others give the reason, viz. That their children had been legitimate, being borne in lawfull wedlock, though neither of the parents had beene a believer, marriage being lawfull to Pagans, as well as Christians. Answ. True, so it is; but yet they scrupled the contrary, and therefore the Apostle doth but take away the scruple, and tells them that their marriage was lawfull, and their issue was lawfully begotten; yea, though one person were an unbeliever. If a person should scruple the plainest thing, as whether it were lawfull to eat flesh, and drinke wine? it were both godly and reasonable, that such tender consciences should be satisfi∣ed; so if a Pagan and a Christian being married, the Christian shall scruple whether the marriage be lawfull, and their issue lawfull, though the case be never so plaine to others, yet is it pious to satisfie such poore soules; and so did the Apostles here, and in all the chapter, answer scruples of conscience, whereof they wrote to him for satifaction, v. 1. See many answers, both to 1 Cor. 7.14 and, Rom. 11.16. Storme of Antichrist, Pag. 42, 43, 44, 45. Mr. BLAKE P. 82. Comes to except against an answer given to this argument, viz. Those that have the substance and thing signified, must not be denyed the signe. But infants have the thing signified viz. Christ; Er∣go, must not be denyed the signe. Answ. I denyed the second proposition, upon this ground; that all in∣fants, nay the greater part, have not the thing signified, but grow up and prove wicked, and for those that have the thing signified, let them make it appeare to any Church of Christ, and they cannot deny their baptisme; meane, time because the greater part go the broad way, and the Church
is to judge only of visible things, give us leave to forbeare till we see how those that have right can make it appeare. Mr. BLAKE to this replyes, this reason will bee of equall force against the baptisme of adult or grown persons, that it will bee against infants baptisme, because their right to the outward part of the covenant, by vertue of their profession, is that which undoubtedly doth intitle them: al∣so, Page 83. He saith, you know we maintaine a visible right in infants, e∣quall to that in grown persons. Rejoynd, 1. Covenants do not alwayes carry seales with them, as in the covenant, betwixt David and Ionathan, 1 Sam. 20. Yet if seales were alwayes annext to covenants, yet were it boldnesse in us to annex the Seale of baptisme, where God hath not so appointed; and no lesse then will worship: besides, the Scripture never calls baptisme a seale; if it be a seale, where is the impression it makes under the new Testament, I know no other seale wherewith believers are sealed, save the seale of the Spirit, the covenant of the new Testament is a covenant of life and salvation, to all that believe, Mar. 16.16. The seale of the covenant must then be an∣swerable to that holy covenant, suable whereto I know no other seale, but the spirit of promise, Ephe. 1.13. 2 Cor. 1.22. To this I answer, Secondly, it is not of equall force to disable grown persons from baptisme, that it is to disable infants, to say let the thing signified appear and they shall not be denied bapsme; for grown persons, believers, can make the thing, signified, viz. Christ in their soul, to ap∣pear both by profession of words, and profession of life, which charity tea∣cheth every Church and Administrator to judge to be in truth; but in∣fants cannot make any profession either way; and though some Hypocrits may make profession of that which is not in them, yet (God only being able to search the heart) charity teacheth us to receive them. And for Mr. BLAKES maintaining a visible right in infants, equall to that in grown persons, it doth not appeare to me what it is, but the or∣dinary practcie is, that in most places the father being a parishioner, the infant is baptized, when the father of the same infant is many times ex∣cluded from the Lords supper: For the visible right founded in the profes∣sion of growen persons, appeares in the Eunuch, who upon his profession was baptized. 2 Also Acts 18.8. Acts 16. The Iaylour, and the Samaritans, Acts 8. How could it be knowne that these persons did believe (being the Apostles and Philip were with some of them but a few houres) but only by their profession 3. Christ most playnly, in Heb. 10.23. . And having washed the body in pure water, let us hold fast the confession, or profes∣on of the hope, without wavering.
Now what profession speaks he of? Undoubtedly, he speaks of that profession they made at their baptisme; because he speaks of their washing their body in pure water: and then bids them hold fast their profession of their hope, that is, that profession which they made at their baptisme. This Confession was in use in Salvians time, l. 6. de Gubern. Dei. In spectaculis quaedam apostacia fidei est, & a symbolis ipsius, & coelestibus sacra∣mentis lethalis pravaricatio. Quae est enim in baptisme salutari Christiano∣rum prima confessio? quae scilicet nisi ut renunciare se diabolo, ac pompis ejus, atque spectaculs & operibus protestentur? Ergo, spectacula & pompae juxta nostram professionem, sunt opera diaboli. Quomodo O Christian, spectacula post baptismum sequeris, quae opus diaboli esse confiteris? Renunciasti semel dia∣bolo & spectaculis ejus, ac per hoc necesse est prudens, & sciens dum ad spe∣ctacula remeas, ad diabolum te redire cognoscas. Vtrique enim rei simul re∣nunciasti, & unum utrumque esse dixisti, si ad unum reverteris, ad utrum∣que remeasti; ab renuncio enim inquis diabolo, pompis, spectaculis, & operi∣bus ejus; & quid postea? Credo inquis in Deum patrem omnipotentem, & in Iesum Christum filium ejus. Ergo, primum renunciatur diabolo, ut credatur Deo — nos vero quid respondere pro nobis possumus? tenemus symbolum & evertimus, & confitemur munus salutis, pariter & negamus, &c. This Confession was in use in SALVIANS time, lib 6. de Gubern. Dei. In Stage-playes there is a certain falling away from the faith, and a deadly trensgressing from the signes and heavenly Sacraments thereof. For which is the first confession in the wholsome baptisme of Christians? what to wit is it, unlesse that they protest that they renounce the devill and his pomps, and playes, and workes? Therefore, stage-playes and pompes according to our profession, are the workes of the devill. How, O Christian, wilt thou follow playes after baptisme, which thou confessest to be a work of the devill? Thou hast renounced once the devill and his playes, and hereby it is necessary that thou mayest know thy self witting, and knowing to return back to the de∣vill, whiles thou makes haste to playes. For thou hast renounced both toge∣ther, and hast said both to be one; if thou returnest back to one, thou returnest back to both. For thou saidst, I renounce the devill, pomps, playes, and his works, and what after? Thou sayest, I believe in God the Father Almighty, and in Jesus Christ his Son. Therefore first the devill is renounced, that God may be believed — But what can we answer for our selves? We understand the signe or badge and overthrow it, and we confesse the guift of salvation, and in like manner deny it. Where we may see what they confest at their baptisme. First, they protest to renounce the devill, and his pompes, playes, and workes. Secondly, they profest they believed in God the father Almighty, and Jesus Christ his Son.
M. Blake spends many words, to disable my answers given to Mr. M. his Ar∣gument, and to his own, p. 82, 83, 84. but let the Reader compare them, and he will see the invalidity of them, if he peruse my former Book, viz. The storm. of Antich. p. 51. 52. Where there are many answers given to this Argument. Next, Mr. Blake p. 86. 87. 88. comes to except against Answers to this Argument, laid down by himselfe and others, viz. Those that are in Cove∣nant, must be sealed with the seal thereof: But Infants are in Covenant. Answ. To this as before I answer, the females of the Jews were in cove∣nant, yet not sealed; whereas you say there was an incapacity of circumcision in the females; I answer there was no incapacity, but the want of a command, and they were naturally defiled in generation, as well as men. Were not Enoch and Noah in the covenant, yet not circumcised for want of a command? Be∣sides, where are the Sacraments of the New Testament called seals? For your saying you have a command to seal all in covenant, p. 87. if you speak of the covenant of Grace, made betwixt the Trinity and the believing soul, grace be∣ing an invisible thing, it will be hard for you to know who they are; neither do I know that you have any such command to seal those that be in covenant; outward and visible signes, cannot be founded on the covenant of grace, which is invisible. Or if you speak of an outward covenant, of which circumcision was the counterpart on mans part, and the giving the Land of Canan the coun∣terpart on Gods part, Psal. 105.7, 8: Act. 7.8. Then baptisme is no signe of any such, being peculiar to the Jew; or if you mean by outward covenant, the outward part of the covenant of grace; I answer, first, there is but one covenant under the new Testament, Heb. 8.8. The branches whereof are on∣ly proper to the Elect, Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. Secondly, all this covenant is wholly inward, and there is nothing outward, Heb. 8.10. I will put my Lawes into their minde, and write them in their hearts, &c. q. d. All this covenant is wholly inward, nothing outward: Hence the worke of new creation is called the Inner man, Ephes. 3.16. Rom. 7.12. the Hidden man, 1 Pet. 3.4. If you say, we may visibly know who are in covenant of grace by their fruits; I answer, this we cannot know in infants, who have not brought forth any fruits. If you say, we may visibly know who are in covenant, by some vi∣sible charter made to ABRAM and his seed, and so to believers and their seed. Answ. 1. There is no such branch in it, that those that are outwardly in the covenant of grace shallbe baptized. 2. The Apostls when they baptized any, never had recourse to any such visible
charter, but only asked them whether they believed, or repented; if you say it was because they came out of Heathenisme, I answer; it was requi∣red in them that were in the Jewish Covenant; for Paul though in the Jewish covenant, must first repent, before Ananias had power to baptize him. 3. Whatsoever branch of any charter made to Abraham that reacheth unto us Gentiles, teaches to us only as believers, and as we are in Christ, and no otherwise, Gal. 3.28. Rom. 4.12. So that if our children be not Christs, they are not Abrahams seed. For your bidding me name the man that made circumcision the co∣venant, I could do it if it were expedient; but for his honour sake, charity teaches me to cover his oversight, For your reply, P. 87. to this speech, viz. Abram had but 3. seeds, Christ,So your selfe ac∣knowledg P. 116. The prose∣lites were no other∣wise A∣brams sons but by walking is the steps o his faith. the carnall Jew, the believer of Jew and Gentile, and many mistake in ima∣gining a fourth seed, that is, the seed of believers, whereas you reply, and aske, P. 87. To which of these 3. seeds Will I refer the proselites of the Gentiles? I answer, those that were believers among them, refer to the 3. kind; and those that were unbelievers among them, were no manner of way Abrams seed, though they did pertake with the Jews, in outward ordi∣nances, for to pertake of outward ordinances, which servants purchased with mony, might instantly do, did not make any person to be Abrams feed, yet this was all the unbelieving proselite had. And whereas P. 90. Mr. Blake would cleere himselfe of former asper∣sons cast on us in his former booke, by a distinction, viz. By calling us the Anabaptists of this presentage, and so distinguishing us from the A∣nabaptists of the former age. Answ. We deny your title, Anabaptisme signfying baptisme againe; our consciences are fully satisfied with one baptisme, provided it be such a baptisme as we judge to be the baptisme of Christ, and if our conscien∣ces judge that sprinkling we had in out infancy to be none of Christs bap∣tisme, I aske you whether can we in good conscience rest satisfied there∣with? we are [if we must needs be] new named, Antipaedobaptists, or Catapdobaptists, but no Anabaptists. For your scofs and wrested collections, P. 91. I desire to take notice of them here, and in many other places of your booke, and to answer as Christ did; when they said, he had a devill, Iohn 8.48. Who only tooke notice thereof, and said he had not a devill, v. 49. so desire I to do. Lastly, whereas Mr. Blake would cleere himselfe from such reviling speeches, P. 92. In that I returned far more then ever I received, let any man peruse
the booke, and finde one reviling speech therein, against any person whatsoever, and let me beare the blame, and shame thereof, if any such should passe from me, I am sure it was contrary to the intention of my heart; but I am sure there was none. But that Mr. Blake might cleere himselfe in this kinde, P. 92. He saith. You have returned far more then ever you received: To make the Church∣es of the Saints garrison-keepers for Antichrist, with you is fair language; to single out two brethren in the fore-front, to serve such a master &c. Answ. If the imbracement of one point of Antichrists doctrine, make the Churches garrisons of Antichrist, and the Ministers, Ministers of Antichrist, then do you no lesse brand the Churches of Christ in Queene Maryes time, as Garrisons of Antichrist, and the martyrs as Garrison keepers for Antichrist: seeing they retained those things, which your selfe I suppose now deem: popish, as Prelaticall Episcopacy of Diocesan Bi∣shops, and Archbishops, you know five of the Bishops suffered martyr∣dome, yea they retained the Common prayer booke, and some of them contended for Ceremonies, yet you never called them Garrison keepers for Antichrist; many of Gods faithfull ones may be in Babilon, in some one point, and yet not of Bbilon; in the Garrison of Antichrist, yet no keeper of it. Yet for your own part; that seeme to be Zealous for that (which the Lord I doubt not will pull downe) take you heed that you be not a Garrison keeper for Antichrist, (though not in the whole body of Popery) yet in this point. I do not a little suspect baptisme of Infants, which is the same for subject with us and the Church of Rome, to have been the cause we came no sooner, nor faster out of Babilon, for all that are baptized are supposed to be believers, or in Covenant with God, and so the Children of Papists come in as the children of supposed believers, (though too too many of them deny Christ in all his offices) and so two of∣ten come to be one in Church fellowship; as in the dayes of the Bishops, when many alter-bowers and persons defiled with deep points of Pope∣ry, did commnicate with godly Protestants at one and the same supper of the Lord. For your saying, P. 92. That to make Arguments of my own, and to farther them upon my objector (that so he may stand in comparison with a certaine Athiest) is neithe reviling not persecution. Answ. The passage Mr Blake exceps against, is, Storm of Antichrist pag. 6. Part 2. Where if the unprejudiced Reader can see any word in that comparison beyond the bonds of charity, let me be reputed as one that justifies himselfe in an evill action.
A REPLY to Mr. BLAKE, his Vindication of Jnfants Baptisme. PART. III. THe first Argument. As the infants of the Jews were circumcised, so the infants of Christians are to be baptized. I denyed the conse∣quence, because then the Lords supper should be given to infants, because they parooke of Manna, and the paschall lambe. Mr. Blake to this saith, Manna and the Rock are considered two wayes. 1 As common food and meanes of livelihood, so infants partooke of it. 2. As a visible pledge of Gods abode among them, so it was a Sa∣crament; this use infants could not make of it. Rejoynd. If infants could not make use of Manna and the passeover as a Sacrament, then not of the Lords supper, and consequently, not to be admitted to baptisme, because they cannot make use of it Sacramentally, if nothing be to infants a Sacrament, of which they cannot for present make use of, then infants baptisme cannot be a Sacrament to them, and so ought not to be administred. The second reason of my denying the concequence, was; Circumcision was commanded to reprobate as well as Elect, Gen. 17.10. Every man∣child shall be circumcised, so was Esau, after God had said the elder shall serve the younger, Gen. 25.23. And Ishmael, after God had rejected him, Gen. 17.20. Compared with v. 23. But baptisme is to be administred only to those that repent and believe. To this Mr. Blake sayth, P. 95. Where is that command of circumcision of reprobates, or restraining baptisme to elect ones. Reply. The command of circumcising all males, is Gen. 17.10. There∣fore for the circumciseing reprobates, for restraining baptisme to elect ones, I never so restrained; it, but said it was to be administred to them that repent and believe.
There many other reasons of my denying the consequence, as the difference betwixt circumcision and baptisme, 1. In the matter, cutting in the flesh, being the matter which left sensible signe in the flesh, but sprinkling with water, the matter of infants baptisme, leaves no sensible signe in faith, and therefore in respect of them cannot be Sacrament, so other differences taken from the change of the visible Church, from what it was in the time of the Jews, &c. See storme Antichrist, P. 32. 32. And compare Mr. BLAKES answers therewith. Ile only add this to what I delivered, that if the command which bound the Jews to circumcision, bind us to baptisme then. First) we must be of Abrahams loynes, as all circumcised Iews were. Secondly, then we must be obliged to the 8. day, and that only for our males. Where is that Scripture that points you to let baptisme suc∣ceed circumcision as far as you please, and on whom you please, that it must succeed circumcision in point of infancy, and not in point of obliga∣tion to keeps the law of cerimonies, succeed for time of infancy, but not for the time of the 8. day, succeed it for males, and yet not for all the males, but only for the males of believers? and Female infants to bee bap∣tized, without any president at all, of Female infants circumcised. To maka the institution of circumcision to be the institution of bap∣tisme, that from the command of circumcising the Males, the 8. day we must baptize, Male and Female is to call us back againe to Iudasme, and to set up againe the partition wall of cerimonies, which the death of Christ hath puled down. I know no more reason why circumcision should bind us by the analogye and proportion, (if there were a proportion betwixt circumcision and baptisme) then the rest of the Jewish cerimonyes, the proportion of the passeover may as well tye whole familyes to eat of the supper. I dar say, we may bring in most of the points of popery, if out un∣derstandings without command from God, may under the new Testa∣ment make proportions from the old. From hence, pope Gregory as D.N. places in his booke of the Masse, Lib. 2. Cap. 7. undertooke to reduce all the old Testament into the new, changing the elders into the sacraficing Preists of the law, the Tables into Altars, the Sacraments into Sacrifices, the Deacons into Levites, and there entred an endlesse peece of worke. Christ being the end of circumcision and passeover, as of all orher cere∣monies, to whom they have reference, as the shadow to the body, Colos. 2.17. Christ being come in the flesh, we have nothing to do with them not with any command annexed to them. Obi. But circumcision was a signe of the covenant of grace, and bap∣tisme
baptisme is the same; therefore basptisme succeeding circumcision in the same office of signing the covenant, it succeeds also in the same sub∣ject. Sol. Though it will very hardly be granted, that circumcision was the seale of the righteousnesse of faith to any other then Abram, and we have answered, Rom. 4.11. (See Storme of Antichrist) where there are 6. an∣swers thereto; yet grant it that circumcision signified circumcision of heart, and was a signe of the righteousnesse of faith; yet was it a signe of these things to be in Christ to come: but baptisme signifies them in Christ already come, who dyed for our sins, and rose for our Justificati∣on; did not divers other things under the law signifie the same covenant: as the cloudy Sea, water out of the Rock, 1 Cor. 10.1.2.3 4.5. Did not Manna, Iohn 6. Signifie the same. Did not the Ark, 1 Peter. 3.21. Signifie our salvation by Christ from the flood of Gods wrath? Did not the sacrifices, Heb. 9 19. The blood of Goates and Calves, and scarlet woll and bysop, signifie the same things, viz. That all cleansing was in Christs blood; And to use the words of a learned man, why may we not say, baptisme succeeds the floud Ark Manna, dayes of attonement, clow-by Sea, and that the Lords supper, succeeds circumcision as well as bap∣tisme, and so all Males Were to eat the supper as all were baptized. 2. For the consequence; that because baptisme signes the same cove∣nant, therefore there must be the same subject. A. Then by the same reason, the Lords supper signifying the same cove∣nant, there must be the same subject; and so infants must receive the supper. 2. Circumcision cannot possibly be asserted to be a signe of the cove∣nant of grace, to all he posterity of Abra, but only to the believing Jew grant baptisme to be also a signe of the covenant of grace, yet will it then follow that baptisme signifies the same, onely to the believing Gentile. Obj. But this covenant, I will the the God of thee and of thy seed; Gen. 17.7. Was made with the faithfull and their seed. Sol. No it was made with Abram and his seed, not with believers and their seed, (for no where in Scripture is any such thing spoken) but with believers, as his seed; the children of the flesh are not the seed, but the children of the promise are counted for the seed, Rom. 9.8. This doctrine of christians begetting christians, or persons in covenant with God is very pleasing for a moment, I wish it may not destroy us for ever, especially, seeing under the pretence of baptizing the children of the faithfull, the infants of all or most of the unbelievers of a parish are baptized. Againe, those with whom God makes the new covenant under the
Gospel, are Heb. 8. They in whose hearts he writes his law, how then dare we say, that now under the Gospe, believers and their seed are confedde∣rates in the Covenant of Grace; seeing we have no knowledge of Gods writing his law in their hearts, and many of them prove wicked. ry of iniqui∣ P. 184. . 167.I will shut up this, with the words of Mr. HELWYS. Obj. As the seed of the faithfull were circumcised, so the seed of the faithfull must be baptized. Answ. The proportion is deceitfull, thus ought the consequence to be drawne: As Abram believing was circumcised, and all the males of his houshold, both men, and children of 8. dayes old, bond and free, so now any man believing, must be baptized with all his houshold, both men, and children of 8. dayes old, bond and free. 2. It is not a necessry consequence, nothing must be proved by consequence, but that which must of necessity follow; but this doth not of necessity follow, that because infants were circumcised with circumci∣sion of the flesh under the law, therefore infants must of necessity be bap∣tized with the baptisme of repentance, for remission of sins under the gospel. But a true consequence is this; none were circumcised, but those that were expresly commanded, by rule or example, so under the Gospel none may be baptized, but those that are expresly commanded by rule or example. To conclude, whereas God saith, I will make a new covenant, not ac∣cording to the old; persons will have it according to the old, that as in∣fants were circumcised under the old covenant, so they will have infants baptized under the new: and is not this to change the covenant which Christ hath sealed with his blood, Next Mr. Blake P. 97. Comes to cite over the answers to Colos. 2.12. Which i generally brought to prove baptisme to succeed circumcision, as an initiating signe, for see the arguments and reasons. Storme of Anti-Christ P. 2. P. 36. Next Mr. Blak, P. 97. Replyes to the answer of this argument. If in∣fants may not now be baptized, then they are deprived of some grace cir∣cumcision did confer. Answ. No, circumcision did not bring any grace to the Jews, but was rather a yoke, Acts 15.10.11. Gal. 5.3. Reply. Circumcision is to be considered as a Sacrament, as given to A∣braham as a signe and seale of Christ, so it was no yok but a priviledge; thus considered, it was no obligation to the law, or as a law Cerimony enjoyn∣ed by Moses. Rejoynd. Consider circumcision which way you will, yet was it bur∣thensome to the flesh, burthensome to the conscience, to be bound over
to such ceremonious observation as circumcision bound to; I do not reade of any such thing that it was a signe or seal of Christ to the believing Jews; one∣ly to Abraham it was a seal of the righteousnesse of faith, in respect of his common fatherhood; but that it was so to other believing Jews, it must have many syllogisticall labyrinths to winde it in, for the Scripture no where saith any such thing. But to answer more fully to the fore-named Argument; First, you understanding by the grace, circumcision did confer not inherent grace, but externall priviledge: I answer, that is only a priviledge which God makes to be a priviledge, if circumcision was a priviledge, then it was because God had so established it, and being he hath not so established Infants bap∣tisme for a priviledge under the Gospell, it is no priviledge. 2. There was an answer Mr. Blake left, because it weighed too heavie for him, viz. It is not a benefit, but a misery for children to be baptized; for here∣by they are apt to think themselves Christians, when they are strangers from Christ. 3. We have no ground to reason the Jews had such a priviledge, therefore we Gentiles must have the same, unlesse the Word say so; in some things the Jews had priviledges above us, see Rom. 9.4. In other things we have privi∣ledges above them, Matth. 13.16, 17. Obj. Unlesse Infants be baptized, they are excluded from the new Cove∣nant; But they are not excluded. Answ. The Canaanitish woman without baptisme, was in covenant with Christ. Secondly, you think your Infants not baptized, are saved. Thirdly, the Scripture no where sets down baptisme as a Gate to let in, or a condition, without which we cannot pertake of Gods Covenant. Reply. You use to put your objection in such termes, that you may answer it with most advantage to your self; you might have put it, That the visible Church is made up of them, and therefore the ordinary gate of entrance into it, is not to be shut against them. Rejoynd. Though this answer be far from an answer, yet suppose it had been so put, it had damnified your cause. Those of whom the visible Church is made up, to them the ordinary gate of entrance is not to be shut; But the vi∣sible Church is made up of Infants. I deny your assumption, the visible Churches are not made up of Infants, but of men and women, Acts 8.12. of visible Saints, 1 Cor. 14.33. of such as are born again of water and of the spirit. Answ. 2. For the assumption, it followes not because Christ bade suffer these little children, therefore he would suffer all such; from a particular, to an universall, is no consequence. It once rained Manna, and once water came
out of the Rock; therefore it shall be so alwayes. Reply. To this Mr. Blake saith, p. 99. Did Christ bid suffer these little children to come, pointing at these individuall children? Or whether are his words, suffer little children (giving license to all within the coasts of Israell to whom he was sent) in generall? Rejoynd. Here is a smooth discourse, were it but truth; If all the children in Israel, had such admission to Christ, and the Kingdome of God belonged to them, how came they to be so wicked shortly after, to crucifie the Sonne of God? which was done according to the voice of the multitude: And forty yeares after, at Jerusalems destruction they were so wicked, that if God had not shortned them, there would no flesh been saved, Matth. 24.22. Mr. Blake may as well collect, that Christ bade all Infants come, as them Infants of Is∣rael, seeing all sorts of persons came to see his myracles. So that Christ speaks only of those that were so qualified as these present children which were now brought, and whose pertinency to Gods Kingdome, Christ did sufficiently know. But however they were, or whatsoever you meane by the Kingdome, yet did not Christ baptize them, for Jesus baptised not, Joh. 4.2. And if he did not baptize these who were so qualified, surely he would not baptize others. Had Christ used to baptize Infants, the Disciples would not have kept them back: It appears Christ laid his hands on them, but it appears not that either Christ or his Apostles baptized them. To infer Christ baptised not, therefore we may, is absurd; these words (the Kingdome of God) having so many acceptions: As taken for the Kingdome of Grace, the King∣dome of Glory, and the visible Church, it is hard to bring any such proof, that the visible Church should be here meant; and farre more hard (yea impossi∣ble) to prove, that though the visible Church were meant, yet that those little children that were then bid come thereinto were baptized: But to make it more unlikely that a visible Church should be meant, this Kingdome is not called the Kingdome of God, but the Kingdome of heaven, Matth. 19.14. To them that were so qualified as these Infants were , of such is the Kingdome of heaven: But what is this to baptizing Infants? The consequence is true of none but those Christ blest. For Mr. Blakes saying, p. 101. The text is not, suffer humble children, but little children; which refers to quantity not quality. Answ. The ground that we suppose a quality meant, is not in the word little, but in the word [such] , yet do we finde godly persons, called little children, in respect of the quality of humility, Matth. 18.3, 4, 5, 6. The seventh Objection being very little different from the former, and barely recited by Mr. Blake, p. 101, 102. and no answer of any right given thereto, I will passe it over, and leave the Reader to peruse it, Storm. of Antich.
pag. 38, 39, 40. Having spoken so fully thereto, that I think it superfluous to adde any thing. Arg. 8. When Peter exhorted his hearers to repent and be baptized, he useth an argument from the benefit that should come to their posterity; for the promise is to you and your children. Answ. That is not the scope; but Peter answers a question, which trou∣bled consciences pricked for killing the Lord of life made, viz. What shall we do? Besides, the mountains and millions of our sins, we have the blood of the Son of God upon us, what shall we do? To whom Peter saith, Repent and be baptized; they further scrupled, what grounds for this? To whom Peter propounded the universality of the promise. It is to you and your chil∣dren, even as many as God shall please effectually to call; they further scrupled, we have contracted guilt on our children, his bloud be on us and our children; to this Peter saith, the promise is to you and your children. Reply. Mr. Blake, p. 105. And in the answer of this question, he prescribes the use of this Ordinance of baptisme; and to perswade to the use of it, he produceth the promise, in the same latitude as it was by God delivered. Rejoynd. If the question were so, and the answer so as I have laid it down, and your self confesse, then down fals the whole fabrick of the Argument; men that were startled under such great guilt of conscience, stood need of a plaister of remission of sins to be preached; It would little have eased them, to have exhorted them to be godly, from the benefit that should come to their chil∣dren by baptisme. Whereas I said this place is not a promise but a proffer of a promise, to per∣sons not actually converted, but in a way of conversion. Mr. Blake saith, he cannot reach this distinction. To which I answer, had these persons been actually converted, as sundry of the Paedobaptists argue (in saying, as it is to a godly man, so is it to his children, but the promise is to a godly man; which argument I heard pressed in a very great auditory) then had been a promise in being to them; but being unconverted, it was onely a promise in proffer, not to persons converted, but onely in a way of conver∣sion. Yea not onely proffered to these, but to all whom God should call effe∣ctually; and that an inward calling is here meant, because some have questio∣ned it; Appears first, because Remission of sins is promised to this calling, but remission of sins is onely promised to effectuall calling. Secondly, be∣cause these persons that have these promises, are bid to repent▪ Verse 38. Therefore PETER speakes of effectuall inward calling. Thirdly, the LORD is said to call them; As many as the LORD our GOD shall call, therefore inward calling is meant; Acts 16.14. Whose heart the LORD opened.
9. Obj. The parents faith is sufficient to receive baptisme for the In∣fant. Answ. The just must live by his owne faith, Heb. 2.4. Ezek. 18.11. What did Isacks faith profit Esau, or Iohosaphats faith Iehoram. Reply. Mr. BLAKE saith to this, he that lives by his own faith, may by that faith entitl his psterity to the ordinances; in the old Testament they had benefit by their fathers faith, to be circumcised the 8. day, Isacks faith did so much profit Esau, as to intitle him to circumcision. Rejoynd. You spoke heretofore, as if the charter granted to Abraham, had been the formall cause of enrightment to circumcision, and to baptisme, now have we a new formall cause assigned, viz. the parents faith; and that not only his professionall faith, but his justifying faith, or such  faith as a just man lives by, which being a thing invisible there is no admini∣strator can have a sufficient ground to administer baptisme to any per∣son, because he knowes not whether his father lives by faith. 2. It was God command, and not the fathers faith; no nor yet A∣brahams faith, that inrighted to circumcision; for Abraham had saith long before, yea also had issue, yet did he not circumcise them, till God com∣manded. 3. It is not said to the Samaritans, Acts 8.12. That they believing, they and their children were baptized, but they that believed only: So, Acts 2.41. They that gladly received the word were baptized, not they and their children. 10. Obj. Baptisme and circumcision are essentially the seales of faith, Rom. 4.11. Therefore baptisme succeeding in the roome of circumcision, ought not to be denyed to infants, lthough it be the baptisme of faith and repentance. Answ. Then none should be baptized but grown persons, and such as have the righteousnesse of faith, as Abraham had at this time when he was circumcised, neither of which are competible to infants of dayes; Its ab∣surd to thinke tt baptisme should succeed circumcision, in respect of in∣fancy, not mentioned in the text, and not in grownenesse of stature, which now was the age of Abraham, nor in qualification of the righteousnesse of faith, which now was the qualification of Abram, both which are men∣tioned in this text. Reply. None but they and there seed, as it was with Abraham. Rejoynd. The text speaks of Abram alone, and Mr. BLAKE puts it in the plurall number, they and their seed, which is a meer fallacy, to bring in the children of believers, had not the text been thus sophisticated, truth would have appeared; we are not Abrahams seed, as from Abrams loyne but only as having his faith.
2. To all former answers, some of the principall whereof are no named by Mr. BLAK, see Storme of Antichrist P. 42. Ile add, that in∣fants cannot hence be baptized, because though they may have a righte∣ousnesse, yet they cannot have the righteousnesse of faith, because they have no power to believe, during their infancy circumcision was the seale of the righteousnesse of faith, which Abraham had being uncircumcised, so if there were any such succession of baptisme to circumcision, as the Paedobaptists would beare us in hand with, then baptisme should be the seale of the righteousnesse of faith, which the person unbaptized hath; but we know infants have no faith, neither can we know they have any righte∣ousnesse, till they grow up and make it appeare, therefore are not to be baptized, neither can we see baptisme to be a seale. For the first and 2. Answers, Mr. BLAKE would seeme to take away, P. 106. Let them be compared with the text, Rom. 4.11. And the Storm. of Antichrist, P. 41. 42. It will appeare he hath said nothing in effect. Obj. 11. Holy persons are to be baptized, but infants are holy per∣sons; Ergo. Answ. 1. Holy persons endued with an holinesse known to the Church, ought to be baptized, but the Apostle speaks of an outward holinesse com∣mon to reprobates. 2. If the child be holy with a covenant holinesse, then is the wife, though an Heathen, holy with covenant sanctification, so the wife though an Hea∣then belongs to the covenant of grace. 3. If there should be any covenant holinesse conveyed to Gentiles, it must be by our being Abrams seed, Gal. 3.29. 4. Covenant holinesse doth not agree with the context, for the question was not after what way, man, woman or child, become holy; but whether a believer or an unbeliever might live one with another in mar∣riage to which the Apostle answers, affirmatively they might, and gives a reason, in v. 14. Mr. BLAK replyes to the first, that which can bepickt out is, that ouward holinesse cannot be knowne to the Church. To the Second, the contrary in the text is evident; the wife is sanctifi∣ed as to the bringing forth holy issue and the issue and not the wife, is stiled holy. To the Third, this faith (as the text showes) carries the covenant holi∣nesse to posterity. To the Fourth, they had a further scruple, viz. What might be thought of their infants, whether they were to be counted holy, with the believing parent, or uncleane with the unbelieving one; these are Mr. BLAS replyes.
Rejoynd. To the first, when we speak of an outward holinesse that makes capable of baptisme, we mean not such an holinesse as was in the Law, Heb. 9. But the outward expression in word and deed, of that inward inherent holi∣nesse in the heart, that it may be made visible to the judgement of charity. To the second, whereas Mr. Blake saith, the issue and not the wife is stiled holy; the contrary appears, in the Text the unbelieving wife is sanctified; 1 Cor. 7.14. Neither saith he, to the bringing forth an holy issue, but saith, is sanctified in or to the husband; that is, is sanctified to his use, and enjoyment, and cohabitation. He saith not, the unbeliever is sanctified to the believing hus∣band, but barely to the husband; to show, that the holinesse consisted in the relation of matrimoniall institution. To the third, I deny that faith carries any covenant holinesse to posterity; for faith onely purifies the heart where it is, Acts 15.19. So that the just live by their own faith onely, Rom. 1.17. How a grace that inheres in the soul can externally redound to any sanctifying of another, is a mistery to me. To the fourth, if you look in the Text, you shall see there was no scruple whether their infants were to be counted holy with their believing parent, or unholy with their unbelieving; as any one may see, vers. 12, 13. If any brother hath a wife that believeth not, and she be pleased to dwell with him, let him not put her away; and the woman which hath an husband that belie∣veth, and if he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave him: In these two verses any one may see what the question was, viz. Whether a believer and an unbeliever may live together, and not the least scruple about the holi∣nesse or unholinesse of children? Now lest he should barely speak the thing, he gives three reasons. First, because the unbeliever is sanctified in the believer; that is, the unbelie∣ver is not defiled in any such bond, and much lesse the believer, vers. 14. Secondly, because there's no defilement in your children, as there must needs be, if the believer must put away the unbeliever, as in the time of the Law; then must your children by such yoke-fellowes be put away, else were your children unclean, now are they holy. The third reason, because you may one of you, be the meanes of saving an∣other, vers. 16. [4. From their Christian calling, vers. 17.] Ile adde one reason more, viz. The Corinthians knew, that as their chil∣dren were not capable of prophanation by one of the parents, viz. the unbe∣liever; so could they not be capable of holinesse by the other parent, viz. the believer; therefore did they not scruple, whether their children were to be counted holy, with the believing parent, or unholy with the unbeliever. Ile conclude this Argument: Whereas an holinesse of legitimation, in oppo∣sition
to illegitimation, though not to bastardy, is meant; (for those that were put away in Ezra's time, were not put away as bastards, but as unho∣ly; because they violated these holy rules God set down concerning mariage) What ground is this for any hereditary covenant holinesse? But what if legi∣timation had been opposed to Bastardy? Perhaps you will say, their chil∣dren had been born in lawfull Wedlock, though neither of their Parents had been a Believer: True, but a childe of GOD may scruple for want of light, things that are cleer enough, and so might these Corin∣thians do. And the Apostle doth charitably in answering their scruple, and I will not say but they scrupled legitimation of their children, not one∣ly in opposition to illegitimation, but to bastardy. For the twelfth Objection, it was answered in the second Part. For the thirteenth Objection, from 1 Cor. 10.1. you give no answer, be∣cause you never supposed any great validity in it, to the question in hand; as your self acknowledge. Obj. 14. Lydia and all her family was baptized, but it is not said her fa∣mily believed; therefore its lawfull for persons to be baptized, although they do not believe. Answ. Lydia and her family were baptized as Christ commanded, else Paul had contemned an Ordinance of Christ. It's absurd to baptize any one in the faith of their Master or Mistresse; I ask those that hold Infants bap∣tisme, whether they would baptize all the servants of a Turk, if he should believe, and not his servants? Reply. To this Mr. Blake saith, these are of capacity to believe, and their unbelief is privative and damning; neither have they any other title then faith to baptisme. Rejoynd. This doth not answer the question, whether an unbelieving ser∣vant may be baptized by the faith of his master? And for title to baptisme, I know no title to baptisme but by believing. Obj. 15. For your exceptions against my answers to the families, I cleer thus. First, for Lydia, its probable she had no husband, because she was so earnest with persons so hated and persecuted, to come to her house, had she had an husband she durst not. Mr. Blake. This conjecture is weak, for Ioanna did as much, Luk. 8.3. Rejoynd. Its denied, she ministred of her goods, but did not urge Christ at all to come to her house. Besides, Lydia might be an ancient Widow, and all her children grown up, no necessity of infants. For Stephanas its beyond your exception; That there were no infants, see
1 Cor. 16.15. For your reason from Luk. 19.9. if you can prove the house received salvation, as the house of Stephanas ministred to the Saints, you might make a little shadow but small substance. For Cornelius his family (though there was some mistake) in my alledging him, yet he feared God with all his house, Acts 10.2. and after was bap∣tized. For your exception against Acts 18.8. The Corinthians hearing, believed and were baptized, because ABRAHAM hearing, believed and was circum∣cised. Answ. Do Infants do so? Obj. 16. As the childe is born free by the fathers freedome, so if God take the the father into covenant, he takes in the children with them: As the Son of a Priest or Levite, or the Son of a State Officer hath right to his fathers Office. Answ. If by covenant you mean the covenant of Grace, no believer is born in this; we being by nature children of wrath; but if you mean some outward covenant, that is inrightment in Church-proviledges, as baptisme, supper, &c. Shew some copie, that by the fathers inrightment herein, all the children come to be inrighted; as there are patents for the other, in divine or humane Ordinances. Reply. Mr. Blake saith, a Nobleman begets a Son as a man, not as a person of honour; so a free-man, a State officer that holds a patent of inheritance, yet these beget sonnes vsted with their discendable immunities and privi∣ledges. Rejoynd. So do Christian men as well as other men, but this doth not prove Christianity or baptisme to be a discendable immunity; you taxe me for char∣ging the traduction of Christianity on these times, but if these comparisons tend not hereto, I know not what doth; onely you lye hid, in not making your reddition in expresse words, but leave it so, that any one may know your meaning; The course of all disputation, should begin from the definition of a thing; I have defined baptisme, Storm. of Antichrist, p. 58. and elsewhere, I would you had done so. But this comparison doth in some good measure expresse your meaning, what you think it to be; which how it can in any way agree with Rom. 6.3, 4, 5. Col. 2.12. 1 Pet. 3.20. and many other Scriptures; I see not. Mr. Blake addes for a conclusion of this Argument; That if I or any other can bring any considerable witnesses of credit, from the time of ABRAM to this hour, that will say, that no such thing was held in their age in which they lived, no such doctrine maintained, nor no practice bearing witnesse to it used, meaning unto this holinesse of birth-priviledge; then he will quit the the cause, and betake himself to our party, pag. 114. Answ. First it lyes upon your part to prove it by the witnesses of the re∣spective
ages, to tell us that our Infants have a holinesse of birth-priviledge. Secondly, it is not sufficient to conclude, that because we cannot bring wit∣nesse, that holinesse of birth-priviledge was not held in the severall ages, from ABRAM to this age, that therefore it was held in all or any of those ages: Is it sufficient for the Papists to argue, that if the Protestants can bring any considerable witnesses of credit, from the times of the Apostles, for 700. yeares after Christ, that no transubstantiation was held in their ages wherein they lived, we will quit the controversie of transubstantion; yea the whole cause of Popery: Nay (say we to Papists) it lyes upon you to prove it in the Apostolicall times, and in following ages, or else we explode it as Idolatry and noveltie. Onely we must take notice of the good opinion Mr. Blake in his sober mood hath of us poor Anabaptists; in that could we disprove his traduction of Christianity, or holinesse of birth-priviledge, he would quit the cause, and betake himself to our party, pag. 115. Which showes, he deems us not so he∣reticall in cold blood, as he doth in a passion; well, if our heresie be no gre∣ter then denying the holinesse of birth-priviledge, I hope we shall never have that Peccadillo charged on us. Object. 17. As soon as Zacheus profest the faith, the covenant of salvation comes to his house, forasmuch as he is a sonne of ABRAM. Answ. Salvation was Christ, Luk. 2.30. Reply. Salvation was saving Ordinances, incorporating him and his to this Common-wealth, Joh. 4.22. Rejoynd. It was Christ: For Ordinances might have come again and again, yet no salvation; we reade not that all the family became sonnes of ABRAHAM, by his receiving Christ joyfully; which must be the thing pro∣ved, to prove your point; but onely himself was a son of ABRAHAM: For your comparing Zacheus and Stephanas his house, I have answered before. Obj. 18. Though I have oft heard it urged, yet you passe it over without any reply, and so do I without any rejoynder. Obj. 19. You say hath already been examined, and so it hath. Obj. 20. Baptisme of infants is not forbid in Scripture, therefore its law∣full, p. 117. Answ. That worship is forbid, which is not commanded, Col. 2.23. Matth. 15.9. Deut. 12.32. 1 Reg. 12.23. Esa. 29.13. Jer. 7.31. Hos. 13.2. Reply. Mr. Blake doth not take away my answer in any kinde, but chan∣ges the termes, yea so far, that he puts a new argument, which is this. Infants Baptisme is commanded in Scripture, therefore its lawfull. Rejoynd. You bring not not tittle of reason to prove it, yet will I not retort your Epithitē Magisteriall. Could you have brought any such com∣mand,
I doubt not but we should have heard of it very loudly, especially see∣ing the producement of such a command would end the Controversie. Obj. But here is no alteration of the worship, but of the subject, for the manner of baptizing is the same. Answ. The change of the subject makes it will-worship, because here∣in you goe from the will of that one Law-giver, who wils onely that Be∣leevers should be baptized, whose sins in the judgement of charity are forgi∣ven, Acts 22.16. Reply. I pray tell us, saith Mr. Blake, where we may finde a text of Scri∣pture that sets forth our charity for a judge in these things. Rejoynd. I commend Mr. Blakes discretion, that after his usuall manner, that if there be an answer hath any infirmity in it, he is nibbling at that, and lets go the strong, for feare he should conjure up more spirits then he can lay downe. I answer, that those that defend Infants baptisme, would think it will-worship if any Ministers should baptize the children of Turks, and that upon this ground, because they are not fit subjects: the like conclude we for the bapti∣zing of Infants, as being not fit subjects. But to answer your demand, where we may finde a Scripture that sets forth our charity for a judge? Answ. Though this was no essentiall point in the Answer, which Answer wisely you left untouched in the least kinde, and fixt upon a Parenthesis set downe for exornation; yet, I answer, Acts 8.37. Philips charity was a judge that the Eunuch did beleeve, and had his sins pardoned; and so was Ananias charity, (Acts 9.) a judge that Paul beeleeved, compared with Acts 16.22. and so was Pauls charity to Lydia, Acts 16.14. and to the Jaylour, ver. 34. he could not looke into either of their hearts, whether their faith was un∣fained; on what ground else was Magus baptized, Acts 13. but because Philip deemed him to beleeve, as well as the rest of the Samaritans. So Ana∣nias, Saphira and Demas, and many others, both sinners and hypocrites, were baptized from the judgement of charity; yea, 3000. at one time, Acts 2.41. and 5000. at another time, Acts 4. are texts of Scripture beyond ex∣ception, that sets forth our charity for a judge concerning persons baptizable, even such as repent, and consequently have their sins forgiven, for these two goe together, Acts 5.31. A Saviour to give repentance unto Israel, and for∣givenesse of sins, Luke 24.47. repentance and remission must be preached to∣gether. And upon this ground of repentance, because Iohn in charity deemed per∣sons to have repented who confessed their sins, he baptized them, Matth. 3.6. hence his Baptisme came to be called, the Baptisme of repentance. 2. Either conjecture, infallibility, or charity, must be judge what per∣sons are baptizable; not bare conjecture, for there is nothing but uncertainty,
in that, such as there is in Infants baptisme, who baptize in a manner all in Christian Kingdomes, (as they call them) because there are some Elect. Or infallibility must be judge; but though Mr. Blake beare much upon this, as if he and such administrators did administer upon more certaine, grounds then others, not onely the certainty of charity, but of infallibili∣ty: for, so he saith, page 24 so we should fall upon the absurdity of your party to maintaine, that this Sacrament is applyed upon the ground of charity, and not certainty, upon hopes that the person is of capacity, not assurance. Yet, must he, in challenging a certainty of infallibility, if any such he challenge, exceed the Apostles, who were not infallible, in their judging per∣sons to be baptized, as we see in Ananias, Saphira, Magus, &c. Bare conjecture, nor infallibility being not the judges what persons are baptizable, what remaines, but that charity must be the judge, whose office it is to beleeve and hope the best of all things, much more to beleeve and hope well of those who make a good profession of life and words before many witnesses, 1 Tim. 6. no greater certainty being attaineable; and God onely being the searcher of hearts. But of this enough, The 22. Objection is formerly cleered, when Mr. Blake did conjoyne it with another. Obj. There are three great mischefes goe along with denying Infants ba∣ptisme; as, 1. Rejection of the Lords Day. 2. Taking their Proselites wholly from the ministery of the Word. 3. Putting of Infants of beleevers into the condition of Turks and In∣dians. Answ. To the first, for the Jewish Sabboth once commanded by God, its put to an end, Col. 2.16. else it stands in force yet, and that being put to an end, we observe the Lords Day from the Apostles example, and the mo∣rality of the fourth Commandement, which requires one day in seven. 2. To the second, we take them not off, but your selves by preaching and praying against the things we practise. 3. To the third, why may not the Infants of Turks, being equally guil∣ty of originall sin, with Infants of Christians, (for your selves confesse, ba∣ptisme takes not away originall sinne) and equally free from actuall sinne, partake of the same benefits of free grace, why may we not have charitable thoughts concerning the salvation of Turkish Infants, being we know no∣thing of their damnation?
Reply. To the first Mr. Blake saith, take heed of a reall refutation not from the pen, but from the practise. Secondly to the second, look to the confession of the faith of your Chur∣ches, and see what they leave to the Ministery: All who have guifts may and ought to prophesie, &c. Thirdly, your third mischief is sufficiently spoken to. p. 73. Rejoynd. To the first, I wish we may take your counsell. 2. To the second, though they leave not so much to the Ministery as per∣haps you would have them, yet this proves them not to take off persons wholly from the Ministery; which is the charge you are to prove, else you say nothing. Secondly, to the second; persons that are hearers, are either weak or strong, if weak they are in danger of being misled, if strong they are in danger not onely of partaking in the sins of a whole congregation, whiles false and scan∣dalous doctrines go for truth, whiles the strong heares them and makes no replyes, and so all the congregation through his silence come to be misled; but also they are in danger of deniall of Christ, whiles things manifestly false in their conscience, goes for truth by their silence, they not testifying against them, nor justifying wisedome, as all the sonnes of wisedome are bound to do, Matth. 11.19. And what a sin it is to deny Christ habitually, as here strong persons are like to do, I leave to persons to consider; there is but one remedy for to prevent this that I can see, viz. To make reply after sermon is done, to any doubtfull point, in meeknesse and modesty, which if the severall Con∣gregations would friendly permit, as the Lawes of the land (so far as I know) do suffer it; provided reply be not in sermon time, but after, not onely my self, but I am perswaded many hundreds more, would be glad to partake of the paines of many learned preachers, whose gifts we reverence in an high mea∣sure; but till our scruples can be salved (it being in the power of your side to salve them) give leave to those that doubt thereof to forbear, because of the Apostles rule, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Howbeit, in the Church wherein I am a Member, if any man be not mo∣ved with the foregoing reasons, but thinks that with a good conscience (re∣bus sic stantibus, things being as they are) that he may hear a Parish Minister in a Parish Church, though he have no habituall intention to professe against any untruth, or being weak, is not able to protest in words of weight, we leave these persons to themselves, without any threats of censure, not making our consciences or reasons in such new controversies, the rules of other mens practises. Howbeit, in regard of doctrines usually preached, contrary to their practice, & petitions in praier powred out contrary to their principles, we greatly fear they
do it out of compliance to temporall ends, which in-dwelling corruption keeps them from the sight of, and dance upon ropes, when they may go with∣out fear upon the ground; that worship doth a man little good, wherein he hears and prayes, in fear of something that may be spoken contrary to his own principles. Thirdly, Whereas you taxe the confession of faith made by some of our Churches (for to it I suppose some of the Churches never subscribed) for their holding, all who have gifts may and ought to prophesie: I wish you, or any man else would make it clear, that they have not power so to do, and convince them by your reasons, rather then by your exclamations: Following times will finde this to be a controversie of great moment; in which I must confesse my self to be very dark, though I heard the point once well sifted in new En∣gland, at a great presence of learned Elders. To the third, you say it hath been spoken to, but I cannot finde where. Obj. 24. There is no expresse command of womens receiving the Lords Supper. Answ. Yes, from example, Acts 1.14. Where the Virgin Mary and o∣thers were gathered, there were divers women. These were together in one place, and they continued in the Apostles fellowship, and breaking of bread, chap, 2.42. and 44. all that believed were together. Therefore women recei∣ved the supper. 2. It appears from command, 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man or woman exa∣mine, . 3. There's one and the same communion in baptisme, and in the supper; Now women were baptized, Acts 8.12. Therefore they received the Supper. Reply. Both your examples and reasons, are by way of collection and infe∣rence from Scriptures. Rjoynd. How should they be else; let the Reader judge, whether Mr. Blake hath in this answer given a full repulse, as his title page professeth. Obj. 25. The denying of infants baptisme is contrary to the practice of the Churches, and casts an aspersion upon them. Answ. We finde the history of the Acts of the Apostles, and the first 300. years, well nigh, if not altogether cleer for us. Reply. For a full discovery of the notable untruth of this assertion, I refer your Reader no further then your 12th. Argument, with all your diligent search, we have not from you one piece of a witnesse, to deny the practice of infants baptisme in that time; but much to the contrary. Rjoynd. For the truth of it in the Acts of the Apostles, it is beyond all exception; in all that Book there is not one tittle for infants baptisme, but plentifull testimony for the baptisme of believers, Acts 8.12.13.37. Acts 10.47. Acts 16.14.33.18.8. &c.
For the well-nigh 300. year we finde cleer, that Believers were the sub∣jects of baptisme. I prove it; First, because in Iustin Martyrs time, who li∣ved 140. yeares after Christ, as Sculptetus saith, and the ancientest Father ex∣tant; there is no mention in the least tittle, of Infants baptisme, but cleer mention of the baptisme of Believers, more then once: See his second Apo∣logy to the Emperour Antoninus; And see, how Mr. Blake answers this au∣thority, pag. 53. In which words, we see enough for baptisme of Converts, brought from Heathenisme to the Faith; but not a syllable against the bap∣tisme of Infants: To which I answer, that he could not speak against the baptisme of Infants, except he had prophesied: Could any man speak against an errour, before the errour were in being; speaking so often as he doth of baptisme, in, many places, had Infants been baptized, we should have heard something thereof. Next after him have we Irenaeus, who lived a hundred seventy eight years after Christ, and nothing at all have we from him of the baptisme of In∣fants. Next after Irenaeus followed Clemens Alexandrinus, in the year 196. af∣ter Christ; as Sculptetus gathers out of Chronologers: Who, Paedagog. l. 1. c. 6. pag. 95. 96. tels us plainly; That Believers were the subject of Bap∣tisme. See Iustins words, and Clemens his words, and authorities of other Fathers in their own words, Storm. of Antich. p. 27. an 28. To this Authority Mr. Blake saith, p. 54. We shall not finde Infants once mentioned; much lesse their baptisme denied. To which I answer, if we in this Authour finde not Infants once mentio∣ned, much lesse can we finde the baptisme of Infants. So we have here 196 yeares of the 300. compleat. Amongst the Latin fathers, Tertullian is the ancientest, who lived in the yeare 183. after Christ, I appeale to the learned, whether his booke which he wrote concerning baptisme, be not only full for believers; and tels us, for every persons condition, disposition, and age, the delaying of bap∣tisme is profitable. To sundry sayings which I produced from Tertullian, Storm. of Antichrist P. 29. Mr. BLAKE P. 55. saith, we expect some direct Testimony from one father at the least, of the first ages, denying the practise of infants baptisme, and affirming the Church, knew no such custome. Rejoynd. If any one please to read my quotations out of Tertullian, he shall see Mr. BLAKE hath his desire in good measure granted to him. Origen is next, who as Sculptetus saith, was borne in the 189. yeare af∣ter Christ, and dyed at Tyre in the 69. yeare of his age, doth he ever
speake of infants baptisme, save that he calls it a tradition in some one place, and yet was it a good while above 200 yeares after Christ, before he began to teach, and how long it was before ever he named infants bap∣tisme is uncertaine. Mr. BLAKE P. 56. From Origens calling it a tradition, for want of a better authority, begins to triumph in these words: why is there not then a plain confession of the truth, that this peece of antiquity is against you? Rejoynd. I never said the name of it was in the first 300 yeares. Is not Origens calling infants baptisme a tradition, above 200 yeares after Christ, a godly peece of antiquity, to prove infants baptisme from antiquity; and to make a full discovery of notable untruth in me, P. 120. The next father is Cyprian, who lived 250. and odd yeares after Christ, he once in all his Workes names infants baptisme; divers reasons I brought to prove the spuriousnesse of that Epistle, but suppose that were true, which to my dying day I shall ever suspect, yet have we a great many yeares above 200. wherein we only find believers baptized; and if that E∣pistle in Cyprian be false, I suppose, we have above 300. yeares compleate; now lay all this together, and the Reader may judge, whether there be a full discovery of a notable untruth, in my asserting; We find the history in the Acts of the Apostles, and the first 300. yeares, well nigh, if not altoge∣ther for us. Further, whereas I said, ll the Churches err'd for many 100. yeares since the time of the Antichristian Apostacy, not only in smaller matters, but in point of the Masse, justification by workes, transubstantiation, Judge of the faith. Yea they have I supposed errd, I meane the protestant Churches, since the reformation, in these particulars; As first, in retaining baptisme, which they had from the hands of Popish Priests, which they could never retaine, with∣out acknowledging the Roman Church to be a true Church, and their Priest∣hood to be true, and their Ministers to be the Ministers of Christ. Reply. To this Mr. Blake P. 121. Saith; First, the baptisme thus received, they could never wash off and maintaine the Pope to be Antichrist; who opposes not Christ openly, but in a mistery, being in the Temple of God. Secondly, there are many truths in that Church, why must we then deny the truth of the Sacrament of bapisme to be with them. Thirdly, What do you finde out of antiquity to reject baptisme, received from the hands of Heriticks, where the essence is retained. Fourthly, their priest-hood is wholly Antichristian: and whatsoever they do, Qua. Preists we justly condemne.
Fifthly, When you have condemned all ministerie & baptisme, and both ours and theirs, you will hardly finde a way to set up any ministery, re-establish a∣ny baptisme, but leave us among the seekers, who deny any Church or ministe∣ry at all upon earth: the gates of hell having prevailed contrary to Christs promise. Rejoynd. It seemes you would not wash off your baptisme, because if you did, you could not maintaine the Pope to be Antichrist, else you would have done it; yes, you may better prove him to be Antichrist by washing it off, or if you had rather by wiping it off; for the more opposition there is against the truth of Christ (whereof I doubt not this to be one yea a great one) the grea∣ter proofe there is of Antichrist; if you would prove your Church true, and baptisme true, by interpreting these words, sitting in the Temple of God; to be sitting in the Church of God; and therefore your Church is true, because Antchist sits there: will not the Romanists come in with a share with you, and upon the same ground prove their Churches to be true, because Antichrist sits there? So that  he sets himselfe into the Temple of God: As God signifies not the place where he sits properly, but the persons over whom he tyrannizes, even the Saints of God, who are called Gods Temple, 1 Cor. 3.16. 2 Cor. 6.16. Not constituted Churches, who are never that I remember, called Gods Temple; and if they were, the Romanists, would come in for a share; he sits into the Temple of God, or multitudes of believers by his injuctions: and sometimes by his er∣ronious tenents which they receive from him. But his sitting most properly is his chayr-power, which he pretends to have over all Christians in spiritualli∣bus, to sit into the Temple of God, is an usuall phrase; as we say, sit into the Church, sit into the shaddow. Secondly, to your Second, viz. Seeing there are many truthes in that Church, why must we deny the truth of the Sacrament of baptisme to be with them? Rejoynd. Our question is no, whether they have some truthes among them? for so perhaps may the Turkish Alcoran have; but whether this point is truth? or rather, whether the power by which the Protestants in the be∣ginning of the reformation, received baptisme from them be a true power? which I deny, and Mr. BLAKE hath not yet proved; and I deny it on this ground; because the succession of their Ministery, or rather Preisthood, was false, as discending from the Pope; also because they were visible Idolaters; sent to say Masse, and sacrifice, as well as to baptize, also because their Church was false, for whereas the true Church is the pillar and ground of truth, their Church was the pillar and ground of fashood. Againe, they were none of Christs Ministers being for the far greatest
number, unable to preach or to believe, and therefore had no power to baptize; upon all which grounds the baptisme which the Protestants in the reformation received from them, was a nullity had the subject been right, how much more a nullity, the subject being false? Thirdly, to the 3d. viz. What do you find out of antiquity, to reject baptisme received from the hands of Heriticks? Answ. Cypr. de baptizand. hareticis. P. 397, 398 399. 40. &c. Edit Pamel, there you may. I suppose see, it was the judgment of 87. Bishops, that the baptisme of Heriticks was a nullity. Fourthly, to the 4th. viz. Whatsoever they do, Qua Preists you say, you wholly condemn. Rejoynd. Then must you reject their sprinkling of babies; for as they say Masse by their power of Preisthood, so do they baptize by the same; and by that power were the Protestants in the beginning of the reforma∣tion sprinkled. Fifthly, to your 5. I answer, suppose all Ministery and baptisme were condemned, both theirs and yours, (to use your words) yet is there no difficulty in setting up a right ministery and baptisme, the way whereto is; 1. For believers to consider that they are the subjects to receive all or∣dinances in time of an apostacy. 2. That these believers gather them∣selves together, 3. That they make profession of their faith one to ano∣ther. 4. That they consent and agree together, to worship God in all his wayes, that are or shall be revealed to them. 5. That they chuse out a Pastor (if he may be had) that may administer all ordinances to them. For Christs promise, of the gate of hell, not prevailing against the Church; I understand not that promise of any visible Church or Churches, against which in all ages the gates of hell have prevailed; but the body of Christ, or the invisible Church, who only makes the same believing con∣fession that Peter did: Against these, the gates of hell cannot prevaile to make them renounce that confession, which with heart, or mouth, or both, they have made. Secondly, the 2d. thing wherein the Churches were charged to err, was in that the elders of the Churches received all sorts of persons to bap∣tism upon a supposed covenant holinesse, derived from the parents, which were Idolaters in the grossest Idolatry, for many 100. yeares. Reply. To this Mr. BLAKE having evaded altogether the former part of the charge without any answer, answers the latter part, viz. For Idola∣try which you charge upon our forefathers, we must distinguish it; 1. As worshipping of a false God, 2. As worshipping the true God in a false way; the former dis-churches a people, and wholly casts them out of cove∣nant;
of this our fore-fathers were not guilty, they worshipped the true God, yea they believed all things aright concerning the person of Christ, in both natures. Rejoynd. You should have spoken to the latter too, and told us whether or no, the worshipping the true God in a false way, do not unchurch a people, see whether it doth; Hos. 1.9. Hos. 2.2. Pead with your mother, plead, for she is not my wife, and I am not her husband, let her there∣fore put away her whoredomes out of her sight, &c. Secondly, Whether is it likely, our fore-fathers did believe all things a∣right, concerning the nature of Christ; bu if they did, whether is that e∣nough? what thinke you of misbelief of the offices of Christ? as in point of satisfaction, to joyne workes with it, so in point of transubstantiation, and Masse, and Image worship, Saint worship, rellick worship, can these stand with your pretended covenant relatio? Thirdly, They have erred, in that Elders, Members, and the whole Church, did agree that the Church should be divided by Parishes, making cohabitation or dwelling together, a sufficient inrightment to Church pri∣viledges. Reply. Somewhat more is required, by protestant Churches for such in∣rightment; so a Jew or Turke renting an house, should become a member of a christian congregation; it is not then bare cohabitation, but a cohabi∣tation of christians, accepting of ordinances, that is inrightment. Rejoynd. What more is required saving Paedobaptisme? All persons that have been sprinkled in their infancy, and live together, whether good or had, are members or may be so, in that parish where they live, and their children by vertue of their fathers Paedobaptisme and cohabitation, are baptized in that parish. Further, it is not the cohabitation of Christians, but of persons baptized in their infancy; many whereof are desperatly wicked, and are so far from accepting, that they reject and persecute ordinances that gives inright∣ment to Church priviledge. For your saying, all the christians within the compasse of such a place make up one only Church, we grant it; but what is this to your practise, that make all Church, and none to be the world, in this Kingdome, or not one of many? Fourthly, the 4th. The churches have err'd in a wrong matter, in that they have taken the whole prophane world, and made strangers from God, to dreame of a communion with him: Till the other day, this abomination be∣gan to be discovered. Reply. This Fourth is the same with the Second of mischiefes, which you charge upon the baptisme of infants.
Rejoynd. This was such an apprent error, that Mr. BLAKE hath said nothing at all to defend it. Fifthly, the fifth thing the Churches have err'd in is, the continuation of Episcopacy for so many 100. yeares, though in some places the name be now changed into superintendency. Reply. Al the Church  have not been in this guilty; some never were under Episcopacy; not the French, nor Geneva Churches, none of them have been so long guilty, as to have err'd so many 100. yeares. Rjoynd. Will you deny all Churches till the reformation of Luther or Calvin, if you acknowledge them, then had they Episcopacy for many 100. yeares, yea, what if they had it before Paedobaptism? I doubt not but they had; if you deny them to be Churches before that time, then must you ac∣knowledge what you denyed, viz. That the Protestants in the reformation, received their bapisme from an undue power, from persons that were of no Church, and so no Ministrs; you instance in Genev, was there not a Bshop in Geneva before their reformation? Sixthly, the sixth thing the Churches have err'd in is, the mutuall inve∣ctives of the Lutheran, against the Calvinists, and these against them, yet I never read of any of the Ministers censured, for this violation of chari∣ty. Reply. To this and divers other branches in this 6th. error, Mr. Blake saith, nothing but this; I do not inend any apology for them; and adds, you tell us of the banishment of Molerus from Wittenberge, and Zanchy, from Strasburg, of which you were it seemes an eye-witnesse, for it is not within the compasse of your reading. Rejoynd. I like you the better for not apologizing for evill, wo to them that call evill good; but for the banishment of Molerus and Zan∣chy, I assure you they are in the compasse of my reading: Molerus hath the story in one of his prefaces upon the Psalmes, and Zanchy sets it downe in one of his letters to Bishop Grindall, as I remember; but sure I am, it was in an Epistle to an English Bishop. Obj. 26. There are many mischiefes go along with denying infants baptisme, and therefore we ought to abandon such doctrine. As first, There will be a wide doore set open to heathenisme, for a great part of the world will in time become Heathens. Answ. This will be no damage but benefit to christianity: in that ma∣ny that live the lives of Heathens, under the name of Christians, will be discovered. Reply. That benefit may be over-ballanced with many unsufferable e∣vils, and there may be other meanes of redresse then so desperate away of cure.
Rejoynd. I know no meanes to discover such, or to redresse this evill, so long as they are admitted to baptisme; it is not keeping such from the Lords supper will redresse such evils. Secondly, this will overthrow Parishes, or Parochiall constituti∣ons. Answ. True, and I thinke it comes nearer the Apostolicall constituti∣on. Reply. Mr. BLAKE seemes to affirme, that Paedobaptisme and Parish constitution, have no dependence upon one another. Rejoynd. They have this dependance collaterall, that he that will not baptize infants, shall not be a Parish Minister though otherwise well guifted; the truth is, there is great difference betwixt their comming in∣to the Church, the Kingdome being divided into Parishes in England, when Henorious was Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, which was about 500. or 600. yeares agoe at the utmost, but now they have partly by custome, and partly by edicts of Princes, been so twisted together; that it will not be an easie thing to untwist them. I added further, I feare me this parochiall constitution, and the large tithes that accompany it, are one of the greatest objections that hinder the passage of this truth. Reply. To this Mr. BLAKE saith, and may I not as justly feare your high applause of your selves; as men resolved to bear banishment, persecution, and run the hazard of certaine ruin, for the truth, in which you among o∣thers take not the least freedome; and your charge of others with selfe-seeking, is one of your chief Engines to hooke in this errour, — This of tithes, you willingly serve in, as a second abomination: Men will be your proselites to save charges. Reioynd. It was far from me in judging all; I hope there are a number of faithfull ones, that would not sell themselves, but are there not a num∣ber that will willingly embrace any way, that they may embrace their tithes? there being I feare no small number of these, cannot but retard any reformation according to the Word; much more this point, for do you thinke that those multitudes of carnall, civill, and prophane men, every where, would ever pay thithes, if they could not have their infants bap∣tized? if they did, it should be violently haled from them. For your fearing our high applause of our selves, in our resolution to suffer, to be an engine to draw in this error. I answer, either his or our vaine glory is either invisible, or visible, if in∣visible, then its knowne only to God; if visible, it being a sin visible, is not like to hooke in persons, but rather to put persons off from us, had we be∣come
fooles in glorying, as the Apostle saith, 2 Cor. 12.11. Ye have by your disparagements of us, compelled us thereto; in that both presse and pulpit ring of us, as if we were the Monsters of the earth. It was not vain-glory in Iob, when his freinds had accused him, for him to commend himselfe as he doth, Cap. 29. From v. 8. to v. 18. When the false teachers had undervalued Paul, it was not vaine-glory in him to spend almost two whole Chapters, 2 Cor. 11. From v. 4. To Cap. 12. v. 19. In his own commendations; which he did not, not out of any vaine-glorious, itch, but for to assert his Apostle-ship, against those that had depraved him. For your places which you alledged against me, to make your charge good, let the Reader peruse, Storm. of Antichrist, Part 1. P. 12. Part 2. P. 57. Which are the places you alledge; I hope he shall find nothing spoken but that which may stand with modesty: and moved from your aspersions, though with greife: I must acknowledge, that I carry a whole body of death about me. For tithes I, meddle not with to dispute the point, only this I say, there being a change of the Preisthood, there must needs be a change of the maintenance, Heb. 7.12. That preisthood that had tithes by divine right affixt to it, did offer sacrifices of beasts, and other oblations, which had re∣ference to Christ to come. I Quere, whether it be safe to recall any such thing as so trenches upon Iudaisme? but if you will have tithes as a civ ll tribute from the Magistrate, I suppose you must show us better tile that they have to do it, then, your place which you bring, viz. 1 Samuel. 8.15. wherein Samuel, shews not the power of a King, but the manner of the King that should rule over them, v. 11. And this King was Saul, wherein Sa∣muel having spoken of many of his oppressions, v. 11, 12, 13, 14. he adds v. 15. And he will take the tenth of your seeds, and of your vine-yards, and give to his Officers, and to his servants: Every good mans heart should tremble, to have his maintenance by such a title. Secondly, show us since the abolishment of the law of tithes in the Scripture, that any Prince in the new Testament; did either de jure, or de∣facto reestablish them, and we shall yeeld thereto. For your saying, men will be our proselites to save charges. I answer, it hath been the mishap, that true teachers have still had the barest maintenance, see 2 Cor. 11.9. Yea they have been forced to pro∣phesie in Sackcloth. 1260 dayes, Apoc. 11.3. When the Ministers of An∣tichrist had for mirth and jollity, v. 10. Yea whereas the Churches ought to allow their Bishops or Pastors an honourable maintenance, even that they may keepe hospitality, 1 Tim. 3. (and not in away of charity, or arbitrarinesse, that they may give what they please, or when they please, which in my apprehension is a great point of disorder, where ever practi∣sed)
maintanance in this particular, being matter of duty, not of charity, yet not withstanding this duty so often inculcated, as Gal. 6.6. 1 Cor. 9.7.8 9. 1 Tim. 5.17. &c. Suppose some particular persons, or whole Churches, should be close fisted or penurious, yet dare not I thinke (what∣soever you dare do) that any man is so Athesticall to be a Proslite with us to save charges; he hath a meane opinion of his religion, that embraces it on this ground, because of the cheapnesse. Third mischiefe, that comes by denying Paedobaptisme is; That such persons as hold this, are going into deeper errours; and that this is but the entrance. Answ. I know many that I have been acquainted with, that are as sound in the faith a sour accusers. Reply. This were a new piece of jugling in Satan, if he could cast so thick a mist over the eyes of men, as not to see the errors which men of this opinion maintaine. Rejoynd. You might do well to instance in perticulars, deceit lyes hid in generals; Whereas you come to instance in one particular, P. 127. In these words; what is vented I tremble to relate, even such things as (by Mr. BLACKWOODS approbaion) the Magistrate ought to punish. Answ. I suppose you have repect to the first, Storm. of Antichrist, Part. 1. P. 23. Where it was, objected; Magistrates are to be a terrour to evill workes, but heresie is an evill worke; I answered, evill workes are of 3. sorts. First, Those that are committed against the light of nature. Secondly, Against the light of faith; as deniall of Christs heresie, &c. Thirdly, Against the light of Nations, where I used these words; There is no nation in the world, but in it the Magistrate will punish those that speake against the God they professe, and against that which they thinke his Scripture; so if any one rayle against Christ, or deny the Scriptures, to be his Word, or affirme the Epistles to be only letters written to par∣ticular Churches, and no rule for us, and so unsettle our faith; this I take may be punished by the Magistrate, because all or most Nations in the world do it. For to cleere which, forasmuch as some besides Mr. BLAKE, have taken offence hereat; I in the faults that were escaped in the said booke, desired the Reader further to inquire thereof, as doubting of it my selfe upon second thoughts, the words in the escaped faults are these; for do it, Read, do it, but Quere, hereof P. 23. But though my soule ab∣horre all such opinions, as I do hell, yet do I doubt, whether the Magistrate have any power to deale with any such offender, unlesse he or they break
the publique peace; so that I retract the foresaid distinction, as suspecting it of errour, and distinguish sinnes, that they are either against the light of Na∣ture, as tumults, whoredome, drunkennesse, theft; or against the light of faith, as pride, covetousnesse, unbeliefe, schisme, heresie, &c. the former belongs to the Magistrate to punish, the latter belongs to the respective Churches to censure, and not to the Magistrate to meddle with: and for sins against the light of Nations, I retract the same as being utterly uncertaine, that the Ma∣gistrate hath any such power; yea, I do thinke the Magistrate hath no power, as he is a Magistrate, in or about matters of religious worship, but onely to preserve the peace, that no man be molested in or about his worship. But the Mr. Blake should heare any such errours vented amongst us, as I suppose he would make the Reader beleeve, I could have wished he had named the persons, and places of such errours, that all Gods people might (after admonition) have avoided them as Hereticks. The last mischiefe was, denying Paedo-baptisme was against charity, in making a schisme in the Church. Answ. How is it possible to recover the souls of men out of this will-wor∣ship, but by dividing them from the common practise: Christ and his Apostles were not Schismaticks, in keeping his Passeover two dayes different from the received practice of the Jewish Church; no more are we, keeping to the rule, though the generality of men practise otherwise. Reply. What pains do you take to hooke in this example, that you and your followers may be parallel with Christ and his Disciples. Rejoynd. To omit your intricate disputation about the Passeover, which is by the by, the places of John 18.28. and John 19.14. prove it sufficiently that Christ varied from the practice of the Jewish Passeover, at least one day, as your self confesse; yet was he no Schismatick, to parallel our selves with Christ, in departing from publique errours, we dare not do so; but we desire to fol∣low him in the same steps, though we cannot take such long strides. To conclude; whereas in this Treatise you have branded my self, and many others of Gods Saints in this Treatise, I will onely give you a seasonable counsell from a grave Author. Discant nostrae aetatis homines ne hac calumniae quosvis qui in omnibus punctis & sillabis cum illis non consentiunt, temere & petulanter prescindant, credibile namque est nos in extremo illo Christi judicio, multos à dextris judicis inter oves computatos visuros, quos in hac vita faedo illo & execratione digno nomine diffamavimus. Bachsius in vita Philastrii; Let the men of our age learne, that they do not rashly and reproachfully de∣fame any one that do not agree with them in all points and sillables; for it is credible, that we at the last judgement shall see many at the right hand of the Judge reckoned among the sheepe, whom we in this life have defamed with that filthy and execrable name, meaning Heresie.
A Postscript, to prevent mistakes. WHat I have writ concerning Infants Baptisme, I acknowledge to be so farre true, that J am undoubtedly perswaded, That Infants Baptisme is not of God; in confirmation whereof, J shall (the Lord assisting, and if I be called thereto) leave the dearest comforts I have i this life. And for liberty of conscience to the different wayes of Brethren, whether Independent or Antipaedobaptist, I am undoub∣tedly perswaded: But whether there be liberty to be granted to men of no conscience? Or to loose lived persons? That pretend conscience, when visibly it is onely passion, humor, fancy, or cloaked iniquity, I leave it to inquiry. The scope of this Treatise, as of the former, is partly to show the cor∣ruptios of Infants Baptisme, and partly to show, that no man can be compeld to Christian worship, or to a profession of the Christian Faith, nor punished (so farre as I can see yet) in case of unbelief or misbelief. Let the Reader also further enquire, whether the Magistrate have power to punish grosse idolatry, and blasphemy against God, Christ, the Scrip∣tures, and holinesse, and seducements of persons by corrupt doctrines in fundamentall points, when there is no violation of the publike peace; These being reall dots to me, I will determine nothing on any side. Yet seeing there is nothing that I know of in the New Testament for the same, my conscience for the present inclies me rather to think, That conservation of peace, equity, sobriety, &c. is the adaequate ob∣ject of the Magistrates power: Yet (knowing there are many instances in the Old Testament, of Magistrates that have used a coercive power herein, and knowing how hard it is for a Christian spirit who loves his God to hear him blasphemed, or to see any man, much more a dear friend, seduced in dctrins that being fundamentally erronious will damn their souls) I have some fear of the contrary. This I have added to avoid all retractations, and that I may not be urged by my conscience, to print any recantation, in case I should be mistaken in so weighty a matter. To conclude, Experience teaching us that every prevailing party,
being prone, through pride, suspition, or conscience, or some such grounds, to crush those of a different judgement, for fear they should become the greater number, and so should crush them, will hereupon endeavour to bring all manner of tenents different from what themselves hold, under one of these three heads; either Blasphemy, Idolatry, or Seducement; and so (if Grace prevent not) will be apt to tyrannize over all persons different from them in judgement: so that nothing shall be preached, printed, or pub∣lished, but if it be different from what the prevailing party holds, it shall be branded with the infamous name of Seducement; and nothing different shall be practised, either in worship or discipline, but it shall be stigmatized with the brand of Idolatry; and nothing shall be spoken or written, against the present wayes of worship or government, but it shall be defamed with the horrid name of Blasphemy: Jt standeth Magistrates in hand, that if in these three cases they shall be found to have any coercive power (which yet doth not cleerly appear to me) that they so bound these three cases, and all other of the like kinde, that they become not snares and traps to the god∣ly, who shall differ injudgement from the present Governours; lest here∣by there be a stop against new truths, when God shall reveal them; and godly persons as farre removed from Blasphemy and Idolatry as their present Judges be taken in these pits, as late experience can tell us in the High Commission Court, which at first was erected to curb the Papists, but in a short time became the bloudy scourge of Protestants. FINIS. Errata. THere are many oversights in the Treatise, the Author living in the Country, only gentle Reader, the Author desires thee to blot out; Que∣r, pag. 3. Whether every persons be not freely born to the choise of what reli∣gion, &c. And once, whereas the Author calles, The signes of the Covenant no seales, he desires thee upon second thoughts, further to inquire hereof. The other faults being many, and more then once interrupting the sence, the Au∣thor desires thee to construe them charitably. Vale.
