C6148 E149_29 99872621 156736
A Copie of a Letter sent from the Committee at Lincoln, to the House of Commons, directed to the Speaker of the said House, and subscribed with the names of the said Committee. Die Sabbati 4. Iunii. 1642. Likewise an Order from both Houses of Parli∣ament, concerning the Ordering of the Militia, di∣rected to the Deputy Lievtenants of the re∣spective Counties throughout all England, and Dominion of Wales. Ordered that this be Printed and Published. Hen. Elsinge, Cler Parl. D. Com. Also Exceeding Ioyfull Newes from Yorke. With the RESOLVTION Of the Protestant Gentry and Commonalty of CHESHIRE, Concerning their Petition lately presented to the Kings Majesty at Yorke. London, Printed for J. Horton, 1642. June 6.
Die Sabbati 4. Junij. 1642. IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That the Deputy-Lievtenants of the se∣verall and respective Counties within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of VVales, that are not Members of the House of Commons, be hereby required and enjoy∣ned to be present at the dayes, and places which are, or shall hereafter be appointed by the Lord Lievtenants, or their Deputies, for the Training, Mustering, and Eueri∣sing of the Inhabitants of the said Counties, according to the authority given unto them by an Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament. And it is further Ordered, That all Deputy Lievtenants, aswell those that are Members of the House of Commons, as others, shall give such dispich, by preparing of Warrants, Commissions, or Letters, and subscribing of the same as the service shall require; And that such as shall refuse, or neglect so to doe, that their Names be certified unto us by their fellow-Deputies, or any one of them that shall or doe performe the said Ser∣vice. And it is further declared, that it is the intention of both houses, fur the better incouragement of so good a Worke, so much condu∣cing to the safety of his Maiesties person and Kidgdomes that some of their Members at the times and places appointed, or to be ap∣pointed for the execution of the said Ordinance, shall be sent down to give their Personall attendance upon the said Service. Ordered to be printh. Hen. Elsinge Cler. Parl.
The Resolution of the Protes∣testant Gentry and Commonal∣ty of Cheshire. SUch have beene the feares and distractions of the County of Chester, by reason of the innumerable and indeed unsufferable assemblies and tumultuous meetings of the Papists, and others that are New∣tralls, or as we may terme them, luke∣warme both in Loyalty and Religion, that the Gentry and Commonalty of the Protestant Party were constrayned to draw themselves to a head, and set downe their Resolution, protesting to to performe these two particulars. First they resolved to be Loyall to his Maiesty, according to their Petition
lately presented to his Maiesty at York, by the Gentry and Commonalty of of the said County. Secondly, they resolved to be obedi∣ent to the Parliamen. Withall desiring that all true heart∣ed Protestants, that desire to expresse themselves Loyall Subjects to his Ma∣iesty, and obedient Servants to the Par∣liament, would with unite consent take the same Resolution. The maner and Forme followeth in as true and as exact a manner as could be gathered by one that was a specta∣tor when the Oath was taken, and Re∣solution declared to the high Sheriffe of the said County. First they resolved and sollemnely Protestest to declare themselves true and loyall Subiects to his Sacred Ma∣iesty, and to his heires for ever.
Next to maintaine and to defend the Protestant profession in all points whatsoever, agreeable to the Church of England, against all Sects and Schismes, against all Papïsts, Donatists, Armini∣ans, and all other Hipocriticall Doc∣trines whatsoeves, all so to maintaine the iust Prerogative of his Maiesties Regall Authority, against all opposers whatsoever. Secondly, they Constantly and with a ioynt consent resolved to maintaine and defend the high Court of Parlia∣ment, and according to their bounden Dutie to acknowledge them (next to God, and his Maiesty) the cheife Au∣thors of their present security, and the onely meanes of their happy continu∣ance, and future preservation, decla∣ring their Councels to be Religious, their Commands Lawfull, and their Actions Loyall, withall promising and protesting obedience to their Com∣mands,
and to those appointed  by them to have Command, and to be Governours of the Militia.0 This is the Resolution of the Prots∣tant Gentry and Commonalty of Cheshire and this ought to be the resolution of all the Prottestants in the Kingdome, seeing that we have so many unknown Enemies, so many Absoloms which day∣ly rebell against his Maiesty, seeing we have so many disturbers, so many Arons lifting up the golden Calfe of Idolatry so many deceivers sowing teares among the Corne, so many Goliah's blasphe∣ming the Lord of Hosts, plotting the destruction of Gods annointed, we had need to have some Davids, to quell their swelling and ore daring Pride, we have need of some true hearted Protestants, to defend the Protestant Religion, see∣ing we have so many Papists, so many wolves in Sheeps clothing, so many destroyers, so many private conspira∣tors,
that dayly conspire the downfall of the Gospell. Wherefore let all those that would be estee∣med either the zealous Servants of God, or the Loyall Subiects of their gratious Soveraigne and obedient Servants to the high Court of Parlia∣ment, let them I say take up the resolution of the Gentry and Commonalty of Cheshire and with them cry, long live King Charles, and God pre∣serve the Parliament. The Copy of a Lerter sent from the Committee at Lincoln, to the House of Commons, directed to the Speaker of the said House, and subscribed with the names of the said Committee, SIR, SUch is our earnest desire, to manifest our obedience to the Commands of both Houses, That we cannot omit any op∣portunity to advertise you of our first dayes proceeding, and successe therein. The Lord Francis Willoughby appointed by the Ordinance of Parliament, to be Lord Lievtenant of this Cnun∣ty, had by his Warrae, summoned the chiefe Consbles to attend him yesterday, the last of May, in this place, to give him  ac∣count concerning the Armes of the Trained Bands and Ammuni∣tion, within their severall hundreds, and Wapentakes, which ser∣vice accordingly they performed with all read nesse and alacrity, even beyond our expectations; there being the fullest apparance of them that we have observed upon any occasion heretofore, so as about fourscore in this great County, not above two or three of them were absent; Neither did the Kings Proclamation (publi∣shed
of purpose as wee conceive, throughout the County, and which some had officjously fixed upon the Gates of the Jne where we met;) nor this inclosed Letter from his Maiesty sent to the old, (but as we heare new established Deputy Lievtenants, under the Earle of Linsey, who likewise hath a Commission under the Broad Seale, for the Lievtenane of Lincolnshire, as we are inform∣ed, any whit deterre, or hinder them. Wee have all ready delivered forth Warrants to those head Con∣stables for Musters to be held (for the more conveniency) in seve∣rall places of this County, at each of which, God willing) wee all of us intend to be assistant; the rather because wee understand that our presence heere both not a little revive she Spirits of all honest and well afflicted persons in this County; Whose forward good examples will (we doubt not) be a meanes to draw the rest to a more ready conformity,. Jn which hopes we are further in∣couraged by this dayes tryall in the Citty, finding, besides the Trained Bands thereof a like number of Volunteers well and com∣pleatly Armed, who are ready to make tender of their Service, for the defence of his Maiesties Person, the Parliament, and the Kingdome, according to their late Protestation. These are our first beginings in your Service, which we humbly submit unto you, and so remaine, Your affectionate Friends and Servants, W. Armynne, Edw. Acsseou, The Harcher, Christo. Wray, Antho. Irb Ioh. Broxolme. Linclne, 1 Iunij. 1642. Ored by the se of Commons, that this be forthwith printed.
