C6123 E391_10 99862053 160265
THE COPIE OF A LETTER FROM THE Commissioners with the King; concer∣ning the manner of the Souldiers fetching his Majestie to the ARMY. And a Copie of a Paper delivered by the said Soul∣diers, declaring their reasons why they did it. decorative element incorporating crown and Tudor rose. London Printed for R. Simps, 1647.
MORE NEVVES FROM THE ARMY My Lord, YEsterday we got first uncertain intel∣ligence of some parties of horse up∣on their march near Stony-stratford.
Towards night other reports came to us, of an intention to surprize this place, where∣upon Col. Graves doubled the guards, by such as ha had most confidence in. At length a Scout of our own brought word of a par¦ty of horse randezvouzing upon Harleston Heath, not two miles off, about ten of the clock at night; and withall, wee were se∣cretly informed, that their intentions were to seize Col. Graves, and to possesse them∣selves of this House. Hereupon we began to prepare for de∣fence, but forced upon advice with Colo∣nell Graves, the guards were to little to be relyed upon, that we thought it requisite, he should withdraw himself, lest he should be taken by force from us there being no means le us to secure our selves, to which necessity he was contented to submit, and we purposely causd it to be divulged, that he was gone, hoping thereby to divert the Horse from falling on us, But about one of the clock, we had certain knowledge of their being drawn into the Park and Mea∣dowes adjoyning, and that wee were sur∣rounded
by them, which caused vs to send for all the Officers of our Guard, who with one consent declared to us, that they found no disposition in their souldiers to fight with any of the Generals army, with whom they had so often adventured themselves against the common Enemy. While this discourse held with them, it passing two of the clock, about break of day we discovered a party of horse drawne up before the great gates, and immediatly at the back yard, where our Horse and Dra∣goanes stood; their horse with many of ours amongst them, entred without any re∣sistance at all, being quietly let in, and im∣braced by the souldiers. We presently sent to speak with their chief Officer: it was answered, there was none that commanded: But soon after, Mr, Joyce Cornet to the Generals Life-guard came into us, and being demanded the cause of their coming in this manner, he answered, that they came with authority from the Souldiery to Collonell Graves that hee might be tryed by a Councell of Warre,
for having scandalized the Army, whereby a Plot also (which was contriving to convey the King to London without directions of the Parliament) would be prevented. VVe desired he would put the same into writing, and they delivered us the inclosed accordingly wher in you will not find Colonell Graves mentioned by name, though intended. This is the condition we are in▪ with much sorrow to our selves, that we can give you no better acompt though our endeavours have not been wanting. Our humble suit is, that by this Bearer Captain Titus, you will please to send us speedy directions, the want whereof hath been no small discouragement to us hitherto, in a service of this length and impor∣tance. My Lord, Your Lordships humble Servant, Edw. Mountague. Holmby Iune 3.
A Copy of the Paper delivered by Cornet Joyce to the Commissioners. May it please the Honourable Commissioners of Parlia∣ment, WEE Souldiers now under his Excellencie Sir Thomas Fairfax his command, have by the generall consent of the Souldiery, manifested our true love to the Parliament and Kingdome, by en∣deavouring to prevent a second warre, discovered by the designment of some men privately to take away the King, to the end, he might side with that intend∣ed Army to be raised, which if effected, would be to the utter undoing of the Kingdome. VVe shall bee able and willing to bring our testimony, when called for, who were the Plotters and Contrivers therein. This being the only way and meanes to prevent all those fore-mentioned dangers, that might unhappily have come upon us, and this whole Kingdome, whose weale we have alwayes endeavoured, with the hazard of our lives, and the bloud of many of our deare
friends, and fellow souldiers. This being the onely thing presented to us, which puts us on our late ac∣tion, for the preservation of the Kings person, and furthering of the Parliaments proceedings, together with the Commissioners great care to effect the same, and to discharge the trust imposed on them. The last Newes fom the Army. WE have from the Army further intelligence, to this effect; That the Committee of Troops that secured his Majestie, brought him to Huntington, Collonel Whalley is sent to command in chief, and to stay His majestie that he march not nearer the Armie; His majestie is used with all civi∣lity, but kept with a Guard as formerly. The Army stiil continues at their Generall Rendevouz neare Newmarket; the souldiers both Horse and foot are very unanimous, and overjoyed at the sight of their Generall, whom they received with great joy and acclamations, whose presence hath brought a great subjection in the souldiers to the Officers. FINIS.
