D2856 E739_3 99866084 118344
An earnest PLEA FOR Gospel-Communion In the way of Godliness, Which is sued for by the Protestant Churches of Germanie, unto the Chur∣ches of Great Brittaine and Ireland: In a Letter written by them to these, which was sent hither to that effect, By the Hand of John Dury, Mini∣ster of the GOSPELL. LONDON, Printed for Richard Wodnothe in Leaden-hall-Market, next door to the Golden Hart, 1654.
To the Godly and Learned Professors and Heads of Colledges in the Two famous Univer∣sities of the Common-Wealth of ENGLAND. BEfore ever this Request was made by Forraine Prote∣stants to our Worthies in England, and when I was at the University of Cambridg ma∣ny years agoe, the Necessity of such a Work as is here implored, was made apparent unto me, and my wishes and earnest endeavours were made awake towards it; but then there was no appearance that ever any such thing could or should be brought to pass: yet since we have seen greater and more unex∣pected
matters accomplished both in refe∣rence to Religion, and to the Civil Govern∣ment, I hope we are in a fair way to see yet greater things brought forth, and things of Peace and Comfort to all the Churches, which may prove to be the foundations of many Generations. For as rhe hope of the Hypocrite shall perish, and be like unto the giving up of the Ghost; so the desire of the Righteous shall be fullfilled, and he shall not be ashamed of his hopes, because the Pro∣mise is, that he who hungers and thirsts for Righteousness, shall be satisfyed. Now the Work which is here sued for by the Forrain Ministers, is nothing else but the knowledge of that way of Righteous∣ness which God hath prepared for his Saints to walk in, that they may have Communion with him in his kingdom. Therefore I am very confident that it will be so fully revea∣led and made known, that a man (as the Prophet saith) though a fool shall not erre therein. And because the Lord hath given unto you who are the Two Renowned Nurseries of Learning in this Nation, the A∣bilities, and I am perswaded the Will also to
make this Way more plain then in former Ages it hath been known; therefore I ha∣ving this Treatise from the Author, to dis∣pose of it in Publick as I should finde cause, could choose no other Patronage for it but that which will proceed from your favour∣able acceptance thereof, both from my self and from the Author, by whose encourage∣ment I with all due respects present and de∣dicate the same unto You, that the effect (for which it is now in a seasonable time made publick) may ensue and answer the vehe∣ment longings of so many suitors, through the zeal and godly wisdom which the Lord hath endued You withall for the advance∣ment of his Truth and the consolation of his Churches. And if I may be so bold as to make a Mo∣tion, which in future Ages happily may con∣duce much to further the scope of this design (which is none other but to promote the acknowledging of the Truth which is after Godliness) I shall humbly desire that which that practically-judicious, pious and pro∣found Teacher at Franeker Dr. Ames hath so earnestly wished for in his life-time; Name∣ly
that in every Protestant University there should be a Publick Professor set a part to handle the matters of Practical Divinity, and to make that Task his whole employment. If then this Motion could be effectually made unto his Highness and his Council, and the benefit thereof made known as from your joint consent therein, I make no doubt but the thing would be established, and re∣dound much both unto the Honor of God nd the Advantage of our Reformation, wherein I beseech the Lord to make You ointly and severally to be Eminently In∣trumental; And so taking my leave I rest e∣ver Your most devoted Servant in all du∣ties of Christianity and Advance∣ment of Learning, SAMUEL HARTLIB.
The PREFACE. To all that wish well to the progress of our own Reformation at home, and to the good of the Protestant Cause, which is the Gospel of Jesus Christ abroad. Loving and Christian Reader, THe Protestant Divines who were yet remaining of the Palatinat, of the Territories of Nassaw, of Hanaw, and other parts adjacent, in the yeare 1633. when I was in Germanie, made it their particular sute unto us of these parts, that we would assist them in the way of the Go∣spel with some spiritual helpe, by putting forth a full and compleat Bodie of Practical Divinitie, which might easily be compiled out of our English Authors, and Translated in∣to Latine for the generall use of all Christians, and the par∣ticular benefit of their Churches and Universities. The effect of this Sute, before the beginning of this Parli∣ament, could not be obtained for want of countenance from those who then were in Places of Ecclesiastical Authoritie; and since the sitting thereof, the sollicitation of this matter hath been interrupted, by reason of the publique Distracti∣ons of this State, and the unsettlement of these our Chur∣ches. But seeing God doth seeme to favour us with the hope of some rest and settlement, I conceive we are obliged, so farre as he shall open a door unto us, to improve the Talents which we have received, not onely towards a further advancement of our own Reformation; but also towards the Edification of all men in the Gospel, by the discovering of the wayes of
God ; whereunto the publishing of a full bodie of Pra∣cticall Divinity, may by Gods blessing become a special help. Seeing then the Divines of those parts our Brethren in the Gospel, were pleased to intrust me with their desires of this kind, that I should propose the same to you, to sollicite the effect thereof in their name; and seeing I did chearfully un∣dertake this task for love to the Work it selfe, and did faith∣fully engage my selfe unto them, to endeavour the accom∣plishment of their request: I think my selfe bound in Con∣science at this seasonable time to offer it to your pious thoughts, in the express words of their own Petition, and in some Considerations which I have annexed unto the matter thereof. Therefore in the first place, you shall find here a Copie of of their Petition in Latine, with the severall subscriptions, whereof the Original writings are in my hand, which I have put in English to satisfie Vulgar Capacities: Then in the se∣cond place, you will find three considerable matters concer∣ning this sute represented unto you. 1. What is meant by a Bodie of Practical Divinitie. 2. What the Reasons are, for which it ought to be published. 3. How the Work may be effected, and imparted unto those that have sued for it at our hands. VVhich having endeavoured to make you sensible os, as a work most acceptable unto God, most suteable to the Gospel, most profitable unto the Godly, very usefull unto all, very honourable unto these our Churches, and not difficult in it selfe to be effected, if it receive but a little Countenance, I shall by the further prosecution thereof, as God shall give me addresses and opportunities, rest satisfied in this (whatever the success and event may be) that I have not been wanting to the discharge of my dutie, nor to the desires of the faith∣ful. so farre as God hath enabled me to proceed towards the accomplishing of the same. And thus commending to the grace of God thy sense of this businesse, I shall subscribe my selfe thy Servant therein. John Dury.
Ecclesiarum Magnae Britanniae at{que} Hyberniae patronis & Antistibus Primariis, Eximiis Dei servis, at{que} Ecclesiae Laborantis in Germania fautoribus Colendissimis, sit Gratia & Pax à Deo Patre, & Domino nostro Jesu Christo per Spiri∣tû: sancti Communionem, AMEN. DIversa Spiritûs Dei dona membris Ecclesiae diversis esse concessa, & sacra oracula testan∣tur, & res ipsa loquitur; finem tamen cun∣deni Communis Aedificationis mutuae{que} uti∣litatis liquet Patri luminum, datori omnis doni perfecti, propositum esse in omnium donorum largi∣tione. Apostolous enim dicit, Unicui{que} datam esse Spi∣ritûs declarationem : & alibi jubemur, Ut quis{que} accepit donum, ità alius in alium illud submini∣stret, ut decet bonos gratiae Dei diversae . Talen∣tum enim quod à Deo singuli accepimus, fidei nostrae com∣missum est, ut illius dispensatores facti, non illud defodi∣amus, ut nequam ille servus, in terram; sed ad Domini e∣molumentum impendamus, ut cum fidelibus ejus servis, plura tam Domino quàm nobis ipsis lucrifacere talenta possimus. Haec eò spectant, Illustres, Clarissimi{que} Viri, Reveren∣dissimi{que}, at{que} Reverendi in Christo Patres & Fratres, ut, cùm nobis certo innotuerit inter Ecclesias Magnae Britanniae, Doctrinam Theologiae Practicae multorum piè Doctorum Ecclesiae vestrae Antistitum publicis scriptis e∣gregiè
excultam esse, at{que} ad usum Popularem insigniter accomodatam, at{que} eam solummodò linguae vestrae Cancel∣lis tanquam reconditum ab exteris Nationibus thesaurum contineri, & asservari, maximàm{que} utilitatem ad omnes Ecclesias Christianas, praesertim autem Evangelicas re∣dundaturam, si quae vobis in hoc genere peculiaria sunt, publicentur, itàut ab iis quo{que} legi & intelligi possint, ut (inquam, cùm hacità se habeant) Illustritatibus at{que} Reverentiis Vestris votum nostrum ac desiderium aperia∣mus, at{que} per sanctae Communionis in Christo vinculum, fraternaeq, libertatis Parrhesiam rogemus, vos praesertim quotquot inter Ecclesiarum Rectores, Protectores, & Fau∣tores estis aedificationis Publicae verè studiosi, ne permit∣tatis hoc Talentum tam pretiosumulteriùs abscondi & oc∣cultari ab Exoticorum manibus & oculis, sed velitis pro prudentia vestra, pro ferventis erga fraternas Ecclesias Charitatis, ac liberalis studii erga Dei gloriam in Evan∣geliipropagatione, pio zelo & affectu vestro rationen ali∣quam inire commodam, quâ Medulla Authorum in illo ge∣nere apud vos extantium & eminentium ex omnibus col∣lecta in volumen aliquod conjiciatur, sive Locorum Com∣munium, sive Systematis Theologiae practicae, quod publici juris sit, & omnium manibus teri possit linguâ notà & doctioribus communi: Audivimus pauca quaedam in Bel∣gicum sermonem esse translata, quae magno usui sunt illis Ecclesiis & Theologiae studiosis. Nuper etiam inter nos Germanico idiomate editus li∣bellus ex Anglico versus de Praxi Pietatis ità omnes afficit Pietatis Cultores, ut indè religioni quae in pura mode∣stà{que} veritatis coelestis professione consistit, accessionem permagnam fieri constet. Ideó{que} sperare nobis licet, si huic nostro voto accedat per vos favor requisitus, ut facilè inter vestrates (quibus ad haec & similia beneficia Eccle∣sia suae praestanda prae aliis tranquillitatem in hisee tur∣bis, & facultates concessisse videtur divina dementia)
inveniantur aliqui, qui colligendis, transferendis, dige∣rendis, atque evulgandis Authorum praecipuis scriptis & meditationibus practicis non gravatè suas impendant o∣peras, suum{que} talentum si id suadebitis; unde futurum confidimus, ut insigne Regnum Dei incrementum accipi∣at, si corpus absolutum talis doctrinae existet ex vestris scriptoribus, in quo tam in Theologia Tyrones studii sui, quàm Ecclesiarum varii Pastores Concionum suarum ma∣teriam invenire possint, aedificationi multò utiliorem quàm illa est quae hodie in scriptis Polemicis occurrit: it à a studio contentionis ad Charitatis non fictae affectus revocari poterunt multorum animi, ex quo andem futurum sit, ut ad Deum imprimis gloria & gratiarum actio, ad Evan∣gelii professores cum Sanctitatis & Pietatis studio Pax & Concordia, ad Ecclesias publica aedificatio, ad simpliciores pia Eruditio, ad pios afflictos, solida Spiritûs Consolatio; ad errantes & devios, salutaris Conversio; ad securos & carnales, vivida conscientiae exuscitatio; ad Hypocritas & obstinatos, clara perversitatis suae convictio; ad omnes etiam posteros, major lux veritatis perveniat; & ad illos denique qui suum in hoc studio Talentum collocabunt ad Regni Dei Promotionem, accedat illa vox quondam glo∣riosa & beata à Domino, qui rationem accepti Talenti conferet nobiscum, Bene est, Serve bone & Fidelis, in exiguo fuisti fidelis, super multa te constituam: Ingredre in Gaudium Domini tui. Quod gaudium omnibus iis quibus postulatum hoc no∣strum patefiet, & gratum erit, cum omni corporali faelicita∣te ex animo vovemus. Valete in Domino Viri Excellentes, atque omni honore nobis colendi. Dabantur Hanoviae 24 Febr. Anno 1633. Joannes Daniel Wildius, Verbi Divin. Min & Ecclesiae Hano∣vicae Inspector. Theodorus Leurelius, Ecclesiae Hanovica Minist. Conradus Ammonius Concio∣nator Aulicus, ibid. Paulus Tossanus, S. Theolog. D. & Senatûs Ecclesiastici in in∣feriori
Palatiuatu Electorali Assessor. Clemens Boecius, Ecclesiae Gal∣licae Neo-Hanovicae Pastor. Isaacus Boots, Pastor Ecclesiae Flandricae, quae Christo col∣ligitur Hanoviae. Matthaeus Rowyer, Ecclesiae Gallicae Neo-Han. Pastor. M. Philippus Pareus Davidis Filius, Illustris Gymnasii Hanoviensis Rector & Pro∣fessor. Besides these, who had a meeting in the City of Hanaw (whereunto I was called at the time above written, purpose∣ly to offer this Petition unto me, and to engage me to follow it for them) others there were, who having been made ac∣quainted with this desire of the forenamed Divines, did also joyn in the same suit by putting their hands to another Paper of the same Tenor at Herborn, and in some other places in March and April the same year 1633. Their names are these following. Petrus Streithagen, Sereniss. Regis Bohemiae beatae memo∣riae Concionator Aulicus. Joh. Moriaen, V. Div. quondam apud Ubios Minist. subscripsi Francofurt, 23 April 1633. Philippus Suabelius, Hoingae Solmensis Ecclesiae Patriae Pa∣stor. John. Conradus Hopfius, V. D. Minist. in Comitatu Hanov. in Marchabel. Exul Palatinus. Perutile hoc Propositum & commune fratrum Germano∣rum votum, meâ quoque sub∣scriptione confirmare volui ego Henricus Meerbottius P. F. Pastor Stresheomi Laden∣burgicus, in Elect. Palatiuatu Johan. Irlin, Theol. Doct. Scholae Herbonensis Rector & Professor, Ecclesiae ejusdem Pastor, & Vicinarum Nasso∣vicarum Inspector. Mr. Casparus Stippius, Ecclesiae Siegenensis Archidiaconus; qui suo & reliquorum fra∣trum in Comitatu Nassovico Sieginensi, nomine subscrip∣fit. Johannes Arcularus, Ecclesiae Beisteinsis Pastor, qui suo & reliquorum fratrum in Co∣mitatu Nassovico Belistemeu∣si & Orzensi subscripsit. Thomas Dorn, Pastor Alten∣kirchensis nomine Ecclesia∣rum Comitatus Sainensis,
This Letter in English speaks thus. To the chiefe Patrons and Rulers of the Churches of Great Brittaine and Ireland, the eminent servants of God, and most respected fa∣vourers of the distressed Church in Germanie, be Grace and Peace from God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ, through the Communion of the Holy Ghost, Amen. ALthough it is attested by the Holy Oracles, and the thing it selfe doth speak it, that to the severall Members of the Church, severall gifts of Gods spirit are bestowed; yet it is evident, that the Father of Lights the giver of every per∣fect gift, doth in the distribution of all his gifts, propose un∣to himself but one and the same end, which is the common edification and mutuall usefulness of all unto each other. For the Apostle saith, That the manifestation of the spirit is given to every one to profit withall; and else∣where we are commanded, As every one hath received the gift, even so to minister the same unto one another, as good Stewards of the manifold grace of God: For the Talent which every one of us have received of God, is committed to our trust, that we being made distributers thereof, should not hide it in the ground as that unprofitable Servant did, but
employ it to the advantage of our Lord, that with such ser∣vants as are faithfull unto him we may gain more Talents, both to our Masters use, and to our selves. These thing Illustrious and Renowned Gentlemen, Most Reverend and Reverenced Fathers and Bretheren, are al∣ledged to the end that we may acquaint you with our wishes and desires, that seeing we are certainly informed that in the Churches of Great Brittaine the Doctrine of Practicall Di∣vinity, by the publique writings of many godly wise Mini∣sters of your Churches, is brought to a great perfection, and that it is excellently fitted for the use of the Common peo∣ple, but yet kept up as an hidden Treasure from the eyes of Forreine Nations, within the bounds of your own language alone; and that a very great benefit would accrue unto all Christian Churches, and chiefly to those that professe the pu∣rity of the Gospel, if so be those things which are peculiar unto you were published, so as by them they might also be read and understood: Seeing (we say) these things are so, our purpose is to acquaint your Honours and Worships with our wishes and desires; and by the bond of holy Com∣munion in Christ, and with that confidence of speech which our brotherly freedom doth suggest, to intreat you (you chiefly who being Rulers, Protectors and Favourers of the Churches, are truly desirous to edifie the publique) that ye would not suffer so precious a Talent to be hid and conceal∣ed any longer from the hands and eyes of Forreiners; but that ye would accordng to the pious zeal and affection of servent Charity which ye have toward your Brother-Chur∣ches, and the bountifull care which ye have for the Glory of God in the propagation of the Gospell, take some conve∣nient course, by which the Marrow of these Authors, which in that kind are exstant amongst you, and are of chief Note, may be gathered out of all into one Volum, either of Com∣mon places, or of a body of Practicall Divinity, which may be published and made use of by all in a tongue known and common to the learned. We have heard that some few things have been translated into the low Dutch language, which are of great use unto
those Churches, and their Schollars of Divinity. Of late also there is a little Book of the Practise of Piety, tran∣slated out of English into our Germane tongue, which hath ta∣ken so much with many godly souls, that we find thereby wrought in them a very great growth of that Religious dispo∣sition, which doth consist in a pure and modest Profession of heavenly truth; for which cause we do hope, that if our wishes may obtain by your means the favour which is desired, that some of your Men (to whom God seemeth mercifully to have given in the midst of these troubles, both quietnesse and means to conferre these and such like benefits unto his Church) will easily be found, who without difficulty will at your perswasion, bestow their pains and their Talents, to Collect, to Translate, to Digest, and to publish the chiefe practicall Writings and Meditatio of your Authors. Whence we are confident this will come to passe, that the Kingdom of God wil receive a notable inlargement, if a com∣pleat body of such Doctrine out of your Writers were put forth; wherein as well the young Schollars of Divinity for their Studyes, as many Pastors of the Churches for their Ser∣mons, might find matter far more usefull unto edification, then that is which now adayes is met with all in contro∣versall writings. So that by this means, the minds of many men may be drawn back from the endeavours of strife, unto the affections of unfained Charity; whence afterward this will follow, that unto God in the first place, Glory and thanksgiving will redound; and then unto the Professors of the Gospell, with the care of holiness and pietie, peace and concord; to the Churches, publique Edification; to the sim∣ple sort, pious learning; to the Godly and afflicted, sound spirituall comfort; to the erring, and such as go astray, sa∣ving Conversion; to such as are secure and carnall, a lively wakening of their Conscience; to the Hypocrites and stub∣born sinners, a clear discoverie of their perversness; and to all the Generations to come, a greater light of truth will be advanced: and lastly, unto those that shall bestow their Ta∣lent towards this endeavour for the advancement of Gods Kingdom, when he shall call us to an account of the Talent
which we have received from him, that glorious and bles∣sed voyce shall then come from the Lord unto them, Well done thou good and faithfull servant, thou hast been faithfull in a few things, I will make thee Ruler over may things; enter into the joy of thy Lord: which joy we wish from our heart, together with all temporall happinesse to all those to whom our request shall be made known, and with whom it shall find accep∣tance. Farewell in the Lord excellent Gentlemen, whom with all respect we are bound to worship. Given at Hanaw 24. Febrn. Anno 1633. By John Daniel Wildins, Mini∣ster of Gods Word, and Inspector of the Chur∣ches of Hanaw. Theodorus Lenrelius, Prea∣cher of the Church of Hanaw. Conradus Ammomus, Prea∣cher to the Court of the same place. Paulus Tossanus, Doctor in Divinity, and an As∣sessor of the Ecclesiastical Senate in the lower E∣lectoral Palatinat. Clemeus Boesius, Pastor of the French Church in New Hanaw. Isaacus Boots, Pastor of the Flanders Church, which is gathered unto Christ in Hanaw. Matthew Rouyer, Pastor of the French Church at New Hanaw. Mr. Philip Pareus, Son to David Rector and Pro∣fessor of the famous Col∣ledge of Hanaw, At Herborne in March, and elsewhere in Aprill, in the same yeare 1633. the same sute was renewed by these. Petrus Streithagen, Prea∣cher to the Court of the most Illustrious King of Bohemia of blessed Memorie.
John Moriaen, formerly Prea∣cher of Gods Word amongst these of Collen. I did under∣write this at Francofurt, 23. April. Anno 1633. Philip Suabelius of Hoing, in the County of Solms, Prea∣cher to his Native Church. John Conradus Hopifius, Mini∣ster of the word of God in the County of Hanaw in Mercabel an exiled Palatin. I Henry Meerbottius for the present time, Pastor of Schesheim Ladenburg in the Electoral Palatinat, am willing to confirme also with my Subscription, this most profitable Intention and common wish of our Brethren of Germanie. John Irlen, Doctor of Divini∣tie, Rector and Professor of the School of Herorn, Pa∣stor of the Church of the same place, and Inspector of the neighbouring Churches of Nassaw. Mr. Casparus Stippius, Arch-Deacon of the Church of Siegen, who subscribed in his own name, and in the name of the rest of his Brethrer, in the County of Siegen in Nassaw. John Arcularius, Pastor of the Church of Beilsteni, who subscribed in his own name, and in the name of the rest of his Brethren in the Coun∣ties of Beilstein and Ozen in Nassaw. Thomas Dern, Pastor of Al∣tenkirch, in the name of the Churches of the County of Sainen. THis Letter doth sufficiently speak for it self; and the per∣sons who did offer it, were in those parts none of the least considerable Protestants: nor is their number small, if you take notice of the Churches in whose name some have sub∣scribed: and although the time since it was offered, may seem somewhat long, yet because that which hitherto could be done to obtain their desire, hath not beene neglected, though by several invincible impediments obstructed, because the expectation of obtaining it, is not vanished, but at this time raised: and because such a suite as this can never be out of date till it be fulfilled; nay although the first Petitioners should all be dead, it ought not the lesse conscionably to be regarded by those to whom it is made, because it doth not at
all concern any temporall, or so much the particular con∣venience of those that make it, as the spirituall edification, and generall benefit of all the Churches of God, and of the ages to come in the Gospell. I say, because of all these con∣siderations, and more that might be added, therefore I am willing to second their request, as I am many waies bound to do; and to that effect, I shall first shew my sense of the Bo∣die of Divinity, which I conceive will satisfie their demand; and then the Reasons why it ought to be, and manner how it may be made up.
Of the First. What is meant by a Bodie of Practi∣call Divinity. BY Practicall Divinity, is meant the revealed truths of God, concerning the obedience of the faith which is to be yeelded unto his will. There is a Two-fold Divine Truth; the one is to be contemplated, which is the Object of the Understanding and Remembrance; the other is to be practi∣sed, which is the Object of the Will and Affections. The first, as we partake of it, is the Conformity of our intellectuall 2 Pet. 1. 22. & 3. 1. 1 Joh 1. 16 Rom. 12. 1. 2. facultie to the testimony of Gods Word, when we con∣ceive aright of his meaning therein. The second, as we par∣take of it, is the Conformity of the purposes of our heart, to that which is known to be Gods will, when we prove how good, perfect and acceptable it is. That first, is in the Notions of the Mind to beget Knowledge: This other, is in the Con∣viction of the Conscience, to beget Resolutions and obedi∣ential Performance. Of the first sort of truth, Christ saith, If ye continue in my Word, ye shall know the truth; Joh. 8. 31, 32. Of the second, he saith, He that doth truth, commeth to the light, Joh. 3. 21. So then as there is a contemplative and in∣telligible, so there is a Practicable truth, that is a truth to be done, which is the action of Vertue: for Christ in Joh. 3. v. 20, 21. doth oppose the doing of evill, and the doing of truth; that is, Vice and Vertue to one another: He saith,
every one that doth evill (that is, who is vicious in his life) hateth the light; but he that doth truth (that is, whose life is vertuous and upright) commeth to the light. As dark∣nesse is to light, so truth is opposite to all falshood; not on∣ly to that of ignorance and error, but especially to that of lying and deceitfulnesse, which are no lesse inseparable com∣panions of vice, then sincerity and uprightnesse are of vertue in the souls of men. Now both the Intellectuall and Practicall truth, is origi∣nally existent in the living word, as in the principle and fountain; and from thence by the testimony of Jesus, which is the Spirit of Prophefie in the Scriptures, it is derived unto us as to a receptacle and vessel, when by it we are sanctified according to Christ's Prayer, Joh. 17. 17. Sanctifie them in thy truth, thy Word is truth; the Word preached by the Apostles and Prophets, is both exhorting and testifying; that is, both Practical and Theoretical, concerning that truth which in God is essential; but as it is manifested to us, it is the Grace of God which bringeth salvation, Tit. 2. 11. Hence it is, that nothing ought or may be called. Theologie, but that which is taught by the divine Oracles:  can onely furnish us with that knowledge which is true Theologie; and whether it be in the Theoreticall or Practicall matters, no∣thing is true Divinity, but that which is divine truth; nor is any thing a Diviue truth, but that which is manifested by the Word of God: the Word then to us, is the Standard of Truth. Now although the Action of the understanding, must of necessity be Antecedent to all our Acts of truth, because the will is a knowing facultie, and cannot act orderly with∣out the Understanding; yet the Theoretical truths notional∣ly apprehended, bring the soul to no perfection of happiness, except they become fruitful in the actions of vertue. The Notional Science of all Gods truth, and of his whole will, as it may be in the brain alone, and without the practice whereunto that Science doth oblige the heart, is more hurt∣full then profitable to our felicitie; It had been better (saith Peter) not to have known the way of righteousnesse, then after 2 . 2. 21. they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment. If ye
know these things (saith Christ) happie are ye if ye do them: Jo. 3. 17. whence it followeth, that if ye do them not, you are not happie, although ye know them. And the Apostle James, doth place the blessedness of a Man in his Deed, as distinct Jm. 1. 21. 2. from his bare knowledge, when he saith, He that is not a hea∣rer of the Word onely, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his Deed: The happiness of his condition is made perfect in his Deed. Whence it is evident, that Practicall truths import us, and reach our happinesse more neerly then Theoreticall; because that which we know, although it be a truth, is no part of our felicitie, nor a true blessing of God unto us, except it either bring forth an enjoyment of the life of God in us, or else result from that enjoyment to us: for the substance of all our felicitie unto all eternitie, is nothing else but our union with God, which is the enjoyment of his life; and this life is onely enjoyed then when by his truth he liveth in us, and we in him. His life in us, is spirituall light and power: Light is in the understanding; and power is to move conformably to Gods will in the whole inward Man: The Light sheweth him to us, the Power maketh us and him one; we may know him at a distance, but we cannot feel his life, and move in him, except he be in us, and we one with him. The knowledge therefore hath lesse of the enjoy∣ment then the power of life; but there is a Two-fold know∣ledge of Gods truth; The one goeth before the enjoyment of his life, and the other followeth upon it. The knowledge which goeth before the enjoyment of Gods life, is the true light which lighteth every Man that commeth into the World, Joh. 1. 9. and this light is that which may be known of God, which he doth manifest in Men, and sheweth unto them: He doth manifest in Men, both that which doth make them clearly see his eternall power and God-head, so that Rom. 1. 19. 20. they are without excuse; and that also which maketh them shew the work of his Law written in their hearts. All this is manifested in them, and shewed unto them, partly by the Rom. 2. 15. Creation of the World, partly by their own Conscience; but yet all this, and much more then this, revealed both in the Law given to the Jews, and in the Gospel, given both to Jews and Gentiles: I say all this both naturall which is
common and supernatural, which is specially revealed know∣ledge; nay although it might be in such a high degree, as to manifest all Mysteries unto them, may befruitlesse: and he that hath it, without blessednesse, and destitute of the life of God: for the truth which is both manifested in the na∣tural mans heart, and shewed unto him by the Creation, is held up by him in unrighteousnesse, Rom. 1. 18. And although he doth know God, yet he glorifyeth him not as God, vers. 21. And the Jews which had the form of knowledge in the Law, and could teach others, did not practise that which they taught; but by their transgression of the Law, they did dishonour God, Rom. 2. 21. 22, 23. And the Gentiles to whom together with the Jews the light of the Gospel was and is revealed, shall be condemned because they loved dark∣nesse rather then light, Joh. 3. 19. And he that may know all Mysteries, may yet want Charity, and be nothing as to the happinesse and life of God. But although all this know∣ledge of Truth, which is Antecedent to the enjoyment of the life of God, may be void of the practise of Truth, and so come short of happinesse; yet it may also through the pra∣ctise of Truth, become effectuall unto happinesse, if God make it fruitful, which he doth according to his own plea∣sure, in giving saving faith; whereby the heart is purified, that it may become obedient to all his will, by which means the soul partaketh of the life of God, and becommeth tru∣ly happie: This knowledge then doth not otherwise make us happie, but as it bringeth us unto this estate. As for the other knowledge of Gods Truth, which fol∣loweth upon our union with him; it is nothing else but a further confirmation of the soul, in the truth which it hath received unto life, and an enlargement thereof by the en∣joyment of God in his power; for Christ doth give us two promises to that effect: The first is, that by the truth of obe∣dience, we shall come to the clearing of doubts, concerning intellectual matters, for Joh. 7. v. 17. He saith, If any man will doe the will of him that sent me, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my selfe. And the second is, that upon the keeping of the Commandements, both the Father and the Sonne will manifest unto the soule
which loveth them, their presence in love. For Christ saith, Joh. 14. 21. 23. He that hath my Commandements, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me; and he that loveth me, shall be lo∣ved of my Father, and I will love him, and manifest my love unto him: and if any man love me, he will keepe my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. Here the manifestation of Gods presence, which is both the light and power of life unto the soule, is the consequent of the obedience of faith: and so it is in that of S. John, 1 Epist. Chap. 5. 20. And we know that the Sonne of God is come, and hath given us an understanding, that we may know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Sonne Jesus Christ; this is the true God and eternall life. This is a reflexive knowledge from God upon our selves, in the enjoyment of him as our happiness; and so is that 1 Joh. 3. 14. We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren. So then we see, that all truths as it is the object of contemplation, is nothing else but a Preparative to, or a consequent of the Truth, which is the object of Action. The Practicall Truth then is the main thing to be heeded; for to it the Theoretical is either subserviant and subordinate, or a necessary and infallible effect. The Apostle maketh this evi∣dent by the nature of his Ministry, which Tit. 1. 1. (he saith) Is be an Apostle according to the faith of Gods Elect, and the acknowledgement of the truth which is after Godlinesse; Intimating clearly, that as his Apostle-ship was appointed by God to beget faith in the Elect, by their acknowledge∣ment of the truth; so the acknowledgement of the truth and faith, is appointed to beget the life of Godlinesse in Be∣leevers. Therefore as the end and perfection of his Apostle∣ship was the begetting of faith by the acknowledgement of the truth; nor was he warranted to teach or do any thing, which did not tend to that end and effect: So the end and perfection of all true knowledge, is the life of Godlinesse; nor is any knowledge in spirituall things warrantable, or any thing to be accounted a truth, which doth not tend to this end and effect. Godlinesse therefore, which is the pra∣ctise of divine Truth, is the measure of all intellectual truths; for whatsoever matter of knowledge is not proportionate,
subordinate, and subserviant unto the production of the life of God in the soul of a Beleever, is not to be received as a divine Truth; for the faith of Gods Elect, is in the acknow∣ledgement of none other truth, but of that which is after Godlinesse. From all which we shall inferre this Conclusion; That the studie of Practical Divinitie, is of farre greater concern∣ment unto all, and farre more to heeded, esteemed, and en∣tertained in the Schools of the Prophets, then the studie of contemplative Mysteries and notions of Divinitie; where∣upon Controversal matters are ordinarily attendants. And seeing there are so many bodies and Systemes of Theoretical and Conteroversal matters, that it would be no easie task to any Man to reckon them all up; and yet there is not so much as one compleat bodie or Systeme, of Practicall Divinitie found in all the Churches; whereunto we see neverthelesse, that all Theoretical truths ought to be referred, and direct∣ed as to their end; it is evident that therein there is a mani∣fest defect, and that much is wanting hereby, to the increase of publique Edification, to the supply of spiritual Conso∣lation, and to the settlement of a sound Reformation in all the Churches, which may be remedied by a Bodie of this na∣ture. Now by this which we call a Body of Divinity, is meant a full Collection, and an orderly disposition of all divine truths which are after godlinesse, under severall distinct heads and matters; to the end that from the holy Scriptures, the man of God may be perfectly instructed, and throughly furnished with sufficient helps and directions, which by the Spirit of Faith, may not onely make him wise unto salvati∣on, but able also to work all his works in God. And concerning this Body; Seeing I am intrusted and conscionably obliged, as in the presence of God to solicite the same towards those that are able to contribute their Ta∣lents to make it up; I conceive it may be an advantage to the Work, to offer the parts thereof unto their confiderati∣on, that the number of tasks being distinguished and known, such as God shall inable and stirre up to manifest his truth, and to joyn with others in compleating this work, may know
what tasks to chuse, and how to concur with each other in elaborating the same. I shall therefore with due respect unto better judgements, offer these following thoughts unto such as shall be under∣takers in this Work. First, I lay this Fundamental Rule to be observed in the contriveance of the whole, and of every part of the Work, viz. That the Number and Measure of the Parts of this Bo∣die should be made sutable and proportionate to the end thereof: that as nothing should be brought into it, which is not proper and useful to the attainment of the end, so no∣thing should be left out which may be requisite and subser∣viant thereunto. We shall therefore look upon the end and use of the Work, that we may find the parts thereof without defect, and with∣out superfluitie. The truth of Godlinesse, which is the Object of practical Divinitie; is the manifestation of the life of God. The aime for which this Truth is to be attested unto the world, and practised by such as know and believe it; is that we may en∣joy God by partaking of his life in the divine nature, having escaped the corruption which is in the world through lust, 2 Pet. 1. 4. This life of God in the divine nature, is communicable unto us by none other means, but by the knowledge of Christ, and the truth which is in him, Joh. 14, 6. 7, 8, 9. and 7. 3. Ephes. 4. 18. 19, 20, 21. Colos. 3. 10. and 2 Pet. 1. 2, 3. And that which Christ doth communicate unto us of this life, is made perceptible unto us by two properties of life wrought in us; the one is the Light, the other is the power of Life: By the light of life, we are made wise unto salvati∣on; and by the power of life, we are enabled to work out our salvation; that is, to do all our works in God. This then is the compleat end of Practical Divinitie, to teach men the wisdome which is profitable unto the salvation of their souls, and the direction of the whole conversation to Gods will; that they may be enabled whatever they do, to do all in God by walking in his light: and what Doctrine soever
doth not directly tend unto this end, is no part of this Bodie, and ought not to be mentioned in it; but whatsoever doth thus tend thereunto, ought not to be omitted. To deliver then all, and neither more nor lesse, then all the Doctrines and Truths which may directly be helpful to ad∣vance a Man unto the attainment of this end; I conceive that this bodie of Divinitie should be made up of two General parts. The first, containing the positive and undeniable Truths. The second, the doubtful cases of Conscience, con∣cerning the practise of Godliness. That part which is Posi∣tive, should contain concerning the life of Godlinesse, three things. First, The Precognitions to prepare the mind to think of that life. Secondly, The Principles by which that life is begotten. Thirdly, The Parts or Acts, wherein that life doth con∣sist. By the Precognitions, I mean such truths as must be taken notice of, and acknowledged, or at least not contradicted and doubted of, before the Doctrine of Godlinesse can be taught; and without the acknowledgement of which, no Man can be rationally dealt withal or induced to intend to live unto God according to his revealed will. By the Principles of the life of Godliness, I mean the Fun∣damentall Doctrines of divine Truth, which begetteth love unto God, and thereby obligeth the Conscience unto all dutifulnesse of obedience towards him. By the Parts and Acts wherein the life of Godlinesse doth consist, I mean all things which either substantially or cir∣cumstantially belong thereunto, to make it up as the state of the perfect man in God. By the Substantials of this life, I mean two things. First, All truths which discover the inward frame and Regenerati∣on of the soul which liveth the life of God. Secondly, All truths which hold forth the outward frame; the way of wal∣king, and the work of the profession which is proper to that life, and inseparable from the ends thereof. By the Circumstantials of the life of Godlinesse, I under∣stand all the different outward states and particular callings
of Professors, wherein God doth set people in this life; as of Husband and Wife, Father and Childe, Master and Ser∣vant; of Magistrate and Subject, of Pastor and Flock, and such like: To all which several duties belong, and there∣unto several directions are accordingly to be given, to shew how every one should walk in all truth with a good Con∣science before God and Man. In this discovery of truths we may find, concerning the Tree of life, as it were the soyl pre∣pared before it be planted, in the Precognitions; the Root, which is to be planted in the principles; the Stemme, when it is grown up in the Substantials; and the Branches, after the full growth in the Circumstantials of the way of Godli∣nesse; so that in this Bodie of Divinitie, the Man of God should be compleated and set forth. First, As it were in his Head and Intellectuals, by the Recognitions and Principles: Secondly, In his heart and vital Motions, by the Substanti∣als: And Lastly, In his limbs and outward Members, with∣out which he is not a compleat Man, by the Circumstantials of his life: and as none of these parts, or of the things ne∣cessary to make up the same should be wanting in this Bodie; so the matters belonging to each of these heads ought to be delivered fully, yet not superfluously; that is to saie, so as they should not onely contain the Marrow, but the flesh and full substance of all profitable truths; yet without needlesse Repetitions, large Amplifications, Rethorical Digressions and enlargements, which to move mens affections, rather then to convince their Conscience, and enlighten their un∣derstandings, are frequently used by writes of Practicall Matters. And as these General parts of the whole Bodie ought thus to follow one another, in respect of their natural dependance upon each other; so the matters subordinate unto every one of these, ought to be set in a method, which is positive and proper to their nature, that there may be a Coherence of all the parcels in the whole without any redundancie. And although such a Bodie of Truths fully and clearly delivered, might suffice to Men that are free from all preju∣dice and of able pars, to direct them in all Cases of Practise, which may be incident to the Course of their life; yet be∣cause
the work is not to be compiled for them alone, but for others also; and because many doubts and scruples of Conscience are and will be raised, partly by the weaknesse of some, partly by the malice of others, which every or∣dinary capacity is not, and will not be able readily to re∣solve by it selfe, although it be helped with the undoubt∣ed principles, with the standing Truths, and with the rules of Practise, which such a compleat Bodie of Divinitie may containe: therefore to supply this defect of knowledge, (which although but accidental, yet is unavoidable) an Appendix or Supplement of special doubts and cases of con∣science (for I suppose the common doubts, viz. such as are incident to meer naturall men, will be cleared by the Do∣ctrine of the Bodie it self) should be added unto the Bodie in a method relating the order of Matters, delivered in each part where the ground of the decision of the doubtful case is to be found: And if this be done, I cannot see what could be desired, or further wished for in this kind; onely to make this Appendix of case-Divinitie compleat (because cases ac∣cording to the differences of Mens capacities and apprehen∣sions of matters, may be as to us innumerable,) therefore some general Rules before the particular cases be set down, should be given, to direct the wavering mind of what degree of proficiencie soever, how to order it selfe in seeking out by the testimonies of the Scripture, and the undoubted te∣nor of the Covenant within its own heart; a determinati∣on of any question whatsoever, at least so farre, that it should not be able to perplex the spirit with any unsettlement in the grounds of faith, hope, and love, which are the Pillars of our whole profession in this life. For by the confidence of faith, we stand and rest in respect of God; by the joyfulnesse of hope, in respect of our selves; and by the sincerity of love, 2 Cor. 1. 24 Heb. 3. 6 1 Joh. 3. 14 & Rom. 13 8. 9. in respect of our Neighbour: These generall Directions then should first be delivered with an example, in a case or two, how to use them, and then the particular cases which have some difficultie more then ordinary should be brought in and resolved. Thus we have the many Heads of the whole; but this will not suffice for a distribution of particular Tasks, because
each Head is too Comprehensive; there must be a subdivisi∣on of every part by it self, into its parcels, set in order like unto the Anatomy or Sceleton of a mans bodie, wherein all the bones do hang one upon another; so that besides the number of parts, the tallness of each part, and the place thereof in the bodie may be discerned: And although such a delineation as this of bare bones, will have no life in it, and be onely like the rude draught of a Painter before he puts colours to his work; yet it may be not onely usefull, but will be even necessary to make the features of the bodie appear, which afterward may have life put to it. Concerning the Precognitions. GOd having made Man a Rational Creature, doth still rule him, and in all his wayes towards him, doth walk with him according to the Grounds of that Reason which he at first gave him; and although  his de∣fection from God (in whose light alone he could see light) by his own default and free choice of earthly mindedness, he hath darkened the eye of his understanding, and made himself blind both in things which are supernatural, and also in very many things which are natural; so that in respect of these he hath not any true Notions at all, till they be renew∣ed in him; and in respect of these, the Notions which he hath, he cannot improve so, as to apply them by himselfe to∣wards their right ends, without some speciall directory and help: yet it cannot be truly said, that God hath left Man destitute of all light, and without all Testimony of the be∣ing of things supernatural, and of the right improvement of things natural; for he doth full maintain some generall Principles and Instincts, as glimmerings of his truth within him, to the end that he may not onely be without excuse in respect of his back-slyding, but that he may be made a subject capable of Grace through the second Adam, to be restored to his original integrity, when he shall be rationally dealt withall, both by the remainder of the light which he hath, and in that which is to be super-added thereun∣to; for I shall freely acknowledge (yet without any advan∣tage
to Socinian Principles) that God doth oblige no man to entertain any thought, either of spirituall or naturall things, or of his own dealings with man-kind in the one or the other way, which is contrary to sound Reason; but that every one who will either conceive of God rightly, or live unto him justly, is obliged to do it in a rationall way, both in reference to God, and toward Men, because we are com∣manded to be ready to give a reason of the hope which is in us, to every one that asketh it of us, 1 Pet. 3. 15. and to pre∣sent our bodie a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, by our Reasonable service, Rom. 12. 1. And although in this place  may be rendred a service accor∣ding to his word, as , 1 Pet. 2. 2. is well rendred the sincere Milk of the Word; yet because the Word of God did by wisdome create all things at first, and still doth uphold all things as they were created, it must needs be rationall in it selfe, and to all intellectual Creatures, the original cause of all Reason, because every Truth and Pre∣cept of dutie revealed to Man therein, is by the Scriptures rationally offered to the Conscience of these that are taught of God thereby; and because they that are taught, are bound to take notice of the reasons why they believe and do every thing, so as to be able to give a rational account there∣of unto other reasonable Men, therefore  in the one, and  in the other place, are to be understood in the fulnesse of their signification, as they comprehend both the Notions of Rationality, and of the Word of God, which indeed are inseparable; for as it cannot be imagined, that Gods Word should have beene separate from his Wisdome, so we ought to conceive, that his Wisdome and Will ex∣pressed in his Word concerning every thing, is that truth of being and reality of reason which is extant in it; and that which in our mind is by any thing found a truth, and sound reason convincing our Conscience, is his Word by that thing towards us. And this observation I have premised to that which I am about to offer, concerning the Precognitions of the life of Godlinesse; lest I might seem to desire without a just cause and sufficient motive, that which I shall propose as a taske to
the workmen to be compleated, before any thing else can be fruitfully and by a rational man (to whom our addresses must be made in this undertaking) convincingly enter∣tained. For before any mans understanding can be dealt withall, to induce him to live unto God according to his will, he must be brought to acknowledg that God is, and that the life of man may have some reference unto him by the know∣ledge of his will. Therefore these things before all others must be rationally made out unto him: and to this effect, Four Heads of truth ought to be handled satisfactorily, which are these. First, That there is a God. Secondly, That God is to be feared, worshipped, and glo∣rified by Man; and that he is a rewarder of those that fear, worship, and glorifie him. Thirdly, That the Scriptures given to the Jewish Church of old by the Prophets, and to the Churches of the Gentiles and Jews by the Evangelists and Apostles, are undoubtedly Gods Word. Fourthly, That the Scriptures were given by those Men, to teach all men the true way of fearing, worshipping and glorifying God. These truths ought to be cleared upon the ground of com∣mon Reason, which all men are supposed to be made capable of; and to this effect, I suppose it will be necessary to handle these following, or such like Positions. Of the First, That there is a God. TO Demonstrate unto a Rational man that there is a God, he must be made to acknowledge these following truths. 1. That in this World, besides the things which are visible, there be other things invisible; which though conceal∣ed from sense, have a being, and may be understood to be. 2. That the Heavens, the Earth, and the things visible there∣in, have not their being from themselves, but from some∣thing
else which is not seen, but may be understood to be over all, as the Governour and supream power thereof, which is called God. 3. That this supream power is before all things, without beginning and ending; infinite in all perfections, most wise, good and bountiful in giving all things unto all. 4. That amongst all visible things, as Man is the most per∣fect; so he can least of all have his Being from inferiour Creatures, or from himself: but having it from the supream cause, more remarkably then other Creatures, he is more en∣abled then they to know God and respect him. Of the Second. WHen upon these grounds a man is Convicted that there is a God; then to demonstrate unto him rationally, that this God ought to be feared, worshipped, and glorified by Man-kind; these following, or such like Positions, are to be made out unto him. 1. That Man hath a soul endowed with a Reasoning fa∣cultie, whereby he is able to judge of his own actions, and know his own aims, though secret and hidden from o∣thers. 2. That in this judging facultie, there is something which universally in all ages Men have called Conscience, which secretly accuseth, or else excuseth Men concerning their acti∣ons and aims, chiefly when others judge of them otherwise then they meant them. 3. That this Conscience doth bear witnesse unto all men (in whom it is awake) from their own reason, that they are under the power of God, and that they ought to be thankful to God. 4. That the reason which convicteth mens Conscience that they are under God, will also convict them, that they ought to shew their thankfulness unto God, sutablie unto the nature and properties of Gods being, and not other wise. 5. That the nature and propertie of Gods being, seeing in all things it is the first and supream, is in it self infinitely perfect, and to all other things the alone Author of all good;
and that therefore it ought to have the glorie of this supre∣macie, perfection and goodnesse, given unto it by man in his use of all things. 6. That in case he doth not shew himself thankful, by respecting the glorie due to God in all things, he doth then deserve to be cast off by God, and deprived of the fruit of his goodnesse in all things. 7. That if a man doth give unto God the glorie which is due to his Name, by being thankfull unto firm; he may as∣sure himselfe, that God, as he is wise and all-knowing, will take notice of him; and as he is just and good, will be mer∣cifull and beneficiall unto him. Of the Third. WHen a Man hath acknowledged these truths, that there is a God, and that he is to be glorified by Man an∣swerably to the properties of his nature; then we must rati∣onally induce him to believe, that the Scriptures written to Jews and Gentiles, by the Prophets, Evangelists and Apo∣stles, are the Word of God: And this may be done by the de∣monstration of these or the like Positions. 1. That no Books in the World have greater evidences and arguments of truth, in respect of their History, then these have: two things must be made out. 1. That they were writ∣ten by those Men, by whom they are said to be written. 2. That the Matters of fact recorded in them, are as ration∣ally credible, as any other humane Records whatsoever. 2. That the Writers of those Books (whatsoever they were) were undoubtedly the true servants of God, inspired by him in writing the same. 3. That all the Doctrines and Precepts of divine fear and worship contained therein, are most sutable to the nature and property of Gods Supremacy, Perfection and goodnesse; and that they are more answerable unto the true Notions of duty written in the heart of Man-kind towards God, then the Doctrines and Precepts of any other Book and Religion whatsoever extant any where in all the World.
OF the Fourth. WHen a Man is rationally Convicted, or at least indu∣ced to believe that there is no cause to contradict this truth, that the Scriptures are the Word of God; it will be no difficult matter to let him see by the substance of the mat∣ters contained therein, and the ends for which they were written and given both to the Jews and Gentiles; that they were written and given to no other end, but to teach all Men the true way of fearing, worshipping, and glorifying God: And to this effect, these or such like Positions may be made out. 1. That the whole summe and substance of the History of the Bible doth directly tend to this scope. 2. That the Authors of the Holy Scriptures, do expresly declare this to be the purpose of their writing. 3. That the naturall Properties and effects of the things taught by them, and their manner of teaching the same, are wholly fitted to work upon the spirits of men, those impres∣sions and affections which lead them to feare, worship, and glorifie God. To all which, this Position at last should be added. That there shall be a time wherein God will judge men according to the works wherein they have, or have not fea∣red, worshipped, and glorified God: which is to be made out upon three Grounds, which may be rationally evinced. 1. Because God having made all things under a Law, and ruling all Men by a Law of Reason; must needs also be ac∣knowledged as a Judge over the observers and transgressors of his Laws, and consequently have a time to exercise his judgement. 2. That the rational Souls of Men are immortal, and live when they are separated from the bodie, and consequently can undergo a judgement after this life. 3. That the Consciences of Men bearing witnesse to them of their wicked deeds, even against their wills, though they live in outward prosperitie, put them in fear; and bear∣ing witnesse also of the vertuous deeds of good Men, though they are in outward adversity, yet comfort and support
them; which inward testimonies of the Consciences of men are not vain notions, but undeniable Evidences of a judg∣ment to come, which the Soul within it self is sensible of. When these things are throughly handled, and all Scru∣ples which may be raised concerning the same are taken a∣way, so that a Rational man, who is without prejudice, shall have no cause for want of the discovery of truths of this na∣ture to make any further doubt thereof; I suppose the ground is prepared upon which the Fundamentals of Divine Faith, that is, the Doctrine of Revealed Truths (which by natural Reasoning no man can reach unto) may be offered. For as God doth make a man first by a living soul to be a na∣tural man, and afterward he becomes by grace a new creature 1 Cor. 15. 46. & spiritual man: so I suppose he doth cause the Truths of Ra∣tionality concerning himself first to become effectual upon the conscience, before the understanding is obliged conscionably to entertain Revealed Truths. For he who is not capable of that measure of Faith which common Reason it self doth be∣get upon the natural apprehensions of God and his Truths written in the heart; how can he be thought susceptible of the other measure which dependeth onely upon Revelation and Divine Tradition? We conclude therefore, that these Precognitions are first to be handled as matters requisite, to fit the mind of a natural man to receive that which is to fol∣low after, because I conceive, not that the Principles of the life of Godlinesse which are to follow, are to be delivered as the products of these fore-going Truths; but onely as mat∣ters subsequent unto the same, in respect of the order of things to be taught. These Praecognita, are Prae-supponenda, but not Principia, because I take a Principle of Godlinesse to be such a Truth, from which a Conclusion of divine faith and love may flow: But that cannot flow from any truth which is entertained upon meer natural Grounds, as I sup∣pose, without spiritual Revelation and Illumination: for divine Faith, as it is the gift of God, and not the product of humane Reasoning; so it must needs have a higher Princi∣ple then these Precognitions, namely some truth, as revealed immediately by God unto the Conscience to convince it, that he doth offer himselfe unto it to be a Saviour. And this
is the reason, why I would have the Precognitions, and the Principles of Godlinesse distinguished; namely, because they are truths of a different nature; yet they are subordinate, but so, that the latter cannot follow the former, without some speciall work of God upon the mind. Concerning the Principles. THe Principles of the life of Godlinesse, are such Truths as set the mind upon the apprehension of supernaturall Objects, and beget thereby the acts of divine. Faith therein, which worketh through love in the whole Man; all which is acceptable unto God. Now all the Truths which beget divine Faith and Love, proceed from one Root, which is the Tenor of the Cove∣nant, which God hath appointed to be offered from the Scriptures, by the Preaching of the Gospel in his name, to be believed and entertained by all: for all that God doth aime at in his dealing with Man-kind, next unto the manifestati∣on of the glorie of his goodnesse over all his Creatures, is chiefly this, to shew himselfe, a Saviour, in uniting man by a Covenant of Grace unto himselfe, that he being guided by Psal. 73. 24. 2. Tim. 4. 7. his Counsel, and having kept the faith therein, may after∣ward be received into glorie. The Covenant of Grace then is, the great and fundamen∣tal Principle of all the Principles of the life of Godlinesse: for as there is none other way appointed to unite man unto God, and restore us again from our fall to integritie, but this way of a Covenant: so there is nothing which we can do acceptably towards God, or profitably for our own salva∣tion; but that which is done in order to the Tenor thereof, Whence followeth also, that all our knowledge is not other∣wise useful, nor to be sought after upon any other ground, but as it leadeth to the observation of the Covenant; nor to be entertained for any other aime, but as it is subordi∣nate unto the Tenor thereof: for as no man ever was, is, or can be saved, but he that is faithful in the Covenant of Grace with God; so no matter of knowledge can be saving to any man, but that which inableth him to keep the Tenor thereof.
Hereunto then all truths, both Theoretical and Practical, are finally to be referred; and therefore in the Doctrine of the life of Godlinesse, the Covenant must be made the ground of all the principles of Faith, from which the duties of obe∣dience must flow: And I am fully perswaded, both upon the grounds of sound reason, which a natural morall man is ca∣pable of; and upon the grounds of divine Testimonie and spiritual experience, that all doubtful matters in Divinity, whether they concern the points of Knowledge, or of Pra∣ctice, may not onely be resolved by the right understanding of Gods aime towards us, and of our dutie towards him in the Covenant; but that the Resolutions thereof (of what kind soever) must be examined by, and applyed unto the Analogie of Faith concerning the Covenant, before ever they can bring true peace to the Conscience of any man; and therefore my advice shall be unto those who will under∣take any part of this Work, that they keep alwaies the Co∣venant in their eye, as Mariners do the North point of the Compass, to steer their Course by it in all their Meditations; for it is mainly for want of this Directory, that both in our Notions and Actions concerning Religion, we runne such wild courses: nor is it possible (as I conceive) ever to u∣nite the Professors of Christianitie to each other, to heale their Breaches and Divisions in Doctrine and Practise, and to make them live together as brethren in one Spirit ought to do, without the same sense of the Covenant, by which they may be made to perceive the termes upon which God doth unite all those that are his Children unto himselfe; and up∣on which every one that is in Covenant with God, is bound in Conscience, through love unto God, to maintain the uni∣tie of the Spirit in the bond of peace with those that are his Children, who all alike, and by the same very way, are in Covenant with him. The knowledge of the Covenant then, being the funda∣niental Principle whereunto all other Truths are to be redu∣ced, that they may be received unto the end for which they are revealed, we shall endeavour to shew what the Do∣ctrines of divine Faith are, which are subordinate thereun∣to; and which by vertue of that subordination, are able to
beget love towards God in a believing soul; for no doctrine of Faith doth otherwise oblige any man to love and obedi∣ence towards God, then as it is revealed to manifest Gods love unto us, as he is become our Saviour, and to make us faithfull towards him in the Covenant. I conceive then, that all the Doctrines of divine Faith, tend either to the erecting and settling of the Covenant of Grace with us, or to the confirmation of our faith in the truth thereof. To erect and settle the Covenant with us, we must needs know 1. The true Instrument of the Covenant wherein it is revealed. 2. The things belonging to the true Tenor thereof, as they are offered to us in that Instrument. 3. The Motives for which we should embrace and entertaine the same: for if any of these three points be wanting, we can∣not be sound in the observation thereof. Concerning the true Instrument of the Covenant, we be∣lieve the same to be the Canonical Scriptures; whereof two things must be known: First, What the proper Character of Canonical Scripture is. Secondly, How the truth of God for the knowledge of the Covenant, is therein offered unto us. Concerning the first; this is to be beleeved, That no Books are to be accounted Canonical Scripture, that is the Word of God revealing his Covenant to Man∣kind; but such as are written in the Hebrew Tongue, and were given to the Jewish Church to be a Rule of their pro∣fession in order to the Covenant; or were written in the Greek tongue, and were given to the first Churches of Chri∣stianitie, as well Jews as Gentiles for the same end. Concerning the second; this is to be beleeved, That these Books offer the Covenant unto our Consider∣ation, and all divine Truths belonging to the knowledge thereof, with infallible and uncontrolable authority, most perfectly and very clearly, to such as have an upright desire to know it. And concerning these three Matters of Infallibility, Per∣fection and Evidence, which we believe to be in the Scrip∣ture, this is further more distinctly to be beleeved, 1. Concerning the infallibility of the Scripture, we be∣lieve
that the truth of God revealed in the Canonical Scrip∣tures, is so highly and incontrolably credible, that no man; no not an Apostle himself, nor an Angel from Heaven is to be believed, who should contradict the same; but all Men, Churches, Councels, Fathers, Schools, and their Writings, Sayings, Actions, and Thoughts concerning divine Matters, are to be examined thereby, as by the onely rule of truth and righteousnesse, and if they agree not therewith, they are to be rejected. 2. Concerning, the perfection of the Canon we believe; That the Word of God revealed therein, is so compleat, both for the matter and manner of expression, that neither any thing unprofitable is therein delivered; nor any thing pro∣fitable or needful to be known, therein omitted; but all things of Doctrine and Reproof, of Correction and In∣struction in Righteousness and for Comfort, whether to be believed or hoped for, or to be done or left undone unto sal∣vation, are more then sufficiently laid open, and prescribed in a forme of sound words, which ought not to be altered; so that all heathenish Philosophie in divine matters, and all humane Traditions, and will-worship in the service of God, are to be utterly rejected: nor is it lawfull for any to con∣ceive, that they can speak of matters of Faith more exactly and properly, in respect of the things themselves; or more conveniently and fitly, in respect of the Capacities of men, then the Holy Ghost hath done in those Writings. 3. Concerning their clearness this is to be believed; That the Word of God revealed therein, is so evident and easie to be understood, that the meanest Capacitie of those that are come to the years of discretion, if they be godly and desirous to do Gods will, searching the Scriptures diligent∣ly, may without difficulty comprehend all things necessary to be known unto salvation; so that none ought, by reason of any supposed darkness to be therein, to abstain from rea∣ding the Scriptures, which is a dutie most sutable and neces∣sary unto all.
Of the things belonging to the Tenor of the Covenant. COncerning the Tenor of the Covenant, as it is revealed in the Canonical Scriptures, three things must be opened. First, Who the Parties are, which are concerned therein, and what their Relation is to one another. Secondly. What the form of the Contract is, according to which the Covenant is made with those that are concerned therein. Thirdly, What the way is, by which it is established amongst men, that they may embrace it, and have the benefit thereof. Of the Parties. THe Parties concerned in the Covenant, are, God and Man, at a distance by reason of sinne; and Jesus Christ the Mediator of God and Man, who reconcileth them by his satisfaction and righteousness. Of God. GOd is to be taken notice of, as he hath revealed himselfe in his Word, to be the Saviour and our God by a Cove∣nant; so that nothing is either necessary or profitable to be known of him further then what serves for this end; and to this effect, he hath revealed himself in his Being, in his Will, and in his Works. His Being is revealed in the Properties of his nature, and the subsistence thereof which we call Personalitie. The Properties of his Nature, are revealed to shew what he is, and who he is. The Properties shewing what he is, That he is a Spirit living of himselfe, Joh. 4. 24. & 5. 26. The Properties shewing who he is, are these, That he is the onely true God alone; in Being infinite, eternall, incomprehensible, every where present, simple, un∣changeable, all-knowing, all-wise, all-free, all-just, all-holy, all-mighty, all-perfect, all-happy, all-good, all-true, all∣faithfull, and full of all mercy and compassion. His subsistence is in three, who bear witnesse in Heaven: the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three
are one and the same God, 1 John. 5. 7. The Father unbe∣gotten; the Son only begotten; and the Holy-Ghost pro∣ceeding from the Father and the Son. His Will is revealed in the properties of his Counsels which are wise, good, free and established for ever. His Works are revealed in the Creation, Preservation and Government of the World, and especially of Mankinde therein, over whom he delighteth to exercise Loving-kind∣ness, Judgment and Righteousness in the Earth, for his own Jer. 9. 24. Glory, and according to the tenure of the Covenant. Of Man. MAn is to betaken notice of as he is spoken of in the Word, to be of God, to belong unto God, and obli∣ged to depend upon God by a Covenant in his Three-fold state. 1. In the state of Innocencie. 2. In the state of Guilt and Miserie. 3. In the state of Grace and Reconciliation un∣to God. Of the Mediator Jesus Christ. JEsus Christ the Mediator of the new Covenant betweene God and Man, is revealed in the Word to relate unto both. 1. In respect of his two-fold Nature in one person. 2. In re∣spect of his three-fold Office, of Prophet, Priest, and King, whereunto he was anointed. 3. In respect of the performance of all Duties belonging to those Offices in his two-fold state, the one of Humiliation by his life and death on earth, the o∣ther of exaltation by his power and glory in heaven. In all which, as the fitnesse which is in Christs Person, Na∣tures and Offices, to work out Redemption for us, and to settle the Covenant of Grace between God and us, is to be taken notice of; so the Work, First of Reconciliation between God and us, as this was effected according to the purpose of God in the Covenant: Secondly, Of the Restitution of our nature to a state of Union and Communion with God, as this doth enable us to observe the Covenant on our part: and Thirdly, Of Christs Mediation and Intercession in heaven for us, as he doth continue us in that state of Grace which is
the effect of the Covenant, is also to be acknowledged; that not onely the Relation which is betweene God and us in Christ, may be believed; but the Tenor of ths Covenant, as it is offered to us in the Word by him, may be embraced. Of the Form of the Contract. IN the form of the Contract, two Things must be acknow∣ledged. 1. With whom the Contract is made properly and directly, and with whom indirectly. 2. What the termes of the agreement are, by which it is made with each of them. The Contract of the Covenant, is properly and directly made onely with Christ Jesus; and indirectly with those that beleeve in him, and make profession of his name; for Christ is given as the Covenant of God unto them, Isai. 42. 6. and 49. 8. and they are received onely for his sake, and not for any things in themselves. The Terms of the Agreement by which the Covenant is made with Christ, are these: That whosoever shall be redee∣med by him, and be found in him, not having their own righte∣ousnesse, Isai. 59. 21. but the righteousnesse of God through faith, to be made conformable unto the image of the Sonne of God, shall become Children of God, and Heirs of eternall glory, Rom. 3. 24. Ju∣stified freely by his Grace through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, Phil. 3. 9. be found in him &c. Rom. 8. 29. Predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Sonne, that he might be the Rom. 5. per. totum. first borne amongst many Brethren, Joh. 1. 12. He gave them power to become the Sonnes of God; and Joh. 6. 39. I should lose nothing of all which he hath given me, but raise it up againe at the last day. The terms of the Agreement by which the Covenant is made in Christ with the Beleevers, are; That God will be merci∣ful to their unrighteousness, and remember their iniquities no more; that he will write his laws in their hearts, and put them in their minds: that he will be to them a God, and they shall be to him a People; and that they shall all be taught of God from the least un∣to the greatest. Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12. The terms of the agreement by which the Covenant is made in Christ, with those that make profession of his Name, are, That every one who nameth the name of Christ, should depart from iniquitie, 2 Tim. 2. 19.
That such as separate themselves unto the Lord, and touch not the uncleane thing, shall be received by him; that he will dwell a∣mongst them, and walke in them, and be their God, and they shall be his people: that he will be a Father uuto them, and they shall be his Sonnes and Daughters, 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17, 18. And that everyone who doth suffer with Christ, shall also reigne with him, 2 Tim. 2. 12. Rom. 8. 17. Hitherto we have mentioned the heads of Matters, which shew what the Tenor of the Covenant is: now follow those things which shew the way, how amongst men it is establish∣ed, that they may embrace it, and have the benefit of it. Of the establishment of the Contract with Men for Christs sake. THat this Contract might be ratified and inalterably con∣firmed, to the benefit of Man-kind, Jesus Christ dyed, and made these promises his Testament unto those that be∣leeve and make profession of his Name; and rising againe from the Dead by the power of his God-head, he is gone in∣to heaven to administer from thence this Testament unto these unto whom he did bequeath it. To this effect the Gospell was preached, and is to be pub∣lished unto the end of the World, by the gifts of the holy Ghost which Christ did send down, and will send down from heaven upon Men: for this is a part of the Covenant which the Father hath made with those that are in Christ for his sake, that his Spirit which is upon Christ, and his Words which he did put in his mouth, shall not depart out of his mouth, nor out of the mouth of his Seed, nor out of the mouth of his Seeds Seed, from henceforth and for ever; Isai. 59. 20. 21. In this Administration of the Testament for the establish∣ment of the Covenant, two things are to be acknowledged. 1. What the generall offer of Grace is on Gods part, cal∣ling all men to Christ to partake of the Covenant. 2. How the particular Termes of the Contract are made good with Beleevers, and with the Professors of Christs name.
Of the generall offer of Grace. IN the Generall Call of all Men unto Grace, three things are to be acknowledged. 1. What state they are in who are called unto Christ. 2. What they are called unto in him. 3. By what way they come to him. Concerning the first, we beleeve, That God hath appoint∣ed the Gospell to be preached to Men dead in sinnes and tres∣passes, who have no abilitie of themselves at all to will any thing which is spiritually good; far less to convert them∣selves, or to prepare themselves thereunto. Concerning the second, we beleeve; That they are called to receive the pardon of their sinnes, rest and ease to their souls, and the light of life, according to that of Christ and the Apostles. Come unto me all ye that labour and are heavy-laden, and I will give you rest, Mat. 11. 28. And be it known unto you, that through this Man is preached unto you forgivenesse of sinnes; and by him all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Act. 13. 38 39. And awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light, Ephe. 5. 14. And he that followeth me, shall not walke in darknesse, but shall have the light of life, Joh. 8. 12. Concerning the third, we beleeve, that the way by which Men come to Christ and follow him, is Repentance from dead Works, and Faith towards God, according to that of Christ and his Apostles, The Kingdom of God is at hand: Repent ye, and beleeve the Gospell, Mar. 1. 15. Testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance towards God, and faith towards our Lord Jesus Christ, Act. 20. 21. How the particular Termes of the Covenant are made good to beleevers. IN the particular Call of Beleevers, three things should be acknowledged. 1. How they are made to beleeve and en∣tertaine the offer of the Covenant. 2. How God doth make good the Tenor of his Covenant in Christ towards them. 3. How they are made sensible of their happie condition in Grace, to apprehend their right to Glory. Concerning the first, we beleeve, that such as heare the
Word, & are moved to answer the Call given them therein, and to embrace effectually the Promises of the Covenant through the knowledg of the Lord Jesus Christ, are moved and en∣abled so to do by a free and special grace of God conferred upon them, who of his own good pleasure doth work in them by the gift of Faith both to will their own conversion, and to perform the same, so that they are brought Free-wil∣lingly unto Christ, and desire above all things to be found in him to partake of the merits of his death. Concerning the Second, We beleeve that God doth make good unto all such as by Faith are found in Christ, the Te∣nor of his Covenant, when by his grace they are justified and adopted to be his children, and sanctified by the Spirit of re∣generation, whereby they are also sealed untill the day of their final Redemption, and enabled to walk and persevere in the obedience of Faith and in the enjoyment of grace unto the end Concerning the Third, We beleeve that all true Beleevers may have a comfortable assurance of their blessed estate in grace, by the testimony of the Spirit of Adoption unto their conscience, given them in the sincerity of their walking with God in the Covenant, according to that which the A∣postle saith Rom. 8. 15, 16. The Spirit of adoption whereby we cry Abba Father, the Spirit it self beareth witness with our spi∣rit that we are the Children of God: and 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our rejoycing is this: the testimony of our coiscience, that in simplici∣ty and godly sincerity by the grace of God we have had our conver∣sation in the World. How the Particular Terms of the Covenant are made good to Professors. IN the particular Call of Professors to entertain professedly the duties, and therein to receive the Graces of the Co∣venant, Two things are to be acknowledged, wherein the Communion of Saints doth consist. First, That such as profess the name of Jesus Christ are to be gathered together, and bound to joyn themselves in one body as members one of another in Christ.
Secondly, That they are to be perfected and built up by the work of the Ministry, towards the effect of the Co∣venant. Concerning The gathering of Professors together into one Body, First, We beleeve that to effect this, the Lord hath given gifts unto men; At first Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists to lay the foundation of his Church, and now Pastors and Teachers to build thereupon, who have continued and shall continue by a lawfull Ordinary Calling unto the End of the World. Secondly, We beleeve also that the gathering together of Prosessors into one body is lawfully performed when they professedly give up themselves unto God through the Mini∣stry of the Testament which Christ hath instituted, and by their professed subjecting of themselves to all the Ordinances of Gods house, which make the Beleevers as one in the Co∣venant with God, so one with each other before the World in the profession thereof to Gods glory. Concerning the perfecting and building up of the Profes∣sors as one man till they come to the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ in the Covenant, We beleeve that the Lord hath appointed severall administrations of the gifts of his Spirit to be used amongst them in the household of Faith some relating principally to the inward man, and some to the outward man: and all to be performed as the services of Love in the communion of Saints. The administration of gifts relating principally to the in∣ward man, is in the duties of publick worship, whereunto Professors are obliged to apply themselves by attending to the word of Prophesy, and by joining in the ordinary Sacrifices of Prayers and Praises to be offered up unto God in his house, and in the extraordinary and lawfull use of an Oath and of a Lot, wherein Gods presence is to be attested and petiti∣oned when necessary matters cannot otherwise be deter∣mined. The administration of gifts relating principally to the outward man, is in the duties of Love belonging to the communion of Saints, wherein Professors are obliged to
watch over one another, observing each others conversati∣on, and to supply each others wants in all things. And although in some respect all are bound alike to admini∣ster their gifts to each other by themselves, yet We beleeve that the Eldership is more especially bound to oversee the wayes of their Flocks, and to make use of the Keyes of the kingdom of heaven towards them, to open and shut the dore of comfort unto them as they shall find cause: and that the Deaconship is more particularly obliged to consider the bodily necessities of the Saints, and to distribute the Con∣tributions of Professors to such as stand in need thereof. Hitherto We have spoken of the wayes by which the Cove∣nant is established: that is to say, whereby God doth offer it, the Elect do embrace it, and the Professors do enter∣tain it before the World. Now followeth the Reason where∣fore all men are bound thus to entertain it and keep it. Of the Third. Wherefore all men are bound to entertain the Offer and keep the Tenor of the Covenant. THe Ground and Motive wherefore all men should re∣ceive the Offer, and observe the Tenor of the Cove∣nant which God doth make with them, is Twofold. First, because God hath now commanded all men every∣where to Repent, and beleeve the Gospel. Acts 17. 30. Luke 24. 47. Secondly, because God hath appointed a Day wherein the Dead shall be raised, and the World judged in righte∣ousness by the man Jesus Christ (Acts 17. 31.) who will receive none into Glory but such as have kept his Covenant by Repentance and Faith, and by making profession there∣of before the World. Hitherto We have mentioned the fundamental Heads of Faith which concern the Revealing and the establishing of the Covenant. Now followeth that which concerneth the confirmation of the same.
Matters of Truth to be known to confirm us in the Covenant. COncerning the confirmation of the Covenant two things are to be acknowledged. First, What God on his part doth offer to assure us of the truth of his meaning and the Reality of his purpose in the Covenant. Secondly, What the Beleevers on their part are bound to do in accepting that which God doth offer for their con∣firmation in the promises of the Covenant. Concerning the First, We beleeve, First, That God hath given unto such as he hath re∣ceived into his Covenant, certain Signs to represent the Re∣ality of his Purpose, to confirm the things promised in the Word, and to conveigh the assurance thereof unto them thereby, as badges of his special Love to them in the Pro∣fession. Secondly, We beleeve further, That these Signes are appointed for three several uses in the house of God: First, for the Reception of Professors into Gods house, to oblige them to entertain the Covenant professedly; and to this effect, Baptism is appointed. Secondly, for the maintenance and continuance of Pro∣fessors in the unity of the Covenant with God and one with another; to which End the Lords Supper is instituted: and Thirdly, for the settlement of orderly Courses and the due observation and administration of all Gods Ordinances in the house wherewith he is in Covenant: and for this use the Imposition of the hands of the Presbyterie is appointed; viz. to give lawfull authority to those that are Publick per∣sons in the Profession of the Covenant. Concerning the Second We beleeve. First, That the Faithfull are bound to make use of these Signes for the Ends for which God hath given them, by ta∣king them up and applying them to those whom he hath ordained them, as Evidences of their dependance upon him and of their owning of his Covenant and of their Profession whereof before the world.
Secondly, We beleeve that the Sign of Baptism is to be applyed unto all whom God hath received into his Cove∣nant, and belong unto his houshold; that the Sign of the Lords Supper is to be applyed unto all that have embraced and do entertain professedly the Covenant; And that the sign of the Imposition of hands is to be applyed unto all that are called & to be set apart for any Publick Office in the Church. Hitherto We have reckoned up the Heads of the Principles of the life of Godliness, as they rise from and relate to the Covenant, which is the ground of all Spiritual Relations be∣tween God and Us. Now followeth that which is to be known concerning the substance of that life which God doth work in Us by the Covenant. Concerning the Substantials of the Life of Godliness. THe Substantials of the life of Godliness are nothing else but the power and practice of that state and life where∣by we are made one with God; and walking with Christ in the Covenant, we enjoy God in him both outwardly and in∣wardly. The enjoyment of God in the Inward man, is by the New creature and his life of communion with God. Concerning the New creature these things should be known; 1 What that change is whereby a man becommeth from an Old a New creature and is born again. 2 How that change is wrought in the Soul by the know∣ledg of Christ in the Covenant; and how the conscience is quickned therein by him, and raised to a new life. 3 How that change is discerned to be real and sincere; and the decitfullness of a pretended or imaginary change disco∣vered. Concerning the Life of inward communion with God, these things should be acknowledged. 1 What it is to know and worship God in Spirit and truth. 2 How the Spiritual man doth walk with God by faith, by hope, by love, according to the covenant.
3 What that vertue is whereby he is enabled to have God alwayes before his eyes, and to do all things in the name of Jesus Christ, giving glory to God the Father through him. 4 What Tentations are opposite unto this Life both from the corruption of our nature and from Satan; and how they are resisted. The enjoyment of God in the Outward man, is by the o∣pen profession and practice of Obedience unto the will and wayes of God in all things: which hath two cheif parts. The first is, To deny the practice and profession of ungod∣liness and of all worldly Lusts. Tit. 2. 11, 12. The second is, To offer up our bodyes as a living sacrifice unto God, by our reasonable serving of him in the Cove∣nant. Rom. 12. 1. Concerning the denying of ungodliness and worldly Lusts these things should be known. 1 What the Practice and Profession of Impiety is as it pro∣ceedeth First, from Natural Atheism. Secondly, from vain Philosophy, the Traditions of men, and the Rudiments of the World. Thirdly, from the strong Delusions and the deceitfullness of unrighteousness which Satan is permitted to make use of in the end of the World. 2 How the Consciences of Natural men are to be dealt withal and convicted concerning the wickedness of their Practices in this kind. 3 What the nature and the original is of Actual sins, and how they proceed from the power of inbred Lust. 4 How the motions of Actual sins are to be resisted; not only by the inward purification of the heart, but also by the outward exercises of a Mortified life, wherein the body is kept under and brought into subjection. 1 Cor. 9. 27. Concerning the offering our bodyes a living Sacrifice un∣to God by the Covenant, Three things must be known, for the ordering of our conversation aright in respect of Our∣selves, in respect of our Neighbour, and in respect of God: for hereunto the Apostle Tit. 2. 12. doth resere all mens vertuous actions in this World, by Sobriety, Justice, and Religiousness.
Sobriety doth comprehend all the way of our coversation with Our-selves; Justice all our conversation with our Neighbour; and Religiousness all our conversation towards God. And these Heads of our outward conversation ought to be handled and taken up in this order; because the duties of the First kind are such a ground-work for the Second and Third, that without Sobriety in respect of Our-selves, no∣thing can be done rightly towards God or Man; And the Duties of the Second kind are in Gods own esteem preferred to the Duties of the Third; because he doth require Mercy of us, and not Sacrifice; that is, the Works of Justice and Mat. 5. 23. Mat. 12. 7, 8. Isa. 1. 11 to 19. Charity towards our Neighbour, more then the Works of outward Worship towards himself. Of the Ordering our way toward our selves by Sobriety. To be able to order our selves and all our wayes in Sobrie∣ty, we must know, 1 What the nature of Sobriety is as it is a Rule of restraint to moderate our-selves in all our Undertakings as they are ours. 2 What the nature of our Intemperance and inclination to Excess is, and whence it commeth; viz. from Self-love; where we must know what Self-love and Self-pleasing is, and how all manner of Excess proceedeth from thence. 3 How Sobriety doth proceed from the Grace of Self-de∣nyal, accompanyed with Contentation, Meekness, and Lowliness, which Christ upon the Ground of the Covenant and Promise of Rest doth invite us to learn of himself, Mat. 11. 29. 4 What the proper work of Sobriety is in reference to the natural acts of Affections; where is to be noted that our na∣tural affections may be two wayes vicious; either as they dis∣compose and wrong us within our-selves, or as they tend to discompose and wrong our Neighbour. In the first Respect they are to be regulated by Sobriety; in the second by Ju∣stice: so that the proper work of Sobriety will be to keep
the acts of our natural Affections within the bounds of that lawfull and necessary use whereunto God hath appointed them. And to discover these bounds, the natural Desires and Actions of Christ in the flesh as he did subordinate them un∣to the life of God in the Spirit, according to the Covenant, are to be taken notice of as a Rule. 5 What the Rules of Sobriety are in Particular, in re∣spect of the lusts of the flesh, as meat and drink, ease and soft∣ness, the conjugal bed, and all other delightfull actions in∣herent to the body. 6 What the Rules of Sobriety are in respect of the lusts of the eye, as outward sights for pleasureand euriosity, the covetousness of Riches, and whatsoever else may be a pur∣chase, or from without an Object of the eye to lust after. 7 What the Rules of Sobriety are in respect of the pride of life, as the affectation of Glory and Honour, the vanity of Worldly Pomp and appearance; the flattery of our-selves in the way of our Passions, Emulation, Anger, Strife, Envy, and such like, which are the fruits or companions of Pride. 8 What the Rules of Sobrieiy are for the ordering of our behaviour as well in speeches as in actions, as at all times, so especially in times of crosses and adversities, or of prosperity and joy, wherein there may be a provocation to exceed, and misbehave our-selves in gestures, if not in speeches and actions contrary to Sobriety. Of the Ordering of our way towards our Neighbours by Justice. TO be able to order our way justly towards our Neigh∣bour, we must know, 1 What the nature of Justice is in reference to a Society, as it is a Rule to direct every one to pay that which they owe to one another in their Society. 2 What the nature of Injustice is, and what doth incline men to deprive others of that which is their due; namely the spirit of men which Iusteth to envy. Here then we should know what Envy is, and how the spirit thereof supported with Pride and Covetousness, doth set men upon all manner of Injustice.
3 How the acts and way of Justice proceed from the Grace of brotherly love, and especially from these fundamen∣tal Rules thereof; As ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise, Luke 6. 31. And, Ye have been called (viz. by God in the Covenant) unto Liberty: only use not Liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another. Gal. 5. 13. 14. Let every one please his Neighbour for his good to edification, as Christ pleased not himself, but came to serve us for our good. Rom. 15. 2, 3, 7. Phil. 2. 3. till 9. Love one another as I loved you Joh. 13. 34. 4 What the proper work of Justice is in reference to that which is good, and by Love due unto others: namely to observe all Inoffensiveness and Communicativeness towards every one. 5 What Inoffensiveness is, and by what Rules our wayes may be made void of offence: and of what importance the observation of those Rules are to the Professors of the Cove∣nant of Divine Love in Christ, whether their wayes relate to those that are within, or without the Church. 6 What Communicativeness is, and by what Rules all good things are to be imparted unto others, either as they stand in need thereof, or as otherwise they may be profitable unto them: whether it be the Communication of Mercifull∣ness by which we relieve them of their Miseries; or of Bountifullness, by which we provoke them to Love and to good Works. 7 How all Dutiful actions which we owe to others in word or deed concerning their persons, or that which doth belong unto them, ought duely and obligingly to be per∣formed, that just things may be done justly. 8 What Rules of Justice are to be observed concerning the Offices of Love comparatively due to Enemies, to Per∣sons indifferently affected, and to Friends in several degrees of neerness.
Of the Ordering of our way towards God by Religiousness. TO be able to order our way toward God Religiously, we must know, First, What Religiousness is, or what the nature of that tye and obligation is, by which those that are in Covenant with God are bound in all their outward carriages to shew that they depend upon him and regard him. Secondly, What doth incline us naturally to Irreligious∣ness, that is, not to referre our-selves unto God nor respect him as we are bound to do by the tenour of the Covenant, in all our ways; and whether it be not this that we easily forget his Omnipresence, and the Supremacy of his Influence over all Creatures, and regard too attentively the properties of Secondary Causes as they may have, and the thoughts of men as they have an Influence upon us. Thirdly, how this obligation doth proceed from the con∣scionable apprehension of these following and such like laws and Rules of Justice and Equity. 1 You are bought with a price; Glorify therefore the Lord in your Soul and in your Body which are the Lords. 1 Cor. 62. 2 He that is ashamed of me and of my words in this adul∣terous and sinful generation, the Son of man shall be asha∣med of him, when he commeth into the Glory of his Father with the holy Angels. Mar. 8. 38. Matth. 10. 32, 33. Luke 12. 8, 9. 3 We should walk worthy of God who hath called us to his glory and kingdom. 1 Thes. 2. 12. 4 As Children of God in the World without blame, we sould shine as Lights, and hold forth the Word of life. Phil. 2. 15, 16, and such like in 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16, 17, 18. and Ephes. 5 1, 2, 8. and 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12. and 1 Joh. 1. 2, 3. and elsewhere. Fourthly, What the proper work of Religiousness is, and whether it benot to walk always in the light of a good Con∣science towards God and men, Acts. 23. 1. and 24. 16.
Fifthly, Whether the proper Rule of a good Conscience in this walking, is not to follow the grace of God which bringeth Salvation, in sincerity, and not according to worldly wisdom. 2 Cor. 1. 12. Tit. 2, 11, 12. And whether the parts of this walking are not chiefly or summarily these, 1 To confesse & profess openly the truth, 2 To worship God privately and publikly, observing all his Ordinances. Sixthly, What the Rules are of a Religious open Con∣fession of the truth by word of mouth. Seventhly, What the Rules are of a Religious Profession of the truth in deed and conversation. Eighthly, What the Rules are of a Religious Suffering for the Confession and Profession of the truth. Ninthly, What the Rules are of a Religious worshipping of God in private by Prayer, by Reading and Meditating the Word, and by private Conference. Tenthly, What the Rules are of a Religious worshipping of God in publick, by Hearing the word, and Joining with the Professors of the name of Christ in Prayer and Praises, and in the fellowship of all the publick Ordinances, whereby the Covenant is established or confirmed amongst men. HItherto we have mentioned the Substantials of the life of Godliness in respect of the distinct parts thereof as well inward as outward: But because a Thing is neither in itself compleat' which hath not all the parts joined in such a way as is sutable to the proper End thereof, nor in respect of us compleatly known, except we understand both what the property of each part is distinctly; and also what the joint frame of all is, which makes up that whole, which is the Result of their union: therefore unto the former consideration another must be added, wherein the union of all these parts is to be discovered, that we may see the entire frame of the whole course which is conformable unto the will of God in all things, as well inwardly as outwardly, in all Duties at once which will make up the substance of the parts of a Godly life.
And to bring us unto this Perfection God hath given a pe∣culiar Rule whereunto he doth oblige all men to be so fully conformable, that whosoever transgresseth in any one Point thereof, is guilty of all, Jam. 2. 10. because the true and perfect observation of any one Duty doth import a full conformity of our Wills to the Will of him who doth command all the rest; and the transgression of Gods will in any one Particular, doth bewray an inconformity of our wills from the will of him who doth command all the rest; and this is to be a transgressor of the whole Law; because the whole Law is nothing else but the will of God; and the substance of our whole Obedience is nothing else but a total subjection of our wills nnto his will, as it is revealed in the Law, Rom. 2. 20. for God hath given the form of knowledg and of the truth in the Law, to this end that we should not displease him, but to studie to please him in all things; for the whole substance of our Religious fear and love is contracted unto this aim that we should do nothing that is displeasing, but every thing as it is acceptable unto him. Our performance then of all Duties in order to the fulfilling of Gods will, and ob∣servance of the Law is the substance of the whole life of Godliness. For the Tenne Commandements given in Mount Sinai, which God wrote twice in Tables of Stone, are the Universal Rule of Righteousness, as they contain the nature of all Duties which are generally obliging nnto every one, and as they comprehend in one expression, both the Spiritual and Bodily perfection of every Human Action. The Doctrine then of the Tenne Commandements should be delivered to this effect, in Four distinct Heads. The First should contain the Rules of interpreting the Commandements. The Second should let us see the Abstract of all the Duties commanded, and Sins forbidden therein. The Third should let us know the Definition or De∣scription of all these Duties and Sins, with the Means and Helps subordinate unto the duties, and the causes which beget,
and the signes which manifest the sins; and although per∣haps some of the things formerly mentioned in some of the parts of the life of Godlinesse, may come to be named here againe, yet this is not to be counted any Tautologie or su∣perfluity, because the same thing may be more then once handled under different notions and respects in severall places: Here then all duties whatsoever, and every thing opposite thereunto, are onely to be handled as they are com∣manded and forbidden in the Law, which is the universall rule of Righteousnesse, to shew the perfection of the Law, and the nature of every action, as it agreeth or disagreeth with the rule, and the quality of every vertue and vice, as it is ranked by God in the whole frame of that life which the Law doth require or condemn: all which are material points of knowledge, and can nowhere be properly handled but in this consideration of the Law. The fourth and last head, should discribe the watch which all men should have, aswell over themselves, as over others, for the observation of the Law; for as all particular vertues make up but one perfection of obedience, by their con∣formity, unto the Rule of the Law; so all mens observati∣on of the Law in their several wayes, doth make up but one submission to the will of God in them all, their joynt care of each others conformity unto the Law; for all Professors as they are members of each other in Christ, make up but one body and spiritual man in him; and this is the substance of the whole life of Godliness, when by the grace and truth which is in Jesus Christ, the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, who walke not after the flesh, but after the spirit; for the Law of the spirit of life, which is in Christ, being through Faith effectuall in us, to free us from the Law of sin and death, which is in our nature, doth make us conformable unto all that is well-pleasing unto God, so that in every thing we are enabled to prove what is that holy, perfect, and acceptable will of God. Which things being laid open, I suppose all that justly may be desired concerning the substantials of the life of Godliness, in the whole and parts, will be sufficiently dis∣covered; and so the second part of this body of Practicall Divinity will be made up.
Of the Circumstantials of the Life of Godlinesse. ALthough the former rules of Piety, which are common to all Beleevers and Professore, may well suffice to di∣rect every one upon all occasions what to doe, not onely be∣cause they containe the grounds of all duties, and the pro∣perties of all vertues; but because God in the Covenant hath expresly promised, that he himselfe will teach all his chil∣dren; and Christ hath engaged himselfe to send unto his Disciples, a spirit which shall lead them in all truth: yet seeing the Scripture doth lay open not onely the substantiall rules of the whole Profession, in the generall nature of ver∣tue and vice by the precepts of the Law, but doth mention in particular termes, the circumstantial duties also which are considerable in order to the Profession; therefore these ought distinctly to be opened, and made the third part of this body. Where againe I shall desire that it may be observed, that the things here to be handled, should be distinguished from the same things handled before, in this respect that in the foregoing part, all actions are to be considered in order to that which is their perpetuall nature, and substantiall pro∣perty never to be altered; but in this part all actions are to be considered in order to that which is alterable in them ac∣cording to the circumstances: therefore in the former part, although the heads of all things which are to be mentioned here, may be brought in and named in their owne places, yet the handling of them ought not to go any further then to define the universal nature & properties thereof, as it is com∣mon to all times, places, cases, and circumstances; but in this part the particular cases and circumstances, which are ordi∣narily incident to persons of severall conditions, are to be taken into consideration, to shew them the rule of their walking therein to observe that which is righteous and an∣swerable to the Law: Here then we presuppose the know∣ledge of the definition, and true notion of all vertues and vices (which is the proper work of the substantiall Doctrin,
for under that respect all things are handld there) and we reflect upon the various subjects, objects, relations, and oc∣casions of putting forth these actions which are discovered to be vertuous or vicious, that the way of maintaining our course in verture and declining vice may be known in mat∣ters circumstantiall aswell as substantiall. These Circumstantiall duties are of three sorts, some re∣gulate the naturall, some the spirituall circumstances of the life of the Professors, some relate unto both. The naturall circumstances concerne either the Sex in re∣spect of the difference which God hath made therein; or the societies which arise amongst men from the conjunction thereof. Concerning the difference which God hath put between the Male and the Female, we should know this. 1. What the preheminency of the Male is above the Fe∣male, in respect of right to mannage domesticke and publick concernments. 2. What the proper worke of each Sex is, which we may call the naturall calling thereof, that is, what the imploy∣ment is whereunto God hath created each Sex, that they should advance his glory in their severall kinds. 3. What the rules are, by which each sex should order it selfe, within those bounds and limits of employment where∣unto God hath appointed it. Concerning the naturall Societies which arise amongst men fromtheir conjunctions, we observe that The first natural Conjunction and Societie is of the Male and Female, of one with one, for the propagation of Man∣kinde, which is Matrimonial, of which we should know. First, What Gods appointment is concerning marriage in respect 1 Of the ends for which it is to be intended lawfully, and for which it ought not to be intended. 2. Of the persons who may or may not joyn together in that state. 3. Of the manner how it ought to be setled between these who may lawfully joyne therein. 4. Of the duties which married persons owe to one a∣nother,
by which they may obtaine the lawfull ends of their Conjunction, by Gods blessing. 5. Of the causes for which marriage may lawfully be dissolved. 6 Of the manner and way how it ought to be, when needs it must be dissolved. Secondly, What the inclinations of men are to abuse mar∣riage, and what corruptions are become customary therein, even amongst Professors. Thirdly, How prejudiciall the abuse of the ordinance of marriage is, not onely to the holy Profession, but even to the Society of Mankinde. Fourthly, How far both Ministers and Magistrates are bound to endeavour each in their owne way, to rectifie the abuses of this Ordinance, by repressing all Whoredoms, A∣dultery, Incests, and other unlawfull Conjunctions, as Con∣cubinate and Polygamy, and whatsoever in this kinde is contrary to the will of God, and to the right use of na∣ture. The second naturall Conjunction and Society is of Pa∣rents and Children, where we must know 1. What the duty is of Parents towards their Children joyntly; in respect of their education, and of their setlement in a course of life in the world. 2. What the duty of the Mother is towards the child whiles it is an Infant; how far she is obliged to give it suck and at∣tend it her selfe, and in what cases she may be dispensed with∣all in reference to these duties. 3. What the duty of the Father is toward the Childe af∣ter it is past the state of Infancy, and how far he is obliged to looke to the education thereof himselfe; and in what cases he may be dispensed withall to commit it unto a Deputy. 4. How the peculiar care of the Daughters belongeth to the Mother, and the peculiar care of the Sons to the Father chiefly when they are past childe-hood. 5. What the duty of Children come to the years of dis∣cretion is towards their Parents, and how they ought to yeeld unto them not onely honour and obedience, but a re∣quitall in their old age.
6. How far the law of Marriage, by which a man is ap∣pointed to leave Father and Mother, and cleave to his wife, doth emancipate him from subjection and dependency upon his Parents. 7. How family duties ought to be observed in the Soci∣eties of Parents and Children; and what obligation doth lie upon Parents to worship God with those of their family. The third naturall conjunction and Society is of bre∣thern and sisters, and of kinsfolks, where we must know 1. What the nature and extent of the relation is, and how it differs from the foregoing of Man and Wife, and pa∣rent and childe. 2. What the duties of kinsfolks are towards each other. 3. What the proper care and affection is, which is more due unto kinsfolks respectively then unto others; though these in all respects be as commendable, and perhaps farre more commendable for grace and vertue then they. The fourth naturall Conjunction and Society is of Alli∣ance, where we must know 1. What the nature and extent of this relation is, and how far it is inferior unto that of kindred. 2. What the proper duties thereof are more to each other then to meere strangers. All these conjunctions and societies are properly naturall and unavoidably necessary, if we suppose the propagation of Mankinde by Marriage: there are other conjunctions and societies which are more voluntary and freely taken up, or left off, as there is cause found, and these are againe either of one with one, or of many together in a Society. The voluntary conjunction and society of one with one, is of Master and servant, where must be known 1. For what ends, and in what employments men ought to seeke for others to serve them; and in what things they ought to serve themselves. 2. What the duties are of Masters towards their Ser∣vants. 3. VVhat lawfull services and employments are in hu∣mane Societies, and for what ends men ought to offer them∣selves to be servants unto others.
4. VVhat the duties are which servants owe unto their Masters, and how they ought as Christians to performe the same. The Voluntary Conjunction and Society of many toge∣ther in one Body, is either of many Families to make a Ci∣ty, or of Citeis to make Provinces, or of Provinces to make Nations and Kingdoms: all which are setled in their Rela∣tions by Laws, and maintained therein by Officers indued with Authority and Power to administer the same; whence doth arise the Office of Magistrates and Subjects: where we must know Concerning Magistrates, 1 What a Magistrate is in the Societies of Christi∣ans. 2 Whence Magistrates have their Authority. 3 What the proper work of their Employment is for the good of the Publick Society; And whether it be not to procure the observation of Both the Tables of the Mo∣faical Law in the Commonwealth over which they are Ru∣lers. 4 How the Sword is committed unto them, and to be used by them for Vengeance against evill Doers, and for the Reward of those that are good. 5 For what End Taxes and Customes are to be laid upon Subjects. 6 What Offices are necessary and lawfull to be constituted for the Peace and Safety of Human Societies. 7 What maketh Warre lawfull in a Christian Magistrate, and what unlawfull. 8 What Power he hath to adminster Oaths and for what Ends. Concerning Subjects we must know WHat the Dutie of a Christian Subject is towards the Supreme and Subordinate Magistrates. 2 How they ought to be subject not only for wrath, but for Conscienc sake.
3 Wherein a Christian ought not to be in subjection or a Servant unto men. HItherto we have mentioned the Heads of Matters which relate unto the Circumstances of the Natural life; now follow the Circumstances of the Spiritual Life of Profes∣sors. THe Spiritual Life of Professors doth Relate to the Church, either as it is made up of Members to make one Body; or as in it are Offices and Officers iwith several Charges. Concerning the Members of the Church we must know 1 What Right and Relation a true Professor of Christiani∣ty hath to any or all the Churches of Christ. 2 What use he ought to make of that Right and Relati∣on; and how he should apply himself to some particular Congregation, where his conveniency of Edification is greatest. 3 How the Common Profession and the Duties of holy Communion with all the Members of Christ are to be main∣tained, notwithstanding the application may be ordinarily made unto one particular Congregation. 4 What the Care is which Members owe to one another in the Communion of Saints to build up each other in the Common Profession. 5 What the peculiar Duty and Respect is which all Pro∣fessors owe unto those that are the Leaders of others in the Profession, for their works sake. 6 How all Members and Professors ought to walk tow∣ards those that are without, as to adorn the Doctrine of the Gospel in all things.
Concerning those that bear Office in the Church of God, We must know 1 What the Office of a Pastor is, and how he ought to discharge it. 2 What the Office of the Teacher is, and how he ought to discharge it. 3 How the Duties of the Pastor and Teacher are con∣joint, and how distinct and separate. 4 What the Office of a Ruling Elder is, and how he ought to discharge it. 5 What the Office of a Deacon is, and how he ought to discharge it. 6 What Correspondence and Communion these Officers ought to have one with another, for the strengthening of each others hands in their Duties towards the Flock. 7 What Correspondence and Communion the Officers of several Congregations ought to have one with another, for the maintaining of the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace amongst themselves, to prevent or remedy Differ∣ences, and for the propagating of the truth unto others that have not as yet received it. Of all these states and Relations the Duties should be laid open as they are prescribed in the Word distinctly. Then the state and Calling which hath a respect to all sorts of Societies jointly, as being the Seed-plot and Seminary of all Vertues to be exercised therein, is the state of Schools: where ought to be delivered 1 What kinds of Schools ought to be constituted, suta∣ble to the Principles and Life of Christianity. 2 To whom the Care of erecting and reforming of Schools doth belong: and what necessity there is of this work, 3 What the peculiar Duties are of School-masters and Mistresses, and of Schollers of both Sexes. Hitherto I have reckoned up summmarily the Heads of those Truths which will make a full Body of Practical Di∣vinity,
if they be throughly handled, and if the particulars which may be referred thereunto be fitly brought in. As concerrning the Supplement of Cases of Conscience, I shall say nothing for the present: hoping that if the Po∣sitive Truths be Compleatly handled, and a General Rule shewed how to draw from the Tenor of the Covenant a re∣solution of Conscionable Difficulties, there will be no great neeed of any large Treatise in this kind. Yet I will not de∣ny but that a full Body of Case-Divinity may be usefull, if well ordered and published by itself: but I would not have the Body of Positive Truths overburdened with Cases: because our main Study ought to be about the knowledg of the Rules, and our exercise about the application of the same to our ways: therefore we need not propose a body of Difficulties to be resolved, but our wisedome will be, ei∣ther to avoid them so far as may be by a cleer direction pre∣venting them, or to overcome them when they cannot be a∣voided, by such a method as may be easie, and followed by all that understand the Truth of Gods meaning, and their own duty in the Covenant. Thus I have adventured to cut out Worke and offer Tasks to those that shall be willing to joyne in compleating this pious Undertaking: not that I presume to prescribe or li∣mit any within these bounds, or to follow this Method, but that I would give occasion unto such General hints as these are. For unto these three Heads of Principles, Substan∣tials, and Circumstantials of Practice, I suppose all the Col∣lections which may be made out of our Authors, may be re∣ferred; and if this Effect can be obtained in any competent measure, I shall have what I intended by these Proposals. Hitherto I have spoken of the Body of Practical Divinity, which I conceive will answer the Request of Forrain Pro∣testant Divines made unto us. Now I shall come on the Rea∣sons why it ought to be compiled and imparted unto them.
Of the Second. What the Reasons and Motives are, which should induce us to make up this Body of Divinity, and Com∣municate it to Forraine Protestant Churches. IF to advance this Gospel-work, there were nothing else to move us, but the excellency of the thing it self, and the Call which we have thereunto by forreine Chur∣ches, with those Arguments which in their Letter they have alleadged: Truly these inducements alone might abun∣dantly suffice, and ought to engage us most effectually there∣unto: for if we have any true zeale to the glory of God, by the Propagation of the Gospel; if there is any sincere incli∣nation to entertain the Communion of the Spirit, by the Communication of spiritual Gifts and Graces: and if there is any fervency of love toward the Brother-hood, or affecti∣ons of serviceablenesse towards the fellow-members of Je∣sus Christ; all other reasons besides those which they offer unto us, will be found superfluous, and of little use to per∣swade; because the heart that is rightly set in heavenly pla∣ces, and raised unto the true Objects which unite the same with God, is not acted by earthly Motives, although it may reflect sometimes not unprofitably upon matters of particu∣lar concerment. But we find too often (and that to our great griefe) when we have to deale even with men that are accounted eminent in the Profession of Religion, and that are of good abilities to judge of all things else, that yet those Reasons which in their own nature are best, most spiritual, and most universal, are not towards them most effectual to perswade; but the motives which are more particular, more outward, and of lesser worth, do rather work, and take more powerfully with them. Whether this doth fall out, either because good Men do not alwaies thoroughly understand the best Reasons;
or because the matter thereof though understood, yet is not alwayes mainly and directly intended: or because the Rea∣sons which are of lesse worth, are alwaies more levell to all mens naturall Capacities; Or lastly, because outward and particular matters are most suitable to close with humane affections; I will not now stand to discourse. What ever the cause of this may be, I shall endeavour at this time to prevent it, by taking into consideration both sorts of Rea∣sons; that both such who (being truely Spiritual) are in love with Christianity for it selfe, and such also who (walk∣ing in a lower Spheare) regard more directly humane and outward relations, may finde in this undertaking, that where∣with they ought to be affected. If we looke then before other things upon God, and upon our selves as in his hand; we may perceive that he doth highly honour us above our reformed Brethren: Chiefly herein, that having received with them the truth of the Go∣spel in the purity thereof, we are made partakers above them of this most eminent gift of Practical knowledge, and enjoy the meanes thereof more abundantly then any other Church whatsoever: Yet the enjoyment of the most eminent of his Gifts is not all the Honour which God hath conferred upon us, but he hath caused the Excellency of this blessing to be∣come apparent unto all the Churches: So that they not onely respect, love and esteeme us for the same, but they hear∣tily with and desire for themselves the same favour at Gods hands; and they are moved without envy, to make their ap∣plication unto us in a friendly manner, that we in love to Gods glory would impart unto them the fruit of that kind∣ness which he hath bestowed upon us. Thus we see that he hath not onely in reference to himselfe, put Ornaments up∣on us, to beautifie us with salvation, but in reference to our Brethren he is pleased by this meanes to make us honourable amongst them; for he doth set us forth in their eyes as ves∣sels which containe the Richest of his graces, and by whom he seemes to be willing to make unto all people his feast of fat things, full of marrow, Isa. 25. 6. and a feast of wines on the lees well refined; and least we should not take notice that we are sitted to be serviceable in this kinde unto the whole houshold of faith, he hath moved some of the chiefe
members thereof (who are brands pluckt out of the fire of persecution) to put us in minde of this part of our duty, by suing towards us, and calling upon us for the improvement of this peculiar Talent, unto the end for which the Lord hath given the same unto us; for they tell us in their Letter God hath given all his Gifts to every one to profit with∣all: That to profit with his Gifts is to administer unto o∣thers; That we are not the direct owners of his Gifts, nor are they our propriety to use them as we please, but all our Title to them is onely this, that we are Stewards thereof to use them as he hath appointed us; and as by the right use thereof we may expect a great reward and increase of Glory to our selves; so by the abuse of our trust, that is, the not using of our Talent to benefit others thereby, we shall be found unprofitable servants, & deserve both to be deprived of the Grace we have received, & to be cast off into utter dark∣ness where weeping is and gnashing of teeth for ever. Thus we see they put us to the tryall of our love towards God, by the discovery of our willingness to please him in fulfilling the known purpose of his will; They put us to the triall of our love towards our Brethern, by the manifestation of our Re∣solution to furnish them with that which may benefit them to their Edification; They put us to the triall of our faith∣fulness both towards God and Man, by our behaviour in our Stewardship and obedience to him that doth imploy us, and our forwardness to dispence his Gifts unto our Brethren, to whom by his appointment we are bound to bestow them; And they put us unto the tryall of our sincerity in beleeving the Promises, & fearing the Threatnings, by the sense we have of the rewards that shall be given to those that use rightly, and that abuse their Talent: And for all this they not only set before our eyes the thankfulness which we owe unto God for the honour he hath conferred upon us more then upon others; but they put us in minde of the wayes by which onely we are enabled to Glorifie God here on Earth amongst men: by which we are made capable of being Glo∣rified with himselfe in heaven hereafter; and by which the Justice is maintained, which maketh all the Subjects of his Kingdome through the Holiness of their Communion, sus∣ceptible
and sensible of their owne and each others happiness, and without which there would be little difference between the State of Christs Kingdome and the Kingdomes of this World. For as concerning our thankfulness towards God for the honour done to us by him, seeing our goodness can∣not be extended unto him, Psal. 16. 2. (for no man can be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable unto himselfe Job 22. 2.) but onely unto the Saints that are in the Earth, and to the excellent ones in whom is all our de∣light: What other or less acknowledgement can we render unto him, then affectionately to endeavour, that the fruits of his kindness towards us may have some reflexion back again towards him, by redounding to the Comfort of his owne dearest Children. And concerning the onely way by which we are enabled to glorifie God on Earth, our Saviour tels us that herein his Father is glorified, that we bear much fruit and so become his Disciples; No man can shew forth the Fathers Glory o∣therwise, Joh. 15. 8. then as it and he is in the Son, nor can any man be in the Son otherwise then by becomming his Disciples; nor can any man become his Disciple otherwise but by following him in the way wherein he did glorifie his Father: Whence it is that the Apostle teaching us to glorifie God with one minde and mouth, Rom. 15. 6, 7. doth set Christs example before us as the onely rule, bidding us receive one another as Christ also received us to the Glory of God: Now the way by which Christ received us to the Glory of his Father, was no other but by the imparting of his Fathers Graces, and the free propagation of his goodness unto Man-kinde; by this means he hath (as the true Vine) borne much fruit, and by this means we also shall bear much fruit if herein we become his Disciples; nor is there any other way on Earth opened but this to glorifie God amongst men; for all good works with∣out which no Glory can be given unto God, of what kind so∣ever, glorifie him only in this that they shew forth his vertues, and cause men to take notice of the excellency of his Nature, that they may have cause to admire and love, and praise him in the same; and if we doe not set our hearts entirely to work all our works in God, that he may thus be glorified
thereby; we have renounced in our heart the great end of our Creation, which is nothing else but his Glory; and the only meanes by which that end is attainable, are good works shewed forth unto men, Matth. 5. 16. for we are Gods workmanship created in Jesus Christ unto Gods Works, wch God hath before ordained that we should walk in them, that in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding Riches of his Grace in his kindnesse towards us through Christ Je∣sus, Ephes. 2. 7. 10. Thus then the onely way to glorifie God the Author of this Talent is to improve it, by imparting unto others freely that which Christ hath freely given unto us. Nor is there a readyer way by which we are made capable of being glorified with God hereafter, then thus to glorifie him on Earth; we see the slothfull servant was deprived of Glory, because he was slothfull; and others were made par∣takes thereof, because they were diligent and faithfull in using their Talents; and the promise is that such as are wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament; and they that turne many unto Righteousnesse, as the Stars for ever and ever. This then is our wisedome to win soules unto God, and turne ma∣ny unto Righteousness, and this will prove the greatest folly, and the greatest unthankfulnesse that we can be guilty of, that having so great a Talent in our hand, and so fit for such a service, we should not thereby Honour God by making it usefull to the enlargement of his Kingdome. But above all this there is a Law of Justice which doth re∣quire this duty of us as a debt to be paid unto all that are sus∣ceptible of the benefit thereof; but chiefly unto those that Challenge it as having a right thereunto; all that belong to the houshold of Faith, have a right to all the priviledges of the house, and all the Gifts and treasures pertaining to it are theirs; all things are yours saith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 21. 22. because every member of the Body hath an interest in all the Graces which flow from the head as conferred up∣on the Body, nor doth any member possesse any thing for it selfe, but for the whole; nor is any thing in it selfe, but as it standeth in its place to serve the whole, and as it belongeth unto other members; for we are said to be members one of a∣nother. So that we have a right to Challenge for our use,
as our owne, all the Graces which another hath, if we stand in need thereof; nor is it lawful for any to refuse the Commu∣nication of any spiritual gift wherewith he is possessed, to any that craveth it of him in the name of Christ, except he will make himselfe guilty of the breach of the great and Funda∣mental law of the Kingdome of Heaven, upon which the happiness of that whole Sate is settled; for the happiness of the State of Christianity above all the Sates of the world is this, that all the Subjects thereof are but one new Creature and Spiritual man in Christ, that they are made and called to serve one another in Love, as he served us, and to enjoy him in each other, as he is the same light of Truth, and light of God in all; for the enjoyments and possessions of all other men in all other States and Kingdomes of this World are di∣stinct and peculiar to every one, because some things are in∣communicably proper to some more then to others, as their lot is fallen amongst men (& except this Law in natural things were observed, there would be nothing but endless and inextricable confusion and strife, yea much more then now is amongst the Sons of men) But it is not so in Spi∣ritual things; the Spiritual man his joy is this, that others partake of al his blessings, that others have a right in him & in∣terest & he in them for all their Grace, and that he is a debtor of all that he hath unto every one, and every one are debtors of all that they have unto him; So that none can count him∣selfe happy or Compleate in any thing, or ought to rest con∣tented within himselfe, without the Happiness, Perfection and Contentedness of others: Thus none can want what a∣nother hath; and what God hath given unto any, it is to be offered unto all; and he that doth not live by this Rule in the Chuch of God, doth exclude his owne soule from the Communion of Saints, and maketh himselfe incapable of all the Felicities of Christs Kingdome. We see then how many and how strong the obligations are, which bind us unto this duty of Spiritual Communication of the Graces which we have received to profit withall; for if we should not intend this, we shall discover our selves to be of all men the most in∣gratefull towards God, and most unworthy of all the Ho∣nours which he hath cast upon us; We shall shew our selves
destitute of all love, both to God and man, and of all faith∣fulnesse in the trust committed unto us, of all sincerity in our Profession, and of all care either to advance Gods glory as becommeth the Disciples of Christ, or to be advanced unto glory by him, or to maintain the happiness of our owne E∣state by fellowship with his members, or finally to discharge the debt of Righteousnesse which we owe unto others on Gods behalfe; for God hath assigned the payment of all the debts which we owe unto him, which are the fruits of his Graces towards us, to be laid out upon the members of Je∣sus Christ, that much joy and many thanksgivings from many hearts and mouths, may redound to the Glory of the Father through him. If then we should hold this truth of God in unrighteousnesse, we should not onely be found ene∣mies to God and our selves, so far as in us lyeth to frustrate him of his intent, and our selves of all the honour whereunto he doth designe us, but opposite unto all goodnesse, to sup∣presse the brightness of his glory, to darken the comforts of his Children, to defraude our Brethren of their just claime and expectation, and to deprive all sorts of men of that wherein we are indebted unto them, for it is not onely our Brethren (that challenge that which is their right, of us, on Gods behalfe) to whom we owe this duty as a debt, but we owe it unto all men; that either now, or in after ages may profit thereby, towards the advancement of Christs King∣dome; and that is the thing which our Brethren in the Con∣clusion of their Letter, presse (though breifly yet throughly) upon us: for having proposed Gods intention in giving his Gifts, our duty answerable thereunto, and their demand grounded upon both, they represent unto us the benefits which ensue our performance of their request, which are all the effects of the truth which is in the Gospel, as by it selfe it is usefull unto all sorts of persons, young and old, Teach∣ers and those that are taught, Godly and ungodly, Peaceable and Contentious: True Professors and those that erre from the Truth, whether by Hypocrisie, or Security, or Obstinacy; and in a word to all men, aswell of this age as of that which shall arise hereafter, all the advantages of Instruction, Directi∣on, Correction, Comfort, Reproof and Conviction, tending
to set forward peace and Joy through Righteousnesse and Holinesse in the soules of men, or whatsoever blessing else, a∣ny shall stand in need of in their severall Conditions: all this I say, we are Debtors to procure unto them, by the meanes which are put in our hands to that effect; for at this time both God and Men doe call upon us to make this use of our Peculiar Talent of the word of life, in holding it forth unto them. If therefore we should hide our Talent, and put this Can∣dle which the Lord hath lighted amongst us to give light unto all that are in the house, under a bushel, that is, if we condiscend not to this their desire, we shall wrong all the Churches; we shall robbe these in particular that sue for it of what is their due: and as much as in us lieth we shall make the word of Truth ineffectual, and shew our selves Adversaries to his vertue and the manifestation there∣of: which how the Lord will in the End take at our hands, I shall not need to mention. But I shall heartily rather pray that in love to himself and to his Truth our spirits may be stirred up to behave ourselves in the opportunity of doing this Service as shall be most answerable unto our own happiness, and the glory and the kingdom of Christ where∣unto we are called. These are the Considerations which from the nature of the Dutie it self should induce us to the performance there∣of, which our Brethren in their Letter having only touched and pointed at, I have thought good a little further thus to enlarge, that whatever shall be undertaken in this kind, may proceed from the right Principle and frame of heart, which will make the work acceptable unto God and profitable unto those that go about it. For if the work be not intended upon these grounds, & upon these alone directly & principally without worldly Considerations and human Respects as leading Motives, it will find but small success, and little conduct from the Spirit of Grace to give it a fur∣therance, because no enterprise can have more strength then its chief Aim and Object can give it. And although some other Arguments of this nature and to the same effect might be alledged, or the same might be
further insisted upon, perhaps not unprofitably; yet be∣cause these Motives are the chief to which all others may be referred, and so evident that they cannot (as I con∣ceive) be denyed, and of such efficacy (if laid to heart) that where they take not, none other in this kind are like to perswade; therefore I shall not insist any further upon them, but come to the Second sort of Perswasions, which in order unto these foregoing may perhaps adde something to our Zeal and Resolution as it proceedeth from a mixt af∣fection; which even good men are inclinable sometime to entertain rather as they are men, then as they are the Chil∣dren of the most High, depending immediately upon his Will. If we look then in the Second place upon ourselves as we are amongst the Professors of the Gospcel engaged not only to maintain the Credit of the Profession, but to ad∣vance the Reformation of the Churches both at home and abroad, and to concurre with Forrain Protestants to assist the Common Cause of Religion against the Enemies there∣of, we shall find nothing more sutable to the Credit of our Profession, or more advantagious to our own and o∣thers reformation, or more effectual in our concurrence to assist Forrainers in the Common Cause, then the Compleat∣ing of this Body of Practical Divinity will be. The Credit of our Profession doth include a twofold No∣tion: the one doth look at the Profession in it self, the other at us as Professors: in both these there is some matter of Credit to be upheld as to men. In reference to the Pro∣fession we are bound in Conscience (seeing we beleeve it to be the saving Truth of God) to make it Creditable and Honorable before all men, approving it unto their Con∣science to be such as we beleeve it to be. And in in refe∣rence to our-selves, the good opinion others have of our sincerity, zeal and ability in the way of the Profession, doth oblige us in honesty to endeavour to the utmost to answer their expectation, and maintain the Honor of our Good name in relation to our Religion. In these respects I say, the Compleating of this Practical Body of Divinity will be of special use, as well for the honor of the Profession, as for our Credit in upholding it.
For whereas nothing doth so much either scandalze the weak, or stagger the ignorant, at the profession of the Pro∣testant Religion, or give advantage on the one hand unto the Papists to seduce silly souls to a superstitious worship, as this Reproach, That we are all broken to peices among our∣selves, and divided in our sense about Religion, having no cer∣tainty in any thing: on the other hand unto the self-concei∣ted Libertines, to entice high-minded Zelots to the pride of singular Saintship, as this other Reproach. That we rest in practice of formes; and being destitute of the power of Godliness, have nothing that is spiritual in our Profession: Whereas (I say) both these Adversaries labour different ways,, and up∣on Colourable pretences (taken from particular misde∣meanors wrongfully applyed unto the whole substance of Religion) to discredit and blemish the profession of the truth (which we Ministers are chiefly bound to uphold) there can be no course either more answerable to the nature of our Calling, or so proper to stop the mouths of these Adversaries, or so fit to settle the wavering thoughts of un∣stable souls, or more effectual to vindicate the Credit of the Profession from the aspersions of division, of uncertain∣ty, of formality, and of the want of spiritual power, then to make up this Practical Body of Divinity. For it being composed of those many Positive doctrins which are unde∣niably evident in the Scriptures, which being understood will be cleer to the conscience by their own light, which will manifest all the true grounds of spiritual knowledg, not fantastically but with real Demonstrations, & which unani∣mously all Protestants will fully acknowledg to be the sub∣stance of their Profession and Religion: I say, those doctrines being gathered into a full body, will stand as an uncontroul∣able witness for the Credit of the Truth against all these in∣jurious reproaches. Nor can it be imagined that in the great multitude and variety of particular Opinions, in the manifold disputes and in considerate heats of men about matters extra-funda∣mental, and in the different practises of things which are but circumstantial, away of Peace and Unity should either be found for our-selves, or shewed unto others, by any other
means then by a demonstration of our agreement in all Truths and duties which are necessary for Salvation in re∣spect of God, and profitable for edification in respect of one another, And This is that which our Brethren in the Latter part of their letter hint at, when they tell us that such a body of Divinity will not only be serviceable for Schollars, but even for, Teachers, to furnish them with more usefull matter in their Sermons then now they are able to find in the book of controversy, whereunto almost all their Learning is reduced, representing unto us the evill which befalleth most of their Churches: viz. that they are overwhelmed with matters of Controversy: that their Controversal writings are void of Piety, full of bitterness, and no ways tending to edification: And that their young Schollers of Divinity being traind up to this way of conter∣tious Learning, for want of better Teaching, prove in the course of their Ministry very often void of all Charitable∣ness, and strangers to peaceable Affections. Which e∣vils by our Pious assistance and endeavours they hope may be remedied if we would gather out of our Authors who handle matters of Divinity in a Practical way as they re∣late to Conscience, a full and sound body of saving and savory truths, which may be put into their hands to wa∣ken them unto Righteousness. For they conceive not a∣miss that by Gods blessing such an Instrument of know∣ledg and way of Teaching which it will produce, may not only season their spirits with meek and humble thoughts concerning themselves, and with loving, kind and merci∣full affections towards their Neighbours (which will make them peaceable) but may work upon them the power of Godliness, when they shall perceive how the Theoretical and necessary Truths of Faith which they make now matters of strife, and have disregarded as to their true usefullness, ought to be applyed unto their owne and other mens Consciences, to teach them to wake with God in all their wayes. And indeed this is a sad matter, which not onely those Churches groane under, but all the rest more or lesse, have cause to bemoane: That because many in the Ministry doe
spend their strength and wit upon needlesse and curious dis∣pensations about matters of private opinion, rather then upon the application of knowne and necessary Doctrines un∣to Conscience, because these disputations are agitated with more provocation to heat and animosity, then to regular and modest searches after the way to resolve doubts imparti∣ally; and because the smallest differences of opinions beget ordinarily the extreamest distances of affections, when men study no Rules of moderation in respect of Passions, or of be∣ing wise to Sobriety in respect of Contemplations, or of mu∣tual forbearance in respect of actions (all which are things if not hated, yet suspected, slighted and neglected almost every where in this our age) I say because these disorders (which like weeds in a Garden not weeded, overgrow the Church) have taken place almost every where; it is very dolesul to see, that the maine and great truths of the Profession are extream∣ly neglected, and not at all Cultivated; and that by this meanes the Adversaries (who lie in wait to deceive the sim∣ple, and watch to discredit our Religion) do get all the ad∣vantages which almost they can desire, to bring their ends to passe upon us, and disrepect upon our Profession; for when the frames of matters are discomposed, as now they are in all the Churches (by reason of the alterations which are brought upon the States of the World;) it is no great difficulty for Cunning men, to worke Sinister impressions, and thoughts of Contempt against our Profession, upon weake Spirits, who know not the substance and true grounds of our Religion; but looke onely (as most men doe) Superficially upon the outward appearance, and the worst side of other mens beha∣viours and failings. For these causes, if we have any sense of Honour for the Truth, and if we have any desire as in Conscience we are bound to have, to maintaine the Credit of our Religion, and to free it from the occasions of all these prejudices, we should set our selves earnestly to hold forth, upon the Com∣mon and undenyable grounds of Truth, the substantial Ex∣cellency of the Doctrine of Piety, which by the making up of this Practical Body of Divinity may be done, and by none other way so effectually.
As for our owne credit amongst our Brethren in reference to the Profession, if we study not to mantaine it in Gods way, by the Propagation of the Truth wherewith we are in∣trusted, certainly God will blast it more then ever it hath been raised; Nor can we expect that any thing will uphold our Reputation in Gods way, amongst our Brethren, so much, as the Satisfaction which they expect, and we ought to give unto them in this their desire; for herein they put us unto the reall proofe of our sincerity, whether or no we are willing to doe any thing for the Faith, and for them; and if in this we faile them, we shall deserve to lose our Credit with them, and that most justly. The Ministers of the Churches of Great Brittane have al∣wayes been esteemed by the rest of the reformed Protestants, to be sound in Judgement, learned in the way of Piety, and zealous in the Practice thereof, moderate in their Affections, & discreet in their writings against Dissentors: Therfore in the work of Reconciliation between the Lutherans and the Re∣formed Churches, they were never excepted against by ei∣ther side, but rather accepted as Mediators of the difference by both sides, but cheifly by the side which is best reformed, whose confidence towards us, and esteeme of us is clearly manifested by the tenor of this letter which hath been writ∣ten to us about the Body of Practical Divinity; for therein with a great deale of modesty and humility, they not onely deferre a great deale of respect unto the worth that God hath put upon us, but they invite us to receive the Honour of being their Leaders to Godliness, & their Teachers unto after ages; and although we may not without presumption, thinke the better of our selves, because others preferre us in Honour to themselves, or have any high thoughs of our owne sufficiency (for who is sufficient for such things? and Christ we know is the onely leader and teacher) because our Brethren esteeme highly of us by submission unto the Grace of God in us; yet if there be any truth of Generosity in our Spirits, or any re∣sentment of duty towards such as love us in the Lord, we cannot be insensible of so mighty a provocation as this unto love and good works, but with all Zeale in true Humility giving glory unto God, we are bound to the utmost of our
abilities to impart our selves unto them: not so much that they may not seem deceived in us, and we found unworthy of the Honour given to us; but that the free Gift of Grace may beexalted in the Communion of Saints, and God alone glo∣rified thereby. Even amongst morall men it is true that Commendations adde life unto vertue; and that as the best things in their nature are most Communicable; so it is one of the chiefest delights of the best natures to Communicate the same, not so much to gain praise, as to do that which is good in it self, and praise-worthy; which is the Contentment of a vertuous disposition; and if this is true in morall dispositi∣ons, how much more ought it to be in those that are Spiritu∣al; if therefore there be any vertue, if there be any praise, let us think not onely how to make good the esteeme which they have of us, but rather to doe that which is good and com∣mendable, as it is acceptable unto God and approved of men; for upon this Ground the Apostle, Phil. 4. 8. doth recommend unto our care and study, all things that are true, all things that are honest, all things that are just, all things that are pure, all things that are lovely, and all things that are of good report; and that in respect of vertue, and in re∣spect of praise: And if in this work which we are now ex∣horting to be undertaken, all these Motives concurre at once, so fully and so eminently as in nothing more; and that not in a private but in a publick respect; then it followeth that if there be any vertue or sense of praise to be regarded in or∣der to the holy profession, which onely is our Glory, that we will not suffer our Reputation to fall to the Ground by a careless neglect of so manifest a duty, wherein our credit not onely is so deeply engaged, but our Religion it selfe ex∣treamly concerned: So that if upon these motives and con∣siderations, this businesse should not at all be effected, it would not onely be an Argument of a most brutish insensibi∣lity and stupidity in us towards that which is true honour; but it would clearly evince the unsoundnesse of our hearts in the Profession itselfe, when we should appeare so carelesse of maintaining and propagating the truth thereof, that even with the loss of our own reputation, and the loss of the love of those that have sued to us for this duty, we should suffer it
to be blasted and lie under Contempt, when it is in our power to Vindicate, both it and our selves from reproa∣ches. And thus much concerning the point of Reputation; The next Motive in this kinde is the advancement of the Refor∣mation of the Churches, both at home and abroad; a thing which doth mainely concerne us, a thing whereunto we are deeply engaged, and a thing whereunto this work will be very Conducible; for as concerning the Churches abroad; that it will be a profitable instrument in their hand, to set forward the Reformation which they stand in need of, we can have no greater proofe then their owne Confession in their Letter; for this is the very ground why they make it their suite unto us, that such a Body of Divinity may be compiled, because they expect from it and by it an effectuall meanes to take away the cheife Causes of their Distractions and Disorders in Spiritual things. And because our owne Disorders in some kinde here at home, in stead of being Reformed, have increased of late, and doe procced from the same diseases which have begotten theirs; therefore in pro∣curing a Remedy for our selves, we may hope to become helpfull unto them also. Now that this Body of Practical Divinity will be very usefull to this purpose, may be gathered from the nature of our disease, and the property of the Cure to Remedy the same. The diseases which afflict us, proceed from the ignorance and distempers of our minde in things pertaining to God, and from the unrulinesse of walking in things pertaining to Men: This ignorance in the understanding, and distemper in the will, and unrulinesse in the outward man, is fomented by the slight and Cunning Craftiness of some men of Cor∣rupt mindes, who being reprobate concerning the Faith (as not adhering to the Testimony of Jesus in the Word, which is the rule thereof) & having taken up either a Superstitious and Traditional formality, or a singular and selfe-conceited Spi∣rituality of worship and of godlinesse, they deny the pow∣er and resist the truth of both, by taking away the Grounds, and making voide the Common Profession of Christianity.
These men both superstitiously and singularly affected, seeking to get followers unto their severall wayes and opini∣ons, agree to wast the Churches, and to blast with a pestilent breath all that is not conformable to their practice, if they can finde any small colour for raising Calumnies against it; and thus they fill the Churches with disputes, and the heads of ignorant people with profane and vaine bablings, which daily increase unto more ungodlinesse: For by this meanes scandals are multiplyed, the unity of the Spirit dissolved, the bonds of peace neglected, factions set on foot and con∣tinued with animosity, wherein the weaker sort as Children are tossed too and fro, and carried about with every winde of Doctrine, till they lose their hold of all Principles, and then give themselves over to Atheism. This is the nature of our diseases both at home and a∣broad: Therefore the Remedy for both will be the same, which can be  other but to this effect. First, that the faithfull Ministers and Professors of the Go∣spel both , should stand fast together in one Spirit and ving together in one way for the faith of the Gospel, and in nothing terrified by their Adver∣saries. Secondly, that they should both with one consent agree upon some profitable way of handling necessary and usefull Controversies, and of stunning profane and vaine bablings, and the Contradiction of Science falsly so called. Thirdly, that we and they should endeavour by all pos∣sible meanes to fight against our spiritual adversaries with the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God: holding out unto the World the same forme of sound words, and dividing the Doctrine of Truth rightly in one and the same way of preaching and handling the Scriptures to advance Godlinesss, as it becommeth workmen that need not to be ashamed. And to enable us all jointly to endeavour these things; I am very confident that next unto the Graces of the Spirit, and the infallible word of truth, delivered unto us in the Scriptures (which are the two things which God hath Co∣venanted to continue with the Ministry unto the end of the
World, Isay. 49. 21.) I say next unto these two, I am confi∣dent that no means can be used to enable us unto that endea∣vour more fitly, and with Gods ordinary blessing more succesfully, then this Body of Practical Divinity, if it were compiled and communicated in English to our men at home, and in Latin to those that are abroad. For the three parts of this Body, if they were throughly and fully handled (as from our Authors they may be) will meet directly and in a right order with the three maine and Original Causes of our disorderlinesse and distracted Condi∣tion, to shew the Spiritual wayes of Reforming the same, wherein if we shall agree to walke unanimously, as no doubt we will, we may undoubtedly also beleeve, that by this Union we shall to all our adversaries become not onely invincible but irresistible to work the overthrow of Satans Kingdome. And this shall suffice also concerning this point of Reformation, which is to be advanced by this meanes: and which the faithfull Ministry of this Land is bound to endeavour by the Tenor of their solemne League and Cove∣nant in the presence of God, who hath put the meanes of this in our hand to be effected, and now calleth upon us to make use of the same. The last thing which I mentioned, whereunto we are en∣gaged, and whereunto this Body of Divinity will be effectu∣all, is to Concurre with Forrain Protestants in the Common Cause of Religion, and to assist them against the Common Enemies thereof. This Concurrence and assistance is an en∣gagement that doth lie closer to us then I finde it appre∣hendred by many: Therefore I shall endeavour to represent unto those that are Conscionable in matters of publick Con∣cenment, not so much what helpe may be given to the cause by this meanes, for that may be clearly seen by what is said already, but what the obligation is which should make us Concurre with Forrain Protestants to uphold the pro∣fession of the cause. As Concerning the assistance which this worke will yeeld unto the Cause, if we will adde any thing to that which hath been said already concerning the Credit of the Profes∣sion, which it will helpe to uphold, and concerning the Re∣formation
of Disorders, which it will helpe to take away, we may consider two things. First, What properly the common Cause is. Secondly, What it is that weakens our hands in prosecu∣ting of it. If the Common Cause of Protestants be made any thing else then the Propagating of the light of the Gospel, which is attested in the Scriptures, that the Kingdome and life of Jesus Christ may take place in the soules of all men, to the Glory of God the Father, by the graces of his Spirit, it is fouly mistaken. For all that we have protested for in former time against Popery, is this, that we will not be led by the dictates of o∣ther men, to beleeve and practise upon implicit faith and blind obedience what they prescribe to us in matters of Re∣ligion, but that in such matters we will knowingly relie onely upon the Word of God revealed in the holy Scriptures, to follow the dictates thereof. And as We are bound still to continue this Profession a∣gainst Popery on the one hand; so in these distracted times especially we are obliged to adde a further Protestation to cleer the truth of our profession on the other hand: which is this, that as we think it not lawfull for us to give up our faith to other men, so we conceive it neither acceptable to God, nor safe for us to be led by the dictates of our own i∣maginations alone to beleeve and practice singularly and by our selves, whatever in matters of Religion we shall in our own private Conceit fancy to be right; but that we will rationally entertain and handle the word of God in the holy Scriptures, for the understanding and practising of all Reli∣gious Truths offered and duties prescribed unto us therein: that is to say, that we will not interpret the Scriptures in matter of outward duty and performance, contrary to the Common grounds of Reason and righteous order amongst men; and in matters of inward relation towards God, that we will be wise unto Sobriety, conceiving that to be the truth of the Spirit which is most answerable to the Common Principles of the Faith of all Ages, and to the Spiritual state of holy Communion which Jesus Christ
hath setled in the new Covenant between God and all his Members. The common Cause of Protestants hath these Four main Interests in Christianity, by which it upholdeth the truth thereof, and thereby is distinguishable from all other Pro∣fessions. The First is The Interest of Scripture knowledg. The Second is The Interest of the life of the Spirit. The Third is The Interest of orderly walking in all Gods Ordinances, Natural and Spiritual. The Fourth is The Interest of the Communion of Chur∣ches in reference to mutual edification in these forenamed matters. These Interests being all joined and professedly followed (that is, openly owned without offence, as it becometh the Disciples of Christ) make up the true Protestanc Cause, that is, the profession of Christianity: And if any one of these be not followed, the Cause is so farre deserted as it is neglected. By Scripture knowledg (which is the fundamental Rule and Seed of the profession of Christianity) Prote∣stants were begotten and are distinguished from Pa∣pists. By the life of the Spirit (which is the heart and soul of the profession of Christianity) Protestants to grow up in Christ who is their head, till they shall come to a per∣fect man: and are distinguished from Socinians and all such as turn Christianity into a Moral profession of a new kind of Philosophy, which is refined and entertained up∣on revealed Principles, but in effect nothing besides or a∣bove human Reasoning. By the orderly walking in all Gods Ordinances (which is the visible body of the profession of Christianity) Pro∣testants stand firm in the truth, to bear witness thereof un∣to the world, and are distinguished from all Libertines that pretend to be so piritual as to be a bove all Ordinan∣ces. And by the Communion of Churches (which is the acti∣vity of this visible body) Protestants are strengthned in
their growth and testimony, made invincbile against their Adversaries, made helpfull to each other and the Cause, and distinguished from all those that pretend to the singula∣rity of Saintship in their several ways by themselves alone, with the condemnation of such as goe not along with them. These being the true Interests of this Cause as it is subor∣dinate unto Christianity, and Christianity being taken up upon none other Ground but as it is revealed in the holy Scriptures, nor maintained to any other End but to mani∣fest the life of Jesus Christ by his kingdom unto the world, it is cleer that the whole observation of outward Ordinan∣ces and the practice of mutual communion, which are the two latter Interests of the Cause, must rise from the first, and rest in the second of those which are the former: and whatsoever designes, practices, negotiations and un∣dertakings are said to be for Christianity or the Protestant Religion (which are all one) and do not tend to advance directly, either Scripture knowledg or the life of the Spirit, or the walking under Ordinances, or the Communion of Churches, or do tend seemingly to advance any one of these without a reference to all the rest, they are to be judged false, deceitfull and destructive to the cause and truth of Christianity. Therefore we ought to acknowledg none to be a Servant to the Cause of Christ (that is a true Protestant) but he who walketh by this Rule of the new Creature; and upon such be peace and upon the Israel of God. As for me, I shall by Gods grace never entertain any de∣signs and practices, or favour any motions and pretences which are undertaken and prosecuted with subtilty on with a strong hand against the persons of a party disagreeing from my judgment, upon this Ground because they favour not my way; but I shall make the prosecution of these fore∣named Interests as by spiritual means and ways they are ap∣proveable to the conscience of every rational man, the o∣pen and only rule of my walking in this Cause. And if any man shall find me shaying from this path, and shew me that I am not in it, he will oblige me to thank him for con∣verting
a Sinner from the error of his Way. Hitherto I have given you my sense of the Common Cause of Protestants; Now I shall adde a word or two con∣cerning that which I suppose doth weaken our hands in pro∣secuting of it: And that is partly an ordinary Mistake; part∣ly an universal Neglect of Duty in the Actors for it. The Mistake is in two things. First, That most men meaning well to the Protestant Cause, as they do understand it, act all rather against the Adversaries thereof then for the Cause it self. Secondly, That when they act so, they take up no rule of Reason or Moderation in dealing with Adversaries for their good, or upon grounds of Justice, but give way to Passion and Hatred; and all that is imagined to be hurtfull to them, is supposed to be advantagious to themselves: both which are Courses altogether preposterous unto Chri∣stianity. For the true way of advancing Christianity is not destructive but edificative: that is, doth not intend to o∣verthrow and build at leisure afterward as the Method of some is: but it doth intend to build first Christs kingdom, that thereby it may overthrow the frame of Satans Policy: for it holdeth forth the word of life and truth, that by the manifestation of light it may dispell error and darkness; And when this is done, then it proceeds to the condemna∣tion of the ways of unrighteousness: first it bringeth our thoughts unto the obedience of Christ, that then every strong Hold of Satan, and every imagination and high thing which exalteth itself against the knowledg of God may be cast down: for except we bring Christ with us, and set him a working upon the Spirits of men that are in the snares of Satan, and led captive at his pleasure, we shall never be able to bind the strong man that hath possession of their souls: and farreless shall we be able to spoil hm of his goods, which are the lusts and the inclinations of the flesh whereby he doth act self will in them, that they may not be subject to the will of God. The way then of Christianity is more directly Positive then Negative; and therefore it is a mistake to think that
refuting and opposing of Adversaries is the main business which ought to be prosecuted in these times: but a farre greater mistake it is to think that by making the ways of our Adversaries odious, or by vexing their persons, and prejudging them any way, (by hook or crook as we use to say) in the freedom and conveniencies of professing their Tenets, we shall profit our Cause, or gain much upon or a∣gainst them. No surely: for this is a farre greater Mi∣stake then the other; and yet this is the ordinary practice which is most commonly followed by those who are zeal∣ous for the Cause. But this way cannot possibly prove suc∣cessefull, because it doth quite mistake the Interest of Chri∣stianity, which is nothing else but by the knowledg of the Scriptures and the life of the Spirit to bring men to walk orderly before God and men, and live in the Communion which the Members of Christ owe to each other. And if we aim not at this even towards our Adversaries to bring them hereunto, we deal not with them as Christians ought to do, but forsake our profession. Now it is neither the convincing them of their particular Errors without further instruction, nor the laying open of their shame, nor the vexing of their Spirits by troubling their persons, or stop∣ping their professions that will bring them to any of these holy duties which uphold the truth of Christianity, but this way of dealing will rather set them further off in their Af∣fections, both from the love of the truth and from us: so that when we shall offer them means tending directly to that which is truly their way to life, they will reject the same, onely because they come from that hand which hath made it self utterly hateful unto them. These Mistakes weaken the Cause greatly; but the uni∣versal Neglect which is in Two main things, doth it farre more. The First is The neglect of duty in using spiritual means and in a spiritual way towards Dissenters. The Second is The neglect of Brotherly Communion in spiritual things, which is the last point of the main Interest of the Cause. The first Neglect which is of the means sutable to the pro∣secution
of the Cause, doth proceed from the forenamed Mistakes, which indeed make some Professors manage Pro∣testancy as a State-Religion rather then a true profession of Christianity: and so they take their strength (chiefly a∣gainst Diffenters) from State-Authority and Practices sub∣ordinate thereunto in a Worldly way of Policy rather then from the word of God and the work of the Spirit. And because many of the active men who have parts, and so love to appear in the Front and to take matters upon them, have been by assed this way, some for one, some for another In∣terest of State, making themselves and all matters of Reli∣gion subservient thereunto: therefore it hath pleased God to befool them in their Counsels, and to suffer Satan to set Instruments awork who have out-acted them in all these ways: but if they had walked by Faith in Simplicity and Godly Sincerity, according to the Rules of the Gospel within their own Sphere, and not according to worldly wisdome; if they had in a Caute of Christianity made use of none other means but of those which Christ hath used and sanctified unto them, and in that way by which he and his Apostles have shewed us they should be used, they should not have miscarried as they have done by trusting to the arm of flesh, nor could Satan either have over-reached them in their Counsels, or stopped them in their proceed∣ings which now he hath been able to do, because he is of old Master of the Trade of Policy and Power, which they of late as yong Prentices were beginning to take up; and this is so undeniably evident to any that will trace Publick Pro∣ceedings in some Actors, and compare them with the Rules of Christianity, that I am (for my Brethrens sake) asha∣med to speak of it any more: and shal therfore turn my back upon particulars to cover them with Silence as my fathers nakedness, nor shall I mention any more of this neglect in the general, lest I should seem either to reproach those with their failings who by admonition may be reclaimed from the error of their way, or to furnish the Adversaries with matter of contempt against the Cause by reason of our frailties who mannage the same. The other Neglect which is of Brotherly Communion in
Spiritual matters both amongst our selves at home and to∣ward the Churches abroad, is of all others the greatest hinderance to the Cause, and obstruction to the ways of Gospel-edification. For if Brotherly Communion were not neglected, all the former Mistakes and Neglects might be remedied by common advice: but because it is not at all laid to heart, no remedy can either be applyed, or being offered become effectual. For now although some can dis∣cerne the causes of our miseries, and know where the Re∣medy thereof is to be found, and how to be made use of; yet because our spiritual Gifts are like dead mens bones scattered at the graves mouth, dis-jointed, withered, bu∣ried within every mans particular brest, without life and without coherence for the actions of life: therefore we are unserviceable one to another, nor can there be any com∣mon Cure applyed to common Diseases. For as the body of the Church cannot otherwise be edified then by itself through love, when every joint supplyeth acording to the effectual working in the measure of every part, that which maketh the increase of the body: so the evils and distempers of the parts, which are destructive to the whole, cannot otherwise be taken away but by the spiritual com∣munication of Gifts and the supply of Graces' from one member to another. For which cause I have made it my work for these many years to sollicite the performance of this duty, and continue still in so doing whereever I can get any opportunity to represent the necessity thereof. And although my earnest and constant Sollicitations have not been so effectual as I could wish, yet I must bless God that they have not been altogether without effect; for although there is not much appearing outwardly, yet some grounds are laid which I am confident the Gates of Hell will never be able to shake. It cannot be denyed but that most men are yet full of aheir own counsels, and therefore consider not what is sug∣gested or may be suggested by others; most men are full of their own strength; and many of those that preach Self∣denyal unto others, practise in spiritual matters least of it themselves, and therefore they look not our for mutual sup∣ply
of strength from the brotherly communion of Graces; but all men almost do please themselves in their own way, so that they regard no man further then he doth come up and follow the way of their particular choosing, because the Apostolical Rule and Practice that being free from all, we should become servants unto all, 1 Cor. 9. 19. is for the most part not at all regarded I say it cannot be denyed but that for the most part as yet things are so; But when he who is now in action, shall have accomplished to scatter the Holy People, Dan. 12. 17. so that none of that strength which our Worldly-wise men have hitherto put their con∣fidence in, shall be either shut up or left any more with them, Deut. 32. 36. then their care will be opened to beleeve these Suggestions, and acknowledge this to be a truth, that Christ is their Rock so farre as they depend upon him, and act jointly in his way, and no further. And if once this Principle be entertained and made a Maxime to walk by in every thing, they will finde that the Lord will suddenly ap∣pear as Judge for his People, and speedily repent him for his Servants. But till we leave all the Confidences which by our own devices we have chosen to our selves, and till we have freed our spirits from the delusions and the jea∣lousies which we have framed unto our selves, to sanctifie the Lord alone in our hearts, and to make him our confi∣dence and our fear by walking in his way, we cannot look for any prosperity, or expect that he should appear amongst us. Now his way is the way of Brotherly and holy Commu∣nion, to maintain the knowledge of his truth in the Scrip∣tures, the life of his Spirit in the Covenant, and the ob∣servation of his Ordinances in the Church; And whatso∣ever Counsel we follow or Course we take which doth not lead us to one End in this way, will never bring any com∣fort with it; And I may freely say, Because this Coun∣sel and Course hath not only been neglected by all, but slighted and despised by some, therefore the Lord hath not as yet appeared amongst us.
Thus we have seen what properly the Protestant Cause is, and what it is that weakens our hands in prosecuting the same. Now if we look back upon the Body of Practical Di∣vinity which hath been delineated, to consider what assistance and help we may give thereby unto the Protestant Cause, in case we shall desire to concur with the forraign Churches of Christ therein, we shall find that it shall prove one of the most profitable instruments that can be made use of, to main∣taine all the parts and interests of the Cause, and that hardly any thiny can be set afoot, that wil be more service∣able both to certifie the mistakes which make us miscarry in our undertakings for Christianity, and to set us upon the duties without which the way of our Profession cannot suc∣cessfully be prosecuted. For if you reflect upon the Interests of the Cause, and take notice what fitnesse this Engine will have to maintain the same; you shall perceive that both by the properties of the matter and form thereof, & by the application of the whole to the use of holy Communion, it will be most advantagi∣ous to uphold the Profession of our Religion: For first, The matter thereof will be nothing else but the compleat and full substance of all those Doctrines which are substantial unto Christianity, as being necessary and usefull to advance Scripture knowledge, to hold forth the life of the Spirit, and to direct all men in the observation of divine Ordinances, and in the wayes of their severall Vocations to walk worthy of God, which are the onely things to be in∣tended in our Profession, if we do mind Christianity for it selfe. Secondly, The form of this Engine may be made such a disposition of those Doctrines, as will shew forth the true method of handling Scripturall Truths Positively, which is to infer from known and undoubted Principles, by the Evi∣dence and Demonstration of the Spirit in matters known to the Conscience, clear and undeniable Conclusions, avoiding all the proposterous wayes of Schoole and Philosophicall Disputations, which for the most part proceeding from the pride and affectation of wit and learning, beget vain jang∣lings and humane passions, multiply mistakes and propagate
impiety in the minds of those that are mainly taken there∣with and addicted thereunto. Thirdly, This whole Body of Divinity being made up as it ought to be, and for the end for which it is desired, will not onely be a witnesse of the union of the Spirits of all Prote∣stant Ministers in the same saving Truth, against the reproach of a Fundamentall Division which is said to be amongst them; but it will be a Center of Concurrence, a subject of brotherly Correspondency, and a means of mutual Com∣munion in the work of the Gospel, by which all hands will be strengthened, and the hearts of those that faint now by reason of their solitary walking, will be encouraged then to proceed with cheerfulnesse, by reason of the conjunction of so great a help from all their brethren. And truly besides the assistance and support which the truth it selfe will receive from this Work, by being published and held forth in that wherein all the witnesses thereof doe agree, (which is one of the greatest helps that can be given to it in these times of disagreement, and therefore should most effectuallyu oblige our Consciences to intend it) the de∣signe of endeavouring a Concurrence by this meanes with our Brethren, to give them encouragement to stand fast in the defence of the Cause, is extreamly necessary, and there∣fore also to our Consciences every way biding and obliga∣tory, so fare as we desire their prosperity in the Cause? And here I mean not our Brethren onely that are abroad, but even those that ate at home also, whose case is not yet settled; and who knows how full of Distraction and Deso∣lation it may be hereafter, if God in mercy prevent it not. For if any will observe into how many peeces we are fal∣len; what the Changes, Breaches, and Dissolutions are which are fallen and may fall upon us; what the effects are which this hath brought forth amongst us; and how a liber∣ty to all, to do without controle whatsoever every one plea∣seth, though never so offensive, is sprung up; and what the way of force (if there be a necessity still to stand under it) may further bring to passe; If I say we will observe this, which is apparent to all, we may easily gather, that nothing will be more usefull and serviceable, to give a testimony of
the truth unto the World, and to strengthen each othere hearts and hands by the unity of the Spirit in that testimo∣ny, then this Work will be. For in the time of our Dissipati∣on this may hopefully become a pillar to uphold the Truth, and therein a monument of our Conjunction, an instru∣ment of our Concurrence in the Gospel, and by Gods bles∣sing in the End a Means to revive and restore the Witnes∣ses to their heavenly splendor and authority: And if there were nothing else but this (which is cleerly our own spe∣cial Interest) yet this alone should waken us to a full Re∣solution to undertake this business with all speed and dili∣gence; chiefly because the Adversaries make no delay to accomplish their Designes against the ways of Righteous∣ness, which we are bound with all our might to maintain. But besides this necessity of joining our spirits to a Corre∣sponding in the Truth amongst our selves against Common Adversaries, and the unlikelyhood to be able to do it any other way, or any way so effectually and so easily as by this means: there is another strong Obligation lying up∣on us in respect of Forrain Protestants to concurre with them in the same Cause I said in the beginning of the last parcel of this Discourse that our engagement to a Concurrence with Forrain Pro∣testants in the Common Cause of Religion, doth lie clo∣ser upon us then I finde it apprehended by many: I shall now endeavour to make this apparent by representing two things which ought sadly to be laid to heart, and are unde∣nyably manifest in the eyes of all the world. The one is concerning Gods judgements against those that have neglected the Common Cause of Protestants: The other is concerning our own Declarations and Oaths strictly obliging us to minde the same. For looke we upon the heavy hand of God how it hath overtaken those that have neglected the state of Forrain Churches, we shall see that because the late King and his persecuting Prelates did not mind the true Interest of the Protestant Cause, which is the Gospel, because they did not endeavour to help the Lord against the mighty, that is, to protect the Churches abroad by those means which
they had in their hands, and were answerable to the light of the truth whereof they made profession, and because the way of their Policy did lead them rather to side with the Common Adversaries for Self-ends to betray the Cause, rather then to uphold it, therefore these publick Calami∣ties have justly overtaken them, and executed the venge∣ance of God upon them, that they who sought themselves only, without respect unto God and their Brethren, should utterly lose themselves without recovery, whiles God did finde out a way to rescue his Churches (which they de∣serted) from the destruction which the Enimies designed a∣gainst them. I alledge this concerning the late King and his violent Prelates, as to me one of the main visible causes of the Judg∣ments of God upon them, for which I conceive they have been principally cast off; namely because their betray∣ing of the truth of the Protestant Cause was the great sin for which Christ had a Quarrel with them; both as with Hypocrites, who pretending to stand for the Protestant Cause did undermine it, and despised the low Condition of the Churches abroad; and as Enimies to the Gospel, who to suppress the light thereof then breaking forth, did persecute those most who did most sincerely profess and pra∣ctise Godliness at home. These sins have caused Christ to fall with his iron Rod upon them to dash them to peeces, as we have seen before our eyes, because herein their way was Diametrically or positeunto his Kingdom, & therefore their sin immediatly committed against himself, whereas their other sins and designes might have a more direct Relation unto the state of the Nation, for which also the power of the Nation hath been justly made use of to overthrow them. For seeing in the great battel which now is a fighting be∣tween Christ and his Saints on the one side, and the Beast and the Kings of the Earth on the other side, the powers both of Heaven and Earth, that is, both of the spirits of men, and of the frames of States must be sett a work to op∣pose each other respectively in their Contradictory Pro∣perties: it is not possible that any visible power amongst men can remain unshaken; And whatever is not subordi∣nate
unto the power which is given unto Christ both in Heaven and Earth, must be so shaken as to be removed and abolished for ever both out of Heaven and Earth; hence it is that their power which they imployed not for Christ, but against him, is justly brought to nought, and brought to nought before all others because it did strike more at the root of the Churches standing, and did more deceitfully oppose the breaking forth of the Light of the Truth then a∣ny other Enimies whatsoever. Now they did strike at the Root and did more deceit∣fully oppose then others, because they were entrusted with more Fundamental truth and more light then others were, and had more abilities every way to uphold the Cause better then others had, and because the Churches did rely more confidently upon them and their assistance then upon others: but the truth and the light wherewith they were entrusted, they held in unrighteousness: and the Confidence which was cast upon them, and which they were willing to seem to answer, they betrayed utterly into the Enimies hands: chiefly then when Signor Con and Banzani negotiated the Papal designes with them amongst us. This I observe with grief for the guilt which they brought upon themselves, and not out of any personal hatred a∣gainst the men: for none of them ever disobliged me other∣wise then in opposing the Protestant Cause, and by neglect∣ing the Opportunities which I was instrumental to offer un∣to some of them, whereby the Gospel might have been ad∣vanced, if they had been so happy as to have made use thereof. But they regarded not the affliction of Joseph, and therefore now they are gone captive with the first that are gone into Captivity, Amos 6. 7. And the Justice of God upon them ought to be observed to his Glory; that others may fear, and that we our selves may beware of falling un∣der the same condemnation: for now the same duty is re∣quired of us which then was incumbent upon them, and that as solemnly if not more strictly then ever they were ob∣liged thereunto: for we have condemned them for that which they did neglect, and have bound our selves with solemn
Remonstrance, and a sacred Oath to mind the common In∣terests of Protestants, which they so sinfully neglected; we then having judged tdem to be unfaithfull in the Cause of God, and engaged our selves to mend their fault, if ever God should put us in a capacity so to doe, if now when we are in that Capacity, we should neglect this duty, we shall deserve a heavier judgement then they are fallen under, if we be found guilty of the same neglect. The Solemn Remonstrance in the name of the state of the Kingdome published, December. 1641. before the Trou∣bles began, doth declare the whole state obliged, and con∣sequently every faithfull subject therein, according to his place to labour by all Offices of friendship, to unite the forrein Churches with us in the same Cause, and to seek their liberty, safety, and prosperity, as bound thereunto by cha∣rity to them, and by wisdome for our own good, for by this means our own strength shall be encreased, and by a mu∣tuall Concurrence to the same common End we shall be a∣ble to procure the good of the whole Body of the Protestant Profession. Here the State is engaged to mind the Cause of the Churches abroad, and to procure the good of the whole Protestan Profession. The Cause of the Churches is not a meer worldly Interest, but a spirituall Cause; and the main good of the whole Protestant Profession, is not a worldly Concernment, but a Gospel perfection by the unity of the spirit to build up one another in love; if this good can be procured to the whole Profession, nothing will be wanting to their safety and prosperity: But if this good be not sought after and endeavoured, what ever else may be intended, will not much availe the main of their prosperity. Now to bring this to passe, and to unite them in a true Gospell interest with us, nothing can be more directly subservient then this designe to gratifie their desires of obtaining such a Body of Practicall Divinity from us. And to confirm this, and bind it strongly upon our Conscience, the solemn League and Covenant between God and the Nations doth engage deep∣ly all those that took that Oath, to desire affectionately and endeavour sincerely, that the success of our proceedings may bee deliverance and safety to all Gods people, and an en∣couragement
to other Christian Churches groaning under, or in danger of the yoak of Antichristian Tyrannie, to joyne with us in the same or like Association and Cove∣nant, to the glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdome of Jesus Christ, and the Peace and Tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and Common-wealths. These are deep Professi∣ons, as made in the presence of God, and therefore ought to be so much the more conscionably minded. Of the Third. How the Worke may be effected and imparted unto those that have sued for it. TO procure the Compilement of this Body of Practicall Divinity, the way is already chalked out unto us, and was agreed upon by some of our most able and godly Mi∣nisters, who before these Troubles, did offer themselves unto the Work, and engaged to take their Tasks to be elaborated under the direction of Doctor Usher, the Primate of Armach, who then was in a powerfull and plentifull condition, and likely to have undertaken the direction of the business. As for way how the matter was deferred unto him, it may be seen by the adjoyned Letter, which in the year 1633. was sent him: nor did any thing stop the proceeding of the Worke, before our late troubles began in Ireland and England, but the want of a compleat Plat-form, and some other contri∣vances which were referred to the Primat to effect: but since the troubles both here and in Ireland have unsetled all men so, that although there had been a Plat-form drawn up, yet few or none could have performed any thing in the Tasks
which they might have taken; therefore the Work hath been hitherto interrupted. But seeing now we are in some hope that the Lord will be mercifull to us, and remove the Cau∣ses of future Distractions, we may also expect that there will be faithfull and able Agents found to undertake this Work, which will be so usefull for all the Churches; and to bring it about, the way may be this. First, Let either this, or some other Plat-form be held forth, that such as will chuse Tasks, may know what to pitch upon. Then let two hands be chosen as Directors, to whom all the Tasks when they shall be perfected may be brought in, that they may according to the Plat-form which they shall think fittest to be followed, set every piece in its own place, and joyne every limme of the Body to its Neighbour, till it be compleated and fitted for the Press. When the Directors of the Work are chosen, let every one who doth choose a Taske, be obliged to notifie his Un∣dertaking to one of them, that they may know what the Tasks are which are in hand, and by whom undertaken, that if all which is to be perfected hath not found a peculiar Workman, some body may be sought out and engaged to become the Undertaker for that which shall be wanting; and in case two should take the same Work in hand un∣known one to another, the Directors may give them notice thereof, and move them to divide their Work between them, that it may be done with more expedition, or incline one of them to take some other Taske in hand, which perhaps hath no Undertaker. An Agent also might be thought upon Residing in London, to whom from all Parts, and by whom to all Parts, the Let∣ters should be addressed, which must be written to or from the Undertakers, or to and from the Directors; and his Charges should be born, and by him the Tasks when they are Compleated, should be first sent, and then conveyed un∣to the Directors carefully that they may not miscarry. The Work being effected, the way to impart it unto For∣raine Churches, is no more but to get it Translated into
Latine, and Printed after that it is Printed in English, which the Company of Stationers will greedily take in hand, as a Book which will yeeld great and ready profit: and if there should be any difficulty in the printing of the Latine Copy in these Parts, because our Stationers perhaps will not readily venter upon a Book which will have no great vent here (as it is not likely the Latine Copy wil have, when the English is already extant) then meanes may be used towards some Forraine Stationer at Geneva, or else∣where, who will not onely Print it, but be induced to con∣tract with the Translators, to buy the Copy from them, be∣cause the Book will sell no lesse abroad in Latine, then it will do at home in English; that is, exceedingly. The Copy of a Letter which was written by severall Godly Ministers, Undertakers in this Work of compiling a Body of Practical Divinity, to Doctor Usher the Pri∣mat of Armach. in Ireland. MOst Reverend Father in God, Grace and Peace, with all due and dutifull Respects premised: If we shall seem bold in apprehending this opportunity of writing by this worthy Knight; yet we are confident that the important Cause moving us, will excuse us, and procure not onely our pardon, but also its approbation of your incomparable benignity and love to the Churches of Christ. And althought it were too great inconsideratenesse in us to imagine, that either your vigilant intelligence sitting in that high watch Tower should need our information, or your great faculty, and no lesse facility, both of Grace and Nature, of Place and Parts to doe good, and chiefly to promote the Cause of the Gospell, should require Arguments for incitation: yet we thought it our duty at least, to signifie our
hearty desire for the wel-fare of Gods Church; and to promise that your care and zeale for it, in the course that we here commend, shall no sooner appear, but it shall sind us ready prest to attend it with our best service. It is not unknown unto your Grace, that the Churches of Germany are no lesse distressed and distracted with∣in then without, the want of inward peace molesting them more then of outward: Yet as the Ancient Civill Roman State, when often rent by intestine Wars, no sooner was invaded by a Forraine Power, but still the breach was soadred up again: So the wiser taking occasion by these Wars in Germany, to strike while the Iron is hot, and to make a vertue of necessity, have hoped and so endea∣voured to reduce the two grand dissenting parts of these Churches to a wished Peace and Unity, while in the fire of furious War, the two spiritual Swords of Luthers and Calvins Party (too keenly bent one against the other) being mollified, might with the more easie hammering be wrought into one, and so become the more strong to fight against the Common Adversarie. And what do we know, whether the all-disposing wisdome of our God, hath not for this very purpose sent the Sword into those Parts, to launce and as∣swage the swellings of such Aposthumes? Now what hath been already done herein, and by whose auspicious setting it on foot, and with what success and greater hopes it still proceedeth (the per∣fection whereof we daily pray for) are need not now to relate. That which we here presume to propound, is a Worke which either may conduce to the begetting of the Child of Peace; or being brought forth to the nourishing of it up unto a perfect man in Christ. This Worke is the framing of a Body of Practicall Di∣vinity, for the furnishing of those Churches in speciall, as being most destitute of it, and very poore in the life and power of Reli∣gion. Now for the furtherance of so good and great a Worke, We who are Ministers of London, whose names are under-written, apprehending the excellent use of such a Work; but withall, the great difficulty of effecting in any good degree, unless some such Noble, Able, and active Instruments as your Grace is, give a good speed unto it: are bold in the bowels of Christ, and in a Brotherly compassion of the same mystical Body, to implore your Piety and Wisdome, not onely in giving Counsel and Direction, but assistance also by your worthy Example, joyning Head, Heart, and
Hand together, for the advancement and accomplishment of so religious and desireable a Worke: And the rather are we em∣boldned to desire the engagement of your Grace herein sith we are Credibly informed, that your Grace formery hath much de∣sired such a Work to be undertaken and effected. And who can better prescribe Methode, manner, matter, and meanes for this then your self, whom the Lord hath so richly furnished with so excellent Gifts of Wisdom, Learning, Charity and Zeal, for the perfecting of the Saints for the ministry for the Edifying of the Body of Christ. Thus recommending all this to your Christian Care and Piety, with our humblest services and dayly prayers for the increase of Gods Grace and blessing upon your vigilancy in keeping the flock of God from Ravenous wolves, and advancing the Gospel in the power and purity of it, as well abroad as at home, we humbly take our leave, attending what service your Grace will Command us, when once your Piety and Prudence hath sett us down an Ample and full Platforme of the whole Body of Divinity, so as we may be able to discerne all the limbs and lineaments of it; and so taking a full view of the entire Model, each may make Choice of that piece in special which he findes himself fittest to frame and polish, untill by this meanes the whole Building shall be happily and the more easily finished, many hands making light work. Your Graces most humble Servants in the Lord, Will. Gouge Jo. Stoughton Jo. Downam Henry Burton Geo. Walker Nicolas Morton Sidr. Simpson Adoniram Byfield Rich. Culverwell Obadiah Sedgwick Geo. Hughes Joseph Symonds.
For his loving Friend M. John Dury, These. Mr. Dury, I am glad that you are still willing to take some pains about the procuring of a Body of Practical Divini∣ty; a Work which I have long wished for; and which formerly my heart was in, and my hand would have been in, if God had been pleased to continue our Peace: for when you brought over the Letters from the Forrain Churches, wherein they made it their Request unto us to gratify their Churches with some Endeavors about the compilement of this Work; which were seconded by a Letter from the Ministers in and about London unto me, when I was in Ireland many years agoe, I was very glad of the Moti∣on, and laid it very seriously to heart, and Conferred with some of my Brethren about it, that we might bring the Work to some perfection. Dr. Downam the then Bishop of London-Derry, was a man whose studies were much bent that way: for which cause it was referred to him; and he readily did undertake the Task to draw up a Model or Platforme, according to which that Systeme or Body might be compiled, that the Ministers who had written to me might be able to choose their Tasks and set themselves aworke about it. This Model he promised to send unto me to revise it before it should be imparted to the foresaid Ministers, that in our joint name it might be sent unto them. But he either for want of health, or some other impediments, did not expedite the Work before his death, and when the Troubles of Scotland did begin: which by reason of my Lord of Straffords intermedling had some Reflexion upon us in Ireland; and not long after I being come o∣ver hither, he the Bishop of Derry being dead, the Troubles of Ireland taking fire, at the proceedings of the then Parlia∣ment here, and the great distractions of this and the other two Na∣tions increasing ever since, I could not do what was desired of me, and what I heartily desired might have been done, and wish yet may be done; for it will never be too late or unseasonable to set upon such an Enterprise. If therefore by your Sollicitation and paines you can oblige those
that in the Universities or in and about this City are able and willing to undertake it, I think you will doe a Work very accepta∣ble to all that are Godly, and profitable to all the Churches at home and abroad. Let me therefore intereat you to proceed, that whiles there is any appearance of doing good to our Genertaion, we may not neglect the Opportunity. As for the Model of the Heads which you have shewed unto me; First, I shall advise this that the Procognitions may not be insisted upon largely, but as briefly and substantially as may be; and if some References be made unto such Authors as handle the Heads of the Precognitions more at large, it may give sa∣tisfaction to such as will be more curious and desirous to see things amply handled. Secondly, my advice is that the work may be contracted to as few hands as may be; who may meet and Conferre together a∣bout it when they are perfecting their Tasks. Thirdly, I would not have the Work too large and Volumi∣nous for several Reasons, yet as full of matter as it can be: and where Eulargement may be thought usefull, References may be made to such Authors as use them most effectually. Lastly, Concerning the Cases if Conscience which should be handled in this Body, I think they may be brought in and inser∣ted under every Head of matter whereunto they belong. This is for the present that which I would suggest. I pray God direct and assist you and all those that goe about it; And what I shall be able to doe towards the encouragement of able Workmen therein, you may be Confident shall not be wanting from Your loving friend Ja. Armachanus. From my Study, Decemb. 14. 1653.
A Letter written divers years agoe by the Au∣thor of the foregoing Treatise to M. Samuel Hartlib concerning the difference of Practi∣cal and Case Divinity. TO speak of the difficulty you propose concerning Case and Practical Divinity, I do thus conceive of the matter, that if men would not be slack to do what they ought, the difficulties would resolve themselves in the action; yet to satisfy the Scruple, and an∣swer the Desire you have, I say thus, That in all Actions Two things are to be considered. First, that which is Essen∣tial to it, Secondly, that which is Circumstantial. The Essentiial parts of all Actions are two: The proper End for which it ought to be taken in hand, and the Means of attaining that End, which is the Formal way of pro∣ceeding in going about that which is intended to be done. These Two, viz. the End and the Means are in all Acti∣ons certain and determinate; But the Circumstantial part of the action is infinite according to the variety of Acciden∣tal Circumstances. Now from this division of the parts of all actions, which is so plain and natural that nothing can seem to me more facile, distinct and orderly, we may gather what is to be done in this matter, and what the Methode both of Practi∣cal and Case Divinity ought to be as well in themselves as the one toward the other. For Practical Divinity contain∣eth properly the determination of the Ends of all our acti∣ons, to shew how they are subordinate to Godliness and the Rules whereby the actions are to be directed to their own proper ends. These Two things so farre as they are expresly set down
in the Scriptures, ought to be explained in that which we may call the Body of Practical Divinity (for in the nature of the thing there is no proper distinction between Practical and Case Divinity) according to the general Idea which I once conceived and sent to you; viz. that the First part of Practical Divinity be concerning the Essentials of a Christi∣an state; the Second concerning the Accidentals as he is a Christian in this or that Calling. We see this is the ordi∣nary Method of the Apostles in all their Epistles: therefore the Practical Directions should as in every particular, so in the whole state of a mans life be divided and ordered, that whatsoever is plainly in the Scriptures determined concern∣ing either the Essential Ends or Means of Christianity, or concerning the Accidental Ends and Means of Christianity in a certain Calling, that should be fully explaind from the Texts wherein it is delivered, which should be accord∣ing to the order of the matters contained in them (viz. as they are nearer or further subordinate to the main End of Gods glory and our own Salvation) set downe in their several Ranks, whereof as soon as ever I can I will labour to give you a more full and demonstrative Draught then that which I have heretofore; so the whole Body of plain Rules and undoubted Truths sufficiently explaind in the Ends and Means of all essential and Accidental parts of a Christian life is to be the matter of that which is properly in a strict sense called here Practical Divinity: add then all the Circumstantials and determinate Accidents which the Scripture hath left to every mans conscience to work upon in the several Occurrences of his life; wherein the variety of his Circumstances changes the nature of the action, and makes a man doubtfull what to do or not to do is to be the matter of that which you call Case-Divinity. Now who doth not see that these two must be joined to∣gether either in one Body of Treatise, or else so if they be two several Volumes and Treatises, yet in the Methode they may be all one, so that the Cases must be referred eve∣ry one to his own Action of which he is a Case; just as in Grammer the Exceptions must needs be referred to the Rules
and every Exception to his own Rule,: otherwise all is in a confusion; so it is here: the Cases are as it were Ex∣ceptions of the General Rule, which therefore must needs he first delivered; from whence you see that I am not of your minde when you say that Case-Divinity must first be Ruled before Practical Divinity; for Case-Divinity cannot be Ruled except you have first a Rule to Rule it by. Now the Rule is that which I say is the matter of Practical Divi∣nity; viz. all such express; Determinations as the Scripture doth deliver concerning all the parts and actions, either of the general and substantial, or of the particular and acci∣dental state of Christianity. When these express determinations are sett down in their natural order, then we have a Rule of understanding and conscience by which every man is able to direct himself af∣terwards in the several Occurrences as his occasions may fall out: for the spirit of Obedience dwelling in his conscience, being informed and strengthened by the Rule of the Word, will discern the duty which is most requisite to be perfor∣med in the particular occasion wherein a man is; Neither is it possible as I suppose, that all the incident Cases of this nature can be truly determined, so that they will satisfy every mans conscience. For the different measures of know∣ledge and of the apprehensions of the Rule, make the con∣science doubtfull; And therefore except the setled and in∣fallible Rules be first received and proposed, all particular decisions of doubtfull Cases will become nothing else but a matter of inextricable dispute, by which means instead of a Body of Practical Truths, we shall have a new kind of Polemical Divinity in matters of Practice, because the pre∣posterous course being taken to begin at doubts, before the true Rules be known whereby to frame our life, we shall hardly ever finde the right way. For after that different opinions are once taken up in matters of doubt, we see how hardly they are laid down; and how that men before they will seem to have erred in the particular determination of the Doubt, will sometimes strain the sense of many Prin∣ciples, as in matters of Theorythe Papists do plainly.
Therefore I think that to begin at Cases is a preposterous Course every way, and to do as you say that these Cases should first be sent into all Churches to be allowed of and then published, I think is dangerous to cause much contra∣diction, and a great deal more laborious then to make up the chief and more profitable part of the Work: which if it be well done, may stand by itself without contradiction of fear of opposition, being clearly the truth both in the Word and in every mans Conscience: And then either when this is done, or whiles it is a doing, if some be sett a work to gather Cases as you say out of all M S. Letters, Conferences, Correspondences, &c. he ought to referre the Cases to the Heads of the Practical part, so that all the Cases stand in the same order wherein the infallible Rules of Practical Directions were delivered corresponding in the same matters, as more particularly and as it were Indivi∣dual Determinations of the same End and Means of an acti∣on, or rather as an application of the Rule delivered to a particular Object wherein every body might not hit the right way of proceeding. FINIS.
