D609A E423_4 99863997 116215
A DECLARATION Of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax And his COUNCELL of WARRE. Delivered by Colonell Sir Hardresse Waller, and other Officers of the Army, to the House of Peeres, upon Munday the 17 of January, 1647. With the Lords Answer thereunto. Die Lunae, 17 Januarii. 1647. Ordered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Declaration of the Generall and his Councell of Warre, with the Answer thereunto, be forthwith printed and published. Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. Imprinted at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1647.
The Declaration of the Generall and his Councell of Warre, delivered by Colonell Sir Hardresse Waller, and other Officers of the Army, at the Barre of the House of Peeres, the 17 of January, 1647. With the Lords answer thereunto, delivered by the Speaker. The Generall and his Councell of Warre, ta∣king notice of some un∣worthy endeavours to asperse the integrity of their proceedings, as ayming at the
overthrowing of Peerage, and under∣mining of the Rights and Privi∣ledges of the House of Peeres, doe unanimously Declare, That they hold themselves obliged in Justice and Honour to indeavour to pre∣serve the Peerage of this King∣dome with the just Rights belong∣ing to the House of Peeres, and will really in their places and callings perform the same. And as in the first place they looke upon the carrying on of this great common Cause, wherein both Houses of Parliament stand in∣gaged (which they hope no respect shall make them to desert) so shall they to, and in the prosecution of those Publick ends be very carefull to preserve and maintaine the Right and
Honour belonging to the places and persons of the Peeres of England. By the appointment of his Excel∣tency, Sir Thomas Fairfax, and his Councell of Warre. Jo. Rushworth.
The Lords Answer. Gentlemen:
The Lords receive with great satisfaction this De∣claration which you have presented unto them, as the unanimous engagement of the Counsell of Warre; and they have commanded me to returne particular thankes to the Ge∣nerall and your selves, and by you they desire their thankes may be returned to the Councell of Warre and the whole Army. And they further have comman∣ded me to assure you, That as they have hazarded their Lives and Fortunes in the maintenance of the true Religion, and the Liberties of the Kingdome, and Priviledges of Parliament according to our former solemne Engagements, and for the procuring a just and safe peace to this distracted and distressed Kingdome; so they shall still pursue those ends from which no respects whatsoever shall ei∣ther alienate their hearts, or lessen their endeavours. Die Lunae 17. Januarii 1647. Ordered by the Lords assembled in Par∣liament, That this Declaration of the Generall and his Councell of Warre, with the Answer thereunto shall be printed and published. Jo. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum. FINIS.
