D789 E337_31 99861467 113604
A DECLARATION published in the Scots Army, Proclaimed by Order from Gene∣rall LEVEN at Durham, May 13. 1646. WITH A DECLARATION and ORDERS from the Estates of Scotland, Dated at Eden∣borough, May 8. concerning the KING, and those that repaire to him. With the Heads of other Papers from New∣castle, concerning the manner of His Majesties en∣tertainment there, and the posture of the said Garrison upon His Majesties comming thither. With two Victories against the Enemy in Scotland. Two of Colkittoths Brothers slaine. These Papers are perused, and commanded to be printed. LONDON: Printed for Matthew Walbanck, May 21. 1646.
Heads of Papers from Newcastle, concerning the King and the Scottish Forces: With a Declaration published at Durham, and Orders from the Estates at Edenborough. AS the coming of his Majesty was strange and unexpected to the Generall and Commissioners of the Scots Army, so it was admired by all the Officers and Souldiers; yet seeing, that it hath pleasd Almighty God to throw his Majesty upon them, they tell us, that they will use their utter∣most endeavours to make the best improvement therof that God shall
inable them to, for the good of both Kingdomes, the maintaining of the Covenant, the setling of the Church, and procuring of a safe and well-grounded peace to both Nations. Since His Majesty me to South∣well, there came divers Malignants to the Army, which number daily increased, so that by that time the K. was marched to Durham: there were many mixed among the Scots soul∣diers, and some came thither also af∣terwards. But his Excellency, the Earle of Leven, and the Commissioners, ta∣king into consideration the dange∣rous consequence thereof (if not timely prevented) & advertisements being had about the same, (both to maintaine the Covenant, and the
peace of both Kingdomes) they thought fit that a Declaration should be published, That all persons what∣soever, that have done any dis-ser∣vice against the Parliament, shall not remain in, or come neer the Army, before they have submitted to the Authority and all Ordinances of Parliament. And accordingly on wednesday, the 13. of May, 1646. the said De∣claration was drawne up, and signed by His Excellencie, with the advice of the said Commissioners, and com∣manded to be published through∣out all their Quarters: And the same day His Majesty being to passe away from Durham to Newcastle, the Proclamation was accordingly pro∣claimed in Durham, as followeth:
By his Excellencie the Earle of Leven, Lord Generall of the Scotish Armies, and with the advice of the Right Honoura∣ble Committee, residing with the Armie. THese are strictly to require all Of∣ficers and Souldiers under my com∣mand, to forbeare to have any dealing, or entertaine any correspondencie, or beare company upon the march, or in any the quarters with any person whatsoever, for∣merly in service against the Parliament of England, nor to have the least compliance with any dis-affected thereto: But upon notice of their being in the Army, forth∣with to signifie the same, that they may be removed, and that wee may be justified in the integritie of our intentions, and the better to prevent all mis-understanding of our wayes▪ It is hereby Declared, That no such persons applie themselves to come neere to
this Armie, but to separate and depart, untill they give all due obedience to, and submit to the Ordinances & Authoritie of Parliament, certifying them, and every of them, That if after publishing of these present Orders, they be found in the Ar∣my, in manner abovesaid, they are not to be protected, but reputed and esteemed as Enemies, their persons to be seized on and delivered by you: And hereof all persons whatsoever, are to take speciall notice, as they shall answer the contrary upon their perill. For all Officers and Souldi∣ers under my command, and for all other whom these may concerne. Signed LEVEN. Dated at Durham the 13 of May, 1646. And the Estates of Scotland have discharged all persons whatsoever, to seek or receive any Gift, Pension, or mark of honour from His Maje∣stie, and appoynted, that no other desire be propounded to him, but to
satisfie the joynt desire of both King∣doms, in setling of Religion & peace. When the Declaration was pub∣lished in Durham, it did no little vex the Malignants, of which sort there are good store in those parts, who hoped to have found better accep∣tance, and from thence encouraged themselves (as they supposed and much wished) that the Parliament of England and their Armies, and the Kingdome of Scotland and theirs would have begun a new warre; and to kindle these coales, many were very active, not only verbally, but in publike action; but blessed bee God, the Cockatrices were crushed in their shels. The Generall made many faire and full expressions (before hee left
Durham) of the integrity of the Kingdome of Scotland towards the Parliament of England, and especi∣ally in the observance of the Nati∣onall League and Covenant; And the Committee of Estates for the Kingdome of Scotland, sitting at E∣denborough, have published this Or∣der and Declaration throughout the Kingdome of Scotland. By the Committee of Estates, for the Kingdome of Scotland. THe Committee of Estates, taking to their considerations the present condition of the publique affaires of this Kingdome, doe find it necessary, in regard thereof, and for divers causes, much im∣porting the advancement of this Cause, & good, & peace of this Kingdom, that a re∣straint be upon all the Subjects of this
Kingdome, from going out of the same without publike Warrant. And for that effect, the Committee doth Ordaine and command, the Lyon He∣rald, and his brethren Heralds and Pur∣sevants, to passe to the Market-Crosse of Edenborough, and there, by open Procla∣mation, to command, charge, and inhibit, all his Majesties Subjects, of what de∣gree and condition soever they be, that none of them presume nor take upon hand to go out of this Kingdome, by Sea or Land, without Warrant of the Committee of Estates, under the paine to be pursued and punished, as publique enemies and contem∣ners of the publique Orders of the King∣dome, with power hereby. And Ordaines this restraint, to continue till the first day of June next com∣ming. To all Governours of Garrisons, and all Officers, Judges, Magi∣strates, and others to whom it doth belong, to take and apprehend all such persons as they find going out of the Kingdome, without a Passe as aforesaid. Dated at Edenborough this 8 of May, 1646.
Also for the Army of the Scots, they mar∣ched very long and hard marches from New-ark; and his Majestie was on the said Wed∣nesday the 13 of May instant (about five of the clock in the after-noon) received by the Go∣vernour of New-castle into the towne, with∣out any solemnitie, or ringing of bels, shoo∣ting of Cannon, or acclamations of the peo∣ple, as some would have had it done. His Majestie entred the towne in a gene∣rall manner, the Souldiers standing to their Armes from Gateshead to the place where his Majestie was to quarter; where the Governor taketh care that the King may be attended with all the circumspection he can, that the dis-affected have no accesse unto his Majestie. And the better to prevent the same, there are appointed Burgesses to wait, two at everie port in the town, and there is not a Scottish∣man to be received from Scotland, without a Passe from the Estates; and no English-man from any place of England, except they be men of trust and fidelitie, and approved of by the Parliament, their Commissioners, or the Deputy-Mayor of New-Castle. And since his Majestie, and the Scottish Nobilitie
came to New-Castle, they have discharged di∣vers Cavaliers of the Kings attendants. Something more is referred to this follow∣ing Letter. New-Castle the 14 of May 1646. Noble Sir, LAst night being Wednesday in the evening the King came to Newcastle, his Majesties entertainment was briefly thus . A lane of muskets, and pikes was made (by or∣der from Sir James Lunsdale the Governour) from Gates∣head (the place where his Majesty entred this town) all along the streets, to the Generalls own quarters, where his Majesty now lyeth; there came with his Majestie about 300. horse, or scarce so many, and very few or none of the Countrey Gentry come with his Majestie into the towne, of any quality, which was prevented by Inhabitants of trust, which were placed both at the Gates, and before the Court, (viz. the Ge∣neralls Quarters where his Majestie still is) and these did very carefully discry and prevent the entrance of all Delin∣quents, and admitted no suspected English persons, to enter into the Towne, and upon search, they found none that were of any esteeme or repute. That watch was continued not only that day, but still is to continue from day, to day; and they have secured some, and feared the malignant party in these parts, and kept them in awe, that they dare not presume to attempt to come near the King. Generall Leven hath received a Letter from the English Commissioners from Lincoln, to whom it was directed, with their desires to acquaint the rest of the Commissioners of Scotland (residing here with the King) therewith, which accordingly was this day done. The substance of which Let∣ter is;
That to prevent the coming of Malig∣nants to the King, upon his moving North∣ward, they desire that no countenance, nor any encouragement at all should be given to the Malignant partie (which shall come neere the King, by his Majestie. And the said Commissioners do also desire the accom∣modation of the Scots, in what they shall represent to them, in relation to that busi∣nesse, and for the better observance thereof. This Letter being delivered to the Generall, his Excel∣lency acquainted the rest of the Lords therewith, who taking the same into consideration, gave their consent thereto, and what hath been observed therein produceth good effect, and the chiefest of the Scottish Nation that are here, do assure us thus much: That the Parliament of England will not be denyed what they shall desire, con∣cerning the Malignants of these parts. And whereas there hath been Proclamation made at Dur∣ham, by order from the Generall, and the rest of the Com∣missioners, that whoever upon the Kings motion or resi∣dence in these parts, shall refuse to submit to the Orders, and Authority of Parliament, shall be punished according to their demerit, which also I believe will bee published in this place, where they have kept from the King divers per∣sons, concerning whom they have received advertisements from the Commissioners,  Lievtenant Colonel  K and others.
Now for the manner of his Majesties march into Newca∣stle, with the horse that came along with him and his atten∣dants, it was in brief in this manner. 1 There marched in a partie of Horse in∣to New-Castle towne by the way of Gates∣head, who marched thorow the Lane made from thence along the streets to the place ap∣pointed for his Majestie, which was the Ge∣nerals quarters. 2 Some that attended upon his Majestie, rid before all bare. 3 Then his Majestie marched with the Generall, and some other Scottish Officers, divers of whom also that were neer the King, rid bare. 4 There went none out of the towne of New-Castle to meet his Majestie, neither the Scottish Lords that were in the towne, nor the Deputy-Mayor thereof; nor any other, either Inhabitant or other. 5 His Majestie was not received in any triumph (as some would have had it to have been done) nor did they in any solemne manner take notice of his Majestie. 6 The King rid in a sad coloured plaine suit, and alighted at the Generals quarters (now the Court.)
7 There were no guns discharged, neither by land nor by water, by way of triumph. 8 There was no acclamation by shooting with muskets, sounding of trumpets, or bea∣ting of drums, and yet there were both Ket∣tle-drums, and trumpets good store in New-Castle; yet were they so far from any publike way of triumph, that they did not found or beat so much, as when one troop of Scottish Horse march into New-Castle. I pray God that things may be accommodated, according to the Parliaments desires, and that a right understanding may bee on both sides, that so all unlucky jealousies may bee removed, and unity, love, and peace, be confirmed according to the Nationall League and Covenant. Now concerning the Kingdom of Scotland, seeing that it hath pleased God to give good successe to the Scottish forces there, as appeares by Letters from Edenborough, bearing date May the 10. instant; I shall communicate to you the particulars of those expresses that we have received from the nconcerning the same, which is briefly thus. 1 That the Marquesse of Argile hath sent over to Argile and Eilah a partie of 1200 men, who found part of Colkiltoths Forces before Eilah, and marched up to them to releeve the Castle, and fell upon them, and af∣ter a sharp encounter killed 140 upon the place, routed the rest, and slew one of Colkiltoths brothers, who had the command there, and releeved their owne friends in Eilah Castle. The said 1200 were most part Volun∣tiers,
and such as fled out of Argile. 2 There were 1600 men more of the Marquesse of Argiles Forces (from the West of Scotland) sent to re∣leeve Skipinoth Castle, where Colkiltoth himselfe then was, who hearing thereof, as also of the raising of the Siege, and routing of his Forces before Eilah Castle, everie one moved Alastor Mac-Doell (who is called Colkiltoth) to attempt to storme, that place before Ar∣giles forces came up, who first sent in a summons, and had a positive denyall, and then drew up his men to storme, which he did very fiercely; but was beaten backe with great losse, and in this fight Colkiltoth lost (another) his eldest brother, who was slaine upon the place with divers other considerable men, and the place is relieved, and the siege raised, Colkiltth and the rest being fled. 3 Colkiltoth was pursued by the 1600. men of the Marquesse of Argile, who still followed him so close, that he with those he hath left, was forced to retreat to the Hills, and the Countrey of Argile is now totally cleared of them, they being all fled with Colkiltoth up to the Hills. 4 Major-Generall Middleton is gone up to Mone, with a resolution to fight with him, and the Estates in Edenborough write, that they expect every day to heare that he is ingaged with him, which it is proba∣ble we shall heare by the next: for at the date of the former Letters they were then verie neare engagement. Newcastle, May 14. 1646. FINIS.
