E2658 669.f.12[78] 99869707 162871
An Order of the Right Honourable the Commons in high Court of Parliament assembled, For appointing a Committee of the House, to treat with a Committee of the Common-councell of the City of London, and of the Commanders of the Souldiers, and Commission Officers in the said City; Concerning their Engagement for the safety and security of His Majesties Person, and the Parliament, during the time of the intended Personall Treaty; with the Results of the Committee and Common-Councell thereupon. Die Mercurii, 5. Julii, 1648. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament: That it bee referred to a Committee to conferr with the Common-councell of the Citie of London, and such as they shall appoint, and with the Commanders of the Souldiers in London, concerning their engagement for the safety of the King and Parliament, during the intended Treatie, and touching the manner of the security, (viz.) unto Mr. Whitlock Mr. Swin Mr. Hungerford Mr. Sam Brown Mr. John Ashe Sir Martyn Lumley Mr. Bois Mr. John Stephens Sir Dudley Nort Sir Walter Erle Col. Copley Mr. Salloway Mr. Prideaux Sir Hen. Vain sen. Mr. Reynolds Major Gen. Brown Sir Robert Harley Sir Tho Withrington Sir Iames Hacrington Mr. Crew. Sir Ioh. Evelyn of Wilts Col. Ven Mr. Drake Mr. Doddridge Mr. Edward Stephens Mr. Ellis Mr. Serjeant Wilde Mr. Strode Mr. Gell Col. Wilson Mr. Wheeler Mr. Green Col. Edwards, And the Citizens & Burgesses of the Ci∣ty of London. This Committee it to conferre with the Common-councell of the City of London, and such as they shall appoint, and with the Commanders of the Souldiers in London, concerning their en∣gagement for the safety of the King and Parliament, during the intended Treatie, and touching the manner of their Security. H. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com. Commune Concilium tent. sexto die Julii, Anno Dom. 1648. Anno{que} regni Regis Caroli Angliae, &c. Vicesimo quarto. TO this Common-councell came divers Members of the honorable House of Commons, as a Committee appointed by that House; And after some short preamble made by Sir Robert Harley Knight, and Giles Green Esquire, they presented an Order of the said House, made the Fifth day of this instant July; whereby the said Com∣mittee are authorized to conferr with this Common-councell, and such as they shall appoint, and with the Commanders of the Souldiers in London, concerning their Engagement for the safety of the King and Parliament during the intended Treatie, and touching the manner of their security; The which Order was here openly read, and the same Committee having withdrawn themselves, this Court took this business, being of great concernment, into debate and consideration; and do declare, That if His Majesty shall come up to the City of London, there to Treat with His Parliament for the setling of a safe and wel-grounded Peace, this Court (as much as in them lyeth) will (by the blessing of God) defend His Majesties Royall person, and the Parliament, in honour and safety, against all violence whatsoever, with their lives and estates during this Treaty according to the Covenant. And further in pursuance of the said Order, it is ordered by this Court, That Mr. Alderman Langham, Mr. Alderman Bunce, Mr. Alderman Avery, Mr. Alderman Bide, Mr. Alder∣man Packe, and Mr. Alderman Brown, or any three of them; Mr. Vincent, Mr. Edwin Brown, Mr. Archer, Mr. Nathaniel Hall, Mr. Dep. Chamberlain, Mr. William Bateman, Major Chamberlain, Mr. Peter Jones, Mr. Dep. Clowes, Mr. Dep. Glyd, Mr. Chetwin, and Mr. Milles, or any Six of them, shall be, and they are by this Court appointed a Committee to confer with the said Committee of Parliament: As namely, with Mr. Whitlock, Mr. Swinfen, &c. touching the manner of the security for the safety of the King and Parliament, du∣ring the Treatie; And to consider what things are fit to be propounded for the better enabling of this Court to perform their said engagement, and all things conducing there∣unto; and to this purpose, they are also to conferr with the Commanders of the Souldiers in the city touching the same: And the said Committee appointed by this Common∣councell, are to acquaint this Court from time to time of their proceedings and opinions therein. Michel. Commune Concilium tentum in Camera Guildhald' Civit' London' undecimo die Iulii, 1648. Annoque regni Domini nostri Caroli nunc Regis Angliae, &c. Vicesimo quarto. AT this Common-councell the Committee appointed by the Order of this Court made the Sixt day of this instant July, to conferr with the Committee assigned by Order of the honorable House of Commons, concerning the Engagement of this Citie for the safetie of the King and Parliament during the intended Treatie, and touching the manner of their security; did now present unto this Court a Paper expressing their progresse and proceedings therein; The which was here openly read, and every particular therein considered of, and some alteration was made in the Answers given to the Propositions made by the said honorable Committee: The tenor whereof is as followeth; Viz. The said honorable Committee did desire that the Military Forces, and the Court of Common-councell, would satisfie them what they intend and mean by those words in the Petition of the Military-Officers wherein the Petition of the Common-councell to the Parliament doe concurre; Viz. [That the King and Parliament may meet and Treat with Freedome, Honor, and Safety, according to the ancient Fundamentall Constitutions of this Kingdom. To this the Committee of Common-councell made answer as followeth; Viz. By these words [The King and Parliament may meet and Treat with Honor, Freedome, and Safety, according to the ancient Fundamentall constitutions of this Kingdom] wee mean, That the King and Parliament may meet and Treat free from force or violence, which wee conceive to be according to the ancient Fundamentall constitutions of this Kingdom. The said honorable Committee did further desire, that the Committee of Common-councell would satisfie them, what is meant by these words; viz. [That they will defend His Majesties royall Person, and the Parliament, during the Treatie, according to their Covenant.] The Committee of Common-councell did give answer thereunto as followeth; Viz. By those words [To defend the King and Parliament according to the Covenant we mean, That during the Treatie, wee will defend the King and Parliament (as much as in us lyeth) free from all force and violence. The said honorable Committee did further desire, that the Committee of Common-councell should satisfie them, what they intend and meane in the Petition of the Military Officers, wherein the Petition of the Common-councell concur) by the word [Freedome] in the last clause; and likewise what they mean by these words [otherwise interrupt.] To this the Committee of the Common-councell gave the severall answers following, Viz. By the word [Freedome] we understand free from force and violence; and by the words [otherwise interrupt] we mean all hostile forces whatsoever; the which answers were approved of by this Court. The said honorable Committee did further propound, that in case the Parliament shall make choice of this Citie to bee the place of the Treaty, and that the Common-councell on the behalf of the Citie, doe ingage themselves to defend both King and Parliament from violence during the Treaty, [whether the City will maintain their guards at their own charge.] To which the Committee of Common-councell did answer, That the same being a matter of charge, must be resolved by Common councell, and that they would acquaint the Common-councell therewith; Concerning this question, this Court did take the same into their serious consideration, and after some debate had thereupon, this Court declared, That if the said intended Treaty be in London, that then the City will for the present defray the charge for the maintaining of the Military Guards, for the purpose aforesaid, during the Treatie, and afterwards referre themselves to the King and Parliament for satisfaction thereof. The said honorable Committee did further propose, that in case the King shall not consent and agree to such things as shall be propounded and insisted on by both Houses of Parliament, in this Treatie for a safe and well-grounded Peace, [whether they will undertake and engage that the Person of the King shall be disposed of as both Houses of Parliament shall thinke fit.] To which the said Committee of Common-councell did answer as followeth, viz. Under the favour of this honorable Committee, we cannot understand by the Order of the honorable House of Commons, which was delivered unto us for this Treatie, That there is any thing therein mentioned, tending to that which is by this honorable Committee propounded, concerning the delivery up of the King in case the King and Parliament did not agree. And the said honorable Committee did further declare [that they were not satisfied with this answer concerning the disposing of the Kings Person, in case the King and Parliament did not agree; and did ex∣pect a further answer. To which the Committee of Common-councell did answer and say, That they would acquaint the Common-councell therewith; Concerning which proposition this Court did take the same in∣to their serious consideration, and upon a full and large debate thereupon, did declare, That in case the said intended Treaty shal be in London, and that His Majesty and His Parliament should not agree (which God forbid) then they conceive themselves bound to submit to the wisdome of both Houses of Parliament. The said Honorable Committee did likewise desire [that the Committee of Common-councell, and the Military Officers, should satisfie them in what manner, and by what meanes, they will make good their engagement, by defending the King and Parliament against all violence.] To which the Committee of Common-councell made answer and propounded as followeth, viz. We do declare, and we are ready according to our engagement, (as much as in us lyeth) by the Trained-Bands of the City, and the late Lines of Communication, to guard and defend the King and Parliament from all force and violence. And to the end that we may be inabled to per∣form the same, we doe humbly offer, That the Ordinance for the uniting of the Military Forces within the late Lines of Communication, and the Parishes of the weekly Bills of Mortality, to the Forces of the City, to be one intire Militia, may be speedily passed. That the Militia may be enabled to raise such other Forces as they shall find needfull, to carry them through this service; And that no other Forces may be raised, or made use of within this City and late Lines of Communication, but by authority of the said Militia by consent of Common-councell. To consider that our dangers are either from without or from within, and therefore propounded, Viz. For those without, that for our better security in garding the King and Parliament, wee desire that some course may bee taken as shall be thought fit by Wisedome of Parliament, that no Forces in Armes may come within 30. miles of London during the time of the Treaty; And for those within, that what person or persons soever shall make any Tumult, Insurrection or disturbance, during the time of this Treaty, after Proclamation made, it shall be death. That if the Wisedome of Parliament shall think fit, that none that have born Armes against the Parliament, or have or shall contribute thereunto shall bee permitted during the said Treaty to come within 30. miles of London, without leave of the Parliament had or to be had. Concerning this desire or proposition of the said honorable Committee, this Court doth approve of the Answers thereunto and Propositions made touching the same. And this Court doth order that the said Committee of Common-councell shall communicate unto the said Honorable Committee, the aforesaid Answers and Propositions of this Court to bee by them presented unto both Houses of Parliament. And also to declare unto them, that it is the humble desire of this Court, that the said Treaty may bee with all expedition, for the preventing of further inconveni∣ences. And likewise that this Court will doe their endeavours (if the said Treaty bee in London) for the finding out of some convenient place within the Citie for that purpose, and such other accommodations as shall be fitting. It is Ordered by this Common-councell, That the Common-councell-men and Commanders, or such as they shall appoint, shall within their severall Precincts, either by calling all the Inhabi∣tants before them, or by their going from house to house receive their concurrence to the said Engagement by subscription of their names. Michel. Commune Concilium tent' in camera Guilhald' civit' London, duo decimo die Iulii, 1648. Anno{que} regni Domini nostri Caroli nunc Regis Angliae, &c. Vicesimo quarto. IT is Ordered by this Court, that the Committee appointed by the Common-councell the sixthday of this instant Iuly, to conferr with the Committee assigned by Order of the Honorable House of Commons, concerning the ingagement of this City for the safety of the King and Parliament, during the intended Treaty, shall forthwith take care to disperse unto the Aldermen, Deputies, Common-councell-men, and Commanders in the respective Wards within this City, the Acts and resolutions of this Court, touching the same Engagement passed the 11. day of this moneth, and that under the same, these words be written, viz. Wee whose names are hereunto subscribed, do Engage with the Common-councell, Commanders and Commission Officers of the City of London in their Engagement above mentioned, and pro∣mise with our lives and fortunes by the blessing of God to performe the same. It is Ordered that all Masters of Families bee desired to subscribe in one column, and their sons, and men-servants and Inhabitants above sixteen yeers of age to subscribe in another column. It is Ordered that the said Committee shall take an account of the Common-councell-men and Commanders of their proceedings herein, in writing, and return the same unto this Court with all expedition. Michel. Printed by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honorable City of London.
