E741A 99895605 153192
A Particular Charge OR IMPEACHMENT IN THE NAME OF HIS EXCELLENCY Sir Thomas Fairfax, And the ARMY under His COMMAND; Against Denzill Hollis Esquire, Sir Phil: Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, Sir Iohn Maynard, Knights, Major Generall Massie, Iohn Glynne, Es∣quire, Recorder of London, VValter Long, Esquire, Col. Edward Harley, & Ant: Nicholl, Esquire, Mem∣bers of the Honourable House of Commons. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Councell of Warre. Signed, Iohn Rushworth, Secret. London, Printed in the Yeare, MDCXLVII.
A PARTICVLAR CHARGE OR IMPEACHMENT In the Name of his Excellency Sir THO: FAIRFAX, &c. VVHereas on the fifteenth day of June last. the Heads of a Charge were delivered in the name of the said Army, unto the Commis∣sioners of Parliament, to be sent up to the Parliament, against the Per∣sons above-named. Now in prosecution and maintenance thereof, and ac∣cording to the power thereby preserved; It is in the Name of the said Army more particularly charged against the said persons as followeth: 1. That the said Mr. Denzill Hollis during the late Warre in prosecution of the evill designes expressed in the generall Heads or Articles formerly exhibited, contrary to the trust reposed in him, contrary to his oath taken in June 1643. and contrary to the Ordinance of Parliament, dated in Oct. 1643. hath assisted the King in the late unnaturall Warre, and held corre∣spondency and intelligence with the Enemy against the Parliament in manner following, (viz.) He the said Mr. Hollis being one of the speciall Commissioners for the Parliament, to present Propositions of both Hou∣ses to the King at Oxford, did privately and contrary to his instructions, at severall times make his addresses unto the Kings party there then in Armes against the Parliament, namely unto the Earle of Lyndsey, the Earle of
Southampton, the Lord Savill, and others, and did secretly plot and advise them against the Parliament, and did intimate unto them, or one of them, that the said propositions then sent unto his Majesty by the Parl. were unreasonable. And the said M. Hollis being demanded what answer he would advise the King to make to the said Propopositions, he the said Mr. Hollis did advise, that the King should demand a Treaty however, and then declare how unreasonable the Propositions were; and that yet for the peace of the Kingdome, His Majesty would treat upon them, but withall wished the said Treaty might bee in London, whither the King himselfe should come upon security. Hee the said Mr. Hollis adding, that there was nothing in the world, that the violent party (meaning the well-affected party to the Parliament against the Enemy) did so much feare, as His Majesties comming to London, which would be a certaine dissolution of their authority and power. And the said Mr. Hollis bad those said per∣sons, or one of them, assure the King, that if His Majesty knew as much as he (the said Mr. Hollis) knew, His Majesty would take his horse and be at London the next day, or words to that effect. And it being againe demanded, whether (if the King should be willing to come) it would be accepted of, He the said Mr. Hollis thereto answered, that certainly it would be much opposed; but yet he the said Mr. Hollis was confident, that he and his party (meaning some of the Members above-named, and others) should carry it, and wished the King to put it upon that triall. And the said Mr. Hollis was desired by the said Earle of Lyndsey, Earle of Southamp∣ton, and Lord Savill, or one of them, that he would be pleased to draw such an Answer in writing to the said Propositions, as hee desired the King should send, and the said Earle of Southampton (who was that night to lie in the Kings Bedchamber) would perswade the King to condiscend unto it, and thereupon the said Mr. Hollis withdrew, and either the same day, or the next day following, the said Mr. Hollis accordingly carried in his hand, unto the said Lords, or one of them, a Paper ready written, which (as he said) was such an Answer to the said Propositions as he had drawne for the King to send to the Parliament, which was taken by the said Lords, or one of them, and carried to the King, to be considered of, and so much thereof as advised the Kings comming to London was laid by, (the King fearing to adventure himselfe:) but the rest of the said Paper the Lord Digby (who writ the Kings Answer to the said Propositions) made use of in the same words as the said M. Hollis had set downe; And the said Ma∣ster Hollis to ingratiate himselfe with the Kings partie, did about the same time revile the well-affected Members of the House of Commons, decla∣ring unto the said Kings partie at Oxford, or some of them, that those wel-affected
Members (which to render them the more odious as he concei∣ved, he named the violent Independent partie) had ill intentions and great aversnesse to Peace, and that nothing would be more pleasing to them, then for the King to refuse the Propositions, how unreasonable soever the same were, and he also then said, that the Commissioners of Scotland were very weary of that violent partie, and that they being desperate to establish their Presbytery here as in Scotland, made their addresses to him the said M. Hollis and his partie. All which tended to the protracting of the said late Warre, and to the hindrance of an happy Peace, and the said M. Hollis did also after that receive from the Earle of Lyndsey a Letter written in white Inke, concerning some secret designe, and kept it from the know∣ledge of the House, from February till about Iuly after, when it was disco∣vered by him that brought it: but the Letter it selfe was by the said M. Hollis (after hee had read it) burnt. And the said Earle of Lyndsey mo∣ved the King for a Passe for the said M. Hollis to goe to Oxford: but the King refused to grant it, saying, That Hollis did him better service in the Parliament, then he could doe him at Oxford. 2. That the said Mr Hollis and sir Philip Stapleton during the said late War (when the said Earle of Lyndsey went from the Tower of London to Oxford) sent severall Messages of intelligence to the Earle of Dorset, and Lord Digby, thereby assuring them, that they, the said Mr Hollis and Sir Philip Stapleton, did better service for the King here in Parliament, then they could doe him if they were at Oxford. And the said Sir Philip Stapleton desired that the said E. of Dorset, would preserve him and the said Sir Philip and his friends, in the good opinion of the party at Oxford (which was then the K ngs Garrison) and he the said Sir Philip would do as much for his Lordship, and his friends here with the Parliament. And the said Mr Hollis, and Sir Philip Stapleton the more to ingratiate themselves into the favour of the enemy, did of their owne accord without any direction of the Parli∣ament, draw up other Propositions then those mentioned in the precedent Articles, which they affirmed were in their Judgements fit for the King to grant, and for the Parliament to desire, and being so drawn up, sent them privately to his Majesty, without any authority of Parliament to warrant the same. 3. That the said Mr Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, Sir John Maynard, Major Generall Massie, Mr Glyn, Mr Long, Collonel Edward Harley, and Anthony Nicholls in the Months of March, Aprill, May, and June last past, and at other times in prosecution of the evill designes in the severall generall heads mentioned,
have frequently assembled and met together at the Lady Carliles Lodgings in White-Hall, and in other places with diverse other persons disaffected to the State (without any authority of Parliament) for holding correspondency with the Queene of England now in France and her participants, with an intent by such secret & clandestine treaties amongst themselves to put con∣ditions upon the Parliament, and to bring in the King upon their owne tearmes, and having a great power upon the Treasure of the Kingdome, have therewith maintained and encouraged by Pensions, and otherwise, the Queenes Party in France, thereby to beget a second and more bloudy War in this Kingdome, and they, or some, or one of them assured the Queene 40000. l per annum, if She would assist them in their designe, and that they would do more for the King then the Army would do, and that they would find out some meanes to destroy the Army and their friends. 4. That in further pursuance of the same evill designes, they the said Mr. Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir VVilliam Lewis, Sir Iohn Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, and Major Generall Massie, by the combination aforesaid, within the space of three months last past without any authority of Parlia∣ment, invited the Scots and other forraigne forces to come into this King∣dome in a Hostile manner, to abet and assist them in the prosecuting and effecting of their said designes. And the said Mr Hollis very lately sent to the said Queene of England then and still in France, advising her amongst other things speedily to send the Prince into Scotland to march into this King∣dom in the head of an Army. And did send a speciall Messenger to her for such ends and purposes. And the said Mr. Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir VVilliam Lewis, Sir Iohn Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, Sir Iohn May∣nard, Mr Glyn, Major generall Massie, Mr Long, Collonell Edward Harley, and Anthony Nicholls, have underhand, of their owne accord without authority of Parliament, listed, or caused, or procured to be listed divers Commanders and Souldiers, endeavouring thereby to leavy, and raise a new War in this Kingdom to protect themselves in their unjust oppressions and factious designes, and have at severall times within the space of two Months last past invited, incouraged, abetted and counselled multitudes of Refor∣mado Officers and Souldiers and other rude persons tumultuously and vio∣lently to gather together at Westminster, to affright and assault the Mem∣bers of Parliament in their passage to and from the House, to offer violence to the House it selfe, locking the doore thereof upon them, and so imprison∣ing them, and by such violences, out-rages and threats to awe and enforce the Parliament.
5. That the said Mr. Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton, and Mr Glyn have been  and are obstructers and prejudgers of severall Petitions to the Parliament for redresse of publique grievances, and the said Master Hollis, and Sir Philip Stapleton in the Month of May last past, did abuse and affront divers Petitioners, who in a peaceble manner then attended the Committee, whereof Collonell Lee was Chaireman; not only reviling and reproaching them, but violently haleing, and boysterously assaulting them, and offered to draw their swords upon Major Tuleday, and others of the said Petitio∣ners, and without any authority or power committed Nicholas Tew one of the Petitioners; and soone afterwards by the procurement of the said Mr Hollis and Sir Philip Stapleton, and upon their mis-information to the House, the said Major Tuleday, and Nicholas Tewe, were imprisoned, not being permitted to speake for themselves, and the said Master Glyn about three moneths since, caused the said Nicholas Tewe to be imprisoned in Newgate, and to be detained a long time there, for no other cause, but for having a Petition about him, which was to be presented to the House. 6. That the said Sir John Clotworthy, Sir VVilliam VValler, and Major Generall Massie have lately in prosecution of the said designes in the said generall heads mentioned; against the knowne Lawes of this Realme, and rules and Articles of Warre made by Parliament; by an Arbitrary power, imprisoned some Members of the Army without any authority, par∣ticularly Ensigne Nicholas, whose Pockets they without authority, cau∣sed to be searched, and severall Papers to be taken from him, contrary to the liberty of every Subject, and caused him to bee sent a Prisoner from the head Quarters to London, without the authority or privity of the Ge∣nerall, or the chiefe Officers of the Army commanding in his absence. 7. That in or about the Moneth of March last, (there being a Petition intended from the Officers and Souldiers of the Army to their Generall (for such things onely as were justly due unto them, and concerning them meerely as Souldiers) The said Sir VVilliam VValler, Sir John Clotwor∣thy, and Colonell Edward Harley a Member of the Army, having gotten into their hands a Copy of the said Petition) by combination with the o∣ther Members above mentioned, with an intent to abuse the Parli∣ament into prejudices and jealousies against the proceedings of the Army concerning the said Petition (they well knowing that the said Army stood in their way, and hindreth them from bringing to passe the designes in the said generall Charges expressed) did falsely and malitiously informe the House, That the said Petition was contrived and promoted to de∣bauch and disoblige the Army from the Parliament; And that it was managed and carried on by divers principall Officers in the Army, that
orders were given out for the reading of it in the head of every Regi∣ment, and whosoever would not subscribe it, should bee put out of the Musters, and cashiered the Army, and by those and other aggravations did represent it to the House as a designe against the Parliament; further adding that some Regiments which were remote, were sent for, to joyne with the rest of the Army for that purpose; by which mis-informations they the said Members did the same day procure a peremptory Order to the Generall, to suppresse the said Petition. 8. That some few dayes after, Colonell Edward Harley by the Combi∣nation aforesaid, and in pursuance of the same designes, did produce to the House a Letter supposed to be written from within the Quarters of the Army, to him the said Colonell Harley, by a person not named, where∣by it was informed that Colonell Harleys Lieutenant Colonell had drawne his Regiment to a rendezvous, and had caused the said Petition to be read at the head of it, and that he threatned to cashiere and put out of the Musters all that would not subscribe it, and that the designe of the Ar∣my therein was to enslave the Parliament and Kingdome, (if the Parlia∣ment proceeded not to some High Resolution) or to that effect, as by the said Letter (relation thereunto being had) may appeare; and al∣though the substance of the said Letter was most untrue, and no author thereof appeared, nor could be produced, although a Committee was appointed for examination thereof, and it was much pressed the author should be discovered; yet the said Colonell Harley, Sir John Clotworthy, and Sir William Waller did so avow the reality of the said Letter, and that the contents thereof would bee made good, as that thereby, and by other false suggestions of theirs against the Army, they procured the House (upon a long debate, which held till about eight of the clock at night) to order that a Committee of five Members (whereof the said Ma∣ster Hollis was one) should prepare a Declaration to bee brought in to the House the next morning signifying the Houses dislike of the pro∣ceedings of the Army upon that Petition as by the said Order dated  day of  last, may appeare. Upon which setling of the said businesse for that night, most of the Mem∣bers departed, as conceiving nothing would be done thereupon till the next day, and that then they might have a free debate concerning the same; But the House still continuing to sit (upon dispatch of some Letters formerly or∣dered,) the said Master Hollis, by the same combination and in further prose∣cution
of the said evill designes having of himselfe (without the Committee) prepared a Declaration against the Petition it selfe, contrary to the intention and direction of the said order, and contrary to the rules of Justice and usu∣all course of Parliament, did the same night about ten of the clocke, on pur∣pose to surprise the House, present the same Declaration to the House (wher∣by the said Petitioners were, without being heard) declared Enemies to the State, and obstructers of the reliefe of Ireland, if they persisted therein (as by the same Declaration, relation being thereunto had may appeare) and did procure it to be then passed accordingly, to the great dis-honour of the Par∣liament and their proceedings, to the insufferable injury, the just provocati∣ons, discouragement and discontent of the Army, to the trouble and danger of the whole Kingdome, to the hindring of the reliefe of Ireland, and other the evill consequences in the said generall Charges expressed. 9. That by the same and the like false informations and suggestions, the said Colonell Harley (then a Member of the Army) Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, and the said other persons did shortly after the said De∣claration so made as aforesaid, procure divers eminent and faithfull Offi∣cers of the Army, namely Lieutenant Generall Hamond, Colonell Hamond, Colonell Lilburne, Lieutenant Colonell Pride, and others, to be all sent for from their Charges in the Army, to appeare at the Barre of the House to make answer in relation to the said Petition, against whom when they came thither, they could Charge or prove nothing at all, in so much as the House thought fit immediately to discharge them. And whereas there was a Committee appointed to examine and consider of the truth or falshood of them; and the said Members informing, were appointed to produce their proofes and evidence to the same before the Committee; though they have since then beene often urged, called upon, and demanded to produce their proofes and evidence thereto (if they had any) and have beene plainly told, that if they did not proceed effectually to doe it, they should be accounted the authors and devisers of the said falsehoods, and reparation would accordingly be demanded against them; Yet they have not to this day produced any proofes or evidence to any of the said informations or suggestions, whereby the Parliament and Army were so much abused as before is decla∣red: nor could they or any of them be hitherto perswaded to give in to the said Committee any Charge against the said Officers of the Army, which they have then or since procured to be sent for as aforesaid, but have held di∣vers of them in a long and chargeable attendance upon the House, without any thing layd to their Charge, untill the House was pleased to discharge them.
X. That the said Mr Hollis, Sr Phillip Stapleton, Sr William Lewis, Sr William Waller, Sr John Clotworthy, Major Gen. Massie, in further pur∣suance of the designes mentioned in the generall heads charged a∣gainst them, have been great Instruments in the obstructing of the Relief of Ireland; and within the space of two Moneths last past, did falsly informe the House, that by their procurement there were fifty Companies of Foot, and ten Troops of Horse of this Army, engaged for Ireland, upon the termes, and under the conduct then by the Parliament propounded: and the more to delude the Parliament herein, they, or some of them by the combina∣tion aforesaid, did procure divers Officers then in this Army, namely, Colo∣nell Butler, Lievtenant-colonell Jackson, Major Gooday, and others, to give in their Names, as listing themselves for Ireland (on the said termes, and conduct propounded) when as those Officers did at the same time declare themselves unwilling thereunto, and resolved not to goe serve in Ireland on any termes whatsoever; they the said Members underhand assuring them, that though they make use of their names, yet they should not goe for that ser∣vice: They have likewise untruly informed the house, and given in the names of many considerable Officers of the Army, namely, Captaine Pennifather and Captaine Burges, of Colonell Butler's Regiment; Capt. Clark, and four or more Commission-Officers of Sir Hardresse Waller's Regiment, and others, as having been subscribed for Ireland, who did not so engage or sub∣scribe, nor give any consent thereto, but did then, and have ever since utterly disavowed the same. And about the same time they also reported to the House the name and offer of Lievt. Col. Farrington, as being then a Lievt. Col. of this Army, and engaging for himself and his Regiment for Ire∣land, whereas the said Farrington had been casheered the Army a yeer and a half before; by which and other their false informations and reports of that nature, the Parliament was abused and misled into a conceit and confidence of a strength out of the Army, then sup∣posed to be engaged, and ready for Ireland on their own termes, when as in truth the same was but a meer delusion, and which was so contrived on purpose to occasion a slighting and neglecting of the Army, as supposing no further use for them. XI. Whereas part of three Regiments of Foot, viz. Col. Har∣bert's, Col. Kemp's, and Col. Gray's, were by order of the House ad∣vanced towards the relief of Ireland, as farre as Broomsgrave in the County of Worcester, the said Sr Phillip Stapleton, Mr Hollis, Sr John Clotworthy, Sr William Lewis, and Major Gen.
Massie, Sr William Wal∣ler,  and Mr Glyn, by combination aforesaid, did of their owne ac∣cord without the knowledge or direction of the House, on the sixt day of June last, being Sabbith day, without summoning a Com∣mittee, command those Forces back again as far as Redding, with an evil intent to draw Forces together, to beget a new war in England. XII. That the said Sr John Clotworthy in prosecution of the de∣signes in the said generall charges expressed, hath in the yeer 1642 1643, 1644. and since, converted severall great sums of Money (which by severall Orders of Parliaments and of the Irish Com∣mittee were designed for the relief of Ireland) to his owne particu∣lar use, namely, the sum of 280. l. which by order of both Houses dated the 11. of Febr. 1642. was to be paid for 20. Buts of Sack for Ireland, 700 l. which the same day was Ordered for 2000. swords, 300 l. which was by Order of the said Irish Committee dated the 5. of Apr. 1643. was designed for 120. pair of Pistols; and divers other sums of Money upon severall other Orders, which he, the said Sr John Clotworthy from time to time received for the use and relief of Irel. but were not imployed to the uses by the said Orders intended and directed, but to his, the said Sr John Chotworthies own private use as aforesaid; and that he hath within two yeers last past received severall sums of Money, Armes and other provisions for a Troop of Horse, which he pretended he had raised in Ireland, when as he had not, nor did raise or furnish any such Troop as he pretended; and that he, the said Sr John Clotworthy for money and other rewards, hath preferred John Davis and William Sommers, and others, to be entrusted with the Irish affaires, who have kept cor∣respondency with the enemy, and have defrauded the state of other great sums of Money, and he hath been privy to, and a sharer in such their actions. XIII. That about Nov. last past, the said Sr Joh. Clotworthy, being by the Parl. sent a Commissioner with others into Irel. who all had a joint power and authority to treat wth the Earl of Ormond for the space of four days and no more; he the said Sr Jo. Clotworthy, con∣trary to the speciall trust reposed in him, held secret intelligence with the said E. of Ormond by cipher or character, without the con∣sent or knowledge of those others in commission wth him, and ma∣ny weeks after the time so limited was expired, & about the same time, he the said Sr Jo. Clotworthy held secret intelligence wth George L.
Digby, then in Irel. beyond the time prefixed, & without the con∣sent  of the said other Commissioners: and in order thereunto, the said Ormond and Digby lately imployed one Slingsby to come into this Kingdom about a design cōcerning the Prince, as he pretendeth. XIV. That the said Sr J. Clotworthy, M. Hollis, S. Phil. Stapleton, by combination with the rest of the Members before named, in further prosecution of the designs beforementioned, wel knowing that the L. Lyle, late President of Irel. was both faithfull and vigilant while he was trusted in the same Kingdom, and had now this last Spring made provisions ready to march into the field, & that the L. Baron of Brohil Gen. of the Parls Horse in Munster, & Col. Sr Arthur Loftus, persons of honor and reputation, and of great fortunes in the said Kingdom, lately came purposely into this Kingd. to exhibit, & did exhibit many Articles of high treasō against the L. Inchiquin, for be∣traying the Parlias Army to the Enemy (as formerly he had done) yet by the great power and violent interposition of the said Sr J. Clotworthy, M. Hollis, Sr Phil. Stapleton, by the practice and combinatiō aforesaid, the said Articles have been obstructed, and the businesse not suffered to come to a hearing, and the said L. Lisle hastily called out of Irel. and the the power and command of the Parl. forces in that Kingdom committed to the said L. Inchiquin to the losse of this Summer service, and the expence of much Treasure for new prepa∣rations: and whereas the said L. Lisle being so suddenly called frō thence as aforesaid, did design and depute, S. Hardresse Waller, Kt. Major Gen. of the Forces there (a man of known integrity and cou∣rage both for his service in Eng. & Irel. and of considerable fortunes there) to take care of the said L. Lisles Forces, till the pleasure of the Parl. may be further known; but the said L. Inchiquin upon the re∣ceit of a Letter from the said Sr J. Clotworthy, M. Hollis, Sr Phil. Staple∣ton, or one of them (or from some other person by their, or one of their direction, privity or procurement) did expresse that he had order or direction from London, that no man that favoured the In∣dependents (under which name the said Lord of Inchequin hath comprehended all men that have shewed themselves opposite to Tyranny and Arbitrary Government) should have any trust or command there. Nay, although they were of another judgment, yet if they would not prosecute the Independents, they should not be imployed there, or words to that effect. And under colour thereof, the said Hardresse Waller, and all others that had their Commissions from the said Lord Lisle, while he commanded were displaced, to the discouragement of those and other faithfull per∣sons to the Parliament, and to the great disservice and hazard of
XV. That whereas a Committee of the House of Commons hath been lately appointed by the Parliament to consider of Pro∣positions for the setling and preservation of Wales, whereof the said Sir William Lewis and Mr Glyn were and are Members, and to report the same to the House, They the said Sir William Lewis and Master Glyn with others of the said Committee did on the 13 day of April now last past, without any authority of Parliament, before any re∣port made to the Houses, of their owne accord, in stead of setling and preserving Wales, order that all Committees for Sequestrati∣ons should forbeare all proceedings of Sequestrations against all or any the Inhabitants of Wales. And although some few persons were (upon generall heads) excepted; yet by vertue of that illegal Order, all he Commissioners of Peace, Commissioners of Associa∣tion (though never so active in pressing men, and raising money for Forces against the Parliament) all the Commissioners of Array that did or should at any time come in and submit to the Parlia∣ment, or their Commanders in Chief, all that had born armes a∣gainst the Parliament, unlesse they were Governours or other Of∣ficers of War that held some Town, Castle, or Fort against the Par∣liament; all disaffected and scandalous Ministers, though in their Sermons they usually reviled and scandalized the Parliament and their proceedings, calling them Rebels and Traitors; and not one∣ly incensing the People against the Parliament, but usually taking up Armes, and leading their Parishioners in arms upon any Alarum against the Parliament; and many other desperate Delinquents have been, and still are taken off and freed from Sequestration: and the said Order was sent to every severall Committee in Wales, in se∣verall Letters from the said Committee, contrary to several Orders and Ordinances of Parliament, and contrary to the Rules of justice and equity which should impartially be administred as wel in Wales as in other places of this Kingdom, whereby the ill affected Gentry and Ministry of that Country are grown so high and insolent, that honest men dare scarce live amongst them: so as that which was intended by the Parliament to settle and preserve Wales, is by the practice of the said Sir William Lewis and Master Glyn perverted to the danger and destruction of it. XVI. That the said Sir William Lewis and Mr. Glyn have further ingratiated themselves with the Delinquents of
Wales, and prepared, them for their said designes, in manner following; viz. he the said Sir William Lewis hath within two yeers last past countenanced and protected many of the most notorious & dāgerous Delinquēts with∣in  the several Countries of South-Wales; namely the L. of Carbery, & o∣thers in Carmarthinsh. Mr Crane and others in Glamorganshire, Mr Morgan late Knight of the shire, Mr John Herbert and others in Brecknockshire, Mr Gwyn, Mr Lewis, & divers others in Radnorshire, by freeing some of them altogether from Compositions, though sequestred, by laboring divers Members of the House & of Comittees to be favourable in compound∣ing with others, and to admit of such to their Compositions as were uncapable thereof. And the said Sr William Lewis hath animated & in∣couraged some of the said persons to continue their fidelity unto the Kings cause, promising them, That if they would be friends with the King for him, he and his would be their friends in the Parliament: in so much as his friends the Delinquents in those parts have lately look∣ed upon him as a rising man when the King shall come to London; wch hath lately been their constant boasting. And the said Sir William Lew∣is hath within two yeers last past caused divers that hath been Com∣missioners for the King, and had prest men, and raised moneys to pro∣mote the late War against the Parliament, namely, his Brother Mast. Tho. Lewis, Mr Gwyn, Mr Charles Walhiffe, Mr Meridith Lewis, Mr Edward Williams, and many others to be Commissioners of the Peace, and Com∣mittee-men for the said County of Brecknock, insomuch as those that have been most active and faithfull to the Parliament, have been and still are out-voted in those places, and can do no considerable service for the Parliament: and the rather for that the said Sir William Lewis hath also produced one Edward Williams his owne kinsman, and much disaffected to the Parliament, to be Sollicitor of Sequestrations in that County, who is and hath been very remisse & corrupt there∣in. And the said Sir William Lewis hath by the means aforesaid late∣ly procured Master Edward Lewis his sonne, though unfit for that im∣ployment, to be chosen and returned Burgesse for Brecknoe; which that he might the better effect, he kept the Writ for election of the said Burgesse above eight moneths in his owne custodie before it was de∣livered to the Sheriffe of the said County. And likewise that the said Master John Glyn with in two years last past hath procured severall persons that have lately been Comissioners of Array, and in Arms a∣gainst the Parliament in Northwales, (viz.) and others to be named in the Commission of the peace for the Counties of Denbigh & Carnarvan, & other Counties there, & to be put in other great places of Trust & Command there, & amongst others, Col. Glyn his brother, who was lately a Colonel in the Kings Army, is by the said Mr John Glyns procurement become Governor of the Town & Castle of Carnar∣van, & Admiral or Vice-Admirall of the Irish seas, to the endangering countries lying upon the coasts towards Ireland, & to the fear
XVII. That the said Sir William Lewis, being heretofore (during these troubles) Governor of Portsmouth, a Garrison for the Parliament, in which time he received much of the Publick Treasure, for which he hath not yet given an Accompt, did while he was Governor there, frequently hold correspondency and intelligence with the Kings party, about the delivery up of the said Garrison; insomuch as although Sir William Waller, and divers others in that Garrison were proclaimed Traitors to the King, yet he by the Kings speciall Command was spared, the King affirming, That the said Sir William Lewis was his Friend, and that he was confident he would do h m good service, or to that effect. And although the then was a Parliament-man, and Governor of Portsmouth, as aforesaid, and his estate in the said County of Breck∣nock, being of the value of aboue six hundred pound per annum, was three years in the Kings quarters, yet the same was never sequestred: And since the Parlia∣ment hath prevailed, Colonel Herbert Price Esq having been Governor of Breck∣nock for the King against the Parliament, being sequestred, the said Sir William Lewis by his sollicitations to the Committee, procured the personall Estate of the said Colonel Price, which the Committee of the County had found out, and cau∣sed to be brought to Morgan Awbrayes house in Brecknock, to be restored unto him, without any satisfaction to the State, and hath procured his the said Col. Prices lands in the said County of Brecknock, being worth about three hundred pound per an∣num, to be let to a friend of the said Col. Pr ces, to his wives use, as fifty pound per annum, contrary to the directions of severall Ordinances of Parliament made in that behalf. XVIII. That the said Mr Iohn Glyn, or some other person or persons, by his di∣rection, consent, or privity, or to his use, hath (during his being a Member of the House of Commons) taken rewards of severall persons for service done them in the House, as namely amongst others, divers Drovers from Wales, who by his means and procurement had an allowance by Order of the House for three thou∣sand pound, in satisfaction of losses they had sustained by the Enemy, did pay unto the wife of the said Mr. Glyn the sum of an hundred pound, as a reward for his said service. XIX. That the said Mr Iohn Glyn, as he hath been most active to bring into the Commission of Peace, and into other places of Authority, divers notorious De∣linquents in North Wales, as aforesaid, so hath been as active, as much as in him lies, to put out and keep out of the Militia and Common-Councell of London, and out of the Commission of Peace of Middlesex, many eminent and faithfull men, that have laid out their estates, and adventured their lives for defence of the Par∣liament and City, in the time of their greatest necessity; namely, Alderman Pennington, Col. Tiebborn, Mr. Estwick, Mr. Moyer, and others, contrary to the Declaration of both Kingdoms, which hath assured all lawfull favour and encou∣ragement to those that have been faithfull, and shall so continue to the Parliament: which doings must needs tend to the giving a fresh occasion and power to the Ene∣my against the Parliaments best friends, to the dishonour of the Parliament, and he indangering of the Kingdom. XX. That the said Sir Philip Stapleton, M. Hollis, and Sir Wil∣liam Lewis, have by their power and countenance, as Members of the House Commons, both joyntly and severally, used meanes to obstruct the course of Justice, and have interposed themselves in severall Causes, and by word of mouth moved and perswaded Judges and other Officers, on the behalf of such as they conceive to be their friends: Amongst others, whereas a great
Langham and Captaine Lymery, and Counsell was met for the pleading thereof, the said Sir Philip Stapleton M. Hollis, and Sir William Lewis, did repaire to the Earle of Rutland about the same; and the said Sir Philip Stapleton told the said Earle, that they (mean∣ing himselfe, and the said M. Hollis, William Lewis) were fully satisfied concerning the justice of Langhams Cause; and therefore as the said Earle did respect them, the said Sir Philip Stapleton, M. Hollis, and Sir William Lewis, or expected from them, he the said Earle of Rutland should give his Vote for Langham, or used words to that effect; which also was seconded by the said M. Hollis in words, and agreed unto by the said Sir William Lewis, as appeared by his presence and gesture. And the said Sir William Lewis did exercise the same power in a Cause of Iohn Gunters, and others. XXI. That the said M. Anthony Nicholls, although about four yeares since hee was by the Committee of Priviledges voted, that he was not a Member fit to sit in the House, by reason his election was void, yet hee the said M. Nicholls doth not only sit and vote there as a Member, but by his power and threats in the West-Countries, and by his sollicitations and indirect practises, hath brought in or procured to be brought in, about twenty eight Members more out of Cornwall, on purpose to carry on the de∣signes and practises before-mentioned, and to make a faction in the said House: and not withstanding the selfe denying Ordi∣nance, he the said M. Nicholls doth still hold a place in the Tower formerly conferred upon him by the House, and receiveth the pro∣fits thereof to his owne use. XXII. That the said M. Nicholls, hath since his fitting in the House as aforesaid, taken rewards for service done there; namely, whereas Sir William Vuedall Knight, for deserting the Parliament and going to Yorke with the King, was suspended the House, hee the said M. Nicholls for the summe of one hundred pounds, or one hundred fifty pounds, paid unto him or to his use, by the said Sir William Vuedall or some for him, did by mis-informations to the House procure the said Sir William Vuedall to be re-admitted a Member of the said House, and the said M. Nicholls while hee was a Member of the Committee for safety, hee and others of the said Committee having issued forth a Warrant for searching Green∣wich house, he the said M. Nicholls did under-hand acquaint one of the Queens Officers therewith, and thereby prevented the de∣signe of the said Committee, to the great disservice of the Parlia∣ment and Kingdome.
affaires, did out of covetousnesse or unworthinesse procure a comand of a troops or Horse under his Excellency the late L. General Earle of Essex, when ever hi, said Troop came upon any service, he the said M. Long out of feare treachery unworthily absented himselfe, & never was seen or known to charge the enemy in person, though his Tropp of en engaged, namely at the battell at Edgehill, when he saw there was like to be blows, he the said M. Long left the field, and ne∣ver charged before his Troop; and at the battell or fight at Brainford, though his Troop were there, yet he staid at London till the danger was past, and fighting done; & when his Troop was sent into the West, he took no other notice, of it, but to receive his pay, and in the mean while he repaired into the County of Essex, and procured a Commission to be a Colonel of Horse, and instead of fighting a∣gainst the Parliaments enemies, he betook himself to plunder, and oppresse the Parliaments friends, there, and contarie to Order, and without any Authoy or Exigences of War, compelling him thereto, inforced great sums of money, & many horses, and other provisions from the Countrey, namely from M. Tho. Man∣wood a man well affected, who had the Generalls protection (whose horses were taken from his Plough) and others, to the great losses and oppression of the peo∣ple, and to the great dishon ur of Parliament, whose service he neverthelesse neglected, and hath not hitherto given an accompt of the great summes of money and other things that he so exacted from the Countrey as aforesaid. XXIV. That the said M. Long afterwards (upon pretence of some losses sustain∣ed by the enemy, and some great service he had done for the State) did procure of the H use a great Office in the Chancery, namely to be the Chiefe Register of that Court, wherein his skill was litle, and whereof he was and still is altoge∣ther uncapable; and although for a time upon the selfe denying Ordinance, he, was displaced; yet upon the motion, or by the power and meanes of the said M Hollis, he hath obtained the same Office, to the great prejudice of skilful Clerks that have bin bred up in the same Court, and to the disservice of the Common-Wealth, and the dishonour of the House. XXV. That the said M. Long, on purpose to drive on the designes in the said generall Charges expressed, hath for the space of two years last past usually pressed and urged severall Members to give their Votes such wayes as he pleas∣ed, and to that end and purpose doth constantly place himselfe neer the doore of the House, that when any debate is concerning any designe wherein his party is ingaged, he the said M. Long hath used much tempering and violence to such of his own party as would goe out of the House, and hath perswaded them to con∣tinue there for their Votes, and he the said M. Long, in case any such have gone out of the House, hath been very inquisitive where they may be found, that so he may goe for them when the businesse in debate comes neare to be put to the Vote, and when they come not according to his expectation, doth ordinarily run out of the House himselfe to call them, and drive them in again, that he hath been commonly clled (by those that are without the House, and have taken notice of his actions) the Parliament-driver, whereby the freedome of the Mem∣bers is taken from them, the manner of the Parliaments proceedings much scandalized, and many times evil and dangerous designes drove on in a faction by Votes, to the great prejudice of the Common-wealth. All which matters and things the said Army shall and will be ready (in con∣venient time) to make good by proof upon Oath, as this honourable House shall direct. And for that by reason of the straightnesse of time, and other more weigh∣ty Affaires of the Army, they could not so fully finish and complish the said Ar∣ticles; therefore the said Army do still reserve further liberty to add other Arti∣cles against the said Members, or any of them, at any time before their Triall, as occasion shall serve.
