G1699 E738_9 99866072 118332
A great FIGHT IN SCOTLAND, Between the English Forces commanded by his Excellency the Lord General MONK, AND The King of Scots Forces, under the con∣duct of Lieu. Gen. Middleton; With the Parti∣culars theref, the manner of the Engagement, and the lamentable loss on both sides. Likewise, the Resolution of the Highlanders, to fight either to Death or Victory; and the number of men engaged in the late Plot against the Lord Protector. London, Printed for G. Horton, 1654.
SIR, ON the eleventh instant Gen. Monk, with divers Officers, went from Dalkieth to Sterling, where he hath given Orders for securing some passes, to prevent the Scots (from the Highlands) from falling into the Lowlands therabouts, as formerly they have done; he is very busie in consultation with the Officers a∣bout marching into the field; and after mature de∣liberation, expresly gave command, that Collonel Cooper, with a select number of horse and foot, should advance towards the enemy, to dissipate the new Levies, which indeed were many; In order whereunto, the said Collonel took his march with fifteen hundred men, and within the space of two dayes engaged the enemy at three distinct passes, who (to speak truth) with great resolution and gallantry disputed the field from Hill to Hill; and
Dale to Dale, till at last, by the comming in of the additional forces, these valiant Heros were forced to retreat with some loss; which did so inrage the adverse party, that unanimously they are resolved to give us a field, and fight it out to the last man, de∣terminating with themselves, neither to give nor take quarter; in pursuance whereof, we hear that Gen. Middleton has sent forth his Masters Royal Mandate, requiring and conjuring all persons what∣soever from 16 to 60, to come in to their assistance, and accordingly by an express command all his Field-Officers were summoned to a general Ran∣devouz; a List of their Names take as followeth: The Earl of Glencairn, The Earl of Seaforth, The Earl of Athol, The Earl of Kelley, The Earl of Marshal, The Earl of Calender, The Earl of Lawderdail, The Earl of Lowdon, The Lord Machlin, The Lord Spyvie,
The L. Montgomery, The L. Cranston, The L. Kenmore, The Lord Lorn, The Lord Sincleer, The Lord Nppier, The Lord Womat, Maj. Gen. Dayl, Sir George Monroe, Sir Arthur Forbis, In obedience whereunto, they have randovouz'd their Army in two Bodies, being resolved to dis∣pute the field, and fight it out either to Death or Victory: Whereupon, his Excellency the Lord General called a Council of Officers, whose result was, immediatly to take the field, and fight the E∣nemy; and in order thereunto, the whole Army advanced, ingaged the enemy, dissipated the For∣lorn Hope, and took above 500 prisoners; which Middleton perceiving, immediatly commanded the English Cavalry, who charged with great Resolu∣tion and dexterity, but were forced to retreat to the main body, if we may give credit to the report of the story. Edenburgh 20, instant. As touching the late Plot, many are apprehend∣ed, and Alderman Bnce his son is again taken.
And seeing that the Lord hath bin plea∣sed to make so timely a discovery of this horrid Conspiracy, we cannot but with all thankfulness of heart call to remembrance the late eminent actings of the providence of the great Jehovah among us, in expeling those Satanical Clouds, & ordaining a glo∣rious peace to shine amongst us; And that after such wonderful discoveries, and varie∣ty of changes, which have passed over His Highness, we cannot but unammously cen∣ter, and with great alacrity cast Anch  the Harbour of Hope, being assured that we shal find a settlement of these Nations in Truth and Righteousness, by the exer∣cise of the declared Government under his Highness; wherein, consisting the present support of our Religion and Lawes, We cannot but acknowledg it as a great mercy of God, that so suitable a Remedy should be so suddenly applyed to our growing
maladies; and that our hopes after many years patient attendance upon other In∣struments (when almost swallowed up in the midst of our too just fears, plots, and conspiracies) are now revived, and recover∣ed from so doubtful a condition, by the rai∣sing up of His Highness in this Juncture of time, and preserving him from his blood∣thirsty Enemies, so seasonably to remain still our Ruler, who hath been so successe∣fully our Leader, God having already put upon him as much of the honour of Our peace as many a noble Spirit of the hazard of our wars; and we desire to honour him as much sitting at the Helm of Govern∣ment, as in the head of our Armies; in bringing to effect those great things, for which the faithful in these Nations have from the beginning of our troubles conti∣nually contended with GOD by earnest prayer, and long with their enemies by vast
expence of blood. So that upon diligent inquiry in∣to the whole business, divers are taken both in City and Countrey; amongst the rest, master Hutchins master of the Sun Tavern in Aldersgate street was carryed away. And diver, other Gentlemen were taken, who unhappily had involved them in this Assassination. No less then 50000 are said to be Complices and Confederates; and a List of as many more is said to be presented. A short time (pro∣bably) may produce strange Alterations, and va∣riety of Changes. FINIS.
