g58 e453_26 99864395 116623
The true Relation OF THE ARRIVALL OF Thirty Flemish Ships, AND Six of those that Revolted, before the Town and Castle of DEALE; Wherein the Prince, the Duke of York, and many Souldiers are said to be imbarked for ENGLAND: With the violent battery they made against the Besiegers, and the effects thereof. TOGETHER WITH The manner of the Siege, the progresse of the Besiegers, and the desperate carriage of the Besieged. Sent in a Letter from the Leaguer in Upper Deale, 20. July, 1648. Printed in the year 1648.
The true Relation of the arrivall of 30 Flemish Ships, and six of those that revolted, before the Town and Castle of DEALE. SIR, WIth my last, I sent you word of the surrender of Warmore Castle un∣to us, and I might say much of the further particu∣lars thereof, but that I doubt not but ere this you have heard of it at large: Immediately thereupon we drew on our Leaguer before Deal-Castle, where we now lie; and
on Saturday morning the 15. of this instant July, there appeared six men of War, (being part of the revolted Ships,) before the Town and Castle of Deal, and by their churlish tokens they sent us, made it appear to us what they were, for they shot very near a hundred great Pieces at us, yet thanks be to the Lord, they did us little harm; only two men were slain by their shot, and two more by the fall of a Chimney which their Canon beat down; That very morning also the enemy sal∣lied out of Deal Castle, and in∣tended to surprize our forlorn guard, which was between three and four hundred yards of the Ca∣stle; but they were soon discove∣red,
and by a Reserve guard, (whom Captain Gayl of Coleman∣street commanded) they were gal∣lantly repulsed, and driven back to the very gate of the Castle, and this with the losse of three of our men, and some few wounded: As for the losse on the Enemies part, it is hot certain yet some of our Souldiers observed about eight or nine of theirs to be carried off on pick pack. The day following being Sun∣day, there appeared near about 30. Fleming Ships before the Castle and Town of Deal, but are very quiet, and have not yet medled on either side, neither have the revolt∣ed Ships at all opposed us since the arrivall of the Hollanders, which
encourageth us to hope that they are rather our friends then ene∣mies. The Enemies in the Castle are madly desperate, and our men very valiant and couragious. But in regard the two Castles of Deal and Sandown are at such a distance that our small forces are not able to besiege both at once, and yet so near that they may in some sort assist each other, we are forced to keep our strength united as neer as possibly we can, lest we be made a prey to their frequent excursi∣ons on both sides. But we daily expect an additionall strength to come to us, and then we hope we shall be able to bridle their rage, and make them keep within straighter bounds. In the mean
time our Souldiers are very busié in making Canon baskets and such other necessaries for our service, and we have begun to raise a new Battery between the Town of Deal, and the Castle of Sandown, by which meanes we shall be a∣ble to command the Sea, the bet∣ter to keep off relief, and secure our selves from the annoyance of those ships that shall attempt against us. In a word, every thing is preparing for the Leaguer with all conveni∣ent speed that may be, and our stout Souldiery will ere long be in action. It is reported that the Prince, Duke of York, and many hundreds of Souldiers are in the Revolted Ships, but there is very little rea∣son for that opinion, and not the
least likelihood of the truth of it. But if they were, yet we fear them not, they are like to have but a sur∣ly welcome on shore, if they come in this posture; for we are reso∣lutely resolved to oppose both them and all others to the utter∣most that come in such a way. In the interim, if the Lord will but send us seasonable weather, our works will go on apace and be speedily finished. As for Provisi∣on blessed be God, it is at a very reasonable rate. This may suffice at present from. Your friend and Servant, R. G. From my Quarters in Ʋpper Deal, July 20.1648.
