G693 E115_18 99871674 156022
EXCEEDING GOOD NEVVS from Nottingham, and Yorkeshire. BEING A TRVE RELATION of all that hath passed there since the removing of the Army from Beverley to Nottingham. VVITH THE NVMBER of Arms and Ammunition that is carried to the Common Hall in YORKE. BEING SENT IN A LETTER from Mr. Gifford to a private friend in LONDON. LONDON, Printed for I. T. September 5. 1642.
THE LAST NEWS from Nottingham, and Yorkeshire. SIR, MY Respect first tendred unto you, next I shall acquaint you with all the pas∣sages and proceedings that hath pas∣sed since my last letters to you. Satturday Post came to His Maje∣stie at Yorke, that a Ship was arrived at Cottam in the mouth of Tees, betwixt Hartlepoole and Tinmouth, wherein are foure great Peeces of Ordnance, 560. great Saddles and Bridles▪ besides 2000 Buts, nine great Casks of Pistols and Carbines; a great propor∣tition of pouder and shot. The same day Colonell Goring writ unto His Majestie, that he keeps Ports∣mouth for Him. and if He dares not confide in him; If He will send another Governour, he will surrender his charge to the Person. The Kentish men are here, and very resolute for the King, and they say have stayed some of the Kings
at Chattam; Also there was some Ammunition yester∣day sent to Leicester for His Majesties service, and the K ng intends to raise a great Army both of Horse and Foot within the Kingdome, divers Counties having proffered great store of Horse, Mn, and moneys for His assistance; and most of the Gentry of Yorkshire, and divers Kentish Gentlemen and others, sate in the Deanery all the last weeke, and they promis to raise the King 100000 men in the Northerne parts, and in Wales. Sunday, great store of Carriages came from Bever∣ley, in regard the Siege of Hull was given over: This day came fourteen Peeces of Ordnance to the Man∣nour at Yorke, and some 30 Carriages more loaden with powder, shot, match, fire-locks, and Carbines, and divers other necessaries for Warre, which was laide up in the Storehouse at Yorke. This day likewise was brought great store of Am∣munition to Yorke, from Durham to Cliffe, and Har∣tlepoole, which came in that Ship, that lately arrived from Holland. Vpon Monday, news was brought to York of another Ship that was arrived at the Holy Island neere Bar∣wicke, loaden with Ammunition also that was sent from the Queene. Likewise this day came into Yorke above 100 Waggons loaden with Saddles, Bridles, Bits, Pistolls, and Carbines, powder and shot, with divers other Engines for Warre. This day the Lord Generall the Farle of Lindsey having disbanded the Army at Beverley, returned to Yorke by His Majesties command; and two Compa∣nies
was discharged and sent to their Habitions, and there to be ready upon all occasions. Tuesday, the Palsgrave left the Court at Yorke, and hath taken his Iourney into Holland. This day two Posts was dispatched towards Scotland, but upon what occasions it is not yet known. This day Sir Iohn Ho∣tham sallied out of Hull, and plundered some houses neere Beverley, levelling the Works raised by His Ma∣jestie, and so retired back againe▪ Wednesday, one Mr. Marwood (lately a Iustice of Peace) who lived within five myles of Yorke, was rob∣bed by 17 Troopers and Cavalliers, who entred into his house in the night, breaking open his closets, chests and trunks, tooke all his plate, and 120 l. in money, and a great deale of linnen. Also they intended to have killed the Iustice, but that he made an escape from them. And it appears the said Mr, Marwood was lately put out of his place of being a Iustice, because he refused to put the Commission of Array in excu∣tion, commanded by His Majesty; for which it seems these Cavalliers did beare him a grudge, calling him Roundhead, and was heard to say two or three dayes before they would pillage him, by which means three of them is taken, but the rest got away. When His Majesty heard of it, He was much incensed therewith, and said, if they could be all taken, every man of them should dye for it; to be an example for future times. Thursday, the King went to Clifton, a myle off Yorke to see some Horse exercised, which was sent Him by divers of the Gentry of Yorkshire▪ and the Bishopricke of Durham; at which time one Colonell Ashburnham, who had the same day made an escape out of Hull in a
disguised habit, presented himselfe to His Majesty, in the said disguised manner, where he gave His Ma∣jesty some Letters, which he had brought out of Hol∣land, from the Queene, which he had preserved from being found about him, during his imprisonment in Hull; After His Majestie was informed who he was, and had received the Letters from him, He presently Commanded a Horse to be brought, whereon this Colonell Ashournham was mounted, in those ragged Robes he came disguised out of Hull in; And so Ridd by His Majeste, discoursing alone with him, untill he came at Yorke. This day a Bill was set up before the Court Gates, by His Majesties appointement, That all Gentlemen Voluntiers, such as intended to beare their own char∣ges, and to make a perticular Guard for His Maje∣sties own Person, would enter themselves into His own Troope, under the Red Cornet, and to give in their names and their servants names, That Order may be taken at the Kings remove, for Billetting of such as are to attend upon His Majestie. Friday, four Troops of Horse belonging to the Lord of Carnarvan, Sir Charles Lucas, Captaine Howard, and Captaine Chapman, did excercise and show themselves on Heyworth Moore, where the King came with divers Lords and Gentlemn to take a view of them, the King being on Horsebacke with the Lords: And gave command to the Lord of Car∣narvan to march with these Troops towards Newarke upon Trent, and there to attend His Majesties coming to Nottingham to sett up His Standard, and then to re∣ceive further Order.
The Gentry of Yorkeshire sate all this weeke in the Deanary, touching the raising of more Forces for his Majestie, in regard the Parliament had refused to ac∣cept of their Petition, concerning the Accommoda∣tion with His Majestie, and of Sir Iohn Hothams Inso∣lencies they complained off, and how one Captaine Iackson was Committed to Prison, for presenting of it. Satterday▪ Post came to YOPKE from Scotland, that Generall Lfley was gone into Ireland with 1500. Horse, To Aide Colonell Munrce in the North part of Ireland. This Day 80▪ Waggons came Londen with Am∣munition from Tinmouth, Hartlepoole and other places being great Sadles, Firelockes, Pistols, Carobines with great store of shott and Powder, all which was put into the Common hall in Yorke. Munday, All the Ammunition that was brought to Yorke, both from Beverley and the North parts, was Loading a way towards Nottingham, There being seven-score Waggons and Carts, appointed to carry all the Ammunition thither from Yorke, and divers Troopes of Horse this day went out of Yorke, to Not∣tingham. This day likewise Sir Lewis Dives was made Collo∣nell of a Troope o Horse, who lately made an escape out of his house in Wotton in Bedford-shire, whose house was bset by divers trained Bands in the Countrey, for apprehending of him, and bringing him to the Parliament This night a Petition came to his Maiesty from the Parliament and the City of London, that his Maiesty
would be pleased to chuse twelve Lords about him, and they to chuse twelve of their Lords for a Treaty of Peace, what answere the King gave we heare not yet. Tuesday His Maiesty tooke his Iourney to Not∣tingham, and his Houshould followes him, there he intendes to set up his Standard upon Monday, and from thence to march forward towards London, di∣vers Troopes of Horse, and abundance of the Gen∣try of the Cavalliers and others is this day gone after the King. At Nottingham his Maiesty will draw up all his for∣ces together and so March forwards, so that we are like to be partakers of the misery of civill warres with∣in this Kingdome, if the Lord of his Merrcy prevent it not, the next weeke I shall give you Information of his Maiesties further proceedings, I Rest. Yorke September the 2. Your Loving friend▪ A. Gifford. FINIS.
