H1289 E172_14 99860293 112411
THE HEADS Of severall PETITIONS delive∣red by many of the Troopers against the LORD GENERAL And some other Officers of the Army. With the Answer which Mr. PYM Made to the severall Heads or Petitions, before the Committee on Tuesday, October 5. 1641. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Thomas, 1641▪
October the 5. 1641. THE HEADS Of the Petitions delivered by the Troopers against the Lord Ge∣nerall and some Officers of the Army; With Mr. Pyms answer there∣unto. VPon Tuesday last the Com∣mittee received divers other Petitions from severall Troopers, viz. from the Troopers of Sir Thomas Lu∣cas Colonell: And of his Brother Sir Charles Lucas Serjeant Major, most of which agreed in their particulars mentioned in their severall Petitions, viz. That the Kings Majestie did freely of his Royall goodnesse give unto the Petitioners their horses, and that they desired
to be resolved from Mr. Committee. I. Whether it lay in my Lord Generals po∣wer to give away 5. l. unto the Colonell▪ and Captaines out of their pay. II. Secondly, they Petitioned for monies de∣ducted for Armes. III. Thirdly, they Petitioned for moneyes for powder and shot, which they paid for; either upon exercise or service, which was allowed their Officers from the King. IIII. They Petitioned for moneyes which was deducted by their Officers for dead horses; And lastly they desired to have redresse from the Committees, and that they might be suf∣fered to travaile into forraigne parts, there were some other particulars then alledged by the Troopers against their severall Captaines for money which they tooke from the Troo∣pers for Armes lost in the skirmish. Vpon the receipt of the said Petitions for answer thereunto; kept the Committees in han all that day, and about 12 of the clocke, M. Pym chiefe Committee, and 6. others of t Committees went to the Lords and desir their Censure, and about one houre after they returned, and Mr. Pym then desired that the Troopers might be called in where the Com∣mittee for the House of Commons sate,
then told them he had an Order from the Lords to answer the particulars mentioned in their Petitions. The answer of Mr. Pym to the above mentioned particulars. I. I Am commanded from the Lords to tell you what the Law of this Realme is in these particulars, and that is this. Whereas you taxe my Lord Generall for the giving away 5. l. out of your pay for the horses. It lyes not in the power of the House of Com∣mons to give you any redresse for my Lord Ge∣nerall being a Peere of the Realme, and a Mem∣ber of the higher House, it lyeth not in our reach to call him to accompt therefore; But you must preferre your Petitions to the High∣er House, and then if my Lord have commit∣ted crimes not becōming his place or person, without all question you shall have a Remedy. 2. Secondly, for moneyes deducted for Armes. The Officers have enformed his Maje∣sty, it was the usuall custome in Holland, Ger∣many, and other forraigne warres, where such an army was assembled, that two-pence a day should bee deducted out of every horsemans pay, in case that any armes should be negligent∣ly lost, the said moneyes were to buy new ones,
or to repaire the old ones, this lyes  Coffers, whereunto we cannot give any answer but upon the desired returne of his Majesty, no question but that so Noble and good a Prince, will give freely that which is your due. Thirdly and Fourthly, for the moneyes de∣ducted for powder and shot, and for the dead horses, it was by order from the Lord Generall, wherefore as I told you before you must repaire to the higher House for satisfaction therein. 5. Lastly, whereas you Petition that none is suffered to goe into forraigne parts, wee have consulted with the Lords thereupon, and hath thought fit that if any one or more of you have a desire to goe beyond Sea, you may repaire hither and have a warrant granted for your pas∣sage; But for those that have friends we shall earnestly intreat them to goe into the Country to their Parents or Kinsfolkes, and if you shall be pleased to follow this businesse you may leave two of each severall Troope to take care for you in your absence, I would not willingly have you abide about this Towne for feare of scandall, there are many and great misdemea∣nors lately committed here in this Countrey, and all is layd upon your backs, but for mine owne part. I doe otherwise conceipt of you, be∣lieving that as you are Gentlemen and Souldi∣ers, you scorne to wrong any of the Kings Sub∣jects, and being informed that there are others who are already in hold, which went in your habits, but proved no such men. I am not ig∣norant
but that a Souldiers life is warranted both by the Scripture and the Lawes of this Realme. And that you are to be nourished by us being Members of the same Body Politique, and assuredly believe, that though it lyes not in our power to meddle with my Lord Generall, yet we shall preferre your Petitions, and bee either ready to heare or right your Grievances with all expedition that may bee, and so you may repaire hither upon this day seaven-night, where you shall heare further. Vpon which Speech the Troopers desired severall warrants for their severall Officers, which Mr. Committee granted, and they are to answer thereunto upon Tuesday next fol∣lowing. Captaine Yarner was this day committed to the Kings-Bench for false Musters. FINIS.
