H470 E116_30 99860226 156048
A Famous and Joyfull VICTORY OBTAINED By the Earl of Stamfords Forces neere Stratford in Northampton-shire, against Prince Robert his For∣ces, who assaulted them at one of the clock at night where they were billetted, declaring the manner of the fight, and how the Earl of Stamfords Forces took 50. of them prisoners, putting the rest to flight. Also another happy Victory obtained by the Lord Brooks, September the 8. against divers Kentish Cavaleers that were going to the Standard at Nottingham, with the taking of the Lord Montague prisoner. who was brought to London, Sep. 9. Signified to the Honourable House of Commons. Septemb. 10. Printed for H. Blunen.
A True RELATION OF A FAMOUS BATTELL Fought betwixt the Earl of Stam∣fords Forces and Prince Ro∣berts neer Stratford in Nor∣hamptonshire, September the 7. 1642. WORTHY SIR, AFter my best love and respects unto you, I thought it not amisse to acquaint you with our happy and successefull Proceedings in these parts, and of those Vic∣tories which we have obtained, since our set∣ting forth from London, VIZ. Vpon the sixth of this month, wee came to a Town called Fenny-Stratford, in Norhampton¦shire,
and intended to have billeted there that Night, but they were disappointed: For a∣bout one of the clock in the morning there came a Messenger to the Town, and informed us, that Prince ROBERTS Troopes were marching with all speed towards the Towne: Whereupon we immediatly arose, and mar∣ched out of the Town to meet the Cavaleers, where we suddenly espyed them comming, and such was the courage of our men, that they set spurs to their horses, and away they rid to∣wards them, where having some parley toge∣ther, and not agreeing, we discharged against them, and they against us, insomuch that a bloody battle did insue, as followeth. Both Armies being set in battle ar∣ray, they began to discharge with much courage on both sides, and continued a long time therein, it being very doubtfull on which side the Victory would fall. Captain Blake, a Dutchman, behaved himself very valiantly in the fight, for he brought up a Troop of men very valiantly against us with much poli∣cy, assaulting of us both in the Front and left wing.
Then we discharged against him both in the left wing and Front, and at the last caused him to retreat back, slaying four or five of his men that came against us on the left wing, and he himself escaped a bullet very nar∣rowly. Wherupon he withdrew himselfe and his men to the Reer of their own Army, the rest of their Troops still discharging against us, being far grea∣ter in Number then we were, and ma∣ny of them very able souldiers that came from Holland with Prince Ro∣bert. Yet although their Company was greater then ours we feard them not for had they bin twice as many more as they were, we was resolved to fight it out to the last man. And such is the courage of our men, that although they be but few in Number, yet will they fight with any that they meet with.
Yet neverthelesse, although they did exceed farre greater in number, yet they did not exceed beyond us in courage; for at our first meeting, wee cut off a great many of them, and took fifty prisoners, they being now sent a∣way to Norhampton Goal, where they now remain prisoners. And after we had skirmished toge∣ther for the space of 9. hours, we put them all to flight, making them runne before us like a flock of sheepe before their shepheard, they not daring to withstand us. There was also a Gentleman came from the Lord Brookes and Collonell Hambdens Regiments neer Coventre, cer∣tifying and intimating unto us the Proceedings of their Forces against the Cavaleers. And likewise signified, that they had had a great skirmish with divers Cavaleers that came out of KENT, being resolved to go to the Standard at Nottingham, to aid and assist his Ma∣jesty
against all those that shhuld op∣pose him. Where having for the space of two hours shot very furiously one against another, the Battle began to cease, and the Kentish Cavaleers began to retreat, retiring back again with all speed, lea∣ving behind them slain and wounded, neer upon threescore, which came out of Kent with them. There was also taken in this battle Sir William Butler, Sir Anthony Liger, Captain Jacob Jackson, and Lieutenant Gilbert, a very able and approved of Souldier. The said Forces that are under the Command of the right Honourable the Lord Brooks, hath defeated many more Troops thereabouts. We are now marching with all speed towards Liecestershire, to cleere that County of the Blood-sucking Cavaleers, that doth now so much op∣presse the distressed Protestants of that County.
The Dragooners of Northampton have plaid many brave Exploits, and have oftentimes fought many skirmi∣shes against the Cavaleers, taking ma∣ny prisoners, and putting the rest to flight. They have also took the Lord Mon∣tague prisoner, at Norhampton, the said Lord being strongly guarded by one hundred men at his own house, where at the first he defended himselfe very nobly, but the Dragooneers soon made entrance into his house, taking great store of Arms, and himself prisoner. I drank with Abraham Hilt at Dun∣stable, and I also met Sergeant Fox at Norhampton. From Norhampton Sep. 8. Your loving Friend, John Hamblet. FINIS.
