l2498 e441_33 99864392 116620
A LIST OF THE Prisoners taken, and those that were slain by Collonell Horton in South-Wales. AND An Ordinance of the Lords and Com∣mons in Parliament Assembled. For setling the Militia, and raising of Forces for suppressing all Rebellions and Insurrections in the Counties of Gloucester, Monmouth, Brecon, and Glamorgan. AND For the better securing, and safety of the Parliament, and the said Counties. Die Veneris 12. May. 1648. REsolved by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembl∣ed, That Wednesday next be appointed for a day of publique thankesgiving to Almighty God, for h great mercy and blessing in giv∣ing so great and seasonable a Victory to the Parliaments Forces; under the Command of Colonell Horton, over all the Forces of the Enemy in South-Wales, on Munday the 8 of this instant May 1648▪ To bee observed within the City of London and Liberties thereof▪ late lines of Communication, and weekely Bills of, Mortality; And that the Lord Mayor be desired to give timely notice hereof, to all the Ministers with∣in the places aforesaid. Joh Brown Cler. Parliamentorum Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, neere the Queens-head Tavern. 1648.
Die Veneris 12 May 1648. BE it Ordained, and it is ordained by the Lords & Commons Assembled in Par∣liament, That these persons following, (viz) For the County of Gloucester, William Lord Viscount Say and Seal, James Fienes Esquire, Sir John Seymor Knight, Nathaniell Stephens, Edward Stephens, John Stephens, Thomas Hod∣ges, Thomas Pury Esquires; Sir Giles Overbury Knight, William Leigh, Richard Aylworth, Job Deighton, John Barnard Esquires, Robert Wa∣terworth Gent. Silvanus Wood, John Fetti∣place, Robert Oldesworth Esquires, Richard Ste∣phens, Stephen Fowler Gent. Thomas Escourt, William Shephard, John Codrington, Samuel Cod∣rington, Thomas Stephens, William Stafford, Mat∣thew Huntley, Anthony Kingscote, Richard Yate▪ William Cooke, Thomas Iames Esquires; Iames Hawkins Gent. William Browne Esq Col. Iohn Barrow, Col. Robert Kyrle, Lieutenant Collonell Daniel Dobbins, and George Ken, Esquire, For the City and County of the Ci∣ty of Gloucester, the Major, Recorder and Sheriffes of the City of Gloucester, for the
time being, John Brewster, William Singleton, William Capell, Thomas Hill, Thomas Pury, Den∣nis Wife, Luke Nurse, John Maddox, Henry Cugley, James Stephens, Aldermen; Iohn Len∣thall, Iohn Dorney, Robert Kirle, Iohn Hanbury, Silvanus VVood, VVilliam Sheppard, Evan Soize Esquires, and Thomas Pury jun: Gent: For the County of Monmouth, Philip Earle of Pembrooke and Mountgomery, Iohn Herbert E∣squire, Sir Trevor Williams Barronet, Tho∣mas Morgan, Collonell VVilliam Herbert, Hen∣ry Herbert, VVilliam Morgan, Edward Morgan, Collonell Thomas Herbert, Collonell Thomas Hughes, Thomas Pury jun. William Iones, Wil∣liam Baker, Henry Baker, Iohn Parry, Iohn Walter, Christopher Katchmey, VVilliam Bleth∣ing, Iohn Hanbury, Roger Williams, William Packer, and Rice Williams Esquires: For the County of Brecon, Howel Guin of Lan∣braine, Iohn Walbief, Edward Ramsey, Edmond Ganies, Thomas Lewes, Thomas Williams, Tho∣mas Price, William Watkins, and Lewis Iones Esquires: For the County of Glamorgan, Philip Earl of Pentbrook and Mountgomery, Phi∣lip Lord Herbert, Algernon Sidney, Walter Stoickland, Bussey Mansel, Edward Brichard; Michael Oldesworth, Evan Soyse, Humphrey
Windham, Thomas Carne, Collonell VVilliam Herbert, Edward Stradling, Collonell Philip Iones, Iohn Herbert, Thomas Spencer, Richard Iones, Iohn Price, and Rowland Dawkins Esquires shall be Committees for the Militia respe∣ctively in the severall and respective Counties o Gloucester and Monmouth, The City, and County of the City of Gloucester Brecon & Gla∣morgan, for the better securing, and safety of the Parliament, and the said Counties. And shall have power and authority, and are hereby authorized by themselves, or any three of them in the said severall Counties, and places respectively to put the said Coun∣ties & places, into a posture of defence, and to raise Forces, Horse and Foot, and them to list, arme and exercise, and to forme them into Regiaments, Troops and Companies, and them to muster, array and weapon from time to time in places fit for that purpose, and to appoint over them Colonels, Cap∣tains and other Officers from time to time, by Commissions under the Hands and Seals of the said severall and respective Commit∣tees, or any seaven of them, in the respective Counties aforesaid, as often as there shalbe
occasion in that behalfe, And shal have pow∣er, and are hereby authorized by themselves, or their said Commanders, and Officers to lead, conduct, and imploy the said Persons arrayed, and weaponed for the suppression of all Rebellions and Insurrections that shal or may happen within the Counties and Pla∣ces aforesaid, according as the said Com∣mittees respectively shall from time to time give directions, or shall be otherwise direct∣ed from time to time by the Lords and Com∣mons in Parliament Assembled, Or the Committee sitting at Darby house, Any for∣mer Order, Declaration, or other matter to the contrary hereof in any wise notwith∣standing, And for all, and every their doing herein, the said respective Committees, and all and every the said Person and Per∣sons shall be saved harmelesse, and indemp∣nified by the authority of Parliament. Pro∣vided that this Ordinance, and every thing therein contained shall continue for the space of six Monthes, and no longer. Hen. Elsynge Cler. Par. Dom. Com.
To the Right Honourable the Earle of Manchester, Speaker of the House of Peers, pro tempore. My Lord, GOd hath this day rewarded our weari∣some Marches with a full and glorious Victory over and Enemy who had used much subtilty and diligence to engage the King∣dome in a new War; they had increased to a great number by the addition of divers dis∣banded men from England, and a generall conjunction of most of able bodied Inha∣bitants of the Counties of Pembrook, Cvr∣marthen, and Cardigan, and many of Glamor∣gan. This day about nine of the Clocke it pleased God that wee ingaged with them at a place called Saint Fagons, three miles distant from Cardiffe, and for neare two hours had a very hot dispute, but at length by Gods mercy they were put to a totall rout, many slaine upon the place, and about three thou∣sand Prisoners, great store of Armes and Ammunition, and many Coulours; The Enemy accounted themselves eight thou∣sand Horse and Foot, which makes the mercy more remarkable. My Lord, The Almighty was pleased
greatly to strengthen both our Officers and Souldiers, in the discharge of their duties with much resolution and cheerfulnesse, but with one heart they desire, that the honour of this worke may bee wholly given to God. This account I held my self bound to present your Lordships with, to bee communicat∣ed to the Right Honourable the House of Peeres, being My Lord: Your most humble and faithful Servant Tho. Horton. In the Field neer S. Fagons 8 May, 1648. Taken Prisoners by Colonell Horton. Major Gen. John Stradling. Laughorns Quartermaster gen. Laughorns Commissary gen. 12 Gentlemen that were to have had Commissions to at∣tend at the head-Quarters. Collonell Harris, Col. Phillip Sammage, of New∣castle. Col. Rith. Grime. Col. Howel Gamis. Severall other Collonels, that had not received their Com∣missions. Lieut. Col. Wogan of Pembrook. Lieut. Col. Lewis of Redla. Lieu Col Hodskin of the Forest Major Phillips, Major Dawkins, Major Stedman, Major Christopher Matthews of St. Anall. Capt. Matthew. Capt. Will: Batton, Capt. Rich: Cradack. Besides divers others, whose names are not yet brought in. (viz.)
80 Collonels, Lieutenant Co∣lonels, Majors, Captaines, and Lieutenants. 70 Inseriour Officers. Doctor Lloyd, Severall other Malignant Min. Mr. Marmaduke Lloyd, Sir Mar∣maduke Lloyds Son. Mr. Hugh Lloyd, Mr. James Walcot, Mr. Walter Lloyd. Mr. George Anderson, Mr. Roger Gamis, Mr. VValter Powel, Mr. Edward Gamis, Mr. Roger VVilliams, Mr. Deavoreux Grafton. 250 Gentlemen and Refor∣mado Officers. 2600 Common Souldiers, 4000 Clubmen dispersed to their severall habitations. 350 Armes broken & whole. 50 Coullours, and standards. 360 Horse, All their Ammunition, bagge and baggage. Slain of the Welch. Lieut. Col. Thomas Laughorne, Lieut. Col. Howel. Major Bussey. Major Evan Thomas, Major Smith. Captain Turburvill a Papist. Capt. Powel of Lantrade, 40 Officers more, 150 Common Souldiers, Gen. Laughorn wounded & fled Col▪ Powel fled with 100 horse Col. Poyer keeps Pembrook ca∣stle with 100 men. Die Veneris May 12. 1648. REsolved by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That Wednesday next be appointed for a day of publique thanksgiving to Almighty God, for his great mercy and blessing, in giving so great and seasonable a Victory to the Parliaments Forces under the Command of Colonel Horton, over al the Forces of the Enemy in South-Wales on Munday the 8 of this instant May 1648 to be obser∣ved within the City of London and Liberties, thereof, late Lines of Communication and weekly Bills of Mortality. And that the Lord Mayor be desired to give timely notice hereof to all the Ministers within the places afresaid. John Browne Cler. Parliamentorum▪ FINIS.
