L493 E181_5 R1469 99859718 111814
THE LAST NEVVES FROM IRELAND; OR, A TRVE RELATION of the sad estate and feares of DUBLIN, and of the Siege of TREDAƲGH by the Rebels: BEING A TRVE COPIE OF A Letter Dated the 19. of De∣cember, Sent to a private Gen∣tleman in London. TOGETHER VVITH A TRVE RE∣lation of the Rebels Oath. LONDON, Printed for VV.L. 1641.
NEWES FROM DUBLIN. SIR, YOurs bearing date the 23. of Novemb. 1641. I have received, which was the more wel∣come, in regard it brought me the first tidings of the Kings safe return to London. We are here in this Kingdom, in a lamentable case God knows, and I feare our Justices have not made our despe∣rate and dangerous estate known in England, as it ought: for surely had they done it, I suppose the King would not have hazzarded the losse of this Kingdome, or suffered his loyll Subjects thus to be destroyed by a Romish rebellion. We thought that our ancient English, which are now turned Irish, would not have rebelled, and therefore deli∣vered many of them armes, which are now Re∣bels: The Lords of the Pale promised fidelity, and their assistance, upon which there were armes given to some of them. The Lord of Louth, and the Lord of Slane sent 500. mens armes back a∣gaine, because he could get no men to take them: and yet without doubt there is neither of them but can procure 1000. men a piece that are now in re∣bellion. And now forsooth, it is given out that those two Lords are taken prisoners by the rebels, and yet I have not heard that ever they medled
with a Papist, or a Papists goods: which hath made many a Protestant who have trusted to their friends to give their goods to them to keepe, when they durst not stay any longer: but as soon as they are gone, their goods are culled out from the Papists, be they Sheep, Cattle, Linning, or any other goods whatsoever, and taken away: there are but few men of any valuable estates, that shew themselves in the Rebellion, but live as though there were no such thing, plowing, and sowing without any molestation, or offering to re∣sist, or help their poore English neighbours, who are betrayed by their owne servants, and destroy∣ed by their next neighbours, who strip them, not leaving them one thred to cover their nakednesse, be they of what quality, or calling soever, Ladies or beggars, though it be before a thousand men. They have shed abundance of English blood, and have vowed to destroy all the Protestants now li∣ving in Ireland: the which, if that we receive not strength speedily from England, I feare they will effect. Three parts of the Kingdome are already out, and every day they spread farther, for the Countrey people rise of themselves, as soon as it is reported that the Rebels are but neare them: We cannot now travell any way, five miles from Dublin without danger. It is reported that there are 30000. now in the County of Wicklow, who have promised to be with us before Munday breakfast next, but we feare them not much, if our Citizens prove not false, I meane the Papists, who without doubt are Rebels in heart. Our Ar∣my here is not above 2000. and many of them
Papists: had we but 5000. Protostants more, wee should not feare what they could doe to Dublin, with their great numbers. Tredaugh hath been besieged by them this Moneth, Colonell Titch∣bourne, with 500. men, and three troopes of horse defend it. There were 600. men, with about 60. horse going towards them from hence some ten dayes since, who were set upon by the Rebels, two miles short of Tredaugh, and for want of ex∣perience in the Serjeant Major, and his Lievete∣nant, who commanded a Counter-march, when the enemy charged them so; that they all lost their Armes, and about 200. slaine, the rest threw downe their Armes and fled: as long as Tredaugh holds out, we feare not much. On Munday last Colonell Titchbourne sent out into the Countrey for Corne, and in bringing of it home, he slew a∣bout 300. of the Rebels. Colonell Coot went in∣to the Countrey of Wicklow, to relieve Wicklow Castle, the Town being in the Rebels possession, who left it at Sir Charles Coots comming, and fled to the Mountaines upon the losse received neare Tredaugh, which was part of Sir Charles his Regiment: The State sent for Sir Charles back againe. The Rebels of Wicklow, the Coun∣ty I meane: On Tuesday, as Sir Charles came homeward, marcht as he did on the Mountaine side, and sometimes were but a little more then musket shot off, at night Sir Charles lay in New∣castle, and the Rebels on the next Mountaine, but on Wednesday about nine of the Clock they set upon Sir Charles in a narrow durty lane at Kil∣coole Townes end, where he was in great danger,
but he by his vigilant care got into a field, and so past below the Towne, and so recovered a little hill, whereon he so behaved himselfe, that after three houres Skirmish with his 600. men, and one troope of horse, he put them to flight, they being valued to be 3000. at the least: Sir Charles is now Governour of our City: the Serjeant at Armes that was sent for Abell Morgan, tooke bond of him for his comming in the last Terme, but by reason of these troubles, our Terme was put off. Farewell.
The Rebells Oath. I K. K. Do with firme faith beleeve and professe all and singular the Articles and prompts which the Catholick and Aposto∣licke Roman Church beleeveth and confesseth; and to my dying will by Gods grace maintaine and defend the same faith against all Sectaries, Jewes, Athiests, and enemies whatsoever, even with the losse of my life, estate, and goods. I doe vow also, and in conscience sencerely beleeve and acknow∣ledge King Charles to be King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland; whose Priviledges, and Attributes, Prerogaties Royall o his Imperiall Crowne, and Royall dignity; I promise and vow to God to maintaine and defend by Gods Grace, against all evill affected persons be they of what country or sect soever, o∣ven with the losse of my life, estate, and goods. I promise and vow likewise to be true to my poore oppressed country, the Kingdome of Ireland, with the losse of life, goods, and estate; and will indeavour to free it from the bondage and grievous oppressions under which it groaneth by the meanes of e∣vill Officers and Ministers of Justice, contrary to his Majesties gratious irtentions. I do vow and promise to God to wrong no Catholicke, nor cha∣lenge any estate of lands if so they be possessed of it before the Plantation began in the yeare 1610. nor any lands possessed by any of them since then, so they bought it, or purchased it for mo∣ney or otherwise. And further, I promise and vow to make no difference of dispa∣rity betwixt meere Irish, and them of the Pale, or betweene the old Irish and the new Irish, be they of what standing, calling, or qualite whatsoever: so they be professors of the holy Church and maintainers of the country liberties All; every of the precedent Articles I the aforesaid K. K. doe promise, vow, and sweare to maintaine and cause all others every where, I shall have power to maintaine and defend inviolate by Gads grace; So God helpe all those of this Gospell. FINIS.
