Q149 669.f.11[61] 99869390 162710
A Quarterne of QUEARIES. I. WHether Prester John, or Jack Presbyter be not gone back whence he came (in∣to Scotland,) and as we have paid for his coming in, whether his going out will bee Scot-free, without further cost or molestation? II. Whether that all such valiant-talking Millitary Men, and Martiall Women, as will have no Peace, nor yet dare to fight (but by Deputies) to be plac'd in the Front of an Army, and abide the Onset, Shock, and Brunt of a Battle, whereby they might know the truth of the old Proverb? Dulce Bellum mexpertis. III. Whether (hereafter) spoyling and rifeling of Churches shall not bee accounted as execrable Sacrileidge? and whe∣ther breaking open Mens Houses, Plundering, taking Mens Purses, and robbing on the High-wayes; may not be allow∣ed their old true Names, and ancient Titles againe: and bee truely called Burglarie, Theiverie, Robberie, Steal∣ing, &c. IV. Whether all such as bee truely Honest, bee not truely Wise? V. Whether Archye be of Cappacitie and Wit enough to bee taken hereafter for the onely Court-Foole, the true Courtiers having more wit then they had, though they have bought it, and paid too deare for it? VI. Whether the famous Company of KNAVES be lesse∣ned or diminished in number and practise, being many Sub-Committee-Men, Excise-Men, with the two maine Pillers, (or Cater-Pillers) Quarterman and Waterton, are annihillat∣ed, defunct, null, voyd, and of no effect, without either force, strength, or vertue? VII. Whether all the Money and Plate, volluntarily lent to maintaine War, was wisely laid out? and whether it be not a high poynt of wisedome, (and the wisest part of the twaine) to get it in againe? VIII. Whether to be daily drunke, be as great a sinne as is was wont to be, by reason it makes the Excise of Beere, and Ale, to come in the quicker? IX. Whether manly cutting of Throates may bee accounted Murther, (as formerly,) and whether to be hang'd for being Honest, be not a signe of ill luck, or (at the least) chance Medley? X. Whether any, or all sorts of Leacherie be punishable by the Law of Platonicall Communitie? and whether it be not tollerable for Recreation, by the Conjunctive aprobation of the Nicholaytans, and rules of Annarchie? XI. Whether Bishops Lands be not well bought and sold, and whether the Buyer or the Seller have the better bar∣gaine? XII. Whether Physitians and Chyrurgions (for these seven yeares space) have thrived or gained most, either by Pox, or Knocks? XIII. Whether Bullets may not be shot at the Body of a King, for the safety, of his Person, and preservation of His Ma∣jesties Life? XIV. Whether there be no Villains that would be glad to set their Country on Fire, to warme their Hands in the Flame? XV. Whether knocking out of a Mans Braines be not a rude or hard Medicine to cure the Tooth-Ache? XVI. Whether many wrangling Knaves would not be still troub∣ling of our Waters of Peace, that they might fish the more profit (unespide) in the mudde of Mischiefe? XVII. Whether it be conducible to the Honour of a King to be libell'd against in Pamphlets, rail'd at in Pulpits, reviled by Black-mouth'd Hell-hounds, uncontrouled? XVIII. Whether Gracious, Religious, Mercyfull, and Just, doe not deserve a more mannerly name then Tirranous? XIX. Whether Banishment, or imprisonment, bee the true Li∣berty of the Subject, and whether a rich Mans estate cannot raise him to the promotion of the Title of a Malignant, and new-found Stile of Delinquent? XX. Whether some over-seene Citizens, or Haberdashers of small Wit, have not spun a fine Thred, and brought their Hoggs to a faire Market? XXI. Whether an oppressing cheating Knave hath a Soule, and whether his Conscience be not a perpetuall Earthly Devill to torment him, till the Hangman take order for him? XXII. Whether Loyallty be not the best Lineing of an honest man's Dublet? XXIII. Whether Beggers are not in most Security? XXIV. Whether the Flux of Licevious Mouthes and Venemous Tongues, may not be wip'd with a Hempen Wispe, and cur'd by the vertue of Gregories Voyder. XXV. Whether all these former Quaeries, are pleasing to Some- Body, or No-Body? Printed at London 1647.
