R779 E116_15 R212778 99871349 156039
A RELATION from Portsmouth, VVherein is declared, the manner how the Castle was taken on Saturday night last; as it was sent in a Letter by one there present. Sep. 6, 1642. LIKEWISE Sixteen PROPOSITIONS, Presented at the Generall meeting of the Gentry of the City of Gloucester, the 25. and 26. of August, 1642. LONDON, Printed for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his Shop in Popes-head Ally, 1642.
A TRVE RELATION Of the taking THE CASTLE AT Ports-mouth. SIR, THe quarrell we goe about to revenge, is not ours but Gods, and therefore wee find so much incouragement in our pro∣ceedings. The dogs (so we call the great guns) barke every houre in the day and night too, they flie through the midst of us, yet God preserveth us; sometimes there is scarce an inch betweene death and us, and yet it pleaseth God to deliver us from those bloodthirsty men. We hazard much, but loose yet little. As I have till Friday last given you a brief relation of our condition here, whereof I hope you heare to day, so now I will give further notice of our proceedns. Vpon Saturday night, (this night) being the 4 of September; upon a long de∣bate between the Collonells and Captaines, we agreed to make
ready 2. Troopes, and a matter of foure hundred foot, and to much, (having a matter of twenty ladders with us) towards a Catle called the Southsea Castle, halfe a mile beyond Ports-mouth. D awing neere the Caste wee met with many Can∣no bu lets, which the Collonell let flie at us, though at ran∣dom, it seemes he heard that we went abut to take the Castle yet none of us hurt at al. At the same time wee made an al∣arum at one side of Ports-mouth on the other side of it, our Cannons plaid from a place called the Gasper into the Towne, whereupon this we heard a very pittifull lamentation, which makes us beleeve, that our gunnes made some execution a∣mongst them since & we heard that our Cannons killed two of their men. On the third side of it we had those afore named forces, and mde toward the Southsea Castle, it being about 3 of the clocke towards the morning. We sent a Trumpeter and one Captaine Bushell to the Castle, where, upon the bridge adjoyning to the Castle, our Captaine commanded his Trum∣peter to found a parly. Presently after this notice being given of it to the Captin of the Castle, called Challender, he had some discourse, about the surrendring of the Castle to us: wee pro∣pounded faire quarter, in case he would fairely surrender the Castle, if not, we would use our discretion in our proceedings against him: he being some thing in drinke, and withall new∣ly wakened out of his deepe sleepe, desired first of all, that we should stay till the next morning, and he would consider of it. Withall he demaunded who had sent him, the Captain reply∣ed, that hee had received his message from Collonell Waler, Collonel Norton, and Collo. Vrri, who were then not farre off, and waited for the resignation of that fort: while hee would have protracted time, our foote being seconded by us, scaled the walles & so prevented that intended delay. Chalender seing himself nigh lost, demanded presently faire quarter, which hee obtained with all his Souldiers, though few in number, beside his Lievtenant and Ensigne. Serjeant Maior Harbert, and Cap∣taine Bushel promised him and all his men faire quarter, which was really performed, and the greatest prejudice they recei∣ved
was, that they were disarmed, and now as yet remain con∣fined to their cabins. Our souldiers carried themselves fairely, being full of resoluion, and ready to goe even upon the mouth of the Cannos. Challender seeing himselfe disposed of, yet amongst his new Friends he fell to drinking of the King and Parliamens healen in sack; with our Officers, desiring that 3. pieces of Ordnance might bee discharged against the town of Portsouth to let them know that now this Castle was at an∣other mans disposing; those being discharged, the town let so fly at us, that I thought we should have been al cut off, but God in mercy preserved us, and no man of us not only not killed, but not hurt neither. I confesse once I was my selfe nigh of being cut off, but thankes bee to God I trump with the ret. We tooke 9. or 10. Cannos mounted again us, and few others or as many ready to be mounted, some fit for great execution, some for present service two. As soon as we had the Castle gi∣ven up to us, we left in it a matter of 80. of our souldiers, be∣ing cofident that now wee have got a mighty advantage a∣gainst Goring, no sooner we returned to our qarters, and re∣freshed our selves with mutuall congratulations, but Collonel Goring sent a Drumme to us, with messge, desiring earnestly some speedy parly, it is thought that there will be a mutiny in the town, he desired a parly to night, but the day being farre spent, they have put it off all to orrow morning, My Cap∣tain Sir Thomas Jervis & Sir William Lewes go thither, and my Lord Wentworth, and two more are to come hither, til the trea∣ty be done, It is conceived that we shall very shortly injoy the Towne. This is the short of this dayes exploit, had I hd more time, I would hve writ more a large. I should have been with you this weeke, but I know why I did not, I might have gone but: Pray you remember my service to my good friends, and so in hate I rest. Your most faithfull Friend. Given at my quarter at Kingstone September 4. 1642.
Sixteene PROPOSITIONS Presented at the generall meeting of the Gentry of the City of Gloucester the 25. and 26. of August. 1642. IT is resolved (for the preservation of the peace and safety of that County against any formi∣dable Companies that shall attempt either to enter or arise in the said County.) 1. That it is necessary to have such forces in readinesse, as may be able to repell any formidable Companies that shall offer to enter into the County and to suppresse any tumults that shall arise within the County. 2. That it is necessary that 240. Horse (besides Offi∣cers) be presently raysed equally out of every division to be disciplyned and disposed under such Commanders and in such places as shall appeare most expedient. 3. To try what horse each division can be perswaded to finde, besides to be ready upon all occasions. 4. That every division be tryed what companies of foot may be raysed and disciplyned under Commanders, and how many of them Dragoneers, all volunteers, provided that the forwardnes of any in a free contribution, shall not be drawne into president for the future as a measure of their abilities, but received as a present Testimony of
their good affection to their Countries safety. 5. That we do voluntarily submit to the commands by ordinance of the Militia, and that it be speedily put in execution. That i is resolved to entertaine 3. Commanders one of Horse, and two of Foote. 6. That the Gentlemen in every Division, do propound to those of best abilities a Loane of such summes of mo∣ney or Plate, as they are willing to spare for the service of the King and Kingdome, to be repayed with interrest, & to supply horses according to the Propositions, and that the Parliament men for this County, may move the Parliament to make allowance of money out of such Loanes for the service of this County, which is usually granted when moved. 7. That there be a place in every Division appointed where all the Souldiers both Voluntiers and such as have bin trayned may make their rendevous upon all alarums, & there receive directions from their Commanderss what to do, and whither to march for the Forrest and City: Huntley for Kiftsgate, Winchcombe for the 7. hundreds Ci∣rencester, and for Berkeley Sdbury. 8. That there be allowed to every musqueteere that hath bin of the trayned band out of your Magazine, a pound of powder, 3. ound o bullets, match answerable alwaies to be kept in readinesse by the souldier, who from time to time is to make it good, that at the time of mar∣ching, the same proportion to be allowed out of the Ma∣gazine to the Voluntiers. 9. That every Musquetier that hath bin of the trayned bands be allowed out of the Magazine a quarter of a pound of powder for every dayes exercise, without which they will not be ready fire men. 10. That every Souldier must have the keeping of the Armes he serves in.
11. That the ancientest Captaine be a Collonell in each division, appointed for the present service, from whom the other Captaines may receive their commands: & that the ancientest of those Collonells may command in chiefe, for the present occasion under the Lord Liev∣tenant. 12. That every Souldier may have a Horse to carry himselfe and Armes to the rendevous. 13. That regard be had to all ferry boates and passages, especially over Wye and Severne that they passe not Soul∣diers, that the boats lye on the English side of the water. 14. That carts be appointed in every division to carry the Ammunition with the Souldiers when they march. 15. That the Magazine be put into safe hands and pla∣ces, and the defects supplied. 16. That speciall care be had for scoutes from time to time to give Intelligence. FINIS.
