S1084 R231900 99897087 137281
ACT For a New Supply out of the Land-Rent. Edinburgh, the Fourth of May,1693. THe ESTATES of Parliament taking to their Consideration, that in regard of the great and imminent Dangers which threaten this Kingdom, from Forrain and Inte∣stine Disaffection, and Designs of evil Men. There is a visible necessity of more stan∣ding Forces, which require additional Supplies to be Raised for their Maintenance: Do therefore Humbly and Cheerfully for themselves, and in Name of this Kingdom which they Represent, make offer to Their Majesties of a Supply, of seven Hundreth and fifty six Thousand pound Scots Money, extending to ten Moneths Cess, and an half Moneth, and that o∣ver and above the seven Moneths Cess and a half, yet remaining unuplifted of the Supply imposed, be the 6. Act 2. Sess. of this Current Parliament dated 7. of June 1690. Which new Supply, is to be Raised and Vplifted out of the Land-rent of this Kingdom, in the same manner, and conform to the Proportions of the Shires and Burghs, contained in the said Act of Parliament, and to be payed in three parts, each third part, answering to three moneths Cess, and a half moneth, viz. two Hundred, fifty two Thousand pounds, as being one third part thereof, to be payed betwixt and the twenty fifth day of May instant, in this present year, one Thousand six Hundreth and Ninty three, and other two Hundred fifty two Thousand pounds at the Terin of Martinmass, one Thousand six Hun∣dreth and Ninty three, and the third, two Hunder fifty two Thousand pounds to be payed, at the Term of Whitsunday, One Thousand six Hundred and Ninty four years. And the King and Queens Majesties considering, That this Supply is granted for so necessary and important Ends and Purposes, do with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament: Declare, that no Person or Persons, shall be Exempted from Payment of their Proportions of this Supply for their Lands, upon any Pretext whatsomever, (excepting Mortified Lands allenarly) notwithstanding of any for∣mer Law, Priviledge or Act of Parliament in the contrair. And Their Majesties with Advice and Consent forsaid, do Nominat and Appoint the same Persons, who are Named in the foresaid Act of Parliament, who are alive, and have Qualified themselves according to Law, or shall Qualify themselves. betwixt and the first day of August next, and such others, as have been since Nominat by the Privy Council, to be Commissioners, for Ordering and Vplifting this Supply, with the same Power to them, to do every thing, that may concern the same, as is Prescribed and Appointed by the said Act, holding the same as Repeated herein. And ordains the same Execution to pass, for In-bringing thereof, as is provided, by that Act in all Points. And Ordains the first Meeting of the saids Commissioners for the Shires, to be at the Head-Burghs thereof, upon the Sixteeneth day of May instant, at ten a Clock, for the Shires on this side of the River of Tay, and the Twenty third of this Instant, for the Shires be North Tay. And requires the Sheriffs and Stew∣arts, or their Deputs, to Intimat the same, to the Commissioners of the Respective Shires and Stewartries, with Power to them, to appoint their subsequent Dyets of Meeting, and their Con∣veener from time to time. And appoints the present Collectors to continue, for the first Terms Payment of this Supply, they renewing their former Caution, or finding other sufficient Caution. But prejudice to the said Commissioners to continue them, or to appoint other Persons to be Col∣lectors, for the other two Terms, as they shall find cause, and Remits to Their Majesties Privy Council, upon the Death, or not Acceptance of any of the Commissioners of Supply, Named in the foresaid Act of Parliament, to Nominat and Appoint others in their Places. And Their Maje∣sties with Advice and Consent foresaid, do Declare, that all Clauses contained in the former Acts of Parliament, and Convention of Estates, in Relation to the In-bringing of the Cess and Quarte∣ring, and anent Riding-money, shall stand in full force as to this Supply now imposed, in the same manner, as if they were insert herein, except in so far, as these Acts of Parliament or Convention are innovat or altered by the foresaid sixth Act of the second Session of this Parliament. And it is hereby Declared, that no Persons, Lyable in Payment of this Supply, shall be holden, to produce their Discharges or Receipts of the samine, after three years, from the Respective Terms of Pay∣ment, unless Diligence be done by Denunciation, before Elapsing of the saids three years. Extracted forth of the Records of Parliament, by TARBAT, Cls. Regis. GOD save King William and Queen Mary. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to their Most Excellent Majesties. 1693.
