S1337 E344_12 R200962 99861568 113706
Several LETTERS FROM THE PARLIAMENT AND General Assembly Of the Kirk of SCOTLAND, TO THE Houses of Parliament of England, The Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Com∣mon Councel of the City of LONDON, AND THE Assembly of Divines at Westminster. Published by Authority. LONDON: Printed for Laurence Chapman, July 13. 1646.
Right Honorable, THe Estates of Parliament of this Kingdom have considered the Desires of the Ho∣norable Houses concerning the Garisons placed by the Scotish Army, in the Towns and Castles of Carlisle, Newcastle, Tynmouth, Hartlepool, Stockton, Warkworth and Thirlwal, expressed in the Letter of the 13 of Nov. last, & have sent Instructions to their Commissioners, to give such an Answer to the Honorable Houses, as they are confident may serve most for promoting the Cause wherein both Kingdoms are so highly engaged, and car∣rying on the War to the best advantage. They have further given direction to their Commis∣sioners to make known to the Honorable Houses, the earnest Desires of this Kingdom for the setling of Re∣ligion and Church-Government (which, as it was the principal ground of their Engagement in this Cause, so will the perfecting of it be their chiefest joy and glory of both Kingdoms) and their propension for carrying on the War with the united affection, and Forces of both Kingdoms; And that no good means be left un-assayed for attaining a firm and lasting Peace, it being the con∣stant Resolution of this Kingdom against all opposition, to strengthen and cherish the unity and Brotherly kinde∣nesse between the Kingdoms; and Peace setled with Truth, and these things performed by the Honorable
Houses (which by Treaty they are obliged unto) to re∣call the Scotish Army, with as great alacrity as they were ready to send the same into England, for the assist∣ance of their Brethren. The inconstancy of the Weather in this season hath been an impediment to the passage betwixt this and Ire∣land, so as they have not yet had an Answer to their Let∣ters sent hither concerning Belfast; but they have com∣manded their Committee to return Answer to the Ho∣norable Houses in that particular, how soon they shall receive Information concerning the same. We are, Your affectionate Friends, and humble Servants, Crawford and Lindsay, President of Parliament. Saint Andrews, 3. Feb. 164. For the Right Honorable, the Lords and Commons assem∣bled in the Parliament of England at Westminster. Right Honorable, AS the Parliament of this Kingdom doth acknow∣ledge the zeal and endeavors of the Honorable Houses of Parliament, for the good progresse already made towards Reformation of Religion and Uniformi∣ty
of Church-Government; So is it expected, that when they shal seriously consider the Brotherly affection and great sufferings of this Kingdom, who from a peace∣able condition, which we formerly enjoyed, did engage our selves in a dangerous & bloody war with England a∣gainst their Enemies, when their Affairs were in the hard∣est and lowest condition, upon a mutual League and Covenant, to setle Religion and Church-Government, according to the Word of God, the practice of the best Reformed Churches, and s might draw the neerest Uni∣formity betwixt the two Kingdoms, which was ac∣knowledged to be the chief ground of craving Ayd ad Assistance from this Kingdom (the Honorable Hou∣ses will now (after so mature deliberation) adde their Au∣thority & Civil Sanction) without further delay, to what the pious and learned Assembly of Divines, upon ma∣ture and accurate Debates, have advised to be most a∣greeable to the Word of God, and perfect what re∣mains to be done in the Work, according to the Cove∣nant; which I am commanded by the Parliament of this Kingdom to demand, and do accordingly in their Names demand of the Honorable Houses of Parlia∣ment of England: The performance whereof will be most acceptable to this Kirk and Kingdom, as a special Recompence of the Labors, and blood which hath been shed in assisting you to promote the Cause of God, and will be a mean to procure Gods blessing upon the proceedings and undertakings of both Kingdoms: And the Parliament of this Kingdom is perswaded, That the Piety and Wisdom of the Honorable Houses, will never admit Toleration of any Sects or Schisms, contrary to our Solemn and Sacred Covenant.
The next desire of the Parliament of this Kingdom (and which of all things next to Truth is most desire∣able) is, That all lawful means be used for attaining a just and well-grounded Peace; for which end, I am com∣manded to desire, and do accordingly in the Name of the Parliament of this Kingdom desire, That the Proposi∣tions of Peace be dispatched to His Majesty, and may be so pursued and managed, as may best procure the set∣ling of Truth and Peace, that there may be an end of the great distractions, and unnatural War of all the three Kingdoms. This Kingdom lyeth under the Burthen of great and vast expence, in raising and entertaining Armies, and hath with the losse of the lives of many precious men, set their own houses on fire to quench the flame of yours, and almost destroyed their own Nation to pre∣serve yours; And seeing by the seasonable assistance, af∣forded by this Kingdom to you, and by the late succes∣ses wherewith God hath blessed your Armies, you are in a great measure freed of your trouble, and are in a far better capacity to pay the Money due to our Armies in England and Ireland, then you were at any time since the beginning of these Wars, I am likewise commanded by the Parliament of this Kingdom to demand, and ac∣cordingly do in their Name demand of the Honorable Houses of Parliament, to make payment before the Third of May next, of the sums of Money duly owing by them to this Kingdom, and their Armies in England and Ireland, according to the Treaties between the two Kingdoms (the Accompt whereof will be given in by our Commissioners) hat this Kingdom may be thereby relieved of the great I rthens and pressures of our debts
contracted in this Cause, and be enabled and encouraged for joynt carrying on of the War, till the Church of God be setled in Purity and Peace. And it is further craved from the Justice of the Ho∣norable Houses of Parliament, that they will take into their serious consideration the great losses sustained by this Kingdom at Sea, through the not attendance of their Ships upon our Coasts, according to the Treaty, and make reparation thereof; and of the losses which Scotland hath sustained by the Irish Invasion, which the Kingdom of England is bound to suppresse by the large Treaty. In all which, the Desires of the Parliament of this Kingdom are no other, then that Religion and Church Government may be setled according to our Covenant, That the War may be carryed on with Brotherly and constant affection, by the joynt Counsels and Forces of both Kingdoms, That a well-grounded and durable Peace may be endeavoured betwixt the King and His Subjects, That payment be made of the sums due to this Kingdom and our Armies by Treaty; and, That (against the malice of our open Enemies, and secret Plots of such as for their own ends are labouring to sow Sedition betwixt Brethren, tyed by so many re∣lations) mutual Amity and Union between the King∣doms, may be strengthned and perpetuated to all poste∣rity. We rest Your affectionate Friends, and humble Servants, Crawford and Lindsay, President of Parliament. St. Andrews, 3. Feb. 164/. For the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons as∣sembled in the Parliament of England at Westminster.
Right Honorable, BEing appointed by the Parliament of this Kingdom, now adjourned, to keep correspondence with the Ho∣norable Houses of Parliament of England, and being in∣trusted with the pursuance of their Desires for the fur∣therance of the Common Cause, and the Publike and mutual good of both Kingdoms; We do in the Name of the Parliament, and by their Authority certifie, That this Kingdom, notwithstanding all their sufferings and discouragements, are not moved or shaken from ther former Resolutions and Vows, but will live and dye with their Brethren of England, in the prosecution of the ends expressed in the Solemn League and Covenant; Being confident of the like Inclination and Resolution of the Parliament and Kingdom of England, against all such groundless suspitions and needless Jealousies to the contrary, as bad Instruments, from the beginning to this day, have been, from their envy of our common hap∣pinesse, and for their own private ends, inventing and suggesting, That all the common troubles which both Kingdoms have endured, may end in a publike Tragedy to the scandal and grief of the Reformed Churches, the hardning and strengthning of our common Enemies, the making of our selves the Instruments of our own mutual ruine and destruction, and, which is most of all, the dishonour of the great Name of our God, with whom we have entred in Covenant for the propagation of the Gospel, and the advancement of the Kingdom of his Son. For the present, according to the Trust committed unto us, we make our addresse to both Houses in the par∣ticulars following, and do not doubt but we shall receive
such satisfaction, as may be a real testimony of their Justice and Brotherly kindnesse. Upon Information from our Commissioners there, The Parliament, before their adjourning, did understand what was written by one calling himself Robert Wright, and informed by an∣other, whose name was kept in the dark, and confirmed by a Letter of Mr. Jermin, to the Lord Digby, against this Kingdom, their Army in England, and their Com∣missioners there, The accusations are of so high a nature, and so sophistically insinuated, that the Parliament, which, during their sitting, were upon all occasions en∣deavouring the best wayes of the preserving the happy Conjunction of the two Kingdoms, were much affect∣ed therewith, as a matter wherein they were much con∣cerned, both for their own Vindication, and the Satis∣faction of their Brethren. If there shall be any matter or ground of such Accusation found against any person of this Kingdom, or our Army, or any of our Com∣missioners, we are no lesse willing that it be examined, and punished to the full, then we desire and expect, that the like be done against any in England, that transgresse in that kinde, which is conform to our Covenant, wherein we all swear, With all faithfulnesse to endeavour the discovery of all such as have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by hindering the Refor∣mation of Religion, dividing the King from his people, or any of the Kingdoms from the other, that they may be brought to publike tryal, and receive condigne punishment, as te degree of their offences shall require or deserve. But let us desire and expect from our Brethren, all charity, tender∣nesse, and respect to this Kingdom, our Army, and Commissioners, of whose faithfulnesse they have had
so large and manifold experience; and in their several Letters to this Kingdom, did give them so ample testi∣monies; that no aspersion or suspitions lie upon them, by concealing the names of any persons who can be dis∣covered. And therefore, according to the Trust com∣mitted unto us, We do desire in Name of the Parlia∣ment and Kingdom of Scotland (if that Robert Wright be not yet found out, who he is, and that hidden Knight after so long a time be not yet unsecreted, and made known by name) all means may be used for disco∣vering the one; whose Letters have been so frequently produced before the Committee of both Kingdoms, and revealing the other to our Commissioners, which is in the power of some of the Members of the House of Com∣mons to do; that both Kingdoms may be satisfied, when the Truth is brought to light, and all such jealousies and misunderstandings may be prevented for the future. We do also represent to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, That this Kirk and Kingdom is more scan∣dalized and grieved in the matter of Religion, which immediately concerneth God and his Honour, then in any thing on Earth, touching themselves and their own name. A Directory for the Worship of God is agreed upon in the Assembly, and Authorized by both Kingdoms, and practised carefully by this Church; but the Service Book still remained in some places of England, under the Parliaments power, and the Directory very much slighted, and by some avowedly written against. In∣stead of the intended Unity in Religion, Basphemous Errors, Heresies, Sects, and Schisms are increased and multiplied through the want of Church Government.
The National Assembly of this Kik in their Answer to the Declaration of the Parliament of England, of the date July, 1642 professe, That themselves and all the well affected within the Kingdom, are exceedingly grieved and made heavy, because the Reformation of Religion had moved so slowly and suffered so great interruption. And the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, in their Re∣ply did professe, That the miserable estate of the Church and Kingdom was not able to endure any longer delay. Like as in their Declaration sent to the general Assembly, they professe, That they do not doubt but to settle such a Refor∣mation of the Church, as should be most agreeable to Gods Word. And in the aforementioned Reply they declare, That their purpose is to consult with godly and learned Di∣vines, that they may setle such a Government, as may be most agreeable to Gods most holy Word. Some Commissioners from this Kirk have attended the Assembly of Divines there, for the space of two years and a half; and long ago the Assembly have offer∣ed their advice to both Houses, yet can we hear nothing of the setling of a government; but upon the contrary of a real growth of all Sects and Errors, and of great en∣deavours for Toleration thereof, which maketh us and this Church and Kingdom, who cannot understand where the difficulty and obstruction lieth, to wonder at so long a delay; wherein we are very much interest∣ed, not onely in relation to the glory of God, our mu∣tual League and Covenant, and the peace and happinesse of that Church and Kingdom; but also in regard of the unity of Religion amongst our selves, and of the peace of this Kingdom, which cannot be long preserved from so dangerous contagion; which would be more griev∣ous
and intolerable unto us, then all our troubles and sufferings have been: And therefore from all these Con∣siderations, in Name of this Kingdom and Parliament, We do in all earnestnesse desire, that Church-Govern∣ment may now at last, without further delay, be setled according to the Covenant. We do in like manner presse what hath been solicited by our Commissioners, for the space of eight moneths past, That the Propositions of Peace after so much de∣bate and deliberation, agreed upon unanimously by both Kingdoms, the most material whereof have been fully Treated upon at Uxbrige, may be forthwith sent to His Majesty, wherein this Kingdom is the more earnest, that they know not the cause why the sending of these Propositions is so long suspended; they long for the end of this unhappy War, by the happy setling of Re∣ligion and Peace: And so much the more, that they do perceive some would make use of the continuance of these Wars, to raise and foment jealousies and differ∣ences betwixt these Kingdoms, and to separate those whom God hath so strictly tyed for so goods ends, by so many Bonds and Relations; And we are confident, will never suffer to be divided, but still continue them in a firm and blessed Conjunction against all machina∣tions of Satan and his instruments: Which shall ever be the settled Resolution and constant Endeavour of Your Lordships most affectionate Friends and humble servants Loudoun Cancellarius. I. P. D. Com. St. Andrews 10. Feb. 164/ For the Right Honorable, the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of England as Westminster.
RIGHT HONORABLE, YOur several Addresses to the Honorable Houses of Parlia∣ment, and the relation of our Commissioners, hath given us so perfect knowledge and deep impression of your affection, and true zal for the Reformation of Religion, and Uniformity of Church-Government, as hath much refreshed us in our greatest difficulties, and doth far exceed our acknowledgements. Yur constant care of advancing and furnishing very great sums of money to the Armies, who stand for defence of Religion, and the just publike Liberty of the Subjects in all the three King∣doms, is an evident demonstration how much you prefer the good of the Publike to your private Interest: And your special regard in cheerfully supplying the Armies of ths Kingdom with Money and other necessity Provisions, in the times of their most urgent necessities, hath so greatly endeared unto us the Brotherly affe∣ction of that famous City, as will not only be a real tye of Amity for the present, but will likewise lay a firm foundation of reci∣procal kindenesse, and inviolable friendship for all succeeding Ages. And as the many real proofs of your affection and fidelity, in doing and suffering for the Cause of God, gives unto us full perswasions and confidence of your constancy for promoting thereof, till (by Gods blessing upon the joynt endeavors of both Nations) Truth with a jst Peace (which is the highest of ou desires) be setled in all the Kingdoms: So do we conceive it suit∣able to your deserts, and agreeable to the gratitude of this King∣dom, to return you most hearty thanks, and to assure you, that all our Actions shall witnesse the candor and sincerity of our Inten∣tions, and most earnest desires to embrace and improve all oppor∣tunities, which may conduce to the prosperity of your City, and testifie the Brotherly affection of Your most loving and faithful Friends, Crawford and Lindsay, President of Parliament. St. Andrews, 27. Ian. 164/. For the Right Honorable, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common-Councel of the Ci∣ty of London.
Right Honorable and Reverend, THe lrge and abundant proof you have given now a long time of your sincerity, constancy, and unwearied painfulness in ad∣vancing nd setling he Affairs of Christ; together with your vigi∣lancy and circumspection, against every way destructive to the U∣nity desired and intended in our Solemn League and Covenant, Re∣monstrated to us by the General Assembly, and their Commissio∣ners from time to time; As it doth comfort us in all the sad suf∣ferings of this Land, so shall you receive the sweet reward of your toylsom Labors in that Work so acceptable to God; and thereby your Name shall be famous to all Churches abroad, and your Memory gracious to Posterity. And although the Honorable Houses of Parliament in that King∣dom, are exercised with such difficulties as occasion these long de∣lays of establishing the Government of the Church, agreeable to the Word of God, and the best Reformed Churches; yet are we confident, that (by the blessing of God upon the Endeavors of the Honorable Houses) their Wisdom and Zeal will break through all difficulties and delays, for setling that Government to our common joy, whereby the hearts of the Lords people fainting under lan∣guishing expectation, may be comforted, the Adversaries frustrated of their vain hopes, deluding Errors suppressed, dangerous Schisms may be prevented, and gross prophanity, and every thing which is against the power of godliness may be banished away: for which, we have more fully represented our most earnest desires to the Honorable Houses; and withal, do certifie our confidence and firm Resolution by the Lords assistance from his Al-sufficiency, That we shall give constant and real Testimony to our dear Bre∣thren of England, and to all the world, who shall impartially con∣sider our proceedings, that no difficulties, no dangers, nor suffer∣ings whatsoever, shall make us swerve from the mutual League and Covenant, nor from the active prosecuting the ends thereof, by all possible and lawful means to the utmost of our power. We rest, Your loving and faithful Friends, Crawford and Lindsay. President of Parliament. St. Andrews, Feb. 3 164/. For the Right Honorable and Right Reverend, the Assembly of Di∣vines at Westminster.
Right Honorable and Reverend, YOur Letter of the 15. of Ianuary did refresh us not a little; for therein we beheld (that which we also heard, by the par∣ticular relation of the Right Honorable the Lord Chancellor, and the Lord Wareston, witnesses of all) the Work of your Faith, the Labor of your Love, the Patience of your Hope, your Constancy in Well-doing, your Sympathy and Bowels of Love towards us your Beloved and Covenanted Brethren, your holy Zeal for the Lord, your Painfulnesse and Diligence to have his Temple purged of all Errors and Schisms, and his Government established and setled on the right Foundation, your Watchfulnesse to hold fast our Solemn League and Covenant, to entertain that Brotherhood and Unity between the Nations, to shun every thing destructive thereof, and contrary thereunto: For all the lively and lovely Expressions whereof we cannot but blesse the Lord, rejoyce in your behalf, and gather hopes of a very rare blessing to ensue up∣on your faithful Labors. We are confident that the Master-builder shall appoint and re∣ward your Work, and strengthen your hearts and hands, that you shall see with comfort the sweet fruits of all your pains, and transmit to Posterity that which shall make your Name to be had in everlasting remembrance, and to smell as a precious oyntment to after Ages. We are not ignorant with how many difficulties you are compassed; but we trust, that your seking of the Lord shall not be in vain; for not by might, nor by power, but by the Spirit of the Lord of Hosts shall the Mountains be made plain, and the Head stone of the Building be brought forth with shout∣ings. Many go about to about to cut asunder the staves of beauty and bonds, and to break the Brotherhood between Iudah and Is∣rael; but blessed be the Lord your God, who hath filled your hearts with a better Spirit, even his own Spirit, a Spirit of Wis∣dom and Understanding, a Spirit of Unity and Verity; the fruits and operations whereof, as they have been hitherto, so we doubt not they shall be hereafter manifested more and more in your constant care and endeavors with the Honorable Houses of Parliament, for establishing the Government of the Church, con∣form to the Word of God, and the best Reformed Churches, and for
Churches, and for removing all Jealousies, and preserving entire Unity between the Kingdoms; which hath been, and ever shall be among the chiefest of our desires and travels here. We do and shall rejoyce in all our undertakings, engagements, and sufferings for you and with you, and are resolved to spend and be spent for your good, for promoting and setling the great Affairs of the Kingdom of our Lord among you, and for making his Ie∣rusalem a praise in the Earth, that all with one heart and one con∣sent may serve and glorifie him in the Unity of Doctrine, Wor∣ship and Government. This is the sum of all our desires and de∣signs, which this Worthy Bearer the Lord Waryston can at great∣er length make known unto you. Now unto our God who will perfect that which he hath begun, and hasten the day wherein all the Sons and Daughters of Iudah shall rejoyce and cry with shouting, Ierusalem is built, and Babylon is fallen. We recommend you and your Labors in this great Work. Subscribed in Name and by Command of the Commission of the Ge∣neral Assembly, by Mr. Robert Dowglas, Moderator. St. Andrews, 12. February, 1646/3. For the Right Honorable and Right Reverend, the As∣sembly of Divines at West∣minster.
A Letter from the Generall Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, to both Houses of Parliament. Right Honorable, THE report of the great things which the Lord has done for your honours, has gone forth into many Lands, and it becommeth us least of any either to smother or extenuate the same; Wee de∣sire to bee enlarged in the admiration of the power and mency of God the author, and to diminish nothing of that praise that is due unto you as instruments. When the Lord set your Honours upon the Bench of judgement, both the Kirk and Commonwealth of Eng∣land were afflicted with intestine and bosome evils, the care where∣of could not but be very difficult, because they were not onely many, but for the most part Universall and deeply rooted, sheltered under the shadow of custome and law, and supported with all the wisdome and strength of the Malignant and Prelaticall party; who rather choosed to involve the Land in an unnaturall and blou∣dy War, then to faile of their ambitious and treacherous designes against Religion, the priviledges of Parliament, and the Lawes and Liberties of the Kingdome. Neither hath that miserable crew been wanting unto their own ends, but for many yeares together hath desperately pursued their resolutions in Armes; And was like∣ly to have prevailed, if the Lord had not put himselfe in the breach, and furnished you with much patience, wisedome, courage, and constancy in the midst of many difficulties and distresses, and at last
with so glorious and triumphing a successe, that the Enemy hath fane every where before you, and there is none left to appeare a∣gaint you. These things as they be the matter of our refreshment and of your glory, So doe they lay a strong obligation upon your honours to walke humbly with your God, and to improve the power hee has put into your hands, for the advancement of the Kingdome of his Sonne, and bringing forth the head stone of his house. The slow progresse of the worke of God has alwayes beene the matter of our sorrow which is now encreased by the multipli∣cation of the spirits of error and delusion, that drowne many souls in perdition, And so strengthen themselves that they shall afterward be laboured against, with more paines then successe, if a speedy and effectuall remedy be not provided. And therefore as the servants of the living God, who not onely send up our supplications dayly for you, but have hazarded our selves in your defence; Wee doe earnesty beseech your Honours in the bowels of Jesus Christ, to give unto him the glory that is due unto his Name, by a timeous esta∣blishing all his Ordinances in the full integrity and power thereof, according to the League and Covenant. As long as the Assembly of Divines was in debate and an Enemy in the Fields, wee conceave that these might be probable grounds of delay, which being now removed out of the way, wee doe promise our selves through your wisdome, faithfulnesse, and zeale, the perfecting of that which was the maine ground of our engagement, And a chiefe matter of consolaion unto us, in all our sad and heavy sufferings from the hand of a most cruell Enemy. Wee know that there is a Generati∣on of Men, who retard the worke of uniformity, and foment jea∣lousies betwixt the Nations, studying if it were possible, to breake our bonds asunder; But we trust that he that sitteth in the Heavens will laugh, and that the Lord will have them in derision; that hee shall speake to them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displea∣sure; And notwithstanding of all that they can doe, set his King upon his holy Hill of Zion, and make these Nations happy in the sweet Fruits of Unity in Truth and Peace. The Searcher of hearts knowes, we desire to hold fast the band of our Covenant as Sacred and inviolable, being perswaded that the breach of so solemne a tie, could not but hasten downe upon our heads a curse and ven∣geance
from the righteous Judge of the World, and involve these Kingdomes in further calamities then they have yet seene. And we abhorre to intertaine any other thoughts of you. Nay we are con∣fident that your Honours will seriously endeavour the prosecution of all these ends designed in the Covenant, and the bringing these Nations unto the neerest conjunction both in judgement and af∣fection, Especially in those things that concerne Religion, which without all controversie is the readiest and surest way of attain∣ing and securing the Peace and prosperity of both Kingdomes. Subscribed in the Name of the Generall Assembly by the Moderator. Robert Blair Moderator. Edinburgh the 18 of Iune, 1646.
18. June 1646. A Letter from the General assembly of the Kirk of Scotland To the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Com∣mon Councell of the City of LONDON. Right Honourable, YOur late and seasonable Testimony given to the truth of the Gospell, and your affection to the Peace of the King∣doms, manifested in your humble Remonstrance and Pe∣tion to the Honourable Houses of Parliament, hath so re∣vived the remembrance of your former faith and zeale, and pro∣claimed you the worthy Seed of so Noble Ancestors in that famous City, as we cannot but acknowledge with all thankfulnesse the grace of God bestowed on you, and stirre you up to take notice, how since you were precious in the Lords sight, you have been ever honourable. The Lord hath ever loved you, given men for you, and people for your life; what a honour was it in the dayes of old when the fire of the Lord was in Zion, and his furnace in your Je∣rusalem (even in Queen Maries dayes) that there were found in you, men that loved not their lives unto the death; what a glory
in after times when Satan had his Throne, and Antichrist his Seat in the midst of you, that there were still found not a few that kept their garments clene: But the greatest praise of the good hand of God upon you hath beene in this, that a midst the many mists of Error and Heresie, which have risen from the bottomlesse pit, to bespot the face and darken the glory of the Church, while the Bride is a making ready for the Lambe; you have held the truth, and most piously endeavoured the setling of Christ upon his Throne. We need not remember how zealous you have been in the cause of God, nor how you have laid out your selves and estates in the maintenance thereof, nor how many acknowledgements of the same, you have had from the honourable houses, nor how preti∣ous a remembrance will be had of you in after ages, for your selling of all to buy the pearle of price: We onely at this time doe admire and in the inward of our hearts doe blesse the Lord for your right and deepe apprehensions of the great and important matters of Christ in his Royall Crowne, and of the Kingdomes in their Uni∣on, while the Lord maketh offer to bring our Ship (so much af∣flicted and tossed with tempest) to the safe harbour of truth and peace. Right memorable is your zeale against Sects and Secturies, your care of reformation according to the word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches, your earnest endeavouring and noble adventures for preserving of the rights and priviledges of Parliament, and liberties of the Kingdomes, together with his Majesties just power and greatnesse, and your high profession, that it is not in the power of any humne authority to discharge or ab∣solve you from adhereing unto that our so solemnely sworne League and Covenant, or to inforce upon you any sence contrary to the letter of the same: besides your other good services done to the Lord and to us, in strengthning the hands of the reverend assem∣bly of Divines, and of our Commissioners in their asserting of the government of Christ (which the more it be tried will be ever found the more precious truth) and vindicating of the same from the u∣surpation of man and contempt of the wicked. These all as they are so many testimonies of your Piety, Loyalty, and undaunted resolution to stand for Christ; so are they and shall ever be, so ma∣ny obligations upon us your Brethren, to esteeme highly of you in
the Lord, and to beare you on our brests before him night and day, and to contribute our best endeavours, and to improve all oppor∣tunities for your encouragement. And now we beseech you in the Lord, Honourable and wel-beloved, goe on in this your strength and in the power of his might, who hath honoured you to be faithfull. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made you free, and in pursuance of this truth, we are confident you will never cease to study the peace and neerer conjunction of the Kingdoms; knowing that a three-fold cord is not easily broken. Now the Lord Jesus Christ himselfe, and God even our Father which hath loved and honoured you, and given you everlasting consolation and good hope through grace, comfort your hearts and stablish you in every good word and worke. Subscribed in the name of the Generall Assembly by the Moderator. Robert Blair Moderator. Edinburgh the 18. of Iune, 1646.
A Letter from the Generall assembly of the Kirk of Scotland to the Assembly of Divines at Westminster. Much honoured, and Right reverend, AMongst other fruts of this our precious liberty, after such dissipation by sword and pestilence to meet againe, we ac∣compt it not the least to have the opportunity of making a publique declaration of our earnest affction to all our deare Brethren of that Nation, and especially to your selves of the Reverend Assembly at Westminster, when we were lately in a very low condition, we may say that our owne sufferings, and feares although embittered with the sense of the Lords displeasure against our lukewarmenesse and unfaithfulnesse, did not so take up our heart, but that roome was left to congratulate with the Lords people there in all their successes, and to condole with them in all their dangers, and if at any time, any here hath see∣med to be more jealous then Godly jealousie would allow, we know not how it can be imputed to any thing else, but to the ve∣hemency of ardent affection and impatient desire to have our Bre∣thren there, and us joyned nearer to Christ, and to one another in all his ordinances and especially in Presbyteriall Government, so well warranted by the word and approved by experience of our own and other reformed Churches, wherein your long and unwea∣ried endeavours have been blessed with a large increase, which yet hath proved a seed, unto a further and more glorious expected harvest. There coud not be wished by mortall men a fairer op∣portunity then is cast in your lap being invited and charged by so high an authority, to give so free and publique a testimony of those truths, which formerly many of the Lords pecious ones by tongue, and pen, by teares and blood have more privately asserted. The smallest of Christs truths (if it be lawfull to call any of them
small) is of greater moment then all the other businesses that e∣ver hath been debaed since the beginning of the world to this day; but the highest of honours and heaviest of burthens is put upon you to declare out of the sacred records of divine truth what is the prerogative of the Crowne, and extent of the Scepter of Jesus Christ, what bounds are to be set between him ruling in his house, and powers established by God on earth, how, and by whom, his house is to be governed and by what wayes a restraint is to be put on those who would pervert his truth, and subvert the faith of ma∣ny. No doubt mountaines of oppositions arise, and gulphs of dffiulties open up themselves in this your way, but you have found, it is God that girdeth you with strength and maketh your way perfect, and plaine before you, who hath delivered, and doth dliver, and will yet deliver; we need not put you in minde, that as there lieth at this time, a strict tie on all, so in a speciall manner both you, and we are ingaged to interpose our selves between God and these Kingdomes, between the two Natins, between the King and the People, for the averting of deserved wrath, for con∣tinuing and increasing a well grounded vnion, by procuring, so farre as in us lyeth a right setling of Religion and Church-govern∣ment, that when we shall sleep with our fathers, the posterity here and abroad may be reaping the fruits of our labours. Wee are fully assured of your constant, and sedulous promo∣ting of this blessed worke; and of the Lords assisting, and carry∣ing you on therein, and are confident that your late experience, and present sense, of the great danger and fearefull confusion, flo∣wing from the rise, and growth of Sects and Sectaries not suppres∣sed, hath stirred up in your hearts most servent desires and care∣full endeavours for remedying of the same, wherein we exhort you to continue and abound, knowing that your labours shall not be in vaine in the Lord, to whose rich grace we commend you and the worke in your hands. Subscribed in the name of the Generall Assembly. Robert Blair Moderator. 27 June, 1646. Edinburgh. FINIS.
