s2269 43078134 151702
A SECOND. CONTINUATION OF THE COMPLEAT CATALOGUE OF Stitch'd BOOKS and Single SHEETS Printed since the First Discovery of The Popish Plot, (September 1678.) From the 24th of JUNE to Michaelmas Term 1680. The Continuation is intended to be publish'd every Term. LONDON, Printed by J. R. and are to be sold at the Green Dragon in St. Pauls Church Yard, where is to be had a Compleat Catalogue of all Printed since the Plot. 1680.
A Second Continuation. Of the Compleat CATALOGUE OF Stitch'd BOOKS and Single SHEETS &c. Printed since the First Discovery of the POPISH PLOT, (Sept. 1678.) from the 24th. of June to Michaelmas Term, 1680. Folio's. Plot, and Popery. Number of Sheets. 1. Englands Calamity fore-shown in Germanies misery, being the dire consequent of the growth of Popery Printed for Lang∣ley Curtis. 1 2. The Tryal of Sir Thomas Gascoyne Bar. for High Treason, Printed for T. Basset, and S. Heyrick. 17 3. A seasonable caution to Apostate Protestants; or Mercy and Judg∣ment at once made visible, Printed for Langley Curtis. 1 4. Truth known to few that the Jesuits are downright Atheists, prov∣ed by two Sentences of the faculty of Sorbonne sold by Langley Curtis. 5 5. The Roman wonder being truth confest by Papists, wherein the Clergy of the Church of England, in their charge of Heretical Do∣ctrines upon the Jesuits, are fully justified Printed for W. Kettilby. 15 6. A narrative of the late Popish Plot in Ireland, for the subjugating thereof to the French King, together with the Tryal of the Earl of Tyrone, by Thomas Sampson Printed for S. Lee and D. Major. 9 7. Malice defeated or a brief Relation of the Accusation and Deli∣verance of Elizabeth Cellier, Printed for her self. 12 8. The Scarlet Beast stripped Naked, or a Brief Answer to Mrs. Celliers Narrative Instituted, Malice defeated, &c. Printed by D. Mallet. 2 9. The Midwise unmask'd being a second Answer to Mrs. Celliers scan∣dalous Libel, Printed for T. Davies. 1 10. The Matchless Rogue or a Brief Account of the Life of Don Tho∣maso, Printed for Elizabeth Cellier. 2 11. Mr. Dangerfield's Answer to Mrs. Celliers scandalous Lying Pamph∣let, entituled Malice defeated sold by R. Taylor. 5 12. An Abstract of the contents of several Letters relating to the ma∣nagement of Affairs with Rome, by the D. of Y. and others. 2
13. A Letter from the Lady Creswell to Madam Cellier, on the pub∣lishing her late Vindication, Printed for Langley Curtis. 1 14. The Tryal of Mrs. Cellier at the Old Baily, Printed for Langley Curtis. 1 15. The Tryal and Sentence of Elizabeth Cellier for writing, and pub∣lishing a scandalous Libell called Malice defeated, &c. Printed for T. Collins. 9 16. The Popes Letter to Mrs. Cellier in relation to her great sufferings for the Catholick cause, Printed by D. Mallet. 1 17. Mr. Prance's Answer to Mrs. Celliers Libel, and other false Asper∣sions cast upon him, &c. Printed for Langley Curtis. 5 18. Modesty triumphing over impudence or some notes upon a late Romance published by Elizabeth Cellier Midwife and Lady Er∣rant, Printed for J. Wilkins. 5 19. A caution to all true English Protestants concerning the late Po∣pish Plot, by way of conference between an old Queen Elizabeth Protestant, and his Country Neighbor, Printed for R. Janeway. 3 20. Mrs. Celliers Answer to the Popes Letter, wherein she declares her fidelity and saintness to the Catholick cause, Printed by D. Mallet. 1 21. The case of Tho. Dangerfield, with some remarkable passages, that happened at the Tryals of Mrs. Cellier and the Earl of Castlemain, at the Kings Bench Bar at Westminster, before the Lord Chief Ju∣stice Scrogs, Printed for the Author. 10 22. Dr. Oates Narative of the Popish Plot vindicated, in Answer to a Scurrilous Libel, called a Vindication of the English Catholicks &c. Printed for T. Cockerll. 14 23. The Popes threatning Letter to the French King, or the present grand controversy between Pope Innocent the II, and King Lewis the 14th about the Regalia, Printed for H. Brome. 2 24. The Popish damnable Plot against our Religion, and Liberties dis∣covered in the Breviats of Threescore & four Letters, & Papers for Intelligence past betwixt the Pope, Duke of York Cardinal Norfolk, of Cardinal Cibo, Cardinal Barbarino, Nuntio and internuntio for the Pope in France and Flanders, and the Lord Arundel Mr. Cole∣man &c. as they were drawn up by the secret Committee of the House of Cmmons; for the satisfaction of the House of Lords, in the Bill against the Duke of York, Printed for R. Janeway. 9
Quarto's. Plot, and Popery. Number of sheets. 1. L'Estranges Narrative of the Plot set forth for the edification of his Majesties Liege-People, Printed for H. Brome. 4½ 2. The Church Papist (so called) his Religion and Tenets fully dis∣covered, in a dispute between a reputed Papist, and an open professed Romanist, Printed for R. Harford. 5 3. The great Idol of the Mass overthrown in 24 Arguments, wherein the Doctrine of transubstantiation is fully refused. Print. for E. Proser. 2 4. Foxes and Fire-brands or a specimen of the danger, and harmony of Popery and Separation. Printed for B. Took. 5 5. The rise and fall or degeneracy of the Roman Church. 4 6. The Memories of James Wadwort a Jesuit that recanted, &c. Print-for H. Brome. 9 7. A Vindication of the English Catholicks from the pretended con∣spiracy against the Life and Government of his Majesty, Printed at Antwerp. 1680. 8 8. The Popes third brief threatning to Excommunicate the most Christian King, Printed for J. Vade. 2 9. The grand Inquest or a full and perfect Answer to several Reasons, by which it is pretended his Royal Highness the Duke of York, may be proved to be a Roman-Catholick, Printed for J. Vade. 3¾ 10. The Zealous and Impartial Protestant shewing some great, but less heeded dangers of Popery, Printed for H. Brome. 8¼ 11. An Account of a Vindication of the English Catholicks, from the pretended conspiracy against the Life and Government of the King, Printed for J. Vade. 4½ 12. The Case of Protestants in England under a Popish Prince, if any shall happen to wear the Imperial Crown, Printed for R. Janeway. 4½
MISCELLANIES. Folio's. Miscel. Number of Sheets. 1 A Brief Method of the Law being an exact Alphabetical dispo∣sition, of all the heads necessary for a perfect common place, Printed for John Kidgel. 16 2 An exact Journal of the Siege of Tangier, from the first sitting down of the Moors, before it on March 25 1680. to May 19 following, Printed for Joseph Hindmach. 4 3 A Narative of the Confession and Execution of Thomas Pardue at Tyburn. June the 25th. 1680. 1 4 An Account of the proceedings at the Common-Hall London, June the 24th 1680. Printed for L. Curtis. ½ 5 Absalon's Conspiracy, or the Tragedy of Treason. 2 6 A Catalogue of the Names of all his Majesties Justices of the Peace in Commission, throughout England and Wales, according to the late alterations, Printed for W. Davies. 9 7 Mr. Chillingworth's Judgment of the Religion of Protestants of Scripture the only rule &c. Printed for Francis Smith. 3 8 Narative of the proceedings at the Sessions House in the Old-Baily. 1 9 A Letter to the Earl of Shaftsbury from Tom Tell truth. 1 10 A Relation of the extraordinary Thunder and Lightning which lately happened in the North of Ireland. 1 11 An exact Coppy of the petition of the Protestants in France, to their Sovereign Lewis 14th. sold by L. Curtis. 2 12 A Narative of the Confession and Execution of the Eight Prison∣ers at Tyburn, July the 14th 1680. 1 13 A Letter written to the French King, by the Arch-bishops and Bi∣shops about the last brief of the Pope, upon the subject of the Re∣gale, Printed for R. Bently. 1 14 A Letter to the Duke of Monmouth. 1 15 A Letter from the King of Morocco, to his Majesty the King of Eng∣land
Charles the 1st for the redeeming of sally Argiers &c. Printed for Rowland Reynolds. 1 16 A true List of Names of these persons appointed by the Rump ment, to sit as a Council of State, Reprinted. ½ 17 A Seasonable Address to the L. Mayor and Court of Aldermen and Commoners of the City of London, upon their present Electing of Sheriffs, July the 17th 1680. 1 18 The Tryal and Condemnation of John Giles, that notorious Ruffi∣an, for wounding John Arnold Esq Printed for L. Curtis. 1 19 The Names of the Field Officers Captains, Lieutenants &c. of the Militia of the City of London 1680. 1 20 The Protestant Antidote or an answer to a Pamphlet, entituled a seasonable Address to the Honorable the Lord Major, touching the Election of Sheriffs, Printed for L. Curtis. ½ 21 A Letter from Jack the Cobler to any Body, sold by L. Curtis. ½ 22 Narative of the proceedings at Surrey Assizes at Kingstone, upon Thames from July the 19 to the 22th. 1680. 1 23 The Bill of Indictment against John Gyles; for his barbarous at∣tempt upon the Body of Justice Arnold, Printed for L. Curtis. 1 24 The Character of a Town-Gallant, sold by W. Whitwood. 1 25 The Character of a Town-Miss, sold by W. Whitwood. 1 26 News from Guild-Hall, or an answer to the address answered, 1 27 Relation of a great and Bloody Fight between the English and the Moors before Tangier, 1 28 The proceedings of Guild-Hall for declaring the Sheriffs. 1 29 An Account of the defeat of the Rebells in Scotland, by the Kings Forces at Crawford John. ½ 30 Bloody News from Southwark of a horrid Murther, committed on the Body of Walter Osily by his own Wife. Aug. the 2d. 1680. 1 31 A true Copy of a Treasonable Paper called the Fanaticks new Covenant, taken from Mr. Donald Cargill, at Queens Ferry, Printed for A. Forrester. 3 32 Goodman Country to his Worship the City of London. P. for W. K. 1 33 Brief Compendium of the Birth and exploits of Thomas Earl of Ossery. 1 34 The Cities just Vindication or a Scourge for a Vagabond Libel, entituled Goodman Country to his Worship the City. 1 35 Tell-truths Answer to Tell-truth's Letter to the right Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury in Vindication of his Lordship, Printed for L. Curtis. 1 36 The proceedings of the grand Jury of Bristol against Mr. Edward Flower, for speaking scandalous and seditious words. ½
37 An Act of Common Council of the City of London, for retrenching the expences of the Lord Major and Sheriffs, &c. with Reasons for putting the same in present Execution, Printed for F. Smith. 2 38 A Letter to Dr. Brurnett from the Earl of Rochester on his Death Bed, Printed for R. Bentley. 1 39 A full relation of Two old Men aged above a Thousand years com∣ing invisibly into the City of Tholouze in France from Damascus in Galilee, Printed for N. Thompson. 1 40 Address of the Common-Hall, for the fitting of the Parliament. 2 41 A Letter to Dr. Buract from the Lord Rochester on his Death Bed, Printed for R. Bentley. 1 42 The Method of turning the Militin of Scotland, into a standing Ar∣my, Printed for J. Gay, and W. English. 1 43 The Imperfection of most Governments, taken out of the Epitomy of the Roman History, Printed for L. Curtis. 1 44 A Relation of the two pretended Apostles that came invisibly, into the great City of Tholouze in France from Damascus in Galilee, aged above a Thousand years, Printed for R. Janeway. 1 45 A Whip for the Tholouze Lyer, in Answer to the Relation of the two old Men, Printed for D. Mallet. 1 46 Great and Bloody News from Turnham Green, or a Relation be∣tween the Earl of Pembrook and his Company, with the Constable and Watch, belonging to the Parish of Cswick, P. for D. Mallet. 1 47 An Account of the misfortune that lately happened to the Earl of Pembrook, Printed for Sam. Miller. Number of Sheets. 1 48 An Account of the Sickness Death and Burial of Captain Willam Bedlow, Printed for Rand. Taylor. 1 49 Great News from Saxony, or a Relation of the mighty Gianr Koorb∣mep of his devouring Men &c. 1 50 An Account of the behavior of the Condemned Prisoners in New∣gate. Sept. 6th 1680. 1 51 The Bishop of London's second Letter to the Clergy of his Diocess, Printed for H. Brome. 1 52 Will with a Whisp to Robbin Good-fellow, Printed for T. Davies. 1 53 A Letter from the Duke of Brandenburg to several Ministers of State, shewing his resolution to defend the Protestant Religion, P. T. Davies.   54 A Relation of a dreadful storm accompanied with Thunders and Hailstones, some of them being above two pound weight about the City of Millain, Printed for T. Davies. 1 55 An Account of the Tryals at the Old Baily, began the 10th of Sept. 1680. Printed for T. Davies. 1 56 The two Noble Converts, or the Earl of Marlborough and the Earl of Rochester, their dying requests to the Atheists and debauche'es of this Age, Printed for Rand. Taylor. 1 57 Remarks on some eminent passages in the life of Collonel Blood, in a Letter to a Person of Quality, written upon the occasion of the late
Tryal, Relating to his Grace the Duke of Buckingham, Print∣ed for John Norris. 4 58 An Account of the New Sheriffs holding their Office, Printed for Tho. Snowden. 1 59 The Speech of Sir Patient Ward the 29th of September 1680. being the day he was Elected Lord Major of London, Printed for Tho. Collins, and Brab. Milmer. 1 60 A Relation of two remarkable Tryals, at the Sessions of the Peace for the liberty of Westminster, on the third of October 1680. the one for scandalous words by one Skippon, the other of a Priest in the Gate-house, for spoyling of a Girl of nine Years old, Print∣ed for W. H. and T. F. 1 61 The naked truth, (the second part) concerning the Cannons, and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction Canonical Obedience &c. Printed for F. Smith. 16 62 A Petition of the City of London to the Lord Major, against Sir George Geoffrys the present Recorder. 1 63 A Serious Vindication of the Church of England, shewing the Na∣tions happiness under the present Government, being an Answer to a late Pamphlet entituled the Naked truth. 1 64 A Narrative of the proceedings at the Sessions for London and Middlesex, Printed for T. Davies. 1 65 The dying Speeches and Confessions of the Prisoners Executed the 22 of October, Printed for Tho. Davies. 1 66 A Petition of the Booksellers in Westminster-hall, to the Honora∣ble House of Commons, to Print their Votes. 4½ 67 Another Letter from Legorn to an Eminent Merchant in London, Printed for R. Janeway. 1 68 An Answer to another Letter from Legorn, to an eminent Mer∣chant in London, Printed for R. Janeway. 1 69 The Confession of John Nicholson, who committed that Barbarous Murther on the Body of John Dimbleby servant to Mr. Marriot, Printed for Rich. Janeway. 1 71 The Protestants joy, or the Relation of the Duke of Monmouth's reception in the City of London on the 29th of October, Printed by D. Mallet. 1 72 An Account of the State of his Majesties Revenue, as it was left by the Earl of Danby at Lady Day 1679. (in a Letter to a Friend) occasion'd by his Lordships Answer to an examination of the State of the case of the Earl of Danby, by the Honorable Sir Robert Howard, Printed for T. Fox. 6 73 A Narrative of the Duke of Monmouths late Journey into the West, in a Letter from an Eye-witness thereof, Printed for R. Janeway. 1 74 The Votes of the House of Commons, (Printed by their Order) from the first day of their sitting the 21 of October (1680) and
usually comes out every Morning in half a Sheet of Paper, Print∣ed for T. Newcomb, &c.   Quarto's Miscel Number of Sheets. 1 LOve and truth in two modest and peaceable Letters concern∣ing the distempers of the present times, Printed for H. Brome 4½ 2 The Interest of the three Kingdoms, with respect to the business of the Black Box in a Letter to a Friend, Printed for J. Vade. 4½ 3 Treason and Popery &c. brought to a publick test with regard to the grounds of his Majesties late Declaration, concerning Succession of the Crown; The same with the true Protestant Sudject of the Nature, and rights of Sovereignty discuss'd and stated in Anno 1679. Reprinted. 5 4 The Religion of the Dutch, represented in several Letters, from a Protestant Officer in the French Army, to a Pastor and Professor of Divinity, at Berne in Swisserland, Printed for S. Heyrick. 9 5 Richard Baxters Answer to Dr. Stallingfleet's charge of Separation, in his late Sermon before the Lord Major, Printed for N Simmons. 12½ 6 Advice to a Soldier in two Letters, written to an Officer in the late English Army, Printed for J Gay. 2½ 7 A short reply to Mr. L'Estranges short Answer, to a litter of Libels in a Letter to a Friend. 1½ 8 A persuasive to Reformation, and union as the best security against the designs of our Popish Enemies, Printed for W. Kettlby. 4½ 9 Short Animadversions upon a Sermon lately Preached by Dr. Til∣losson, upon Joshua 24.15. sold by B. Alsop. 3 10 The charge of Schim renewed against the Separatists, in Answer to the renewer of that pretended peaceable design, which is false∣ly call'd an Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet's late Sermon, Printed for H. Brome. 3 11 Aarons Rod Blossoming the Orthodox Government of the Church of England, by Bishops &c. asserted from the practice of the A∣postles &c. Printed for R. Butler. 5 12 A strange Apparition of several Spirits and Visions, at Cow Cross in St. Sepulchres parish London, Printed for J. Clark. 1680. 1 13 A Letter out of the Country to a Person of Quality in the City, who took offence at a late Sermon of Dr. Stillingsleets. sold by S. Tidmarsh. 6 4 The Mischief of Impositions, or an Antidote against a late Dis∣course
course Preached at Guild-hall Chappel, May 2d, Printed for B. Alsop. 16 15 The Rector of Sutton committed with the Dean of St. Pauls, or a defence of Dr. Stillingfleets Irenicum and other writings; against his late Sermon, sold by R. Janeway. 11½ 16 Magnalia natura or the Philosophers Stone, lately expos'd by John Joachim Becher, sold by L. Curtis. 5 17 Strange news from East-Barnet, or a true Relation of a Murther committed by a Woman on her self and two Children, Printed for J. Clarke. 1 18 A Relation of two conferences between Father L'cheese and four considerable Jesuits. 5 19 Speculum Baxterianum, or Baxter against Baxter, being sober re∣flexions upon a Treatise of Mr. Richard Baxters stiled sacrilegious desertion of the holy Ministry rebuked and tolerated Preaching of the Gospel Vindicated, Printed for R. Chiswell. 10½ 20 Oratio Aniversaria habita in Theatro Inclyti Collegii medicorum Lon∣dinensium 55th Augusti 1680 à Gualtero Charletono. M.D. Sumpti∣tibus J. Baker. 4½ 21 The Casuist uncas'd in a Dialogue betwixt Richard and Baxter, with a moderator between them by Roger L'estrange, Printed for H. Brome. 11 22 The Moors Baffled being a discourse concerning Tangeer, especial∣ly when it was under the Earl of Teviot, by which you may find what Methods and Government is fittest to serve that place, P. for W. Crook. 4½ 23 L'Estrange case in a Civil Dialogue betwixt Ezekiel and Ephraim, Printed for H. Brome. 5 24 A Just and Modest Vindication of his Royal Highness the Duke of York, Printed for Tho. Benskin. 2 25 A Letter to Monsieur Van B-de M-at Amsterdam written 1676. Printed 19. Octob. 1680.   26 Liberty of Conscience in its Order to Universal peace Impartially stated, &c. Printed for T. Parkhurst. 2 27 L'estranges Appeal humbly submitted to the King and the three Estates Assembl'd in Parliament, Printed for H. Brome. 5 28 The Conversion and Persecutions of Eve Cohan now called Eliz. Verboon, a person of Quality of the Jewish Religion, who was Baptized the 10th of October 1680. at St. Martins in the Fields, by the Bishop of St. Asaph, Printed for R. Chiswell   29 An Appeal of all the Non-conformists in England to God, and all the Protestants in Europe in order to Manifest their sincerity in point of Obedience to God and the King, Printed for R. Janeway. 4 30 The Grand-jury Mans Oath and Office explained, and the rights of English Men Asserted in a Dialogue between a Barrister at Law and a grand Jury-man, Printed for L. Curtis. 3
31 Londons Glory or the Lord Mayors shew, Printed for H. Play∣ford. 2½ 32 The case of the People called Quakers stated in relation to their late and present sufferings. 10 33 A prefatory discourse to a late Pamphlet, entituled a Memento for England Protestants &c. or an Answer to that part of the Com∣pendium, which Reflects upon the Bishop nf Lincolns Book, P. by T. Dawks. 4½ 34 The Case of Protestant Diffenters of late prosecuted on old Sta∣tutes made against Papists, Printed 4. Nov. 1680. 1 Octavo's. Miscel. Number of Sheets. 1 TRuth made manifest or the dead Man's Testimony to the living, being a Compendium of the last sayings of Captain William Bedlow, with a Sermon Preached at his Funeral by Mr. T. Palmer, Printed for P. Rooksby. 1½
POETRY Folio's. Poetry. Number of Sheets. 1 THe Saints Jubilee, or the fullness of Joy to the sweet Singers of Sion, sold by J. Blith. ½ 2 The Claret drinkers song or the good Fellows design, Printed for R. Harford. ½ 3 Elegy on the Death of the Earl of Ossory. 1 10 Elegy on the Death of the Earl of Rochester, Printed for Langley Curtis. 1 11 A Poem on the Death of Mr. Stephen Charnock, Printed by Tho. Snowden. 1 12 Jockies downfal, a Poem on the late total defeat, given to the Scotish Covenanters near Hamilton Park 22th. of June 1679. by His Majesties Forces. 1 13 An Elegy on the Death of Captain Bedlow, Printed for J. Gay. 1 14 A Poem on the Arrival of the Prince palatine of the Rhine, Nephew to Prince Rupert, Printed for L. Curtis. 1 15 An Elegy on the truly worthy and ever to be remembred Captain William Bedlow, Englands deliverer &c. with an account of his pious end, Printed for L. Curtis. 1 16 Funeral Tears on the Death of Captain William Bedlow, Printed for James Vade. ½ 17 An Elegy on Colonel Blood, who dyed the 26th of Aug. 1680. P. by J. S. 1 18 The Dutches of Mazarines farewel to England; Printed for L. Curtis. ½ 19 A Song upon Titus. ½ 20 A Character of a true Christian, sold by L. Curtis. 1 21 To the praise of Mrs. Cellier the Popish Midwife, on her incompa∣table Book, Printed for Walter Davies. 1 22 The Epitaph of Captain William Bedlow. ½ 23 A Poem on the Earl of Ossory, who dyed July the 30th. 1680. P. for L. Curtis. 1 24 The second part of the Loyal Subjects Letany, Printed for B. Took. 1
25 A Satyr on Madam Celliers standing on the Pillory, Printed for T. Davies. 1 26 The progress of honesty or a view of a Court and City, Printed for J. Hindmarsh. 6½ 27 A Commentation on the late Wonderful discovery of the new Po∣pish Plot being the Jesuits device to inveagle the Son to betray the Father, Printed for T. Adams. 1 28 A Poem on the History of Queen Hester, and an Elegy on the Death of the Lord Chief Justice Hales and other occasional Po∣ems, Printed for W. Leech. 4 29 An Heroick Poem on the Right Honorable Tho. Earl of Ossory, P. for W. Cademan. 10 30 A Congratulatory Poem on the meeting of the Parliament. 1 31 A Panegyrick, to his Royal Highness upon His Majesties late De∣claration, Printed for the Author, sold by J. G. 1 32 A Congratulatory Poem on the Right Honorable Sir Patient Ward, Lord Major of the City of London, Printed for R. Janeway. 1 33 A pindarique Ode on the Death of the right Honorable Tho. Earl of Ossery by Tho. Flatman Esq Printed for B. Took. 2 SERMONS Quarto's. Serm. Number of Sheets. 1 THe Improvement of Navigation a great cause of the encrease of knowledge in a Sermon June 7. 1680. by Mr. Richard Hol∣den, Printed for J. Martin. 5 2 The duty and happiness of doing good, in two Sermons, the first at the Yorkshire Feast in Bow Church Feb. 17. 1679. the other be∣fore the Lord Major &c. at the Spittle April 14. 1680. by Dr. John Sharp, Printed for W. Kettilby. 11 3 The Plotters Doom, in a late Sermon upon the Hellish Plots, which have been discovered in these Nations, and may be an Answer to Mr. Hs. late Sermon upon Curse ye Meroz, Printed for B. Alsop. 5 4 A Sermon Preached before the Lord Major and Court of Alder∣men, June 27. 1680. by Mr. Charles Hickman, Printed for H. Brome. 5 5 A Sermon Preached before the King at Windsor, June 13. 1680. by Mr. John Lambe, Printed for W. Kettilby. 4½
6 A Sermon Preached on the fourth Sunday in Lent, in the Cathe∣dral Church of Norwich, by Dr. William Smith, Printed for W. Kettilby. 5 7 A Sermon against Murmuring, Preached in the Cathedral Church of St. Peter Exon on the 29th day of May 1680. by T. Long, P. for R. Royston. 4½ 8 Divine Providence the support of good Men, under all events in a Sermon Preached before the Lord Major at Guild-hall Chappel, June 20. 1680. by W. Shelton, Printed for N. Ranew and J. Ro∣binson. 5 9 A Sermon at the meeting of the Natives of the County of Worcester Bow-Church; by Dr. Littleton, fold by J. Crump. 5 10 A Sermon Preached by Mr. Charnock, on 2 Cor. verse 19, sold by L. Curtis. 5 11 The Christians prize and race, or a discourse of the good things promised to us in Christ, being a Sermon Preached by Mr. Za∣chary Cawdrey, Printed for J. Leigh. 4 12 Spirit of Enthusiasm exercised in a Sermon, Preached before the University of Oxford, on Act Sunday by D. G. Hicks, Printed for W. Kettilby. 6½ 13 A Sermon Preached before the Lord Major and Aldermen of the City of London at Bow-Church, Sept. 2. 1680. by G. Burnet, D. D. Printed for R. Chiswel. 5 14 A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of the Earl of Rochester; by Mr. R. Parsons, Printed for R. Davis and T. Bowman. 6½ 15 The Shining forth of the Righteous being a Sermon Preached on the Death of Mr. Stephen Charnock, by Mr. J. Johnson, Printed for T. Parkhurst, W. Miller. and B. Alsop. 6 16 A Sermon Preached before the Artillery Company of London, at St. Mary le Bow, Sept. 15. 1680. by Mr. J. Scot, Printed for J. Ba∣ker, and W. Kettilby. 4½ 17 A Sermon Preach'd before the Lord Major in Bow-Church, on the Feast of St. Michael, at the Election of the Lord Major by Dr. Sharp, Printed for W. Kettleby. 5½ 18 A Sermon Preached before the Lord Major at Guild-hall, 19. Sept. 1680. by Mr. Robert Hancock, Printed for Tho. Fletcher, and W. Leech. 5
Weekly News. 1 THe London Gazette, begun with number 1. the 13. Nov. 1665, and is still Printed twice a Week Mondays and Thursdays, in half a sheet of Paper by Tho. Newcomb. 2 The City Mercury, from the Office at the Royal Exchange together with a weekly Advertisement of Books in half a Sheet of Paper, Printed by R. Everingham. 3 Another City Mercury, to which is also adjoyned, a weekly Advertise∣ment of Books, Printed by T. James in half a Sheet of Paper, they are both publish'd on Thursday Morning. WEEKLY NEWS. Quarto's 1 THe Weekly Bill of Mortality in a Quarter of a Sheet of Paper, published every Thursday Morning. 2 The Weekly Packet of Advice from Rome, left off Fryday the 25th of June 1680. and on Fryday the 9th of July it came out again with a new title (viz.) the Anti Roman Packet or Memories of Popes and Popery, and so continues and comes out every Fryday in one Sheet Printed for Langley Curtis. PROCLAMATIONS Folio's. 1 A Proclamation in Scotland, declaring Richard Cameron and o∣ther Rebels and Traytors, &c. Reprinted at London for Andrew Forrester. July the 15th 1680. 1 2 A Proclamation declaring the Parliament shall sit the one and twen∣tieth day of October. came out Aug. the 30th. 1680. 1 3 A Proclamation commanding all Papists or reputed Papists forth∣with to depart from the Cities of London and Westminster, and from within Ten Miles of the same 4th. of Octob. 1680. 1 4 A Proclamation declaring that if any Church Wardens or Over∣seers of the Poor, can find a Convicted Papist within 10 Miles of London, contrary to the Proclamation of the 4th of October, they shall receive for the benefit of the Poor of the Parish where such Papists, shall be sound the Moiety of a Hundred Pounds penalty due by the Law to his Majesty. 16. Octob. 1680. 1 5 His Majesties Gracious Speech to both Houses of Parliament on Tursday the 21th of October 1680. 2 6 A Proclamation for Incouragement of the further discovery of the Popish Plot. came out the 30th. of Octob. 1680. 1 FINIS.
