S5089 E1484_3 99867682 170020
RULES Of Civil Goverment, Drawn from the best Exam∣ples of Forreign Nations, and Common-wealths- Briefely discovering the excellency and benefit of good Governors, and the dangerous consequence of corrupt Self-seekers. In a short Dialogue between a Country man and a Scholer. Written by Robert Sprye, Lawyer. Humbly presented to his Excel∣lency the Lord Generall as a word in season. Exod. 18. 22. Morover thou shalt provide out of all the people, able men, such as feare God, men of truth, hating covetousnesse, and place such over them, &c. LONDON Printed for John Hancock in Popes∣head-Alley, 1653.
State-Policy. C. SIR, I Have of late heard much of a Common-wealth, but know not what it meaneth: I presume your late comming from Oxford, can somewhat informe me what it i, and its my earnest desire to know? S. A Common-wealth is a multitude of Men, ruled by one government. C. Our Auntient acquaintance en∣couraged me to demand this question of you, and I now perceive by your short Answer, which is so knotty and difficult to my understanding, that you have a de∣sire to renew our old familiarity, by more questions from me; I shall the re∣fre desire, if your leasure will permmit, to
unfold to me in our country Language, what this word Government is? ad not answer me by Scholasticall resoluti∣ons, which make me farther of from be∣ing informed, then when I first deman∣ded the question. S. My friend and Country man, by your last question, I am sensible, you either go about to inquire of my proficiency at the Vniversity; or else do propound the questi∣on throughly to be informed; friend, inre∣gard of your former love to me, I will make bold to borrow so much time, if your pati∣ence will give audience throughly to in∣struct you in this matter, by a more larger unfolding the particulars of this your Que∣re, that so I may not put you to unnecessa∣ry Questions. C. Sir I am greatly beholding to you that you have not forgotten your old friend, but are willing to have discourse with him, I pray proceed to the Answer, and I shall attentively give eare. S. Government is a setled order of Com∣manding and obeying; Order is maintained by three things, viz. Religion, Lawes, and Magistrates: the definition of Religion, I presume you know, but because of my pro∣mise
to you; and to avoin multitude of que∣stions, I will describe it what it is. Religion is that worship of God publicke∣ly professed and practised, and is maintai∣ned by Lawes and Magistrates. C. Do all Nations agree that there is a God? S. Yea; all Nations agree in those three Propositions. 1 That there is a God: 2 That God is the punisher of offen∣ces and rewarder of vertues. 3 That whatsoever is a God ought to be worshiped. C. Is there not a difference amongst Nations concerning God? S. The difference of Nations, consisteth in these two points. 1 In their opinion, what is God, Christians, Jews and Turks, do all hould there is but one God. The Heathens in times past, and now many of the Americans: as also the people far Northward do hould that there are many gods and worship them accordingly. 2 The second difference amongst Nati∣ons is, In the manner of worship∣ping
of God, and so the Christian Jewes, and Turks, do mainly differ. C. VVhat is the Center of a Common∣wealth? S. The Center of a Commonwealth, where the hearts of all men in the same State doe meet, is Religion. The force of Lawes is shewne only upon occasions. The better sort of the people will be sure to observe them. Lex non est justo posita. The Law is made for the offendor: as for offendors, Law can lay hold no farther then prooffes may be made of offences: Scelera tatum Proba∣ta lege puniuntur Religion holdeth a per∣petuall strength, and aweth the couscience, restraining facta, dicta, cogitata, by the power of the which, Nemo nocens, se judi∣ce, absolvitur. C. VVhat is the chiefe disturbance in a Common wealth? S. Nothing sooner divideth a State, then distraction in Religion, as may appeare in old stories, by the distraction, as the Egip∣tians who worshiped severall Gods in their Countries, and of latter times, by the strange Tumults in Germany, the Civill Warres in France, and the sad condition of England Scotland, and Ireland, at this time.
C. VVhat then is the best way to main∣taine Amity in a State? S. The greatest band of unity in a State, is unity and conformaty in Religion, neither can any State safely suffer divers Religions to be publickly maintained, or men of diffe∣rent Religion, from that which is maintai∣ned, to have any power to work a change. C. Shew me by what Divine power, Magistrates can enforce contentious men to conformity, in the publick exercise of Religion? S. You now put me to it indeed; but I will not now take it upon me to resolve you in such a point; our only discourse now is, what the greatest Polititians hold for the supportation of a Weale-publick or State. C. I may not then pin my faith, on what you relate, but I am to take it as the writing of ancient States-men, who labor to uphold that Government, they have set up, or have lived under, I pray then go on, and shew me what Nations have been most strict in enforcing men to out∣ward conformity? S. The Spaniard is the most observant of this, of all Nations, maintaining an In∣quisition, not only to censure dicta facta,
of any that sem to differ from them, but to search the very thoughts of men, whom by any means they suspect different. C. Are the Turks so severe, to those that live with in their Territories? S. Noe, The Turks howsoever they in∣quire into no man, meerly for Religion, if he do not scandalize theirs; yet they suffer neither Christians, nor Iews, nor any oppo∣site to their Religion, to have either Armor or Authority. C. Did the Ancient Romans make VVarre for Religion? S. The old Romans in their manifold Conquests, never pretended occasion of quarrell, by difference of Religion: but ei∣ther revenge of wrong offered to their Citi∣zens, or to their State, or else the releeving of their Confederates oppressed, or main∣taining of their weak Neighbours. C. Did the Romans regard the Religi∣on of their Enemies? S. The Religion of their Enemies, they had of it reverend esteem; howsoever they strictly observed Patrios Ritus, yet they often brought home Peregrinos Deos, and in the besieging of Cities, they had many Ce∣remonies and expiations, ad evocandum
TVTELARES LOCI DEOS, to shew they fought not against their Gods, but desired they wold not succour their people & so should be reverenced in the Roman Territory. After the Roman Empire was growne to the height and could not sustain their own greatnes, & the civil weeds sprang, all those Rites were omitted or forgotten. Ambition openly professed that it fought pro imperio neither was there any cause pretended between the concurrences, but the getting of the Empire. On those terms the world passed until Mahomet devised a new and strange Religion in the East parts, which set the world in a mighty difference, laying two grounds to encou∣rage his followers, the first that whosoc∣ever dyed in War against the Christians or other Enemies to the Mahometan law, did instantly passe to all pleasure and de∣light in Paradise. The second that death was so necessarily ordained to men, that no violence would end a man before his time, nor wearines avoid it at the time. Of this Mahomet the Saracens first and af∣ter them the Turks, a mighty people, bor∣rowed their Religion. Of him their Ha∣man
family learned to cover the fire of Am¦bition, with the Ashes of Religion, & under pretence to propogate it, to perswade their followers both to fight an d to dye resolutly? C. I partly beleeve that the Pope and his Predecessors have hither to walked by the Mahometan rule you last discoursed of. S. The Papacy, in the generall, have very much followed this course or Rule, as you call it; concealing all their privat revenges and ambitious desires, under the pretence of the Catholick cause: And that with that confident perswasion and credulity of their fellowes, that many of the Papisticall Soul∣diers, if he hath a crosse on his back, and the Papisticall benediction over his head, think that either they are not of danger in earth, or if they dye, they have a present passage to Heaven, at least shall passe through Purga∣tory, and so escape Hell. In this point there is great difference be∣twixt the present and ancient Romans, that the old Romans had a reverend opinion of the Religion of all Countries, though diffe∣rent from them, and would never suffer a∣ny despight or wrong to be shewed to the Coquered under that name of Religion, which is not in particular mens power to
take or leave as they list. The present Papists make their decrees, the Rules of all truth in Religion, and those that are different, they curse, and mischiefe by all means they can ivent, accounting, them Atheists, Miser eants, and Hereticks &c. which violent proceeding hath enforced the like vehemency in the opposites to iudge of him and his, in like sort, which hath been the sole cause of the great distraction in Christendome, and laid it so open to the Mahometans. There is no mischiefe that works so dan∣gerously as that which is carried with a Colour of Religion. Simulata sanctitas duplex iniquitas. For that nothing can carry a multitude so forcibly, as blind zeal and superstition in any cause underta∣ken. In times past, Sortorius a Roman, raz∣sed Portugall, & the better part of Spaine, defeated the Roman Armies, working credit with his followers by pretending conference with Diana, by means of a white art. Ma∣homet by his Dove and Bull of late times, the Seriffo in Africa under a pretended Ho∣linesse, gate first his strength, by which he turned the lawfull Prince out of the State, and setled himselfe and his. John of Ley∣den
at one time, and Muncerus at another time, raised those great Tumults in Ger∣many. C. Sir, in your description of Go∣vernment, I remember you told me that order was maintained or supported by those three things, Religion, Law, and Mgistrates, you have given me ample satisfaction concerning Religion. I de∣sire you would now discover to me what Law is? S. Lawes are certaine Rules written, or customs continued, by which the light of persons, actions, or things are determined. Ius triplex est. 1 Ius naturae, Is the light of nature, by which we know what is wrong, be∣ing offered unto us, and that the same s wrong, being committed by our selves against others. 2 Ius Gentium, Te Law observed by all Nations, how difference so ever, and is the rule diding right betweene men of sundry Common-wealths; and it spe∣cially concerns Leagues, Contracts, Captives &c. 3 Ius Civile, Is that by which the
Citizens of every state are ruled, and it is of two sorts. 1 Ius Commune, Or Ius Iusticiae, the Common Law which is contey∣ned in the letter of the Law, or in the Customes of the Coun∣try, and this in particular cases may sometimes be the cause of wrong, as is often spoken, Sum∣ma Ius, summa Injuria. 2 Ius Equitatis, The Law of E∣quity, when a particular case by reason of some circumstance, de∣sireth help and ease against the rigor of the Law; such was Ius Pretorium amongst the Romans, and the Court of Chancery with us in England. In the Case where the stranger saved the City by mounting on the Walls, and encouraged the Citizens to keepe the Towne against the Enemy, contrary to the Law, Peregrinus in mures si ascenderit Capitale esto: the action in it selfe most honourable, it by the letter of the Law, Capitall. Besides all these there is Ius Prerogative, which resteth wholly in them, be they
one or more, in whom the Supreame power and Authority resteth. Such have Princes in absolute Monarchies, and such a Power had the people of Rome, whn the State was Popular, to receive appeals from any of their Judges, to call matters determined by Law to a new audience, to suspend the execution of any sentence, or to pardon the punishment: Such also hath been the accustomed power of the Parliaments of England. The Law is necessary for every State, for that Leges fiunt propter homines; homi∣nes non fiunt propter Leges. Men are not made to satisfie the Law in its rigor, but Lawes are made for the safety and preser∣vation of men. Salus Populi suprema Lex. C. Doe all Nations agree in their Lawes? S. Noe. C. How then are their Lawes to be dis∣cerned or known? S. There are two Rules by which the Lawes and Customes of Countries are to be discerned. 1. By the Law of Nature, spoken of before, by that light. by which we know
what is right or wrong, either in doing or suffering. Altrine facias, quod tibi fa∣ctum nolis; in this all good estates agree, in the substance, framing their positive Lawes against Atheisme, Murther, Adul∣tery, Theft, &c. Things in the light of Nature Condemned. Nations also differ in the punishment and means of restrai∣ning which is not in Nature defined. If any Law in a State be made against this of Nature, it must needs be inconvenient as implicating a contradiction in the Go∣vernment to other Lawes. For that the whole Law of nature, is most agreeable, and conformable, in all the severall parts unto it selfe. 2. The second Rule by which the Law of Nations are discerned; is, by the Sup∣position of the State, that is; by compa∣ring the Law or Custom, with the maine government in Practise, for if a Law be made which holds not on scope with the present Government established, it must needs breed variance and discord, and in the end some occasion for one party to assaile the other. As it must needs hap∣pen to a Monarchy, if the people get any power to deale in the State; but most
commonly in a popular State, if either they continue their great Offices for too long a time, or yeild too great authority, by Decree, to any one man. Sya first, and afterwards Caesar gate the whole state in∣to their hands, by the name of perpetuall Dictators. Augustus, by a more popu∣ler name, Tribune of the people. C. By this I understand, that its a dan∣gerous thing, suddenly to alter a standing Law, or custome of a Nation or State; for you say that divers distractions and broyles do ensue thereupon? S. Auntient Lawes and customes, are not to be suddenly changed, though they be but of small importance. Plato thinks that the change of Musick ought not to be suffe∣red, least that should also change mens con∣ditions. Amongst the Thurans whosoever attempted a new Law, must perswade it with a Halter about his neck, with which he was to be hanged, if he failed in shewing the necessity of it. New Lawes are seldome received with intire consent, and hardly observed at the first, if there be not great necessity; which necessity seldom appeareth, but with hazard, which may breed much danger before the Law be established.
Few Lawes make shew of much vertue and obedience, yet it is more security when all Lawes necessary have been together framed, and by continuance gotten strength. It is bet∣ter to prevent a mischiefe, then to seek for a remedy, after it is happened; for though it be true, that (in corruptissima Rep. plures sunt leges) yet its true ratione signi, not ratione Causae, for that Lawes do not make any corruption, but shew it, which would be greater if it were not hindred by Law, and men, must be supposed as they are, not as they should be; that as occasions of all na∣tures do arise, so in time vices of all sts will sooner shew themselves then vertues. C. What you have allready spoken concerning Law sufficeth. I shall now intreat you, for my more cleare and di∣stinct apprehension, to resolve Magistra∣ty into the severall heads and branches thereof? S. Magistracy, is a power in men which boldeth all in obedience to Religion and Law. C. You are againe harping on your old string, the power of Magistrates in matters of Religion, but I beleeve you will not now resolve me, in regard you
ave denyed me formerly? S. I told you before, and I tell you a∣gaine, I cannot now resolve you, because it is a matter of great consequence, and the greatest Schollers are (if I may so say) to their Ne plus ultra, concerning this thing, but I shall re long take some opportunity to give you my thoughts herein, I will let it passe now and proceed to the matter in hand, relating to Magistrates. Magistrates are of two sorts. 1. Supreame, who have the first place in Honour, and the cheifest in power to inforce obedience, that Religion and Lawes may be observed. 2. Subordinate, be all Magistrates that have delgate power, from the Supreame authority, to hold men in obedience in their severall places. In the supreame Magistrate is especially considered, capacity of the State. which is two wayes. 1. By his owne understanding and experience, knowing and intending what to advise in all occurrences, which is al∣most impossible in the variety of acci∣dents which befall in State businesse; yet such we read Augustus to have beene;
who kept written with his own hand large remembrances, of all his Legions, Officers, Rents, Customes, Allyes, Leagues &c. 2. By Election of advice, propounded by others, which appeareth in the choyce of the best Councellors, and in the choice of best Councell in hard mat∣ters, neither blind by weaknesse of judge∣ment, nor inclined by partiall affection: for the Princes choice is the life of any advice be it never so wise. If we looke into any of their falls, they must have fallen not for want of fit Counsell pro∣pounded, but for want of Judgement, or partiall affection in the choice of that Counsell which they followed. Qui∣nec sibi potest recte consulares, nec aliis bene consulentibus auscultare velit, extremi est ingenij. C. What are the generall Suppositi∣ons holden by the wisest Magistrates? S. 1. To prevent all inconvenien∣ces, in the beginning, and not to think those things which severally to the vul∣ger sort seeme little, to be little., being joyned together. Insensible vapors, do breed horrible Tempests, and small grains great heaps.
2. In avoiding inconveniences, to have speciall regard to the manner of a∣voyding them. In making their people obedient and quiet, not to suffer them so to forget Armes that they may be a prey, to their forraigne Enemies, in making themselves strong against the Enemies, carefully to provide against disobedience and mutining, which often happeneth a∣mongst Military people. 3. Not to suffer any one part, how good so ever in shew to attaine an over∣swaying power, or dependance, which cannot be brought and holden in order, and obedience, if opposition should hap∣pen, occasio facit ambitiosis. And mens powers are more certainly ruled, then their wills. 4. To distinguish warily offences and good deserts, rewards and punishments, that neither great deserts may breed In∣solency, or hope of impunity for future offences, nor offences take away all hope of reward for future vertues. 5. Especially to have men, from their beginnings, to be brought up to the Com∣mon-wealth in which they live. Legum optimarum nulla est utilitas nisi sint, qui
ad Rempub. informentur. 6. It is imposible, in civill cases, sub∣ject to such variety of times and other circumstances, alwayes to finde out opti∣mam ex bonis: It is often times enough to take that which is mimimum ex malis &c. In those passages there is not re∣spect alwayes to be had to the greater part, nor yet to the better part, but to the whole State intirely considered: Pars quicquid est totius est. C. I conceive those six foregoing sup∣positions or Rules are peculiarly inci∣dent to the supreame Magistrate, but how ought a subordinate Magistrate to be qua∣lified? S. Three things are to be considered chiefly in a subordinate Magistrate: 1. That they do affectionatly love the State established. 2. That they have sufficient power to execute that which is required by their Office. 3. That their parts be answerable to that charge which they undertake, in the Common-wealth. Viz. Valour and Bounty fit for a Souldier, Wisdome and Justice for a Judge, Frugality and hone∣sty,
for an Officer of account. C. What are the accidentall differen∣ces of States? S. They are two. 1. Good, Bad. 2. Wek Strong. C. How or in what respect are Com∣mon-wealths said to be Good or bad? S. Three wayes. 1. In respect of their good or bad Lawes, so the Lacedemo∣nian Respublick, was thought wanting, which by Lawes permitted Theft, and Adul∣tery. 2. In respect of Good or Bad Magistrates, so the Lacedemo∣nian Respublike was holden the best, in that the Magistrates most strictly observed the Lawes and Customes of their Cuntrey, and the supposition of their State, which was A∣ristocraticall, and Military. 3. In respect of both, as all good Common-wealths, whose Lawes agree with the Law of Nature, and the Magistrates
acting according to the Lawes C. Is the Law, alwayes to be executed according to the letter of I? S. No fo it is neither safe that Law alone should rule which can not distinguish of times, occasions, nor actions. Neither is it safe that Magistrates should rule alone without Law, for men are so subiect to ha∣tred love, feare, passion reward &c. It is best where both have their place, for that Law directeth best actions; but discretien and true iudgement best distinguisheth cir∣cumstances. C. How shall a man discerne the strength of a State? S. By observing these three things. 1. Whether it be strong in the frame it selfe of present Government, so if Mo∣narchy is held more strong, and in lesse hazard of distraction and division then a popular state. 2. Whether it be strong by continuance of time, having long holden on forme, so New Principalities are weak, as wan∣ting time to confirme them; Auncient Principalities are strong, where the peopl have been inured to reverence and obedi∣nce, Monarchy could not have been taken
from the Assyrians, if Sardanapalus had not been a beast, nor from the blood of the Cesars, if Nero had not been rather a Monster then a Man. 3. Whether it be strong only by vertue, Wisdome, and Valour of them, which are in present Authority. So only New Principalities have strength by them which raise them, Such was the Gre∣sian Monarchy, which appeared in the world, and vanished againe like lightning; the strength whereof wholy consisted in Alexander, and with his death perish∣ed. C. What are the reall differences of Common-wealths, and from whence have States their Denomination? S. The reall difference of Common-wealths are taken from the different order in comanding and obeying; the Name of every State is given according to the Su∣preame and highest Authority. C. Wherein is the Supreame Authori∣ty manifested? S. In these foure things. 1. Potestas belli et pacis. 2. Potestas vitae & Necis. 3. P. faciendar. legum.
4. Po. Creandor. magistrat. By these foure powers, States are deter∣mined in themselves, and distinguished one from another. In whom those four powers, or most of them do rest, whetherin on, ome few, or in many, in them is the supreame Au∣thority, and they give the Name to the State. If they be absolute in any, the state of them is called an absolute Monarchy, or Aristocraty &c. If they be partly in some, and partly in others, then the State is said to be a mixt Common∣wealth. According as these powers are divesly setled, so States are rally distinguished. If those powers be in one person, well used, to the good of the people under him, the State is called A Monarchy. If in the person of one, abused, to the profit only of that one, and of his who hath the Authority in his hands, its called A Tyranny. If in some few, well used to the com∣mon safety it is called, An Aristocraty. If in some few abused, to the profit and pleasure of some few.
An Oligarchy. If the fore said powers, be in the mul∣titude, well used, to the safety of all, Law having power above the people, is then called, A good Democraty. If in the multitude, abused to faction, and the setting up the basest of the people, the multitude over-ruling Law, A bad Democraty. C. Which of these Governments do you esteem the best? S. Heretofore most Histrians were of the iudgement that regulated Monarchy, was the best, but the State of England, as now it stands, admits not such weak iudge∣ments as mine to distinguish. C. SIR, I see you are silent in your thoughts, I pray tell me what you ac∣count the worst. S. The worst State is a Tyranny, as be∣ing opposite to the best, Bonum & malum in suo gnre maxime distant. C. I have heard of an Anarchy, I pray what government is that? S. Anarchy is no State, but a confusi∣on of all order, much wose then the worst Tyranny, which well appeared at Rome,
after the death of Nero, when all men did what they list, which caused an honourable Senato to say, that if that misorder should continue, they should have occasion to wish for Nero againe. It is better living where nothing, then where all things are lawfull. C. I remember you told me, tht if the forementioned powers were in one person, it was an absolute Monarchy; by which I conceive there are sevrall kinds of Monarchis? S. A Monarchy is the government of one to the preservation of all, But Monarchies are of two sorts. 1. Absolute where the chif doth rul all causes by his absolute Authority, not any way dtrmind by Law, and thee are good, so sare as the Authority is well used, and the cheif doth hold it, Sa∣lus populi suprema Lx. For govern∣ment was before positive Lawes, and in Nature, there is absolute priority and power of the Father over his Children. 2. Limited, and that three manner of wayes. 1. By Lawes a lore, where the Sub∣ject may have lawfull audience, and hep in Law, for holding, or recovering his
right against the Prince. 2. By Oveseers alone, where there be Officrs of State, which may demand eson, whn the cheif stretcheth his power to the the dtrimet of the Subject, such have been the Electors in Germany. 3. By Lawes and Overseers, as in times past in France, when the twelve peres held their places, and their Parliaments had their full power for the processe of Lawes. Just Prinipalities are generally mai∣tained by houldng the favour and love f the Subject. Imperium est in voluntate obsequenti∣um. C. What meanes is a Governour to use to gaine the love and affection of his people; and being gained; how isit to be kept, and preserved? S. The peoples love is houlden by these meanes. 1. By being Religious, to wards God, for that men will never seek, nor desire the overthrow of them, whom they are perswaded to be gded with divice proection. 2. By shewing ae of the puli safe¦ty
not of privat gaine, me doe most willingly contribute, when they are per∣swaded that money is either imployed or reseved for publick benefit. 3. By bilding publick works, and rleiving publick misfortunes. 4. By bestowing honours and re∣wards upon men of great worth by de∣sert. 5. By referring all matters of Justice and punishment to their offences, never shewing contentment in the shame or misery of any. 6. Generally, by bounty, magnanimi∣ty, and all hoourable and vertuous acti∣ons. C. Tyranny you say is the worst of governments, I shall earnestly desire, you would branch it forth, into its severall parts, by which I may perceive the ini∣quity of it. S. Tyranny is the government of one man according to his own will, and respecting only his owne profit, Tyrants have used two wayes to support and uphold their Tyran∣ny. 1. By taking away all desire and know∣ledge of altering their government, which
is thus done. First by working pusilla∣nimity. Ignorance, and distrust in the people; which is acted five manner of wayes. 1. By taking away all Schooles, and discipline; by which men might under∣stand what is right or wrong; A thing practised by the Turks &c. 2. By taking away all societies and fra∣ternities, by which they might be ac∣quainted one with another. 3. By placing Guards in the strongest places, by which they might suppresse a∣ny sudden attempt. 4. By placeing privy spies to entrap such as talk of State matters, and so make all jealous of one another. 5. By often making shew of forraigne forces, which may be feard to be ready if any need require. 2. By taking a way all power from the people, which is thus wrought: 1. By banishing or putting to death, or shutting up in Prison the men of account and their ofspring, that no male contents may know where to finde a leader that the people would follow; the house of
Bela took this course in the Moscovite State, It was Perianders Counsell to Thrasibulus; the house of Ottiman is so jealous, that the Grandsenior never thinks his Estate sure, before he hath cut of his Brethren. 2. By utterly impoverishing their Subjects by exactions. Dionysius in 5 years gat all the treasury of Sicily into his hands. 3. By maintaining disscention between the great men and the Commons, or of the greater men between themselves, ta∣king part with neither, that they may know and use the griefes and wants of all. 4. By not suffering the great men to live at home, but attend there, where the higher power do obscure them, or if they be imployed to keep their Children as Hostages, so useth the Magnus Mogor in Asia. 5. To commit no trust to the Natives, or men of great blood or kindred, but to Eunaches or strangers, such as can not be popular, nor hold place, but by their Tyranny, such are the Turkish Bassaes. 6. To suffer no man to beare Armes, but their sworn Souldiers, to give Lands
only to such, the inheritance depending still at their proper disposition, the Mo∣scoveticall and Turkish practise, the one to his Gentlemen; the other to his Tima∣riots; All other are slaves to them, as they are to their cheif Lord. C. By what properties shall I know  King from a Tyrant? S. These four differenses will distinguish them. 1. Kings were first chosen out of the best, and by the best, to guard them, and to rule the rash multitude. Tyrants had their beginning ex Dema∣gogis; such as flattered the people, and stirred them up against the worthyest persons, and so under shew of prote∣cting of them, made away, all such as might with stand them, Pisistratus at A∣thens, Dionysius at Syracuse. 2. The second scope of a King is vertue and honour. The scope of a Tyrant, profit and pleasure. 3. A King is the protector of all, Rich, and poore, that on neither doth, nor suf∣fereth wrong of the other. A Tyrant only regardeth the profit
and security of him self, and his leaving others open to al wrongs. 4. The trust of a King is in his Sub∣jects, and of them he maketh his Guard. The trust of a Tyrant is only in stran∣gers, and to them he commits his safe∣ty. C. How are Principalities over∣thrown? S. Two wayes. 1. By forraign power, when one state assayleth and overthroweth another, the conquered receiveth such govern∣ment as the Conqueror thinketh meet, so the Romans ovrthrew many King∣doms, and turned them into principali∣ties; to be governed by their Liften∣nants. 2. By Domesticll seditions, which are commonly raised by these occasions, in number Six. 1. By the Iustice of the Rulers. 1. In Injuries towards thir persons, which is acted two manner of wayes. 1. In murthering, and ravishing their Kinsfolks. As the Tar∣quines at Rome.
2 In beating like slaves men of account. 2 In oppressing with exactions, so far that by xtream poverty, subjects grow desperat, having nothing to lose, but their fe, whereof want hath made them wea∣ry. 2 By contempt of them. 1 For their folly, and incapaci∣ty of state. 2 For effeminate manners, as Sardpalus. 3 For Drunkennsse, as Cmbises and Dionisius Junior. 3 By feare of death or disgrace in the subject. 1 Either through knowledge or suspicion of anger conceived in the Cheif himself. 2 Or feare of slander from them which are about him in Au∣thority. 4 By hope of profit and wealth, which moveth specially base Rebells, which pretend a community of all. 5 By Ambition or desire of Honour, the most dangerous motive, for that it possesseth only great spirits, which are of
resolution, to their utmost power, As Savla which attempted upon King Po snna, and the Confederats that slew Caesar in the Senat. 6 By desire of change in Religion, which hath only moved men in these lat∣ter times, being never made a pretence or motiv. for either forraign Conquests, or Domesticall seditions, before Mah∣met. Patet supra. C. You formerly told me, that Ari∣stocraty was the power of Ruling in some few, well used, to the Common sefety: I pray acquaint me of what sort of the people they are or ought to be? S. Aristocraty, is a gournment of the best, for the safety of all, but there are three kinds. 1 The first, where respect is had, to both wealth, and vertue, in the cheif of all Officers. 2 The second where respect is only had of wealth, this inclyneth to an Oli∣garchy. 3 The third, where respect is only had of virtue, leaving it free to all, to make way to the cheif places, this inclineth to a Democraty.
C. What means have been used to maintain and uphold States Aristocrati∣c. S. These Nine Maximes have beene hld nd practise'd. 1 Complling the Nobility to bring up their Children in feats of Armes, and politick Discipline, suffering the rst to do as they list. So the Lacedemonians brought up all their Children in publick places, to∣gether, where they learned exercise of Armes and knowldege of government. 2 Constraining the Nobility upon great pealy, to be present at their pub∣lick Assemblies, suffering the rest to at∣tend their profit and busiesse. 3 Receiving the Citizens into their spciall patroages, that in Popul quarrells, every man severally might pacifie his Clyents, or followers, this was often practised by the Senators of Rome, to uphold their State. 4 Suffering none to continue in the greatest Offices for long time, that he might procure too many dependents, or wakn his opposites. 5 Giving noe man that honour whch
others might not hope to obtain. 6 Imploying them which were too great, in forraign businesse, that absenc might make them forgotten. 7 Keeping Offices of Honour, wholly amongst the Noility, leaving them of petty matters and gain to the people. 8 Suppressing the first occasions of quarrells amongst the greatest men, To that end to hold friendly meetings in pla∣ces indifferent, where pacifications may be made. 9. Holding the people in fehre of pub∣lick danger, to make an enemy if there were none, by that means, to draw from home such as were mutinous: A thing much practised by the Roman Senate, while their power held. C. You have declared nine Maxims or Sophims, that are the props of an Aristo∣craticall State, but by what means is that government overthrown and changed? S. Three things alter and change an Aistocraty. 1. The Sedition of the great men, when their numbers do so increase, that the Ho∣nours to be devided, are not enough to sa∣tisfie their Number, the Lacedemonian,
for remedy of this, sent the Parthenians into Italy which built Tarentum. 2 The Transgression of that suppositi∣on in not making vertuea mean between the wealth of the great men, and liberty of the people; yeelding too much to the peoples liberty, makes the State Demo∣craticall, but wholy to wealth Oligar∣chicall. 3 Negligence in small matters, suffe∣ring inferior Officers to be perpetuall, which after giveth example and occasion that the greatest likewise should be so. C. By this it is evident to me that A∣ristocraty may be turned into a State De∣mocraticall or Oligarchycall: my re∣quest is, that you would more fully shew me what Oligarchy is, and wherein it differeth from the State last mentioned? S. Oligarchy is a Government of some few to their owne profit; and it may be branch∣ed forth into 4. kinds. 1 Where all cheife Officers, are cho∣sen only by valution of wealth and possessions. 2 Where men of middle wealth, are admitted to Offices, but the pre∣ceedent Magistrate chuseth his suc∣cessor.
3 Where, the Magistrates succeed, as in Inheritances, The Son in his Fathers place. 4 Where all power is in some few, which rule above Law as they list, and this is like the worst kinde of Democraty. C. How is this Rule▪ of Government kept from fall or ruine? S. The Fabrick of this government is pre∣served from fall or ruine, by those Axioms or Sophismes, as Sir Walter Rawleigh calls them, in his Book, called the Prince of State, which are these. 1 By suffering no Elections, to passe either by Lot or by Common suffrages, but by a set number. 2 By suffering no choice to be made, but out of certaine, which likewise had such a valuation of goods. 3 By making their Officers perpetuall or of long continuance. 4 By maintaining great Troopes of Horse, imposed on them in Authority, which make a Terrible shew, and can not be maintained but with great wealth so did the Eretrians and Chalcedonians. But Aristrocratyes and Deocratyes have
rather maintained foot-men for their Souldiers. As the Lacedemonians, the Romans, and at this day the Swissers. 5 By keeping the people poore and without Armes, that they might neither know how to arme themselves, or give, pay to them which should take Armes in their behalfe. 6 By raising many Warres, or ru∣mors of Warres; Common people are easily awed in publique dangers. 7 By making Marriages only with themselves, where Marriages are Com∣municated, the greater sort is lesse estee∣med. 8 By providing means of employment in Warres, or Colonyes, when their Is∣sue groweth too great, and all can not be in honour. C. I conceive those political Fabricks are destroyed, and brought to nought, by fewer means and wayes: they are upheld like a house built by many hands, yet one man or two can pluck it downe. My request now is, that you would shew and unfold unto me the occasions of Oligarchyes fall?
1 By them that are not in Authority. As at Heraclea and Massilia, where the younger Brethren rose against the Elder, for that they were excluded from the Common-wealth. 2 By them in Authority, these five wayes. 1 Either by reason of the smal num∣ber, the Father and Son, or two Brethren can not be in Office to∣gether. 2 When the few in place would yet have fewer. 3 When the few having Luxuriously spent their goods and Estates, seek to spoile the Common Trea∣sury. 4 When of those few which Rule, all can not come to the Chiefest place. 5 When they in Authority by any occasion fall at dissention and as∣sayle onn another, the weaker fetching in the people for his Guard, maketh either a Tyrany or a Democraty. 3 By Accident two wayes. 1 In time of Warre through di∣strust
in the people, those few enforced to hire fortaigne Soul∣diers, which committed to one that is populer, with them makes himselfe Lord of all. 2 In time of peace, when the people and those few being at variance, commit themselves to a third, which oppresseth them both. C. I remember in your description of States, you mention a two fold Demo∣craty; I request your patience to unfold to me the particulars thereof, and what difference hath been used in their Electi∣on of cheife Officers. S. A Democraty, is a Government of all, to the good of all, or else A government of a multitude which are the greater part of the State, to that end they propound to themselves, and this is called a bad Demo∣craty, and of neere kin to Tyranny. As concerning their choice of State Offi∣cers, they had divers fashions of Liberties. 1 In some; all might be capable of the highest Offices, and all had voices in the Choice. 2 In others; all had suffrages, but yet they made their choice by
certaine estimation of wealth. 3 In some all might be Rulers, Ita ut Lex dominetur. In others all might rule. Ita ut Po∣pulus dominetur. C. In my Judgement, those popular States, that are not governed by the Rule or Square of Law, can have no strength, neither can their basis be well fixed. S. A popular State, hath neither strength nor goodnesse in the frame it selfe; besides it is subiect to such daily factions and dis∣sention and making way for every impu∣dent flatterer to grow mighty, by fawning on people, and slandering them whose good vertues and fortunes for their greatnesse might be occasion of envy. C. How then is it supported, if it want strength and goodnesse? S. The strength of it only consisteth in the goodnesse, morall vertues and civill parts of their Citizens, and according to the di∣vers sorts of people popular States doe dif∣fer. 1 The most ancient is of Husband∣men supposed the best, because their life being laborious and full of businesse, they
have least leisure to mutiny from their private cares. So the Medians are re∣ported to have lived before Deiocius alte∣red their government. 2 The second of Shephards much like the former for their kind of life. 3 The third of Artians and Merchants &c. which must needs be full of innova∣tions through their continuall whispe∣ring and private devices at their mee∣tings. 4 The other is a mixture of all those kinds together. Aristotle condemneth utterly the last; and yet wee read not of any of the first, any thing memorable: The Athenians admitted of all sorts to the choice of Magistrates, the making Lawes, and to their great censure, when they ba∣nished any by Ostracisme. So did the Romans in the latter times howsoever the auncient did hold it a suf∣ficient commendation to be commended. As Bonus Colonus & strenuus miles. C. What banishment was that Ostra∣cisme, and for what time, and what the Transgression that made men liable there: unto? S. It was a kinde of banishment used a∣amongst
the Athenians, and the party exiled was to remaine ten yeares in Exile, which was thus executed; by delivering Shells, with the names of the persons con∣demned written therein; It was used not so much to punish other Offences, as to abte the immoderate power of the Noblemen. C. What are the pretexts of a popu∣lar State, and what meanes doe they use to maintaine the same? S. The supposition of a popular State pretendeth two things, which in themselves are plaufible. 1 Equality. 2 Liberty. The means of maintaining their sup∣position have beene these seaven. 1 By choosing all Magistrates by the voices of all, and out of all. Ne quis sit exclusus á Republica. 2 By giving no power to any Magi∣strate, to put any to death, though con∣demned by Law, if they appealed to the people. Vt libera si provocatio ad Popu∣lum, absoluta Potestas in Populo. 3 By causing all to know the use of Armes, that they neither should feare Forraigne forces or powers, nor one
patie to stand in awe of another. 4 By suffering no man to continue long in Office, and to be called to an ac∣count, his Office being ended and expi∣red. 5 By diminishing the power of them which were growne to great by what meanes soever. As the Athenians used their Ostracismus, The Syracsans their Petalismus, the parties name written in Olive leaves, upon which he was to be exiled. 6 The more simple, otherwise. If hee can but understand their Lawes, and cu∣stomes to see execution on Offendors, the fitter and safr for a popular Estate. In some Democraties the chiefe Officer hath beene tied to such kindes as are mecha∣nicall. 7 By compelling all to be at Assem∣blies, especially the meaner sort, who in some popularities have been invited by rewards. C. Sir, I have exercised your pai∣ence long, and I feare I am to bold with you; but your freenesse of discourse hi∣therto, encourageth me to demand, or request some other few resolutions before your departure.
S. The time I have spent with you, I account it not lst, for I have made a two fold gaine thereof, by renewing our old acquaintance, and thereby our loves. 2 By bringing to my remembrance what I have read out of divers aun∣tient Authors concerning STATE-POLICIE. I shall willingly resolve you, if your dmandes come within the reach of my weake Lear∣ning. I pray proceed to your Que∣stion. C. How are Democraticall States alterd? S. Democraties are changed into O∣ligarchyes, by the banding of them, in great favour with the people; if they can agre betweene themselves: if they disagree, the one assyling the other, the conqueror rayse a Monarchy. The Popular State of Rome, by the confederacy of Crassus, Pompy, and Caesar, proved in effect Oligarchicall, All things being acted as they would have them. Afir Crassus death, Pompy and
Caesar falling at variance, one assayling the other, the Conqueror drew the whole State to himselfe. After Caesars death it became againe Popular. The new Triumverate made it Oligarchicall, their dissentien, Mo∣narchicall againe. C. What things are those, without which, neither of those orementioned States, can be supported, or continue without ruine. S. Aristotle sayeth, Sex sunt quae di∣cuntur necessaria Alimenta, Artificia, Arma, Pecunia, Sacra, Judicia. More∣over else where he saieth. Quinque sunt arcana quae in potestate superioris Ma∣gistratus reservare solent Resp. There∣fore it behoveth the Supreame power of any State, to have a speciall care, that those six things be duly had in regard, and according to the respective qualities and number of their Subiects.
ALIMENTA. Nourishment which is to be considered. 1 By what kind the people desire to be maintained. By Tillage. By Pasture. 2 Where they have that which they fancie or most desire, from home; or from other Countries. 3 With what ease or difficulty the Vi∣ctualia, desired may be gotten, t what rates, and what quantity is requisite. ARTIFICIA. Crafts to keep the people from Idlenesse. 1 Where regard is to be had, of what matter they worke upon, whether Mettalls, Stones, or Wooll, and where those things are to be had for their use. 2 To what valew their workes can raise the matter where on they work. 3 Regard is to be had, whether their
kinde of worke maintaine health of body, and strength of minde. ARMA. Armes whether made in their owne Country. 1 Of what matter, of what fashion, of what use, and of what advantage. 2 Whether brought from Forraigners, with what ease, and at what rates or price. 3 Consideration is to be had of what advantage to the Nation, either in the excellency of the use, or in the pri∣vate or proper usage to men alone. As the Roman Pilum, and the bow in times past Anglis. 4 Whether Armes be permitted to all so in Democraticall states, or to some few, as in Oligarchyes. 1 Pecuniae, Mony, of what matter it is made, and the valew of the same, 2 VVhether the Mines thereof be in their owne Country. 3 VVhat things abound, by which it
may be fetched from others. 4 VVho hath the power of valew∣ing. 5 VVhat necessity of levying for publick uses. 6 VVhat necessity of disbursing for the same uses. SACRA. 1 The publick manner of serving God. 2 The Orders and Degrees by which the Priests and Levites are distingish∣ed from the Laytie, and one of them from another. 3 The maintenance, Liberty, and priviledges that they have to maintaine them of that place. 4 The power and honour that the Cheife of them have either over them of the Clergy, or over others. 5 The meanes to hold the reverence of the people. 6 The Scriptures of life, to which they are bound by Oath, Vow, or Custom
7 Their apparrell, in matter, Co∣lour, or fashion, how it is different from the Layety. The Romans kept the whole ordering of matters of Religion, especially, a∣mongst their greatest Personages. The Lords of the Senate, were the Pontifi∣ces, and Flamines. The Salii who car∣ried their Ancilia in a strange manner a∣bout the City, were of the young Gentle∣men, and most of their fraternities. were of men of the best stocks. C. VVhat were these Salii? S. They were the Priests os Mars the gods of Battl, who bearing Ancilia or Targets and Sheilds dancing about the City in token of Triumph. C. VVhat is to be observed concerning Magistrates? S. Foure things. 1 VVho hath the power of choo∣sing them. 2 VVho are capable, who are not? 3 VVhat causes are in their power? what not. 4 By what their powers are n∣larged
or restrained. So long as the power of the Se∣nate of ROME availd, though the people did chuse, yet they did chuse their great Officers, onely ex Patritiis, out of those that came from the loynes of Senators, who though they determined all matters, yet there was still liberty to appeale to the pople. Afterwards all were made capable and any of the Tribunes might hinder any act of the Consul, or decree of the Senate. JVDJCJA. 1 Either criminall; as in cases of life and death. 2 Or Civill; as of personall or reall actions, which concerne matters of Trespasse and Title The manner of proceeding whether the Tryalls be. 1 De facto only 2 De Iure only. 3 De Iure & de facto, together.
C. There are five Maxims, or secrets as you call them, peculiar to the supream power or chiefe Magistrate in regulating A State or weale publick. I pray disco∣ver the particulars thereof, and how they become so necessary? S. Those five. Conciones, Magistratus, Juditia, Arma, & Exercitia. Require a more abler Statist then my selfe, to disco∣ver their power or use; and will take up longer time then now can be spared, or our patience quietly attend. In regard of the prolixity, I will only give you the bran∣ches thereof, but leave the demostration of each particular, untill another opportu∣nity shall present it selfe. CONCIONES. Assemblies or Counsells. 1 Generall. As that Des estats gene∣aux in France, and the Parliaments in England. 1 of what Persons these states Ge∣nerall consist. 2 In what matters they may deale. 3 VVhat Power they have, limited by Law, or above Law. 4 VVhat Order they use in procee∣ding.
5 VVhat Authority in concluding. 6 By what meanes. 1 Their power is drawne to Act in performing an thing. 2 Their power is restrained from doing any thing. 2 Their Ordinary Counsells for ordi∣nary Occurrences. VVhere in we are to consider. 1 Their Authority. 2 Their Inclintions to peace in VVarre. 3 Their desires of honor or wealth. 4 The power of every particular. 1 In respect of the sufficiency and eminency of his parts. 2 In respect of his speciall favour and grace in the state. I told you before, that Oligarchyes constrained the rich men to be present at their great Assemblyes, on paine of penal∣ties. Democratyes, sometimes by rewards, invited the meaner sort at their generall Assemblies, to make their presence the greater, and that they should not altoge∣ther loose their private profit  which is
most regarded by the multitude, by omit∣ting their private affaires and following of publique. EXERCITIA of body. VVhether for health only. VVhether for strength only. VVhether for pleasure only. VVhether and how farre they all be mixt. Vse and custome, breeds delight in any exercise, The Romans so practised themselves with Armes; that they car∣ried them with as much ease as their parts; hence came that saying. Arma militis membra sunt. 2 Exercise of mind. VVhether te contemplation especially, as the Indian Gymnosophists, and the Athenians, which were great discoursers, whether to action es∣pecially, which is of most use in aci∣vill life, which is active not con∣templative: As the Lacedemoni∣ans, who taught their Children, plurimum facere & minimum loqui. 3 VVhat kind of Exercises. Are commanded by Law. Are permitted only. Are directly forbidden.
As concerning Armes, I have already given you my thoughts of the same. But you may observe. 1 That Monarchicall states have used to traine, and discipline all, in the exer∣cise of Armes. As in England all by an Edict to bear Armes that are up wards of seaventeen yeares of Age, and under threescore, except Schollers. 2 Aristocraticall States, enforced only their Nobles to bring up their Children in feates of Armes, & military discipline. 3. Oligarchicall States, keep their Armes, and the use and practise of them only, amongst their greatest men and their followers, so doth the Muscovite & Turk at this day. 4 Democraticall or popular States, have accustomed to bring up all sorts of their people to Martiall feats; and not only permitting, but enjoyning all at a certaine age to learne and practise them∣selves to warlicke exercises. As the anti∣ent Romans at seaventeene yeares of Age, the Suiffers at this day sooner.
An Act declaring and Constitu∣ting the People of England to be a Common-wealth and Free-State. Be it Declared and Enacted by this present PARLIAMENT, and by the authority of the same, That the People of ENGLAND, and of all the Dominions and Territories thereunto be∣longing, are and shall be, and are hereby Constituted, Made, Establish∣ed and Confirmed, to be a Common∣wealth and Free-State: And shall from henceforth be Governed as a Common∣wealth and Free-State, by the supreme Authority of this Nation, The Repre∣sentatives of the People in Parliament, and by such as they shall appoint and con∣stitute as Officers and Ministers under them for the good of the People, and that without any King or House of Lords. Die Sabbathi, 19. Maii, 1649. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that this Act be forthwith Printed and Published. Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.
POSTSCRIPT Gentle READER, HAving now given you a briefe and cleane discovery of the Govern∣ment of severall Nations, Kingdomes. and Common-wealths in the World which I have taken paines to Collect from Choice Authors, of divers Languages, that thou maiest the better Iudge of the Nature of our present New Established Common-wealth, as touching the Ex∣elency thereof, and Encouragement to a willing Subjection thereunto, Take Mr. LILLIES expressions in his conclusion of the Epistle to his Predictions for 1650. in these words, to every true English man, I hartily implore them, as one man to unite their hearts, their Prayers, their Forces, and Purses, unanimonsly, for defence of this Common-wealth now established; For without it as at present,
our Condition stands, our lives and for∣tunes will be subject to all the inconve∣niences, a wofull Nation can expect from devouring Enemies: Conforming unto, and assisting this Authority; We shall have the better of all Nations, wee shall by degrees arise to the most accom∣plished Government, that ever was vi∣sible since the Creation; and when the Commonalty of ENGLAND, viz. the Yeomanry, after some yeares are fitted for the work intended, it shall not dis∣please them, that they have with pati∣ence acted so long a time without any vi∣sible Frutes of their Labours, Sith then the Sole Dominion and power shall rest in themselves, after which universall peace and never more any Warres shall follow in ENGLAND, untill the day of the dissolution of this earthly Fabrick. In the next place, I shall only put you in mind of the New Engagement, to be taken generally throughout the Nation, in regard it is of speciall concernment to all. The expresse words of it (are these) as it is Ordered by the Parliament, viz. I DO DECLARE AND PRO∣MISE,
THAT I WILL BE TRVE AND FAITHFVLL TO THE COMMON-WEALTH OF ENG∣LAND AS THE SAME NOW IS ESTABLISHED, WITHOVT A KING OR HOVSE OF LORDS. For such as make any doubt or scruple of taking this Engagement; I referre them to Mr. IOHN DVRYES Book, lately published, called Considerations, concerning the present Engagement, whe∣ther it may lawfully be entred into, yea, or no, they are sould at the Star, under St. PETERS Church in Corn-hill, or in Popes-head Ally; Licensed by Master IOSEPH CARYLL. In my apprehension, he removeth all the stumbling blocks, and answereth all the Obejctions that can be made a∣gainst the taking of it, which may satis∣fie all such as shut not their Eyes against the light. The three Chiefe Objections are these, viz. 1. OB. That the Oath of Allegiance, and the Nationall. Covenant are still binding and Contradictory to this present Engagement.
2. OB. That the present power by which the Engagement is tende∣red, is very doubtfull as a power, unlawfully usurped, to which u∣surpation you think you will be accessary, if you take the en∣gagement. 3. OB. That the Consequence of the Engagement seems to tend to an opposition against the Lawfull Hir of the Crowne, and the right constitution of the Parlia∣ments, whereunto you are prein∣gaged, and from which you cannot recede. All which Ob∣jections, are learnedly and fully answered by Mr. DVRY which hath saved me that Labour, and expence of time. VALE.
