T1396D 45578469 172383
To the High and Honourable Court of Parliament. The humble Petition of sundry of the Nobles, Knights, Gentry, Ministers, Freeholders, and divers thou∣sands of the Inhabitants of the County Palatine of Chester, whose names are subscribed to the several Schedules hereunto annexed. In Answer to a Petition delivered in to the Lords Spirituall and Temporall, by Sir Thomas Aston, Baronet, from the County Palatine of CHESTER, concerning Episcopacie. Humbly shew; THAT whereas divers Petitions, by the practise of the Prelates and our present Diocesan, have been lately posted about this County for the continuance of our present exorbitant Hierarchie and Church-Government, under which the whole Kingdome hath long time groaned, and the hands of many persons of sundry qualities (sollicited to the same by the Prelates agents) with intent to be preferred to this Honourable House, which we conceiving, not so much to ayme at our Church and Prelates Reformation, as at the maintenance of their absolute Jurisdiction and Innovations both in Religion and Government, which will give the greatest advantage to the ad∣versaries of ou Religion: We hold it our duties to disavow them all, especially that lately tendred to the Lords Spirituall and Tem∣porall, by Sir Thomas Aston Baronet. And hubly pray, that we incurre no mis-Censure, if any such scattered Papers have (without our privitie) surreptitiously assumed the name of our County. We, (as all other Counties of this Realme) are deeply sensible of the many common and heavie Grievances (under which the whole three Kingdomes suffer) occasioned by the Prelates, and have just cause to rejoyce at, and acknowledge with thankfullnesse, the pious care already taken by your Honours for the suppressing of the growth of Popery; the better supply of able Ministers in all places to instruct the People; removing of all Innovations, and for your indeavours to suppresse and remove our Lordly Prelates, the sole Authors of all our present miseries, Innovations, and most professed enemies of the Gospell: and we doubt not but in your great Wisdomes you will not only regulate the rigour of their exorbitant Ecclesiasticall Courts, but likewise wholly extirpate them, as neither suiting with the Temper of our Laws, nor the nature of Free-men. And when we consider, that Diocesan Lordly Bishops, superiour to Presbyters, were neither Instituted, nor heard of, in the time of the Apostles, who alwayes ordayned Acts 11. 30. c. 14. 23. c, 15. 2. 4, 6. 22, 23. c. 16. 4. c. 20. 17. 28. c. 21. 17, 18. c. 22. 5. phil. 1. 1. 1 Tim. 5. 17. c. 3. 1. to 9. c. 4. 14. Tit. 1. 5, 6, 7. Iam. 5. 14. 1 pet. 5. 1, 2, Rev. 4. 10. c. 5. 11. 14. c. 7. 11. 13. c. 11. 16. c. 19. 4. If than it be of Divine and Apostolicall in∣stitution, that there should be many Bishops and presbyters in every particular Church; Then it is point blank against it, to erect one Bishop over many Churches, and one Archbishop over many Bishops, one patriarch over them and one pope superiour to them all: And if one mans pos∣sessing of a plurality of Church∣es hath been ever held infamous and unlawfull in all ages, because he cannot discharge their cure, much more must one Bishops Superintendencie over many hundreds or thousands of Churches, which he cannot duly governe and instruct, be more unlawfull. sundry Bishops in every particulor Congregation, and those all equall in Authority; not one Bishop over many hundred Churches, and he paramount his fellow Presbyters: That our See Bishop Vsher Do Brit. Eccles. primordiu c. 1, 2, 3, 4. 6, 7, 8. c. 16. pag. 800. Fordon Scotchton l. 3. c. 8. Major de Gest. Scoter. l. 2. c. 2. Church of England (with that of Scotland) from the first plantation of the Gospell here, in the Apostles dayes, for some hundred of yeares after had no Bishops at all to governe it. That Bishop Vsher De Brit. Eccles. primordiu c. 5. p. 56, 57, 58, 59. all ancient Authors and Historians unanimously record, that our Archbishops and Bishops, succeeded the Heathenish Arch-Flammines and Flammines here planted in times of Paganisme, both in their Institution, Jurisdiction and Seas; and so are onely of Ethnicall or Diabolicall, not Apostolicall Institution. That they were the greatest fire-brands of contention, and Authors of Cent. Magd. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. cap. 8. all the Schismes in the first generall Councels, and Primitive-Church. That so many of them have sowed the tares of Heresie, Popery, Schisme, Rebellion, Sedition, See Baleus de vitis pontifi∣cum. The Imperiall History. Morney his mystery of Iniquity. The English and French Book of Martyrs, Holingshead, Speed, and Goodmans Catalogue of Bi∣shops. opposed, excommunicated, dethroned, yea murthered Christian Kings, Emperours, and raysed up many bloody warres to the effusion of much Christian blood, in all Kingdomes, where they have swayed; preserved and rescued Popery and Heresie from utter extirpation in this and former ages; exceeded the Primitive persecuters in Martyring and shedding the blood of Gods deare Saints. That to them we owe the corruption of the purity of the Gospell we now professe, with Romish Errors and Su∣perstitions, as your Honous have already unanimously voted. That many of them for the propagation of Popery, and suppressing of the Truth (especially the Arch∣prelate of Canterbury, William Laud, accused by your Honours, and committed to the Tower of London for See his Articles. High Treason against his Majesty, our Laws, and established Religion; Bishop Wren, Bishop Mountague, Bishop Pierce, Bishop Goodman, and others now in question before this Honourable Assembly) are like to become glorious Martyrs in the Roman Calendar. That (not divers, but) most of them lately, and yet living with us, have been very great Oppugners of our Religion, indeavouring to reduce or captivate it to the common enemie of Rome. And that their tyrannicall, Papall, Lordly government hath been so long oppugned by See Catalogus Testium verita∣tu: Flagellum pontificu the last Edition, and a Catalogue of Te∣stimonies in all ages, &c. lately Printed. infinite godly Martyrs and writers both at home and abroad; established (through their own over-swaying power, and undermining subtiltie) by the Common and Statute Laws of the Kingdome made onely in times of Popery, but oft exploded or restrained by sundry Laws and Statutes since the time of Reformation, though with little good successe: And as yet there is nothing in their Doctrine (generally taught, when they rarely preach) but what is dissonant from the word of God, or the Articles ratified by Law. In this case, not to call their government, a perpetuall vassalage, an intollerable bondage. And (prima facie, though not, inaudita altera parte, of whom your Honours have heard so much evill already in the Committees for Religion; for the High Commission, Bishop Wren, Bishop Peirce, the Ministers Londoners, and other Counties Petitions against Prelacie) not to pray the removall of them, and not to seek the utter desolation and ruine of their Offices as hristian (as divers Counties else have done in their Petitions to your Honours,) we cannot conceive but to relish of injustice, and uncharitablenesse, both to the So Bodies and Estates of us and our Posteritie; nor can we joyne with them who petition for their continuance. But on the contrary, when we consider the Tenor of such writings and Books as by the Prelates and their agents have been lately spread among the people with their publike allowance (as the Prelates New Canons, Oath, and act for a malevolent Benevolence, for non payment whereof every Minister shall at first bout be ipso facto deprived, without the benefit of any Appeale, Bishop Mountagues, Dr. Heylins, Dr. Pocklingtons, Shelfords, Doves, Reeves, Francis Salis, Franciscus de Sancta Clara, their late Books, with others: and our Prelates Letters in nature of Commissions, for the collecting of the late Lone for the maintenance of the Warres against the Scots, which Bishop Peirce affirmed in sundry speeches to the Clergie of his Diocese, to be Bellum Episcopale, the Bishops Warre, using it as the chiefe motive why they should liberally con∣tribute towards it. When we againe ponder the Tenents preached publiquely in Pulpits, and the Contents of many Printed Pamphlets swarming every where amongst us, See the Archbishops Articles, n. 2. against the frequencie power and use of Parliaments; the Right and Liberties of the Subjects, the propriety of their goods; in advancing the exorbitant Jurisdiction of Prelates, their Injnctions and Courts under the name of the Church; their asserting of his Majesties absolute power both over the Laws, Goods, Lives and Liberties of the Subject, and the like; all of them dangerously tending to the introduction of a lawlesse tyrannie, and arbitrarie form of Government both in Church and State; to rob his Majestie of the hearts and loyall affections of his people: And then further consider, not onely the Bishops severall usurpations of the sole power of the Keyes, and Ordination, but likewise their intimations of their desire of the full power of the Sword, that they in their severall Courts (as they doe in all their High-Commissi∣ons) may execute both Ecclesiasticall and Civill Censues within themselves. We cannot but expresse our just feares, that their intention is to introduce an absolute In∣novation of tyrannicall and Papall Government: Whereby we who are now governed only by the Common and Statute Laws of this Realme made in Parliament, shall be governed (as our Anti-petitioners confesse we are) only by the Canon and Civill Laws (which the now See the Archbishops Articles Art. 1. Archbishop of Canterbury professed he would introduce and governe us by) made and dispensed only by twenty-six Ordinaries and their under-Officers (or rather only by one over-potent Arch-Prelate) not easily responsible to Parliaments, for their deviations from the Rules of Law, so long as they enjoy such ample Lordly Revenues, continue Lords in Parliament, Lords of the Privie Counsell, and greatest swaying Officers in the Realme, Archbishops Articles, Ar. 13. able to dissolve even Parliaments themselves in case they attempt to question them (as we know by many late experiments;) whereas if we were governed (as was the See the Answer to an Hum∣ble Remonstrance. Gersonius En∣cerus de Gobernat. Ecclesiae. Primitive Church) by a numerous Presbytery and ruling Elders, (farre lesse in power, though more in number) according to the Laws of God, and those this Honourable Assembly (not the Convocation, or every Bishop in his Diocese at his meere pleasure) shall prescribe; we dare assure our selves, no such incon∣veniences shal be found in that Government, equivalent to those of Episcopacie; which how corrigible they have been by Parliaments and Councels, how ill consistent with a Monarchie; and how dangerously conducible to an Anarchie; their incorrigiblenesse, Treasons, Rebellions, Conspiracies, with the Warres and tumults occasioned by them in all former ages, and now, abundantly manifest. And therfore we have just cause to pray against their continuance, as fearing their consequences would prove the utter losse of pietie, Libertie, unitie, peace, Laws, and divine learning, and necessarily produce an extermination, if not of Nobilitie, Gentrie, and Order, yet certainly of Religion, and all true pietie. With what vehemencie and arrogancie of Spirit the Prelates and their Instruments have prosecuted all good Ministers and people of all sorts, even to the losse of Members, Blood, Libertie, Life, Goods, Fortunes: and how many thousands of his Majesties good Subjects they have driven out of the Realme into Forraigne parts; and how plausible your Honourable proceedings in this present Session of Parliament against their Innovations, Canons, Exorbitances, (yea, and their very Callings too) have been to the whole Kingdome (who daily blesse God for them) we need not represent to your honours. And therfore humbly pray, that some present speedie course may be taken, as in your Wisdomes shall be thought fit, to suppresse all Lordly Prelates; together with the importing, Printing and dispersing of all Popish and Arminian Bookes, and the calling in and burning of those forenamed, (especially of the late Canons, Oarh, and Act for the Benevolence) which have produced dangerous discon∣tents both in the Clergie and common people, We having great cause to feare, that of all the distempers which at present threaten the welfare of this State, there is none more worthy the mature and grave consideration of this Honourable Assembly, then to stop the Torrent of such ambitious Spirits, as lye masked under our Lordly Pre∣lates white Rochets, before they swell beyond the bounds of Government, and drown his Majesties three whole Kingdomes in a deluge of blood, and utter desolation. Then we doubt not but his Majestie, persevering in his gracious inclination to heare the Complaints, and relieve the grievances of his Subjects in frequent Parliaments, it will so unite the Head and the Bodie ((k) Archbishops Charges Art. 14. Mr. Nathanael Fines Speech in parliamett, Febr. 9. p. severed principally by the practises and continuance of the Prelates) and so indissolublie cement the affections of the people to our Royall Soveraigne; that without any future government at all by Bishops, he shal be a more absolute and happy Prince then any of his Predecessors, and shall never want revenue, and honour, nor his people justice. We have presumed to annex a Copy of severall Petitions exhibited to your Honours against the Prelates this Parliament, and of sundry Positions preached by their instruments in this and other Counties, which we conceive imply matter of dangerous consequence to the peace both of Church and State: together with a briefe Remonstrance of sundry Grievances, Innovations and Persecutions, under which we of this County (especially those of the City of Chester) have mi∣serably suffered, by meanes of our now Bishop, and the High-Commissioners at Yorke. All which we humbly submit to your grave judgements, praying that they may be read, and redressed. Subscribed to this Petition, Eight Noblemen. Knight Baronets, Knights and Esquires, ninescore and nineteen. Divines, one hundred and forty; not one of them a maker, taker, or approver of the new &c. Oath and Canons. Gentlemen, seven hundred fifty seven. Freeholders and other Inhabitants, above twelve thousand. All of the same mind, and County, and not one of them a Popish Recusant.
