T1576 45578470 172384
TO THE MOST HONOVRABLE THE HOVSE OF PEERES, AND THE HONOVRABLE HOVSE Of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT. The humble Petition of the Baronets, Justices, and Gentlemen of the County of DEVON at their Generall Sessions. Sheweth; THat your Petitioners observing to our comfort your infinite labours, and to our sorrows your abounding pressures and incombrances; and studying how we might possibly in our degree contribute to your help; The Com∣plaints and fears of our Countreymen herewith commended to your view, have given us an overture, charging us, by all the interest of our common welfare and danger, to represent to His Majestie, and your Honors, their present distresses and expected miseries. The Port Towns as they are for the most part the first receivers of forraigne intelligence; so are they soonest sensible of inconveniences occurring by the pro∣ceedings of their trade, losses by Turkish Pyrates, Crosses by the Irish Rebellion, and Lon∣don distractions though first felt, yet are these their least feared calamities; Neither do the flocks of poore Protestants coming from that Kingdom robd of their late good Fortune, and now depending upon their Christian charity so much affright them, with the charge of their relief. As for the threatning messages they bring from their woolvish enemies, That the bounds of that Kingdom shall not limit their malicious Tyrannie: So these as your Honors may perceive by the perusall (which we humbly pray you to afford) they adde the Popish Plots by your wisedom and vigilancie alreadie discovered, as certain ar∣guments of warre intended and readie for Execution. And all this they do with so much probabilitie conjecture to proceed from the practises of the Popish Lords, and their constant adherents in most of their Votes, the Prelates in the House of Peers, as your Petitioners concurre with these our neighbours in opinion and desires, that your Honors would once more imploy your endeavours to our most gracious King, to exclude Papists from his great affairs, and his Prelates from Temporall Iuris∣diction. By the bearers hereof your Petitioners have presumed to make the like tender to his Ma∣jesties Royall hand, being from thence confident of their happie effects; instead of distra∣ctions, unitie; for remora's, celeritie; for misunderstanding, correspondencie. And by the mercie of God upon his Church and people, and upon the best of Kings their Supreme Governor; Prerogative and Priviledge will kisse each other, when His Maiestie shall think it his greatest Honor to grant your just Priviledge, and you acknowledge it your best Pri∣viledge, to enjoy the benefit and glorie of his due and princely Prerogative. For these and all other wished Felicities, your Petitioners shall ever pray, &c. Printed for H. Blunden, 1642.
