T1615 669.f.15[50] 99870661 163124
To the Right Honourable, the Com∣mons of England Assembled in Parliament. The humble Petition of divers well-affected people, Inhabitants of the Cities of LON∣DON and WESTMINSTER, the Burough of SOUTHWARK, HAMBLETS and places adjacent, Promoters and approvers of the Petition of the 11. of Sep∣tember, 1648. SHEWETH, THat although we abhorre nothing more, then the designing of any thing to the danger and prejudice of this Common-wealth of England, and utterly detest all such plots and confederacies, as were entred into by Eusebius Andrews, lately ad∣judged, by the High Court of Justice, to dye as a Traytor for the same, yet deeply weighing, that of all the Fundamental Liberties of England, none were ever either by people or Parliaments, esteemed so precious, as Tryals by Juryes, consisting of indifferent uningaged sworn men, although for facts of highest Treason, against the very safety and being of the Common-wealth; whereby the publick peace hath been saved, and justice done upon the greatest Traytors. And that for preservation of the said just way of Tryals, the 29. Chap. of Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, were principally constituted, and have been ever by our Ancestors exceedingly contended for; and for which chiefly, the Parliament undertook their War against the late King, as without which Magna Charta and the Petition of Right, were both dead and useless to the people. And being well assured that the principal cause of abolishing the High Commission, Coun∣cel-Table and Star-Chamber (in all which they never attempted life) was, for that they were contrary to the 29. Chap. of Magna Charta and the Petition of Right, in proceeding without Juries, And being very sensible of the manifest danger of Tryals by another way (without any respect to the person of the said Andrews otherwise then as bound in duty and Conscience, to preserve this our Fundamental Liberty, indeed our sole Liberty, and without which, Li∣berty is but an empty name) Grieving at our very souls, to have seen the same violated more then ONCE in this kind, which (after your Declarations of Febr. and March 1648. to main∣tain inviolable that most excellent Law (as you call it) of the Petition of Right, with all things incident and belonging to the Lives, Liberties and properties of the people of England) We hoped would have been the last. We therefore most earnestly intreat, that you will be pleased to suspend execution of the said Eusebius Andrews, and to admit unto him and to all other offenders whatsoever, the benefit of Legal Tryals by Juryes in an ordinary way, and that the High Court of Justice may for ever cease; that so this our Fundamenoal Liberty (abundantly more prized by us then our Lives, and all our Relations) may stand firm and inviolable to all future Gene∣rations; and our selves and all other Lovers of the ancient good Laws and Liberties of England, may be truly encouraged, heartily and chearfully to serve and assist you against the Common enemy; which we humbly presume, your Honours will find of more safety to your selves and the Authority of this Nation, then the continuance of an High Court of Justice. And as in duty bound we shall ever pray, &c.
