T1671 669.f.6[68] 99871097 160929
❧ To the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament. The Humble Petition and Remonstrance of the Nobility and Gentry of the County of YORKE. Sheweth, THat this County is extreamely perplexed, by reason of the publike Acts of Hostility committed by Sir Iohn Hotham, and the Garison at Hull, to the great disturbance of the Peace of this County, threatning no lesse than ruine and destruction of it. That the first putting a Garison into that Towne, was pretended to be to defend it against the Papists at home, and the invasion of forraigne Enemies: Since that time, the Gates have beene shut against Our gracious Soveraigne, and entrance denyed to His own Royall Person, severall persons have beene throwne out of the Towne, and expelled from their owne Freeholders, and personall Estates, and some part of the Countrey is drowned by Sir Iohn Hotham, to the utter ruine of many Families. Sallies have beene made with Armed men, who have burned and plundered houses, and murthered their fellow Subjects, (when we were confident of a Cessation,) with all the circumstances of rage and cruelty, which uses to be contracted by a long and bloody War. After all this, His Majestie (who hath kept His Residence here, with all the Demonstrations of Care, and Affection towards us) gratiously forbeares, to lay any Siege to that place, and hath declared to us, That by no Act of His, this County shall be made the Seat of a War: And yet by the new supply of Soul∣diers taken into Hull, and the late Actions there (which we conceive, to be manifestly against the Oathes of Supremacy and Allegiance, the Petition of Right, and the late Protestation) we have cause to feare, that some violence is intended both against our persons and fortunes. The Premisses considered, we cannot but be infinitely jealous, That Sir Iohn Hotham cannot derive his authority, to com∣mit such barbarous Acts of Hostility, from the two Houses of Parliament, from whom we expect all the effects of happy Peace and preservation of Our Lawes and Liberties. Wee humbly desire therefore to know, whether these outrages are done by your Authority, and whether this County must be subject to that Garrison, that we may thereupon provide in such a manner for our safeties, that these Injuries, Violences, and Oppressions be no longer imposed upon us, by our fellow Subiects, but that wee may be all lyable to the knowne Lawes of the Land, to which we are borne, and which is the onely security and evi∣dence we have for our lives and fortunes. These three Instances, amongst many others, of Sir John Hothams Acts of late, we thought good to Annex He stayed two Ships at Hull, Iohn Rauson and Watson Masters of them, being laden with Cloth to the value of neere forty Thou∣sand Pound stayed by him, contrary both to the Kings pleasure, and the Order of Prrliament, and tending the great destruction of Trade. Mr. Wright, a Gentleman of quality, taken Prisoner, since His Maiesties drawing His Forces from Hull, travelling from His House to Yorke. A Drummer of one of His Maiesties Captaines taken, and forced to march naked through three hundred Musketires, and whipped by each of them. Subscribed and consented unto by all the Nobility of Yorkshire, 40. Baronets and Knights, and divers Esquires and Per∣sons of quality. First Printed at Yorke, and now reprinted at London for William Smith, 1642.
