T1737 669.f.14[31] 99869864 163019
TO THE SVPREME AVTHORITY OF THIS NATION, the COMMONS of ENGLAND, in Parliament assembled. The Humble Petition of divers Young men, and Apprentices of the City of London, and parts adjacent: in behalf of Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, Mr William Walwin, Mr Thomas Prince, and Mr Richard Overton, now close Prisoners in the Tower of London, without any declared just cause: and of Capt. William Bray in the same condition in Windsor Castle. Sheweth, THat the honour of God, the good of the Nation in generall, and the Lives, Liberties and Estates of every Free Commoner in England in particular, is deerer unto us than our very Lives. That about the year 1642. when the late King endeavoured in the like hostile way to secure the persons of the same number of men (who were then all Members of this House) you then declared that such his endeavour was against Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, and o∣ther the fundamental Lawes of the Land: as also a breach of the Priviledge of Parliament, and a∣gainst the liberties of the Subject; whom since you have declared to be a free People. That in their just Vindication, you then as fellow Members, and we (though bound to our Masters for a time, by our own free consent, yet) fellow Commoners with them, did joyn toge∣ther: (we adding our power unto your authority) in managing whereof many of our deer friends and fellow Souldiers lost their lives, and others with some of our selves are sorely wounded. That our dear friends before mentioned are tender unto us, like the apple of our eye, and shall never be otherwise untill we see just and apparent cause to the contrary. That therefore it is no small grief and amazement to us, to see any (especially such eminent up∣holders of Englands Liberties, as we do apprehend them to be) violently fetcht out of their beds and houses, and forced to prison, there to be shut up, without allowing them so much as bread and water, to maintain life, for the space of more than forty dayes and nights; notwithstanding they are not known to be accused or suspected with the breach of any other Law than the wills of some men in Authority. That we apprehend there is too just cause for us to fear, that seeing there is no particular Act either of Treason, Fellony, or any other crime laid to their charge, but only a general accusation (which neither in Law nor Reason is any whit valid) that therefore instead of bringing them to a Legal Tryal, they will be destroyed in Prisons, and that not in an open way at one blow, but by the most inhumane way of Martyrdom, viz. to be starved to death: for although they have no allowance (wich the worst of malefactors ought to have) yet their neer friends are forbidden either to releeve them with food, or other necessaries, nor yet to comfort them in this their sad condition: though in never so peaceable and earnest a manner desired. That we cannot but take notice that the same condition which is theirs this day, may be ours the next, though we judge our selves cleer from doing any thing justly deserving the same. That we find by the answer to a late Petition, presented by some of our Masters, in their be∣halfs, that it is not safe for them to move any more in their behalf, though in the like way of Pe∣titioning (the most inferior badge of Freedome which we know.) That therefore we are constrained by the law of Nature, and Reason which God hath given us, to appear for them, at least in this humble way, and in their behalf, as they are Englishmen, and ellow Commoners with us, do humbly pray, 1. That we may be informed what particular offence every of them are particu∣larly guilty of; that so if any of them shall plainly appear to be Malefactors, we may no longer take their parts. 2. That if no crime were legally laid to their charge before they were under their present restraint, they may be forthwith enlarged, and have just Reparation for the wrongs they have suffered. 3. That then, if any man have ought to lay to their charge, none but legal and just proceedings be exercised towards them; the contrary whereof will certainly be requited by him who is the Judge of all the Earth, and will do right. 4. That in case the former shall be, yet notwithstanding they may not be debar∣red of those priviledges which the worst of Theeves, Murderers and Traytors do en∣joy; viz. to have such allowances as have formerly been given to Prisoners of the like nature▪ and be allowed the comfort of Friends in a peaceable way, according to the Lawes both of God and this Nation. And if these our desires shall appear reasonable to you, so that we shall thereby obtain the same, we shall therein rejoyce; but if not, we shall fear that the same (if not worse) oppressions which were by you condemned in former powers, will now appear to ly upon the free Commoners of England, for the deliverance from which we have contested hitherto: and for the same We shall pray.
