T2663 669.f.6[72] 99871107 160933
A true Copy of the Petition of the Rebells IN IRELAND, Subscribed by eleven Lords, and others of qualitie among them; Attested to be an Exact Copy, being examined with the Originall by a Person of Honour there, when it was intercepted; and sent over unto two Members of the House in Letters, dated the 17th of August: 1642. To the Kings most Excellent Majestie, The humble PETITION OF THE CATHOLIQVES OF IRELAND. Most Sacred and Dread Soveraigne, WEe your most Loyall and Obedient Subjects, whom it neerest concerns to preserve the Rights and Prerogatives of Your Crown firm and entire, as yeelding us a just and mercifull protection against the security of our penall Laws. In maintenance of that power the birth-right of Kings, kept un∣blemisht for You by Your famous Ancestors, we have had recourse to Arms, to that end onely, that You Our Gratious Soveraigne, with all the preeminences due and derived unto You, by a long succession of Monarchs, might alone Reigne over us; And we in the just freedom of Subjects (Independent of any Jurisdiction not derived from Your Majestie) live happily under the Crown of England. Yet lest these our intendments by the practise of our Adversaries might be misrepresented unto You, and we enforced unde∣servedly to suffer in Your Majesties opinion (which would be a burthen more heavy unto us, then the sword of our Adversaries, although dayly imbru'd in the blood of our wives and children) we have often indeavoured to have accesse to that Royall Throane, which with the hazard of our Lives and Fortunes, we labour to maintain glorious and unspotted. Yet such is the unwearied watchfulnesse of our Adversaries, that all our attempts are made frustrate; And now of late when by Lieutenant Colonell Read, whom therefore we imployed, because a stranger to our cause and Country, and so likeliest to passe undiscovered, we sent our Petition. He poor Gentleman was intercep∣ted, and put to the torture of the wrack, so as now it is beyond our reach, and onely in Your Power to provide that we may be heard by Your Majestie, since we are so unhappy as that Your Majesties resolution of coming into this Your Kingdom, met with greater diversions then the threats and menaces of the Puritane party of the Parliament of England, who seeke all things to limitt You our King, and to governe us Your Subjects. That it would therefore please Your Majestie, to appoint some such way by which with safety we may ap∣proach Your Royall presence, that so You may be informed truely of the whole scope of our Resolutions, and we receive faithfully Your Commands. And we, as our duty bindes us, will ever pray for Your Majesties happy raign over us. London, Printed by L. N. and J. F. for F. C. August 24. 1642.
