T425 E1251_4 99868069 169499
ALE ALE-VATED INTO THE ALE-TITUDE: OR, A Learned Oration before a Civill Assembly of ALE-Drinkers, Between PADDINGTON and HOGSDON, The 30. of February last, Anno Milli∣mo Quillimo Trillimo. By JOHN TAYLOR. LONDON, Printed in the yeare, 1651.
A LEARNED LECTƲRE, IN PRAISE OF ALE. ALE Beloved Brethren, I am come this day to make an Oration in a Tub, having dranke all the ALE. the Barrell is turned into a Tub, and the Tub transformed into a suitable Pulpit: and my hope is, I shall please you better then with a tale of a Tub: my Theame or Text is but 3. Let∣ters, ALE, which though they are short and briefe in the pronunciation, yet they are Copious and ample, both in Mysticall, and Intrinsicall Expositions, and Historicall Relations.
The Letter A. is the Captaine, the Leader, the Conductor, the Duke, Ram, and Generall of the Letters, Words, and Syllables of all the Speeches, Tongues, and Languages, that have been, are, or will be amongst all Nations and People in the World. And therefore the Letter A. is, in the Originall tongue (or Hebrew) called or knowne by the name of ALEph, the first Syllable being ALE, and as an addition of Honour to A, and ALE, all the following Letters are called ALEphabet; and in Greek the first Letter is ALpha. For further proofe of the Antiquity and high estimation of Ale, it is Recorded in famous Histories, that many Coun∣treys. Kingdomes, Nations, and Persons have had their deri∣vations, and names from A and Ale; for this Land, this very England, was at the first called Albion: also Albion was the name of a Giant, one of the sons of the Sea-god Neptune, and the Countrey of Albania in Greece (other∣wise called Epirus, whereof the most valiant and famous terrour to the Turks, Scanderbe, (or George Castriot was King) had their Originall Epithites from Ale: the Maho∣metans (with their abusing of Ale in the right use and bre∣wing of it) were madly inspired with Enthusiastick Rhap∣tures, that our of the Grounds and Dregs of Ale they brew∣ed their Alcaron, by the ayd of Alecto one of the 3 Infer∣nall Furies. The first part of any name that begins with AL, it doth import that the party or place have been, or may be great and fortunate. For was not ALExander for his great Conquests called the Great? and it is to be supposed, that if he had dranke no worse drink then Ale, he had not been poysoned in Babylon.
There was also ALExander Severns, a Grave Phylosopher, a good and mighty Romane Emperour; and in memory of ALExander, there are many famous Cities named ALEx∣andria, one in Aegypt, which the great ALExander caused to be begun and finished in 18 dayes, although it was 6 miles (within the Walls) about. Alaricus, a Potent and conquering King of the Gothes, in the yeare 408. sack'd the City of Rome, and burnt it to the ground: and Alcibiades a valiant Noble man of Athens, of the Race and linage of Great Ajax Telamon, atcheived many great exploits with successe and victory, to the Honour and profit of the Athenians; yet (for some small faults) they ingratefully banished him, and in Frigia his head was stook off. Two Grecian Emperours of Constantinople, their names were ALExius and Cassandra (the Sister of the Worthy Hoctor and Daughter to King Priam) was called ALExan∣dra, because that by the Vertue of Ale she was inspired with the gift of Prophecying of severall sorts of truths; but her evill Fate, and the Trojans ill luck was, that she never was believed, though she alwayes Prophecyed truly. Also there were divers Saxon Kings named Ala: and Aladine was a common name to the Sarazen Kings and Princes. Al∣bumazer a learned Arabian Magitian, was (by his owne Re∣port) much forwarded in his skill and knowledge of Astrolo∣gy by the operation of Ale of his owne Brewing, the Re∣ceipt whereof he had from Alphonsus a King of Naples, and Sicilia; besides, Ale doth infuse such vigour and valour in∣to men of the sword, that as the History of Barbary (or Mauritania) Relates, ten Tuns of Ale was sent from a Consull of ALEppo to Sebastian, King of Portugall at the
Battle of Alcasor, which Ale made them fight so couragious∣ly, that 3 Kings were slaine that day in the field, namely, Se∣bastian of Portug ALE, Mulley ALEt, King of Fesse, and one more, which I omit, because I have forgot his name; but I remember our brave English Stukeley was killed then, and there; and he was partly a King, for the Pope had gi∣ven him the Kingdome of Ireland, and the troath is, that Stukeley wanted but two small trifles of the full inheritance of it, which was only possession and Coronation. Bacchus, who is likewise named Liber, which is frank, free, merry, and at liberty; hee was also called Liber Pater, which is a free liberall Father; hee was the first inventer and Brewer of Ale, for which hee is named Alysius, by ma∣ny Grave and Learned Writers, as in Bishop Coopers Dictio∣nary, and others, and it is unquestionable that Bacchus was honoured as a God, amongst the Ancient Heathen, for his ad∣mirable Invention for Potable drinkes; of which ALE was then in his time, to this time, and shall bee in after times, the chiefest. ALE is of that Venerable, and Reverend esteeme, that the most Worthy, Wisest, and Wealthiest Senators are called Al∣dermen; for there is Sage ALE, and to bee Sage, is to bee Grave and Wise; and by drinking Sage ALE, the Wise men of Greece were called the seven Sages. From this ALE beloved, all beloved ALE there are many Vertues have had their Originall; Charity is a Vertue, and though in these times shee is almost dead with cold shee hath taken against her will; yet as in Reference from or ALusion to ALE, ALmes are the fruits of Charity, and therefore all great Kings and Princes doe maintaine (for the distribution of their ALmes) some Grave, Reverend Person who hath the
Office and Title of the Kings (or Queenes) ALmoner. Moreover, ALE (taken to the purpose will ALEvate and lift up the spirits with ALacrity, ALias Mirth, ALias Courage, ALias Exhilleration and Jocundity. The foundation and invention of the mysticall Art of AL∣cumy, was from the force and fume of ALE: Can it bee i∣magined that so many Grave and Learned men have laboured in vaine so many Yeares and Ages, with such excessive and infinite charge, but that they have found or know where to have the Rich, Rare, Invisible Philosophers (or ALEosophers) Stone; some of them with ALaborate paines, and some pretty cost, have attained so much skill and knowledge, that they have turned Land into Silver, and all into smoake and fume, and with as much Iron and Brasse as would furnish a house, they have made a piece of Gold as big as a lowse. But to returne to my Text, ALE; a mad wag, in a merry Song, doth affirme that ALE is not onely a Moover, Exciter, and Instigator to Arts and Sciences, but also that ALE of it selfe and in it selfe, is an Alcumist; as for example. It will turns your gold to silver wan, And your silver into Brasse. A Taylor it will make a man, And a man it will make an Asse. I must acknowledge that there are many and divers sorts of drinks of great Antiquity and use in this Island, as Syder, Perry, Matheglin, Mead, Braggot, Pomperkin, &c. These are all Native and naturall amongst us, of whom I will say little, because their use is not of that Amplitude or uni∣versallity as ALE is.
First, Syder is made of Apples, and held to bee most An∣cient, and that CAINE (having learned of his Mother EVE) did practise it when hee was a Vagabond, and got a great estate by it. My Country (Glocester shire) is most plentifully stored with it; when it is new it is Laxative, and being old it must bee sugred, and a skillfull Vintner can make it passe for White Wine, or Clarret, with a dash of red Perry; the Ancient Writers cannot agree, from whence it had its origi∣nall, some will derive it from Persepolis in Persia, others from Perue in America, one fetches the Pedigree from Pe∣riander, (one of the Grecian Sages) but my opinion is, that it was invented by one Parry a Welshman, a cousin German to Owen Tuedor, (of the Linage of the Emperour Pertinax, and kinsman to Cadwallador Magnus, the Epilogicall King of the Cambria Brittaines) howsoever Worcester shire is now the Fountaine and Magazine of Perry, it is delicious in the pallate, and in some places and constitutions it is very opera∣tive to qualifie drought, and quench thirst. Matheglin, (as it is related in the History of Monmouth) was first made in a fruitful Vally at the foot of Penmenmaure, and (in the Brittish Greeke) a Vally is called a Gline; in that Gline or Vally then inhabited one Mathew, who was called Mathew of the Gline, this Mathew had many swarmes of Bees (and brethren) you know Bees make Hony: This Hony of the Glinne, with the industry of this Mathew, was first invented, and it still doth beare the Authours name Ma∣thoglin; it is purgative, by reason of its melioration, it eases obstructions, it expells tremor cordis, it provokes dormosity, or sleepe▪ it is (for the most part) confined to the principalli∣ty (or 13. Cantons) and in those famous Territories it is e∣quivalent with Muskadell.
Mead, came from the Meades and Persiant, and though inferiour to Matheglin, yet it is much like it in taste and ope∣ration. Braggot, is not of any Ancient standing, it is an inflaming kinde of tap-lash, made of sundry Spices, being hot and dry in the third degree, it is good against cold and moist in the se∣cond; the Originall and Authour of it is unknowne. Pomperkin, some derive it from Pomerania, (a Dukedome in high Almaine) others from Pompey the Great; but it is not probable that so great a Spirit was the Inventer of so smal and inconsiderable a drinke; it is made of Apples, which are squeezed and pressed with water put amongst, it is a poore conditioned confection, and tis thought that Perkin Warbeck was the Authour of it, in his Rebellion against K. Hon. the 7. Beere, is a Dutch Boorish Liquor, a thing not knowne in England, till of late dayes an Alien to our Nation, till such time as Hops and Heresies came amongst us, it is a sawcy in∣truder into this Land, and its sold by usurpation; for the houses that doe sell Beere onely, are nicknamed Ale houses; marke beloved, an Ale-house is never called a Beere-house, but a Beere-house would have but small custome, if it did not falsly carry the name of an Ale-house; also it is common to say a Stand of Ale, it is not onely a Stand, but it will make a man understand, or stand under; but Beere is often called a Hogshead, which all rationall men doe know is but a swi∣nish expression: But to returne to my Text, ALE, from whence I have digressed, and too much made use of your pa∣tience. It is past mans understanding to conceive the admirable flowing and overflowing Innundation of ALoquence that Rhetorickally runs from the trowling tongue of a constant
ALE-drinker: he will speake ALEgories, so mystically sen∣tentious, that the wisest Bachan ALian Wine-bibber can ne∣ver comprehend or understand literally. ALE will make a man impartiall in his knowledge; for he that is quick and nimble in his ALE, will not know his ALiance from ALiens; for if you note the grave actions of a man in his ALE, how he will winke and nod upon you with grave and discreet postures; marke him when he holds up his finger, and turnes up his ALbum Oculi, (the white of the Eye:) then is his judgement Ales, quick, or swift, and his tongue is Ala, a birds wing, and his whole selfe is Alius nemo, or no man such, and then may he be justly esteemed to be no man of this world, but that he is mounted and ALEvated to an ALtitude higher then the ALpes; then will he talke of Re∣ligion beyond beliefe, interpret Scripture beyond all sense, and shew you points of the Law above all the reason that can be ALEged. Matheo ALEman by the vertue and inspi∣ration of the first Sylable of his sirname, ALE, did write that well composed Booke, and most excellent fancy of Guzman de ALfarach, or The Spanish Rogue. I should be endlesse, and speake much to no end, if I should repeat all the good and vertuous words which doe begin with ALE, as ALEgiance was ALowed for a Vertue in the dayes of Yore, and it is so yet in France, Spaine, and in other places; for which causes of tranquility and plenty, which former times afforded, our Reverend and Wise Ancestors gave them the name of ALcion dayes, as faire, cleare, and merry; for the Bird called Alcion or Halcion, or Kings Fi∣sher, doth never shew her selfe, or is seldome seene in foule tempestious dayes, or stormy weather. And chearfull times of the Heavenly Sunshine of Peace and calmnesse were a long
time the undeserved blessings which our English Edon en∣joyed: then one friend, or one neighbour, or more, did e∣steem a Pot of ALE for a better Companion in Company, then of ten Pot Companions that delight to be drunk, and do or study mischiefe. Besides all this, beloved, the word ALEbria is in our translation, a nourishing, and the word ALiment is nourish∣ment, or preserving, and what is more approved for the nou∣rishing and preserving of sick or aged People, then ALE? It was wisely and truely said, that Wine makes the heart of man glad, but (not to be prophane) if it be considered by whom, and when, and where those words were spoken; it is plaine and evident, that though the words are true and un∣alterable, yet the person that spake them is gone, and ga∣thered to his Fathers in rest and happinesse, the time when is much altred, and the place where most barbarously changed: first they were spoken by a King, and a Prophet, who could speake nothing but truth; secondly, those words were ut∣tered in a time, when plain honest dealing was used between man and man, without deceit or equivocation; and thirdly, they were spoken in the City of Jerusalem, the greatest and most famous Metropolis of the world at that time. It is to be more then conjectured, that there was not then in that great City (or scarce any where) to be found one craf∣ty Wine Merchant, one juggling Cooper, or one sophistica∣ting Vintener: that Wine was the pure and comfortable Juice of the Grape, without any mingle mangle, blending, balderdashing commixtion, that Wine would glad the heart of man indeed; and he that will fetch me a quart of that, shall have twelve pence, and thanks for his paine: But most of our Wines now a dayes doe not glad, but mad the heart of
man, as by dayly and lamentable experience we perceive by the frequent quarrelling, sighting, wounding, killing, and murdering, which happens by the excessive abuse of abused fuming Wines, and intexicated braines; of all which, ALE (most vertuous ALE) may plead, not Guilty. We have many good Townes in England, whose names are derived from ALE, as ALEsbury, so called because of the strong ALE which was brewed there, Nut brown ALE, as browne as a berry, and there the first Cawdles and Alebe∣ries were invented for the comfort and restoratives of old or sick folks, or women that lay in. The ancientest Records of the famous Towne of Abing∣ton in Barkeshire doe testifie, that the old name of it was ALEBENDONA, (and according to the old appellation) it is to this day, seldome or never unfurnished with most P∣table, Potent, high and mighty ALE. Sanbich, Darby, Do∣ver, Canterbury, Northdowne, (but especially Windsor) are Townes and places famous for brewing of this excellent Li∣quor. There are Antiquaries that doe more then suppose, that Hercules had never atchieved or accomplished his twelve la∣bors, but by the Vertue and Vigour of ALE, whereby hee vanquished Giants, Monsters, Dragons; for which Con∣quests and Victories (for the perpetuall honour of ALE) he was called ALcides. Also there are and have beene many good Knights and Gentlemen, with others of great worth and honour in England, whose names began with ALE, as Sir ALEn Per∣cy Sir ALEn Apsley, the Worshipfull Knights, and Gentry of the Families of the ALeffs, and ALEworths, or the AL∣thams, ALEsops, ALEas, &c. with the most famous Ma∣ster
Edward ALEn (our ever to be remembred Roscius, and renowned Stage Actor) he Acted an excellent part and piece of Charity in his life time, in founding and furnishing a neat and comely Colledge at Dulledge in Surrey, three miles from London, for the perpetuall reliefe of poore aged people, and a Free Schoole for the education of youth: hee got not his e∣state by Totos dies potare, by sitting whole dayes drinking, he had wisedome and discretion to know the right use, and a∣void the wrong abuse of ALE. For ALE is an enemy to idlenesse, it will worke and bee working in the braine as well as in the Barrell; if it be abu∣sed by any man, it will trip up his heeles, and give him either a faire or a fowle fall, if hee bee the strongest, stowtest, and skilfullest Wrastler either in Cornwall or Christendome. But if ALE bee moderately, mildly, and friendly dealt withall, it will appease, qualifie, mitigate, and quench all striffe and contention, it will lay anger asleepe, and give a furious man or woman a gentle Nap, and therefore it was rightly called Nappy ALE by our Learned and Reverend Forefathers. Besides it is very medicinable, (as the best Physitians doe affirme) for Beere is seldome used or applyed to any inward or outward maladies, except sometimes it bee warmed with a little Butter to wash the galled feete, or toes of a weary Traveller; but you shall never know or heare of a usuall drinker of ALE, to bee troubled with the Hippocondra, with Hippocondragacall obstructions or convulsions, nor are they vexed (as others are) with severall paines of sundry sorts of Gowts, such as are the Gongra, Pdogra, Chirogra, and the lame Hip-halting Sciatica, or with the intollerable griefe of the Stone in the Reines, Kidneys, or Bladder; for an expe∣rimentall
proofe whereof, a Reverend Grave Judge dyed lately, who all his life time was a hater of ALE, hee being perpetually or continually vexed with the tormenting pain of the Stone, and when hee was deceased, his body was ope∣ned, where in his Bladder was found a Stone as bigge as a Turkies Egge, which the skillfull Physitians and Chyrurgians did put into a Basen of ALE, and in a few houres the ALE did dissolve the sayd Stone to small Gravell. Take this into your considerations all you ignorant haters of ALE. For, are not your eyes opened, your mindes illuminated, your understandings enlightned, and all your spirits illustra∣ted with gratefull Capacities? As to remember the benefit of health which ALE hath universally beene the monumen∣tall meanes to produce and propagate to our Nation, within this three or foure yeares: Note but the great ALteration in the weekly Bills of mortallity, and you will finde by true observation, that French Wines being prohibited, and Beere (as the Proverbe saith) is downe the winde, ALE being in such deserved request, that for one flaggon of Beere that is dranke, foure pots of ALE are acceptably taken, whereby Physitians have not beene so much imployed, or Church∣yards so fat as formerly they were wont to bee when ALE was dispised, flighted, and neglected: therefore I say, let as many as doe love the preservation of their ves and healths, let them drinke ALE, and also let ALE be their drinke. Moreover, ALE is melodious humonically musiquALE, for it puts men into Quavers, Semiquavers, Minoms, Trou∣bles, (Treables I should say) Tenors, Counter-Tenors, Be, and more then sol, fa, ut, &c. for ELA is an Anagram of ALE, and ELA is the ALdeboron, or highest Note of Mu∣sick, either in winde Instruments, strung Instruments, or
Voyces; and truely it would doe a deafe body much good to heare the strange Tones, Tunes, and Voyces, which do ascend and mount above ELA three Notes and a halfe, from the merry Harmonious Songs, and Catches of men in their ALE; for ALE will make a man sing Selengers Round, to the tune of Greene sleeves, or Trenchmore, to the tune of Laugh and lye down. Also ALE will make a man a Linguisht, it will teach him the Greeke Tongue in two hours, if hee ply his ALE ALpha∣bet diligently: Me vat a whee, and me pat a whee, shaugh at orum, probibi tibi, &c. in Arabick, Cornutian, Diocrisian, Paracelsian, and Catharackt. Thus (beloved brethren) I have related unto you (in part) the Antiquity, the Honour, the Vertues, and severall uses of ALE, which uses will bee profitable to you, and to all such as will make good use of ALE. The Application of all that I have sayd, doth consist onely in your selves; the Lesson is short, (as my Text was) it is no more then this, make constant Application of ALE to your selves, and apply your selves constantly to ALE. And so my loving Brothers, I hold it no offence to shut up all with a friendly conclusion, that before wee part company, wee may (for the better remembring of our Text, which was ALE) every man drink off his two Pots for Edification. From my house at the signe of the Poets Head in Phoenix Alley, neare the Covent Garden, or the Globe Tavern, nigh to the midst of Long Aker, where ALE is my ALiment and Element. For your better Recreation heere followeth some few Lines in praise of ALE, written in merrier Times, by a most Learned Authour.
THE EXALE-TATION OF ALE,. The ancient Liquor of this REALME. OR, A Cleare Definition of its Efficatious operation in severall Paes, Arts, and Professions. NOt drunken nor sober, but neighbour to both, I met with a friend in Ales-bury Vale; He saw by my face, that I was in the case To speak no great harm of a Pot of good Ale. Then did he me greet, and sayd since we meet, (And he put me in minde of the name of the Dale) For Ales-bury's sake, some paines I would take, And not bury the praise of a Pot of good Ale. The more to procure me, then he did adjure me, If the Ale I dranke last were nappy and stale, To do it its right, and stir up my spri'te, And fall to commend a &c.
Quoth I, To commend it I dare not begin, Lest therein my credit might happen to faile; For many men now doe count it a sin, But once to looke toward a &c. Yet I care not a pin, for I see no such sin, Nor any thing else my courage to quail: For this we do finde, that take it in kinde, Much Virtue there is in a &c. And I meane not the taste, though thereby much grac't, Nor the Merry-go-down without pull or hale, Perfuming the throat when the stomack's aflote, With the fragrant sweet scent of a &c. Nor yet the delight that comes to the sight, To see how it flowers and mantles in graile, As green as a Leek, with a smile in the cheek, The true orient colour of a &c. But I meane the Mind, and the good it doth find; Not onely the Body so feeble and fraile: For Body and Soule may blesse the Black-bowle, Since both are beholden to a &c. For when heavinesse the mind doth oppresse, And sorrow and griefe the heart do assaile, No remedy quicker, than to take off your Liquor, And to wash away Cares with a &c. The Widdow that buried her husband of late Will soone have forgotten to weep and to waile,
And think every day twain, till she marry again, If she read the Contents of a &c. It is like a belly-blast to a cold heart, And warms and ingenders the spirits vitall, To keep them from domage, all spirites owe their homage To the Sp'rite of the Burtery a &c. And down to the legs the virtue doth goe, And to a bad Foot-man is as good as a saile, When it fills the veins and makes light the brains, No Lackey so nimble as a &c. The Naked complains not for want of a Coat, Nor on the cold weather will once turne his taile; All the way as he goes, he cuts the wind with his nose, If he be but well wrapt in a &c. The hungry man takes no thought for his meat, Though his stomack would brook a ten-penny naile; He quite forgets hunger, thinks on it no longer, If he touch but the sparks of a &c. The Poor man will praise it, so hath he good cause, That all the yeare eats neither partridge nor quaile, But sets up his rest, and makes up his feast With a crust of brown bread and a &c. The Shepherd, the Sower, the Thresher, the Mower, The one with his scyth, the other with his flail, Take them out by the poll, on the peril of my soul, All will hold up their hands to a &c.
The Soldier, the Saylor, the True man, the Tayler, The Lawyer that Sels words by weight and by tale; Take 'em all as they are, from the War to the Bar, They all will approve of a &c. All Religions and Nations, all Countreys and fashions, Rich or poore, Knave or Whore, dwarfish or tall, High or low, this I know, all will bow, Ile avow, To the high power of a &c. The Sallamander, Brazier that baths in the fire, Whilst his Bellowes are blowing a blustering gale Will shake off his full Kan, and sweare each true Vulcan Will hazard his wits for a &c. The Black-smith, whose bellowes all summer do blow, With the fire in his face still, without e're a Vaile, Though his throat be full dry, he will tell you no lye, But where you may be sure of a &c. Who ever denies it, the Prisoners will praise it, That beg at the Grate, and ly in the Goale: For, even in their Fetters, they thinke themselves better May they get but a two penny black pot of Ale. For though they be inclos'd in the Grate, They'le sing and be merry, and care for no Bale; Nor for hunger, for cold, for fetters or fate, The Comfort consists in a &c. The Begger whose portion is alwayes his prayers, Not having a tatter to hang on his taile,
Is as rich in his rags, as the churle in his bags, If he once but shakes hands with a &c. It drives his poverty cleane out of minde, Forgeting his brown-bread, his wallet, and maile, He walks in the house like a six-footed lowse, If he once be enricht with a &c. And he that doth dig in the ditches all day, And wearies himselfe quite at the Plough-taile, Will speak no lesse things, than of Queens and of Kings, If he touch but the top of a &c. 'Tis like a whetstone to a blunt wit, And makes a supply where Nature doth faile: The dullest wit soon will look quite through the Moon, If his temples be wet with a &c. Then DICK to his Dearling, full boldly dares speak, Though before silly fellow) his courage did quaile, He gives her the smouch, with his hand on his pouch, If he meet by the way with a &c. And it makes the Carter a Courtier straight-way; With Rhetoricall terms he will tell his tale; With Courtesies great store, and his Cap up before Being school'd but a little with a &c. The Old man, whose tongue wags faster than his teeth, (For old-age by nature doth drivel and drale) Will frig and will fling, like a dog in a string, If he warme his cold bloud with a &c.
And the good Old Clark, whose sight waxeth dark, And ever he thinks the Print is too small: He will see every Letter, and say Service better, If he glaze but his eyes with a &c. The Cheeks and the Jawes, to commend it hath cause, For where they were late but even man and pale: They will get them a colour, no Crimson is fuller, By the true dy and tincture of a &c. Mark her enemies, though they think themselves wise, How meager they look, with how low a wail: How their cheeks do fall, without spirits at all, That alien their minds from a &c. And now that the grains do work in my brains, Me thinks I were able to give by retaile, Commodities store, a dozen and more, That flow to Mankind from a &c. The MUSES would muse, any should it misuse; For, it makes them to sing like a Nightingale, With a lofty trim note, having washed their throat, With the Caballine Spring of a &c. And the Musician of any condition, It will make him reach to the top of his Scale: It will clear his pipes, and moisten his lights, If he drink alternatim a &c. The Poet divine, that cannot reach Wine, Because that his mony doth many times fail;
Will hit on the Vein, to make a good strein, If he be but inspired with a &c. For Ballads ELDERTON never bad Peer, How went his wit in them, with how mery a gale; And with all the sails up, had he been at the cup, And washed his beard with a &c. All Writers or Rimers, for such whose mishap, Is from Newgate up Houlbourn, to Tyburn to sail; Shall have suddain expression of all their confession, If the Muse be but dew'd with a &c. And the power of it shows, no whit lesse in Prose, It will file one's Phrase, and set forth his tale: Fill him but a Boul, it will make his tongue troul, For flowing speech flows from a &c. And Master Philosopher, if he drink his part, Will not trifle his time in the Husk or the Shale; But go to the Kernell by the depth of his Art, To be found in the bottom of a &c. Give a Scholar of OXFORD a pot of Sixteens, And put him to prove that an Ape hath a tail: And sixteen times better his Wit will be seen, If you fetch him from Botley, a &c. Thus it helps Speech and Wit; And it hurts not a whit, But rather doth further the Virtues Morale: Then think it not much, if a little I touch The good moral parts of a &c.
To the Church and Religion it is a good friend, Or else our Forefathers their wisdome did faile, That at every mile, next to the Church stile, Set a consecrate house to a &c. But now as they say, Beer beares it away; The more is the pity, if Right might prevaile: For with this same Beer, came up Heresie here; The old Catholique Drink is a &c. This Beer's but an upstart from Dutchland here come, Whose Credit with us sometimes is but small: For in the Records of the Empire of Rome, The old Catholique Drink is a &c. O! the ancient tales that my Grandam hath told, How merry we have been in Parlour and Hall; How in Christmas time, we would dance, sing, and rime, As if we were mad with a &c. The Churches much owe, as we all do know; For when they be drooping and ready to fall, By a Whitson or Church-Ale, up again they shall goe, And owe their repairing to a &c. Truth will do it right, it brings Truth to light, And many bad matters it helps to reveile: For, they that will drinke, will speak what they think; TOM tell-troath lies hid in a &c. It is Justices friend, she will it commend: For, all is here served by measure and tale:
Now true-tale and good measure are Justices treasure And much to the praise of a &c. And next I alledge, it is Fortitudes edge: For a very Cow-herd, that shrinks like a Snaile, Will swear and will swagger, and out goes his dagger, If he be but arm'd with a &c. Yea, ALE hath her Knights and Squires of degree, That never were Corslet, nor yet shirt of mail, But have fought their fights all, 'twixt the pot and the wall, When once they were dubb'd with a &c. And (sure) it will make a man suddenly Wise, Er'e-while was scarce able to tell a right tale: It will open his jaw, he will tell you the Law, As made a right Bencher of a &c. Or he that will make a bargain to gaine, In buying or setting his goods forth to sale, Must not plod in the mire, but sit by the fire, And seal up his Match with a &c. But for Sobernesse needs must I confesse, The matter goes hard: and few doe prevaile Not to goe too deep, but temper to keep; Such is the Attractive of a &c. But here's an amends, which will make all friends, And ever doth tend to the best avail; If you take it too deep, it will make you but sleep; So comes no great harm of a &c.
If (reling) they happen to fall to the ground, The fall is not great they may hold by the Raile: If into the water, they cannot be drown'd, For that gift is given to a &c. If drinking about they chance to fall out, Feare not the Alarm, though flesh be but frail, It will prove but some blows, or at most a bloudy nose, And friends again streight with a &c. And Physick will favour ALE, as it is bound, And be against Beer both tooth and nail: They send up and down all over the Town, To get for their Patient a &c. Their Ale-berries, Cawdles, and Possets each one, And Sillabubs made at the Milking-pale, Although they be many, Beer comes not in any, But all are compos'd with a &c. And in very deed, the Hop's but a weed, Brought o're against Law, and here set to sale: Would the Law were renew'd, and no more Beer brew'd, But all good men betake them to a &c. The Law that will take it under her wing: For at every Law-day, or Moot of the hale, One is sworne to serve our Soveraign the KING, In the ancient Office of a CONNER of ALE. There's never a Lord of Mannor or of Town, By strand or by land, by hill or by dale,
But thinks it a Franchise and a Flowr of the CROWN, To hold the Assize of a &c. And though there by writs, from the Courts Paramoūt, To stay the proceedings of the Cours Paravaile; Law favours it so, you may come, you may go, There lies no Prohibition to a &c. They talk much of State, both early and late, But if Gascoign and Spain, their Wine should but fail, Noremedy then, with us Englishmen, But the State it must stand by a &c. And they that sit by it, are good men and quiet, No dangerous Plotters in the Common-weal Of Treason and Murther: for, they never go further, Than to call for, and pay for a &c. To the praise of CAMBRIVIUS that good Brittish King That devised for his Nation (by the Welshmens tale) Seventeen hundred years before CHRIST did spring, The happy invention of a &c. But he was a Paynim, and ALE then was rife, Yet after CHRIST came and bid us all hail, Saint DAVID tid never trink Peer in her life, Put all Cwwrwwhibley a &c. The North they will prayse it, and prayse it with passion, Where every River gives name to a Dale: There men are yet living, that are of th' old fashion, No Nectar they know but a &c.
The PICTS and the SCOTS, for ALE, were at lots, So high was the skill, and so kept under seal: The PICTS were undone, slain each mothers son, For not teaching the SCOTS to make Hether Eale. But hither or thither; it skils not much whether: For drink must be had, men live not by Keal, Nor by Havor-bannocks, nor by Havor-jannocks, The thing the SCOTS live on is a &c. Now, if you will say it, I will not denay it, That many a man it brings to his bale: Yet what fairer end, can one wish to his friend, Than to die by the dart of a &c. Yet, let not the innocent beare any blame, It is their own doings to break o're the pale: And neither the Mault nor the good Wife in fault, If any be potted with a &c. They tell whom it kills, but say not a word, How many a man liveth both sound and hale, Though he drink no Beer any day in the yeare, By the Radicall humour of a &c. But, to speak of Killing, that am I not willing; For that, in a manner, were but to raile: But Beer hath his name, cause it brings to the Buyer; Therefore well-fare say I to a &c. Too many (I wis) with their deaths proved this; And therefore if ancient Records do not faile)
He that first brew'd the Hop, was rewarded with a rope, And found his Beer far more bitter then ALE. O ALE ab alendo thou Liquor of LIFE! That I had but a mouth as big as a Whale! For mine is too little to touch the least tittle That belongs to the prayse of a &c. Thus (I trow) some Vertues I have marked you out, And never a Vie in all this long taile, But that after the Pot there complet a Shot, And thats thonly blot of a &c. With that my friend said▪ That Blot will I bear, You have done very well, it is time to strike saile; Wee'l have six pots more, though I die on the score, To make all this good of a Pot of good ALE. FINIS.
