T61 E333_13 99861413 159651
BARNSTABLE Agreed to be surrendred to Sr. THOMAS FAIRFAX: With all the Ordnance, Armes, and Ammunition, and upon what tearmes: VVith a Copy of seven Articles (of the chiefe of those) for surrendring of EXETER; And the manner of the Armyes march towards OXFORD. These being true Copies of Letters examined, and Printed according to Order of Parliament. LONDON, Printed for Matthew Walbancke at Grays-Inne-Gate, 16. April 1646.
Honoured Sir; ON Friday the 10th of this instant Aprill, the Generall Himselfe, with one or two more of the Generalls Of∣ficers, with Master Rushworth (his Excellencies Secretary) went from Tiverton to Barnstable, to send in a summons to Sir Allus Ashley the Governour, for the delivering up of the Castle, and Fort, and are to returne to Callmb-Iohn to morrow, being the 12th instant, that so they may bee on Munday at Exeter, to see the performance of the Ar∣ticles, and after that wee have setled the City, wee shall march towards Oxford, which I here will bee about Wed∣nesday next (as is intended) or Thursday at furthest, but the most part of the foote are this day on their march for Oxford, Mount Raedford, with Hunkses Fort in Saint Tho∣mas parish was delivered up to the Generall according to agreement, I have here sent you the Copy of the seven first Articles; and by the next Messenger, I will send you a perfect Copy, From Teverton April 11. 1646. Your servant, T.T.
Articles of Agreement concluded upon by Thomas Ham∣mond Lieutenant Generall of the Ordnance, Colo. Sir Flardresse Waller. Col. Edward Harley, Col. Lambert Commissary Generall Stan, and Major Watson Scout Master Generall, Commissioners on the behalfe of the Right Honourable His Excellency, Sir Tho∣mas Fairfax Generall of the Parliaments forces on the one party, And Sir Henry Berkley, Sir George Par∣ry, Col. Ashburnham, Col. Godolphin, Cap. Fitz Ge∣rate, Mr. Iohn Were, Mr. Robert Walker, and Mr. Thomas Knot, Commissioners on the behalfe of Sir Iohn Berk∣ley Knight, Governour of the City of Exeter on the other party, concerning the Rendition of the said Ci∣tie, and Garrison. 1. THat that the City and Garrison of EXETER toge∣ther with the Castle, and all the Forts, and Mounts, places of defence, of or belonging to the same with all Ordnance, Armes, and Ammunition, Provisions, and furniture of Warre, belonging to the Garrison (excepting, what shall be excepted in the insuing Articles) shall be delivered unto Sir Thomas Fairfax Generall of the Parlia∣ments forces, or to any whom he shall appoint to receive them for the use of the Parliament, on the 13. of Aprill 1646. 2. That if any Officer or Souldier, or any person (included in these Articles) wrong, or plunder, in person or goods (in their march away, or before) any Citizen, or Country man, or any persons whatsoe∣ver, shal (as far as he is able) give satisfaction to the persons so inju∣red at the judgement of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax. 3. That if any Officer, Souldier, or any person [included in these Articles] shall after the date of this Treaty, wilfully break, deface, spoyle or imbese any Armes or other Provisions of Warre whatsoever
by the precedent Articles to be surrendred as aforesaid, shall loose the benefit of the ensuing Articles. 4. That the Princes, and Governesse, with his househould, shall have full Liberty to passe with their plate, monyes and goods with∣in 20. dayes after the conclusion of this Treaty (when they shall de∣sire) to any place within the Counties of England or Dominion of Wales, at the Election of the Governesse, and there to remaine untill his Majesties pleasure be further known, touching her settling, and the Governesse shall have liberty to send to the King to know his plea∣sure herein, and accordingly to dispose of her highnesse within the a∣foresaid limitation of places, and that fit and convenient Carriages be provided for their passage at reasonable rates. 5. That the Cathedrall Church, nor any other Church within the City shall be defaced, or any thing belonging thereunto spoyled or ta∣ken away, by any Souldier or person of either side whatsoever. 6. That the Governour, together with all Lords Clergie men, Gentlemen, Chaplaines, Officers▪ Troopers, and Common Souldiers (that will) shall march out of the City, with their Horses, full Armes bagge, and baggage and their goods, Colours flying, Drums beating, Matches lighted, with sufficient Convoyes, to Oxford, Pendennis, or the mount in Cornwall, at their severall Elections, and in case those Garisons shall refuse to receive the Common Souldiers, they shall de∣liver up their Armes to the Convoy, and have Passes to returne to their severall homes; Provided that all the Troopers, and Common Souldiers, which march not into the Garisons aforesaid, shall have libertie from both parties to goe to their owne homes, and also all those that shall so do shall march away without their Arms, enjoying their bagge and baggage. 7. That all those that shall march into the Garisons aforesaid, shall have free quarter in their march, and shall not bee obliged to march above 10. myles a day, and that such other Souldiers as are inhabitants in the City shall have liberty to stay, &c.
SIR, ON friday night the Generalls Excellency came before Barnstable, where he spent not much time before he treated about the surrender there∣of, which held dispute till Sunday, and then the Ge∣nerall being resolved not to loose time, sent in a summons to Sir Allen Apsley the Governour, with a Copy of the Articles whereupon Exeter was sur∣rendred, requiring the speedy rendition of Barn∣stable on the same tearmes, or else to let them know that he would admit no more delayes, but forth∣with fall on, which he was resolved to do, if the Go∣vernour had not sent an Answer of satisfaction. But there was an agreement made that night, The Articles are the same that Exeter was, only some∣things (as of the Cathedrall, and concerning the Princes; and the rest not usefull in that) were omit∣ted, other alterations not much. As Exeter surenders this day (for the entry into which place our men are now drawing up) so Barnstable surrenders to
morrow, they are to deliver up the Towne and Castle with all therein according as is exprest in the aforesaid Articles, and to remaine in the fort only, and after eight dayes, they are to surrender the fort also, and for performance of these articles, they are to give hostages immediatly, any two, whomsoever the Generalls Excellency shall make choyce of the Governour, and Deputy Governour only ex∣cepted, and they are to have liberty to lend to Oxford, to know His Maiesties pleasure, and have an answer if it may bee within the eight dayes, for they are to remain there no longer in the Fort, and for those who are to march away when they doe goe, I believe they will not much exceed one hundred, I can assure you that their hearts are very low, though they have not hearts to see the hand that makes them so; The Generall is returning back to take possession of Exeter full of laborious action, little rest day nor night; wasting his very spirits to hasten the worke, that the King∣dome may bee setled, depriving himselfe even of necessary refreshments, that so no opportunity may be lost, I presume that by that time these come to your hands, that the Van of our Army will bee a good way in Dorsetshire, The Generall intends
himselfe to hasten after with the Army, By the next I suppose that I shall be able to give you a List of the Ordnance, Armes and Ammunition in Exe∣ter, till when I rest, and ever remaine, Tiverton 13. of April 1646. Your humble Servant, N. T. FJNJS.
