T993 E56_1 99860088 155265
Good Newes from Sea, BEING A True Relation OF The late Sea-fight, betweene Captain William Thomas, Captain of the 8th Whelp, now imployed for the ser∣vice of the King and Parliament, against Cap∣taine Polhill, Captaine of the ship call'd the May flower Admirall of Falmouth, with the taking of the said ship. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Relation be printed and published. Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. LONDON, Printed for Lawrence Blaiklock, and are to be sold at his shop next to Temple-barre, June 26. 1643.
THE RELATION Of Captain WILLIAM THOMAS, Captain of the eighth Whelp. Touching his fight with Captain Polhill, Admirall of Falmouth, neer unto Brest, on the Coast of Brittain on the fourth of June. 1643. BEing commanded by your Lord∣ship, the tenth of May last, to convoy certain Vessels from Hampton, Torbay and Lynne, to Morleaux; I arrived at the Isle of Basse, the third of June, and staying there about twenty four hours, to get some Intelligence from the English Merchants at Morleaux, they sent me word, that
Captain Polhill, Captain Jones, and a prize Ship that they had lately taken belonging to Yarmouth, which they had man'd and fitted with ten pieces of Ordnance, were about that Coast neer Brest; and withall the said Merchants sent me three Masters of Ships, who had been taken by them, pillaged of all their Goods, and imprisoned till they gained an opportunity to slip away; upon some conference with these Masters, I found there was no more strength of English Shipping in those Parts, but these three men of Warre; and they told me their accu∣stomed manner was to set out their Scouts in severall places, to give them notice when they should dis∣cry any English Colours coming in the Trade, which they could do six or seven Leagues off, presently to Ship their Cables, go out, and by craft, and deceit, seize on them. I set sail from the Isle of Basse to the Trade, and when I came there, I took down my Foretop-Gal∣lant-Mast, and put English Vanes, in all my top Masts Heads, and took in all other Colours, with a resolution to meet with him, and surprize him, with the Charitie, a small Friggate with me, whereof Daux was Commander, having onely six small Peeces; and on Sunday the fourth of June, went in like a Merchant man, having covered my painting with old Canvas, took in all my Ordnance, kept close my men. He had his Spies there, which di∣scerned my coming in, Commander Daux coming three hours after me, with a Flag in the main Top: On Munday morning, they sent their Boat full of
men, with Muskets, Pikes, &c. to take us, but passed by me, with an intent to Board the Friggat, and viewed us narrowly, and returned, Boarding neither of us; I being more desirous of the Ship then the Boat, let them passe, and never shot at them; Afterwards Polhills Lievtenant came in a small French Boat, and in French habite, and came a Boord the Charitie Friggat, demanding whence she was, he answered, (as we had concluded before) his Ship was of London, and mine of Bristoll, both come from Bilboe, laden with Wool and Iron, and being pursued by Turks men of Warre, were fled thither for shelter, and desired to know what Eng∣lish Merchants were there on shore, that were bound for London, enquiring of him further, what English Ships were there of strength, that might accom∣pany us to London, for we were afraid. The Lievtenant presently repaired ashore, and acquainted Polhill, who made great haste to come out with his Ship, having in her two and twenty Pieces of Ordnance, and six Murderers, and appears to us about eleven or twelve of the clock, with an intent to have boorded us; But we were provided, with our Sails furr'd with Rope-Yarns, and the Ax at the Bitts, ready to cut the Cable, and to receive them assoon as they came neer us; and presently I cut the Cable in the Hause; and in two or three Boords got to winde-ward of him; and when I was drawn neer unto him, out went all my Guns, my Colours, and my Wast∣clothes, and shot at him, and followed him till
they run the Ship on ground; and I Anchored within lesse then a Musket shot of him when he was aground, with my broad side to his, and then I dis∣charged within one hour and a half, an hundred and twenty Pieces of Ordnance upon him, and he ply∣ed his Ordnance all that time very hot at me: I finding some of his Shot very dangerous, was for∣ced again to cut my Cable in the Hause, hoping to do better execution under Sail; and standing off one boord, I made in again to him, and gave him a broad side, which took place every Piece; which did so daunt and discourage him, that within one broad side or two after, we perceived the men to forsake the Ship. Polhill and the Master escaped out at the Gun-room Port on shore, half an hour before the Fight was ended. Then they strook down their Flag, and held out a white Cloth; but we being doubtfull of their treachery, and having but small Boats, I could not send men enough on boord; but I man'd the Fregat with my men, and commanded him to run as neer as he could, and to burn and destroy her, if otherwise they could not preserve her: But God be thanked, though she was mightily torn (with great difficulty, and much pains taking) we stopt her leaks, and preserved her, and have safely arrived with her at Stokes Bay. During the continuance of this Fight, I dischar∣ged an hundred fifty nine Pieces of Ordnance, and came off with the losse of one man, my self and another a little hurt. And two of his were slain out-right, if not more, and aboue twenty hurt.
There came from Polhils and Jones his Ship neer fourty of their men, and desired that I would en∣tertain them, which I did, wanting men to mannage my own Ship and the Prize, who are likewise all safely arrived with me; for which I heartily ac∣knowledge the goodnesse and mercy of God. This is the truth of our proceedings, which I hum∣bly submit to your Lordship. From aboard the eighth Whelp, the 20 of June, 1643. William Thomas. FINIS.
