W114 E94_30 99873450 155796
THE COPY OF A LETTER Sent From BRISTOLL: VVherein is set down the true Relation of the great Victory obtained by Sir WILLIAM WALLAR, against the Welch Forces, un∣der the Command of the L. Herbert. With the number of Prisoners taken by him, and other materiall Observations. As also▪ a Catalogue of the names and qualities of such Commanders as were taken in that Battaile. Together, With the names of the Conspirators against the Citie of BRISTOLL, with their Vocations and Habitations; as it is appointed to be published by the Councell of War in Bristoll, and the names of that Councell therunto Annexed. From a true hand in this City, who presented it to the Committee of Lords & Com. Apri. 3. at Haberdashers Hall. Aprill 4. Printed for R. D. 1643.
BRISTOLL, 1. April, 1643. SIR, I Presume the report of Sir William Waller his good successe against the Welch, is very common with you; yet lest you may not have full information of the truth, I have made bold to insert it upon assured knowledge. Sir William pretending when he went from Malmsbury, to fall upon Cirencester, sent thither all his prisoners, wherof one hundred have taken Oath to fight for the King and Parliament, and are entertained into pay, but Sir VVil iam made towards the Forrest of Dean, and to give passage over the River, made use of 30. boates that were intended for service at Worcester, and with them made a bridge over Sabrin, and so marched, forcing his passage through the Forrest to Highnam, a place where the Welch Forces were intrenched, and fell upon the reare of them, while other forces out of Gloucester fell upon the front, and so encompassed them, slew many, tooke 1326. prisoners, 500. Horse besides Commanders; a List whereof I have herewith sent you, as also a publi∣cation made by the Councell of War in Bristoll, with the names of the Councell, to which I referre you: since which overthrow given to the Welch, some other of the Kings forces tooke a Troope of Sir VVilliam Wallers Horse, but he soone recovered it againe, and about 51.
horse more of theirs, nine hundred pounds in money, and store of Victuall sent in by the Country. A judicious Gentleman your speciall friend, told mee, that the House of Ragland and all Wales, cannot raise such ano∣ther Army for Horse, Armes and Commanders; he hath spent at the least threescore thousand pounds in the ex∣pedition. The miscarrying of the last Post, as it hath made me loose my journey to Bristol, so it doth much pre∣judice the businesse here, cutting off all intelligence and commerse, giving advantage to the Maignants to raise what reports they please, who to make good this great losse, give it out, that the Lord Generall hath received a great overthrow, but we believe it not. I pray you afford me two words of the truth, the Country here, gi∣ving much credit to my relations, for which your paines they thinke themselves all ingaged. The plundering the last Carriers hath undone divers poore men, and unlesse some remedy be provided the mischiefe will bee great, and the distast greater, in respect that their robber∣ries are don with in so few miles of Windsor: excuse my boldnesse, who rest, Your humble Servant, T. W. A CATALOGVE of the Names of the most emminent Officers of the Lord HARBERTS Army; taken Prisoners at Higham upon the 25th. of March, 1643. SErgeant Major Generall Bret. Sergeant Major Fox.
Sergeant Major Griffeth a Recusant. Sergeant Major Throgmorton. Colonell Treaver Williams Baronet, a Commissioner of Array in Munmouth shire. Lieutenant Colonell Wigmore, a Captaine of a Traine Band in Hereford-shire. Lievtenant Colonell Dukes a Yorke shire Man. Captaine Kenus whose Father is Steward to the Lord Herbert and Commissioner of Array. Captaine Henry Lingurne a Commissioner of Array of Hereford-shire, a Gentleman of 3000. l. per annum, and a Recusant. Captaine Lochard, late High Sheriffe of Radnor-shire a Recusant. Captaine Berrington a Gentleman of 2000. l. per annum. Captaine Elton sonne of Mr. Ambrose Elton a Iustice of Peace of Hereford-shire. Capt: Adams Muster Master Generall, and Prevancer a Recusant. Capt: Iohn Abraall heire to Rich: Ahraall of Iuxen. Cap. Canniford a Commissioner of Array for Munmouth-shire. Cap. Arnold Burfill brother to Colonell Burfill a Man of 2000. l. per annum. Capt: Brooke a Somerset-shire Gentleman. Captaine Lews. Captaine Hooke. Captaine Philip Morgan. Captaine Roger Williams. Captaine Lewes Thomas. Captaine Thomas Hunt. Captaine Sympson. Lievtenant Thomas Lingurne, brother to Cap. Henry Lin∣gurne a Recusant.
Lievtenant Lochard a Recusant. Lievte: Weare. Lievtenant Butler. Lievtenant Charles Sommerset. Lievtenant Iames Wigmore, brother to Lievtenant Co∣lonell Wigmore. Lievtenant homus Morris. Lievtenant Pawlet. Lievtenant Knowles. Cornet Roger Ʋaugham of Ruerden a Recusant. Coronet Carny. Coronet Lee. Coronet Bradford. Ensigne Charles Madock. Ensigne Iohn Thomas. Two sonnes of Captaine Charles Booths Ensignes. Ensigne Pilkington. BRISTOLL the 28th. of March, 1643. It is this Day Ordered by a Councell of Warre with direction, to be Published, THat whosoever either in this City or Country, have or shall have in their hands any goods or estates belonging to any of the late bloody conspirators of Bristoll, whose Names are hereunto annexed, who endeavoured to cut off the garison there, and let in Prince Ruperts plundering Forces, or shall know where any of their goods are, and conceale the same, or hath, or shall help to carry any of them away, or whosoever hath, or ow∣eth any debts, Rents, ammunities or summes of money to any of the said conspirators, and shall not in some convenient time
after the publishing hereof: make kown the same to the Gover∣nour of the City BRISTOLL, shall undergoe and suffer the same penalty and forfeiture in their owne goods, Estates, and Persons, as men adherent to them, which are or shall be inflcted upon the same Conspiraters, and whosoever servant or other, that shall discover and make knowne to the said Gouernour any of the concealed goods, estates, Rents, amunities or summes of money to or of the said Conspirators belonging, whereby the said goods, debts or summes of money, shall come unto our possession for the service of the King, Parliament, and Kingdome; shall have a good reward. The Names of the CONSPIRATORS. ROwland Sachfild Mercha. Joh. Waldron Hornemak. Mr. Brint Parson. George Butcher Merchant. John Butcher Merchant, Francis Belcher Sope-maker. Thomas Barret Cutler. Thomas Browne. Phillip Barrow. John Casly. Robert Taylor. Cap. Boone. Edw. Boone. John Nichinas Trunke-maker. Tobie Goodier. John Williams, Hatter. 2. Haines, William and John Helliers. 2. Tristams brothers. Joh. Sopemaster and William. Richard Howell. Ephraim Goodier. Rich: Yeomans grasier. William Yeomans Marcha. Ro; Yeamans. Marcha. John Bradway, Vintner. Mr. Miller of St. Michaels. William Beane. Edward James Rope-maker. George Teague. Rich: Lucket. John Taylor Merchant. John Taylor. Edward Arundell Merchant. Edmond Dakers Plummers. John Dymmut Carpenter. John Throupe Gent. Dr. Markes. John Postor. Mr. Thomas Bursill▪ Jo: Collins Ro: Blacburough, Brewer▪ Ro: Browne of Clifton. Tho: Vaymond Jo: Cary Coop Captaine Doty,
Captaine Cole. William Coulson: Edw: Caple. Rich: Grigson. John Goodman. John sweetman. William Evans. John Bucher son to great But¦cher. Walton Cugly. Robert Dowlesse. Thomas Hilman. Mr. Greene Lawyer, and Stew- of the City. James Terrey. Griffen Batten. Nathaniell Street. William Pope. John Potrell. Corne Bradway. Samuell Warne. Henry Rusten. Thomas Matten. Edward Hungerford. James Abbot. Edward Hunt. William Dabber. Joseph Brown. Edmund Lews. Henry Priest. William Cox of Long Ashton. John Tilley Mercer. John Councell. John Rowde. Edward Taylor. William Jones. Thomas Redding. James Thomas. Nathaniell Blanch. The Councell of War. NAthaniell Fiennes. John Seymor. Thomas Walker. Hercales Langriedge. Henry Vaughan. Thomas Talbot. Thomas Rawling. Richard Hyrsley. William Lews. Thomas Eyre. Barnard Lasly. Mathew Swaine. William Franklin. FJNJS.
