W3287 R221176 42475293 151469
A SUPPLEMENT TO THE QƲEEN-LIKE CLOSET; OR A LITTLE OF EVERY THING. PRESENTED To all Ingenious Ladies, and Gentlewomen. By HANNA WOOLLEY. LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Richard Lownds, and are to be Sold at the Sign of the White Lion in Duck-Lane, 1674.
To all Ingenious Ladies and Gentlewomen. LADIES, The last I sent unto your view, The Queen-like Closet I presented you: And in it such rare Secrets, I may say, In no Book you will find (though read you may) The twelve years past since first in print I came More for my Countries good, than to get fame. My study was to impart to others free, What God and Nature hath informed me. I must not hide that Talent God me gave, Content I am others a share should have To practice what I teach; if pains they'l take, Amends for all my Care they will me make. Servant to Ingenuity I'le be, Such Ladies shall command all Arts from me. Nothing from them I'le hide, that's in my heart, To wait on them▪ I think it is my part.
And to confirm to them what I have writ, Fearing no Censures, mongst them that have Wit. If any one that Honour will e give, To see me in the place where  do live, I will them satisfie in every thing That they desire, and vindication bring Ʋnto my self, who have been much abus'd By a late printe Book, my Name there us'd: I was far distant when they printed it, Therefore that book to even I think not sit. To boast, to brag, tell stories in my praise, That's not the way ( know) my ame to raise; Nor shall I borrow thy  or Wit (Innocence will hide what fault I do commit.) My true intent is, for to serve you all; To Works to Write, to Come when you do call, Nor would I seem as dead while I do live▪ No commendation to me would that give: Nor like the idle Drone my time to pass, But as the Bee, suck Hony from Flower and Grass. The Quintescence of what I have I send; Accept it really, as I intend, For to accomplish those who want the skill, Their Tables to adorn and Closets fill. To those of riper Judgment I submit, To commend, or to consure what I've writ. Thus Ladies, I take leave, desiring still, Your pleasures and your fancies to fulfil. H. W.
TO THE READER▪ YOU find in my former Books Instructions, for Cookery, Preserving, Rare Waters, both Cordial and pleasant; Cakes, Jellies; several excellent Remedies for those in Consumpti∣ons, and for the Stone. I shall now give you some Di∣rections for washing Black, and White Sarsnets, or Coloured Silks; washing of Points, Laces, or the like; starching of Tiffanies, ma∣king clean Plate, cleaning of Gold
and Silver Lace, washing Silk Stockings, adorning of Closets with several pretty Fancies; things ex∣cellent to keep the Hands white, and Face and Eyes clear; how to make Transparent Work, and the Colours thereto belonging; also Puff Work: Some more Receipts for Preserving and Cookery: Some Remedies for such Ailments as are incident to all People; as Corns, Sore Eyes, Cut Fingers, Bruises, Bleeding at Nose; all these you may help, by my Directions, with a small matter of Cost; whereas else, you may be at a great Charge and long Trouble, and perhaps endanger your Eyes, or Limbs. I shall give you none, but such things as I have had many years Experience of, with good success, I praise God. As you dare conside in me, I pray make use of them: I hope you will not fear, since what I
have already imparted hath been found true, and hath benefited many. Some are of that mind, that they value nothing but what is, Far fetcht, Dear bought, or Hard to be had, and will rather prize those things which are kept Secret, though if known, are but simple: And such are apt to slight what is made known to them, not regard∣ing the reality of the Friend who doth impart it to them, meerly out of their Good-will, and to save their Purses. Such is the va∣nity of this wicked World, that whatsoever one doth out of a sin∣cere and Christian-like mind; yet it is slighted. I may compare it to those words in the Gospel, which says, Cast not Pearl before Swine. And, if Gallen, and Hippo∣crates and Paracelsus were alive, or any of the Wisest Philosophers, and should declare in Writing all
their Skill, and lay those Writings down to the view of every Eye, not one in ten would believe it. For my part, I am of that mind, never to condemn any Man till I prove it false; nor publickly to commend any thing, till I find it good. You may believe me, if you please, and as you find the Truth, so trust me. I have been Physician and Chirur∣gion in my own House to many and also to many of my Neighbours, eight or ten Miles round. I think it not amiss to recite some of those Cures I have done, the Places where I have done them, and upon whom; but cannot particu∣larly tell you with what, where the Cure is difficult; because there is in those cases a good Judgment required; and I use those things in those Cases which are not Com∣mon Receipts, which may as wel Kill, as Cure; but such things as I
find proper to take away the Cause of the Distemper; Expe∣rience with much Reading must give that understanding. I dare not therefore adventure to teach, but only those things wherein People cannot easily Erre, and by which they may receive good. For the rest of what I have spoken, and for many other things which I cannot in few words re∣late, if any Person will come to me, I will satisfie them to their content; and be Their Friend, and Servant, H. Woolley.
The TABLE, OR CONTENTS of this BOOK. A FOR any Ague whatever. page 18 B A Most excellent Bal∣som for wounds, p. 20 For pain in the Bones, 23 For biting of a Mad-dog, 29 To stench bleeding, 35 For the Bloody Flux, 36 Black-salve so Corns, 37 An excellent Balsom, 40 For a Bruise, 45 For a Burn, 46 Botch or Boyl, 56 To Dye black, 67 To boil Beef or Mutton to eat savourly, 87 Beef-Pye, 91 To dress old Beans, or French Beans, 96 Beef stewed. 97 Bisket, 105 C FOr a Cancer in the Breast, or for sore Eyes, p. 21 For a Cow that stales bloud, 24 To make Oil of Charity, 29 A Cordial Electuary, 36 Water for a Canker, 38 Consumption, 46 in the eg, 51 55 Colours for Puff-work, 66 More Colours. p. 67 To fry Clary, 83 To boil a Cock with broth, 88 A Calves head Pye, 97 Chilblanes on the hands 52 To Candy white Sugar, 110 Catarrhs, and Consumption, 112 Catholick Plaister, 111 Cordial Electualy, 121 Cordial waer, 122 To Candy Fruit, 126 To dess up a Chimney, 127. 129 D TO Cure a Deafness p. 27 A Diet-drink, 31 Drink for a Cough, and o-ther Distempers, 41 Deafness, 49 A Drink to comfort you, 121 E EMorroids or Piles, p. 59 F TO wash the Face, p. 9 For the Falling sickness▪ 18 For any spots in the face, 22 For a film in the Eye, 32 Faces scabbed, 58 Frames for Pictures, 6 Feathers of Woosted, 73 Fruits preserved, 108
G FOr the cold Gout. hot Gout, p 25 25 A Glister to cool and bind, 26 The running Gout, or any hot Tumor, 27 Plaister for the Gout, 28 Glast windows made clean, 68 To gild any thing with gold or silver, 126 H TO keep the Hair clean, and peserve it, p. 8 Rheum falling from the head▪ 19 To cure a Horse of a Cold, 24 Huckle-bone, 47 Pain in the head, 48 Heart-burning, 50 Passion of the heart, 50 Hangings for Closers, 72 I FOr the , p. 44 Impostame in the Ea, 48 so Ague or Feavor, 59 Jelly for a weak stomach 109 Jelly of Fruits, 116 K FOr Kbed-heels, p. 35 Kings Evil, 55▪ 56 L TO make clean gold and silver Lace, p. 7 Lip salve, 9 or other , 23 119 M MAdnese and fumes in the Head, 23 Falling down of the Mother, 28 To dress Mutton very sa∣vourly. 89 To stew Muscles or Cockles, 90 Marmalade of Damsons, 118 Marmalade with Barbersies and Pippins, 124 N TO Cure sore Nipples▪ 32 Numlness in Lambs, 48 Neats Tongues ported, 86 O A Most excellent Oint∣ment, p. 19 Obstructions, 113 P TO make clean Points, or Laces, p. 3 To wash and starch Points, 3 To make clean Plate, 8 To Cure one who pisseth their Bed, 22 Poultis for any Sore, 39 Pin and Web in the Eye, 43 Plague Sore, 57 Plague and Pestilence, ibid. Puff work, 64 To make the Puffs, 65 To acorn a Room with Prints, 70 To dess up Gloss plates, 72 Petticoats, Bodice or Belts embroidered, 81 To Pot Fowls. 85 To stew Parsnips, 90 Pigeon Pye, very good, 92 Loyn of Pork boiled, 93 To bll green Pease, 95
To preserve Green Pease a while, p. 95 Pudding of cold Meat, 98 Paste, very rich and dei∣cate, 120 R TO kill Rats, p. 23 For Rheum in the Eyes, 34 For the Rickets in Children, 35 Rheum and Cough, 39 Red-face. 54 Red Beets dressed well, 92 Rabbits stewed, 94 Sirrop of Roses, 107 S SWeet-meat of Grapes, 123 Sirrop of Snails, 118 Sweetmeat of Lettuce-stalks, 117 To wash white Sarsnets, 4 To wash black Sarsnets, Silk-stockings, and coloured Silks, 6 To ge spots of Ink out of any linnen Cloth. 7 Likewise, stains of Fruit, 7 Also, greasie spots out of Silk, Stuff or Cloth, 8 For the Stone and Choller, 32 For the Stone, 36 Sinew-strain, 45 Shingles, 47 Scabbed head, 51 Scurvy, 53 Squinancy or Sore-throas, 54 To stain Satten, 66 To starch Tiffany, 1 T TO keep the Teeth clean and sound. p. 10 To cure a Timpany, 30 Thistolow water, 31, 33 Tooth-ach, 44 Thrush in the mouth, ibid. Transparent work, 62 Colours for it, ib. More Colours for it, 63 64 A Toy to catch Flies, 125 V TO stew Veal savourly▪ p. 88 Sirrop of Violets, 106 W FOr VVorms, a miraculous Cure, p. 19 For Worms in Children, 57 Worms in the Nose, 58 in the Chest, ibid. Work for Chairs, 77, 78 To make Wax▪work, 182 To make the moulds for it▪ 184 To make the likeness of many things in Wax, without the help of a Mould, 185 To take the shape of your own hand, 186 To take the face of a dead Body, 187 For Eggs to be hard▪ and cut in quarters, ibid. Colours for Wax-work, 189, 190, 191 To make Spanish white, 192
LETTERS▪ FRom a Sister to a Bro∣ther, far distant from her, pag 19 From a Daughter to he Mo∣ther, 150 From a Mother to a Daugh¦ter in a Ladies Service, 151 The Answer. 152 From a Sister to a Brother, 153 From one Friend to ano∣ther, 158 The Answer, 156 From one Sister to another▪ 156 From a Lady to a Gentle∣woman, whom she hath a Kindness for, 157 The Answer, 155 From a Wife to her Husband, craving his pardon, &c. 160 From an Aunt to her Neece, 161 The Answer, 162 From a Widow to her Friend, desiring her Assistance▪ 163 The Answer, 164 From a Woman in Prison, o her Friend to help her, 165 The Answer, ibid. From a Seamans Wife to her Husband, 166 From a Servant to her Mistriss, concerning her Charge, 166 A Letter of Complement from one Friend to ano∣ther, 167 The Answer, 168 From a Mother to a Daugh∣ter, who had gone astray from her, 169 The Daughters Answer to her▪ Mother. 170 A Letter from a Gentleman to a Relaion of his, &c▪ 172 The Ladies Answer, 17 From a Gentlewoman to her Father, 175 From a Gentlewoman to her Ʋncle▪ 176 From a Widow to her Land∣lord. 177 From a Gentlewoman to her Brother at Oxford, 177 From a Gentlewoman in An∣swer to a Leter from a Gentleman who Courted her. 178 Another Letter from a Gen∣tlewoman, to one who Courted her for his Mi∣stress, 181 The Cause why good Chil∣dren, or the Children of worthy Parents, are off∣times in a distressed con∣dition, 135 The Cause why others do commonly run into mis∣chief and wickedness, 138 Advice to Parents concern∣ing their Children, and Advice to Children con∣cerning their Parents, 141 Directions for the more cu∣rious working and adorn∣ing of the Images of the Poetical Gods and Goddesies, p. 193, 194, 195, 196 Also for the better Drawing of the Months of the Year, 197, 198, 199
AN Advertisment. IF any Person desire to speak with me, they may find me at Mr. Richard Wolleys House in the Old-Baily in Golden Cup Court; He is Master of Arts, and Reader at St. Martins Ludgate. They may have of me several Remedies for several Distempers, at reasonable Rates. Likewise, If any Gentle∣women, or other Maids, who desire to go forth to Service, and do want Accomplishment for the same: For a reasonable Gratuity I shall inform them
stone, and keep them all the time from the Air, for that will spoil them. Then make your starch of a reasona∣ble thickness, and blew it according to your liking, and to a quarter of a pound of Starch, put as much Allom as an Hasel Nut; boyl it very well and strain it, and while it is hot, wet your Tiffanies with it very well, and lay them in a Cloth to keep them from drying, then wash your hands clean and dry them, then hold your Tiffanies to a good fire till they be through hot, then clap them and rub them between your hands from the fire till you see they be very clear, then shape them by a piece of Paper cut out by them before they were washed, and iron them with a good hot Iron, and then they will look glossie like new Tiffany. Thus you may starch Lawns; but ob∣serve to iron them on the wrong side, and upon a Cloth wetted and wrung out a∣gain. Sometimes (if you please) instead of Starch you may lay Gum-Arabick in water, and when it is dissolved, wet your Lawns in that instead of Starch, and hold them to the fire as before directed, clap∣ping them and rubbing them till they are very cleer.
To make clean Points or Laces. Take white Bread of half a day old, and cut it in the middle, and pare the Crust round the edge, so that you may not hurt your Points when you rub them, then lay them on a Table upon a clean Cloth, and rub them very well with the white Bread all over, then take a clean little brush and rub over the Bread very well, till you think you have rubbed it very clean, then take your Point or Lace and shake the Bread clean off; then brush it very well from the Bread, and take a clean linnen Cloth and gently flap it over oft-times. Thus you may get the soil off from white Satten, Tabby, Taffety, or any Co∣loured Silk; provided it be not greazy nor too much soiled. To wash and starch Points. Take your Points and put them into a tent, then make a strong ladder with the best Soap you can get; then dip a brush in that ladder and soundly rub your Point on both sides; so do till you
have washed it in four ladders, then wash it in fair water alone, then with blew water; and when you have so done, take Starch made thin with Water, and with your brush on the wrong side wash it over with it, so let it dry: then lay your tent upon a Table, and with an Ivory bodkin made for the purpose run into every close and narrow part of it, to open it betwixt the gimp or over-cast; likewise into every Ilet hole to open them. For the Laces after you have pulled them out well with your hands, you must iron them on the wrong side. Let your water be warm wherewith you make your ladder. When you take them out of the tent, iron them on the wrong side: let not the water be too blew with which you wash them. To wash White Sarsnets. Lay them very smooth and streight upon a Board, and if there be any dirty plats soap them a little, then take a little hard brush and soap it well, then dip that brush in water, and with it make a pret∣ty thick ladder, then take the brush and
rub your Sarsnet well, the right way of the Sarsnet side-waies of the brush, and when you have washed one side well, turn it and wash the other. Then have a clean ladder scalding hot, and cast your Hoods in double into it, and cover it, and still as fast as you wash them cast them into that; you must give them three good washes upon the board, and after the first ladder let the other be very hot, and cast them in a scald every time, then make up a scalding hot ladder, into which put some Gum-Arabick, steeped before in water, and some smalt to blew it a little, let them lie doubled up in that, close covered for one hour; when you come to take them out, be sure you dip them very well all over, and then fold them up to a very little compass, and squeeze them smooth betwixt your hands, then smoak them over Brimstone, then draw them between your hands e∣very way till they be little more than half dry, then smooth them with good hot Irons the same way you did wash them, and upon the right side of the Sirsnet.
To wash Coloured Silk. They are done the same way with the White, only there must be no blew, nor smoaking over brimstone. To wash Black Sarsnets. They are washed the very same way with the other, only wrinsed in strong Beer cold, without any Gum, and iron'd upon the wrong side, and on a woollen Cloth. To wash Silk Stockings. Make a good strong ladder with Soap, and pretty hot, then lay your stockings on a Table, and take a piece of such Cloth as the Sea-men uses for their Sails, double it up and rub them soundly with it; turn them first on one side, and then on the other till they have past through three ladders, then wrinse them well, and hang them to dry with the wrong sides outward; and when they are near dry, pluck them out with your hands, and smooth them with an Iron on the wrong side.
To make clean Gold and Silver Lace. Take the Lace off from your garment, and lay it upon a Table, and with a brush rub it all over very well with burnt Al∣lom heaten fine, till you find it to become of the right colour, then shake it very well, and wipe it very well with a clean linnen Cloth often times over. To get spots of Ink out of any linnen Cloth. Before that you suffer it to be washed, lay it all night in Urine, the next day rub all the spots in the Urine, as if you were washing in water, then lay it in more U∣rine another night, and then rub it again, and so do till you find they be quite out. To get the stains of Fruit out of any linnen Cloth. Take them before they are washed, and with a little Butter rub every spot very well, then let the Cloth lye in scalding-hot Milk a while, and when it is a little cooled, rub the spotted places in the Milk till you see they are quite out, and then wash it in Water and Soap.
To take out any greasie spots out of Silk, Stuff, or Cloth. Take a linnen rag and wet it very well in fair water, then with a pair of tongs put  live Sea-coal or Wood-coal up∣on the wet rag, and hastily close the rest of the rag about the coal, and pre∣sently lay it upon the greasie spot while it is smoaking hot; and when you do per∣ceive it to be cool do so again, and so do till you find they are quite taken out. To make clean Plate. Wash your Plate first in Soap-suds and dry it, then if there be any spots, rub them out with Salt and Vinegar. Then when you have so done anoint your Plate all over with Vinegar and Chalk, and lay it in the Sun or before the fire to dry, then rub it off with warm clean linnen Cloths very well, and it will look like new. To keep the Hair clean, and to preserve it. Take two handfuls of Rosemary, and boil it softly in a quart of Spring-water till it comes to a pint, and let it be cove∣red
all the while, then strain it out and keep it; every Morning when you Comb your head, dip a sponge in this water and rub up your Hair, and it will keep it clean and preserve it, for it is very good for the brain, and will dry up Rheum. To wash the Face. There is no better thing to wash the face with, to keep it smooth and to scour it clean, than to wash it every night with Brandy, wherein you have steeped a little flower of Brimstone, and the next day wipe it only with a Cloth. To make a Salve for the Lips. Take two ounces of white Bees-wax and slice it thin, then melt it over the fire with 2 ounces or more of pure, sallad Oyl and a little white Sugar Candy, and when you see that it is well incorporated take it off the fire, and let it stand till it be cold. Then set the skillet on the fire again till the bottom is warm, and so turn it out; anoint your Lips or sore Nose, or sore Nipples with this, and it will heal.
To keep the Teeth clean and sound. Take common white Salt one ounce, as much of Cuttle-bone beat, them toge∣ther, and rub your Teeth with it every Morning, and then wash them with fair water. I have spoken enough concerning your Cloaths, and Face and Hands; now I vvill give you direction for to be your own Chirurgions and Physicians, unless the case be desperate: but before I begin to teach, be pleased to take notice of vvhat Cures I have done, that you may be as∣sured of my ability. FIrst, Take notice that my Mother and my Elder Sisters vvere very vvell skilled in Physick and Chirurgery, from vvhom I learned a little, and at the age of seventeen I had the fortune to belong to a Noble Lady in this Kingdom, till I Married, which was at twenty four years (those seven-years I was with her) she finding my genius, and being of a Cha∣ritable temper to do good amongst her poor Neighbours, I had her purse at command to buy what Ingredients might
be required to make Balsoms, Salves, Oyntments, Waters for Wounds, Oyls, Cordials and the like; besides she pro∣cured such knowledge for me from her Physicians and Chirurgions (who were the best that all England could afford) and also bought many Books for me to read, that in short time, with the help of those Worthy men before mentioned, I soon became a Practitioner, and did be∣gin with Cut fingers, Bruises, Aches, A∣gues, Head-ach, Bleeding at the Nose, Felons, Whitloes on the Fingers, Sore Eyes, Drawing of Blisters, Burnings, Tooth-ach, and any thing which is com∣monly incident; and in all those Cures God was pleased to give me good suc∣cess. When I was about the age of two and twenty years, I was sent by this Noble Lady to a Woman in hard labour of Child, who being quite wearied out with her pains, she fell into strong Con∣vulsion fits▪ which greatly endangered both her self and her Child; but by Gods help those Remedies which I gave her caused her Fits to cease, and a safe De∣livery followed.
When I was Married to Mr. Wolley, we lived together at Newport Pond in Essex near Saffron Walden seven years; my Husband having been Master of that Free-School fourteen years before; we having many Boarders my skill was often exercised amongst them, for oftentimes they got mishaps when they were play∣ing, and oftentimes fell into distempers; as Agues, Feavors, Meazles, Small-pox, Consumptions, and many other Diseases; in all which, unless they were desperately ill, their Parents trusted me without the help of any Physician or Chirurgion: likewise the Neighbours in eight or ten miles round came to me for Cure. A Woman vvho had had a sore Leg one and twenty years I quite Cured. Another being kicked by a Churlish Husband on her Leg, so that a Vein vvas burst, whereby she lost at the least a pottle of Blood; I stayed the Blood and cured her Leg. A young Maid as she vvas cutting Sticks vvith an Ax, by chance cut her Leg sorely, she having long time been afflicted vvith the Green-sickness and Dropsie; I not only Cured her Leg, but also her other Distempers at the same time.
A Gentleman having got a bruise on his Leg by the lash of a Whip, and being in a desperate condition with it, so that he was in danger of his life, I in a com∣petent time did Cure. Many of the Convulsion-fits, and Rickets among Children I did Cure. One being bitten with a Mad-Dog, I in very short time did Cure him. Several Women who had sore Breasts and sore Nipples, I Cured. Many who had violent fits of the Stone, I eased them. A Man being much bruised with the fall of a Cart upon him, I cured. One being much bruised by Rogues meeting him on the way, and after they had beaten him down, kicked him on one side of his Head, so that his Ear was swelled you could see no shape it had, and withal fell into a Feavor: I, by Gods help did Cure. A Woman who for divers Months had a very great Flux upon her, I speedily Cured. A man lying sick of the Meazles, and being all struck in, so that it was thought he could not possibly have lived, I gave him a Cordial which brought them forth again and recovered him.
A Child of a year old being taken with the shaking Palsie, I Cured. A Man having a Pitch-fork run into the Corner of his Eye, I Cured. A Woman having a Stick run into the corner of her Eye, I Cured. A little Boy falling from a Bridge into a little River, cut his Head so with a stone, that while I had it in Cure there came forth a sliver of the Skull; I Cu∣red. A Man taken suddenly with an Apo∣plex, as he walked the Street, his Neigh∣bours taking him into a House, and as they thought he was quite dead, I being called unto him, chanced to come just when they had taken the Pillow from his Head, and were going to strip him; but I caused him to be set upright, and his mouth to be open by force, then did I give him something out of a little glass, and caused him to be rubbed and chaffed, and Air to be given him, so that in a little time he came to himself and knew every one: He lived about ten hours after, and gave God and me thanks, that he was not taken away in that condition, but gave him sence to make his Peace with God and to order what he had left. I willed
him to send for a Physician; which he did, who did approve of what I had done, but could not save his life. A Woman being struck with a staff upon the Lip, so that it was cut asunder with the blow: I in short time Cured. Many I did cure in that Town, which were burned with Fire, and some scalded, and none of them had a Scar. A Girle about twelve years of Age being taken with a Lethargy, and after I had brought her out of it she fell into strong and strange Convulsion-fits, which in few weeks I did perfectly Cure. After these Seven years were past, we lived at Hackney, near London, where we had above threescore Boarders; and there I had many more Trials for my Skill both at home and abroad. I Cured my own Son of an Impo∣stume in the Head, and of a deep Con∣sumption, after the Physicians had given him over. I Cured a Woman of Threescore years old, who had lyen Bed-ridden half a year of a Timpany, and was not able to help her self: This Cure I did in three days.
I Cured a Man-servant to a Gentle∣man, who had a sore Leg by a fall from an high place, and it was grown so dan∣gerous, that it was thought incurable. I Cured a Bricklayer who had a sore Leg by the fall of Timber, and because he was poor his Chirurgion gave it over. I Cured a Shoe-maker of a sore Leg, who had spent three pounds on it before he came to me. I Cured a poor Woman of a sore Leg, who was advised by a Chirurgion to have it cut off. A Cancer in the Nose I have Cured. Cankers in the Mouth and Throat. The Green-sickness in many. Dropsie, Jaundies, Scurvy, Sciatica, Griping of the Guts, Vomiting and Loosness. And for the Palsie, whether Dead or Shaking, I am sure none can give better Remedies, nor know it better than I do, having bought my Experience at a dear rate; there is none who have been more afflicted with it than my self, and (I humbly bless God for it) there is no Person more freer from it than my self, nor from any other Disease, and that is very much, I being now in my Two and fiftieth year.
Much more I could say, but I think I need not; for they who do believe any thing I write, will, I hope, have confi∣dence to make use of these Receipts I shall give them without any fear. It is altogether as necessary that you should know how to keep your Bodies in health, to preserve your Eye-sight and your Limbs, as it is to Feed or Cloath your self. Therefore the more fully to accomplish you, let me perswade you not to slight, but to value what I shall teach, and give God the glory; who out of so mean things as I shall name, he should, of his goodness to us, create in them so great a vertue. I do not attribute any thing but to his alone power, and give him praise when he pleaseth to make me an Instrument of doing good.
For any Ague whatever. TAke of the dried leaves of Lawrel which is esteemed in Gardens: Take of the fine powder thereof as much as will lie upon a sixpence by heap, mix it vvith any liquid thing, and take it one hour or two before the fit comes; do this three times and go to bed, and keep warm. The best thing to give it in is Treacle-water, Cardus-water, or Dragon-water. For the falling Sickness. Take a live Mole, and cut the throat of it into a Glass of Whitewine, and presently give it to the party to drink at the New and Full of the Moon (viz.) the day before the New, the day of the Nevv, and the day after, and so at the Full. This vvill Cure absolutely, if the Par∣ty be not above forty years of Age.
For an extream Rheum falling from the Head. Take some Lucatelia Balsom, and spread it thin upon the smooth sides of red Sage leaves, take five or six of these leaves with the other side downward upon a few embers of Wood Coals, and take the smoak through a paper tunnel into your mouth; thus do every morn∣ing till you find a Cure. For Worms, a miraculous Cure. Let the party drink their own Water with a little Methridate mingled therein, for three days together in the morning fasting, and walk after it. A most excellent Oyntment for all manner of swellings and sores, and for the Kings Evil, it will dissolve it if it be to be dis∣solved, it will both break and heal; it is good also for sore Eyes if anointed therewith. Take one pint of the juyce of Cellon∣dine, and boil it in one pound and half of new Butter never salted, till you may by your judgment think it to be enough,
so keep it in a Gally-pot for your use, and when you apply it let it be warm, and bath the place well, if it be not broken, but if it be broken, then dip fine linnen Cloths in it and lay on twice in the day, anoint sore Eyes gently with a Feather, every night till they are well. A most excellent Balsom for Wounds. Take a pint of the purest sallad Oyl, and put to it four ounces of common Brimstone beaten fine, and set it in the Sun for three weeks or more before you use it. If the Wound be inflamed, spread some conserve of Red-roses upon a linnen Cloth, and lay on over night, the next Morning bath it well with Brandy, and then lay on this Balsom with a Feather warm, use the Conserve of Roses till you find the inflammation to be quite gone, and if you perceive proud flesh to grow in the Wound, then lay in a little burnt Allom after you have washed it, before you lay on the Balsom. Conserve of Red-roses is also very good to lay upon inflamed Eyes, moist∣ned first with a few drops of Plantain Water,
For Madness, and for fumes in the Head. Rub the soles of the Feet with the Spirit of Brandy every night, and apply the Herb Henbane, bruised with a little Nutmeg and Whitewine Vinegar to the Temples; it will ease pain in the Head, and cause the Party to sleep. For pain in the Bones. Anoint the place grieved with Dogs grease every night by the fire, and wear socks cut out of a Bears skin in their Shoes every day, and their pain will be gone. For the Leprosie, or any other venemous Humour. Swallow every twelve hours a bullet of Gold, and still as you void one wash it in Treacle-vvater, and at the due hour swallow it again; continue doing this a long time and it vvill Cure. To kill Rats. Fry a Spung in Butter and hang it by a string, and the Rats vvill forsake the Room.
To Cure a Horse of a Cold, though he hath had it never so long a time. Take two new laid Eggs, put them into an Earthen-pot, and then put in as much Whitewine Vinegar as will cover them, then cover them close and put them into a Horse-dunghill and cover it over with the dung, so let it stand twelve hours, then pour it down the Horses throat shells and all, and gallop him af∣ter it, and Cloath him very warm; be sure you give it him three or four times, but there must be a day between every time. For a Cow that Stales bloud. Take a good handful of the Herb called Peruwinckle and bruise it, and boyl it in a quart of Ale till it comes to a pint, then strain it and give it her to drink; do so three times. Peruwinckle hath also an excellent vertue to stench bleed∣ing at the Nose in Christians, if it be made into a garland and hung about the Neck.
An excellent Medicine for the Cold Gout. Take Stone-pitch three drams, pound it to dust, and set it over the fire; Venice Turpentine so much as being mingled with the Pitch, will make it spread when the Pitch is cold; the best Turmerick, 5 or 6 Races beaten to powder, Letharge of Gold half an ounce; mix all these toge∣ther when you have warmed the Pitch, and work them together that all may become one substance, and use it for your Plaister, following the Gout as it shall remove. For the Hot Gout, A most admirable Medicine. Take the Bones of a Horses Legs, break them, and take the Marrow out of them and wash it clean, it must be the whitest Marrow, wash the Bones also, and put both the Marrow and them into a Kettle with Running-water, and set them a boyling, scim off the first rising for that will be froth, then scim of all the rest that ariseth and save it, as you
do the Neats-foot Oyl; then take of Is∣sop, Time, Camomile, Rosemary, and six leaves of red Sage (of all) the quantity of a handful, and when you have got as much Oil as you can, then boil the Herbs in it for a quarter of an hour, then strain it and keep it in a Gally-pot or Glass; the quantity of a small Nut will go a great way; you must strip the Rosemary and Time upwards, and be sure you put in none of the stalks; put in as much Sothernwood-tops and of Lavender Cotton, as you did of each of the other Herbs, and boil them with the other, keep it well from the Air. An excellent Glister to Cool and Bind. Take a quart of new Milk, and a handful of Knot-grass, as much of Bramble, as much of small Plantain; boil these together in the Milk, then strain it, and put in six penny weight of Bolear∣moniack, and administer it blood-warm.
For the running-Gout, or any hot Tumor. Take Mallows, Violet leaves, Marsh-Mallows, Melilot, of each two handfuls, Linseeds beaten two ounces, Crumbs of Bread as much; boil these in Milk and make a Poultis therewith; then put into it a little Oil of Roses, and apply it to the grieved place very warm twice a day. To Cure a Deafness which is caused by the stoppage of the Ears by wax. If it hath been long, then drop into the Ear a little of Bitter-Almonds warmed, for a week together every Night; when the Party is in Bed then take a little warmed Sack, with as much of the best white Anniseed-water, and seringe the Ears with it once a day for three days together, and keep them stopped with black Wool. If they have been deaf but a little while, then the Wine with the Anniseed-water will be sufficient, with∣out the Oil of Almonds.
For the falling down of the Mother. Take Smiths Water and Oaken leaves, or the Bark of Oak, and boil them well in a Pewter dish close covered, then strain it through a Cloth; wet Cloaths therein and apply them hot two or three times in a Night when you go to Bed: Thus do for a week together, and keep your self warm in the day time. A most excellent Plaister for the Gout, wherewith a Gentleman as I knew was Cured after all the Chirurgions had given him over. Take half a pound of un-wrought Wax, half a pound of Rosin, one ounce of Olibenum, four ounces of Letharge of Gold, three quarters of a pound of White-lead finely beaten and searced; then take a pint of Neats-foot Oyl, set it on the fire with the Wax and Rosin, and when it is melted put thereto the o∣ther powders, and stir it fast with a stick till you find it be enough: so make it up in Rouls, and keep it for your use, and when you feel any pain apply it upon linnen.
For the biting of a Mad-dog, taught by Doctor Mathias. Take of Rue, of Garlick, of scraped Pewter, of each two ounces, of Venice-Treacle one ounce, of Muscadine one quart; put all these into it, stop it close and boil it in a Kettle of water for the space of two hours, then pour off the clearest, and apply some of the dregs to the place bitten, and give the Patient two spoonfuls to drink of the Liquor, Morn∣ing and Evening for nine days together. This never failed Man nor Beast. To make the Oil of Charity. Take Rosemary, Sage, Lavender, Ca∣momile, the lesser Valerian, of each one handful; cut them small and put them into Oyl-Olive, let it be very thick with the Herbs, let it infuse seven daies in the Sun; then take the Glass wherein they are and wind about the bottom a little Hay, and set it into a Kettle of seething Water, and let it stand two hours; then strain it out and put in Herbs; and do as before, so do three times; then put in Valerian alone and do as before, then
strain it and let the Oyl settle: keep the clearest for Christians, and the grounds and Herbs for Beasts. The Vertues. It healeth green-Wounds and Bruises (if inwardly:) Take a spoonfull of the clearest Oil in a little warm Posset-drink, and go to Bed and sweat after it. It cu∣reth the Tooth-ach if it comes of a cold Rheum, dipping Clothes in it and ay to the Cheek. It is good for all Aches that come of Cold. It is good for Deafness, if it be dropped into the Ear warm; if first the head be carefully opened with the stream of red-Sage and Milk boiled together. It will also Cure or knit to∣gether a broken Rib. To Cure a Timpany. Proved by me. Take shell-Snails, crack their shells and take them off, then put the Snails into a Cullender for a little while to drain, then beat them in a Wooden-Boul or Mortar till you find they are well beaten; then warm it a little in a stone-Pan and spread it upon Sheeps-leather, and lay it all over the Belly when the Party goes to Bed, and bind it on: the next Moning take it off, and lay in the stead thereof a warm Cloth. Thus do three Nights together.
To make the Black-water, to Cure a Thisto∣low Woolf; Noli me tangere; or any Tetter or Scald; or any other Sores. Take the fattest Wool about the Cod of a Sheep, dry it in an Oven after Hou∣shold-Bread is drawn; then beat it into fine powder; put to it a sufficient quan∣tity of white Rose-water, with a little Mercury sublimate, and so apply it to the grieved places, by wetting linnen Rags and lay it on warm. A most excellent Diet-drink for any Disease, caused by sharp or foul Humors. Take Sasa-perilla 4 ounces, Sasafras-wood 4 ounces, and China-root 1 ounce, 4 handfuls of Egrimony, 4 handfuls of Colts-foot, 4 handfuls of Scabions, 2 pen∣ny worth of Marsh-Mallow-root, one handful of Betony, 1 handful of Ladies-mantle, 1 handful of Sanicle, and 1 root of Columbine; shread the Roots above∣said, and put them together with the Herbs into three gallons of Running-water; boil it to two Gallons, then strain it, and put to the water one gal∣lon more of Water, and boil it until it be half consumed; then strain this
drink, and put thereto one pottle of Whitewine, and one pint and half of Hony, boil it a little again and scum it very clean, then take it from the fire, and put in two ounces of Sena, and three quarters of an ounce of Rubarb; drink a draught thereof Morning and E∣vening: It is good for Dropsie and Scur∣vy. For a Film in the Eye. Take English Hony, and the Marrow of a Goose wing, of each a like quantity, warm them together, and lay them on the Eyelid with a Feather, and let it go into the Eye, dress it twice a day till it be well. It will cure those films which do come of the small Pox. To Cure sore Nipples, or for abruise which comes by a fall. Take Persley and shred it, and boyl it in Cream till you see an oil on the top of it; then take that oil and boil with a little Loaf Sugar, and so apply it. For the Stone and Choler. Half an ounce of Cassia in the Cane, taken from the point of a knife, and pre∣sently
after it half an ounce of Manna, dissolved in Posset-drink, and two hours after that drink Lemmon Posset-drink: This you must do three days together. To make Thistolow Water. Take of Bolearmoniack four ounces, Camphire four ounces, white Coperus one ounce; slice the Camphire thin and beat the Coperus fine; then boil them two together in an Earthen-Pan never used, they will melt of themselves with∣out any thing to them; when they are melted, stir them together with a little stick till they are hard, then beat them in a Mortar to a powder, and then beat your Bolearmoniack and mix with them very well, and keep it tied up in a blad∣der (it will keep seven years:) when you use of it, take a quart of Spring-water and make it boiling hot, then put in one good spoonful of the powder and stir it about, and when it is cold put it into a Glass, and cover it: When you dress any Wound or Thistolow with it, you must warm it very hot, and bath the place well with it, then double some soft Rags and wet them in it, having
before a little Hony in the heating of it; so lay on your wetted Rags, and bind them on: thus do twice a day till it be well. This heals very fast, if the Wound be fit to be healed; but if there be any inflammation in it, it is not for it. If you use it for the Eyes, you must warm it, and drop it in. I did Cure a Gentlewoman of a Thistolow in the Eye with it, which she had by the Small-Pox: And several sore Legs I have Cu∣red with it. It is very good for the Itch (and for Gald-Horse backs) only you must dou∣ble your quantity of powder, and always put in Hony when you heat it; for that doth cleanse and help to heal. For Rheum in the Eyes. Dragons-blood, Bole-armoniack, and Mastick beaten and searst, of each a like quantity; mix them with the white of an Egg well beaten: then spread it on a piece of Leather, and lay it on the Fore∣head, from one Temple to another, and let it lie till you be Cured; which, with Gods blessing, will be in three days.
To stench Bleeding at the Nose, or in Wounds. Take of Frankinsence one dram, A∣loes half a dram, beat them into fine powder; then beat the white of an Egg and mix with it, let it be of the thickness of Hony; dip the wool of a Hare in it, and apply it to the Wound, and bind it on: if to the Nose, spread it upon a lin∣nen Cloth, and lay it to it. For Kibed Heels. Take the Wool of a Cony, and the white of an Egg, beaten together, and spread it upon a linnen Cloth and lay it on: but if they are broken, then take a live-Mouse and flea it, and lay the skin on while it is warm. For the Rickets in Children. Take of the inner Bark of Ivy, the in∣ner Bark of Ash, Harts-tongue leaves, branches of Tamerisk, boil them in sour Gallons of middle-Wort, and put in so many of Hops as you think will keep it: when it is cold enough, work it up with Yeast as you do
other drink, have one Vessel under ano∣ther, and let the Child drink no other drink for a quarter of a year. I have cured many with this drink, and a Plai∣ster of Paracelsus upon Sheeps leather to the small of the back. An excellent Remedy for the Stone. Take White-wine and quench a black Flint in it five several times, then sweeten it with Sirrup of Marsh-Mallows, and take it Morning and Evening for three days. An excellent Cordial Electuary. Take of Conserve of Sage-flowers, Rosemary-flowers, Marigold-flowers, and of red-Roses, of each one ounce, mix them together with one ounce of Sirrup of Clove-gilly flowers, and six sheets of leaf-Gold; keep it in a Gally-pot, and take every night when you go to bed as much as a little Walnut. It is very good for any weak Body. For the Bloudy-Flux, or other Loosness. Take two or three Races of Ginger and slice them thin, and lay some of them
ever a Chaffing-dish of Coals; then sit over the heat and smoak of it, and take heed you catch no Cold: Do this Morn∣ing and Evening for three or four days. For the Worms in Children. Take of the tops of unset-Leeks, with the lower part also of them, one hand∣ful, as much of the tops of Wormwood; chop them small; then set them on the fire with a little fresh Butter and a little Whitewine Vinegar, and boil them till the Herbs be soft, and that it be reasona∣ble thick; then put it between two linnen Clothes sewed like a Bag, and lay it warm all over the belly of the Child at Night, and bind it on with a Cloth. The next Morning take it off and put a warm Cloth instead thereof. Thus do three or four Nights toge∣ther and it will cause them to void the Worms. It doth also draw Wind and infection out of the Body. To make a black Salve very good for Corns, or for any Sore old or new. Take a pint of sallad Oyl, and half a pound of Red-lead, and put them into a
skillet that will hold three pints, or near, for fear of boyling over; stir it all the while, and let it boil softly till you per∣ceive it to look black, and that it leave boiling and doth smoak; then take it from the fire, and let it stand till it be quite cold, then warm the bottom of the Skillet and turn it out. An excellent Water for a Canker in the Mouth, or for any Sore. Take of Rosemary, Sage, Plantain and Scurvy-grass, of each one handful, one little branch of Herb of Grace, and a little Sweet-bryer; boil these in a quart of Water and a quart of White-wine, and put therein a bright shining Sea-coal as big as an Egg, one that was ne∣ver burned; let them boil softly over a slow-fire, close covered, till half be con∣sumed; then strain it out and put in some Roach-allom; make it sharp with it; then make it very sweet with Hony, and set over the fire again till it be boyling hot; then when it is almost cold put it into a Glass-bottle, and keep it for use. When you use it, wash your Mouth with it very hot, three or four times in a day; and then take a little warm Hony in
your Mouth to ease the smart: Bath-Wounds with it very hot and well, then dip linnen Clothes in warm Hony and lay on. Dress it twice a day. A very sine Poultis to lay on any Sore, to take the inflammation out of it; or to lay to a sore Breast to break, or to dissolve it if it will not break: It will also heal it if broken. Take a quart of Milk, and boil it with two slight handfuls of Oatmeal, and one good handful of white-Lilly leaves (I mean the green leaves of the white Lil∣lies cut small) when it is boiled enough, put in as much of the best sallad Oil as will make it very soft and moist; accord∣ing to the bigness of your Sore spread some of it upon a linnen Cloth, and lay o∣ver it as hot as you can suffer it Morning and Evening: when you dress it wash it with a little Brandy and Butter. For a tickling Rheum and Cough. Take of Conserve of Fox-lungs two ounces, Sirrup of Colts-foot, Sirrup of Maiden-hair, Sirrup of Hore-hound, Sir∣rup of Hysop, Sirrup of Violets, of each one ounce; mix them well together, and take them often in the day or night upon a Liquorish-stick.
An excellent Balsom for inward Bruises, for outward Wounds, and for the Stone. Take of Oyl-Olive, Oyl of Turpen∣tine, and of the best Whitewine, of each one quart, put into them three good handfuls of the tops of St. Johns Wort, with the flowers and seeds; let them stand in a Glass in the Sun ten daies; then put them into a long Gally-pot, and set that pot into a Kettle of water, and fa∣sten it with Hay; let the water seeth for two hours, then take it out and set it by: alwaies keep it covered. If you take it for the Stone, take a spoonful of it at a time in a Glass of Whitewine, in the Morning fasting, for three days together at the New and Full of the Moon; but if you should be sud∣denly taken, then take it when your self is in pain. For Sores, warm it a little, and after you have vvell vvashed the Wound with Brandy, lay on the Balsom with a Fea∣ther, and dip Lint in it and lay into it, and a piece of Hogs-bladder over that, that the linnen you bind it up with may not soak it up, dress your wounds Morn∣ing and Evening.
If you take it for an inward Bruise, take two spoonfuls of it in a Glass of Whitewine, and go to bed and sweat, do so three nights together; be sure to jum∣ble the pot well together when you take any▪ or else the Oils vvill be at the top, and the Wine at the bottom; the Herbs and Flowers applyed stench bleeding in Wounds, or at the Nose. A most admirable Drink for a Cough: it also expelleth any congealed Blood, Im∣postume, or other filthy Humour. It healeth all inward Ʋlcers, and cooleth inflamed Lungs, and also healeth Ʋl∣cers in them. Take two pounds of quick-Lime, and put it into ten quarts of Spring-water in an Earthen-pot; let it stand twenty four hours; then you will see as it were a thin ice on the top of it, which you must take off very clean with a scimmer, then pour off all that is clear into another pot, and put into it these things following: Of blew Figgs slit in two half a pound, of Raisons of the Sun stoned half a pound, of Liquorish scraped and sliced thin four ounces, of China Root sliced
thin two ounces, of Anniseeds bruised one ounce, of the shavings of Ivory four ounces, of Maiden-hair one handful, of Burrage, of Pimpernel, of Balm, of Penny-Royal, of Colts-foot, Scabions, Horehound, of St. Johns Wort, of each one handful, and half a handful of Ma∣rigold flowers; then put in four ounces of Earth-worms, slit and cleansed from their filth with Whitewine. Let all these steep in that water 24 hours; then take it and strain it gently and keep it in Glass-bottles; drink there∣of Morning and Evening a good draught (or if you please) oftener, and you will find a great benefit. Take two pounds more of quick-Lime, and put it into the same quantity of Spring-water, and do as you did before; only you may use the same Ingredients as you made the other, without any new.
For a Pin and Web in the Eye. Take of red-Rosewater one quarter of a pint, put into it two pennyworth of Mastick finely powdered, and one quar∣ter of an ounce of white Sugar-Candy; then have in readiness of burnt-Allom, and white Sugar-Candy, of each a like quantity beaten fine and searsed, and mix∣ed well together: When you dress the Eye, first wash it well with the Water, and then blow in some of the powder with a quill, and hold your hand over it till the smart be gone; the next Morning let some Breast-milk be milked into it, and do nothing else in the Morning; and every Evening use the other: so do till your Eye be well. Do not put any Cloth, or Silk before your Eye, for that poysons it, by causing the venemous humor to return. This Water is very good for other Sore-Eyes, if they be well washed with it Morning and Evening, and if the Rheum be very much in the Eyes; then lay a plaister of Burgundy-Pitch to the Nape of the Neck, and let it lie as long as it will stick.
For the Tooth-ach. Anoint that side of the face on which the Tooth-ach is, from the Temple down to the lower part of the Ear (upon all those Veins which carry the Rheum to the Teeth) with a few drops of Oil of Amber; work it well with your hand and gently, then spread a black Ribbon two penny broad with Mastick, and lay it upon the place which you did anoint, and keep it on. For a Thrush in a Childs mouth. Wash it Morning and Evening with a little Verjuyce and Hony, warmed a lit∣tle, and then blow in some white Sugar-Candy beaten fine with a quill. For the Itch. Take some common Brimstone▪ beaten fine, and mix a little beaten Ginger with it; then tie it up in a Tiffany or Lawn, and let it▪lie in strong Whitewine Vine∣gar with some Roach-Allom; when it hath lien all night you may begin to use it, but the longer it lies the better it will be; when you use it, take up the Cloth
wherein the Brimstone is tied, and rub all your Joynts with it very well every night when you go to bed; then take a little Methridate before you go to bed; so do till you are Cured. It is a dan∣gerous thing to cure the Itch, and not to drive it out, for that strikes it in, and many times it falls upon the Lungs; some∣times it causes Convulsion-fits, Apo∣plexies or Lethargies if not driven out. It is also very necessary when you have quite killed and cured it, to purge the Party very well, to prevent further mis∣chief. For a Bruise where no skin is broken. There is no better thing than to bath it well with Oil of Spike, morning and e∣vening. For a Sinew-strain. Take strong Beer or Ale and boil it till it be very thin, then spread it upon Leather, and lay it on as hot as you can suffer it, and let it stay on.
For a Consumption, or other weakness. Take a Gallon of strong Ale-wort, and put therein two ounces of Liquorish scraped clean and sliced thin, and one ounce of Anniseeds bruised; boil them together till it be very thick; then strain it while it is hot, and keep it in a Gally-pot, and take thereof every Morning and Evening: It is a very good Remedy. For a Burn. Take the juyce of a great Onion, and put to it three spoonfuls of Fair-water, and as much pure sallad Oil, and beat it together very well with two or three Feathers tied together; beat it till it be thick and white, and lay it on with a Feather; then lay on very thin Raggs dipped therein; dress it three times in a day, for you must not let it be dry; and when you do dress it, anoint the Cloths with some of it before you take them off, that they may come easily: the pul∣ling of them off when they are hard and dry is that which makes a Scar. When you perceive the fire to be quite out, then leave out the juyce of Onion
and use only the Oil and Water, and be¦sure you anoint it eight or ten days after it is quite well. I have Cured many Burnings, and some with Gunpowder, without a Scar, with this Medicine. For the Shingles. Take a Cat, and cut off her Ears, or her Tail, and mix the Blood thereof with a little new-Milk, and anoint the grieved place with it Morning and Evening for three days; and every night vvhen the Party goes to Bed give her or him two spoonfuls of Treacle-water, to drive out the venom. To take away the pain in the Huckle-bone, or for any Old ach. Take of Burgundy-Pitch, Oxicrosci∣um, and Paracelsus, of each a like quan∣tity, melt them together in an Earthen-Porringer, and spread them upon Sheeps-leather; then anoint the grieved place vvith Oil of Amber, and lay on your Plaister. This is very good also for any Sprain.
For one who is suddenly taken with a Numbness in any Limb. Take Brandy and Mustard, and warm them well together, and bath the place very well with it twice a day for a week together, and it will work a wonderful effect. To take away any extream pain in the Head in any Sickness. At your going to rest, let a linnen Cloth be dipped in Aquavite, and laid all over the Forehead from one Temple to another; then dip little linnen Rags in Cinnamon-water and put up the No∣strils, let them not be too short for fear the breath draw them into the Head. For an Impostume in the Ear. Take a great Onion and roast it in a paper wetted (in wood-Embers) when it is enough, put to it two pennyworth of Saffron, and a little spoonful of sallad Oil, and work them well together with the back of a Spoon; then apply it on a linnen Cloth to the hole of the Ear as hot as the Party can suffer it, at the time
of going to rest, and the next day when you take it off, put a warm Cloth instead thereof; thus do three Nights together, and when you find that it is broken and well drawn out: Seringe the Ear with a little warm Sack and Betony-water for three days together, twice a day. For Deafness in Young or Old. Take Brine which comes from Beef at the first salting, and boil it very well, and scum it well, and keep it in a Glass for your use: Then take the Kidney-Suet of a Loin of Mutton, and shave it very thin, and when the Party goes to Bed, fill the hole of the Ear that is grieved with some of the Suet, and stop it with Black-wool, and let him lie on the other side that it fall not out, and as he sleeps it will melt into the Ear; thus do for a Week every Night: when that is done, then take three or four drops of the Brine in a Spoon and warm it a little, and drop into the Ear every night for a Week. This hath done very much good to one of Fourscore years Old.
For the Emorroids or Piles. Take of Unguentum Album, vvhich you have at the Apothecaries commonly; melt it over the fire vvith a little sallad Oil, and put in a little of the best Bole∣armoniack; apply it upon a linnen Cloth every Night vvhen you go to bed till you are vvell. For to Cure Heart-burning. Take prepared Crabs-Eyes, and mix leaf-Gold therein, and keep them in a Box; and when you find your Heart be∣gin to burn, lick two or three times of the powder, and it vvill Cure you for that time, and be a means to keep it a∣way for the future. Also a draught of Milk never at all boiled doth help it; but the other Medicine is much better. For the passion of the Heart. Take as much Confection of Alker∣mes as a Pea, in a drop or two of Sirrup of Clove-Gilly-flowers, and it will case you in such an instant, as you cannot but admire▪ it is beyond all things that ever I used, and not of much cost. Take heed that it be good Alkermes, for there is much of deceit used in it.
For the Cramp in the Legs. Take a lock of black-Thred, about half an ounce, and dip it in such Oil as they greaze Wool withal; then draw it through your hands very well that the Oil may not drop from it; then vvind it about your Thighs, and tie it and keep it on day and night. Eel-skins are also good to tie about the Thighs; but first they must be made gentle and easie. And that which is as good as either of these, is to anoint the grieved parts vvith Oil of Spike a vveek together. The same perfectly Cures a Crick in the neck, in two or three times using. I like the latter best. To Cure a Scabbed-Head, and to kill the Lice. Take the yolks of six hard Eggs, and bruise them well with a spoon; then put one pound of new-Butter to them that vvas never salted; boil them together till you find it to be enough, which will be in an hours space, upon a slow fire; let it look blackish when you take it off the fire; then strain it and keep it for your
use; anoint the Head very well with it twice a day, and it will soon destroy both Scabs and Lice in a short time, to much admiration. For Chilblanes on the Hands. So soon as you find your Fingers begin to itch, spread some Burgundy Pitch upon Leather, and lay round about your Arms; let the Plaisters be four-fingers broad, and lay them four-fingers above your hand. They will soon abate the itching, and draw forth the humor where they lie, not suffering it any more to fall into your hands. Wash your hands every day with right Venice Soap, and that will help you in the Cure. This is a very certain Re∣medy to my knowledge. It also Cureth sore hands that are crackt and chopt with a sharp humour, if you lay the Plaisters round about the upper-part of your Arm above the Elbow, and wash with the same Soap
To kill the Scurvy before you purge. Take of Scurvy-grass, of Worm-wood and Sage, of each half a handful, with a little Rue; put them into a pint of Whitewine, and let them boil softly till half be consum'd, close covered; then strain it, and put in as much Saffron as will well colour it. Divide this into three parts, and take every Morning one; then take this Purge following: Take five Gallons of Ale, put into it a quarter of a peck of Garden-Scurvy-grass bruised, two great handfuls of Sage, two ounces of Horse-Radish-root scra∣ped and sliced very thin, Red-Dock-root sliced very thin two ounces, Anniseeds bruised one ounce and an half, Liquorish scraped and sliced thin four ounces, Sena two ounces, Figs sliced thin half a pound. When your Ale hath done working, put in all these things and stop it up; when it hath been four days, then drink every Morning a pint, and again at four in the After-noon, till you have drunk all the Ale. With this I have Cured many who were very bad.
For a Squinacy, or other sore Throat. Take the whitest dung of a Dog, which he hath dunged abroad in May, let it dry in the Sun very well, and when you have occasion to use it, beat it fine and searce it, and give the Party thereof a slight spoonful in a Glass of White-wine; and mix some with Hony, and spread it and lay to the Throat: let the Plaister lie on, and take the other three Nights and it will Cure you. For a Red-face. Every Night wash your Face with this following: Take Fumitory-water half a pint, a little lump of Allom, and a little white Sugar-Candy; with the juyce of one Lemmon, and as much common Brimstone beaten fine as will lye upon a half Crown heaped. Do not wipe your Face when you have washed it, but let it dry in. Every Morning drink a Glass of old Malago-Sack, and eat a little Toast dip∣ped therein. It will be very good for you to Purge every Spring, if you find much heat in it, which you may know by a dry hot hand, and inward heat.
be sure to shift them often, till the Coar be drawn out. For a Plague-Sore. Take Figgs half a pound, and of Ho∣ny as much; beat them together ex∣treamly well; then spread some of it upon a Burdock-leaf, if you can have one, or else upon a linnen Cloth: dress it twice a day; this will both break and heal it. Use it till it be quite well. An excellent Medicine prescribed by a Worthy Physician, against the Plague and Pestilence. Take of strong White-wine Vinegar half a pint, of Spring-water one quar∣ter of a Pint; mix them together, and put thereto one ounce of Venice-Trea∣cle: Take of this every Morning two spoonfuls, and anoint your Nostrils with a little Methridate; for that will not suffer any Infection to pass that way.
To kill Worms which breed about the Nose. Wash it often with Vinegar, Allom, and Brimstone, till you find they are killed: and then use Pomatum every Night to smooth the skin. For Childrens Scabbed-faces. Take Mallow-leaves, and the leaves of Red-Dock, of each a like quantity; shred them small, and put as much sallad Oil to them as will just stand even with them; then boil them on a soft fire till you find the Herbs begin to be crispy; then presently take it off, and strain it out and keep it: Anoint the Face with it twice in a day, and every time before you dress it, wash off that you laid on be∣fore with Butter and Beer. This is very good to Heal and Cleanse. For Chest-Worms. Take a quarter of a pint of New-Milk, and when it boils put in a piece of Allom, and stir it about till you see that the Milk be well turned, then take out the Allom, and take off the Curd very
clean, and give the Party the Cleer drink, to drink in the Morning fasting: do so three Mornings together, and it will kill all the Worms; but then it will be necessary for to purge them with these things following: Take a pound of Pruons, and stew them leisurely in fair Water; and take half an ounce of Sena and tie it up in a piece of Tiffany, with half an ounce of Liquorish scraped and sliced thin, and a quarter of an ounce of Anniseeds bruis∣ed; let these stew in the Pipkin with the Pruons till they are enough; then every Morning fasting give four or five, or more, of the Pruons, according to the Age of the Party; and also two or three spoonfuls of the Liquor: do so so long as you see fitting. I have given this with very good success. A fine Julip for one in an Ague or Feaver. Take four ounces of French-Barley and wash it well, then boil it in three quarts of Water till half be consumed; then strain the Barley from it, and put into the Water the juyce of two Lem∣mons,
and as much white Sugar-Candy as will well sweeten it; then put in two ounces of Sirrup of Violets, and nine sheets of Leaf-Gold cut very small, give the sick Party of this three or four times in a day, four or five spoonfuls at once; it is both cordial, and very pleasant. I Think I have said enough concern∣ing those things which I have alrea∣dy written in this little Book: I will now give you some Directions for seve∣ral sorts of Work, which may pleasure you in your Chambers and Closets. And if any of you shall desire to be further informed than I can possibly di∣rect in Writing; or to confirm themselves in what they have already made Trial of, if you please to give your selves the trou∣ble as to come to me, I shall give you the best assistance I can in any of those things which I profess to teach, and for a competent gratuity.
I have set down every thing as plain as I can; and I know there are many who have done things very well by my Books only: but you may imagine that if you did learn a little by sight of my doing, you would do much better; For if my Pen can teach you well, how much better would my Tongue and Hands do? The one to make answer to any Objection or Question; the other to order or to shape any thing. So that in my opinion you would not lose by having some personal Acquaintance with me; neither would I willingly lose my time and labour in in∣forming you: Therefore I beseech you let it be thus; Be pleased to afford me some of your Mony; And I will repay you with my pains and Skill. That I judge to be fair on both sides.
Imprimis: To make Transparent Work. BOil all in Earth, and let your Pipkin be three quarts full of Isinglass, such as you have at the Apothecaries, broken nto small pieces, and a small quantity of Gum-Dragon amongst it; then fill it up with fair Water, and boil it till you find it be enough, which you may well know by dipping your Wyer therein; which must be shaped according to the Leaves or Flowers you intend it for. Strain it while it is hot. Now for the COLOURS. First, For Red. Take the shavings of Brazil-wood, and fill your Pipkin half full with them; then fill it up with Water, and put in a little Roch-Allom; set it over the fire, and when it boils strain it out. This and Oil-Tartar makes a Purple: Do not mix it too hot for that will spoil it.
For Sea-Green. Take one ounce of Verdigreace, and a pint of Whitewine, and let it but just boil together; then let it drop thorough a double Brown-paper, and it will be a perfect Sea-Green. For White. Take of the best Cerus, and dissolve it in some of the best Isinglass-liquor, and it is done: So must you mix all your Colours, as you do use them, with some of that Liquor, and put them into Gally-pots. For Yellow. Take Saffron and tie it in a Rag, and put it into some of your Liquor; to which you must add Gum-Arabick and Fair-water; two parts of Gum, and one of Water: When you use them, you must warm them, and lay them on with a Pencil, on the wrong-side of the Flowers. For Primrose-Colour. Yellow and White makes it very right: You may make it as Deep or as Pale as you will; some will do well a little Deeper than the other.
Flesh-Colour. Vermillion and White makes Flesh-Colour. Damask-Rose Colour. Vermillion, and Brazil, and Purple, and White makes the Damasck-Rose Colour. Grass-Green. The yellow added to the Sea-Green makes a perfect Grass-Green, and very beautiful. Blew. You must put in some Smalt into your Liquor, and strain it very well; and when you will have it Pale, mix a little White with it. Clove-Colour. Take Logwood and boil as you do the Brazil. Tauney. Mix the Clove-Colour and Red toge∣ther. To make the Puff-work. Take two ounces of white Vellom cut in pieces, and steep it in a pint and half of
Blew. Take Indico and mix with the Spirit of Sack, and when your stains are tho∣rough dry, rub them over with White-bread, and wipe it off again with a soft clean linnen Cloth. A most excellent Black-Dye for any Stuffs or Stockens. Take one peck and half of black Al∣der-Bark, and break it indifferently small; then steep it three days in three Pails full of water, and if you have any rusty Iron steep it with it; then boil it with a pound of green-Copperus, for the space of an hour and half; if you can get them, put also one ounce of Nut-galls beaten to boil with the rest: then scum off all the Bark and let it boil up again; then put your Stuff in which you mean to Dye, and stir it down altogether as near as you can, and keep stirring of it down for a quarter of an hour; then take it out and drain it, and let it half-dry, then put it in again and do as before; then let it be quite dry, and when it is so, wash it so long as it will blaze the Water, then dry it well.
To make clean Glass-Windows. First brush them with a Cobwebbing-Broom, then take some Spanish-Whiting and warm Water and wash them all o∣ver very well, and rub them every where; then wash it off again with cold Water very well, and rub them with clean Rags till they are very dry. And if you would paint the Wooden-barrs of your Windows white or red, take Red-lead, or White-lead, and grind it with a little Linseed-Oil, and then lay it on with a Brush; but first you must let them be very clean: Do it over twice, but let the first be dry before you lay on the second. To make pretty Frames for slight Pictures in Black only. Cut Past-board plain, without form, but only long narrow pieces about two fingers breadth, and fasten them toge∣ther at the corners with a little Glew; then wash them over with a Brush, with a little Lamb-black and Size mixed well together; then presently before it be dry,
strew it all over with French-Frost, of what Colour you please; then put on some Shells with Bees-wax and Rosin melted together hot. To make Frames for Pictures in work of Satten, Stitch, and the like. Let a handsome plain Frame be made of Deal-wood, fit for your piece of Work; then black it over as you did the other, and Frost it; then have in readiness some Bones out of the Heads of Whitings, Frosted over first; do them over with a Feather, with some Water wherein Gum-Arabick hath been steeped, and put on your Frost, and let some be of one Colour, and some of another. Make some little Flowers of several Colours upon round pieces of Cards, with small Satten-Ribbon, and fasten some Wier for the stalks; get some Shells and some Mo∣ther-Pearl; some Corral and some Am∣ber; some little kinds of Creatures made in Wax, as Frogs, and such like; pieces of old Neck-Laces, and Pendants, with a little Moss. When you have got all your things ready, put on your Shells first in se∣veral Fancies with Bees-wax and Rosin,
and do them quick, and crush them on hard; then put on the Mother-pearl, and then as you please the rest of the things till you have put on all. It will look like a Frame of great price, but it will not cost any great matter. To adorn a Room with Prints. Buy of your Prints only Black and White, of sorts what are good, and cut them very exactly with a small pair of Cissers from the paper, put them into a Book as you do cut them; then let your Room be done with plain Deal, but Wainscot fashion, and let it be painted all over with White-lead and Linseed-Oil, ground together, and some little streaks imitating Marble: then lay your Prints upon a smooth-board with the wrong-sides upwards; then with a knife take some Gum-Dragon, steeped well in fair water, spread them all over as thin as you can, and still as you do them, take them up with your knife, and so turn them into your hand, and clap them up∣on the Wainscot; but let it be dry first; close them well on with your fingers that they be not hollow in any place; and
observe to put them in proper places, or else it will be ridiculous; be sure to put the things flying above, and the walking and creeping things below; let the Houses and Trees be set sensibly, as also Water with Ships sailing, as you put them on, observe that they have a relation one to another. If you employ your fancy well, you may make fine stories, which will be ve∣ry delightful and commendable; also Gardens and Forrests, Landskips, or in∣deed any thing you can imagine; for there is not any to be named, but you may find it in Prints, if you go to a Shop that is well stored, nor no Pencil can shadow more rare than that will shew; it makes a Room very lightsome as well as fine: as for those in Colours I do not esteem for this purpose, for they look Childishly, and too gay. If you mean to make Stories, you must buy good store of Figures; the colou∣red ones are good to put upon white Plates and Flower-pots for Closets.
To dress up Glass-Plates, on which you may lay dry Sweetmeats or Biskets. Take your Glass-Plates, and lay the right-sides downward upon a Table; then have in readiness some coloured Prints finely cut, and lay them on with Gum, with their right-sides to the wrong-side of the Plates; then take some Spanish-Whiting, mixed with Size which is pure∣ly cleer, let it be as Batter for a Pud∣ding; order it so that there may be no knots in it, but that it may be very smooth; then spread the same all over upon the Prints (not too thick) and when they are very dry, wipe the right-side clean, and set them up in your Clo∣set to use at your pleasure. Fine Hangings for Closets. Make some plain Net with Brown-thread, and a good round Pin; let the Panes be as long and as broad as you think fit; when they are done, wash them and starch them very stiff, and pull them out against the fire till they are quite dry, then put one of them into a long Tent, and let it be very streight; then have in
readiness a Paper drawn with Leaves, or Flowers and Leaves together, or any o∣ther things you like; tack it at the cor∣ners under the Net, and so flourish it ac∣cording to the Paper. To make Feathers of Woosted which do look very like natural Feathers, for the Cor∣ners of Beds. About four pounds of French-Woo∣sted will serve your turn; three pounds of that colour your Bed is wrought with, and one pound of White. First, Buy three quarters of a pound of Wier of sixteen pence the pound; burn it in the fire till it be red-hot; then take it out and cool it, then cut it into pieces; twenty of them must be a yard long, and sixteen something shorter, and twelve must be but a quarter of a yard long, or little more; double all these Wiers in the middle, and twist them slightly; then take your Woosted and open it, and cut every skean twice; then comb it well with a Horn-Comb; then cut it in whole locks as it is, in pieces a∣bout a quarter of a yard long, or some∣thing less, and comb every one of them;
then take three Brown-threds, turn a large Stool the bottom upwards, and tie these Brown-threds from one foot of the Stool to the other very streight; then take a long double Brown-thred in a Needle, and then take one of your short locks of Cruel, or Woosted, and cast o∣ver your Threds which you have tied to the Stool; hang them even, then sew them fast to the tied string; which that you may the better do, be sure to hold the ends of the Woosted in one hand, and sew with the other; for if you do not sew the tied Thred fast in, your Feather will not hold but come to pie∣ces: and one thing you must be sure of, that as you sew them, to clap another lock on before you have done that you begun, or else there will be gaps in your Feathers: In every Feather you must put three locks of White, or more if you please; but not too much in a lock: When you have thus sewed them, then take your Wiers, fasten a Needle and double Brown-thred to the bolt end of it, and begin at one end of your Woo∣sted you have sewn, and sew the Wier very fast to it; you must leave at the o∣ther end as much Wier as may be con∣venient
to bind them up in a Plume, when you have done them all: When you have done thus, then take some double white Woosted, and sew over all that so thick, that nothing may be dis∣covered that you have done before; then cut the Feather from the tied string, and lay it on your Lap, or a Table, and comb it; then take it by the stalk, and with a Bodkin part it as right in the middle as you can; then comb it up∣wards, towards the tip, and you will quickly perceive it to look like a natural Feather; then with your Cissers cut it in shape, and then comb it a little again: the little ones of all must be made with Woosted not above half a quarter of a yard long, for they are for the sprigs which stand up in the middle, and there must be three in every sprig. The twenty large Feathers are for every Cor∣ner five, and the other sixteen are for every Corner four. When you bind them up, first bind those three together which are for the Sprig, and turn the right-sides inward; then put on the four with the right-sides inwards, and then the five; and bind the Wiers very fast.
Then put them into the Cups, and turn the Feathers quite back, and bow them down as you would have them be. I have given you as full a direction as I can in writing; but you may ima∣gine, that if you were with me but one hour, you would learn perfectly. For these kind of Feathers I have taken ma∣ny a pound. Some count it folly in me to declare so many things, and rather wish me to keep them secret▪ but I am of that humour that I must and will impart all, what may be beneficial to others; For we are not born for our selves alone. God made us to serve him, and to keep his Com∣mandements; and I am sure it is part of my duty to be kind to my Neighbour, and what is kindness more shewed in, than by giving good Counsel, and good Instructions; and when we are not near, then to express our selves in Writing. So do I do by you all, and do beseech you to practice what I direct you to.
How to save much work, and to make a suit of Chairs which be very noble. Let what Draught you please be drawn upon a very course French-Canvas; then have your Chairs cut out as you would have them, either of Camlet or Paragon; put your Stuff into a Tent, and then tack your Canvas streight upon it; so work it in Cros-stich, and take heed that you do not cleave the Threds of the Canvas in the working, nor work your Woosted or Silk too full; and when you have done, cut your Canvas between your Leaves and Flowers, and pluck out every Thred one by one, and there will be your Work very brave upon your Stuff, and will look very high; then form it about with what coloured Gimp you fancy best. And if you want skill to shadow, de∣sire the Drawer to direct you in the drawing of it; but then you must get an Embroiderer to draw it, for no other can direct you right; and you had better not work, then that which is ridiculous. This way saves the grounding, or cut∣ting out to Embroider, and is much bet∣ter and not common; therefore to be more esteemed.
Another way for Chairs. Let your Draught be drawn upon Stuff or Satten, what else you please, and work it with Woosted or Silk, or both together, which doth better then Silk alone if it be upon Stuff; but if upon Silk, then Silk alone doth best: Work it in Satten-stich, and as many o∣ther stiches as you know, or can devise; and when you bring off one shadow, take a bright one from another, and that wil much quicken and enliven your work; for one shadow simply of it self looks very faint: Observe when you walk a∣broad and find a dead Leaf, or beginning but to wither, how many shadows there is mixed together; also what Bark of a Tree, what Flie, Worm, or Snail do we admire but those which are extraordina∣ry for their Colours: it is in those things, and as much difference as is between a beautiful Lady and a Cinder Woman (the one hath loveliness to their dying hour, the other are never comely) there are also some Leaves which be of a per∣fect Grass-green, some Willow, some Sea-green, which are in themselves very
pleasant, and some of the dullest Co∣lours you must put in, and then your work will shew the more naturally; and whatsoever you do, be sure to let your shadow be very dark, for without a dark shadow you can make no lively Work. Now for the folds of your Leaves or Flowers there must be a place for sha∣dow, but that must be begun with a midling Colour, and fall very light, with some other shadow among those you be∣gin with; but be sure not to choose your Colours too near in such a case, but skip a Colour, or sometimes two, and you will find it very fine work; when you have done one piece, form it about with a Back-stich, and let it be purely wrought, and of such a Colour, sad or light, as may agree with the Leaf or Flower you work: Let the Stalks of all be of one shadow, Hair-colour or Ash▪colour will suit with any thing. You must be sure to shadow your Stalks with Black, where you find any part of any thing to lie over it; and in all dark places be sure to begin your sha∣dow vvith Black.
This kind of Work I have wrought often upon Demities; and have wrought thereon with Woosted, Cruel, and Mo∣hair, in all sorts of Stiches; all kinds of Shadows, and many fancies which were after my own fancy, not at all to imitate others; for there is nothing which I hate more, than to work as a Child doth after a Sampler: That brain that can in∣vent nothing, is good for nothing; nor there is nothing which I more love than Invention. One Bed thus wrought, with Chairs belonging to it, is worth a hundred Gin∣nies before the Upholsterer comes to touch it; and may, if it be cleanly wrought, be used several years before it be washed; as hath been proved. It will not be amiss to give you some directions for the washing of it. First, Make a strong ladder with Soap and good Water, reasonable warm; then lay one of your Curtains upon a Table, and with a Brush and some of this lad∣der, rub it very well all over, and do so ill three Ladders are spent; then pour on good store of fair Water to Rinse it very well; then hang it to dry from the Sun, with the wrong-side outward, and as it
dries, pluck it out and smooth it, and fold it up, and then hang it out again, and so do till it be quite dry: There is no Co∣lour but will hold, if you do wash it af∣ter this manner; but if you do rub the Soap upon it, that will change the Co∣lours. The best Lining for these Beds is changable Sarsnet, or Ducape, for that will agree with any of your shadows, and it is as cheap as any thing. To embroider Petty-coats, Bodices, or Belts. When your Pattern is drawn▪ form it about with black Gimp, or other, which you do fancy best, and fill the Leaves and under-parts of the Flowers with Saxen-stich, some dark and some lighter: then for the upper-parts, and seeds of Flowers, let them be done with high-work, as Purple-stich, and such like, and let your stalks be all alike with a great Gimp twisted▪ your Flowers may be of all manner of Shadows as you fancy; and if you shadow them well, they will look very naturally. Thus you may go fine, and with less cost than if you bought good Lace.
It is more commendable a great deal to wear ones own Work, than to be made fine vvith the Art of others; and though one may be envied for it, yet none can have so just a quarrel against them, because it is their Ingenuity; and besides it argues that Person not to be idle, but rather a good House-wife. Any fool may be made fine with Cost, but give me those who can be neat and nobly habited with but a reasonable charge. The World is grown very fine of late years, but it is with so much charge (together with so ill a phansie some have in choosing things) that they look more like Stage-players than fit to come into any Church, or Civil places: Some will plead Ignorance, not knowing how to do these things, but that's a bare Excuse; for if they know not already, they may learn: In a Weeks time I dare undertake to teach any Ingenious Per∣son to Embroider any of these things; therefore if any of you have a desire to Learn, I shall be willing to wait on you at your Houses, and to teach you and your Servants; and for my Work, what I shall do, and for Teaching of you, I shall expect four shillings the day, and, I
hope, you vvill judge it reasonable: for you may imagine, that the mean while I am with you, I am wholly sequestred from all profits and benefits which might happen. Likewise if any Gen∣tlewoman would learn to Preserve, if she please to give me forty shillings in hand, she shall have the liberty to come so oft as she pleases, and bring her mate∣rials with her; and at any time if there be any new thing to be learned, at any time, for seven years, I will direct her, or give her a Receipt, if at distance. I think it will not be amiss if I give you some direction what stitches to put into a Bed which is wrought only with one Colour, therefore observe this fol∣lowing: Form it all with a double Back-stitch, and on the one side of the Stalks work a broad Gold-stitch, and bring it off by degrees with powdering, first pretty big stitches, and so smaller and smaller; work the veins of the leaves with Bread-stitch, Chain-stitch, open Chain-stitch, and any other that you can think on, or devise; then sprig them thick with several Fan∣cies, and let the folds of your Leaves be the thinnest work, and be sure you put a shadow under every fold.
If your leaves be great, let them be the fuller of Work, or else you had as good do nothing; for how will the Ground shew if the work be too thin. I saw a very fine Bed once wrought in this manner following: The Ground was an Ash-colour Pa∣ragon, and drawn all over vvith Clouds, some of one sort, some of another, and wrought to resemble the Clouds of Night; some very dark, some lighter, and here and there between were Stars, made vvith oyes, vvhich you must be sure to have them good, or else they vvill change; else they vvill hold as long as your other vvork will last. I have often been desired to give some directions for Work in Print, and truly I have so done as plain as I can: I hear∣tily wish I could infuse all that I can do, into those vvho are desirous to learn; it vvould do them good, and me no harm; for I am still, and shall be all my life∣time improving my self: and still as I do purchase new things, I shall impart them to you. I shall now give you something of Cookery, and such as hath not yet been Printed.
Imprimis: To pot Fowl to carry to Sea; or to keep to be spent in your House. TAke a good company of Duck and Mallard, pluck them, and draw them, and lay them in a Tub with a lit∣tle Pepper and Salt for twenty four hours; then truss them and roast them; and when they are rosted let them drain from their Gravy, for that will make them corrupt; then put them handsomly into a Pot, and take the Fat which came from them in the roasting, and good store of Butter, and melt together in a pot, set into a Kettle of boiling-water, put there∣in good store of Cloves bruised a little, some sliced Nutmeg, Mace, Bay-leaves, and Salt, and let them stew in the Butter a while; then while it is hot pour it over your Fowls in the Pot, and let the Pot be filled, so that the Fowls may be cove∣red; then lay a Trencher in upon them, and keep them down with a vveight or stone till they are cold; then take of the same kind of Spice which you did put into your Butter, beat it very fine, and
strew over it, and lay some Bay-leaves on the top, so cover it up; they will keep a good while. Drain your Fowl from the Gravy twenty four hours before you put them into your Pot. A very fine way to pot Neats-Tongues. Take the largest Neats-Tongues you can get, and Salt them very well; two days after pour away the bloody-Brine, and Salt them again, and let them lie in that Salt a Month; then take some Salt-Peter, and a little Roach-Allom beaten together, and rub them over with that, and let them lie one Week; then boil them till they be tender, with some Hay on the top of them, then take them out of the Kettle, and pull off the skins; then hang them up in a Chimney where Wood is burnt for four daies and nights: then melt some Butter with Spice, as you do for the Potted-fowl, and put your Tongues in a Pot, and pour that over them; and when they have been Potted one Month, take out one, and eat it with Mustard and Sugar, or Mustard alone. These will look very red, and eat plea∣santly.
To boil Beef or Mutton to eat savourly. Take any piece of good Beef, and set it on the fire with as much water as will cover it; put in such a quantity of Salt as you think fit; let it boil, and scim it very well; then put in a little whole Pepper, Lemmon-pill, a blade or two of Mace, some sliced Nutmeg, a few Cloves, and a little Time and Winter-Savory; so let them stew together close covered upon a slow-fire till your Meat begin to be tender; then put in good store of Herbs, as Persley, Spinage, Lettice, Chervil, Radish-tops, Sorrel, or any o∣ther Herb you love: and when the Herbs are boiled, and the Meat thoroughly ten∣der, put some sliced Bread into the bot∣tom of the Dish, and lay your Meat on it, then pour your Broth thereon, and serve it to the Table: One drop of this Broth will be better than twenty which is made the plain way. If they vvho are to eat it do love O∣nion or Shelot, it will do very well to put some in.
To Boil, or rather to Stew a Leg of Veal; a very savory Dish. Take a large white Leg of Veal, and stuff it with some fat Bacon and Sage shred small together, with a little Sage and Nutmeg; cover it with Water, put in some Salt, let it boil, and scim it well; then put in some sweet Herbs, and some Spice, such as you love, and let it boil leisurely close covered; then when you find that the Knuckle begins to be tender, put in a pound of Sausages cut one by one, and let them stew with it for a while; when you find it is enough, put in a piece of fresh Butter, and serve it in with the Broth upon sliced Bread, and lay the Sausages on the top: Garnish the Dish with Collops of Bacon and Sau∣sages. To fry Clary the best way. Take the Yolks and White of Eggs beaten together very well; then put a little grated Nutmeg, and beaten Cinna∣mon therein; then having your Butter very hot in the Frying-pan, take a Leaf by the stalk end and dip it therein, and
lay it into the Pan, and so another as fast as you can, till your Pan be full; fry them brown with a very quick fire, and serve them in with a little Butter: For∣get not a little Salt amongst your Eggs when you beat them. To dress a Legg of Mutton; a very savory Dish. Boil your Mutton in Water and Salt for the space of an hour; then cut it in thin slices, and put it into a Dish over a Chaffing-dish of Coals, without any Li∣quor, and in a little time you will find the Gravy will be Liquor enough; then put in a little Salt, and a little grated Nutmeg, one Onion, or two or three Shelots sliced, a sprig of Time, and Winter-savory, and one Anchovy; let▪ it stew between two Dishes till it be al∣most enough; then put in a piece of fresh Butter, and when it hath stewed a little longer, take it up and serve it in: Gar∣nish your Dish with pickled Barberries, and pickled Oysters.
To stew Muscles, or Cockles. Take any of them, and wash them ve∣ry well, and put them into boiling Wa∣ter and Salt, and let them boil till they gape; then take them up, and take them out of their shells, and put them into a Dish over a Chaffing-dish of Coals with a little Whitewine, a blade or two of Mace, and a little Nutmeg and whole Pepper; let them stew a while; then put in a piece of Butter and shake them together; then put your Fish into a hot Dish, and take the yolks of two or three Eggs well beaten, and thicken the Sauce vvith them over the fire; you must let them be but a little time over the fire, and stir it vvell for fear it turn. Garnish your Dish vvith Persley, Salt, and pickled Barberries. To stew Parsnips: A good Dish. Boil the tenderest Parsnips very well, then scrape them very clean, and cut them in two, and then slit them in half; put them in a Dish vvith some White vvine, vvhole Mace, grated Nutmeg, and a little
Salt; vvhen they have stewed close co∣vered one hour, then put in some pieces of Marrow, and a little Sugar; then stew them very vvell, and a little before you take them up, put in a little Butter, and shake them vvell together, and serve them in. Garnish your Dish vvith thin slices of boiled Parsnip, and fine Sugar beaten and searced. To make a good Pye of Beef. Take of the tenderest piece of Beef, and cut it in thin slices, and beat it very vvell vvith a Rouling-pin, and lay it in a little quantity of Claret-vvine all night, vvith a little grated Nutmeg, and crack∣ed Pepper; in the Morning make your Pye, and lay some Butter in the bottom; then lay in your Meat, but first Salt it a little; then lay some more Butter on the top, and pour in that Wine in vvhich it lay, and so close it up, and let it Bake three hours, or more: So serve it in hot.
To dress red Beet-Roots. Wash them and boil them very well, slice them in round slices, and eat them with Butter, Vinegar and Salt; and you may if you please eat them cold with Oyl, and Vinegar and Salt; it is a very pleasant Sallad. To make a good Pidgeon Pye. Pluck your Pidgeons very well; then cut them in halves, wash them and dry them; cleanse their Livers and Gizzards also, and let them go with them; season them with Pepper, Salt, and Nutmeg; When your Pye is raised, lay in some Butter in the bottom, then lay in your Pidgeons, with the cut-side downward▪ and then the Yolks of hard Eggs, and a little Time stripped from the Stalks; then lay on some more Butter on the top, and put in a glass-full of Claret-wine: So lid your Pye, and let it bake one Hour.
To boil a Cock, and to make good Broth with him. Pluck and draw your Fowl, wash him very vvell, and bruise his Leggs; boil him in a little Water and Salt for one hour; then add some Water wherein Mutton hath been boiled, and put in a quarter of a pound of French-Barley, or Rice, which you please, with some Time, Winter-savory, and a little Lemmon-pill, a little large Mace and sliced Nutmeg, with a Clove or two. When it is clean scummed, let it only ew till it be enough; then take up the Cock for a while, and boil the Broth very well; then put him in again and eat him throughly; then serve it to the Table, and garnish your dish with Lem∣non and Barberries. Be sure to truss your Fowl handsomly. This Dish is very good for Weak Peo∣ple. To boil a Fore-Loyn of Pork, with good Sauce to it. Let your Pork be reasonably well salted, and boil it very well; then have  readiness a good quantity of Sorrel
stripped from the Stalks, and beaten in a Mortar as fine as possible you can, then put in a few Crumbs of Bread, the yolks of hard Eggs, vvith a little Mustard, and a little Salt: and so serve in your Pork vvith this Sauce, and garnish your Dish vvith Persley, or any other Green Leaves. To stew Rabbits. When they are flea'd cut them in pie∣ces, and put them into a Pot vvith as much Water as vvill vvell cover them; put in some Salt and let them boil, and scum them vvell, then put in a faggot of Sweet-herbs, and let them stevv close covered; then pill a good quantity of great Onions, and boil them in several Waters till they be tender; put them also into the Pot vvith your Rabbits, and let them stevv till the Rabbits be very tender: a little before you take them up, put in a good quantity of fresh But∣ter, and a little Vinegar, and stir it about very vvell; and then Dish them for the Table, and garnish your Dish vvith O∣nion, Salt, and green Leaves.
To boil Green-Pease. When they are sheal'd put them into a long Gally-pot, and set it into a Pot of Seething-vvater, and cover the Gally-pot very vvell, and in a short time you vvill find the Pease to be fine and tender; then put them out into a Dish, and strew some Salt upon them, and put in a good quantity of Butter, and so shake them vvell betvven tvvo Dishes; then put them into a hot Dish, and serve them to the Table. If they vvho are to eat them do love Sparemint, put in a sprigg into the Pot vvith them. These are far more pleasant and svveet, then those vvhich are boiled in Water. To preserve Green-Pease a while. When they are sheal'd and pickt, put them into a long Gally-pot, and take ome Butter, and cover them vvith it, and close it down upon them vvith your and; your Butter must not be melted ut cold; then cover your Pot very vvell and set it in a cool place.
To dress Old Beans. Lay them in Water one Night; then put them into cold Water, and set them over the fire, and let them heat by de∣grees; and when they are hot, let them boil apace, and with them a piece of Bacon, and some Persley; when they are very tender take them up, and drain them well from the Water; pour some Butter melted very thick over them, and lay Bacon on each side of them, and serve them to the Table. To dress Old French-Beans. Water them as you do the other Old Beans, and boil them after the same man∣ner, but no Bacon with them, and when they are enough, take them up, and drain them well from the Water; strew some Salt and grated Nutmeg on them, and Butter them well.
To stew Beef, a very fine way. Slice your Beef in thin slices, and put it into a long Gally-pot, with a sliced O∣nion, some Pepper, and some Salt, and sweet Herbs, with a little Persley; cover the Pot close, and set it in a Kettle of seething water; so let it be ten or twelve hours, and put in a little Clarret Wine also. Let the fire be well tended under the Kettle, and you will find a dainty Dish of it. Your meat must be reasonable Fat: Serve it to the Table upon sippets of White-bread. To make rare Pyes of a Calves-Head. Take a fine fat Calves-Head, and cleanse it well; boil it with Water and Salt till it be very tender; then take it from the Bones and mince it very small; then to a pound of this Meat, take one pound of Currans, washed and picked very well, one pound of Raisons of the Sun, a little Salt, some Nutmeg, Cloves, Mace, and Cinnamon beaten fine, a little
Whitewine, and a little Lemmon-pill shred small, with a little Sugar, and the yolks of four hard Eggs; having your Pye ready raised lay Butter in the bot∣tom; then put in your minc'd Meat, and on the top of it lay some pieces of Marrow, and some Dates cut in thin slices, then lay Butter over that, and lid it and bake it; and when it is baked, cut open the Lid, and put in a little Whitewine, Butter and Sugar. This is a very good Pye, and may be eaten hot or cold. To make a Pudding of cold Meat. Take any pieces of cold Meat, which is not fit to come to the Table any more, as Veal, Mutton, Lamb, Capon, Chicken, Rabbit, or the like; mince either of these very small, and put some Milk to it, and the yolks and whites of Eggs, with some beaten Spice and Salt, and a little Sugar; make it up with a little Flower, so that you may wrap it in a piece of thin Paste; put it into boiling water, and let it boil two or three hours; then take it up and put it into a Dish, and so cut it in slices, and Butter it; strew
Sugar on your Dish and serve it in. This may be called The good Hous-wives Pud∣ding. They are fools who cannot tell what to do with scraps of Meat: (Are they any worse than the rest?) If any be too Fat, let them try it up for Suet, else make a Florentine or Pudding with it; and so used, you may bring it (if occasion were) before a Great Person. It is an easie matter here for any that hath Mo∣ny, if they have nothing but cold Meat in the House, to go to the Market and buy a Joynt of Meat: But, I pray, what do they in other Countries, where they have not such plenty? Do they not live upon green Herbs, Plants and Roots, as much as any kind of Meat? And who are so weak as our English People? for they eat so much of Meat, that they distem∣per themselves with it: whereas if they did eat Herbs, Roots and Plants more freely, it would be better for them. Observe the Diet of the French, Italian, Dutch, Spaniards, Portugals, or any other Nation; they make good savory Meat, and do not spend half so much Meat as we do; yet, who so strong as they? you shall hardly ever see a Crooked
person among a thousand of them, nor weak ey'd, so far as to give blemish to them; and I do impute that to their Diet partly: And that they do not Coat their Children too soon, when they are young, but keep them long in their Blankets; that prevents the Rickets, and many other Distempers: but our proud Nurses here must be humour'd, although it be to the ruine of a Child; but if there were none would humour them more than I, they would be mute. Let them look well to a Child, and keep it sweet and clean, and then if they have their Wages duly paid them, they have no reason to find fault: If the Child do not go so fine as they would have it, it will be the Parents shame, not theirs. It is better to let a Child, or ones self go plain, than to run in Debt for fine Cloaths. They that will heed what I say, I believe it will do no harm, but a great deal of good, for they will find it true what I say. Did I not see what fools we are made, here in England, both by our Nurses and Servants, and what destru∣ction there is made in many Houses, I should not speak; but really there is in
some Houses, I know, so much Waste, as that it is a great shame and discredit to those who guide the Family; and if they would look a little more into their Affairs, they would be more careful for the future. Therefore all you who are Mistresses of Families, look narrowly to your Ser∣vants, and let them not spoil or waste your Goods, for which you must take pains and care: Be watchful that they do not sit up beyond their usual time, Juncketing, and making their Friends welcome (as they call them) with your Goods; while you are asleep, and think no harm of them. Suffer not your Chil∣dren to go too frequently abroad with Servants, least it cause such an obligation, as you shall pay dearly for the Requi∣tal. If you see your Servant go beyond what you think the Wages you allow her will well maintain, and to lay up somewhat in case of Sickness, or being out of Service, you ought to Question her, or him; for either they must run in Debt, or Cheat you, or take some ill Course to maintain their pride and folly; and then of necessity discredit must follow:
On the other side; If you find a Ser∣vant to be Civil, neat, cleanly, and care∣ful to please, I do advise such a Servant may be cherished and encouraged, not only by good Words, but good Gifts also▪ for such a Servant cannot be too highly prized: yet too much of Fami∣liarity I do not hold with, for that will breed much Contempt. Keep your di∣stance as you being her Superiour, and shew your love and favour in what may benefit her. Trust not a Servant too much with Secrets which concern your Credit, or your Livelyhood, least you thereby en∣slave your self to them; for I have seen very sad effects from such confidings. You may make the Messengers for to carry Letters, but do not trust them to be your Counsellours. If any Servant, who hath performed her Duty to you, do ask your advice in Marriage, give her the best Counsel you can, and also bestow somewhat towards the forwarding of it: If you probably think she may be happy, let the Man who she hath an inclination to, know that you have a Kindness for her, and that you will shew them all the Favour
you can; if they will endeavour honestly to live in the World. If your ability will reach to it, be kind to them upon their Wedding-day; either to give them their Meat, or at least wise, to give them somewhat to∣wards their Charges: And when she is gone from you, afford her your assistance when she stands in need, and grace her with your Company when it is requi∣red; for then her Husband will be apt to be the more kind to her, and will have an awful reverence for you. For Nurses. If you find an ill one, take your Child away, and own her no more. Let your silence be her sorrow, and her shame: Report not ill of her, least it be her Ruine; neither Commend her, least you ruine your own Credit. It is better to be silent, and let others find her out, then for you to accuse her: It is enough, that you have taken your Child away. If you find a good and faithful Nurse, one who hath done her duty to you in the care for the Child, cherish her, nou∣rish her, and never think any thing too
much that you can do for her, without prejudice to your self: If she hath been careful of the Childs Cloaths, give her what you can well spare of them for her own Child, or else give her the worth▪ of them to lay out her self; and as your Child grows up, teach it to love the Nurse, and infuse those Principles into it, that when you are dead and gone, your Child may still remember her with a perpetual kindness. This is my own mind: I would have my Children do so, and therefore I commend these Directi∣ons to others. For Preserving I have before given you very many Receipts, and of the ve∣ry best, for all manner of things; there∣fore you must not expect that I shall say much as to that Art; yet some things there be which you have not, as follow∣eth; and a mixture of things, such as commeth into my mind, that I have not yet written.
Imprimis: To make very fine Bisket. TAke one pound of the yolks of hard Eggs, one pound of the finest Su∣gar beaten and searced, two ounces of candid Iringo-root, one ounce of can∣did Cittrou-pill, the whites of two Eggs well beaten, one quarter of an ounce of Cinnamon beaten fine, one Nutmeg grated, half a quarter of an ounce of beaten Ginger; beat all these in a Mortar to a Paste, with a little Sack, and one grain of Amber-grease; then mould it up with searced Sugar; make it into little Cakes, according to your fan∣cy, and lay them upon Wafer sheets, up∣on a Tin-plate, and bake them after Bread is drawn. Another sort of Bisket. Take half a pound of Naples-Bisket, mix them with a little Sack, when you have sliced them thin, and let them lye in soak in it; then take half a pound of sweet Almonds blanched in cold Water,
and beaten to a Paste with a little fair▪ Water, to keep them from oyling; then beat that Paste with the Naples Bisket, and the Yolks of three Eggs, and the Whites of one: when you have mixed them, then put in three quarters of a pound of searced Sugar, a little juyce of Lemmon, and one grain of Amber∣greace; of what Spice you like, you may put in a little beaten and sear∣ced. When these are well incorporated, take them out of the Mortar, and mould it up with searced Sugar, upon a smooth Board, and make it into what form you please; bake them upon Waser-sheets on tin Plates after-Brown-bread is drawn: do not take them from the Plates till they are cold enough, To make Sirrop of Violets. Pick your Violets very clean, and beat them well in a Mortar; then strain them, and to one pint of the juyce take one quarter of a pint of Spring-water; put it into the Mortar with the stamped Vio∣lets which you have strained, stamp
them together a while, and strain the Water well from them, and mix them with your other juyce; then put it into a long Gally-pot, and to each pint of Juyce put in one pound of double Re∣sined Sugar; let it stand close covered for the space of twelve hours; then put in a little quantity of Juyce of Lemmon, that will make it look purely▪ transpa∣rent; then set your Gally-pot into a Kettle of seething-water covered, till you find it to be thick enough; then set it by till it is cold, and then put it up. Sirrop of Roses, a good way. Fill a great Stone-pot with Damask-Rose leaves, as hard as you can thrust it; then fill it up with Damask-Rose water, and cover it with Stone or Glass, and set it into a Kettle of boiling Water, till you find that the Rose-water be very well coloured, which may be about four hours; then strain it out hard, and put the Liquor into a Gally-pot, and to every pint of it, put two pounds of Sugar; then cover the Pot
and set it into a Kettle of seething Wa∣ter, and let it stand till it be a thick Sir∣rup: when it is cold put it up and keep it for your use; it will worke very kind∣ly, and very effectually. The best way to preserve Fruits. Wet the Sugar for them with the juyce of some of the same Fruit, instead of Water, and that will give a full and lively taste, and they will keep the better: The worst of your Fruit will serve for that. Be pleased to observe my former Books for the ordering of all Fruits in the Preserving, only do not put in Rose-water so generally, as is set down, be∣cause it is not so much used as formerly, unless in Cordial things, or some other particular things; therefore where it is liked use it, or else not, for we have new Modes for Eating and Drinking, as well as for Apparel: One cannot so strictly set down any thing, but that in the ma∣king of Sauce; dressing of Meat, with Seasoning, Preserving several things, and the like, there must be a judgment in those who order them, to leave out, or
to add, or else they will please but a few pallets▪ for some do hate the taste of what others do extreamly love. To make very fine Jelly for a weak stomach. Take Calves-Feet, or Sheeps-Trotters cleanly dressed, and split them in half; put them into a Pipkin with as much Whitewine as will cover them, put in a little Salt, make it boil, and scum it well; then put in a blade or two of whole Mace, with a sprig or two of Time, and a little Lemmon-pill, put in a few Dates sliced very thin; cover it close, and let it boil leisurely till the Feet be very tender; then take them up, and eat them if you please; and take the Liquor and strain it, and to a quart of it put in the juyce of one Lemmon, and as much fine Sugar as will well sweeten it, and set it over the fire till the Sugar be throughly melted; then keep it in a Gally-pot, and give the Party of it three or four times in a day, as much as they please to take; if you like it, you may put in a little Ambergreace and Rose-water▪ the one is pleasing and good for a weak stomach, the other for the Brain;
Amber-greace is good for the Head (if inwardly taken) but it is not good to smell to, because it will raise fumes to the head: Yet observe this, I once did ask a Physician concerning Musk and Ambergreace, Why the smell of either of them did offend so much? He An∣swered me thus; The reason (saith he) why either of them are so offen∣five, is, because they smell but a little, and do only disturb; but if they go into a Shop where store is, and smell to divers pounds of it, they will find it rather a purge downward, than a raiser of Fumes to the Head. To Candy White Sugar; excellent good for any Cough or Cold. Take two pounds of the best pow∣dered Sugar, and put it in a Dish to dry very well in a warm Oven; then beat it fine and searce it; mix with this quan∣tity, one ounce of the best prepared Amber; mingle them very well toge∣ther, and put them into a Preserving-Pan, with one pint of Fair-water; melt it over a gentle fire, and when it boils,
put in the White of an Egg to clarifie it; then seum it very well, and when you perceive it to be as clear as Chry∣stal, then let it stand in the Pan until it be cold, covered very close: then take fair Running-water about two quarts▪ and one ounce of the clearest Roch-Allom beaten to powder, mix them together, and let them stand twenty four hours: When you have so done, take an Earthen-Vessel, or Pot, and some few sticks of the whitest sappy-Fire, splintered from un-wrought Deal, and place your sticks as you do in a Bee-Hive; cross every way, set this Pot over a few Embers empty; then mix your Sugar and your Water in your Preserving-Pan, setting them upon the fire; and so soon as you perceive the Sugar to sink, then pour out the Wa∣ter, having a Cullender; pour your Sugar into the said Pot very gently through the Cullender, and it will Candy presently in square forms, and that which falleth to the bottom will be as good as the rest, though perhaps not altogether so clear of colour; as soon as you have poured in all your Sugar, which will rope like Hony; then stop
your Pot very close, and let the Pot stand in a Vessel of cold water four daies very well luted; they usually break the Pot when they take the Candy; then break it off the sticks, and keep it in a Box in some dry place. A most rare Receipt for the Scurvy; for old Catarrhs or Rheums; or for a Consumption. Take a good quantity of Scurvy-grass, and beat it, and strain it; take the juyce thereof and set it over the fire till it be hot, but let it not boil; so soon as you see a thick scum arise, take it off, and strain it through a linnen Cloth, but never press it between your fingers; as soon as the scum is thrown away, then set it over the fire again, and take clarified Hony three ounces, Butter clarified with three Cloves of Garlick one ounce, Anniseeds half an ounce, Eunulacampane half an ounce, Liquorish half an ounce, pow∣dered very fine, and searced through a lawn Sieve, Saffron one dram finely beaten, White Sugar-Candy finely beat∣en one ounce; mix all these powders
very well together, and strew them carefully into the aforesaid Juyce, with the clarified Butter and Hony, and keep it continually stirring till you have incor∣porated it fully over the fire; then take it from the fire, and keep it stirring till it be cold: then if you have a mind to keep it for a Sirrop, you may keep it in a Gally-pot, or you may make it thicker with more Sugar-Candy; add a little Fos Sulphuris, and you may perfume them if you please; that is, if you stiffen it enough for Lozenges. An excellent Medicine for any Ob∣structions. Take a quarter of a peck of fine Wheat-flower, half an ounce of Cloves beaten very fine, two Nutmegs, and a quarter of an ounce of Mace beaten fine, mix these well with the Flower; as also half a pound of fine Sugar beaten and searced; put in some juyce of Harts-tongue and Liver-wort, the yolks of six Eggs, and six ounces of fresh sweet Butter, knead it together very well, and make it into a Cake, and bake it with
Bread; eat of it very often and no doubt you will find good of it, for it hath done very great Cures upon many who were Obstructed. Here is a most excellent Plaister, which is called the Catholick, and for fear I should forget it, I will not omit it any any longer. Take of Rosin beaten beaten to powder two pounds and a half, Heifers Tallow one pound and a quarter, tryed with a gentle fire and cleansed; when it is cold scrape away the dross from the bottom, and melt it in a Brass Vessel; then strew in the Rosin by handfuls, and stir it with a Willow Spatula, continually stirring it until it be all stirred in and melted; then have ready a Bason of Pewter, and in it of Water of Camomile, of English Briony-Root, and of Damask Rose∣water, of each eight ounces, with pow∣der of Salt of Wormwood, Salt of Tar∣tar, Salt of Scurvy-grass, Vitriol cam∣phonate, of each one ounce and half; then pour in the melted bod d stir it with the Spatula from the East to the
West, round continually, until the body have seemingly swallowed up all the Waters and Salt; continue it stirring until the Water appear, and thus work it until the body be as white as Snow; then let it stand a Month in the Water, covered from dust; and when you use it, let it not come near any fire, but work a little at a time, until it be as white as Snow on the brawn of your hand, over against the little-Finger; spread it on a linnen-Cloth or Leather, for the best Catholick Plaister in the World; for the Reins in all Accidents; for all Bruises and great Contusions, and where the Bones are broken into small bits, to ease pains▪ least a Gangrene en∣sue; then twice a day foment the part with hot stroops wrung out of a fomen∣tation, made with a strong Lye of three quarts made with Wood-Ashes, then in the Lye Centaury, St. Johns Wort, Mallows, Wormwood, of each a good handful, one root of Solomons Seal, if you can get one, or else it may be made without foment with hot stroops wrung out of this liquor of Wollen Cloaths, and apply to the part as hot as may be, and cover it  Blankets to keep in the heat,
and before it be quite cold, renew ano∣ther hot stroop; continue this order one hour Morning and Evening, then pre∣sently apply the Plaister a little warmed every time; when you see want, spread it again if you see cause. But when such shatterings are of Bones, Contused Wounds, Dislocations; roul it not up as other fractures, but have a Box made open at each end, and lay the part on a pillow, and let the strings of binding come about the pillow, and lay the Member in the Box; bind it not hard, and sometimes not at all. This is a very great Secret, and to be valued. To make fine Jelly of Fruit, which will look transparent. Take some Isinglass and break it in little bits, and boil it in Water very well, and strain it; then colour it with any sort of Fruit, by putting in the juyce thereof; then to every pint of it take one pound of the best refined Sugar, boil them together, and scum it very well; and when you find it to be enough, put it into flat Glasses, and keep it in a Cub∣bord.
You may make Jelly of any Cordial Herb or Flower in this manner, which will be very comfortable and strength∣ing, and also very pleasant. A pretty sweet Meat of Lettuce-stalks. Boil them in several Waters till they are tender, then wash them in cold wa∣ter, and dry them well, then take their weight in fine Sugar, just wet it with Water, and boil it to a Candy-height; hen put in your stalks, being first stam∣ped in a Mortar very well; boil them together till it be very cleer, and take them from the fire, and put them into Glasses; and if you please you may add  little juyce of a Lemmon to it as it oils, and a little candid pill of a Lem∣non shred small, for that will give a good taste, and make it look very beau∣tiful. In like manner you may do with Harty-Choaks bottoms, when they are boiled ender.
To make Marmalade of Damsons. Take your Damsons and scald them in Water till the skins do crack; then pill them, and take away the Stones; then beat them well in a Mortar; then take their weight in fine Sugar, wet it with Water, and boil it to a Candy-height; then put in your Damsons, and boil it, and keep it stirring continually, till it will come from the bottom of the Posnet. To make Sirrop of Snails; most admira∣ble in Consumptions. Take shell-Snails, and break their shells off, and wash them very well in a Pan with Water and Salt, and then with several Waters alone till they be very clean; then put them into a long Gally∣pot, with a blade or two of Mace, and a little quantity of Whitewine; cover the Pot, and set it into a Kettle of boiling Water, for the space of two hours or more; then put them out into an Hip∣pocras Bag, and hang them up to drain, and let them drop into a Glass with a mouth so wide as that it may not drop besides, and when it hath dropped all it will; then to a pint of it take a pound of White Sugar Candy, two spoonfuls of
the best Cinnamon-water, one quarter of a pint of red Rose-water, one grain of Ambergreace, and twelve sheets of Leaf-Gold; put all these into the Glass, and let it stand all night; then set it carefully into a Kettle of Water when it is cold, and fasten it very vvell about with Hay, and let the Kettle be set on the fire, and by degrees be made to boil; but if you should put in a Pot or Glass into a Kettle of boiling hot Water, the suddain heat would break it, or else not. Let it stand thus slightly covered, till you find that the Sugar be quite incor∣porated with the Juyce; when it is taken off and cold, put it up to keep, and give the Party of it two spoonfuls at a time, twice in a day, in the Morning and in the Afternoon, about four of the Clock. Very fine Lozenges for a Cough of de∣fluxion of Rheum. Take two ounces of powder of Li∣quorish, half an ounce of powder of An∣niseeds, one quarter of an ounce of pow∣der of Elecampane, one dram of flower of Brimstone, and one dram of prepared red Corral, one pound of double re∣fined Sugar beaten and searced; then with some Gum-Dragon steeped all night
in red Rose-water, beat them into a paste, then mold it up with a little searced Su∣gar, and make it up into Lozenges; print them with a Seal, and dry them in the Sun, or in some warm place; eat of these often in the day or night, putting one in your mouth, and let it lye till it be quite melted. To make a Paste very delicate, rich, and very pleasant. Take one pound of red Quince-Mar∣melade, which is made very smooth, one ounce of candid Lemmon-pill, one ounce of candid Cittron-pill, one ounce of can∣did Iringo-root, one ounce of candid Ginger, one ounce of Dates sliced thin, and one ounce of Prunels; let all these be cut small, and beaten with a little Sack to a Paste; then put your Marmelade to them, with four ounces of sweet Al∣monds blanched and beaten, and four ounces of fine Sugar beaten and searced, and a little Gum-Dragon, steeped all night in fair water, when you have beat∣en them extream well, then take it out and mold it up with searced Sugar, and make it into little Cakes, of what form you please, and dry them upon Wafer∣sheets
on Tin-plates in an Oven after Bread is drawn. If you please you may perfume some of them. To make good Drink to comfort you in a cold Morning. Take a pint and a half of Claret-Wine, and half a pint of stale strong-Beer; boil them with such Spice as you like very well, and a little Lemmon-pill; then take the Yolks of four or five Eggs, and beat them very well; then put so much Sugar into your Wine, as you think will well sweeten it; and after mixing some of your hot Wine with the Eggs, brew them and the Wine ve∣ry well together, and let there be a little piece of Butter in it. Be sure to brew it a pace that it curdle not, for then it is spoiled. To make an excellent Cordial Electuary, for to restore one that is weak, or against Melancholy. Take of Conserve of Burrage flowers, Rosemary flowers, of Marigold flowers, of Sage flowers, of Benorty flowers; of each of these one ounce, two ounces of Sirrop
of Clove-Gilly flowers, two ounces of the Sirrop of the juyce of Cittrons, one dram of Confection of Alkermes, two ounces of the best Cinnamon Water, and twelve or fourteen leaves of Leaf-Gold, with one ounce of prepared Cor∣ral, either White or Red; mix all these together very well, and take about the quantity of a Walnut every night when you go to Bed. A very good Cordial Water without the trouble of a Still. Take two quarts of Brandy, and keep it in a great Glass with a reasonable narrow mouth; put into it of Cloves, Nutmeg, Cinnamon and Ginger, Car∣demon seeds, Coriander seeds, Anni∣seeds, Liquorish, of each of these half an ounce bruised; Long-pepper and Grains of each one dram bruised, Ele∣campane one quarter of an ounce brui∣sed; let all these steep in the Brandy a fortnight, then pour it out into another Glass softly, so long as it will run clear; then put more Brandy into the Glas, where the Ingredients are, and let that stand three weeks; and so along as you
find there is any strength in the Ingredi∣ents, still put in more Brandy, and let it stand every time longer and longer. Then take your first two quarts of Brandy which you poured off, and put in it four ounces of White Sugar-Can∣dy, and so much Sirrop of Clove-Gilly flowers as will well colour it, with store of Leaf-Gold; give two spoonfuls at a time: It is good in case of any Illness or Swouning, to drive out any infection and venemous humors; it is good for wind in the Stomach, and to keep out Cold. A pretty Sweet-mèat made of Grapes, very good in Feavors. Take Grapes and pluck them from their Stalks, and bruise them well; then strain them through a Strainer made of French Canvas; then set that juyce in a Gally-pot into a Kettle of boiling Water for three hours, then take the weight of it in fine Sugar, and boil it to a Can∣dy height, then put in your juyce of Grapes, and boil it till it be very clear, and scum it well; then put it into Glasses, and set them into a Stove for a while.
To make Marmelade with Barberries, and Pippins. Take one pound of fine Sugar, and a pint of Water, and boil them toge∣ther, and scum them very well; then put into that Sirrop one pound of the best Pippins pared, and cut in quarters and Coared; boil them quick in this Sirrop till they are extream clear; then take them and bruise them as small as you can with the back of a Spoon; then put to them one pound of Conserve of Barberries that is curiously made, and stir them well together, and let them boil till they are well incorporated, and then put them into Glasses. This is very Cordial and pleasant in Feavors. To Candy Fruits after they have lien in Sirrop. Take any sort of Fruit which you have preserved; as Apples, Pears, Plumbs, Oranges, Lemmons, Citrons, or any other, and lay them out of their Sirrop all night to drain; then lay them upon Sieves, and set them into a warm Oven to dry; then wash them over with Wat
wherein Gum-Arabick hath lien to steep one night and do it with a Feather; then have in readiness some White Su∣gar Candy, beaten not fine but grosly, and some small, some bigger; so soon as you have washed your Fruit with Gum-water, then strew it over with this Sugar Candy, so thick as the Gum will hold them on, and lay them upon slicked-Papers to dry in the Sun, and turn them often; and if you see any fault mend it with more Gum-water and Sugar. This is an extraordinary pretty way, and looks very delicately; and as they lie in the Sun they will sparkle like Dia∣monds: it is soon done, and with as little Cost as that which taketh up more time. To make a pretty Toy to hang up in the Kitchin to catch Flies, or rather to keep them from spoiling the Pewter, or trou∣bling People. Take a square Trencher, and bore a hole at each Corner; then take four Cucumbers of an equal bigness, and not too long, and let them every one have stalks, by which you must tie them with
pack-thred to the four holes of the Trencher, and let your Trencher be painted over; and when it is dry wash it over with Gum-water, and strew it thick with French-frost; then take some Barley, and stick your Cucumbers thick with the Corns, with the growing ends outward; then wash them over with Gum-water, and Frost them, and so let them dry as they hang; and on the top of the Trencher set some pretty kinds of Toys, as Babies, Dogs, Birds, or any thing you fancy better, and tie knots of fine Ribbon at every Corner, which may hide the Stalks of the Cucumbers; they do look strangely and prettily, and the sight of them is pleasing to Children to quiet them. To lay on Leaf-Gold or Silver to any thing you would Gild. Take Gum-water, made with Arabick, and let it be pretty stiff; then lay it on with your Pencil where you would Gild; then take a little Cushion, made for the purpose, of very smooth Leather, and upon that cut your Gold with a sharp Knife, as you will; and to take it up,
draw the edge of your Knife finely up∣on your Tongue, that it may be only wet, with which, do-but touch the very edge of your Gold and it will come up, and you may lay it as you list; but be∣fore you lay it on, let your Gum be al∣most dry, or else it will drown your Gold: and when you have laid it, press it down hard with the skut of a Hare, and when it is dry, burnish it over with a Dogs-tooth. This is the right way to lay on either Gold or Silver. You may gild any Wood, or Stone, or Sweet∣meats, as what you make in Sugar, Plate, or such like. To dress up a Chimney very fine for the Summer time, as I have done many, and they have been liked very well. First, take a pack-thred and fasten it even to the inner part of the Chimney, so high as that you can see no higher as you walk up and down the House; you must drive in several Nails to hold this pack∣thred, for that is to hold up all your work; then get good store of old green Moss from Trees, and melt an equal pro∣portion of Bees-wax and Rosin together,
and while it is hot, dip the wrong ends of the Moss in it, and presently clap it upon your pack-thred, and press it down hard with your hand; you must make hast, else it will cool before you can fasten it, and then it will fall down; do so all round where the pack-thred goes, and the next row you must joyn to that so that it may seem all in one, thus do till you have finished it down to the bottom: then take some other kind of Moss, of a whitish-colour and stiff, and of several sorts or kinds, and place that upon the other, here and there carelesly, and in some places put a good deal, and some a little; then any kind of fine Snail-shells, in which the Snails are dead, and little Toad-stools, which are very old, and look like Velvet, or any other thing that is old and pretty; place it here and there as your fancy serves, and fasten all with Wax and Rosin. Then for the Hearth of your Chimney, you may lay some Orpan-Sprigs in order all over, and it will grow as it lies; and according to the Season, get what flow∣ers you can, and stick in as if they grew, and a few sprigs of Sweet-Bryer: the Flowers you must renew every Week▪
but the Moss will last all the Summer, till it will be time to make a fire; and the Orpan vvill last near two Months. A Chimney thus done doth grace a Room exceedingly. Another way for Chimneys, very fine; but will not last half so long. Take a fine thin Wainscot-board, a∣bout three quarters of a yard long, and proportionably broad, for what you do intend it; let it be cut in what form best pleases you. I have seen some cut like a Rose and Crown; some a Flower de Luce; some other flowers: when it is cut out, let it be all over thick with pieces of Wier sharped at one end, and drove in about an inch in length, each of them: then lay it upon a Table, and take some Clay wetted a little, and lay all over it, till you have quite filled up the Wiers with the Clay, for it is they must hold it on: Then round about the edges every where, stick it thick with little small sprigs of green Tamerick or Cypress; or for want of either of these, take Ewe-sprigs, and be sure to stick them so
that not any part of the edges may be discovered; then according to the form of the Board you must choose your Flowers and Herbs. If it be for a Rose, then your Flowers must be all Red, yet of divers kinds; if there be a Crown that must be all of Yellow flowers; if a Flower de Luce, then Blew, or Purple and Yellow, and so to every other: let your Flowers be all picked ready, and every sort laid by themselves; then run the Stalks of them into the Clay near to the Flower, and so do till you have finished all; and put the Greens also in their proper place, as in the leaves and bearbs of the Flowers; when you have quite done, set it into the Chimney, and let the bottom of it rest within a great Flower-pot, such as they make for Chimneys: It must be lifted by three or four People at once very carefully, or else you will spoil all; for it will be so weighty, and the Board so thin, that it is easily broke in the mo∣ving. When you have set it as it should be, then cover your Chimneys-Hearth with Green things, and then with fine Flowers, and be sure to cover your Pot also that there may be no discovery; it
will be fresh two Months if you sprinkle it with Water. I have here directed you to many things, which will (no doubt) be plea∣sant and profitable to you. Give me leave now to treat a little concerning the Be∣haviour of the Female Sex, and to give Counsel to those who need it, because I find there is some need of it. In my Book called The Ladies Guide, I did speak very much to them, but most to the Younger sort. My intention was to have inlarged that Book, if Mr. Newman had done me that right, as to have let me known when he vvould print it; but it was his pleasure to employ another; who hath so transformed the Book, that it is nothing like what I had written: It is now about Eight years or more since I writ that Guide, which was sold for twelve pence the Book; and it is above twelve Months since the New one came out, which sold for half a Crown the Book. I thought to have sued him for it, but he very cunningly prevented that by taking advantage of me; notwith∣standing he must give me leave to say the truth, That that Edition was none of my Writing, I will never disown
what I do Write, nor am I willing to own what I writ not. He did indeed (after I had Cavilled with him, and shewed him vvherein I vvas abused by his Writer) give me a small matter to look it over, and told me that I should take out, and put in the room of it vvhat I best pleased, and agreed with me by the Sheet vvhat to give me, which I did accordingly: and truly, I dealt very Friendly with him; for I took away nothing but that which was scandalous, ridiculous, and impertinent, and put in only that vvhich vvas inno∣cent and harmless: So willing was I to be peaceable vvith him, and I thought he vvould have been Civil to me; but vvhen I brought it to him, he did not give me the one half of what I bargain'd for: I asking him why he dealt so un∣worthily with me? He said, it was his humour to give me no more. So now he may take notice that it is my Humour to let all People know, that I was abused in that his late printed Book. He told me, he cared not for my Name, he would print it without it: if he do so, I have nothing to do with it. I should not speak so much did I not find a prejudice:
for People of vvorth do wonder why I would Write so; and I have vindicated my self to those who told me of it, with telling the Truth. Now to proceed: In that Book which was mine (called The Ladies Guide) there was as good Instructions to Youth, as I can imagine to give; and also to all manner of Ser∣vants, what their duty was each one in their several Employs; and there vvas the Mistresses part as well as theirs: The Wife to the Husband, the Widow to the World: and indeed when I writ it, I could not tell how to say more. He would do himself much right, as well as me, to print the same Verbatim: in the mean time I desire you to observe vvhat I shall say, which may do some of you much good for the future. There are very many at this present time vvho vvant Services, both Gentlewomen and others, and some of them very well accomplisht (those I find to be the most humble, and willing to please:) Another sort there be which have little in them; yet none but great Places vvill serve them; vvhich vvhen they have wearied themselves to find, and at last miss of what they have propounded to them∣selves,
they are ready to run any extra∣vagant Course still to purchase fine Cloaths, then to conform to any Civility or Manners, or to take the Advice of those who would assist them. Some who have apt Wits, and that dame Nature hath been favourable to, they are Court∣ed to be Players: Some other of them to Bawdy-Houses: Some are tempted to Steal. And thus many Wickednesses are committed against God and Man, and themselves brought into a most miserable condition of living, or to a shameful end: whilst the first I spake of are diligent to get wherewith to feed and cloath them∣selves by some honest employ or other, till such time as it shall please God better to provide for them, and keep close to their business (not shewing themselves in the Streets, but vvhen they have just occasion to go forth:) Such as these last shall never want my assistance, if it lye in my power to help them; for it is a great deal of pity but that all Ingenious and Honest minded Persons should be encouraged. I do love such vvith my heart, and do beseech them still to trust in him vvho is able to remedy all, or to give patience in sufferings. I will now
tell you several▪Causes vvhich may bring good Children, and Children of good Parents, many times, to be in Distress; as also, Why the other do commonly run into Wickedness, and vvhat may for the future prevent such Miscarriages; vvith my loving and Christian Advice to both their Parents and them; and somewhat to those under whose Tuition they are, or may happen under. The Cause why good Children, or the Children of worthy Parents, are oft∣times in a distressed Condition. IT hapneth oft-times, that a Gentle∣man having a good Estate, but many Children, he, and the care of a good Mo∣ther together doth make a very good shift to bring them all up (in appearance to the eye of the World) very handsom∣ly; their Attire being such as becomes his and her Children; their Education such as is fitting for, or the best vvhich can be attained in that
place they live in: this they do till some of the Eldest are Women grown; and by that time they are considering how to bestow them in the World, finding the Charge to be too great for them. If an Elder one Marry; although there be one less in the Family, yet carries more with her, than, if she had stayed, would have been spent upon her: Her Husband perhaps in a short time, by playing the Ill-fellow, is quite ruin'd, and his Wife turn'd home to her Parents again, with a Child or two to provide for. Where, after a vvhile, she cannot abide to hear her Husband blamed, neither is she wil∣ling to burden her Parents so much; she endeavours to get into some good Service, to be Nurse, and leaves her Child or Children vvith them. She hath her affliction, and doth vvaste her self vvith grief and sorrow. The Parents find themselves so burden'd, that they must needs send some of the rest out to Service: and here they come to London, perhaps to some Cozin, or some Friend, thinking to get some place or other quickly, but find it a hard business. Their Friends beginning to grumble at their being; their Cloaths beginning to wear
out, and all their Mony spent; then do they find themselves in a desperate Con∣dition, and do seek some place or other to Lodge in, and are content to be im∣ployed in any honest way to get a penny, till they can procure a Service; being not vvilling to return to their Parents, to add to their grief. Some men are un∣done by Surety-ship; some with the Ill-chance of a Die; some by Fire; some by Sea; some by long-sickness; some by Robbery; some by Suits in Law; some by War; and many other waies there are to bring Men to destruction; and then their Wives and Children must needs be exposed to Misery: The poor Mother, she employs her self in some∣what or other to maintain her self, and the younger Children, who are not yet able to take care of themselves: and for the Elder ones, they are forced to Ser∣vice, and are fain to accept for the pre∣sent, which are but slavish, rather then to follow any Ill-course of Life. All these, you will say, have their Afflictions; and you have sufficient Reasons for the Causes thereof.
The Causes why others do commonly run into Mischief and Wickedness. They are such whose Fathers have died vvhen they vvere young, and their Mother perhaps by a second match hath ruin'd her self, and them; or she hath been left in so miserable a condition, that she hath not been capable of Advising them, nor able to bring them up as she should do in the Fear of God: so that wanting that, they have grown Refra∣ctory to her, and forgot their Duty, and then liable to all Temptations whatever. Some Parents have both died, and left their Children to the Care of some near Friend, and their Estates to be managed by them for the Childrens good; and those Trustees have been neglectful of those in their Charge, and have spent all which vvas left for them, and then ex∣posed them to the mercy of the World, vvithout Education or Mony: And some are naturally inclin'd to Wickedness▪ and that is worst of all; For it is as hard to bring them to good, as to vvash a Black-Moor white, or to make a Foo vvise; both vvhich are I think impos¦sible:
some for vvant of good Principles, and vvhich have been left too much to their own Will, to do even vvhat they list, and vvhen they list. God knows our Nature of it self is prone to nothing but Evil; therefore how happy are they that have careful Parents, that are not over-fond to leave them to their own Will, nor cruel to them in their Cor∣rections; but do vvisely and soberly, religiously and lovingly Nurture them, and strictly keep them to Church, and Family Duties, such do seldome go a∣stray; for God vvill certainly bless those Children for the Parents sake. And how unhappy are those vvhose Parents are careless of their Childrens Education, and not only so, but do also ruine them by giving an ill Exam∣ple. Of all these vvhich I have mentioned, I at this present know some, both Pa∣rents and Children, every one of their Conditions in particular, and am truly sorry for their Affliction; for certainly there is no greater Grief than ill Hus∣bands, and ill Wives, cause to one another, or vvhat ill Children create to their Parents or they to them.
I thank God, though I have passed through many more Afflictions and Troubles then thousands of my Sex, yet I never had an ill Husband, nor undu∣tiful Children; but (on the contrary) I have been marryed to two Worthy, E∣minent, and brave Persons; and I have four Sons, as good Children as ever Mo∣ther did bear. For my own part, I can say nothing for my self, what Wife or Mother I have been; but if no Accusa∣tion come against me, I have no reason to accuse my self. I give thanks and glory to Almighty God, for what bene∣fits I have received from time to time; especially for those Blessings which I do at this present enjoy; The lives and welfare of my Dear Children, The happy choice which two of them have made in their Wives, and that I have lived to see two sweet Babes from their Loyns. Such like comfort as this I wish to all good Christians.
Advice to Parents concerning their Chil∣dren, and advice to Children concern∣ing their Parents: Also to any Person under whose Tuition they may be; which (if well observed) may prevent much wickedness for the future. YOU who are the Mothers of Chil∣dren, I advice you to have an espe∣cial Care, first, That they be well-grounded in the Principles of true Reli∣gion: That they keep duly to Church and to Family Duties: That they duly ask you Blessing; and make them to know their Distance, by keeping them to all due Reverence: Let them be lovingly and quietly Governed; not with perpe∣tual Chiding and Brawling, but treat with them mildly and gently; unless you find them Refractory to your Com∣mands; if so, then some Austere lan∣guage must be used: and when they do well, be kind to them, and encourage them. Let them not be too nice in their Diet; but teach them to know, that
God is worthy of Thanks and Praise for the least bit or drop they Eat or Drink. Let them be neat and decent in their Habit, not at all Extravagant: have a care what Company they keep, and do not give them too much Liberty, nei∣ther deny them lawful Recreations. Let them not have the command of your Purse, neither let them be without a little; and as they manage that, give them more. Let them learn whatever they are capable of, or that you have opportunity for the Learning, and espe∣cially what their Genious is inclined to; for that to be sure they will be excellent at. Let them be fully employed, but with diversity of things; that will be a delight to them, and they will have no time to give heed to wicked Temptati∣ons, nor no room for idle Thoughts. Suffer them not to tell you▪ a Lie, but encourage them alwaies to tell the Truth; for lying is the ground of all Mischief. Teach them to be Houswifely in their Cloaths, and too sparing of them. Let them learn the way of House∣keeping, by acting your Commands. Let them know how to entertain Friends, and to be Courteous to Strangers, and
loving to your Servants; not Dominee∣ring over them, nor yet too familiar with them. Advise them to be modest in their Carriage in mens Company, for fear of ill Censures. Suffer them not to be too loud in their Discourse, nor Snappish and Peevish with any. Give them Counsel, who are your Children, to Love one another, and alwaies to give more than ordinary Respect to the Eldest. These things, if you will please to observe▪ to Command them, and they will be careful to obey you, you shall not need to doubt of your happiness in them▪ and they will alwaies have rea∣son to bless God for such a Parent, or Parents, who were not only the Cause of their being, but also of their well-being. But if by ill-Fate (after all this Care) you should have a Rebellious and refractory Child, your frequent Prayers to Almighty God will be the only way to reclaim them. But truly, I do think there is no other way, nor no better way to prevent Wickedness in Children, then this I have proposed; which per∣haps, you may say is needless, because you know already how to order them.
I beseech your pardon; for we are not so sit to advise our selves as others, for our Indulgence oftentimes blinds us: Therefore we are fitter to Advise one another, then any one to Advise their selves. Neglect of Childrens good, by being over-Fond ruines them. Too much Se∣verity doth so too: I cannot tell which is worst: Therefore it is good to shun both, and to keep the middle way. All you Children, who have Parents living, observe your Duty to them, and whatsoever they Command you, do▪ and God will bless you the better; for he hath Commanded you, to Honour your Father and Mother. If they do Chide you, bear it patiently, and do not pro∣voke them to continue their Anger by unreverent Answers, but be silent and submissive to them. Be careful of your time when you Learn any thing, and do not let the Mo∣ny (which they are willing to disburse for you) be lost through your Idleness. Observe every one how they do order their Houses, and how they do make this or that; and what you cannot re∣member,
that write down, that it may stead you another time. Be careful of your Parents when they are Sick, and reverence them when they are Aged. Burthen them not when you come to be of Age of Discretion, but think with your self how, or which way to case them. Take heed what Company you keep, for fear they corrupt you, and draw you into mischief. Go not from your Parents without their leave, least you grieve them; and bring a Curse upon your selves, by Dis∣obeying them. Depend on no Friends, but trust in him who is able always to provide for you, and that will never fail those who wait upon him patiently without di∣strust; he is never weary of hearing the complaint of the Widow and Fatherless, nor of any who are in Distress. On the other side, do not neglect or slight your Friends; but shew your duty to them in your respects, and give ear to their good Counsel. When you are absent from your Pa∣rents, be sure to Write to them so often as need shall require, and let not what
you Write be impertinent and trouble∣some. If God hath blest you with a good Lady or Mistress, be you observing al∣waies what may please her, and be hum∣ble and modest in your Behaviour; be neat and Houswifely in your Cloaths, and lay up what Mony can handsomly be spared. Be careful of what she gives you, or what you have in your Charge, that by so doing you may oblige her to be loving and kind to you, and cause her to speak well of you. Do not keep familiarity with any, but those by whom you may improve your time. If you be an Apprentice; be careful that you learn your Trade well, that you may live another day: and let not the Mony your Parent or Friends gave for your good be thrown away by your Neglect and Carelesness. If God hath blest you with a For∣tune, be careful to improve it, and trust not too much upon it. Never consent to Marry with any man without your Pa∣rents or Friends Consent, least you be the Cause of their Grief and Sorrow; and bring your self to Affliction and Misery.
All you who have any Young Mai∣dens, or Gentlewomen, under your Charge or Tuition, be you alwaies mind∣ful of their Good as well as your own. If they are put to School to you, or Apprentices, let them not lose their Youthful time, which cannot be re∣deemed; but keep them strictly to their Duty in a loving and mild way. If they come as Servants to you for Wages, be not cruel to them in severe Language; nor impose more upon them than they shall be able to perform; nor pinch them in their Diet, but allow them such Food as is convenient for them. When they do their Duty to you, be you pleased to encourage them, by gi∣ving them good words, and bestow some small Favour on them. Advise them how to lay out their Mony, and never to spend all, but keep some for a reserve. Let them go decently, not vainly and proudly: and command them duly to the Service of God. I think I have spoken sufficiently o all I mentioned; and as I mean well, so, I hope, you will all of you ake it well. With this my advice  vvish you the Blessing of GOD,
and do desire the same from you upon my self; which is all the Gratification I do desire or expect from you. Be pleased to take notice, that in my Book The Ladies Guide, I did give di∣rection for the Writing of Letters; but it was only to such as were Young, and to Servants. I think it not amiss to give some Forms or Patterns of Let∣ters for Elder, and more-serious people: for I do daily find, that in Writing most Women are to seek. They many times spend their time in Learning a good Hand; but their English and Lan∣guage is, The one not easie to under∣stand, The other weak and impertinent. I meet with Letters my self sometimes, that I could even tear them as I read them, they are so full of impertinency, and so tedious. I will begin with one of them; not that you should take example by it to do the same; but I set it as a thing to be abhorr'd, and shun'd.
From a Sister to a Brother, far distant from her. Dear Brother, MY love remembred unto you, ho∣ping that you are in good health as I am at the writing hereof, praised be God. I hope you got well to your Journeys end; I pray let us know. My Father and my Mother do remember their Love to you; and my Sister Betty remembers her Love to you; and my Brother John, and my Brother Nicholas do so too: and my Couzin Jane is Mar∣ried, and she doth remember her Love to you, and her Husband remembers his Love to you, and says, he would be glad to see you, and to be acquainted with you. My Couzin Robin remembers his Love to you; and my Couzin Nan remembers her Love to you; and I remember my Love to you. So I rest Your loving Sister till death, Elizabeth Spanner. You see in this Letter how ridiculous it is to Write after this manner, the lan∣guage being both impertinent and foo∣lish: Give me leave now to shew you
what ill English is, and tell me which is worst, for I do not yet know. From a Daughter to her Mother. Dear Mother, MY duty remembred unto you hop∣ping that you are in good helth as i am at the Riting hereof prased be God, this is to let you understand that i have receved the things you sent to me by Tomas Frenge and he had a grot of me for the bringing them, i pray do not forget my Come I left in the Kichen windo and my Aporn in the Chamber, pray send them al to me, i hop my Fa∣ther is wel and my brother Ned and my suster Joice and i hop godie welsh is wel, thus with my love and duty to you i rest your dutiful daster Ann Blackwell. Now I have shewed you how ridi∣culous and simple, and how impertinent these are; I will also shew you how to Write that it may be effectual in what
you shall desire, and also acceptable to those you Write to. You shall find here Letters upon all Occasions which com∣monly concern us; and some others which accidentally may happen. Ob∣serve that you are not to Write word for word, but to take the manner of the Form it will teach you, and by so doing you may save your Purse, and keep your Secrets to your self. Take notice that those Letters I shall write as from People well knowing, is not to teach them how to Write, but to teach you how to Answer them. From a Mother to a Daughter in a Ladies Service. Dear Child, I Do desire to know how you do in your Service, and whether or no you think you shall be able to perform what you have undertaken: however I com∣mand you to be very diligent to please, that you may by that oblige your Lady to be kind to you, and willing to keep you. Be careful to serve God, and be pleasing in your Carriage to all People. So soon as I know you shall stay I will send your Trunck, and other things.
Thus with your Fathers and my Blessing to you, and your Brothers and Sisters Love, I rest Your careful and loving Mother, Sarah Wild. March 3. 1663. The Answer. Most Dear and Honoured Mother, I Received yours dated March the third, and do give you humble thanks for your Motherly Care of me; I have not yet been long enough to give you a full account how my Lady will like me: I hope well, because as yet she finds little or no fault with me. I beseech you to assure your self, that if I should be tur∣ned home to you again, it shall be for what I cannot do, not what I will not do; but I hope better things, and I will stay here if it be possible, for it is a wor∣thy Family, and they are very kind to me. My Lady likes my Dressing very well, and also what I Starch; but she would fain have me more curious in my Point-Work. She will not let me wash her Chamber because I should not spoil my Hands for Work. If she like me well, I
shall be glad, for I like her Service very well. Thus with my humble Duty pre∣sented to you and to my Father; with my Love to my Brothers and Sisters, and to all my Friends: I take my leave, and do beseech you to esteem me as I endeavour to be, Dear Mother, Your most Obedient Daughter, Mary Wild March 10. 1663. From a Sister to a Brother. Dear Brother, YOur absence at first caused much Grief, both to our Parents, and to us your loving Brothers and Sisters; but since we hear of your welfare, and very good liking, we are as much joyed, and do heartily wish and pray for the continuance of the same. We want the comfort of your Company; but we can∣not live by sight of each other. This is a miserable World, and every one must be Careful and Industrious, or else it is impossible to wade the Troubles which it brings people in. We are happy in our Parents, that they took such good Care
for us in our Education, to make us able to live in the World. I thank God I am in a very good Place, where I have the Love and good word of the People I serve: I do not doubt but to gain it more and more. My Mother as well as my Father. Commanded me to write to you, and to let you know their Indispo∣sition, or else my Father would have Written to you himself. He hath been ill of the Gout, and my Mother of an Ague; but I hope they will both do very well again. My Brother James hath also hurt his Side by a Fall, but he is on the mending hand. Thus with my Fa∣thers and Mothers. Blessing to you; with mine, my Brothers and Sisters Love to you, I rest, Dear Brother, Your ever affectionate Sister, Martha Hopewell. Decemb. 4. 1665. From one Friend to another. Honoured Friend, I Have written to you several times, to let you know what I have done concerning the Business you were pleas∣ed to intrust me withal; but hearing no
Answer, I fear my Letters have mis∣carried. This is now again to give you an account of what I have done. So soon as your Letter of commands came to my Hands, I went streight to Mr. Shewer, and demanded your Mony, delivering the Let∣ter of Attorney you sent, to peruse, that he might know the truth; but he wil∣ling to while-off, told me, that he would pay it to you so soon as he could see you, and speak with you about some Business which concerns your good. If he keep his Word it will do very well. I was also with Mrs. Madewell, and she hath paid me; also with Mr. Stockwell, and he hath also paid me. I pray do me the favour as to see my little Girl for me, and know what Nurse wants, and I will send it down. I shall trouble you no more at this present, save only with the Service and Respects of Your most affectionate Kinswoman, and humble Servant, Ann Boarman. Novemb. 2. 1667.
The Answer. Dear Friend, I Received yours; wherein you have given me full satisfaction concerning what I desired you, for which I most humbly thank you, and do desire you will be pleased to accept this Token from me: I wish it were better; but I know your Temper so well, that your Eye will not be over-curious with me, nor mind the Gift more than the Giver, but take all in good part. I have seen your little one, which is in good health. Nurse wants nothing as yet▪ All our Friends here are well, and desire you to accept their Love and Service. Thus with mine in particular to you, I rest▪ Your ever obliged Friend, and devoted Servant, J. M. Novemb. 2. 1667. From one Sister to another. Dear Sister, I Am very glad to hear you do so well, and that you have recovered your Health again; I pray God continue it to you. My Mother remembers her
Love and Blessing to you, and desires you will send her the Receipt for the Stone; for she hath great need of it, both for her self and others. She desires to know when you think you shall come to Town. I am in a little haste, and nought else at present, but my dear Love and Respects to you, and to tell you that I am, and ever will be, Dear Sister, Yours ever to love and serve you, Mary South. Decemb. 6. 1664. From a Lady to a Gentlewoman, whom she hath a kindness for. My dear Friend, YOur Humility commands what Fa∣vour lies in my power to do for you or yours; therefore if you can conde∣scend that your Daughter shall be a Ser∣vant to me, you shall find that I will be more a Mother than a Mistress to her. I doubt not of her Abilities, since I know your care hath been very much for her Education. However, I may find her not at present altogether fit for my Service, yet I am confident she will be capable that I do intend her good;
and in relation to that, I know she will endeavour to please me, or else she must not be your Daughter. Fear nothing in me, I value your worth, and shall al∣so value your Child; and what is wanting in her, I shall not spare my Purse to give a full Accomplishment to her; therefore if you please to send her speedily it will be very well, because at this time I am destitute; yet I might have the Choice of many Accomplisht Women, were it not a particular Kind∣ness I have to you, that causes me to re∣fuse them. I desire you will let her be handsomly Cloathed for your Credits sake; which, if you lack Mony to do it, let me know, and I will soon furnish you. Thus desiring you not to delay, I remain Your Friend to love and serve you, M. C.
The Answer. Madam, YOu have so much obliged me by your goodness and Charity towards me and my poor Child, that we are e∣ven transported with joy. Poor Girl, she sleeps not in the night, least any thing should happen to hinder her com∣ing to you. Her Cloaths are making, but indeed I have not wherewith to pay for them, nor to provide other things which she very much wants: therefore since it is your Ladyships plea∣sure to send me Mony, I beseech you it may be speedily; and so soon as her Cloaths are finished, and other things bought, she shall tender her Duty and Service to you, and I will give her the best Instructions I can. I hope she will not be refractory to her Duty, but strive to be a good and faithful Servant; yet, if she should have any Childish faults, I beseech you, be pleased to let me know, that I may rebuke her for them. Be pleased to accept of my humble Service, and to believe that I am, Madam, The most humble of your poor Servants, C. H.
From a Wife to her Husband, Craving his pardon for her long absence from him. Dear Heart, WHen you gave me leave for my Journey, I did intend no other but to Return according to your Order; but the much Kindness, and Intreaty for my stay, together with the late very ill Weather, hath caused me to transgress my bounds; which I do wholly trust to your Goodness to pardon, and do the more hope for it, because it is the first time I ever offended you in this Nature. I do desire, you will please to let me know how you and my Children do, and whether our Servant doth her Duty; likewise how our little one at Nurse doth: And I desire you also to send me some Mony speedily, to bear my Charges to you. This is all at present, save only the Love and Duty of Your most obedient, and loving Wife, E. D.
From an Aunt to her Neece. Dear Neece; YOur Parents being Dead, I would have you take notice that I shall take Care of you; therefore do not think your self destitute in the World. On the other side, I would have you endea∣vour what you can for your self, in an honest way; but want nothing that is fitting for you. Let me know at any time what you would have, and I shall furnish you; either with Mony, or with Necessaries. Be careful you do not con∣sent to Marry with any Man, without my leave, for fear you make your self Un∣happy. I have sent you a Bible, and twenty shillings in Mony by the Carryer. I pray let me know if you have received it or no. Be careful in the first place to serve God, and to please those whom you serve; and you shall never be for∣gotten by Your most Affectionate Aunt, M. C.
The Answer. Honoured Aunt, I Never doubted of your Kindness; but could not have expected so much as you are pleased to shew me, because I know I have never deserved it: But since I know your Care for me, I do assure you that it shall cause me to be more careful of my self. I have received the Mony and the Bible, and do give you most humble and hearty Thanks for them. My Lady finds little or no fault with me, therefore I presume I do please her. I have not an over∣stock of Cloaths, neither can I complain of much want; yet if I had a new and fashionable Gown it would do me Cre∣dit. I have somewhat towards it, and if you please to make it up, I shall be the more bound to pray for you; be∣cause no Body is now esteemed without fine Cloaths. For my Marrying with any one without your Consent, I shall not be so mad; neither do I think any man will as yet be troubled with me. When you think it is time, I had rather take your Choice than my own: In the mean time, I shall endeavour only to perform
what I am obliged to; and to shew my Duty to you. Thus with the tender of my humblest Respects, and Service, I take leave humbly, and remain, Dear Aunt, Your most obliged Niece, and most humble Servant. E. C. From a Widow to her Friend, desiring her Assistance. Dear Friend, I Stile you as I have alwaies found you: But now is the only trial of a Friend in this my necessity. It is not unknown to you the Charge which I have now upon me, and the many Troubles I am involved in; my Husband having had a long time of Sickness, and died in Debt; so that I have little or no Comfort in my life: Yet, if I had a Stock to begin, I could set up my own Trade, and live very well; but who to ask, besides your self I do not know, and how to ask you I cannot tell, having already been so much obliged to you; yet my Necessity en∣forces me to crave this one Favour from you, That you will please to lend to me 10 l. for the space of one whole year,
and I will faithfully return it again with many Thanks. This if you will please to do, will give a new Life to Your most faithful Friend, to love and serve you. The Answer. Dear Friend, I Am very sorry for the occasion of your sad Letter, and shall not deny your Request, in hopes that the grant thereof may make you happy: yet I do as∣sure you, that were it any one else who did sue to me upon such an account I would deny them; for the World is so base, and Mony so hard to come by, that there is hardly any that will let Mony go out of their hands. I shall freely lend you so much, and for a longer time than you do propound; but I would sain speak with you first, and advise you in your Way: Therefore do not delay the time, but come as soon as possible you can, and you shall find me then, and for ever, Your most faithful Friend, and ready to serve you.
From a Woman in Prison to her Friend, to help her. Dear Friend, I Suppose you have heard how wrong∣fully I have been dealt with since my Husbands departure; how they have accused me of what I was never guilty of, and cast me in Prison to my great Discredit, Charge and Detriment in the World. I do desire that loving favour of you as to come and see me, and to lend me a small sum towards the de∣fraying of my Charges here, and then I make no doubt but I shall get quickly quit of this place. Dear Friend, Have pity on me, and if it ever lie in my power, I will restore you Seven-fold. Thus with my due Respects to you, desiring speedily to hear from you, I rest Your true Friend and Servant. The Answer. Dear Friend, I Am extream sorry for your Trouble, and do verily believe that you are much wronged, therefore I shall assist you in what I can. I have some busi∣ness to dispatch this Week of great con∣cern,
which will keep me in; but upon Monday next (God willing) I do in∣tend to be with you, and answer your desires: In the mean time I desire you to comfort your self, and to be assured that I am Your loving Friend to serve you. From a Seamans Wife to her Husband. Dear Husband, SInce your departure our little Boy is dead of the Small-Pox; and our Girl hath been ill too, but now I thank God she is reasonable well again. I de∣sire you will remember to bring me home some fine things for my House. Edward Long also desires that you will not forget what he spake to you for; as also Mrs. Chappel. We are very glad for your safe Arrival, and wish you a speedy and safe return; but especially Your poor, but loving Wife. From a Servant to her Mistriss, concerning her Charge. Madam, YOur sweet Children, I thank God, are all very well, but think long for your coming▪home. I have spoken with your Tenant, Goodman Porter, and
he desires you should know that the Mony shall be ready for you at your Return; but as for the Widow Totnham, she hath had a great Loss lately, therefore she desires your Patience yet a while. I have no more at this time but the tender of my Duty and Service, beseeching you to believe that I am Your obedient Servant. A Letter of Complement from one Friend to another. Honoured Friend, THe last time I saw you, you laid on me such an obligation of Kindness as I fear I shall never be able to Re∣quite; but I will endeavor what possible I can. I wish you would do me the Fa∣vour as to lay your Commands on me, then I should give you some proof of my Gratitude, and I know you are so good as that you will accept the Will for the Deed. I desire you will please, when you have a leisure time, to Honour me with your Company; of which I shall be proud as well as happy, and I presume our Air would do no harm, but rather good; you also add to the Favour, if you please to let me know a little before,
that I may meet you some part of the way. Your God-son is very well, but is not able as yet to shew his Duty to you. I desire you will please to bring little Miss with you, and then I shall hope to enjoy your Company the longer; for I know you cannot be without her many daies. If you please to grant this, you will oblige her who is, and ever will be Your most humble Servant. The Ladies Answer. Madam, ALL that I have ever done, and can imagine to do, cannot merit the least of your expressions; which if I did not believe to be Realities, I should wrong you much, for I am very well acquainted with your temper. For your desire of my coming to wait on you, I do assure you, you might have spared your Invitation, for I did intend to come however; and seeing it is your desire that Miss should come too, she shall wait on you with me. I cannot tell what day I shall come as yet; nei∣ther am I willing to tell you if I could▪ because your free and noble heart will
be apt to transgress the bounds of my desires; else I should be very glad you should be satisfied when I would come: Sometime within this fortnight I shall not fail you; in the mean time these are to let you know that I am, and ever will be Your truly devoted, and humble Servant. A Letter from a Mother to a Daughter, who had gone astray from her. Susanna, I Could never have believed I had had so wicked a Child, as you have proved your self in your late Actions: You have not only afflicted me, but ut∣terly ruin'd your self, your Person and your Credit for ever. Had your Dear Father lived, you never durst have of∣fered to think upon such Wickedness: His Severity kept you in awe, but my Indulgence hath spoiled you. What Cause had you justly to leave me? I cannot tell, nor imagine any; but on∣ly that bad Company (which I have often gave you warning of) I believe hath enticed you. You are my Child still, though never so bad, and I your Mother,
and if I thought you would be reclaim∣ed, I would freely forgive you all that is past, for my heart still yearns upon you; but if you resolve to go on in Wickedness, think not of coming near me. Therefore bethink your self spee∣dily, and let me know what you intend to do. I am yet Your very loving, though very much afflicted Mother, E. H. The Daughters Answer to her Mother. Dear, and Honoured Mother, GOD forbid that your Indulgence to me should be the Cause of my Miscarriage. I do confess my Fault, and most humbly crave your pardon; which I desire▪ I may be assured of before I do return to you, else I know not with what face I shall look upon you. You are not at all deceived: It was that ill Company you warned me from, which did entice me upon pretence of going only to make Merry; but after I was gone from you, I soon perceived they
would have quite ruin'd me; and I fear you do believe they have in part done so; but I do assure you, that no harm hath hapned to me, save your just dis∣pleasure for my coming away, and the discredit I have gotten by so doing. I staied not in their Company, after I found. out their design, but gat me from them unawares, and would willingly have returned home, if I durst: Therefore be pleased to quiet your Thoughts, and do not think your Child is a Strumpet, although she hath done foolishly. If you please to receive me again, and freely to pardon me, you shall find that I will strive alwaies to shun the occasion of Evil, and ever be truly careful to obey you in all things. Therefore, Dear Mother, forgive your poor unworthy Child, and she will be alwaies bound to pray for you, and ever be Your obedient Daughter. M. H.
A Letter from a Gentleman to a Rela∣tion of his, wherein he doth advertise her of some Accusations laid against her. Madam, I Chanced not long since to be in some Company, who, methought, did take a great deal of liberty to speak of you; and indeed their language was such, as I held it more wisdom to employ my self in a Book which lay by me, than to seem to observe, or to participate with them. I assure you, I minded not the Romance that was before me, but wholly employed my Ears to bring me (if pos∣sible) what the drift, and what the occa∣sion was of their Discourse; but instead of satisfaction, they created in me a mul∣titude of troubled Thoughts. I had ever an honourable esteem of your Ver∣tue, and have been so great an Admirer of your Person, and excelling Beauty, that I have suffered (though never known to you) great torment for your sake. Love indeed did command me to commence my Sute to you; but the near Relation we have to each other for∣bad me: However, I know I did not transgress, in continuing an innocent Love
and Respect to you, and resolution to serve you in what might be in my power to do for you; also to vindicate your Honour upon all accounts. Now, Ma∣dam, perhaps you will say, Why did you not do so now, when you heard me Abused and Aspersed? Your pardon I beseech you for that. I Answer thus: I could most willingly have given that Person who most did villifie you, a Chal∣lenge, and would have been content to have lost my dear Blood for you, could I have had the happiness to hear from you how the business was: For to answer Mens Passions without the true▪ ground of all, is rash and vain. I pre∣sume it will oblige, though not please you, to have this intimation: and it will oblige me more to hear from you, what might be the occasion of this. I doubt not but you will deal candidly vvith me, vvhich vvill teach me what I have yet to do. I blush to question you; but it vvill be no prejudice for you to Answer: therefore do him that Favour, as to re∣ceive a few Lines from your Hands, who is, and alwaies must be, Madam, Your truly devoted, and most humble Servant.
The Ladies Answer, in which she vindi∣cates her self. Most Honoured Sir, YOU have done me great Honour in telling me of my Dishonour. I fear not to give you a full satisfaction of what you desire, but am infinitely con∣cerned for your disturbance. What Per∣son he was which was so free of his Speech, I presume will not, nay, I know, dares not affirm to my face. Such pitiful Cowards would be Cudgeld into better Manners: They are not worth a Challenge. Sir, For those very high Expressions you are pleased to make of me, I am Conscious to my self, I never deserved them, therefore your Obligation is the greater. I have no way to requite it, but to return to you the same Respect you say you have for me. If you dare be consident that what I say is Truth, then believe, Sir, I never yet did trans∣gress the bounds of Modesty. Had I yielded to his base Design, he had never branded my Honour. I am glad you commanded your Passion so well as not
to fight: It would have been a lasting Trouble to me, if you should have lost one drop of Bloud for my sake. Let me alone with him, I will get some sturdy Porter to Kick him for me. The scandal is great: but my Honour will be the greater when the Truth is known. Be pleased to do me the favour as to let me see you, and then I shall more amply give you an account. In the mean time I beg the esteem of being Your most obliged Kinswoman, and very humble Servant, E. N. From a Gentlewoman to her Father. Honoured Sir, I Should be unworthy of such a Father, if I did not by all means possible, en∣deavour to testifie my Duty to you, there being a double Obligation upon me since my dear Mothers death. Your absence is my great Grief, and much the greater because you are so far distant from me. I shall pray heartily for the dispatch of your business, and for your safe return: In the mean time, I shall observe the
Command you gave me. This, with the tender of my humble Duty, is all at pre∣sent from; Sir, Your most obedient Daughter. From a Gentlewoman to her Ʋncle, who had the Charge of her. Honoured Ʋncle, COuld you know how unwilling I am to displease you, you would not have such fears when I am from you. I wish I could tell how to give you confidence of my Obedience, which I doubt not to testifie whenever I shall have the happiness to see you; and in relation to that desire of mine, I shall make as quick a dispatch of my business as is possible, and do not doubt but that you will be fully satisfied that I am, Sir, Your most affectionate Neece, and humble Servant.
From a Widow to her Landlord. SIR, I Beseech your Patience till Thursday next; when (God willing) I shall not fail to wait on you, and bring all that is due. I should have come before now, but that I was disappointed by those who faithfully promised me; and because I would not deceive you any longer, I have craved from a Friend to lend me some Mony to make up your sum: Therefore think not ill of this de∣lay, but esteem me Your honest Tenant, and humble Servant. From a Gentlewoman of Quality, to her Brother at Oxford. Dear Brother, THe content I have in the thoughts of your most pleasurable life, doth somewhat mitigate my Grief for your absence; yet when I am alone, and have none to condole with me, I hardly know how to satisfie my self. If you would be pleased to Write to me more frequently, it might much allay my Passion, for I should then fancy that I did Converse with you; nay,
and see you too; but I fear that your Studies will not admit you so much idle time as to think of me long, your Genius being wholly employed to hear the Sage Philosophers, and the Muses, which I do imagine cannot choose but be very delightful: However, be pleased to accept my dear Love and Respects, and believe that I am Your most affectionate Sister. From a Gentlewoman, in Answer to a Letter from a Gentleman who Courted her. SIR, I Received your late Lines, which very much surprized me. The Expressi∣ons you are pleased to make, are very far greater than I am able to deserve. I wish you would undeceive your self, and if you have a true Respect for me, you must also be confident, that I will not tell you that which is not Truth. Be∣lieve me then, Sir, I have not that For∣tune you hope for, and therefore shall not entertain, one thought of giving any Countenance to your Sue. I know it is an ordinary thing, in these lave Times, for Gentlemen, when they hear of a
Fortune, presently to make their Ad∣dresses to that Lady, or Gentlewoman, let her be as deformed, or unhandsom a Creature as is imaginable. And, for the most part, Women are apt to believe their abominable Flattery, when (God knows) it is their imagined Fortune they Court, and not their Person: And for fear any other should rob them of that Felicity they promise to themselves, they huddle up a Match; but when all things come to be made clear, they then begin to think how they shall quit themselves from that wicked Woman who so de∣ceived them; when indeed they had no reason to complain, but of their own Covetous Humour: However he must now think of some way to advance him∣self, and leave this miserable Woman to shift for her self; and while he yet pre∣tends great Kindness to her, he gathers up all the Mony he can to fit him for his Intentions; and if perchance he have not an opportunity to go out of the Land, but fears therefore to be persecu∣ted by her, or her Relations, he then protests that she was never his lawful Wife; so, that unless she can bring a Certificate to Testifie when and where
she was Married, he quite defeats her; and then is she esteemed no better than a Whore; others go away beyond Sea, and get employ there, and never think upon the Person whom he hath so high∣ly injured, unless it be to laugh at her Misery, and admiring his own Wit in serving of her so. If Women were of a more Jealous nature, and would consi∣der the Policy of Men, they might be generally happy; whereas now very few are so. I have seen and known so much, as it hath given me a sufficient Caution to beware of them. I am not in haste to Marry. I will take deliberation, and crave Gods assi∣stance and my Friends advice, before I proceed in any such business: Therefore I do beseech you not to take it ill, if my Answer correspond not to your desires, If you have Respect for me in that way, I am sorry for it, because I cannot An∣swer it. I am sure there is nothing in my Person that is attractive, neither is my Fortune worthy one of your Quali∣ty and Estate. I have no more to say, but that I shall be very careful of my self; and if you please to give your self
no further trouble, but desist, I shall e∣ver be Your obliged Friend. Another Letter from a Gentlewoman, to one who Courted her for his Mistress. Ʋnworthy Sir, I Had scarce patience to read your Lines, after I perceived your base design; but perswading my self I might the better Answer you, I forced a for∣bearance of my Passion from tearing them. Now know, Sir, that if you do not make me some satisfaction for this Dis∣honourable Sute of yours, by asking my pardon before some of my Friends, you shall receive your due reward for such Villany. If you have a mind to a Whore, there are enough without tempting of honest Women from their Husbands. Thus desiring you to consider what I have Written, and to have a care of your self for the future, least you meet with some Friends of hers Who is not yours▪
I have now done with the Letters, having given you the Forms of as many as may teach you all the rest, that possible you may have occasion for, and did here intend to have finished my Book; but being unwilling to keep any thing from you, I here present you with a very good Receipt, how to make Wax-work; which if you carefully observe, it is a very sufficient Direction. How to make Wax-work. REd-Lead is for Oranges. When your pure White-wax is melted take it off the fire, then put in so much of the finest Red-Lead as will make it of an Orange-colour, then wet your Moulds and pour it in; but be sure that you stir it well together to mix it first Red-Root is for all Red, for red-Paste; and that Root must be boiled in the Wax a while, till you find the Colour very good. For Pruons, a little Lamb-Black: For Rasberries, Lamb-black and Red-Lead together, so much of each as your discretion shall think fit. Vermil∣lion for Flesh-colour: Verdigreace for
Willow-green: and if you put a little Turmerick to it, it will make a perfect Grass-green; Saffron also will do the same, and likewise Turmerick and Saf∣fron, or either of them makes a Lem∣mon-colour; and also some kinds of Ap∣ples and Pears, and yellowish Plumbs; which when they are cast and cold, and taken out of the Moulds, you must co∣lour them with a Pencil, with streaks and spots as you think fit, and with those Colours you think most natural for them. You must have all your Co∣lours purely ground. Saffron or Tur∣merick will serve for any kind of Paste that should be Yellow, or for Cakes; but then you must white the bottoms of them, to make them look like Wafer-sheets. If you observe well the Trans∣parent Work you may take several Co∣lours from those Rules; and if you would gild any thing of Wax-work, you have already the Rule in this Book punctually given.
To make the Moulds for the Wax-work. Take Plaister of Parris, and mix it with Water, and make it like Paste, as much as will serve for half a Mould at a time; for you must do no more, because it will dry so fast; then lay it upon a Board, and what you will, have a Mould on upon it, and let it lie till it be dry, when you have done the one half of the Mould, then do the other. Note, That whatsoever you lay upon your Plaister of Parris, to make the Mould, must be first anointed with Lin∣seed Oil, or else it will stick so fast as you can never get it out again; and be sure to wet your Moulds very well in Water before you pour your Wax into them; and when you have pour'd it in, wave it up and down in your hand, that the Wax may run into every part of the Mould. Now for Images; you must put every piece in its place, and tie it up, and fill the hollow place full with Water; and then pour it out, and pour in the Wax, and shake it about till it be reasonable cool; then take off the pieces from it, and order it as you think fit,
In the same manner you must shake your Sweet-Meats or Fruit, and when you find that it is a little cool, take off the one half of the Mould. A very fine way to make the likeness of many several things in Wax, without the help of a Mould. Melt pure White-Wax, and colour it for what you intend it; then take an O∣range, Lemmon, Apple, Pear, Plumb, or any other Fruit which you fancy, and tie a string to the stalk, and anoint your Fruit first with pure Sallad Oil, then let it down by the string into the melted Wax, and presently pull it up again, and hang it on a Line till it be cold; then with a hot knife cut it gently down each side, and take out the Fruit within; then heat your Knife again, and hold the two halves together, and close them neatly with your hot Knife, and so you have the direct shape: You may do so with an Egg, if you first make a little hole at each end and blow out the meat, and then draw a string through it with a knot at one end. Radishes
with their Green-tops look very pretti∣ly. Green-Peascods, Beans, Walnuts or small Nuts, Chesnuts, black and white-Puddings, Saucages, Dishes, little Cups, Plates, or any thing almost that you can think of; for there is nothing which re∣presents things more lively than Wax, if they that do it have skill for the Co∣lours, or else it will look as unhand∣somly. To take the shape of your own Hand. Have your Wax melted, and coloured Flesh-colour, then dip your Hand as high as you would have it in pure Sal∣lad Oil or rather anoint your Hand all over with a Feather, and when the vehe∣ment heat is out of the Wax, dip in your hand, and presently pull it out a∣gain; and when it is cold take a hot knife, and cut it in such places as that you may get out your hand, and close it again with a hot knife. Thus you may also take the shape of your Legs.
For a Dead-body for the Face. You must anoint it with Oil, and then pour the Wax all over it, and when it is cold take it off, and where you see it faulty, mend it with a hot knife: And if you would have the shape of the Arms, or of the Legs, you must dip them in, as I have said before. For Eggs to be hard, and cut in quarters. Take an Egg-shell, as I have said be∣fore, and when you have dipped it, and that it be cold, cut it with a hot knife in four quarters, then take the Yolk of a very hard Egg, and press it down gently into some Plaister of Parris, as before, half way; but first remember to Oil your Egg: when one half is made, then make the other, and then have melted Wax in a readiness of the colour of the Yolk of an hard Egg; and then when it is cold, cut it in four quarters and fasten them with a little strong Gum-water to the fore-said Whites. In this Wax-work you may represent a Fridays, or Lenten-Dinner, as well as a
Banquet, and both of them would do excellent well; but I would not wish to invite a Woman that is with Child to see it, for fear of harm. You may, if you please, mix a little pure Tallow in the melting of your Wax, to make it go the further. When you take the shape of any dead Face, you must put a little Clay round about by the Hair, to keep the melted Wax from running where you would not have it, else it will run very much to waste. I have known a living Bodies Face taken; but that must be with a great deal of Care; the Face being first well anointed with pure Oil, the Wax not too hot, the Eyes shut, and Clay, as in the other, to keep it off from their Hair; and be sure you make haste to make holes for the Mouth and No∣strils, for fear you stop the breath of the Party; then afterwards you may make the Eyes according to your discretion, and colour the Lips with a Pencil, with some Vermillion and Gum-water. Now because you shall be excellent at this Art, I shall give you the knowledge of more Colours, and how to make some of them your selves, which may save you some Mony. These Directions, with
your own Ingenuity, will make you per∣fect. Orient Red Colour. SPirit of Salt and Smalt mixed toge∣ther, makes it of an Orient Red Colour. Green. Verdigreace and Argil ground toge∣ther make it very well. Yellow. The yellow Chives in white Lillies, Saffron and Argil ground together very fine, make it excellently well. Grass-Green. The Liver of a Lamprey dried and ground very fine makes a perfect Grass-Green, and very durable: Also Yellow and Blew mixt together make a perfect Grass-Green.
Purple. The juyce of Bilberries mixed with Allom and Galls; and for a Murry take Rosset. The Berries of Buckthorn gathered green and dried, make a very fair Yel∣low. Another for Green. Take the Berries of Buckthorn when they are through ripe and black, bruise them in a Copper, or Brass-Vessel, and set it three or four daies in a warm place; then heat it a little upon a fire, and put into it some Allom-water; then press it forth, and keep it in a Bladder, and hang it up till it be dry. A pure Black. IT is made with the smoak of a Torch, held under any thing which is made of Tinn. You may, if you please, wash over your Wax-work when it is done, with a little Gum-Arabick Water if you would have them look glossie.
Date-Stones well burned upon a Col∣liers Hearth makes a pure Black; and so doth burnt Harts-Horn, and the Gall of a Neat ground together, and dried in a Shell in some shady places. These are all very good for Black. Burnt Ivory, or burnt White-bread is also good Black. Note, That the smoak of a Torch or link, as I have said, held under a Lat∣ten Basen, is that which we call Lamb-black. For Blew. Take fine Litmose, ground with Ce∣ruse as pale or as deep as you please, by putting in more or less of either of them. Also two parts of Ceruse, and one of Red-Lead doth make a perfect Crane-colour. For a Dark Red. Take Turnsoil-Raggs, and let them boil in the Wax for a while, till you find the Colour to your mind.
To make Spanish-white, which may save your Mony; for much of that is used in all Houses generally. Take two parts of fine Chalk, and one part of Allom, grind them with fair-Water till it be thick like Pap; then roul it up into Balls, letting it lie till it be dry; then put it into a clear Fire till it be red-hot; then take it out and let it cool, and keep it for your use. I Shall Conclude with some Observa∣tions, which I desire those, who de∣sire to be good Work-women, will take notice of; because whatever they em∣ploy themselves in, they may be able to give an account of, and not work Non-sence. If they observe these Directions I give them, they may be able to teach them who are to Draw them. I have seen such Ridiculous things done in Work, as is an abomination to any Artist to behold. As for Example: You may find in some Pieces, Abraham and Sarah, and many other Persons of
Old time, Cloathed as they go now a∣daies, and truly sometimes worse; for they most resemble the Pictures in Bal∣lads. Let all Ingenious Women have regard, that when they work any Image, to represent it aright. First let it be Drawn vvell, and then observe the Di∣rections which are given by Knowing Men. I do assure you, I never durst work any Scripture-Story vvithout informing my self from the Ground of it; nor any other Story, or single Person, without informing my self both of the Visage and Habit; As followeth: If you Work Jupiter, the Imperial feigned God, He must have long Black-Curled-hair, a Purple Garment trimmed with Gold, and sitting upon a Golden Throne, with bright yellow Clouds about him. Mercury, the Messenger of the Gods. With long Yellow Hair Curled, in a Coat of Flame Colour, with a pure white Mantle, trimmed with Gold and Silver, his Beaver white, and vvhite Feathers like Wings; his Shoes Golden, and his Rod of Silver.
Apollo, the Physical God. With long Curled yellow Hair, vvith a Lawrel Wreath, a Purple Robe, a Sil∣ver Bow, a Golden Harp, and a Throne of Emraulds. Neptune, the God of the Sea. With long hoary Hair, a blew or Sea-green Mantle trimmed with Silver, ri∣ding in a blew Chariot, or upon a Dol∣phin of a Brown-black colour, with a Silver Trident in his Right-hand. Pluto, the God of Riches. With Black Curl'd Hair, in a Robe of Cloath of Gold. Bacchus the God of Wine. With Curl'd Brown Hair, Cloathed in a Leopards Skin spotted, or in a green Mantle, Crown'd with a Wreath of Ivy, or Vine-Branches; his Complexion Taw∣ny. Hymen, the God of Marriage. With long Yellow Hair, in a Purple or Saffron coloured Mantle. Vulcan, the Deified Black-Smith. Let him be Cloathed in a Scarlet-Robe. Genius. In a Purple Mantle, fringed with Gold.
Sleep. In a White Mantle cast over a Black. Cupid. In a Green Robe. Minos, one of the Judges of Hell. His Curuseers to be of Gold, his Robe Blew and Silver, his Buskins of Gold; vvith long Curl'd Brown Hair, and Crown'd with a Golden Crown. Momus, the Carping God. With a Dark-coloured Robe, the hair of his Beard must be Party-coloured. Goddesses. Juno, the Queen of the Goddesses. With black Hair, and black Eyes, with a Skie-coloured Mantle wrought vvith Gold and Peacocks Eyes. Diana, the Virgin Goddess. With yellow Hair, a Grass-green mantle trimmed with Silver, Buskins of Silver, a Golden Bow, and a painted Quiver. Pallas, the Goddess of Wisdom. With a Blow Mantle, embroidered with Silver.
Venus, the beautiful Goddess. With Gold yellow Hair, attired vvith Black, a Scarlet Robe, and a Dove-colour or Watchet Mantle. Ceres, the Goddess of Corn. With yellow Hair, and a Straw-colou∣loured Mantle, trimmed vvith Silver. Tellus, the Goddess of the Earth. In a Green Mantle. Proserpine, Queen of Hell. In a black Mantle trimmed vvith Gold flames. Aurora. In a Purple Robe, and a blew Mantle fringed with Silver. Urania, one of the Muses. In a Mantle of Azure, filled with Lamps. Vesta, Daughter to Saturn. In White Garments, filled with Flames. Astrea, the Goddess of Justice. In a Crimson Mantle, trimmed with Silver. Flora, the Goddess of Flowers. In a Mantle of Divers Colours: And Night; In a black Mantle, spotted about with Stars of Gold.
Ceres, the Enchantress. Her under garment Gold, the ground Green, the Mantle Purple, the three Graces in Silver Robes. The Twelve Months of the Year. March: Is drawn in Tawny, with a fierce as∣pect, a Helmet upon his head, and lean∣ing on a Spade, and a Basket of Garden Seeds in his Left hand, and in his Right hand the Sign of Aries: And Winged. April. A Young Man in Green, with a Gar∣land of Mirtle, and Hawthorn-Bude; Winged; in one hand Primroses and violets, in the other the Sign Taurus. May. With a sweet and lovely Countenance, clad in a Robe of White and Green, em∣broidered with several Flowers, upon his Head a garland of all manner of Roses; on the one hand a Nightingale, in the o∣ther a Lute. His Sign must he Gemini. June. In a Mantle of dark Grass-green, upon his Head a garland of Bents, Kings-Cups, and Maiden-hair; in his Left hand an
Angle, with a box of Cantharides in his Right the Sign Cancer, and upon his arms a Basket of seasonable Fruits. July. In a Jacket of light Yellow, eating Cherries; with his Face and Bosom Sun-burnt; on his Head a Wreath of Centaury and wild Tyme; a Seith on his shoulder, and a Bottle at his girdle: carrying the Sign Leo. August. A Young Man of fierce and Cholerick aspect, in a Flame-coloured Garment; upon his Head a garland of Wheat and Rye, upon his Arm a Basket of all man∣ner of ripe Fruits, at his Belt a Sickle. His Sign Virgo. September. A merry and chearful Countenance, in a Purple Robe, upon his Head a Wreath of red and white Grapes, in his Left hand a handful of Oats, withal carrying a Horn of Plenty, full of all manner of ripe-Fruits, in his Right hand the Sign Libra. October. In a Garment of Yellow and Carna∣tion, upon his head a garland of Oak-leaves
with Akorns, in his Right hand the Sign Scorpio, in his Left hand a Basket of Medlars, Services, and Ches∣nuts; and any other Fruits then in Sea∣son. November. In a Garment of Changable Green and Black upon his Head, a garland of O∣lives with the Fruit in his Left hand, Bunches of Parsnips and Turnips in his Right. His Sign Sagittarius. December. A horrid and fearful aspect, clad in Irish-Rags, or course Freez girt unto him, upon his Head three or four Night-Caps, and over them a Turkish Turbant; his Nose red, his Mouth and Beard clog'd with Isicles, at his back a bundle of Holly, Ivy or Misletoe, holding in sur'd Mittens the Sign of Capricornus. January. Clad all in White, as the Earth looks with the Snow, blowing his Nails; in his Left Arm a Billet, the Sign Aquarius standing by his side. February. Cloathed in a dark Skie-colour, car∣rying in his Right hand the Sign Pisces.
LADIES, I hope your pleas'd, and  shall I, If what I've Writ, you may be gainers by: If not; it is your fault, it is not mine, Your benefit in this I do design. Much labour and much time it hath me cost, Therefore I beg, let none of it be lost. The Mony you shall pay for this my Book, You'l not repent of, when in it you look. No more at present to you I shall say, But wish you all the happiness I may. H. W. FINIS.
