W542 E94_12 99872868 155782
A LETTER From Sir William Waller, A Member of the House of Commons, To the Right Honorable, ROBERT Earl of ESSEX his Excellencie; OF A GREAT VICTORY he obtained at Malmsbury, 23. Martii, in the County of WILTS: With the Names of divers of the Commanders in chief that he took, with 300 foot, a Troop of horse, and many Peeces of Ordnance. Also a true Relation of Sergeant Major Burghells valour, who went into the Enemies quarters at Sherston, routed them, took twenty five prisoners, one Captain, two Lieutenants, one quarter∣master, killed eight, and took forty or fifty Horses and Arms, without the losse of one man. Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Letter be forth∣with printed and published: H: Elsynge, Cl. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edw. Husbands, and are to be sold at his shop in the middle Temple. March 28. 1643.
A Letter from Sir William Waller, a Member of the House of Commons, to the Right Honorable, Robert Earl of Essex his Excellencie. My most honored LORD; I Have had the honour to re∣ceive two Letters from your Excellency; This met me at Malmesbury, where I was engaged in a hot service for so long as it lasted. I sate down before the place ye∣sterday a little after Noon: At my first comming their horse shewed themselves in a bravado under the side of a VVood, about a quarter of a mile from the town,
but upon the first proffer of a charge they retired hastily towards Cicester-way be∣fore we could come up to them; where upon we fell to worke with the Towne, which is the strongest in land scituation that ever I saw: In the skirts of the outer Town there were Gardens waled in with dry stone wall, from whence the enemy played upon us as we came on, but with in halfe an houre we beat them out of those strengths, and entered the outer or lower Town with our horse and foot and kept possesion of it, she enemy withdraw∣ing into the upper, where they had bin at, cost to fortifie; We fell on upon the the west Port, in which they had cast up a breast work, and planted a peece of Ordnance: The street so narrow at the upper end next the work, that not above four could march in breast; this businesse cost hot
water: As we fell on we advanced two Drakes, and under that favour our mus∣queteers possessed themselves of some houses neer the Port, from whence we galled the enemy very much; If our men had come out roundly we had then car∣ryed it, but the falling of some cooled the rest; And so the first assault failed, after a fight of neer halfe an hour, whilst we were preparing to renew the assault, the enemy shewed himself neer the Town, vvith seaven, or (as some say) ten troops of horse; vvhereupon Sir Arthur Hazel∣rig fell out upon them vvith eight troops, but upon his approach they retired spee∣dily. In the mean time before his return that night, vve gave on again upon the Tovvn, and had a very hot fight, vvhich after an hours continuance at the least, vve vvere fain to give over for vvant of
Ammunition, the main part vvhereof vvas unluckily stayed behind by a mis∣chance of the carriage, and could not come up till the next morning: I vvas in such vvant of powder, and especialy ball: that if the enemy had falen out upon me, I could have maintained a very small fight, and I had no notice here of from the Officer, untill I vvas reduced to this straight; VVhereupon I thought fit to dravv off the Drakes that night, or rather morning, for it was neer two of the clock; The better to effect this, and to prevent the hazard of the Enemies sally, I caused all the Drums to beat, and Trumpets to sound, drawing both horse and foot out into the streets: As in preparation to an Assault, vvith all the strength I had; which gave the Enemy such apprehen∣sion, that immediately they sent out a
Drum, and craved a Parly. They yeel∣ded upon quarter, and gave me entrance about seven or eight of the clock that morning. They were about three hun∣dred foot, and a Troop of horse, but the horse I related formerly shifted for them∣selves upon our first coming. VVe have prisoners, Colonell Harbert Lunceford, Colonell Cook, Lieutenant Colonell Da∣bridgecourt, Sergeant Major Finch, six Captains, six Lieutenants, six Ensignes, one Cornet, and four quartermasters, besides ordinary Souldiers, part vvherof vve mean to send to Gloucester, the rest to Bristoll. This morning, in the name of God, I purpose to march to Cicester, where there are seven hun∣dred Foot, and three hundred Horse and Dra∣goones. I must not omit to represent. Major Burghells merit to your Excellencie, who on the 19. of
this present, having information at Bath, that there was a party of two hundred and forty Horse, Plundring Sir Edward Hungerfords house; drew out a hundred Horse and marched thither but finding they were gone from thence and quartered at Sherston a place about three myles from Malmesbury; he pursued them thither, and about twelve of the clock that night, falling into their quarters, Routed them, took twenty five Prisoners; whereof there was one Cap∣tain, two Lievtenants, and one Quarter-master, six or eight slain upon the plaee, and three dead since, between forty and fifty horses taken, with some Arms, without the losse or hurt of any one man of our own. I shall upon all occasi∣ons certainly advertise your Excellencie of what passeth here: I commit your Excellencie to Gods heavenly protection, and rest, MY LORD, Your Excellencies d humble servant, WILLIAM WALLER. MALMSBURY, 23 Martii, 1642 FINIS.
