4650 S91360 44920322 173768
BRITAINES GLORIE, OR An Allegoricall Dreame: with the Exposition thereof. Contai∣ning, The Heathens infidelitie The Turkes blasphemie The Popes Hypocrisie Amsterdams varietie The Church of Englands verity in Reli∣gion. And in our Church of England, The Kings excellencie. His Issues integritie. The Nobles and Gentries constancie. The Councell and Iudges fidelities. The Preachers puritie. The Bishops sinceritie. Conceiued and written by ROBERT CARLYLE Gent. for the loue and honour of his King and Countrie. LONDON, Printed by GEORGE ELDE 1618.
Directions for the Reader. THe Dreame is implicate, or Allegoricall, in Verse. The Exposition is explicate, in Prose. The Staffes are numbred for the speedie turning to the Expo∣sition of euery Staffe; which also beare the same numbers: without which, the Mysterie of the Allegory, will hardly be vnderstood. The Heathens infidelitie, is conteined in the first foure Staffes. The Turkes blasphemie from the fifth Staffe to the eight. Amsterdams varietie, from the eight to the thirteenth. The Popes Hypocrisie, from the thirteenth to the seuen and twentieth. Our Churches veritie, from the twentie seuen to the last. The Kings excellencie, is handled in the 27.28.30.38. and 39. Staffes. His Issues integritie, in the 29. Staffe. The Nobilitie and Gentrie, handled in the 33. Staffe. The Councell and Iudges, in the 35 Staffe. The Preachers puritie, in the 31. Staffe. The Bishops in the 36. and 37. Staffes. Errata. Page 5. line 27. for pure reade poure. Page 19. line 25. for which reade doth.
TO ALL VERTVOVS Nobilitie, reuerend Clergie, and well affected Gentrie, ROBEKT CARLYLE wisheth grace, mer∣cie, and peace in Christ Iesus. RIGHT Noble, Religious and worthie persons, the Title Page demonstrateth vnto you, that the plot of this fa∣bricke hath a generall scope, and is erected vpon all your seuerall re∣putations, so that for the interest which you may challenge in this structure, I will entitle you with the Dedication: For in so much as God hath giuen you the inheri∣tance of knowledge, Religion, and Ver∣tue, you are also coheires of the com∣mendation thereof: And because this building is thus magnificently beauti∣fied
with excellent Statues, no lesse per∣sons then your selues, adorned with all the golden and pretious robes of faith∣full Saints: meruaile not that I giue it a glorious name; for if the Arke of God was called The glory of Israel being a type onely, 1. Sam 4.21. Then the Gospell of Christ Iesus, the foundation of this frame, shall make it glorious eternally. I haue beene curious in the workemanship of this Edifice, and carefull lest my blunt edged Chissell, in the caruing of your pictures, and inscription of your Tro∣phies, should blemish your personages, or dash out one letter of your fame: If I haue done well I shall be glad for my Countries sake; If I haue committed any one error I disdaine not to haue it amen∣ded in this worke by such as are better experienced then my selfe. Meane time I desire my loue and good will may be louingly accepted. And so I rest, Yours most deuoted R. C.
The Dreame. 1. THe Dreame is this: One in a shape diuine, Transported by the Windes as swift as thought, Whose face more glorious then the Sunne did shine, Me to an vnknowne climat quickly brought, Whereof strange things that were within that Nation, And of their natures he gaue true relation. 2. He shewed me Oare of Gold, which being tried As Mettals vse to be in burning fire, One should haue thought would haue beene purified, But contrarie it turn'd to filthie mire, And whosoeuer kept it afterward, Should be with Sprights and Goblins strangely scard. 3. Besides the operation of this Oare Was, whosoeuer toucht it, to make blinde And sottish, so that they could neuer more Haue wit or sight in any perfect kinde, Except by bathing in one Riuer pure, In Europe Northward where they might haue cure. 4. In this strange Countrie also was a flower, Which this good Angell had no sooner gather'd, But within one halfe quarter of an hower, As a thing blasted suddenly it wither'd, And as the Marigold by the Sunne is spread, This by the Sunne shut vp and seem'd as dead. 5. The Angell then transfer'd me to a Land, Where huge deformed vgly Giants breed,
Which spoil'd and burnt good corne which there did stand, And set Tabacco that foule stinking weede, One bad me taste, but the Angell bad me leaue, For that would me quite of my life bereaue. 6. For this is not a man as you suppose, But a black fiend which humane shape assumes, That takes Tabacco thus through mouth and nose, And brings from Hell these deuillish perfumes, I started back seeing it was a Deuill, And praied good Angell, saue me from this euill. 7. Be not afraid quoth he, thou shalt that see Before that we depart this wicked Land, Which neuer eie beheld: And then to me Appear'd damn'd creatures in the flames to stand, Thse are Tabacconists said he, that for this turne, Did whilst they liu'd, before-hand learne to burne. 8. Then suddenly he snatcht me vp and flew, Vntill he came vnto a thick-set Wood, Where trees of all sorts many thousands grew, And likewise Shrubs innumerable stood, And looke how many Trees and Shrubs there were, So many seuerall fruits they all did beare. 9. Some were like Apples, but were Crabs in tast, And in the eating had but sowre digestion: Some were as bitter as the Oaken mast, More fit for swine then any mags refection: Some were delicious sweete, and perfect good, Such as at first in Edens Garden stood. 10. But as that fruit was good and lushious, The Scituation of the Trees was bad, For none of them by meanes of Vnder-bushes, Sufficient roome to sprout their branches had, So th for want of elbow-roome, a Tree Not halfe so fruitfull was as else might bee.
11. Vnfruitfull briars choakt their sappy roote, And with sharpe pricks did goad their tender Rinde, Thornes would not let their springing Armes to shoote, Sprigs of wilde Trees about their branches twinde, As if they all malicious enuie had At that good fruit, seeing their owne was bad. 12. Pitty it was the husband-mans respect, Did not roote out these inconuenient lets; He might haue remedied that great defect, By burning vp those preiudiciall sets, For those Trees properly are made to burne, As some to build, and some for other turne. 13. This when I had perused curiously, The Angell led mee to a goodly Vine-yard, Kept by a Tyrant, who swore furiously, That hee would kill mee with his bloody whineyard. The Angell sau'd mee, and compel'd him to Declare the mischiefes which hee there did do. 14. Then thus the Tyrant timerously said, Northward from hence there is within a Land, Amidst the Sea, a fruitfull Paradice made, Where goodly Vines in curious order stand, Which proue exceeding plentifull: And there I sometime great authoritie did beare. 15. And those faire Vines to all estates were free, As well the Plough-man as the Potentate, And euery beggar might sufficed bee, Without controlement of the Magistrate, That all degrees by vertue of that Grape, Grew perfect wise, sober, temperate. 16. But I by craft and deuillish inuention, Desiring their subuersion, cut those Vines Vnseasonably, to hinder their extention In growth and spreading: And as oftentimes
As J with blood the Rootes should haue made moist, A poyson strong I closely in did foist. 17. Which to conceale from mens detection, This trick I had, I suffer'd none to come Within that Paradice for to make collection, But I my selfe in person, or else some Of my confederates, whom I put in trust, Deliuer'd them how, and to whom we lust. 18. Many diseases heerevpon did grow, The Ague, Palsey, Megrims, Scurfe and Scab, The cause of sicknesses they did not know, For no man of the Grapes suspition had. By this I got at ending of their daies, All that they had for Rosemary and Bayes. 19. At length my hellish purpose was descried By one that vomited a poysoned Grape, By reason of an Antidote applied, And all the Countrie then did beare me hate, And for those faults which I committed there, They banisht me, and so I thence came here. 20. And all these Vines which heere you planted see, Are of that sort, which I from thence did bring: But I haue caused other Weedes to bee Set with them, that they may together spring, And both at one time put into the Presse, The Grapes and Weedes, to make a mingled messe. 21. And to keepe well those Weedes, I haue ordain'd, They be continually vnderpropt with stakes, By such as I haue purposely retain'd, Who in like case for their owne lucre sakes, Ten times more curious are to trimme and prime Their branches, than the branches of the Vine. 22. This mingle mangle composition, Hath much besotted all the Peoples braines,
And such is their sond supposition, They hold him curst that from this drinke refraines: The gaines being great for selling of this Ale, Hath lift my head as high as Dragons taile. 23. And all the Countrie call me Demy-god, Bending their knees to me with great deuotion, And offer Gold, Iewels and Emmerods, And all they haue for this my potion: But out alas, their blind inchaunted sight Sees not the Adder me that doth them bite. 24. And that my gaine may be enlarg'd the more, I haue deuis'd a Law on Paine of death, That none the Iuce of Grapes shall tast, before The Iuce of Weedes be mixt, whereby of breath I haue bereaued thousands with this blade, Which for that purpose onely I haue made. 25. The Angell answer'd, for this Impious fact, A iudgement on thee suddenly shall come, Worse then the Serpents curse, for his vilde Act Which in deluding Euah he had done: Vengeance from Heauen shall one day driue thee out From this faire Vineyard with thy Rabble rout. 26. Who pitifully shall lament thy case, The aspect thereof will be so vehement: But others shall reioice at thy disgrace, And for deliuerance from thy mischiefes sent. And therefore double shalt thou punisht be, For thy delusion and vilde Tyrannie. 27. And then mee thought I was translated thence Into a Paradice replenished With fruitfull Trees, Corne, Vines, and Hearbes, from whence The Tyrant had before beene banished: Who when be kept it was not so perfidious, As is the man that keepes it now Religious.
28. For hauing Children, he instructs them how They may those Trees, Corne, Vines and hearbs best keepe From Caterpillers, Cankers, and the Sow, That longs into that place by stealth to creepe, To spoile the Paradice; Of which sort there were Some by that Tyrant left of purpose there. 29. So that this Paradice is like to florish Vntill the finall period of all things, For his faire issue know well how to nourish Those holy Plants, and those cleere water-springs, Running there-through to keepe from foule pollution, Till all things haue their finall dissolution. 30. And how prouision is by vertue made To keepe the Caterpillers from the Trees, Js thus; A fire vnderneath is laide, Whose smoake consumes them, as in swarmes of Bees Is vsed commonly to rid the Drones, And so they proue continuall fruitfull ones. 31. And that the Corne from Cankers may be cleane, Thousands of carefull Laborers are fitted, To polish, cleanse, and winnow, by which meane, None but good Corne is to the ground committed: The like care is to cleare the hearbs from weedes, So there good Corne and good hearbs onely breede. 32. But to keepe out that beastly breed of Swine, Three thick-set hedges decently are placed About the Paradice, least they should vndermine, And so it might be vtterly defaced: These Fences being strong, this stincking rout Shall ne're get in, though they runne round about. 33. The first and out-most hedge is guarded well By Champions of valiant condition, Whowatch continually them to repell With shield, and speare, or sword, or such munition:
And if the Swine but once come neere that fence, One of those weapons sure shall beate them thence. 34. But if the Swine doe chaunce to sneake vnseene, Of all that well approued outward guard, Within their hedge a little space betweene The first and second fence, them to reward, Lie beagles to discouer the intrusion Of those, that wish to Paradise confusion. 35. Being set on by this quick-sented crue, The second guard being hunts-men soone prepare, Who make those Swine their boldnesse for to rue, By force of Iauelin, Pistol, Pike, or Speare: Whose proued shields, and vertue of their Armes Them' gainst a thousand boares, will saue from harmes. 36. But say a foule Swine in a cleane beast skinne, Were closely put (as none but cleane come there) Thinking by subtile policie to get in, Yet would it be discried ere it come neere, For the third guard is clad in Armes compleat, And search each beast that thither comes to eate. 37. And they with compleat furniture addrest, In single combat shunne no fierce assault, Such manly courage resteth in their brest, From an whole host they neuer will reuolt, But fight couragiously and winne the day, And carry conquest for their Prize away. 38. This goodly Paradice thus is safely kept, From vncleane beasts, chiefely from Wolues and Boares By vertues care, and prouident respect, Who chiefe Commander is, and keepes the dores, And lets all in and out, and sets these guards, (Whom for their paines he daily giues rewards) And so the Lambes and silly Sheepe feed free From the Wolues rapine, and the Swines infection,
Plentie of Corne is alwaies seene to bee, And fruits great store, by Vertues good direction, Good Sallet hearbes abundant, water cleere (As if it were distil'd) in Riuers there. 40. And those three Guardes me thought deuoutly prai'd For the continuance of this heauenly place, And God graunt Vertue all bappinesse they said, And his posteritie, with increase of grace Mercy, and peace, for euermore. And then Legions of Angels answered Amen. THen toward me the Angell turn'd his face, And said he now had shewed me good from euill, Vertue from vice, Celestiall from base Terrestriall things, bright Angels from the Deuill, And of these things to know the explanation, Reade these few leaues and see the Demonstration, Which take and coppy out with expedition, For I must leaue you now to Vertues guard, To whom present it without intermission, And he to you for this will giue reward, I tooke my penne, as he gaue me commission, And thus I writ the Visions exposition.
The EXPOSITION. 1 — One in a shape diuine, BY these words is meant the Spirit of Truth, the Re∣uelation of the Mysterie of Iesus Christ, the diuine and heauenly operation of the holy Ghost. Transported by the windes as swift as thought, Which is inspired, and breathed into our soules, thoughts and consciences, from the mouth of the most sacred Trini∣tie: as Acts 2.2. it is said, that when the Apostles receiued the Holy Ghost, suddenly there came a sound from heauen, as of a rushing, and mighty winde, and it filled all the house where they sate. Whose face more gloious then the Sunne did shine. The Word of Truth may well be said to be farre more glorious then the Sun in brightnes and shining, in respect of the integritie and eternitie, thereof: for the Sun onely giueth light vnto the outward eyes, to guide our naturall feete from stumbling: But this gratious visitation in Christ Iesus hath lightned the darknesse of our hearts, to guide our mindes and affections, lest we stumble at errors and deadly sinnes, and so fall into perdition. S. Iohn 1.4. speaking of the worthines of the word, saith, It was life, and the life (mea∣ning Christ Iesus) was the light of men. Me to an vnknowne Climate quickly brought. By this is to be vnderstood a Representation vnto vs of such places, where the light of the Gospell hath not yet shined, and where the word of Truth is not yet preached, as amongst the Heathen people, Pagans, Infidels, Virgini∣ans, and other the like barbarous and bruitish Nations,
and as it was with vs Gentiles in the time of the Law be∣fore our vocation, as it is written, wee were sometimes stran∣gers from the promise, Eph. 2.12. Where of Strange things that were within that Nation, And of their Natures he gaue true relation. That is, the Spirit of grace doth demonstrate vnto vs, the strange Religions and Heresies of those forraine Nati∣ons, their vaine superstitions, and blinde Idolatrie, and the effects and euents of their errors: 1. Cor. 4.5. He will lighten things that are hid in darknesse, and make the Councels of the hearts manifest. 2 He shewed me Oare of Gold, — All is not gold that glistereth, neither is this meant to be materiall Oare, but that which indeed (if it had beene of the right touch) would haue been farre more pretious then gold. It is meant by their Religion, which being of a coun∣terfeit stampe, is but a superficies, faire without, but drosse within; for instead of worshipping the liuing God, they adore a dead Idol of gold, and sometimes of wood and stone: some of them also worship the Sun, the Moone, and the Starres; some put their trust in their Coyne, saying, with the couetous miser, Pecunia omnia potest: I pray God too many of those Idolaters be not amongst vs; nay, some worship the Deuill himselfe. We reade in the 2. King. 16.3. That Ahaz King of Ieru∣salem made his sonne to goe thorow the fire, after the abhomi∣nations of the Heathen, as a Sacrifice to the Idol Molech. Also, in the 2. Kings 21. It is said of Manasseth, that he built the high places which Hezekiah his father had destroied, and he erected vp Altars for Baal, and made a groue as did A∣hab King of Israel, and worshipped all the hoast of Heauen, and serued them. And as in those times, they worshipped the Gods of their Na∣tions, 2. King. 17.29. So is it now with those ignorant incre∣dulous
people in our daies which know not the true God. —which being tried, As mettals vse to be, in burning fire, One should haue thought would haue beene purified, But contrarie it turn'd to filthy Mire, The Gospell of Christ Iesus is compared to a burning fire, most vehement, which maketh a change of things through all the World: as in Luk 12.49. Christ saith, I am come to put fire on the earth, speaking of the Gospell, so then this is the meaning of the last verses, That the Religion of those Idolaters and Heathen people, being compared and examined with our Catholike and Apostolike Doctrine, it needes no other touchstone, it shewes both inside and out∣side, that in respect thereof it is base and vilde, and as durt and drosse to pure gold, as a pibble-stone to a pretious Di∣amond. If we diligently peruse the Scriptures, we shall finde that Idolatrie is forbidden 500. times in the New and Old Te∣stament with seuere punishments: And God himselfe for the vilde wickednesse and abhomination thereof, hath pro∣nounced that the entisers of Idolatrie seeme they neuer so holy should be slaine, Deut. 13.5. Blessed is the Tree whereby Righteousnesse commeth, but that is cursed that is made with hands, both it and he that made it: He because he made it, and it being a corruptible thing, because it was called God, Wisd. 14.7.8. And whosoeuer kept it afterward Should be with sprights and goblins strangely scard. Heere is to be noted, that after our consciences haue beene throughly tried, by the word of God, and that we haue receiued by the spirit of Grace the knowledge of Christ Iesus, if we reuolt againe from the truth, to serue strange Gods, the Lord will giue vs ouer to the temptati∣ons of Satan, hardnesse of heart, blindnesse of vnderstan∣ding,
and will bring vpon vs warre, famine, and all the curses mentioned in the Booke of his Law, and in the end death and destruction, & after death perpetuall damnation. It is euident in diuers places of the Old Testament in euery booke, that the Kings of Israell so long as they kept the Commandements of God, and obserued his Lawes, as the Lord hath appointed, not according to their owne ima∣ginations, they prospered in all their doings, and many blessings were vpon them: But when they went a whore∣ing after strange Gods, the vengeance and wrath of God came vpon them with many heauy curses pronounced: whereof reade 2. King. 17.7. Exod. 22.20. also 23.32.33. Deut. 17. from 2. verse to 8. also 29. from the 18. to the last verse. also 30.17.18. Reuel. 21.8. 3. Besides the operation of this Oare Was, whosoeuer toucht it to make blinde And sottish, so that they could neuer more Haue wit or sight in any perfect kinde, Heere are described the effects of Idolatrie, blindnesse and dulnesse of vnderstanding: So heere are blinde Gods, and blinde People: 2. Sam. 5.8. When king Dauid and his men went to Ieru∣salem vnto the Iebusites, he promised preferment to those that would smite the Lame and Blinde, meaning the Idols which his soule hated, as the text mentioneth. And Salom. Wisd. 14.26.27. saith, that the worshipping of Idols, which ought not to be named, is the beginning and the cause and end of all euill, for either they be mad, when they be merrie, or prophesie lies, or liue vngodly, or else lightly forsweare themselues. The Apostle Paul also writing to the Eph. 4.17.18.19. ex∣horteth them that they will not walke as other Gentiles, in va∣nity of their minde, hauing their cogitation darkened, and be∣ing strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardnesse of their hearts, &c.
And it may be truely applied vnto them that is spoken by Isa. the Prophet cap. 59.10. They grope for the wall like the blinde, and as one without eies, they stumble in the noone-day, as in the twilight, and they are in solitarie places as dead Men. Except by bathing in one Riuer pure, In Europe Northward where they might haue cure. The word of God in diuers places of the Scripture is likened to Riuers and waters, whereby is meant, that if those Idolatrous Nations haue recourse to the holy Scrip∣tures as they are now professed and taught in the Church of Great Britaine, they shall be deliuered and freed from their blindnesse and ignorance. Iohn 4.14. Whosoeuer drinketh of the water (saith Christ) that I shall giue him, shall neuer be more a thirst, but the water that I shall giue him, shall be in him a well of water springing vp into euerlasting life. Ezech. 47.8.9. The Scriptures are called wholesome wa∣ters, in these words, These waters issue out toward the East Countrie, and runne downe into the plaine, and shall goe into one Sea, and the waters shall be wholesome, and euery thing which moueth wheresoeuer the Riuers come shall liue, and there shall be a very great multitude of fish, because these waters shall come thither, for they shall be wholesome, and euery thing shall liue whither the Riuer commeth. Also in the 36. ver. 25. Gods Spirit is compared to cleane water, where the Lord saith, I will pure cleane water vpon you, and ye shall be cleane, yea, from all your filthinesse, and from all your Idols will I clense you. And the Apostle Paul writing to the Eph. cap. 5. ver. 26.27. sheweth how Christ sanctifieth and clenseth his Church by the washing of water through the word, that he might make it vnto himselfe a glorious Church, not hauing spot or wrinckle or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blame.
Lastly, Baptisme (which these Heathen people haue not) is a token, that God hath consecrated the Church to him∣selfe, and made it holy by his word, that is, his promise of free iustification and sanctification in Christ. 4. In this strange Countrie also was a flower Which this good Angell had no sooner gather'd, But within one halfe quarter of an hower, As a thing blasted, suddenly it wither'd, And as the Marigould by the Sun is spread, This by the Sunne shut vp and seem'd as dead. Certaine it is, that there is a flower in the Indies, which when the Sun shineth it shuts it selfe close, as a Marigould openeth by the Sun. And there is a Tree called the shame∣fac'd-Tree, which groweth very faire and greene, whose leafe if you touch, though you pluck it not from the Tree, yet it will shrinke together for a season, like as if it should wither, and so continue vntill your departure from that place, but the purpose heere is not to discouer naturall cau∣ses, but to make Spirituall vse. Therefore, By this flower, is signified the weake faith of these Infidels, which as it is little or none at all, so it hath no sure foundation whereupon it is built, and therefore cannot stand against the power of the spirit of truth, no more then the Idol Dagon did before the Arke of the Lord, whereof it is written, 1. Sam. 5.2 3.4. That the Philistines tooke the Arke of God, and brought it into the house of their chiefe Idol Dagon, and set it by Dagon, And when they of Ashdod rose the next day in the morning, behold Dagon was fallen vpon his face on the ground before the Arke of the Lord, And they tooke vp Da∣gon and set him in his place againe, And they rose vp early in the morning next day, and behold Dagon was fallen againe vpon his face on the ground before the Arke of the Lord, and the head of Dagon and the two palmes of his hands were cut off vpon the threshold, onely the stumpe of Dagon was left to him:
And so is it with this flower which properly I cannot call Faith, seeing the Apostle Paul 2. Thes. 3.2. saith, all men haue not faith, but it is a kinde of blinde zeale in their blinde Re∣ligion, which at the appearance and tryall of the spirit of God withereth like a flower. 5. The Angell then transfer'd me to a Land, Where huge deformed vgly Giants breed, Who spoil'd and burnt good Corne which there did stand, And set Tobacco that foule stincking weede. By this land is conceiued so much as is vnder the Domi∣nion of the great Turke, where the people may properly be called deformed vgly Giants, in respect of their horrible foule Heresies and blasphemies which in them is more monstrous and damnable, then in the Heathen people before mentioned, which neither haue heard of Christ since his comming, nor any type, figure, or Prophesie of him before his comming: But these Monsters haue euer had the Law of Moses among them, and also the bookes of the Prophets, which likewise they haue now in vse; where∣by the fore-knowledge of the true Messias was prefigured vnto them: They did also know of his comming, they haue heard his Doctrine, seene his miracles, he liued and died a∣mongst them; Yet, these sauage and wilde Giants of the earth, which neuer were naturally borne as I may say in re∣spect of Regeneration, wast and burne vp (our Bibles wherein is written the Gospell of our blessed Sauiour) that good seed which that great Husband-man Christ himselfe did sow within their Land, The bread of life, Iohn. 6.48. I am the liuing bread (saith Christ) which came downe from Heauen, If any man eate of this bread he shall liue for euer: And the bread that I will giue is my flesh, which I will giue for the life of the World, Ioh. 6.51. This bread was giuen to the Iewes before any other Na∣tion, which is within the Turkes Dominion now (by Inua∣sion,) being the elect people of God, before the calling of
vs the Gentiles, as appeareth, Math. 15.26. When the Ca∣naanitish woman cryed out to Iesus for her daughter which was miserably vexed with a Deuill; Christ answered, It is not good to take the Childrens bread, (which were the Iewes) and to cast it to whelpes, whom Christ so called being stran∣gers from the house of God: But Christs holy name be glorified, that we now are made partakers of this heauenly bread, whereby we are made one body with him, 1. Cor. 10.17. But instead of this bread of sinceritie and truth, 1. Cor. 5.8. These deformed Giants the Turkes, haue sowed another kind of seede, such Corne as will proue vnto them as the bread of affliction mentioned in the 1. King. 22.27. Or as the bread of teares, Psal. 80.5. Or as the bread of Aduersitie, Isa. 30.20. For it is Tabacco, it is the black seed of blasphemy, which they haue sowen, a horrible contempt and defiance of the Gospell, and an approbrious iniurie and violence done to Christ himselfe, worse then the blasphemie of Pha∣raoh, saying, who is the Lord that I should heare his voice, and let Israel goe? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israell goe, Exod. 5.2. Worse then the blasphemie of Olofernes, saying, Who is God but Nebuchadonozor? Iudith 6.2.5. Worse then the blasphemie of the Pharises, that said, Christ cast out De∣uils by Belzebub the chiefe of Deuils, Luke 11.15. For the Turke yet cease not to defie and blaspheme Christ Iesus that was crucified about 1585. yeares past, terming himselfe in deri∣sion and scorne of the Sauiour of the World, occupier and possessor of the Tombe of the hanged God of the Iewes: And in the Gates of their Temples (I tremble to thinke of their deuillish rebellion against the Lord) they place the Image of Christ hanging vpon the Crosse with his head downwards, when they haue taken a Christian, and they force him either to turne to their abhominable Religion, or else put him to extreame and miserable slaue∣ry, in which desperate case, many Christians are drawne to reuolt from their faith, and belieue in Mahomet, and
then when the Christians enter into their Church, they are constrained to spurne that Image on the face, in de∣spight and defiance. Let the World iudge what they doe to Christ himselfe in their hearts, when to his Image they are so despightfull: For which cause this their odious blasphemie is compared to that stinking weede Tabacco: For as Tabacco being suckt into the mouth, causeth men to euacuate a noisome choaking smoake, and maketh the body of Man blacke and vncleane within: so doth their profession & their faith in their Religion make their soules black, and cause filthie blasphemies to come out of their mouthes, as it is written of Antichrist, He opened his mouth vnto blasphemie against God, to blaspheme his name and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heauen, Reuelation 13.6. One bade me taste, — Satan hath beene a Tempter from the beginning, and is, 1. Thess. 3.5. and consequently the wicked which are the Chil∣dren of the Deuill are alwaies ready to seduce and deceiue the Children of God, and cause them to forsake God if it were possible, but such are enemies to Christ & deceiuers. Many deceiuers are entred into the World which confesse not that Iesus Christ is come in the flesh, He that is such a one is a deceiuer and an Antichrist, 2. Iohn 1.7. — the Angell bad me leaue, For that would me quite of my life bereaue. By the corruption of nature we daily commit sinnes of infirmitie, but such as belong vnto the Lord shall be kept and preserued by his grace from falling into heinous sinnes such as blasphemie is, we are deliuered from the snares of death, the delusions of the Deuill, and the temp∣tations of the wicked, by the infusion of Gods spirit, and the illumination of the Gospell. The Lord knoweth to deliuer the godly out of temptation, 2. Peter 2.9.
Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, therefore I will deliuer thee from the houre of temptation, Reuel. 3.10. 6. For this is not a man as you suppose, But a blacke fiend which humane shape assumes, That takes Tobacco thus through mouth and nose, And brings from Hell these deuillish perfumes. The first man Adam was made a liuing soule, 1. Cor. 15.45. After the Image of God according to his owne likenesse, Gen. 1.26. That is, in righteousnesse and true holinesse, Ephe. 4.24. and continued in that state vntill his fall. The last Adam was made a quickning spirit, 1. Cor. 15.45. that is, Christ bringeth vs from Heauen the spirit of life, whereby we are now in the state of Grace: Of which state the Turkes haue no part, because they denie and defie Christ. So then the Turkes are the Children of the Deuill ac∣cording as Saint Iohn writeth Cap. 8.44. Yee are of your fa∣ther the Deuill, and the lusts of your father you will doe. As for their Blasphemie, of all the sinnes in the World that man can commit, it is so high & presumptuous against our Sauiour that died for vs, that the very light of our natu∣rall vnderstanding, without any further probation of Scrip∣tures, will tell our hearts and consciences, with feare and trembling (if we haue any conscience at all, or except we haue a seared conscience) that it is the very workes of dark∣nesse, hellish, damnable, and deuillish, and if there be any spirit of error and wickednesse worse then Deuils, it is their inuention and Doctrine, For Deuils know and confesse Christ, Luke. 4.41. Oh miserable and wretched people, that hauing the shape of men, they should be worse then Deuils. I started back seeing it was a Deuill, And praied, good Angell saue me from this euill. By the starting back is meant, that we should not keepe company with the wicked blasphemers of Christ, but flie from them: Put away therefore from among your selues that
wicked Man, 1. Cor. 5.13. which is spoken of those which are without, that is, which are not subiect to Gods word, and to the Discipline of the Church. The last verse signifieth, that wee ought to pray in the Holy-Ghost. Iude 20. ver. Edifie your selues in your most holy Faith, praying in the Holy-Ghost. And Math. 6.9. Christ himselfe commandeth vs to pray thus, Our Father &c. but deliuer vs from euill, &c. 7. Be not afraid quoth he — Heere is to be obserued the singular loue of Christ, that in any feare or danger he will comfort and strengthen such as belong to him: Iohn 16.33. Christ speaking to his Disci∣ples, saith, In the World yee shall haue affliction, but be of good comfort, I haue ouercome the World: Wherefore let vs say with the Apostle Paul 2. Cor. 1.3.4. Blessed be the God euen the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, the Father of mercie, and the God of all comfort, which comforteth vs in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any affliction, by the comfort wherewith we our selues are comforted of God. —thou shalt that see Before that we depart this wicked Land Which neuer eye beheld:— Sometimes the Lord sheweth signes and wonders that his power may be knowne, Exod. 34.10. Sometimes for the confirmation of the Doctrine of them that beleeue and establishing of their faith, Mark. 16.17. Sometimes precee∣ding the day of iudgement, Math. 24.29.30.31. So is it also with his sights, hearings, and apparitions, Iosua 5.13.14.15: 2. King. 7.6.7. Acts 16.9. 18.9. —And then to mee Appear'd damn'd creatures in the flames to stand, Heere is the iust iudgement of the Lord seene vpon the wicked for their vnbeliefe: He that will belieue and be bapti∣zed
shall be saued, but he that will not belieue shall be damned, Mar. 16.17. For the time is come, that iudgement must begin at the house of God. If it first begin at vs, what shall the ende be of them that obey not the Gospell of God? and if the righteous scarce be saued, where shall the vngodly and sinner appeare? 1. Pet. 4.17.18. Also 2. Thes. 2.8.9.10.11.12. The Apostle Paul speaking of the wicked man that shall be reuealed, saith, The Lord shall consume him with the spirit of his mouth, and because that wic∣ked mans comming is by the working of Satan, with all power, and signes, and lying wonders, and in all deceiueablenesse of vn∣righteousnes among them that perish, he sheweth, because they receiued not the loue of the truth that they might be saued, Therefore God shall send them strong delusion, that they should belieue lies, that all they might be damned which belieued not the truth, but had pleasure in vnrighteousnesse. Many examples may be produced out of the Scriptures to proue and declare the iudgement of God against the wicked, will be terrible and fearefull at the day of his second comming; and that Hell is prepared from the beginning for the Deuill and his Angels, and all wicked persons. One more onely shall suffice to shew the Description of Hell, that these wicked blasphemers, & all others may be affrigh∣ted in their consciences, and conuert and be saued: Isa. 30.33. The Prophet saith, that Tophet is prepared of olde, that is, Hell, It is euen prepared for the King, he hath made it deepe and large, the burning thereof is fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord like a Riuer of brimstone doth kindle it. These are Tabacconists that for this turne, Did whil'st they liu'd before-hand learne to burne. These Tabacconists are those blaspheme's spoken of be∣fore, and such as dispise the word of truth, and the Gospell of Christ Iesus, whose wickednesse is said to burne as fire whilest they liue: Isa. 9.18.19. For wickednesse burneth as a
fire, it deuoureth the bryars and the thornes, and will kindle in the thick places of the Forrest, and they shall mount vp like the lifting vp of smoake, By the wrath of the Lord of Hoasts shall the Land be darkened, & the people shall be as the meate of the fire. 8. Then suddenly he snatcht me vp and flew, Vntill he came vnto a thick-set Wood, Where trees of all sorts many thousands grew, And likewise shrubs innumerable stood, And looke how many trees and shrubs there were, So many seuerall fruits they all did beare. Heere is represented vnto our eies, the confused mixture of opinions and Sects in Religion of Amsterdam, a Towne within the 17. Prouinces, where it is certainely known, that there be more varieties of Doctrines, then in any one place of the World, as namely, Protestants, Papists, Atheists, Ana∣baptists, Brownists, Arians, the Familie of Loue, and such like, and I thinke some of no Religion at all, wherefore the place is compared to a Wood, the people to Trees, and their Sects to fruits, which may fitly be said to be of seuerall kindes, in respect of the difference of opinions. Euery tree is knowne by his fruit, whether it be good or euill, Math. 12.33. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth good things, and an euill man out of an euill treasure bringeth forth euill things, Math. 12.35. 9. Some were like Apples, but were Crabs in tast, And in the eating had but sower digestion. This may be vnderstood of the fruits of Mans inuentions, which carrie onely a similitude of goodnesse, but are bad in themselues, as the Crab is like to an Apple, but is lesser and far worse in taste. Such is the hypocrisie of the Brow∣nists, whose digestion is sower, (that is) their punishment certeinely will be very grieuous vpon themselues, Seeing that the earth which sinneth not shall be made wast because of their wickednesse, as in Micah. 7.13. Notwithstanding, the
Land shall be desolate, because of them that dwell therein, and for the fruits of their inuentions. Some were as bitter as the Oaken Mast, More fit for swine then any mans refection. These are the fruits of the flesh, which in many things are brutish. Ro. 7.18. I know (saith the Apostle Paul) that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwelleth no good thing, for to will is pre∣sent with me, but I finde no meanes to performe that which is good. Gal. 5.19. The workes of the flesh are manifest, which are Adulterie, Fornication, Vncleannesse, Wantonnesse, Idolatrie, Witchcraft, Hatred, Debate, Emulations, Wrath, Contentions, Se∣ditions, Heresies, Enuie, Murders, Drunkennesse, Gluttonie, and such like. To all these euery man is naturally prone, but two of these may be appropriated to the fruits of the Papists, to wit, Fornication and Idolatrie, the one being tolerated, the other allowed by their Religion, so that it seemeth they ne∣uer learned this lesson of Saint Paul, or else they scorne to allow his Doctrine, or else it is out of their booke. But let them know as Saint Paul saith, That such shal not inherit the kingdome of God. Some were delicious sweete, and perfect good, Such as at first in Edens Garden stood. These are the fruits of Righteousnesse, and of the Spirit, and may be said to proceed from a true zealous Protestant. Gal. 5.22. The fruit of the Spirit is Loue, Ioy, Peace, Long∣suffering, Gentlenesse, Goodnesse, Faith, Meekenesse, and Tem∣perance. 10. But as that fruit was good and lushious, The scituation of the Trees was bad, For none of them by meanes of vnder-bushes, Sufficient roome to sprout their branches had, So that for want of elbow-roome, a Tree, Not halfe so fruitfull was as else might bee. Many times it fals out that the godly are hindred by the
wicked, that they cannot shew their good workes in such measure as they would. For the profession of the true Gospell of Iesus Christ, is oftentimes ecclipsed in them by the darke cloudy meetings, and mixture of Heresies of o∣thers, among whom they liue, so that it doth not shine with his perfect light, especially among such as either refuse to heare the Gospell of Christ at all, or else if they heare it, they will peruert it, and make the construction thereof ac∣cording to their owne fantasies. So these vngodly people are compared to vnder-bushes, that hinder the propagati∣on of Gods holy word, and the growing and prospering of the fruits of the Spirit. And they are like to the Pharises, that neither would be∣lieue the Gospell themselues, nor suffer others to belieue, Math. 23.13. Add like to the Iewes spoken of in the 17. Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, where Paul being in Thessalonica, (as his manner was) went into their Syna∣gogue, opening and alleadging, that Christ must haue suffe∣red and risen againe from the dead, and some belieued, but the Iewes which belieued not, tooke vnto them certaine va∣gabonds, and wicked fellowes, and made a tumult in the Citie, and would haue brought Paul out to the people. 11. Vnfruitfull briars choakt their sappy roote, And with sharpe pricks did goad their tender Rinde, Thornes would not let their springing Armes to shoote, Sprigs of wilde Trees about their branches twinde, As if they all malicious enuie had At that good fruit, seeing their owne was bad. Enuie is one of the fruits of the flesh, as before mentio∣ned, and therefore is altogether repugnant to the Spirit. And heere is demonstrated vnto vs, the malice of the Chil∣dren of the Deuill against the Children of God. Accor∣ding as Christ saith to his Disciples, Yee shall be hated of all men for my sake, Math. 10.22. They that doe maintaine those wicked Heresies, and vaine inuentions, haue their eies euill,
because the Protestant is good. The similitude of sharpe pricking bryars and thornes is alluded vnto such as haue heard the word, but the cares of the world, and the deceitful∣nesse of Riches, and the lusts of other things, enter in and choake the word, and it is vnfruitfull, Mark. 4.19. But that is not all the hurt they doe, to be vnfruitfull in themselues, for the nature of such bryars and thornes is to make the ground barren round about where they grow, and to hinder the growth of any thing, that is neere there∣unto. And they may be said to be wilde Trees, which haue not the knowledge of truth grafted in their hearts, of which there are too many in that place, and those of seueral Sects, so that it is now with the good Protestant in that place, as it was with the Children of Israell, who being but one people in their iourney to the Land of promise, met with diuers Nations that resisted them; & being there is but one truth, which the Protestants professe, there they are much cum∣bred and troubled with many hoastes of Errors, but as the Lord euer gaue the Conquest to the Israelites, so no doubt he will be to the Protestants. 12. Pitty it was the husband-mans respect, Did not roote out those inconuenient lets; He might haue remedied that great defect, By plucking vp those preiudiciall sets, What greater ruine and spoiling of a delicate faire garden then to suffer it to be ouer-growne with weeds? What grea∣ter confusion to a Common-wealth then errors in Religi∣on? and as it belongs to the prouidence and care of a good Gardener to preuent the one: So it appertaineth to Magi∣strates and Ecclesiasticall gouernors to remedie the other, so neere as they can. But it fals out sometimes, that those weedes onely which are growne great and apparant, are onely pluckt vp, the rest
being neere the ground amongst good hearbes are not so easily discerned, so is it with Sects, which if they once grow vp and shed their seede, they cannot be clensed, they multi∣ply so fast, and grow so thick, that commonly they ouer∣grow the good Religion. And likewise in goodly fruitfull Orchards, where trees are pestered thick together, the bad trees that are vnfruitfull, hinder the prospering of the good trees, that they cannot be so fruitfull as otherwise they might be. Euen so, is it with the good and sound Religion of the Gospell, amongst other wicked Sects and diuisions of opinions. But if laborers were purposely appointed for the one, and subordinate Ministers for the other (because the eie of the Magistrate cannot see all) both the one, and the other, might be freed from these great inconueniences. For those Trees properly are made to burne, As some to build, and some for other turne. The vse of Trees is diuers, according to their natures: some are for timber and building as we read, 1. King. 5.56. And behold (saith Salomon) I purpose to build an house vnto the name of my Lord my God. Now therefore command that they hew me Cedar trees out of Lebanon: Of such trees, that is, of the faithfull, God hath beautifully built his Church militant heere on earth Yea are Gods husbandrie, and Gods building, 1. Cor. 3.9. Now as concerning Thornes and Bryars, that is, the wicked, they were from the beginning ordained for the fire. And so likewise euery tree though it bring forth fruit, yet if the fruit be not good, it is hewen downe and cast into the fire, Math. 7.10. If any man abide not in me (saith Christ) he is cast forth as a braunch, and withereth, and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they burne. 13. This when I had perused curiously, The Angell led mee to a goodly Vine-yard, Kept by a Tyrant, who swore furiously, That hee would kill mee with his bloody whineyard.
By this Vineyard is meant the Church of Rome (in re∣spect the Gospell of Christ is there preached, though with many heresies) and by the Tyrant is vnderstood the Pope, whose bloody disposition I need not tell to the World, he is so wel known, & manifested to be such as Salomon speaketh of, Pro. 28.15. As a Roaring Lyon is a wicked Ruler ouer the poore people, for he can neuer be satisfied, but euer oppresseth and spoi∣leth, And he is worse then Herod the tyrant, who sent forth and slew all the male Children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the Coasts thereof, from two yeare olde and vnder: For the Pope he neither spareth men, women nor children, yong nor olde. The Prophet Micah. cap. 3.2. writing against the tyranny of false Prophets, saith, they hate the good and loue the euill, they pluck off their skinnes from them, and their flesh from their bones, and they eate also the flesh of the people and breake their bones, and chop them in peeces as for the pot, and as the flesh within the Caldron. And as the Prophet Zeph. spake concerning the Citie of Ierusalem, so it may be fitly applied to the Citie of Rome: Zeph. 3.1.2.3.4. Woe to her that is filthie and polluted, she heard not the voice, she receiued not correction, she trusted not in the Lord, she drew not neare vnto her God, her princes within her are as roaring lyons, her Iudges are as Wolues in the euening, which leaue not the bones till the morrow, her Prophets are light and wicked persons, her priests haue polluted the Sanctuary, they haue wrested the Law. The Angell sau'd mee, — It is the Lord that deliuereth vs out of all aduersitie, 2. Sam. 4.9. Dauid in the 22. Chapter of the same Booke 2.3. ver∣ses, confesseth, that the Lord was his Rock, his fortresse, and he that deliuered him: saying further, God is my strength, in him will I trust, my shield, and the horne of my Saluation, my high tower, and my refuge, my sauiour, thou hast saued me from vi∣olence. Euery word of God is pure, he is a shield to them that trust in him, Pro. 30.5.
— and compel'd him to Declare the mischiefes which hee there did do. It is the iustice of God, that the wicked confesse their sins to their condemnation, for they will not belieue to obtaine remission: and their owne words shall be a sufficient proofe to condemne them if there were no other thing. Euery man shall be iustified or condemned by the words of his owne mouth, Math. 12.37. Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and confessed that he had sinned, and that the Lord is righteous, but he and his people were wicked, Exod. 9.27. 14. Then thus the Tyrant timerously said, This sheweth that the power of God maketh the wicked afraid: The Israelites hauing seene the mightie power of God, feared the Lord, Exod. 14.31. Adam after he had sinned was afraid of God, Gen. 3.10. And the word of the Lord is heerein fulfilled, for the Lord threatneth they shall be afraid in their chambers, which prouoke him by Idolatrie, Deut. 32.25. Northward from hence there is within a Land, Amidst the Sea, a fruitfull Paradice made, Where goodly Vines in curious order stand, Which proue exceeding plentifull:— That is within this Iland of great Britaine, which lieth Northward from Rome, the Gospell of Iesus Christ which is compared to a fruitfull Paradice of Vines, which plenti∣fully abound, and the profession thereof is spreadth ough∣out the same, like as goodly Vines florish and spread. The Prophet Dauid speaking of the Church, Psal. 80.8. compares it to a Vine, Thou hast brought a Vine out of Aegypt, thou hast cast out the Heathen, and planted it, thou madest roome for it, and diddest cause it to take roote, and it filled the Land, the mountaines were couered with the shadow of it, and the boughs thereof are like the goodly Cedars, shee stretched out her braun∣ches vnto the Sea, and her boughs vnto the Riuer.
I am the Vine (saith Christ) and my father is an husband-man, Iohn 15.1. — And there I sometime great authoritie did beare. Too great was the Popes authoritie in this Kingdome, when before the Reigne of King Henry the eight he had the supremacie. 15. And those faire Vines to all estates were free, As well the Plough-man as the Potentate, And euery beggar might sufficed bee, Without controlement of the Magistrate, The freedome of the Gospell is two-fold: free of ex∣pence and restraint. The Apostle Paul 1. Cor. 9.18. speaking of the Preaching of the Gospell, saith thus, What is my re∣ward then, verily, that when I preach the Gospell I make the Gospell of Christ free, that I abuse not mine authoritie in the Go∣spell, that is, that I be not chargeable to them to whom I preach, seeing that they thinke I preach it for gaines. And the same Apostle, 2. Tim. 2.8.9. exhorting Timothie to be constant in trouble, to suffer manly, and to abide fast in the wholesome Doctrine of our Lord Iesus Christ, bids him remember, that Iesus Christ made of the seede of Dauid, was raised againe from dead, according to Saint Pauls Gos∣pell, wherein the Apostle suffered trouble as an euill doer euen vnto bonds, but the word of God is not bound, thereby shewing that notwithstanding his imprisonment, the word of God hath his race, and increaseth. That all degrees by vertue of that Grape, Grew perfect wise, sober, temperate. Who seeke wisedome early shall finde it, that is, they that study the word of God diligently, and with a desire to pro∣fit shall finde wisedome: Riches and honour are with her, euer durable riches and Righteousnesse, that is, spirituall treasures and heauenly things, Pro. 8.17.16. Moses exhorting the people to keepe the ordinances and lawes of God, Deut. 4.6. tels them
that is their wisedome and their vnderstanding in the sight of the people, which shall heare all those ordinances, and shall say, onely this people is wise, and of vnderstanding, and a great Nation. The wisedome of the World is but foolishnesse with God, 1. Cor. 1.20. But vnto them which are called both of the Iewes and Grecians, Christ is the power of God and the wisedome of God, for the foolishnesse of God is wiser then men, and the weaknesse of God is stronger then men, 1. Cor. 1.24.25. Also the wordes of God are the words of sobrietie and truth, as appeareth in the Acts of the Apostles 26.25. where the Apostle Paul rehearsing his conuersation to approue his Innocencie, being accused before Festus, said, I am not mad noble Festus, but speake the words of truth and sobernesse. 16. But I by craft and deuillish inuention, Desiring their subuersion, cut those Vines Vnseasonably, to hinder their extention In growth and spreading: — The Deuill and the Pope haue euer yet beene enuious a∣gainst the propagation of the Gospell, and haue laboured by all the deuises that possibly they could, to extinguish, or at least to obvmbrate the true light thereof, wherefore it was a subtile deceit of the Pope, to haue the word of God set forth in the Latine Tongue, which the common people could not vnderstand, whereby the knowledge of the Gos∣pell was like the Sunne in Eclips, and could not be so gene∣rally spread as if it had beene written in their naturall En∣glish, so thereupon it may be said, that it was vnseasonably cut, to hinder the extention thereof. The Apostle Paul, 1. Cor. 14.1.2. speaking against prayer and seruice in a strange tongue, exhorteth men to follow af∣ter loue, and couet spirituall gifts, and rather, that they may pro∣phesie, (that is, to expound the word of God to the edifica∣tion of the Church) for he that speaketh a strange tongue, speaketh not vnto men but vnto God, for no man heareth him, (that is, vnderstandeth him.)
Also in the 4 and 5. verses of the same Chapter, the Apo∣stle saith, he that speaketh strange language edifieth himselfe (for he profiteth none saue himselfe) greater is he that pro∣phesieth, then he that speaketh diuers tongues, except he expound it that the Church may receiue edification. — And as oftentimes As J with blood the Rootes should haue made moist, A poyson strong I closely in did foist. That is, As often as the Pope and his Ministers should haue sincerely deliuered the word of God to the people ac∣cording to truth, whereby it might haue taken roote in their hearts, So often they preached their owne inuentions, brin∣ging in many horrible new heresies which poisoned the peoples vnderstanding. Saint Paul gaue them other directi∣on, 2. Tim. 2.15. Studie (saith he) to shew thy selfe approued vn∣to God, a workeman that needeth not be ashamed deuiding the word of truth aright. But the words of that holy Apostle, 1. Tim. 4.1.2.3. are truely verifide in the Pope and his Mini∣sters. Now the spirit speaketh euidently, That in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, and shall giue heede vn∣to spirits of error, and doctrines of Deuils (meaning false tea∣chers) which speaking lies through hypocrisie, haue their consci∣ences burned with an hot Yron, forbidding to marry, and com∣manding to abstaine from meates, which God hath created to be receiued with giuing thankes, of them which belieue and know the truth. And as for the Gospell, as it is professed by them, Deut. 32.32.33. there it is decyphered, Their Vine is the Vine if Sodom and the Vines of Gomorah; their Grapes are Grapes of gall, their Clusters be bitter, their Wine is the poyson of the Dragons, and the cruell gall of Aspes. 17. Which to conceale from mens detection, This trick I had, I suffer'd none to come Within that Paradice to make collection, To cast a mist before the peoples eies, that they might not
discerne the false Doctrine and superstitious ceremonies which were then brought into the Church, the Pope would suffer none to haue the bible in English, least their heresies should be detected, and their discipline despised, (for the Pope and his Ministers know in their consciences, if they haue any consciences, (or else God lighten their vnderstan∣ding that they may know) that their Doctrine is a Doctrine of vanitie, and the worke of errors, according to the Pro∣phet Iere. 10.8. They altogether dote, and are foolish, for the stock is a Doctrine of vanitie: Where because the people thought that hauing Images was a meane to serue God, and to bring them to the knowledge of him, the prophet sheweth, that nothing more displeaseth God, nor bringeth man into greater errors and ignorance of God. But I my selfe in person, or else some Of my confederates, whom I put in trust, Deliuer'd them how, and to whom we lust. The common people wanting the knowledge of the La∣tine tongue, were forced to receiue the word from the Priests, deliuered according to their owne fantasies, and so were deluded by these false teachers: of whom the Apostle Peter prophesied, 2. Peter 2.1.2.3. But there were false Pro∣phets also among the people, euen as there shall be false teachers among you, which priuily shall bring in damnable heresies, euen denying the Lord that hath bought them, and bring vpon them∣selues swift damnation, and many shall follow their damnable waies, by whom the way of truth shall be euill spoken of, and with couetousnesse shall they, with feigned words make marchan∣dize of you, which is euidently seene in the Pope and his Priests, which by lies and flatteries sell mens soules, so that it is certaine that he is not the successor of Simon Peter, but of Simon Magus. 18. Many diseases heerevpon did grow, The Ague, Palsey, Megrims, Scurfe and Scab,
This false Doctrine brought in by the Pope and his Priests hath wrought many sects, opinions and diuisions in this our true Catholike-Church, and by that meanes, many doubts, questions and controuersies did arise, which are compared to Agues, Palsies, and Megrims, and are as great a blemish to the true faith in Iesus Christ, as a scurffe or scab is to a na∣turall mans body. For this cause saith Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 11.30. Many are sick and weake among you, and many sleepe, that is, they died or be dead. The cause of sicknesses they did not know, For no man of the Grapes suspition had. The Pope and his Priests will say that they are the people of God, make a faire outward shew of sanctitie in words, but not in Action, for they abuse Gods name, and colour it with shadow of Religion to cloake their hypocrisie. The Prophet Micah 3.11. speaking of the heads of the house of Iaakob and the Princes of the house of Israell, figureth out plainely the state of Rome: saying, They abhorre iudgement, and peruert all equitie. They build vp Zion with blood, and Ie∣rusalem with iniquitie, (that is, they build them houses by bri∣bery) The heads thereof iudge for rewards, and the Priests there∣of teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof prophesie for money, yet will they leane vpon the Lord, and say, is not the Lord amongst vs? no euill can come vpon vs: Which hypocrisie being thus cloaked with Religion, is the more free from suspition of the people. By this I got at ending of their daies, All that they had for Rosemary and Bayes. The silly people were taught such blinde deuotion, that notwithstanding their daily offerings to Idols, which came to the vse of the Priests, and whereby they grew exceeding rich, commonly at the time of their deaths, they would be∣queath all, or the greatest part of their substance to massing Priests, for maintenance of lights, obits, and prayers for
their soules, perswading themselues verily that they should neuer be saued without such fond babling, and so the whole Kingdome almost came into the hands of the Church-men. So those Dirges are alluded to a little Rosemary and Baies, as to a thing of no value or respect, but they are hardly so good, for indeed the Rosemarie and Baies is a decent orna∣ment for the corps when it is carried to the graue, but as for the songs and prayers and their feighned power to doe the soule of the dead any good, or to be any ornament there∣vnto, there is no true Christian but will hold him a very simple vnderstanding man that imagines it. For as a man dieth, so shall he come to iudgement. Eccles. 11.3. If the tree doe fall toward the South or toward the North, in the place that the tree falleth there it shall be. 19. At length my diuellish purpose was descried By one that vomited a poysoned Grape, By reason of an Antidote applied, The whole circumstance heereof is largely and truely re∣corded in the booke of the Martyrs of the kingdome of England, among the memorials and acts done in the time of the Reigne of King Henry the eight, to which for breuitie the Reader shall be referred. Thus much onely may be said, That it pleased the Lord to illuminate the vnderstan∣ding of that renowned, vertuous and well affected king with the light of his truth, whereby he discerned the hypocrisie of the Pope and his ministers, And then caused the Bible to be printed in English, and the glorious Gospell of Christ Iesus to be truely preached, and so the whole kingdome was plentifully fed with the heauenly and spirituall foode of the Soule, which that famous and blessed King hauing recei∣ued and digested, it was to him as a preseruatiue, or an An∣tidote against the Heresies of Rome, and caused him as it were to vomit out those vilde errors out of the Church of England.
And all the Countrie then did beare me hate, And for those faults which I committed there, They banisht me, and so I thence came here. Heere the people began to obserue the Doctrine and institution of Saint Paul, that is, to flie from Idolatrie, 1. Cor. 10.14. and to hate those detestable follies, and supersti∣tious vanities which hindred them from the true seruice of God, according as our Sauiour Christ saith, Luke 14.26. If any man come to me and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brethren and Sisters, yea, and his owne life also (that is, he that casteth not off all affections and de∣sires which draw vs from Christ) cannot be my Disciple. And the gouernment of the Church being setled according to the profession now vsed, the Pope was not onely iustly de∣priued of his Supremacie, but his authoritie and traditions were quite abolished out of the kingdome, his Ministers put to silence, their religious or rather irreligious houses (as I may rightly terme them) vtterly defaced, according as the Lord commanded. Deut. 12.2. Yee shall vtterly destroy all the places wherein the Nations which yee shall possesse serued their Gods vpon the high Mountaines, and vpon the hils, and vnder euery greene tree, Also ye shall ouerthrow their Altars, and breake downe their pillars, and burne their groues with fire, and yee shall hew downe the grauen Images of their Gods, and abo∣lish their names out of that place. 20. And all these Vines which heere you planted see, Are of that sort, which I from thence did bring: The Pope and his Ministers in the manner of their wor∣ship in many things doe much derogate from Gods glory, insolently attributing their praiers either to dumbe Idols, or to Saints, or Angels, which can doe them no more good then the golden Calfe that the Israelites worshipped, Exod. 22.4. Which afterwards Moses abolished, Exod. 32.20. Such was the Religion of the Romish Catholike when
that Religion was heere professed, and such or rather worse is it now at Rome. And I haue caused other Weedes to bee Set with them, that they may together spring, And both at one time put into the Presse, The Grapes and Weedes, to make a mingled messe. By these Weedes is meant the worshipping of Idols inuo∣cation of Saints, their rabling repetitions of Pater-Nosters, Aue-Maries and Creedes, their superfluous Sacraments. Tran∣substantiation, their obits, lights, and prayers for the dead; the Popes Buls and Pardons, and many other such vaine in∣uentions which were neuer heard of in the time of the Apo∣stles, nor since vsed in any Church but in theirs, neither in∣deed ought any such to be vsed, seeing the Lord hath forbid∣den it with his owne mouth, as it is in Deut. 22.9. Thou shalt not sowe thy Vineyard with diuers kindes of seedes, least thou de∣file the increase of the seede which thou hast sowed, and the fruit of the Vineyard. By this is meant, we should walke in simplici∣tie and not to be curious of new inuentions. But by this meanes it is true of them that was spoken by the Prophet Isa. to the Iewes, Isa. 1.22. Thy siluer is become drosse, thy wine is mixt with water, that is, whatsoeuer was pure in thee before is now corrupt though thou haue an outward shew. 21. And to keepe well those Weedes, I haue ordain'd, They be continually vnderpropt with stakes, By such as I haue purposely retain'd, Who in like case for their owne lucre sakes, Ten times more curious are to trimme and prime Their branches, than the branches of the Vine. By this is perceiued that Birdes of a feather will hold to∣gether, The Pope and his Prelates to make their Doctrine more probable, haue conspired together like the false Pro∣phets and Priests of Ierusalem, Ezechiel 22.25.26. There is a conspiracie of her Prophets in the mids thereof like a Roaring Ly∣on rauening the prey, they haue deuoured soules, they haue taken
the Riches and pretious things, they haue made her many widowes in the midst thereof, her Priests haue broken my law and haue defi∣led mine holy things, they haue put no difference betweene the holy and prophane, neither discerned betweene the vncleane and the cleane, and haue hid their eies from my Sabbaths, that is, they haue neglected my seruice, and I am prophaned amongst them. And these are such as the Apostle Paul told Titus of, Tit. 1.10. saying, there are many disobedient and vaine talkers and decei∣uers of mindes, whose mouthes must be stopped, which subuert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for lucres sake, 2 Tim. 3.6. Of this sort are they which creepe into houses, and leade captiue simple women laden with sinnes, and led with diuers lusts: And in the margent of that text, they are expounded to be Monkes, Friars, and such hypocrites, which I also meane to be those whom the Pope hath retained and appointed in his Church to vphold his heresies. 22. This mingle mangle composition, Hath much besotted all the Peoples braines, The Prophet Isa. speaking against the Israelites, to wit, of the hypocrites which were among them who were altoge∣ther corrupt in life and doctrine, cryeth out against them. Isa. 28.7.8. They haue erred because of wine, and are out of the way by strong drinke, the Priest and the Prophet haue erred by strong drinke, they are swallowed vp with wine, they haue gone astray through strong drinke, they faile in vision, they stumble in in iudgement, for all their tables are full of filthy vomiting, no place is cleane. And as naturall wine immoderately taken be∣sotteth the braines of the outward man, and causeth drun∣kennesse, so the superfluitie and dregs of the Romish heresies filleth the inward mans vnderstanding with spirituall drun∣kennesse, a beastly kinde of life, vomiting their vncleane er∣rors out of their foule gorges, And such is their fond supposition, They hold him curst that from this drinke refraines: It is not vnknowne to any that know any thing at all of the
Popes malitious disposition, how he and his Prelates curse the children of God (that follow not his vilde traditions) with Bell, Booke and Candle, as they say: Witnesse his Buls, which very often haue beene sent out against the Lords annointed Kings and Princes and their People and Nations, and also his excommunications. But as we are the children of Abra∣ham the father of the faithfull through Christ Iesus, elected and called to our profession, so let vs stand fast in our faith, and then the Lord will turne their curse vpon their owne heads, as he promised Abraham, saying; I will blesse them that blesse thee, and I will curse them that curse thee, Gen. 12.3. The gaines being great for selling of this Ale, Hath lift my head as high as Dragons taile. 23. And all the Countrie call me Demy-god, Bending their knees to me with great deuotion, And offer Gold, Iewels and Emmerods, And all they haue for this my potion: The yearely profit which comes into the Popes treasurie for pardons and redemption of Soules out of Purgatorie, a∣mounteth to a great sum, The Peter-pence spoken of in the booke of Martyrs paid quarterly to the Friars, came to aboue 500000 li. yearely alone, Their mortuaries, gifts and lega∣cies for Requiems, obits, and lights, is an vnknowne value, The peoples offerings at the Altar and to Images which come to the Priests vse, is a secret gaine. But if we reckon all the tricks which they haue to get money, and adde the profit together, it will arise vnto an vnspeakeable masse of wealth. The Booke of Martyrs in the time of King Henry the eight, demonstrateth many worthy memorials heereof, and other the deuises of the Pope and his Prelates, to which I also re∣fer the Reader. But by this means we see the Pope is growne mightie in riches and power, And as the Apostle Paul saith, 2. Thes. 2.4. speaking of Antichrist, he exalteth himselfe against all that is called God, or that is worshipped, so that he doth sit as God in the Temple of God, shewing himselfe that he is God.
But out alas, their blind inchaunted sight Sees not the Adder me that doth them bite. The Apostle Paul to the Eph. 4.18. as before is said, exhor∣teth the Ephesians not to walke as other Gentiles in vanitie of their minde, hauing their cogitations darkened, and being stran∣gers from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardnesse of their hearts. Which example is very good for vs to follow, Let vs not walke as the Romish Catho∣likes, for it is with them as it was with the Israelites when they prouoked the Lord with strange Gods by changing his seruice for their superstitions, Deut. 32.28. They are a Nation void of Councell, neither is there any vnderstanding in them. For if the Romish Catholikes were directed by the true light of the Gospell, which maketh all things manifest, Eph. 5.13. they would easily discerne the delusions of the Pope and his Mini∣sters, who deceiueth them as the Serpent deceiued Euah. 24. And that my gaine may be enlarg'd the more, I haue deuis'd a Law on Paine of death, That none the Iuyce of Grapes shall tast, before The Iuyce of Weedes be mixt, whereby of breath I haue bereaued thousands with this blade, Which for that purpose onely I haue made. Here is set forth the tyrannie and bloody persecution of the Pope. We reade Acts 8.1. that Stephen was stoned to death for the Gospell of Iesus Christ, and that at that time there was a great persecution against the Church which was at Ierusalem, and they were all scattered abroad through the Regions of Iudea and Sama∣ria, except the Apostles. But if we turne ouer all the Histories of the Iewes and Gentiles, we shall not finde greater examples of crueltie, and more diuellish plots of treachery, against the true Church of God then hath beene acted and conspired by the Pope and his confederates, Priests, Iesuites, Fryars, Monkes, &c. and their followers. Witnesse that heauenly Communion of Saints, that great companie of Martyrs which haue patiently
suffered death for the Gospell, by his cruell and bloody hand, some in this our Nation, and those an infinite number, some in France, Italy, Germanie, and other places beyond the Seas. So that if there were no other argument, this were sufficient to proue that his inuentions proceed from the Deuill and not of God nor good men. Wee reade in the Reuel. 17.4. of a vision described of a wo∣man araied in purple and scarlet and guilded with gold, &c. This woman is the Antichrist, that is, the Pope with the whole body of his filthie creatures: who afterwards in the 6. verse of the same Chapter (inferring his mercilesse seueritie) is said, to be drunken with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of the Mar∣tyrs of Iesus. 25. The Angell answer'd, for this Impious fact, A iudgement on thee suddenly shall come, Worse then the Serpents curse, for his vilde Act Which in deluding Euah he had done: Vengeance from Heauen shall one day driue thee out From this faire Vineyard with thy Rabble rout. Here is set forth the iudgement of him and all persecuters. The vision of the beast mentioned, Reuel. 17.8. is meant by the Romane Empire, which being fallen into decay, the whore of Rome vsurped authoritie, and as he proceeded from the Deuill, thither shall returne, as in the Margent of the Text. The words are these, The beast that thou hast seene was and is not, and shall ascend out of the bottomelesse pit, and shall goe into perdition. And Reuel. 18.2. the ouerthrow of Rome is descri∣bed vnder the name of Babylon, thus, And the Angell cried out mightily with a loud voice, saying, It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon that great Citie, and is become the habitation of Deuils, and the hold of all foule spirits, and a Cage of euery vncleane and hatefull bird. Againe, Reuel. 19.19.20. the destruction of Rome is pre∣figured in these words, And I saw the beast, and the Kings of the earth, and their warriours gathered together to make battaile a∣gainst him that sate on the horse and against his souldiors, (that is,
the Pope and the worldly Princes shall fight against Christ) but the beast was taken, and with him that false Prophet that wrought miracles before him, whereby he deceiued them that re∣ceiued the beasts marke, and them that worshipped his Image, These both were cast into a lake of fire burning with brimstone: (which will be accomplished at the second comming of Christ.) Also Reuel. 20.10. there is his perpetuall damnation set forth in these words, And the Deuill that deceiued them, was cast into a lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false Prophet shall be tormented euen day and night for euermore. 26. Who pitifully shall lament thy case, The aspect thereof will be so vehement: It is written of the whore of Babylon, Reuel. 8. ver. 8.9.10.11. That her plagues shall come at one day, death, and sorrow, and fa∣mine, and she shall be burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord God which will condemne her, And the kings of the earth shall bewaile her, & lament for her which haue committed fornication and liued in pleasure with her, when they shall see the smoake of her burning, and shall stand a farre off for feare of her torment, saying, Alas, alas, the great Citie of Babilon, the mightie Citie, for in one hower is thy iudgement come, And the Marchants of the earth shall weep and waile ouer her, for no man buyeth her ware any more, By that is meant both they that temporally haue had profit by the strumpet, and also the spirituall Marchants shall for sorrow and want of their gaine cry out and dispaire, for besides their spirituall liuings, the Monkes and Friars, as sometimes they were heere in England, being stewards to Cardinals, Bishops and Abbots were temporall Marchants, and held and occupi∣ed Farmes, Mannors, and Graunges, &c. But others shall reioice at thy disgrace, And for deliuerance from thy mischiefes sent. The Children of God shall reioice at the fall of Antichrist, as in the Reuel. 19.1. praises are giuen to God for iudging the whore, and for auenging the blood of his seruants, in these words: And after these things I heard a great voice of a great mul∣titude in Heauen, saying, Hallelu-iah, Saluation, and glory, and
honour, and power, be to the Lord our God, for true and righteous are his iudgements, for he hath condemned the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and hath auenged the blood of his seruants shed by her hand. And therefore double shalt thou punisht be, For thy delusion and vilde Tyrannie. In the 137. Psal. ver. 8.9. They are said to be blessed that could repay the like to Babylon, where the Israelites were so tyrannously handled, O daughter of Babel worthie to be destroy∣ed, blessed shall he be that rewardeth thee as thou hast serued vs, blessed shall hee be that taketh and dasheth thy children against the stones. But in the Reu. 8.6. speaking of the whore of Rome, it is said that her reward shall be double, For there was a voice heard, saying, Reward her euen as she hath rewarded you, and giue her double according to her workes, and in the cup that she hath filled to you fill her the double. 27. And then mee thought I was translated thence Into a Paradice replenished With fruitfull Trees, Corne, Vines, and Hearbes. By this Paradice is meant the Kingdomes of England, Scot∣land and Ireland A comprehensible Type of the incompre∣hensible excellencie of the holy Ierusalem, spoken of in the Reuel. 21.10. descending out of Heauen from God. And by the Trees, Corne, Vines and Herbes, is vnderstood how plen∣tifully the word of God aboundeth there: for sometimes the Gospell of Iesus is compared to a Tree, Reuel. 22.2. Which bea∣reth 12. manner of fruits, and gaue fruit euery moneth, and the leaues of the tree serued to heale the Nations with: This is the tree of life, Christ the life of his Church, and is common to all his, and not peculiar to any one sort of people. Sometimes the Gospell is compared to Corne, as in the parable of the sower. Math. 13.3. Behold a sower went out to sowe, &c. Some∣times it is compared to Vines, as before is mentioned in the 14. staffe. And in respect the Gospell is the Spirituall foode of the soule, it may be compared to herbes and any other su∣stenance, which is the naturall foode of the bodie, applying
the one to the soule, spiritually, as the other is applied to the body naturally. —from whence The Tyrant had before beene banished: Who when he kept it was not so perfidious As is the man that keepes it now Religious. This our Nation is the Paradice where the Pope sometime did beare such great authoritie, as before is relation made in the 14. staffe: And from whence he and his errors were aboli∣shed as in the 19. staffe: Whose perfidious treacherie, he him∣selfe hath heere already at large demonstrated. But the Lord be praised, wee haue now a Religious Soueraigne Lord King James, who is supreame head and gouernour of our Church vnder God, to whom for sinceritie and truth in Reli∣gion, the speech of Saint Paul may be appropriated, Eph. 4.20. That he hath learned Christ, and hath heard him, and beene taught by him, as the truth is in Iesus, that is, he hath cast off concer∣ning the conuersation in time past the olde man, which is cor∣rupt through the deceiueable lusts, and is renewed in the spirit of his minde, and hath put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousnesse and true holinesse. And for integritie of life, he is like vnto Samuel, 1. Sam. 12.3. And for vprightnesse in heart he is like vnto those worthy Kings Iosias, Hezekiah and Dauid, whose deserued commenda∣tions are singularly set forth in the Booke of Ecclus. cap. 49. And God grant that he may long liue to multiply his vertues in himselfe and his Royall issue. 28. For hauing Children, he instructs them how They may those Trees, Corne, Vines and hearbs best keepe From Caterpillers, Cankers, and the Sow, That longs into that place by stealth to creepe, To spoile the Paradice; Of which there were Some by that Tyrant left of purpose there. By the Caterpillers and Cankers is meant al such as either enuie, or wish hurt to, or depraue, derogate or speake ill of
the true Preaching of the Gospell of Christ, of what Religion or Sect soeuer they be: But by the Sow is particularly inten∣ded the Papist, of which sort their be too many yet remaining that doe much hurt secretly to the weake members of our Church, animated and set on by the Pope, but by the Religi∣ous care of our vertuous King, the Paradice is pretty well rid of them, the Church is reasonably cleered, and the word of God more plentifully planted amongst vs, then heeretofore it hath beene. And heerein all the World may see his Maie∣sties great prouidence in the education of his children, for the continuance and vpholding of the Gospell, according to the commandements of the Lord, Deut. 11.18.19. Therefore shall you lay vp these my words in your heart, and in your soule, and binde them for a signe vpon your head, that they may be as a frontlet be∣tweene your eies, and you shall teach them your children, speaking of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou wal∣kest by the way, and when thou liest downe, and when thou risest vp. 29. So that this Paradice is like to flowrish Vntill the finall period of all things, For his faire issue know well how to nourish Those holy Plants, and those cleere water-springs, Running there-through to keepe from foule pollution, Till all things haue their finall dissolution. Heere is set forth the excellent towardnesse of our renow∣ned Prince Charles Prince of Wales, Frederike Prince Elector Palatine, and the Lady Elizabeth his wife, as the issue of our royall King, which may well be said to be faire and beautifull: Not as Absolon, That was comely in outward proportion onely, 2. Sam. 14.25. Nor as Saul, which was a goodly yong-man and a faire, 1. Sam. 9.2. for among all the children of Israell there was none goodlier then he in person, Nor as the daughters of men, whom the sonnes of God saw were faire, Gen. 6.2. For this is but the beautie of the flesh which withereth and decaieth like grasse, 1. Pet. 1.24.
But their beautie is an euerlasting beautie, which excel∣leth the beautie of all other Princes in Christendome, and like the Sunne appeares glorious to the whole World, their beautie is the Deuine beautie of their soules, made and fa∣shioned after the image of Christ Iesus. The holy plants of that Paradice they haue learned of their royall father to nou∣rish, that is, they allow and maintaine the Gospell truely prea∣ched amongst vs, and to keepe those cleere watersprings from pollution, that is, that the word of God be not defiled with Heresies, whereupon dependeth a great hope of the prospe∣rous estate of this kingdome, for the Lord hath promised, that whosoeuer meditateth his word continually, his daies shall be mul∣tiplied, and the daies of his children, as long as the Heauens are aboue the earth, Deut. 11.21. 30. And how prouision is by Vertue made To keepe the Caterpillers from the Trees, Js thus; A fire vnderneath is laide, Whose smoake consumes them, as in swarmes of Bees Is vsed commonly to rid the Drones, And so they proue continuall fruitfull ones. Vnder the name of Vertue is comprehended our royall King Iames, for whose desert no lesse name can be giuen him, seeing that God hath endued him with such full measure of Faith, knowledge, temperance, and godlinesse, which is eui∣dently seene in that he is continually carefull and prouident that the Gospell of Christ may haue free propagation, and so proue fruitfull amongst his subiects, and that it be not hurt or violated by ill affected people, who as Caterpillers are con∣sumed with fire, so are they vtterly destroied by the truth of the word professed, which is also compared to fire, Luke. 12.49. 31. And that the Corne from Cankers may be cleane, Thousands of carefull Laborers are fitted, To polish, cleanse, and winnow, by which meane, None but good Seede is to the ground committed: The like care is to cleare the hearbs from weedes, So there good Corne and good hearbs onely breedes.
That the word of God be not mingled with the false Do∣ctrines of Heretikes, thousands of diligent preachers are pro∣uided, who are called Laborers, Math. 9.37. who as Saint Paul saith, 2. Cor. 4.2. haue cast from them the cloakes of shame (mea∣ning such shifts and pretences as become not them that haue such a great office in hand) and walke not in craftinesse, neither handle the word of God deceitfully, but in declaration of the truth approue themselues to euery mans conscience in the sight of God: And so deliuer the word of God purely to the people. 32. But to keepe out that beastly breed of Swine, Three thick-set hedges decently are placed About the Paradice, least they should vndermine, And so it might be vtterly defaced: These Fences being strong, this stincking rout Shall ne're get in, though they runne round about. The three thick-set Hedges are three sorts of people prin∣cipally in this his Maiesties Dominions, which being true and sincere professors of the Gospell of Christ, and stedfast and confident in their profession, doe keepe out the Papists insi∣nuation and incroaching into this Kingdome, with the tradi∣tions of their deuillish inuentions. And as long as they con∣tinue in the true faith of Iesus Christ, it is impossible that the Pope with all his host of erroneous and subtle Clergie, shall euer haue any place heere, though they worke neuer so close∣ly, or diligently range about seeking to seduce from the true faith daily by cunning circumstances, such as they finde or suppose to be weake members of the Church of Christ. 33. The first and out-most hedge is guarded well By Champions of valiant condition, Who watch continually them to repell With shield, and speare, or sword, or such munition: And if the Swine but once come neere that fence, One of those weapons sure shall beate them thence. The first outward hedge or defence consisteth of three de∣grees of people, vizt. Noblemen, Knights and Gentlemen
of vertuous and Religious disposition which being of the number of the faithfull, are well prouided with their spirituall weapons, to repell the dartes of the Papists. For by the shield, speare or sword is not meant those which are material: for the exercise of such weapons is forbidden in some respect, Math. 26.52. Put vp thy sword (saith Iesus) into his place, for all that take the sword shall perish with the sword. And Reuel. 13.10. If any lead into Captiuitie, he shall goe into Captiuitie (this is meant of leading soules captiue) If any kill with a sword, hee must be killed by a sword. Neither indeed is it the sword or bowe or any other materiall weapon whereby Gods children ouercome, Ios. 24.12. But by this shield is vnderstood the shield of faith, by the sword, the sword of the spirit. For the faithfull haue not only to striue against men and themselues, but also against Satan their spirituall enemie, which is most dangerous, for he is ouer our heads so that we cannot reach him, and therefore he must be resisted by Gods grace. Dauid by faith feared not to fight with the Giant Goliah with a sling and a stone, for he flung away from him his Armour and weapons which Saul put vpon him, 1. Sam. 17.37.39. Nay, by faith we resist the De∣uill, and ouercome both the World and him. 1. Iohn 5.4. For all that is borne of God ouercommeth the World, and this is the victorie that ouercommeth the World, euen our faith. Also in the Reuel. 19.15. the word of God is called a sharpe two-edged sword, in these words, And out of his mouth went a sharpesword, that with it he should smite the Heathen, for he shall rule them with a rod of Yron, &c. These are infalliable wea∣pons which the weake faith of the Papists is not able to resist; which shewes that their faith is but counterfeit, and that ours is the true Catholike and Apostolike. 34. But if the Swine doe chaunce to sneake vnseene, Of all that well approued outward guard, Within their hedge a little space betweene The first and second fence, them to reward, Lie beagles to discouer the intrusion Of those, that wish to Paradice confusion.
Vnder the name of Beagles is comprehended all subordi∣nate officers and Ministers, who are appointed by the superi∣our powers to hunt out or make inquisition or search for all slye Recusants, Papists, Iesuites, Priests and such like, who closely sneake and insinuate into the bosomes and hearts of many well disposed persons, attempting to extirpate and root out their well affected thoughts. 35. Being set on by this quick-sented crue, The second guard, being hunts-men, soone prepare, Who make those Swine their boldnesse for to rue, By force of Iauelin, Pistol, Pike, or Speare: Whose proued shields, and vertue of their Armes, Them 'gainst a thousand boares, will saue from harmes. After these subordinate officers haue found out any such, they report to the Iudges and Councell of this Land, who are put in the place of the second Guard, & are likened to hunts∣men, because indeede, if the knowledge of such persons come once to their eares, either they doe vtterly subdue them with their spirituall Armes, strong arguments of Religion; or else they chase them quite out of the Kingdome: whose wisedome in this I cannot sufficiently expresse, and whose worthinesse I want experience to commend. Only thus much I haue obser∣ued in them which now supply those eminent places of autho∣ritie and iustice, that they haue a watchfull care for the sup∣pression of all hereticall and diabolicall Inuentions that may happen to proceede from the fantasticall delusions of sedu∣cers, and maintenance of such things as shall tend to vertu∣ous institutions, and are so sufficiently furnished with the wea∣pons of the spirit, that a thousand foolish blind Papists with al their philosophicall deuices, are not able to preuaile against the least one of them, whereby is approued the sinceritie and truth of their Religion, & the inuincible power thereof; which as it worketh in them vprightnesse of heart; so it araieth them with many other vertuous induments, as mildnesse, aswell to poore as rich; indifferencie, in the hearing of causes, aswell for strangers as their friends, sinceritie in affection, soundnesse
in their skill and iudgement, constancie in their resolutions besides great prudence in politique gouernment, and that which is the true token of a wise discreete Iudge, to be more apt to heare, see, and consider, then to speake or giue iudge∣ment, which should be also in euery person of what degree or condition soeuer, seeing that nature hath giuen all men two eies, two eares, and but one tongue: To conclude, if any a∣tion vpon the Earth be well supplied with a vertuous Coun∣cell and vpright Iudges, this Land may boast thereof, which is furnished with such as are spoken of Exod. 18.21. Men of cou∣rage, fearing God, men dealing truely, hating couetousnesse, Deut. 16.18. That iudge the people with righteous iudgement, that wrest not the Law, nor respect any person, nor take reward, which blin∣deth the wise and peruerteth the wordes of the iust. 36. But say a foule Swine in a cleane beasts skinne, Were closely put (as none but cleane come there) Thinking by subtile policie to get in, Yet would it be discried ere it come neere, For the third guard is clad in Armes compleat, And search each beast that thither comes to eate. 37. And they with compleat furniture addrest, In single combat shunne no fierce assault, Such manly courage resteth in their brest, From an whole host they neuer will reuolt, But fight couragiously and winne the day, And carry conquest for their Prize away. By this third Guard is meant the Reuerend and learned Bishops of this Kingdome, which are compleat in all things that appertaine to their place and calling, and they are like a neast of Eagles, whose eies stedfastly looke vpon the Sunne without winking, whose iudgements discerne Diuine Myste∣ries, whose profession in Ecclesiasticall gouernment is sutable to Christs and the Apostles prescription, whose preaching & writing manifesteth the truth of their Religion, and whose godlinesse and vertue is seene by their life and conuersation whose learning aboundeth like the Sea, and whose wisedome
extendeth throughout the whole Land, God forbid that euer bastard egge should be hatcht in this neast, for what greater confusion then errors & diuisions in Religion? These are they that search the Papists inside though they appeare neuer so faire in the outside. These are the Tutch-stones that trie the false faith of Recusants, These make the Priests and Iesuites appeare to the World as they are, like the Scribes and Phari∣ses, Math. 23.21. Hypocrites which make cleane the outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of bribery and ex∣cesse, And like painted Tombes which appeare beautifull outward, but within are full of dead mens bones and of all filthinesse: These are Gods warriors and Champions that are strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephes. 6.10. That haue put on the whole Armour of God, their loines girded with veritie, and hauing on the brest-plate of righteousnesse, and their feele shod with the preparation of the Gospell of peace, and haue taken the shield of faith, the helmet of Saluation, and the sword of the spirit. Let no simple Romish Catholike presume to make triall of their pro∣found knowledge, lest as they deserue, they suffer a disgrace∣full repulse. 38. This goodly Paradice thus is safely kept From vncleane beasts, chiefely from Wolues and Boares By Vertues care, and prouident respect, Who chiefe Commander is, and keepes the dores, And lets all in and out, and sets these guards, (Whom for their paines he daily giues rewards) 39. And so the Lambes and silly Sheepe feed free From the Wolues rapine, and the Swines infection, Plentie of Corne is alwaies seene to bee, And fruits great store, by Vertues good direction, Good Sallet hearbes abundant, water cleere (As if it were distil'd) in Riuers there. Oh that I had the spirit of perfect wisedome, that I might heere set forth our Salomon, our Royall king in his true shape, of whose excellencie I am rauisht with admiration, O King, the Lord hath annoi  with his holy Oile, as he annointed his ser∣uant
Dauid, Ps. 79.20. Prosper with thy glory, Ride vpon the word of truth, and of meekenesse, and righteousnesse, Ps. 45.2.4. It is thy goodnesse and carefull prouidence O King to elect such wor∣thy and wise Bishops, Councell, Nobilitie and Iudges, for the defence of this Kingdome, who are as Guards and bulwarkes, Forts and defences against the Rauening Wolues, the merci∣lesse Papists, (who as they are the enemies of Christ may bee so called, Mat. 10.16. also) That seeke to deuourethe sillie Lambs your poore subiects. Acts 20.29. Thou art the sole Commander and Supreame head vnder God of this our temporal Paradice, the Lord make thee great in the Kingdome of Heauen at the day of thy dissolution. By thy protection we haue plenty of spirituall Corne, the bread of life: plentie of spirituall fruits and hearbs, the foode of the soule: and plentie of spirituall water to refresh our spirits; to wit, the Word of God truly taught amongst vs, the Gospell of Christ Iesus; which as I haue shewed before, is thus in seuerall places so compared. And vnder thee O King we are happy aboue many other Nations for the peace and tranquilitie of our Land. 40. And those three Guardes me thought deuoutly prai'd For the continuance of this heauenly place, And God graunt Vertue happinesse they said, And his posteritie, with increase of grace Mercy, and peace, for euermore. And then Legions of Angels answered, Amen. St. Paul writing to Timothy, 1. Tim. 2.23. declares, that it is a good and acceptable thing in the sight of God our Sauiour, that supplications, praiers and intercessions be made for Kings and for all that be in authoritie, And heerein is obserued the allegiance of these eminent persons and the generall loue and dutie of the people, whose daily Inuocations of God according to the Apostles direction, are deuoutly made for all Spirituall and Temporall blessings to be multiplied vpon the King and his Royall issue, which, the Lord grant may be infinite without number or measure. Amen. FINIS.
