E3667 R176824 52612159 179454
AN EXACT NARRATIVE OF THE Resolute ATTEMPT and happy SUCCESS OF A SMALL PART OF HIS MAJESTIES FLEET, Under the Conduct of Sir ROBERT HOLMES, Rere-Admiral to the Red Squadron, Upon the  of VLY and SKELLING, On the ninth and tenth of this instant August, One thousand six hundered and sixty six. EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY, 1666.
AN EXACT NARRATIVE OF THE Resolute Attempt and happy Success OF A PART OF HIS MAJESTIES FLEET, Under the Conduct of Sir Robert Holmes, upon the Isles of Vly and Skelling, on the ninth and tenth of August, 1666. ON the 29. of July, His Majesties Fleet, under his Highness Prince Rupert, and his Grace the Duke of Albemarle, weighed an∣chor from within sight of Zealand. They steered their course for the Vly, but the winds being contrary, they did not make the Island till the 7. of August; In which time, several rich ships hapned to get in, which otherwise had faln into their hands. Being come to
an Anchor, the Generals were informed, that the Islands of Vly and Skelling, were very ill guarded (notwithstanding there were Store houses, both for the States and the East-India Fleets) and riches to a good value; and what did weigh most, a consi∣derable number of good Merchant-ships, usually riding there; Upon which, it was resolved by the Generals, that there should be a speedy attempt made. A Councel of Flag-Officers was call'd; and it was deter∣mined there, that it should be carried on, in manner following, viz. That three hund∣red men should be drawn out of each Squa∣dron, consisting of two parts Land-men, and the third Sea-men; these to be com∣manded by nine Captains, their Names as followeth, Sir Robert Holmes Rere-Ad∣miral of the Red, to command in chief, Sir Philip Howard, to command one hundred and twenty Volunteers, Captain John Bel∣lasis, Captain Hamond, Captain Wiltshire, Captain Haddock, Captain Guy, Captain Silver, Captain Healing, Captain Butler, Captain John Holmes, each command a Company; Sir William Jenings was also or∣dered (that in case they had attacqued
both Islands at one time) he should have com∣manded one division of the whole. The ships ap∣pointed for this expedition, were as followeth, The Advice, Hampshire, Tyger, Dragon, and Assurance, fourth Rates; the Garland, Pembrook and Sweep-Stakes, fifth Rates, five Fireships, and seven Ketches; which being in a readiness on VVednesday the 8th August, about eight in the morning, they weigh∣ed from the rest of the Fleet, and came to an Anchor about a League from the Buyes; where they met the Princes Pleasure-Boat, called the Fanfan, who had discovered within, a considerable Fleet of ships near the Vly; vvhich proved to be one hundred and seventy Merchants-ships; the least of which, was not of lesse then two hundred Tuns burthen, with two Men of VVar, who had lately convoyed near one hundred of the aforesaid ships from the North∣ward, being homeward bound; some from the Streights, some from Guiny, some from Russia, and some from the East-Countries; the rest were out∣ward bound ships; all, of both parts, richly loaden. Sir Robert Holmes considering, that if he should proceed, as his design was, first to attempt the Land, that numerous Fleet might possibly pour in such numbers of men, as might render the Success ha∣zardous, Resolved to begin with the Ships; and ac∣cordingly having ordered the Advice and Hamp∣shire to lie without the Buyes, he weighed with the rest of his Fleet, and the wind being contrary, with much adoe, he turned into Skelling Road, where the Tyger came to an Anchor, and immediatly Sir Robert went on board the Fanfan, and put out his
Flag; upon which the Officers came aboard him; where it was ordered, that the Pembrook which drew the least water, with the five Fireships, should fall in amongst the Enemies Fleet with what speed they could; Captain Brown with his Fireship laid the biggest Man of VVar very bravely aboard, and burned him down-right; Another Fire-ship, run∣ning up at the same time, to the other Man of VVar, he backing his sails, escaped that present execution of the Fire-ship; but so, as to run him∣self by it on ground; where he was presently taken by some of the Long-boates, and fired; The other three Fireships clapped the three great Merchant-men, which carried Flags in their Main Tops, and burned them. This put all their Fleet in a great confusion; which Sir Ro∣bert Holmes perceiving, made a sign for all the Officers to come aboard again, and presently gave order, that Sir William Jenings with all the Boates that could be spared, should take the advantage, and fall in, and burn and destroy all they could; But with a strict command, they should not plunder. The execution was so well followed, each Cap∣tain undertaking his Share, some 12. some 15. a peece, that of their whole Fleet there escaped not above 8 or 9 ships; one of which a Guiny Man of 24 Guns and three small Privateers, who being dravvn up into an Narrovv Corner of the Stream, served to protect 4 or 5 Merchant men, that vvere a head of them, vvhere it vvas not possible for our Boats to come at them, though even these fevv vvere much damag'd; This vvork took up most
part of that day, being the 9th of Aug. so that vve had not day enough, to fall upon the Island of the Vly. Sir Robert Holmes being also informed by some prisoners, that the place vvas not so conside∣rable, as it vvas represented; and night coming on, and perceiving tvvo of the Frigots, viz. the Dra∣gon and Garland on ground, It vvas thought most convenient; for all hands first to go to vvork to get them off, vvhich being done, he continued in his in∣tention of attempting the Vly next morning, as soon as the high vvater could permit the motion of his Vessels; But his design vvas novv likewise prevent∣ed; for so great a gust and rain hapned that night, that the Armes and Ammunition in the Boates, Hoyes, and Ketches having received much damage, he thought it best to weigh, and as the wind stood, to attempt something upon the Island of Skelling, vvhich the morning proving moderate vveather, he accordingly prosecuted, landing by the help of his Long boates eleven Companies on shore, vvhere he discovered only some fevv scattering fellovves, but met vvith little or no opposition; leaving therefore one Company to secure his Boats, himself, with ten Companies marched up three miles to the Capital Town, called Brandares, a very fair Town, or Dorp, of above one thousand houses, where keeping five Companies upon the skirts of the Town, to prevent any surprize of the Enemy, he sent the other five to fire and burn the Town. But finding them somewhat slow to receive that order, and fearing they might be tempted to forget themselves in the
pillage; he himself was forced to set fire to some houses on the wind-ward, the sooner to perfect the work, and hasten his men away, which burnt with that violence, that in half an hours time, the most part of the Town was in a flame. The Town was reported by those that were found in it, to have been very rich; and so it appeared by some of the Souldiers pockets, but very few people were to be seen in it, except some old men and women, which were used with all gentleness and humanity. The remaining Villages of that Island, which were two or three, had certainly run the same fortune. But, considering, it was nigh high water, Sir Robert thought it not fit to lose the opportunity of getting out to Sea; which he thought more considerable, than to stay 24. hours for the destruction of some few and inconsiderable Villages, remembring likewise, that the Channels next the Buyes, vvere very narrovv, and not bold vvithout a franck vvind. By hight of vvwater he got off all his men, and set sail out of the place retaining still his first intentions of falling upon the Vly; but as he vvas going on board, he received Orders from the Generals, to return to the Fleet vvith all speed, vvhich he did that evening, being the 10th. of Au∣gust; bringing off the marks of a singular conduct, and most vigorous execution; besides, a consider∣able booty to the private Souldiers and Sea-men, their States Pleasure-boat of 12 Guns, vvithout any other loss, then of six men killed, and about as many vvounded. FINIS.
