P920 Lutt.III[96] R226345 99886668 186972
PEACE CONCLUDED AND TRADE REVIVED IN An Honourable Peace betwixt the English and Dutch, &c. Vnited now in one, all discords cease, The Gentrys quiet, Farmers joy, and Trades encrease. HAil happy peace, which doth in one Cement Divided Islands to the Contenent; Making the aire more clear, weather more pleasant Sweet Angel, beauty, Sacred Peace, Heavens present Patron of Arts, of good the special spring; All hail (dear Peace) which so much good doest bring, O that I had a quill pluckt from the wing. Of Venus Doves, how I thy praise would sing. Sweet sacred Peace, who can enough thee praise, Which to an Iron age bringst golden dayes. The Drum's now silenced, Bellona is fled, And hurtfull Arms a happy Peace has bred: Plenty and Peace do kindly kiss each other, And Mars appeas'd sits down by Cupids Mother The thundring Cannon which did use ro roare, And ring alarums to the neighbouring shore, Shall now no more discharge their murdering shot And make such store of flesh the fishes lot. No more shall the shrill Trumpet sound the knell, And unto thousands be the passing Bell; Muskets and pikes shall both neglected lye, And more by Venus then by Mars shall dye. Trades men rejoyce, whole streams of wealth shall flow, Into your shops, such good from Peace doth grow. London now ruinous shall mount his head, Whose fame through all the worlds great Orbe shall spread, Peace bringeth Plenty, Plenty buildings raises, Who then of peace can speak sufficient praises. Now Belgia and Albion shake hands. Strongly conjoyn'd together in Loves bands, Bones broken, joyn'd together stronger grow, I hope England and Holland will do so. Of killing Swords who might first Author be Sure a steel heart and bloody mind had he, Mankinds destruction so to bring about And Death with bloody horror to find out; More lovely Peace which sheweth no such things, But all content with proffit to us brings. And now Phanaticks who did hope to rise By our devisions, see where your hopes now lies? Henceforth learn to obey, seek not to mount By others fall, you fall by that account; In vain ye think by Jelousies and fears To sett's again together by the ears For this we know for truth assuredly If Forraign Warrs be bad; Civil worse be; They are a Stem of a most Viperous brood, Whose sole delight is in their Countries blood; Base bloody Canniballs, whose hungry Zeal Devours heir Countries welfare at a meal. But now I hope those dismal Clouds are past, Which our Horizon late so overcast: Peace and her handmaid plenty both attend Our happy Coasts, good luck on us to send, And may all those who at our Peace repine On misery and affliction sup and dine. All those who at this Prayer snapps or snarls, I wish unto them all this curse of Quarls. That all the World may hear them curse and cry Who loves no Peace, in Peace shall never die. With Allowance. LONDON, Printed by Peter Lillycrap, 1667.
