10213.3 24047958 27114
ARTICLES TO BE ENQVIRED OF, WITHIN THE ARCH∣deaconty of Glocester, in the ge∣rall Visitation of the Right Wor: M. Samuel Burton, Archdeacon of the Dio∣ces of Glocester. Holden in the yeere of our Lord God, 1618. In the 16. yeere of the Raigne or our most gracious So∣ueraigne Lord James, by the grace of God, King of Great Britaine, France & Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter. 1618.
The tenor of the Oath to be ministred to the Church-wardens and Sworne-men. YOu shall Sweare, that vpon due conside∣ration of the Articles giuen you in charge to present vnto; You shall particularly present all the Wants & De∣fects; and also all offences and offenders therin required of: wherein you shall deale truly and faithfully: So help you God. LEVIT. 19.12. Yee shall not sweare by my Name falsely; neither shalt thou profane the Name of thy God.
ARTICLES TO BEE ENQVIRED OF WITHIN THE Archdeaconrie of the Diocesse of Glocester, in the Visitation to be holden in the yeere of our Lord God, 1618. ¶ Articles concerning the Cleargie. WHether hath your Minister read the Constitutions set foorth by his Maiestie, once euery yéere, vpon some Sundaies or Holidaies, in the afternoone, be∣fore diuine seruice; according as by the Canons he is bound? 2 Whether doth your Minister vse to pray for the Kings Maiesty, King Iames, & for the Quéenes Maiestie, the Prince, and all their royall Progenie, giuing vnto him such stile and title of Supreme Gouernour, in all causes, and ouer all persons, as well Ecclesiasticall Temporall, as by law are due vnto him, exhorting their Parishioners to yéeld him obedience, accor∣ding to the same: and also in their sayd Sermons, doe pray for all Arch∣bishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiasticall persons, according to the fifty fiue Canon? 3 Whether is the prescript forme of diuine Seruice vsed by your mini∣ster vpon Sundayes, Holidayes, Wednesdaies, and Fridaies, according to the Booke of Common Prayer? And whether doth your minister duely obserue all the orders, rites and ceremonies prescribed in the said booke of common prayer, as well in reading publike prayers, the Letany, as also in administring ye Sacraments in such māner & forme wearing the Surples, as in the Booke of common prayer by law now established, is enioyned. 4 Whether doth your Minister administer the holy Communion so often, and at such time, as that euery Parishioner may receiue the same at the least thrice in euerie yéere: whereof once at Easter, as by the booke of Common Praier is appointed? And whether doth your Minister re∣ceiue the same himselfe on euerie daie that hee administreth it to others, knéeling at the same, & administreth it to none but such as do knéele at the receiuing thereof, and vse the words of the Institution according to that booke at euerie time that the bread and wine is receiued, in such manner & forme as by the promise of the 21. Canon is directed, or wherein is hee faultie, and whether is warning giuen by him before hand for the Com∣munion, as the 22. Canon requireth?
5 Whether hath your minister admitted any notorious Offenders, or Schismatiques to the Communion, contrary to the 26 and 27 constituti∣ons, without satisfaction, by due course of Law before enioyned them; or reiected any from the Communion, who were not by publike present∣ment or other open scandall infamous and detected of some notorious crime, by common fame published in the Parish? 6 Whether the Minister, together with the Church-wardens and Quest-men, doe take diligent héede and care, that not onely all, and euery of your Parishioners doe receiue thrice in euery yéere, as aforesaid: but also that no strangers of any other Parish doe forsake their owne Minister and parish to receiue with you, contrary to the 28 Canon? 7 Whether doth your Minister vse to signe the children with the signe of the crosse when they are baptized, according to the Booke of Common Praier, and the thirtieth canon? and whether he hath deferred, or wilfully refused to baptize any infant in his parish being in danger, hauing béene duly enformed of the weaknesse thereof: and whether the childe hath died in his default without baptisme, contrary to the 68 and 69 canons? 8 Whether is your minister continually resident with you vpon his Benefice, or for how long time hath he been absent: and where is he resi∣dent for the most part, and what other Benefice hath he. 9 Whether doth your minister, being a Preacher, preach vsually, ac∣cording to the constitutions, either in his owne cure with you, or else in some other church or chappell néere adioyning, where no Preacher is: ac∣cording to the 45 Canon: or how oft hath he been negligent in that behalfe. 10 Whether is your minister a Preacher allowed: if yea, then by whom: if not, whether doth hee procure Sermons to bee preached among you once in euery moneth at the least, by such as are lawfully licensed, ac∣cording to the 46 canon, or doth contribute toward a licenced Preacher, if his liuing will beare it? 11 Whether hath your minister another Benefice, and whether doth he supply his absence by a Curate that is sufficiently licensed to preach in in that cure of his, whereon he himselfe is not resident: or otherwise, in case he doth not finde a Preaching minister there, by reason of the smal∣nesse thereof, whether doth hee preach at both of his Benefices vsually himselfe, according to the 47 canon? 12 Whether is your Curate licenced to serue by the Bishop of this Diocesse, or by any other, and by whom? whether doth your minister or Curate serue more cures then one, contrary to the 48 canon: if yea, then what other Cure doth he also serue? 13 If your minister bee not licenced to preach as aforesayd, whether
doth he read homilies, or rather take vpon him to expound the Scriptures either in his owne cure or elsewhere, contrary to the 49 canon. If yea, then you are to present him, & specifie the place where he hath so preached. 14 Whether hath any person beene admitted to preach within your church or chappell, but such as you haue well knowen to be sufficiently licensed: whom haue you so admitted, you shall present their names, and how oft haue any such béene admitted to preach, and by whose procure∣ment; and whether haue you caused euery strange Preacher, licensed or not licensed, to subscribe his name, together with the day whē he preached, according to the 50 and 51 canons: and if he were licenced, then by whom he was licensed: And whether haue they, or any other preached in your church, not being soberly & decently apparelled, according to the 74 canon? 15 Whether doth your Lecturer and Preacher, reade diuine seruice, and administer the Sacraments in his owne person, twice euery yéere, ob∣seruing all the ceremonies in the Booke of common Prayer established, ac∣cording to the 56 canon. 16 Whether doth your Minister weare the Surplice whilest hée is say∣ing the publike prayers, and administring the Sacraments: and if he be any Graduate, whether then doth he also weare vpon his Surplice, during the times aforesaid, such a hood as by the order of his Vniuersitie is a∣gréeable to his degrée, according to the 58 canon. 17 Whether doth your Minister on euery Sunday and Holiday before Euening prayer, for halfe an houre or more, examine & instruct the youth and ignorant persons of his parish, in the ten Commandements, the Arti∣cles of Beléefe, & the Lords Prayer, as also the Catechisme, last set foorth in the Booke of Common Prayer, whereby the children of the Parish may be prepared for confirmation according to the 90 canon? 18 Whether hath your minister without licence from the Archbishop, the Bishop of the Dioces, or his Chancellor, solemnized marriage betwixt any parties, the Banes not being three seuerall Sandayes or Holidayes, first published, in time of Diuine seruice, in the seuerall churches or chap∣pels of seuerall abode, according to the booke of Common prayer, and the 62 canon: and that also betwixt the houres of eight and twelue in the fore∣noone, contrary vnto the 102 canon? 19 Whether hath your minister, since the last canons published, solem∣nized any mariage betwixt any persons, being vnder the age of 21 yéeres, although the Banes be thrice asked, before such time as the Parents haue made knowen vnto him their consent therunto, contrary to the 99 and 100 canons: and whether hath he married any of another Diocesse: and who are they: and by what authority, and when?
20 Whether doth your Minister vpon Sundaies at morning praier, declare vnto the Parishioners, what Holidaies and fasting daies are ap∣pointed to bée kept the wéeke following, according to the 64. Canon, wherby they may be put in minde to prepare themselues accordingly, and to repaire to Church to publike praier, as by law they are bound. 21 Whether doth anie Minister in the Rogation daies, vse the peram∣bulation of the circuit of the Parish appointed by law, and in the same perambulation, mooue the people to giue thankes to God for his benefits, vsing such Psalmes, Praiers, Homilies, as are to that end set forth. 22 Whether doth anie man (being neither minister nor Deacon) read Common praier openly in your Church or Chappell, or administer the Sacrament of Baptisme, or solemnize matrimonie, or take vpon him to practize anie other ministeriall dutie in the Church, that is prescribed to be executed particularlie by such, as are either ministers, or Deacons: and what is his name that so doth. 23 Whether doth your minister euerie six months denounce in his Parish, all such of his Parish, as doe perseuere in the sentence of excom∣munication, not séeking to be absolued: and whether hath hee admitted anie person excommunicate, into the Church, without a certificate of his absolution from the Ordinarie or other competent Iudge, vnder his seale, according to the Canons. 24 Whether doth your Minister, being a Preacher, endeauour & labor diligently with mildnes and temperance to conferre with, & thereby to re∣claime the popish recusants in his Parish from their errors, if there be any such there being: and whether is he painefull in visiting the sicke, accor∣ding to the Booke of common prayer, & the canons in that case prouided. 25 Whether is your Parson, Vicar, Lecturer, or Curate, too much frequent, or ouer conuersant with, or a fauourer of Recusants, whereby he may be suspected not to be sincere in Religion. 26 Whether hath your minister, or anie other taken vpon him the place of a minister, preached, baptized children (vnlesse in case of neces∣sitie) solemnized marriage, churched anie woman, or ministred the holie communion in anie priuate house or houses: If yea, then where: whom, and how often hath he so offended in anie of the Premises. 27 Whether hath your Minister taken vpon him to appoint anie pub∣like or priuate fasts, or prophesies not approoued and established by law, or publike authoritie, or hath he attempted vpon anie pretence either of pos∣session, by fasting & praier to cast out diuels, contrarie vnto the 72. canon. 28 Whether hath your Minister, or anie other person or persons with∣in your Parish, vsed to méete in anie priuate house or other place, and to holde priuate conuenticles, contrarie to the 73. Canon; if yea, then you
shall present them all and euerie one of them. 29 Whether doth your Minister vse such decencie and comelinesse in his apparell, as by the 74. Constitution is enioyned, as be all at home, as when he goeth abroad. 30 Whether doe you know in your parish, any that hauing heertofore taken vpon him or them the order of Preisthood, or of a Deacon, hath since relinquished the same, and betaken himselfe in the course of his life, as a lay man, neglecting his vocation: if yea, then you shall present his name, and the place of his abode. 31 Whether is your Minister noted or defamed to haue obtained his benefice by symonie, or reputed to be an incontinent person, or doth kéepe anie man or woman in his house, that are suspected either to bee of euill Religion or bad life; himselfe to be a common drunkard, or to be a com∣mon hunter of Tauernes, Ale houses or other suspected places; a com∣mon gamester, or player at dice, or other vnlawfull games; a common Swearer, or notorious person, or faulty in any other crime punishable by the Ecclesiasticall censures, whereby he is offensiue and scandalous to his function or ministery. 32 Whether doth your Minister vse the forme of Thankesgiuing to to women after childbirth: and whether hath he admitted any thereunto that was begotten with childe in adultery, or fornication, without license of his Ordinary? And whether haue any married wiues refused to come to Church according to the Book of Common Praier, to giue God thanks after childbirth, if any bee faulty héerein, you shall present their names. 33 Whether doth your Minister baptize anie children in anie Bason or other vessell then in the ordinarie Font, being placed in the Church, accor∣ding to the 81. canon, or doth vse to put anie Bason into it. Articles concerning the Church. WHether haue you in your seuerall churches and chappels the booke of constitutions, or canons Ecclesiasticall, ready to bée read by your minister, according to his Maiesties pleasure, published by his High∣nesse authoritie vnder the great seale of England. 2 Whether is there in your church or chappell one parchment Register Booke prouided for Christnings, Mariages, and Burials: and whether is the same duely and exactly kept according to the Constitutions in that behalfe prouided? and a transcript thereof brought in yéerely, within one moneth after Easter, into my Lord Bishops principall Registers Office? And whether doth your minister vpon euerie Sundaie read the names of all such as haue béene married, christned, or buried in the wéeke before. 3 Whether haue you prouided a faire great Bible of the last Transla∣tion,
the book of Common prayer, lately commanded by his Maiesties au∣thoritie onely to be vsed: and the Booke of Homilies, and two Psalters: and whether haue you in your Church or Chappell a Font of stone set vp in the ancient vsuall place, a conuenient & decent Communion Table, standing vpon a frame, with a carpet of silke, or some other decent stuffe, and a faire Linnen cloth to lay thereon at the Communion time: and whether i the same then placed in such conuenient sort within the Chan∣cell or Church, as that the minister may be best heard in his prayer and Administration, and that the greater number may communicate: And whether are the Ten Commandements set vpon the Cast end of your Church or Chappell, where the people may best sée and reade them, and other sentences of holy Scriptures written on the wals likewise, for the same purpose? 4 Whether haue you a conuenient seat for your Minister to read seruice in, together with a comely Pulpit set vp in a conuenient place, with a de∣cent cloth or cushion for the same: a comely large Surplice, a faire Com∣munion Cup of siluer, and a couer agréeable for the same, with all other things and ornaments necessary for the celebration of Diuine Seruice, and administration of the Sacraments; and a strong chest for the Almes of the poore, with three locks and keyes, and another chest for the kéeping of the Ornaments of the church and Register booke. 5 How many Bells are there at this present hanging in the Bell-frée of your Parish church? And how many haue there béene héeretofore? whe∣ther any of your said Bells haue béene taken downe and sold, or made a∣way, and what other church goods are now wanting in your said church? 6 Whether are your Churches or Chappels, with the chancels therof, & your Parsonage, or Vicarage house, and all other housing thereto belon∣ging, in good reparations, and decent and comely kept, as well within as without, the seats well maintained, your church yards well fenced, and kept without abuse, according to the 85 canon: If not, then through whose default, and what defects are? All these things in these Articles, to be pre∣pared, according to the canons vnder the Title appertaining to churches. 7 Whether haue you since the last Metropoliticall Visitation of the most Reuerend Father, the now (Lord Arch bishop of Canterbury) taken a true Terriar of all the Glebe land, Houses, Tenements, Orchyards, Gardens, and portions of Tithes (whether within your Parish or with∣out) belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage, and deliuered the same into the office of the Register of this Diocesse?
Articles concerning Schoole-masters. WHether the Schoole-master or Schoole-masters within your parish, openly or priuately, in any Noble or Gentlemans house, or in any other place, be of good and sincere religion, life, and conuersation, and be diligent in teaching and bringing vp of youth, and whether they haue béene examined, allowed, and licenced for Schoole-masters, by the Ordinarie in that behalfe: and how many seuerall Schoole-masters haue you, and what be their names? 2 Whether your Schoole-master or Schoole-masters, do themselues re∣ceiue the holy Communion as often as they ought to doe: and whether do all your Schollers, which be of age sufficient, and of capacity by instructi∣on, to receiue the Lords Supper, come to the Communion, either in your Church, or where their Parents dwell, once euerie yeere, and bee diligent to heare common praier? 3 Whether the Schoolemaster, or Schoolemasters, either priuate or publike, doe teach their Schollers the Catechisme authorized by publike Authoritie, at the least once euerie weeke, and doe enstruct and examine them in the same, and do teach any other catechisme, and what catechisme is it that they doe so teach? 4 Whether your Schoolemaster or Schoolemasters, or anie of them, be known or suspected to read vnto their Schollers priuately, any vnlawfull books, or priuately to enstruct them in their young yéeres, either in popery, superstition, or disobedience, or contempt to his Maiestie, and his Lawes Ecclesiasticall by publique authoritie allowed? 5 What Recusant Papists are there in your Parish: and whether doe they, or any of them kéep any Schoolmaster in their house, which commeth not to Church, to heare Diuine Seruice, and receiue the Communion: what is his name: and how long hath he taught? 6 Whether the Schoolemaster or Schoolemasters within your Parish, doe teach his or their Schollers any other Grammar then that which is called the Kings Grammar; set foorth by the authoritie of King Henry the eight, teaching the prescript forme thereof, whereby the Schollers may perfectly vnderstand their Grammar rules and constructions. Articles concerning Parishioners, and hers of the Laytie. WHether is there any within your Parish, that hath or do im∣pugne the Kings Maiesties Supremacie and authority in causes Ecclesiasticall, or doe anie waie, or in anie part impeach the same, being restored to the Crowne by the Lawes of this Realme established in that behalfe? 2 Whether is there anie in your Parish that denieth the Church of
England, by Law established vnder the Kings most excellent Maiestie, to be a true and Apostolicall Church, teaching and maintaining the doctrine of the Apostles. 3 Whether is there any in your Parish that doe impugne any of the Articles of Religion, agréed vpon in Anno 1562. and established in the Church of England? 4 Whether is there any in your Parish, that doth impugne or speake against the Rites and Ceremonies established in the Church of England, or the lawfull vse of them? you shall present their names. 5 Whether are there any in your Parish that doe impugne the gouern∣ment of the Church of England, vnder the Kings most excellent Maiestie, by Arch-bishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, & the rest that beare office in the same; affirming that ye same is Antichristiā, or repugnāt to ye word of God. 6 VVhether is there any in your Parish, that impugne the forme of consecrating & ordaining of Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, or Deacons: affirming that the same is repugnant to the word of God, or that they, who are so ordered in that same forme, are not lawfully made. 7 VVhether is there any in your parish, that doth hold or frequent any conuenticles or priuate méetings, and there doe confer, to agree vpon anie priuate orders, other then such as are by the canons set foorth by publique authoritie, to be by them, or any others in Church gouernment obserued? 8 VVhether any persons haue lurked or tippled in Tauernes or Ale-houses on Sundayes or other Holidayes, or vsed his or their manuall craft or trade, to keepe their shops open vpon the said dayes, or any of them, and especially in the time of diuine Seruice. 9 VVhether are there any in your Parish that doe or haue prophaned (since his Maiesties last generall pardon) the Lords day, called Sunday, or other Holidaies, contrarie to the orders of the Church of England pre∣scribed in that behalfe. 10 VVhether hath any person in your parish quarrelled, stricken, or vsed any violence vnto, or with your Minister, or any other in the Church, or Church-yard, or vsed himselfe disorderly in the Church by filthy and prophane talke, or any other rude and immodest behauiour. 11 VVhether is that due reuerence & humble submission vsed in your Church or Chappell in the time of diuine Seruice, as by the 8 Constitu∣tion is prescribed: and whether each one in the Church or Chappell do ap∣ply & order himselfe there, in time of diuine Seruice, as by the latter part of the same Constitution is commendably enioyned? 12 VVhether the Church-wardens and Questmen, from time to time, doe their diligence in not suffering any idlepersons or Loiterers to abide
either in the Church-yard or Church-porch in Seruice or Sermon time, but causing them either to come into Church to heare Diuine Seruice, or to depart, and not to disturbe such as are hearers there. 13 VVhether the Church-wardens doe prouide against euery commu∣nion with the aduice of the minister, a sufficient quantitie of fine white bread, and of good and wholesome wine for the number of the Communi∣cants that shall receiue, and that to be brought in a cleane and sweet stan∣ding pot of Pewter, or other pure metall? 14 VVhether haue anie in your Parish béene Godfathers or Godmo∣thers to their owne children? or whether your Minister, or anie Godfa∣thers or Godmothers haue vsed, or doe vse anie other forme, answer, or spéech in Baptisme, then is in the booke of common prayer appointed? Or whether anie which haue not communicated, bee admitted to bee Godmo∣thers, contrary to the 29 canon. 15 Whether is there any in your Parish that doe refuse to haue their children baptized, or themselues to receiue the communion at the hands of your Minister, because he is no Preacher? you shall present their names. And if your Minister, sithence the publishing of the sayd Booke of Canons, haue receiued any such persons (being not of his owne cure) to the com∣munion, or baptized any of their children, you shall likewise present him. 16 VVhether doe all Fathers, Mothers, Masters, and Mistresses, cause their children, seruants, and apprentises, to come to the catechisme vpon the Sundaies and Holy-daies before Euening praier, to heare, and to bee enstructed and taught therein: and those that doe not their duties heerein, you shall present their names. 17 Whether haue you or your predecessors Churchwardens there suf∣fered since the last pardon, any plaies, banquets, feasts, church-ales, drin∣kings, or any other prophane vsages, to be kept in your church, chappell, or church-yards, or bels to be rung superstitiously vpon Holidayes, or eues, abrogated by the booke of common praier, contrary to the 68 canon. 18 How many inhabitants within your parish, men or women, aboue the age of xvi. yéeres, doe refuse to frequent diuine Seruice established by publike authority of this Realme, or to receiue the holy Communion, or are negligent therein: what be their names, and of what degrée, state or trade of life are they? you are to present them all of both sorts. 19 Whether doe any of the inhabitants of your said parish entertaine within their house any soiourners, lodgers, or any common resorters and guests, who refuse to frequent diuine Seruice, or receiue the holy Com∣munion, as aforesayd, what be their names, of what quality or condition are they?
20 Whether are any of the sayd popish Recusants of insolent behaui∣our not without publike offence, or doe boldly busie themselues in sedu∣cing and withdrawing others, either abroad or in their owne families, by enstructing their children in popish religion, or by refusing to entertaine any, especially in place of greatest seruice or trust, but such as concurre with them in opinion of Relgion, and what be their names that so doe? 21 How long the said Popish Recusants haue obstinately abstained ei∣ther from diuine Seruice, or from the Communion, as is aforesayd: whe∣ther of any long time, or onely since his Maiesties raigne, and how long? 22 What persons aforesaid within your Parish, either for the offence aforesayd, or for any other contumacie or crime, doe remaine excommuni∣cated, what be their names, and for what cause, and how long haue they stood excommunicate? 23 Whether were you the Church-wardens & Quest men chosen by the consent of the Minister and Parishioners in Easter wéeke, according vnto the 89 and 90 Canons, and whether haue the Churchwardens before you, giuen vp a iust account for their time, and deliuered to you their suc∣cessors whatsoeuer money, or other things of right belonging to the Church, that was in their hands: according to the 89 canon? 24 Whether doe all persons aboue the age of sixtéene yéeres, vsually resort to heare diuine Seruice vpon Sundayes and Holidayes approued, and whether hath each one of your Parishioners (being aboue the age of sixtéene yéeres, as aforesaid) receiued the holy Communion thrice this last yéere, chiefly once at Easter in your parish Church knéeling? if no, then you shall present their names which haue not so done. 25 Whether haue you a fit parish Clark, aged twenty yéeres at least, of honest conuersation, and sufficient for reading and writing, and whe∣ther hee bee payd his wages without fraud, according to the most ancient custome of your parish; if not then by whom is he so defrauded and denied, and whether he be chosen by the Parson, or Vicar, or by whom, according to the 91 canon? is the Parish Clarke approued by the Ordinary, and doth he kéep the church cleane, and the doores lockt, is he diligent and ser∣uiceable to the minister? 26 Whether haue any in your parish béene married within the prohi∣bited degrées, forbidden by the Law, and expressed in a certaine Table, published by authoritie in the yéere 1563. if yea, then you shall present their names: and whether haue you the sayd Table publikely set in your Church, and fastned to some conuenient place there? 27 Whether doth any heeretofore diuorced, kéepe company with any
other at bed and at boord, as man and wife, what bée their names, when and where they were married, and how long they so continued? 29 Whether haue you any in your Parish to your knowledge, or by common fame and report, which haue committed adulterie, fornication, or incest, or any Bawds, harborers, or receiuers of such persons, or publike¦ly suspected thereof, which haue not béene publikely punished to your knowledge: if yea, then with whom: And whether are there any which are by common fame & report reputed & taken to bee common drunkards, blasphemers of Gods most holy name, common & vsuall swearers, filthy speakers, raylers, sowers of discord among their neighbours; or spea∣kers against Ministers marriages, Vsurers, contrary to the statute made in the 37. yéere of Henry the eight, Symoniacall persons, fighters, braw∣lers, or quarreliers in Church or Church yard? you shall not faile to pre∣sent their names. 29 Whether haue any in your parish receiued or harboured any wo∣man begotten with childe out of wedlocke, and suffered them againe to depart without penance first enflicted vpon them by the Ordinary: You shall truly present as well the party harbouring, as harboured, and who is suspected to haue committed Incontinency with her. 30 Whether any person or persons suspected or detected héeretofore of incontinency, and therefore departing out of your Parish for a season, is now returned againe, or in what place else is hée or shee now abiding to your knowledge, or as you haue heard: you shall not faile to present the whole truth in that behalfe. 31 Whether ther be any person or persons, Ecclesiasticall or Tem∣porall, within your Parish or elsewhere within this Diocesse, that haue retained or kept in their custodie, or that read, sell, vtter disperse, carrie or deliuer to others, any English bookes or libells, set foorth either on this side, or beyond the Seas, by Papists or Sectaries, against the Kings su∣premacie, in causes Ecclesiasticall, or against true Religion and Catho∣like doctrine now publikely professed in this Church, or the Gouernment or Discipline of the Church of England, now within this Realme recei∣ued and established by common Authority, and what their Names and Syrnames are? 32 Whether there be any in your Parish, who are noted, knowne, or suspected to conceale, or kéepe hidden in their houses any Masse-bookes, Portesses, Breuiaries or other bookes of Popery or superstition, or anie Chalices, Copes, Vestments, Albes, or other Ornaments of superstiti∣on, vncancelled or vndefaced, which is to bee coniectured, they doe kéepe for a day; as they call it?
33 Whether any of your Parishioners, hauing a Preacher to their Parson, Vicar, or Curate, or doe absent themselues from his Sermons, and resort to any other place to heare other Preachers. 34 Whether there be any Inkéepers, Ale-wiues Victuallers, or Tip∣lers, that suffer or doe admit any person or persons in their Houses, to Eate, Drinke, or play at Dice, Cards, Tables, Bowles, or such like Games, in the time of common Prayer, or Sermon, on Sundaies or Ho∣lydaies; or any Butchers or others that commonly vse to sell meate, or o∣ther things in the time of common prayer, preaching, or reading of Ho∣milies? And whether in any Faires or common markets falling vpon Sundaies, there be shewing of any wares before morning praier be done? And whether any Markets and selling of wares, be vsed or suffered in any Church yards, on the Saboth day, by common Packe men and Pedlers, going about, or any Butchers? 35 Whether hath your Minister or any of your Parish, without the consent or priuity of the Ordinary, caused any to doe penance, or be puni∣shed, either openly or otherwise, for any crime, punishable by Ecclesiasti∣call Lawes onely: and what bée the Names of the parties that haue béene so punished, and in what manner? 36 Whether there be any in your Parish, who will come to heare the Sermon, but will not come to the publike prayer, appointed by the book of common prayer, making a Schisme or diuision (as it were) between the vse of publike Prayer and Preaching. And whether there be any who be∣ing present at publike prayer, doe not deuoutly and humbly knéele vpon their knées at such times as by the booke of common prayer they are ap∣pointed; to wit, when they make a generall confession of their sins: when all Prayers and Collects are read? and at the receiuing of the Holy Com∣munion, &c. And what are their Names, that haue at any time shewed themselues vndutifull and vnreuerend in that behalfe. 37 Whether there bee any married women or others within your pa∣rish, which after child birth, refuse or contemne to come to the Church, to giue God thanks for their safe deliuery, and to haue their praiers publike∣ly appointed in that behalfe, by the booke of Common Prayer. 38 Whether any within your Parish, doe resort into Barnes, Fields, Woods, priuate houses, or to any extraordinary exposition of Scriptures, or conferences together: or that be drawers, or perswaders of others, to any such schismaticall conuenticle. 39 Whether any doe kéepe their children vnbaptized longer then is conuenient: vnlesse that it be for sicknesse of the childe, or other vrgent occasion? And whether any doe carry their children from the Parish they
are borne in, to other parishes to be baptized, and so refuse their owne parish: or doe bring strange Ministers into their owne houses, to baptize their children priuately, according to their owne Fantasies? 40 Whether you haue knowne or heard any Fidlers or Minstrels, or any other persons, which goe vnder the name of Musitians and Waytes, which either at Weddings, Churchings, or any other Feasts, or méetings, haue sung, or vse to sing any Songs, Ballads, or Rimes, tending to the disgrace of Religion, or the Ministers thereof: or tending to Profanenes, or the corruption of good manners? You shall truely present the names of such, if you know them, or can learne them: As also the names of the Housholder, or Housholders, in whose house or houses they haue sung such songs, as also the particular names of them before whom they haue sung them. 41 VVhether doe the Church-wardens of your parish, looke diligently to the mending of the Church wayes: and whether the said waies bee at the time of the yéere so sufficiently mended, that the Parishioners may conueniently come to Church, from all places of the parish in winter time. 42 Whether doe you know of any other matter, of Ecclesiasticall cog∣nizance, worthy the presentment in your Iudgement, aboue not expressed, which you hold fit to be reformed. And if you doe, you shall likewise pre∣sent the same, by vertue of your Oathes. AT the deliuery of your bill of Presentment, you are likewise in the sayd bill to set downe the names of all such as haue beene buried at any time, since the last Visitation, being Men, Mayds, or Widowes. And likewise the Minister, Church-wardens, and Side-men of euery parish, must in the sayd bill of Presentment, set downe besides their presenting, which they make of all Recusants and Non-communicants, this Note following. Recusants Men— Recusants Women— Non-communicants of both Sex Communicants of both Sex — in the whole Parish. So set downe the number of euery one, The Minister, Church-wardens, and Side-men, must put their hands to this note. And the olde Church-wardens are to be chosen Side-men.
