10617 s115579 99850797 16024
CERTAYNE GODLY EXARCISES MEDITACIONS AND PRAYERS, VERY necessary and profytable for all persons and for all times, set forthe by certayne godly lerned men, to be vsed dayly as you shalbe godly disposed, and shall feele nede thervnto. And also the Letany dayly vsed in Churches annexed to the ende hereof. Ephesians. vi. &. i. Timothe. ii. ¶ Praie alwaies euery where with all maner of praier, and that in the spirite, lifting vp pure hartes and handes, with out wrath or doubtinge. ¶ IMPRINTED. London in Fletestrete at the sygne of the George neere to saincte Dunstons churche by VVyllyam Powell.
¶ Vse often and hartye prayer to God, knowing that it is no lesse necessary for your soule therby to liue and contynue in godlines, then water is for the life of fishe, or dew is for the growth of grasse and herbes: but if you wyll haue youre praier accepted of god, se that you accept his worde. For accursed be they (sayth Sallomon) and their prayer, that wyll not heare the worde of god. If I behold with fauour any wyckednes (saith Da∣uid) in my hart, god will not heare me, for he heareth no such synners as retai∣nethe styll the purpose to continewe it sinne, as hee stoppethe not hys eares to heare the prayers of the pore penitents, but often before they pray he graunteth them their hartes desire. I B.
¶ Occations to meditate & to stirre vp the harte to praier. IN your praiers thinke vpon the remission of sinnes pro∣mysed by and for Chryste, and let there be in your re∣membraunce some most eui¦dente and playne sentence to inflame & stirre vp the mind, as this. Aske and ye shal haue. &c. And verely verely I saye vnto you, what soo euer you shall aske the father in my name, he wyll geue it you. &c. Asking al spiritual gifts with∣out condicion, and all temporall vppon condicion. As Christ did: Father if it be thy wyl let this cuppe passe frō me. &c. God commaundeth vs to aske of him. We breake his commandment in not askynge. We do his cōmaundement in asking of hym. He promiseth to vs our askinge. He is debtour to vs tyll he fulfill our askinge. We make god a liar if we mistrust to obteine our askynge. He is glorified in his sonne by giuing
vs our askynge. He longeth to haue vs aske of him, & loketh for it at our handes. If we therfore turne not oure eares from his lawe, but call vpon him wyth a stronge Faythe, he will moste gladly geue vs our askynge. Because we are necligent in askinge he doth of his fatherly goodnesse by ne∣cessities and troubles, dryue & prouoke vs to aske of hym. And because we are ignoraunt in as∣kinge, he teacheth vs by his holy spirite sent into our hartes, and by the prayer that therfore is called the lordes praier how & what we shulde aske of him. Let vs therefore in our necessitie and troubles, aske of god our father and he for his sonnes sake will geue vs our as∣kinge, whose very nature and propertie is to relieue suche as are in necessitie, and in deede our necessities are as lowde cryinges in his merciful eares.
A meditation vpon the Lordes prayer. QVr father which art in heauen. We gloriousely formed vnto the Image of thy deuine maiestie, created by thy gracyouse good∣nesse vnto highest honour, how be it by our own sinfulnes diffigured with vile∣nes deseruinge dampnation, and yet by Christes death redemed and restored vn∣to grace to be Citizens with sainctes of the family of God: Nowe altogether in Christian vnitie as members of one bo∣dy, we pray, desyre, and trust to obtayne of thee our heauenly father, accordinge vnto thy gracious goodnes mighty pow¦er, and faithefull promise, vnto vs that aske, aboundaunce of thy grace. That, thy name may be halowed. That thy diuine power, and glorious maiesty, may be certainely knowne and reuerently honoured. That the hartes of vs men by thy word and prayer maye
be sanctified from all sinne and vanity, so that we with al that we haue seruing thee in holinesse & righteousenesse, may so shine afore men vpon earth, that they therby may be occasion to honoure thee our father which art in heauen. Thy kyngdome come. Thy worde be so fruitfully preached amongest vs thy peple, that we may be throughly instructed & taught to brydle our sensual apetites by natural reason, and to submit our wyttes & reasons vn∣to a good godly spirite, and to trye our spirites by the true scriptures. So that within vs may raigne the kingdome of God, which is neither meate nor drink whiche is neither supersticious ceremo∣nies, voluptuous pleasures, nor vayne glory, but righteousnes, peace, & com∣forte in the holy ghost, by the which we now tasting of thy heauenly ioyes, may be made frō henceforth wery of al world¦ly vanities, continually loking & pray∣inge for the apperance and comming of thy eternall and euerlasting kyngdom.
Thy wyll be done in earth, as it is in heauen. In heauen the angelles of reuerente loue do thy will and commaundement, with comfortable courage & ioyful plea¦sure. In hel the wicked spirits through malice and enuye, repininge and grud∣ging, do torment and vexe them selues, what so euer they be doinge. And vpon earth, men being subiect vnto sinne, do thinke it a labour and paine, to be occu¦pied in any thing that is good and god∣ly. Wherfore we pray that the grace of thy heauenly spirite, maye so worke in our earthly bodies, that we being dely∣uered from sinne and vanitie, may frely delite and take pleasure to do thye wyll and commaundement, being men vpon earth, as thy glorious aungels do whi∣che be in heauen. Geue vs this day our dayly breade. We hauinge great nede, not hable of our selues to deserue any thing, beseche the of thy fatherly goodnes, to geue fre∣ly vnto all vs in general: So that none be hurt nor hindered seuerally this day
when as we crye constrained by present nede, not craftely crauing for vayn care against to morow, our dayly bread, our daily and necessarie foode & reliefe, both bodely and ghostly. And especially so: that the spiritual foode of Christes flesh and his bloud, by dayely preachinge of the gospell, and ministracion of the sa∣cramentes, maye replenishe our hartes & mindes with continual remembrance of Christes deathe, and his passion, day¦ly to be vsed for necessary and spirituall consolation. Forgeue vs oure trespasses, as we forgeue them that trespas against vs. Geue vnto vs that feling and know∣ing oure owne synfulnesse, do nede, and desire thy mercifull forgeuenes of oure fautes & trespasses, which we haue com∣mitted against thee, so that we frely for∣geuing all other, that haue offended vs in any thyng what so euer it be, may be sure that mercy springyng in thee hathe proceded vnto vs, and being graciousely offred of thee, hath ben thankefully re∣ceaued of vs, and beinge charitably vsed of vs towardes other, shal most certain∣ly
be confirmed and enlarged of thee to∣ward vs: So that by free mercy spryn∣ging and proceding from thee, al fautes maye be freely forgeuen: euen as those which other hath committed against vs, so likewise those whych we haue done a gainst thee. And leade vs not into temptation. Suffer not the deuyll by the abuse of thy benefites, to leade vs captyues into deceitefull and dampnable temptation, drawing vs by deinty meates, vnto gre∣dy glotony, by money and richesse, vnto vnsaciable couetousenes, and by wealth and prosperity, vnto pryde & vayne glo∣ry, and by al thy godly gracious giftes, vnto euery dyuelishe abominable sinne. But deliuer vs from euill. Deliuer our goodes from abuse, our bodies from corruption, our soules from damnation. Deliuer vs by Christ Iesu, from the bondage of sinne, vnto the ly∣bertye of the Gospell, so that from all daunger of diuelishe temptation, tray∣ning and enticing men toward damna∣tion, we maye be deliuered to serue thee
in holinesse and ryghteousenesse all the daies of our life, with most certaine and sure hope of euerlasting saluation, tho∣row Christ Iesu, in whom our hope and thy promise is moste certaine, that is to say. Amen. Your time is short, your daungers be great: you are well warned by Goddes worde written. Mar. xiij. Take hede, watche, and praye. Take hede, that your hartes and min∣des be not made heauy, hard, and dull, with meates and drink, vaine plesures, or worldly cares. Watch, with dyllygence to doe youre owne dewties, in desyrous lokynge for Chrystes comming. Praye, that ye may escape all daun∣gers, and stande in grace and fauoure afore the face of Christ, at his comminge. T. Leuer. APOCAL. XXII. Beholde I come sone.
¶ A prayer to be sayde in the mornynge. O Almighty and moste gracyous God, we hartely thancke thee for the swete slepe & comforta∣ble rest whiche thou hast geuen vs this nighte, and for as muche as thou haste commaunded by thy holy worde that no man shoulde be idle, but all occupied in godly and vertuous exercises, euery mā according to his calling, we most hum∣bly beseche thee that thine eies may at∣tende vpon vs, dayely defende vs, che∣rishe, comforte, and gouerne vs, and al our counsayles studies and labours, in suche wise, that we maye spend and be∣stowe this day accordynge to thy moste holy wyll, without the hurtynge of our neighbours, and that we may diligent∣lye and warely eschewe and auoyde all thinges that shoulde displease thee, set thee alwaies before our eies, liue in thy feare, workyng that may be founde acceptable before thy diuyne maiestie, through Iesus Christ our lord. So be it.
¶ A Confession of our synnes. O Mercifull and most louing fa∣ther, whose Loue is infinite, whose mercye endureth for e∣uer, we sinfull creatures tru∣stinge in thine vnspeakeable goodnes & loue towardes vs, do appere this mor∣nynge before thy dyuyne maiestie, most humbly confessing our manifold sinnes and innumerable transgressions of thy commaundementes and fatherly wyll: against thee only, against thee O lord, haue we synned. we acknowledge oure offences, we accuse our selues vnto the O mercifull lord, and wyl not hyde our vnrighteousnesse, we fynde in our sel∣ues nothinge but ingnoraunce of thye wyll and disobedience, mistrust, doub∣fulnes in thy goodnes and incredulitie, hatred & contempt of all spirituall thin∣ges, selfe loue, confidence in our selues, and feruent lustinge after carnall thin∣ges of this worlde: and this tree of our corrupt nature, bryngeth forth continu¦ally in vs, none other fruictes, but rot∣ten and vnsauery workes of the fleshe, in thoughtes wordes and doinges vnto
condempnation. Wherfore we humbly beseche thy fatherly goodnes, euen for thy sonne Iesus Christes sake (whome thou hast set forth for a purchaser of mer¦cye vnto vs through fayth in hys bloud) make our hartes cleane, take away our stony hartes, and geue vnto vs a true & a liuely fayth, whych shal worcke con∣tinually by loue throughe Christ, haue mercy vppon vs, forgeue vs our sinnes for thy sonnes sake, certifye our consci∣ences of remission of the same by thy ho¦ly spirite, by whose operation so morti∣fye in vs, our olde man, the whole body of sinne, that we continually dyeng vn¦to sinne, may walke in newnesse of life to the glory of thy holy name, through Iesus Christ our Sauiour. Amen.
¶ Before thou prayest, beleue that god is not onely almighty to helpe and to de¦lyuer thee: but also that he is gracious and faythefull to fulfill all his promises made vnto vs. Then forgeue if thou hast any thing against any man, And remember that thou com¦mest not to god with a dou∣ble harte, but lyfte vp pure handes with oute wrathe or doubtinge. O Almighty eternal & euer∣liuing god.1. 2. Corin. 1. and. 2.1. the eternal father of our Lorde Iesus Chryst whych haste made 2. heauen and yearthe,2. Ictes. 4. the sea, and al that therin is, and of thy great goodnes, didst open thy selfe from heauen, & madest proclamatiō of Iesus christ, saieng. 3 this is my deare sonne heare him,3. Matth. 3. thou maker of al thin∣ges, preseruer & helper,4. Philip. 2. Ebre. 1. with thy. 4. coe∣ternal sonne our lord Iesus Christ raig∣nyng with thee, and manifested in Ieru¦salem, and thy holy ghost poured on the apostles, O most wise, good, mercifull,
righteous iudge, and also strong, which hast sayde by thy prophet.5. Ezechi. 18.5. I will not the death of a sinner, but that he cōuert and liue: I thy pore creature and worke of thy handes, do acknowledge and con∣fesse vnto thee my manifold synnes and offences, which I from my youth vp vn¦to this time, haue greuously committed against thee, in thought, worde, & dede, & am now taught & moued by thy word & grace, to be hartely sory for the same, desiring thee (which hast sayd.6. Psal. 50.6. call v∣pon me in the day of thy trouble, and I wyll heare thee, and delyuer thee) for the precious bloudde sheading of Iesus Christ thy sonnes sake our lord, whom thou wouldest to be made a slaine.7. Eb. 9..107. sa∣crifice for our sinnes, to haue mercy vp∣pon mee, and forgeue me all those myne offences according to thy great mercy & promise, whych haste sayde.8. Eze. 18.8. at what time so euer a sinner doth repent him of his sinne from the bottom of his hart, I will put al his wickednes out of my re∣membraunce. O lorde I acknowledge and confesse that I was borne in sinne,9. Psal. 51. Ephe. 2. Rom. 7. and. 9. conceiued in wickednes, and am by nature a. 9. childe of wrath, for that
in my. 9. fleshe (as saincte Paule saith) dwelleth no good thing, and that of my selfe I am not able to think a good. 10. thought that can please thee,10.2. Corin. 3. much lesse to wishe, and least of al to doe that thou in thy lawe requireste of me to be done, for.11. Gala. 3. Rom. 7.11. thou hast saide, cursed is he that continuethe not in all thynges that are written in the lawe to do them: againe, thy lawe is. 11. spiritual, but I am car∣nall, solde vnder sinne: therfore o lorde I call vnto thee for grace (whyche haste saide.12. Math. 7.12. aske and ye shall haue, seeke & ye shall finde, knocke, and it shalbe ope∣ned vnto you) to preuent and drawe my will to all goodnes, (for none can come to thee,13. Iho. 3..6 except he be drawne. 13. againe excepte we be borne from aboue we can¦not see the kingdome of god) assiste ther¦fore and gyde me also with thy holy spi∣rite from time to time, drawe me there fore and I shall runne after thee, & geue me strength and ablenes through christe our lorde to accomplyshe and fulfill the same,Canti. 1. lorde make me to become poore in spirite, vile and lowe in my owne sight, that I lift not vp my self aboue my bre∣therne,Ihon. 1. but that I esteme my selfe to be
as a seruaunt to al men to do thē good, after the example of christe, which came not to be ministred vnto but to minister, for he hathe sayde.14. Math 5. Iames. 4.14. Blessed are the pore in spirite: againe, thou resistest the 14. proud, but geuest grace to the hum∣ble, geue mee therefore thy grace, that when so euer I be ouer taken wyth any kinde of synne and wickednes eyther in thought, word, or dede, or that I fele my owne infirmitie or weakenesse, I maye immediatly with harty repentaunce.15. 2. Timo. 215 (which is also thy gyfte) returne to thee againe, and not to lie stil in the security of sin. Take from me my stony, vnbe∣leuing, blynd, doubtfull, vnfaithfull, & vnthankeful hart, and. 16. repose in me an hart of fleshe, to bowe and encline to thy wil: my carnall, idle, secure, & impe∣nitent hart, take away from me, & geue me an hart to feare thee, to loue thee, to truste in thee for euer, write thy lawe in my harte, graue it in my mynde, that I may beleue, trust, and liue in thee sor e∣uere. Deliuer me frō the spirite of pryde and vaine glory, all hautines of minde, presumption, selfe loue, and selfe trust, that I stand not to hye in my owne con∣ceyt,
but that I may be willing rather to learne then to teach. Lake from me that wicked spirite of suspicion and en∣uy, euil gelousy, vaine surmisings, mur¦muring, and grudging, whispering, or backbiting of any, especially such as be in auctority, and ministers of thy word. O lord kepe me from al wrath, malice, and hastynesse, all respecte of personnes in the faith, all lying, euill wordes, con∣tention, flatteryng, dissimulation, I po∣tresy, blasphemy, and vaine swering by yt name of god, his works, or creatures, from all lightnes, idle wordes, and all vnstablenes of hart. O lord deliuer thou my hart from all filthynesse both of the flesh and spirite, as heresy, and errours, from al vncleane thoughtes and vnlau∣full desires, euil concupisence and lustes of the body. Lake frō me also couetous∣nes and mordinate care of riches, all de∣ceit and guile in my callinge and office, all idlenes and slouth, and geue me not ouer vnto an vnshamefast and obstinate mende. Make me able and contented to beare occasions with pactence whē they be offred or geuen me, and not to recom¦pence euyll for euyll, neyther to swell,
nor to murmure, nor to be solemne, nor angry. Good lord make me very loth to geue occasions of euil to any man, & if I chaunce to geue any, make me willyng to cōfesse my fault & to amēd it. Graunt me grace yt I may be wylling and fre to geue, but loth to take & receaue, because it is more blessed to geue thē to receiue. Geue me thy grace that I neuer enuye any good mans loue or womās, because they do either loue god & his peple more thē I, or els that they be beloued of him or his more thē I. make me to reioice in other mens gyftes, & not to enuy them, because they be better then mine, but ra¦ther to geue thankes for thē with al my hart, desiring yt they may be incresed in thē & in me. Oh lord take fro me a care∣ful hart in al worldly thinges, & graunt ye neyther pouerty opresse me & driue me to dispatre or falsehod, nether riches lift me vp to forget thee or my self, but that in prosperitie I may be thankefull, & in aduersitie pacient & humble. Lord make me mery without lightnes, sad without mistruste, sober wythoute dulnes, true withoute doublenes, fearing thee, with out desperation, trusting in the without
presumption: geue me also the spirite of humblenes, simplicitie, mekenes, gen∣tlenes, goodnes, faithfulues, and truth, Braunt me O god the bowels of mercy and louing kindnes toward my brethe∣ren, longe suffering & pacience to beare al things well that thy prouidēce shal se metee to lave vpon mee, regenerate my hart with the spirit of grace dayly more and more, geue me an inward taste and feling of thy fauoure & mercy towardes me in Christ Iesu our lorde, that I may know thee to be my god and father, and my selfe to be thy chylde for euer more. Lorde merease this my faith in thee and in christ thy sonne my redemer, encrease and confyrine my hope in thy promyses touchinge my saluation. Oh god make perfecte my loue toward thee and to my reademer and iustifier, geue me a trewe and vnfamed loue to al vertue & godli∣nes, and to all thy chosen people where so euer they be dispersed throughout all the worlde, encrease in me strength and victory against all temptations and as∣saultes of the fleshe, the worlde, and the deuill,18. 1. corin. 1 that accordinge to thy promise I be neuer further proued or tempted then
thou wilt geue me strēgth to ouercome. Geue me grace to kepe a good cōsciēce, geue me a pure hart and minde, and re∣nue a right spirite within me, geue me also the true vnderstandinge of thy holy worde, that I maye neuer swarue from the true sense and meaning thereof, and yt my chefe felicitie may be in the same, in hearing, reading, talking, watching praying, fasting, mortifyinge, and sub∣duinge mine owne wyll and membres. O gracious lord Iesus Christ, sonne of the liuing god, which wast. 16. crucified and raysed againe for vs,10. Act. 2. &. 3 20. Act. 2. &. 7 21. Psal. 68. Ephe. 4.22. 1. Timo. 2 1. Ihon. 2 which now sit test and raignest on. 20. the right hande of the father that thou mayste. 21. gyue giftes vnto men, and art apointed to be the onely. 22. mediatoure and aduocate for vs vnto god, haue mercy vpon me, & praye for me to thy eternall father, and sanctify me with thy holy ghost, as thou hast promised sayinge, I will not leaue you. 23. comfortlesse, but will sende you the spiryte of truthe whyche shall abyde with you for euer.23. Ihon. 14. Kindle my mind and hart with thy holye spirite, that I maye truely beleue in thee, acknowledge and call vpon thee, geue thankes and obeye
thee, for I feele my selfe so clothed and cloyed with infirmities and synne, that I know not what to do, but euen to of∣fer vp my selfe wholy wyth all my cro∣ked and corrupte nature, so muche as it is in wyll and workes, vnto thy mercy to be corrected & refourmed at thy owne wil and pleasure. Most mighty god and father, through our lorde Iesus Chryste thy eternal sonne, with thy holy spirite, gouerne and kepe thy holye catholyke & apostolike church, & euery mēber of the same, as thou hast promised saying, this is.24. Esai. 56.24. my couenaut with thē, my spirite which is in thee, and my word which I haue put in thy mouthe, shal not depart frō the mouth of thy sede for euer, ligh∣ten vs alwayes with thy gospell, rule & cōfirme our harts with thy spirite, least the Ipocrisy & superstition of papistes, & other heretikes, or ye erroures & wicked life of Epicures & Lybertynes, cause vs to fal. Gouerne therfore yt studies of thy church, & defend the policies of those re∣almes & cities which geue harborough to thy people,25. Sacha. 12.25. powre vppon vs the spirite of grace and prayer, make vs di∣ligente and happy in the workes of our
vocation, take into thy custody for euer our soules and bodies, our liues, and al that euer we haue. Be gracious and fa∣uourable (O lord) to all Iewes, Turks, Infidels, heretikes, and euen oure very enemies, and according to thy good wil and purpose forgeue them their sinnes. Conuert vnto thy truth all those whom thou haste apoynted in Iesus Chryste to saluation. Be merciful also (O lord) to all our bretherne and sisterne that suffer anye kynde of persecutyon or affliction, whether in mynde or in body, especially such as suffer for thy name and gospell, geue them pacience, constancy, and sted∣faste hope till thou sende theym full and good deliueraunce of all their troubles. Be gracious to al those whom thou hast coupled and linked to vs in loue & frend shippe, whose hartes thou hast moued to praye for vs, to wysshe vs good, to suc∣coure and helpe vs in oure necessytyes, graunt vs all thy blessing and holy spy∣rite, to sanctify vs in the vnity of fayth, and dwel in vs for euer. Finally oh lord haue mercy vpon my wife, children, and famely, which thou hast geuen me, and encrease thy feare in our hartes that we
maye truely loue thee, and one of vs an other in thee, so that we maye be pure both in soule and body, and bryng them vp in vertue, nurture, and information of the lord. Plant and sowe in my harte all vertues that be necessary and requi∣red in a christiā man, namely wisdome, discretion, tēperance, pacience, strēgth, and boldenes, and geue me grace so to vse them and all other giftes whyche I haue receaued at thy mercifull hand, as may be most to thy glory and praise, to my consolatyon & saluation, and to the profyte of thy Churche.26. Esai. 64. which peticions and requestes I do not make (O Lorde) trustinge in myne owne ryghteousnesse (which I do acknowledge with thy pro∣phet to. 29. be stayned & defiled) no but onely in thy great mercye and promise. O heare me lord, forgeue me lorde, con¦sider me, and tary not ouer long, but for thy owne sake doe it, and for thy sonne Iesus Chrystes sake (in whome all thy promyses are, yea and amen) whych is our onely reademer, sauiour, and Iusti∣fier, to whom with thee o father and the holy ghost be al glory & prayse now and for euer. Amen. Lord let it be so. Robart Coles FINIS.
A morninge prayer. WE humbly and hartely geue thākes to thee (O merciful father) in and by thy derely beloneb sonne Iesus Christ our only sauiour, that to thy innumerable benefites hitherto powred vpon our soules and vpon oure bodies, thou hast vouchedsafe to kepe vs al this night past, from many euils, spiritually and corporally, and nowe of thy mercye doest offer and geue vs time to repente, & to amend our liues, so that we might lyue hence forth not as we will, but as thou wilte: and as our bodies do drawe cōtinually nearer and nearer their end, (ye graue I meane) so our soules myght aproche to theyr ende, that is, heauen & not hel (For in one state we stande not styll, but eyther we are nearer & nearer ye happy state of life, or els ye infortunat or vnhappy condicion of death eternall) Therefore we besech the to be merciful vnto vs good father, that is wee praye thee, as of thy goodnes thou geueste vs time to repente & to liue godly, so of the same thy goodnes in christ, we humbly
besech and pray thee to geue vs thy gra∣cious gift of true, holy, perfect and per∣perpetuall repentaunce, that we maye more and more lamente our former sin∣full life, trusting vnfainedly in thy rych mercye, throughe the merytes of Iesus Christ, for the pardone of al onr sinnes, and that we maye vnfainedly purpose & effectually labour to amende our liues this day and so long as we haue to liue, in al our doinges and wordes, and euen in oure very thoughtes, to the praise of thy holye name, & good example of our neyghboures and bretherne. And for as much as thou knowest our weakenesse, our ignoraunce, & great vntowardnesse to cary any geeat crosse or affliction, we besech thee oure swete father, so to tem∣per and order all thynges towardes vs this day and for euer, that we be ne∣uer further proued and tempted, then thou wilt so helpe vs in the same, as may be most to thy glory and our saluation, tho∣rough Iesus Chryste our lorde. Amen. R. Coles.
¶ An Euening praier. MOste mercyful God and ten¦der Father, whiche besides thyne inestimable mercyes declared & geuen vnto vs in the making of the world for our sakes, in redemynge of vs by the deathe of thy dere sonne Iesus Christe, in the callynge of vs to the knowledge of thy blessed worde, in keping of vs hi∣therto in thy holy Catholike churche, & in the moste gracious gouerninge of vs and all thinges hitherto for our mooste weale, hast also most fatherly cared for vs, and kept vs this daye from all dan∣gers bothe of soule and body, geuing vs bealth, foode, apparell, & al other thin∣ges necessary for the comforte & succour of this poore & miserable lif, which ma∣ny other do want: for these and al other thy good giftes and gracious benefites, which thou of thine owne goodnes one∣ly, & fatherly prouydence, for Christes sake hast hitherto powred vppon vs, & doest presently powre vpon vs, and ma∣ny other, wee most humbly thanke thee & prayse thy holy name, beseching thee
euen for the same thy Christ, to pardon our vnthanckefulnes, our neglectynge and abusing of those thy benefites, and all our sinnes whiche this daye or any tyme heretofore we haue commytted a∣gainste thy holy commaundementes. And as nowe we purpose to lay our bo∣dyes to rest, so graunte the garde of thy good Aungelles to keepe the same this night and for euer. And where or when so euer our last slepe of death shal come, graunte that it may be in thee, good fa∣ther, so that our bodies may reste bothe temporally and eternally, to thy glory and our ioye, through Iesus Christ our Lorde. So be it. R.C. ¶ Certaine exercises to meditate, very profitable to euery Christian. WAtche and Pray,Part. 4. that ye en∣ter not into temptation. &c. For the deuyll your aduer∣sary goeth about lyke a roa¦ryng lion, seking whō he may deuoure. Committe thy selfe, and all thye do∣inges vnto god, with feruent and faith∣full praier: and then doubte nothing at
all of the good and profitable successe of the same. Pray before thou comest into any cō∣pany, that thou geue no offēce in worde or dede, but rather mayst geue good ex∣aumple to edyfie. Pray also that thou mayst marke wel and immitate that whiche is well done and spoken, and that thou maist forget and flie from that whiche is euyll doone or spoken of any one where thou shalte come. Pray when thou art come alone from company, with any that god wyl make them to forgette the euyll example thou hast geuen in worde or dede. In euery prayer begge of god the spy∣rite of grace and prayer,zacha. 12. that thou maist haue delight in praier and talking with God, aske (I say) continually his holy spirite with encrease of Faith & Hope. In euery benefite behold goddes grace and stay not the considering of the same tyll thou comest to the oryginall & rote, that is the grace of god in Christ, before the worlde was made: so shal euery be∣nefite confirme thy Faith. Speake, thinke, and do al thinges as
in the sight of god, and as vnto god. Of all thy thoughtes,Eccle. 7. woordes, and dedes, consider the ende: and thou shalt neuer do amisse. Trust in god whē thou felest no cause in thy selfe: for that is ye gretest honour thou canst geue vnto him, and a sure to∣ken that thou arte his Chylde for euer. When thou beholdest any of the wor∣kes of god, beware thou do it not to cō∣prehende him, for so thou loosest thy la∣bour: but loke vpon theym, to beholde him to be a God of might and power, in the diuersitie of theym to be exceadynge wise, by the multitude of theym, to be good and gracious, whiche hath so done them that they ought to be had in remē∣braunce of vs: And when thou hast this profite by them, then be thou thanckful to god who hath geuen it thee. The more sure we are of our saluatiō & that we be the children of god, the tem¦ples of the holy ghost, & the inherytours of heauen, the more we cannot but loue & long for the dissolutions of our bodies. Vse therfore to beg of god by continual praicr his spirite to cōfirme you in this certen perswasion that god loueth you.
In the lawe behold god to be thy god, to be holy, to be iust, and seuere against synne: and thy selfe vnholy, vniust, and full of contumacie, & therfore not mete, nor worthy, to be where god is: but to be reiected frō him, and worthy damp∣nation, & therfore feare him & sinne not. In the gospell beholde god to be thye father, to loue the euerlastingely, to for geue thee all thy synnes, to geue thee e∣ternall saluation through his sonne Ie∣sus Christe, who hath ouercome sinne, death, and hell, for thee, & hath brought lyfe & ymmortalitie vnto light: & ther∣fore loue him as a son, loue hym, for he loued thee fyrst, loue hym (I say) in and for his Christ, loue his Christ, loue him euer: Onely beleue in him, forget not to be thanckefull to hym, for that he is thy god, and thy father, for his loue, for his Christ, for thy saluation, for the for∣giuenesse of thy synnes, for thy delyue∣raunce from dispaire, for the sure certi∣ficate of thyne election, for the delyue∣raunce from errour into his truthe, for calling the into this grace wherin thou standest: and therfore reioyce in hope of the glory of God. R. Coles
A Complaynt of the Tiranny vsed against the sainctes of god, contey∣ning a confession of our sinnes, & a praier for the deliuerance and preseruation of the Church, and confu∣sion of the ene∣myes. ** ETernall and euerlyuinge god, father of our lord Ie∣sus Christ, who hast com∣maunded vs to praye, and promised to heare vs, euē when we do call from the pyt of desperation: the miseries of these our moste wycked dayes compell vs, to poure forth before thee, the complaintes of our wretched hartes, oppressed wyth sorrowe. Our eyes do beholde, and our eares do heare the calamities and opres∣sions whiche no tongue canne expresse, neyther yet (alas) doo oure dull hartes rightly consider the same. For the Hea∣then are entred into thine inherytance, they haue poluted thy sanctuarye, pro∣phaned and abolished thy blessed insty∣tutions, moste cruelly murthered, and
dayly doe murther thy deare children. Thou hast exalted the arme and force of our enemies, thou hast set vs forth as a praye, to ignomy and shame, before such as persecute thy truth. Their wayes do prosper, they glory in mischefe, & speake prowdely agaynste the honoure of thy name. Thou goest not forth as a captaine be∣fore our hostes. The edge of our sword, which somtime was most sharp, is now blunt, and doth returne without victo∣rye in battaile. It apereth to our ennemies (O lorde) that thou hast broken that league, whi∣che of mercie & goodnes, thou hast made with thy churche. For the libertie whi∣che they haue to kil thi childrē like shepe and to shed their bloudde, no man resi∣stinge, doth soo blynde and puffe theim with pride, that they ar not ashamed to affirme, that thou regardest not our in∣treatinge. Thy longe suffering and pa¦cience maketh them hold from crueltie, to procede to ye blasphemy of thy name. And in this meane season (alas) we do not consider the heauines of our sin∣nes, which longe haue deserued at thye
handes, not onely these temporall pla∣gues: but also the tormentes prepared for the inobediēt. For we knowing thy blessed will, haue not applyed our dily∣gence to obey the same, but haue folo∣wed for the most parte, the vaine con∣uersation of the blind world: and ther∣fore in very iustice hast thou visited our vnthanckfulnesse. But O lorde if thou shalt obserue and kepe in mind for euer the iniquities of thy children, then shal no fleshe abide, nor be saued in thy pre∣sence. And therfore cōuicted in our own consciences, that most iustly we suffer, as punished by thy hande, do neuerthe∣lesse cal for mercy, according to thy pro¦mes. And first we desire to be corrected, with the rod of thy children, by the whi¦che we maye be brought to a perfect ha∣tred of synne, and of our selues: & ther¦fore that it would please thee, for Christ Iesus thy sonnes sake, to shewe to us & thy whole church vniuersally persecuted the same fauoure and grace, that some times thou diddest, whē the chiefe mem¦bers of the same, for anguish and feare, were compelled to cry: why haue nati∣ons raged? why hathe the people made
vprores? and why haue princes & kings coniured against thyne anointed, Christ Iesus? Then diddest thou wonderfully assiste and preserue thy smale and disper¦sed flock: then diddest thou burste vp the barres, and gates of yron: then dyddest thou shake the foundations of stronge prysons: then dyddeste thou plague the cruell persecutours: & then gauest thou some tranquilitie and rest after those ra∣gyng stormes and cruell afflictions. O Lord, thou remainest one for euer: we haue offended, and are vnworthy of any deliueraunce, but worthy art thou to be a true and constant god, and wor∣thy is thy deare sonne Christ Iesus, that thou shouldest glorify his name, and re∣ueng the blasphemy spoken against the truth of his gospell, which is by our ad∣uersaries damned as a doctrine deceiua∣ble & false: yea, the bloude of thy sonne is troden vnder fete, in that the bloud of his members is shedde for wytnessyngs of thy truth. And therefore, O lorde, beholde not the vnworthines of vs, that call for the redresse of these enormities, neither let our imperfections stoppe thy mercies from vs, but beholde the face of
thyne annointed Christe Iesus, and let the equitie of oure cause preuayle in thy presence. Let the bloudde of thy sainctes which is shed, be openly reuenged in the eyes of thy Churche: that mortall men may know the vanity of their counsels, and that thy children may haue a tast of thine eternal goodnesse. And seing that from that man of sinne, that Romayne Antechriste, the chyefe aduersary of thy deare sonne, do the all iniquitie springe, and myschyefe procede: let it please thy fatherly mercy, more and more to reuele his deceit and tiranny to the worlde: o∣pen the eies of princes and magistrates, that clearely they may see, how shame∣fullye they haue bene, and are abused by his deceiuable wayes, how by him they are compelled most cruelly to shede the bloud of thy sainctes, and by violēce re∣fuse thine eternall testament: that they in depe consideration of their greuous offences, maye vnfaynedly lament their horrible defectiō from Christ Iesus thy sonne, from henceforth studieng to pro∣mote his glorye in the dominions com∣mitted to their charges, that so yet once againe the glory of thy gospell may ap∣pears
to the worlde. And seing also that the chiefe strength of that odious beaste consisteth in defension of princes: let it please thee, O father, whiche hast clay∣med to thy selfe to be called the God of peace, to vnite and knyt in perfect loue, the hartes of all those that looke for the life euerlastinge. Let no craft of sathan moue them to warre one againste an o∣ther, neither yet to mainteine by their force and strengthe, that kingedome of darkenesse, but rather that godly they may conspire (illuminated by thy word) to roote out from amongest them, al su∣persticion with the maynteyners of the same. These thy graces, O lord, we vnfai∣nedly desyre to be powred forth vppon all realmes and nations, that they may be firmly vnited and godly knitte toge∣ther in the vnitie of thy worde: that in their godly concorde, thy name maye be glorified, and thy dispersed flocke com∣forted and relieued. The cōmon wealthes, O lord, where thy gospell is truely preached, and har∣borowe graunted to the afflicted mem∣bers of Christes body, and specially ac∣cordinge
to our bounden duetie this out countrey of Englande, we commend to thy protection and mercy. Be thou vn∣to them a defence & buckler: be a watch man to their walles, & a perpetual saue garde to their cities, that the crafty as∣saultes of their ennemies repulsed by thy power, thy gospell maye haue free passage from one nation to an other: & let al preachers & ministers of the same haue the giftes of thy holy spirite, in su∣che aboundance, as thy godly wisedome shal know to be expedient for the perfect instruction of that flocke, whiche thou hast redemed with the preciouse bloud of thy onely and welbeloued sonne Iesus Christ. Purge their hartes from al kind of superstition, from ambicion & vaine∣glory, by whiche sathan continually la∣boureth to stirre vp vngodly contēcion, and let them so consente in the vnitie of thy truthe, that neither the estimation whiche they haue of men, neyther the vaine opinions, whiche they haue con∣ceyued by their writinges, preuaile in them, against the cleare vnderstandyng of thy blessed worde. And nowe last, O lorde, we most hū∣bly
beseche thee, according to that prai∣er of thy dere sonne our lord Iesus, so to sanctifie and confirme vs in thy eternal veritie, that neither the loue of life tem∣porall, neither yet the feare of tormen∣tes and corporall death, cause vs to de∣nie the same, when the confession of our faith shal be required of vs: but so assist vs with the power of thye holy spyrite, that not onely boldely we may confesse thee (O father of mercies) to be the true god alone, and whō thou haste sent our lord Iesus to be the only sauiour of the world: but also that constantly we may withstande all doctrine, repugninge to thy eternall truthe, reueiled to vs in thy most blessed worde. Remoue from our hartes, the blynde loue of our selues, and so rule thou all the actions of our life, that in vs thye godly name may be glorified, thy chur∣che edified, and sathan finally confoun∣ded by the power & meanes of our lorde Iesus Christe: to whom with thee, and the holy spirite, be all glory and prayse before thy congregations, nowe and e∣uer. So be it. Arise, O lord, and let thine ennemies
be ashamed: let them flee from thy pre∣sence, that hate thy godly name: let the grones of thy prisoners enter in before thee, and preserue by thy power, suche as be appointed to death: let not thyne enemies thus triumphe to the ende: but let them vnderstande, that against thee they fight: preserue and defend the vine, whiche thy righte hande hath planted: & let all nations see the glory of thine an∣noynted. Hasten lord and tary not. A praier against the obstinate enemies of the truth. MOste righteous iudge, god of all mercy and comforte, whiche by thy secrete iudg∣mente and wisedome, doest suffer the wicked to triumph and increase for a tyme, for triall of the faith of thy welbeloued little flocke, and the mortifyinge of theyr lustes, but at length to the vtter confusion of the ene∣mies, & ioyfull delineraunce of thy peo∣ple: loke doune we beseche thee on thy
dispersed shepe, out of thy holy habitati∣on in heuen, and strengthen our weake∣nes againste their furyous rages, abate their pryde, asswage their malyce, con∣found their deuises, wherwith they lifte vp them selues against christ Iesus thy sonne our Lord and Sauiour, to deface his glory and set vp Antechrist. We be not able of oure selues to thynke a good thought, much lesse to stād against their assaultes, excepte thy vndeserued grace and mighty arme defend and deliuer vs. Performe thy promises made to Iacob, and stoppe the mouthes of the cursed E∣domites, call them to repentance whom thou hast apointed to saluation: bringe home them that runne astraye, lyghten the blind, and teach the ignoraunt: for∣geue al those that wilfully & obstinately rebell not against thy holy will, let thy fearefull threatninges pearce our stony hartes, & make vs tremble at thy iudge∣mentes. Make the exaumples of theim whom thou haste ouerthrowne in their owne deuises, as Cayn, Cham, Nim∣rod, Esau, Pharao, Saule, Achitophel, Iudas, & such other to be a warning for vs, that we set not vp our selues against
thy holy wil: graunt free passage to thy holy word, that it may worke effectual∣ly in vs the worcke of life & blessed hope of our saluation, to the eternal praise of thy maiestye, throughe our mediatoure Christ Iesus, to whom wyth the father and the holy ghost thre persons and one god, be praise and thankesgeuing in all congregations world without ende. So be it. Ia. P. ¶ A prayer for the common peace and quietnes of our countrey, neces∣sary for this our tyme. MOst mercifull god, which hast cre¦ated man after thyne owne lyke∣nesse, to lyue thereafter in godly peace and concorde, take away all strife and debate, not onely in priuate causes betwyxte man and man, but especially betwixt realme and realme, cuntrey and cūtrey, douchsaf to pacify the troublous affections of worldly mens hartes, who inflamed by yt spirite of discorde, labour to breake that godly knotte of peace and concorde, which most besemeth thy elect seruauntes and desciples to performe.
Gide thou vs in the vnitie of thy spirite, that we maye in thee be of one mynde, aswell in matters touching the truth of religion: as also outward & ciuill, that all maner groundes of discorde and war being taken away, we may liue in holy peace & quietnes to the aduauncement of thy glory, and the settyng forth & sprea∣ding abrode of thy gospell. Geue good successe (O Lorde) to the trauayles and counsailes of our gouernoures, directed to the safety & quietnes of this realme. Defend and aide the ministers, and tra∣uailers about ye same. Bryng to naught all the subtill deuises of Sathan, of An∣techrist and his mēbers, deuised againste the veritie of thy word, ouerthrow their counsailes, and bring their conspiracye to naught, beate backe their proud bold∣nesse in aduancing lies, and suppressing of the truth, and so make an ende at last of their outragious tiranny, that we thy seruauntes may quietly consent and rest in thy truth, hauinge both the inwarde peace of minde and conscience, & also the outward concorde aswell amongest our selues, as wyth all forren natyons and cuntreis: graunt this O lord, for Iesus Christes sake. Amen.
¶ A praier for the whole church of christ. and for euery state and degree therof accordinge to the petitions of the Lordes prayer ∴ ALmighty god our heauenly Father, since thou hast pro¦mised graciouslye to heare vs and graunte our reque∣stes, whiche we shal make vnto the in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ thy welbeloued son:Ihon. 16. And we also are taught by him and his apostelles to make our common prayer in his name, promisyng that he wyl be amonge vs,Math. 18. and make intercession for vs vnto thee, for the obteinynge of all suche thinges as wee shall godly desyre here in earth: And moreouer since thou hast commaunded vs to pray for such as thou hast appoynted rulers, and gouer∣nours ouer vs,1. Timo. 2. and also for all thynges nedefull for thy people: we therfore cō∣ceauinge boldnesse throughe thy holy worde; and leaninge assuredly vnto thy most vndoubted promises, do make our earnest suplication vnto thee our moste mercifull god, & bountifull father, that for Iesus Christes sake our onely sauy∣our
and mediatour, it would please thee of thy infinite mercye, freely to pardon our offences, and in suche sorte to draw and lifte vppe our hartes and affections towardes thee, that our requestes maye bothe procede of a feruent mynde, and also be agreable vnto thy moste blessed wyll and pleasure. We beseche thee therfore (O heauen∣ly father) as towchinge all princes and rulers, vnto whom thou hast commyt∣ted the administration of thy iustice, and namely as towchinge the estate of oure moste gracious Queene, that it woulde please thee to endue her and all her ho∣nourable Counsaile with thy plentiful grace and principal spirite, and increase the same from time to time in her, that e may with a pure faith acknowledge Iesus Christ thy onely sonne our lorde, to be the kynge of all kynges,1. Timo. 6. Act. 17. Math. 28. and go∣uernour of al gouernours, euen as thou hast geuen al power vnto hym bothe in heauen and in earthe, and may vpright∣ly and zelously seke and earnestly mayn∣teine thy true glory, minister iustice, pu¦nishe synne, and defende the ryght, ru∣lynge her subiectes whiche be thy crea∣tures,
and the shepe of thy pasture, euen as she is taughte and commaunded by thy worde. We beseche thee also (most deare fa∣ther) for al Pastours and ministers, vn∣to whom thou hast cōmitted the charge of mennes sowles, and the ministery of thy holy gospel, that it wold please thee so to guide theim with thy holy spirite, that they may be founde faythfull & zea∣lous of thy glory, directing alwais their whole studies vnto this ende, that the poore shepe which be gone astray out of the stocke, may be sought out, & brought againe vnto the lorde Iesus (who is the chiefe shepeharde & head of al Pastours) wherby they may frō day to day,1. Pe 5. growe and increase in him vnto all righteous∣nes and holines. And on the other part, that it wolde please thee to delyuer thye churche from the daunger of suche idols shepehardes,che. 11. wulues, and hirelynges, as seeke them selues and their bellyes, and not the settinge forthe of thy glorye and the safegarde of thy flocke. Moreouer we make our prayers vnto thee (most mercyfull father) for all men in general, ye as thou wilt be known to
be the sauiour of all the world by the re∣demption purchased by thy onely sonne Iesus Christ: euen so suche as haue ben bytherto holden captiue in darcknesse & ignoraunce for lacke of the knowledge of thy gospell, maye throughe the prea∣ching therof, and the cleare light of thy holy spirite, be broughte into the righte way of saluatiō, which is to knowledge that thou art only very god, and that he whom thou haste sent is Iesus Christe.Iu. 17. Likewise that they whom thou hast al∣ready indued with thy grace, and whose hart thou hast lightened with the know¦ledge of thy word, may continually en∣crease in godlinesse, and be plenteousely enryched wyth spirytuall benefytes: so that we may altogether worshippe thee both with hart and mouthe, and render due honour and seruice vnto thee accor∣dingly. In like maner (O lord of al true com∣forte) we cōmend vnto thee in our pray∣ers all such persons, as thou hast visited and chastised, by thy crosse and tribula∣tion, all such people, as thou hast puni∣shed with pestilence, warre, and famin, and all other persons afflycted with po∣uerty,
imprisonment, sickenesse, banish∣mente, or any like bodely aduersitie, or hast otherwise troubled and afflycted in spirite, that it will please thee to make them perceaue thy fatherly affection to∣wardes thē: that is that these crosses be nothinge ells, but fatherly chastisinges for their amendment, to the intent that they should vnfainedly turne vnto thee, that they cleauinge vnto thee, mays re∣ceaue ful comfort, and be deliuered from all maner of euill. Finally most deare father we beseche thee to graunt, that we may knowledge truely without hipocrisie bowe misera∣ble a state of perdition we are in by na∣ture, and how worthely we procure vn∣to our selues euerlastinge dampnation heapinge vp from time to time thy gre¦uous punishmētes towards vs, through oure wicked and synfull life, to the ende that seing there remayneth no sparke of goodnes in our nature, and that ther is nothing in vs (as touching our first cre∣ation, and that which we receaue of our parentes) mete to inioye the heritage of gods kingedome, we may wholy render by oure selues with all oure hartes, and
with an assured cōfidēce, vnto thy dero∣ly beloued son Iesu Christ our lord; our only sauiour & redemer, to the ende that he dwelling in vs may mortefy our olde man (yt is to say) our sinneful affectiōs, and that we may be regenerated into a more godly lyfe:  wherby thy holy name (as it is worthy of all honoure) may be aduaunced and magnified through oute the world and in al places: so that thou hauing the tuicion and gouernaunce o∣uer vs, we may learne dayely more and more to humble and submyt our selues vnto thy maiestie, in such sort that thou maist be counted king and gouernour o∣uer al,  guiding thy people with the scep¦ter of thy word, and by the vertue of thy holy spirite, to the confusion of all thine enemies, through ye mighte of thy truth & righteousnes: so that by this meanes all power and heighte which withstan∣deth thy glory, may be continually thro∣wen downe and abolyshed, vnto suche time as the full and perfecte face of thy kingdome shall apeare when thou shalt shewe thy selfe in iudgement:  whereby also we with the reste of thye creatures may render vnto thee perfecte and due
obedience, euen as thy holy aungells do apply them selues onely to the perfour∣ming of thy commaundementes: so that onely thy will may be fulfilled without any cōtradiction, & that euery man may bend him selfe to serue and please thee, renouncing their owne wylles with all the affections and desires of the fleshe. Graunte vs also good lorde, that wee thus walking in the loue and dreade of thy holye name, maye be nouryshed and susteyned through thy goodnesse, & that we may receue at thy handes, all things expediente & necessary for vs, and so vse thy giftes peaceably and quietly, to this ende that when wee see that thou haste care of vs, wee maye the more affectu∣ousely knowledge thee to be our father, lokinge for all good giftes at thy hand: and withdrawynge and pullinge back al our vaine confidence from creatures, may set it wholly vpon thee, and so rest onely in thy most bountiful mercy. And for so moch as, whiles we continue here in this transitory life, we are so misera∣ble, so frayle, and so much inclyned vn∣to synne, that we fall continually and swarue from the right way of thy com∣maundementes:
we beseche the pardon vs our innumerable offences,  whereby we are in daunger of thy iudgemente & condempnation, and forgeue vs so free∣ly, that deathe and synne may hereafter haue no title against vs: neither lay vn∣to our charge that wicked rote of sinne, whiche dothe euermore remaine in vs: but graunt that we may forget and for∣geue the wronges whiche other do vnto vs, & in stede of seking vengeaunce,  may procure the wealthe of our ennemies. And for as muche as of our selues, wee are so weake that we ar not able to stād vpright one minute of an houre: and a∣gain so belaid & assaulted euermore with such a multitude of so daūgerous enne∣mies, that the deuyl, the world, synne & our own cōcupicēces, do neuer leaue of to fyghte against vs, Let it be thy good pleasure to strengthen vs with thy holy spirit, & to arme vs with thy grace,  that therby we may be able strongly to with stand al tēptations, & to endure constāt∣ly in this spiritual battaile against syn, vntil such time as we shal obteine ye ful victory, & so at length may triūphātly re¦ioyse in thy kingdome with our captain & gouernour Iesus christ our lord. Amē.
Who can tel whether the lord wil turne againe and haue compassion vpon vs, and leaue a blessinge be∣hynde him. Ioel. 2. ¶ A prayer mete for this present tyme, that god woulde turne away his plagues hanging ouer vs for our sinnes. OH lorde God, strong and mighty, great and fear∣full, whiche dwellest in the heauens, and wor∣kest great wonders, we thy myserable chyldren here vpō earth, do most humbly beseche thee to be mercifull vn∣to vs, to pardon our offences, & forgers vs all our sinnes. O Lord enter not in∣to iudgement with thy seruauntes, for if thou do, there shall no fleshe be saued in thy sight. O Lord we confesse and ac¦knowledge that it is our syns that hath caused thee to be moued vnto wrathe, & to shewe suche tokens of thy displeasure towardes vs in these our dayes, fyrfte with fire from heauen, whiche did beto∣ken
thy hotte burning indignation, and wrathfull displeasure for synne whiche aboundeth at this day, & then with such horrible and monstruous shapes against nature, as was neuer sene in our daies, nor in no time before vs in this misera∣ble countrey of oures: whiche all do be∣token to vs none other thinge, but thye plagues to come vppon vs for our dege∣nerate and monstrous lyfe and conuer∣sation: and our wonderfull and terry∣ble destruction and desolation (vnlesse we spedely repent and turne to thee) be∣cause we haue ben so longe taught oute of thy most holy and sacred worde, and yet no fruites of repentaunce or christy∣an life will appere. Woe and alas to these our daies, that neyther preachinge by worde most com∣fortable, nor preaching by fyre most ter¦rible, nor preaching by monsters moste ougly & horrible, wil flyrre vp our stony hartes, and awake vs from our sinnes. We feare (oh Lorde) that the turkes with all the rest of the vnbeleuing will condempne vs in the last day: whiche if they had ben so longe instructed by the comfortable preaching of thy word, and
sweete promises of thy gospell, or seene the wonders whiche we haue seene, no doubt their righteousenes woulde haue shined at this day, to our greate shame and confusion. Thou hast no lesse war∣ned vs (oh Lord) of thy feareful displea∣sure & heauie plagues at hande for our great wickednes, then thou dyddest the Israelites of that horryble destructyon which came vpon them: whō thou first in mercy diddest call to repentaunce by the preachinge of thy worde, but when no warnynge wolde serue, thou diddest send them monstrus and feareful signes and tokens, to declare that thy visitati∣on was not farre of. But they, like vn∣to vs at this daye, dyd alwaies inter∣prete these thinges after the imaginati∣on of their owne vaine hartes, promy∣synge to them selues peace when destru∣ction was ouer their heades. Whiche thinges when we do call to minde (for as muche as they are writtē for our learnynge, exaumple, and war∣nynge) it maketh vs to tremble & quake for feare of thy iust iudgementes. For if thou hast thus dealt with thine owne dears & chosen chyldren, in token of thy
great wrathe against synne, what shal we loke for? who do no lesse deserue thy feareful scourge (and of mercy it is that thou doeste thus lenge forbeare vs) but liue as though there were no god at all to be reuenged vpon our sinnes. It ma∣keth vs to feare and cry inwardly in our sowles: Come lord Iesu,Apor. 22. holy and trus in al thy doinges, and shortē our dayes, brynge this our pilgremage to an ende, suffer vs not to heape synne vpon synne vnto the day of vengeaunce, leste we be taught vp amongest the numbre of the wicked and reprobate, whiche shall ne∣uer see thy louyng countenaunce. It maketh vs to crye to thee (o lorde) Let thy kingdome come & ende this our synfull lyfe, wherin we do nothing but rouoke thee to wrath.Psal. 6. Correcte vs not O lorde in thyne indignation, neyther chasten vs in thine heauy displeasure: & thoughe to vs belongeth nothinge but shame and confusion, though our offen∣ces haue deserued to be visyted with the rodde, and our sinnes with scourges:Psal. 89. yet in mercy lorde and with fatherly correc∣tion chasten vs, and thy louinge kinde∣nes take not away from vs.
To thee we flee for succour, vnder the winges of thy mercy shall be our refuge vntill thou turne thy wrathfull counte∣naunce from vs.Psal. 57. We knowe that thye mercy is aboue all thye workes, and e∣uen as great as thy selfe.Eccle. 2. Therfore wil we say with holy Iob, though thou kill vs, yet wyll we put our trust in thee. Thou cammest to comforte, and plucke out of the dungeō of hel, such wretches as wee are:Luke. 10. thou art the good Samari∣tane that cameste to heale our deadlye woundes: thou art that good phisition that camest to cure our mortal infyrmi∣ties: thou arte the good shepeherd that camest to seke vs wanderinge and loste sheepe,Luke. 15. and to bringe vs to thy folde a∣gaine: and more then that thou art our brother,Eph. 5. fleshe of our flesh, and boane of our boanes; whiche haste tasted of oure infirmities,Esa. 53. felte our temptations, and borne the burden of our synnes: Ther∣fore at thy handes wee looke for mercy againste the daye of vengeaunce. And thoughe thou punyshe vs, yet our hope is and euer shall be, that thy rodde shal no further touche vs then shall make to thy glory, our commoditie, & the streng
thenyng and increace of our faythe. Let this thy preaching sundry wayes (O lord) be sufficient for our warning, and graunte that we maye spedely and from the bottome of our hartes repent, endeuour to do thy righteouse and bles∣sed wyll reueled in thy word, and frame our lyues accordinge to the same: that we maye here liue in thye feare all the dayes of our lyfe, and after this our sin ful course is ended, may dwel with-thee in thy blessed kyngedome, throughe the death and merites of Iesus Christe our onely redemer. So be it. When thy wrathe is kendeled (O Lorde) blessed are all they that put their trust in thee. Psal. 2. ¶ A prayer for fayre weather. O God and mercifull father, we acknowledge that we through our manifolde sinnes haue de∣serued to be sharpely rebuked and corrected of thee. But if thou shul∣dest deale with vs after our synnes, we are not hable to abyde thy wrath & heuy
hand. Wherfore deale mercifully with vs (O Lorde) after the greatnes of thy goodnes, and the multitude of thy mer∣cies, that we rather may reioyce and be thankeful vnto thee for the aboundance of thy great mercies, and louing kinde∣nes, then be caste downe and discoura∣ged by the heauy waight of thy hande. In thy handes (O lord) are both hea∣ven and earth: So gouerne them ther∣fore, we besech thee for thy names sake, that we maye haue seasonable weather to receaue the fruites of the earth. Stay the immoderate plentie of rayne and vn¦seasonable weather, and powre rather vpon vs the plentyfull dewe of thy spy∣tite, that we may daily grow to the per∣fection of christen menne. Take awaye from vs our stony hartes, & geue vnto vs in the stede therof, hartes of fleshe, that we may cease at the length thus to pro∣uoke thy wrathe to brynge vpon vs ey∣ther this so great a plague as the losse of the fruites of the earthe, eyther elles o∣ther plagues of thy iuste iudgement. Graunte that we maye so repente vs of our former euils, that hereafter the wor∣thy fruites of true repentaunce may con¦tinually
appere therin, and soo to passe ouer and to ende this our mortall lyfe, that at the last we may attaine vnto the blessed resurrection and lyfe euerlasting through Iesus Christ our lorde. Amen. ¶ A Prayer to be said before the re∣ceauing of the communion. O Father of mercy and god of all consolation, seinge all creatures doe knowe∣ledge and confesse thee to be theyr gouernoure and lorde,Apoc. 5. it becommeth vs the workmanship of thine owne handes, at all times to reuerence and magnifie thy godly maiestie: Fyrste,Gent. 1. for that thou hast created vs to thine own ymage and similitude, but chiefly because thou hast delyuered vs frō that euerlasting deathe and dampnation,Ephe. 2. Gal. 1. Gene. 3. into the whiche Sa∣than drewe mankinde by the meanes of synne: frō the bondage wherof neyther man nor Angell was hable to make vs free,Act. 4. Hebre. 1. Apoc. 5. but thou (o lorde) ryche in mercye and infinite in goodnes, haste prouyded our redemption to stande in thine onely
and welbeloued sonne, whome of verye loue thou diddeste geue to be made man lyke vnto vs in al thinges,Iohn. 3. Hebre. 8. Hebre. 4. 1. Pet. 2. Es. 43.53. Mat 3.17 Iere. 31. Heb. 8. Rom. 5. Heb. 2. Iohn. 6. Gene. 3. Rom. 5. Ephe. 3. synne excep∣ted, that in his body he mighte receyue the punishement of our transgressiō, by his death to make satisfaction to thy iu∣stice, and by his resurrection to destroye him that was authour of deathe, and so to bringe againe lyfe to the worlde, frō which the whole ofspring of Adam was most iustely exiled. O lord we acknowledge that no cre∣ture was able to comprehende the lēgth and breadth, the depenes and heighte of that thy most excellent loue whiche mo∣ued thee to shew mercy where none was deserued,Ephe. 2. Io. 6.17. Ephe. 2. Gene. 6. Rom. 3. Esai. 64. Psal. 5.12 Rom. 7. Mat. 10. 1. Cor. 2 Luke. 11. Mar. 10. Math 26. Luke. 22. 1. Cor. 11. to promise and geue life, wher deathe had gotten victory: to receiue vs into thy grace whē we could do nothing but rebell against thy maiestie. O lorde the blinde dulnes of our corrupt nature wyll not suffer vs sufficiently to weigh these thy most ample benefites: yet ne∣uerthelesse at the commaundemente of Iesus Christ our lorde, we presente our selues to this his table (whiche he hath lefte to be vsed in remembraunce of his deathe vntyll his comminge againe) to
declare and witnesse before the worlde, that by hym alone we haue receiued ly∣bertie and life:Io. 8. Gal. 5. Ro. 8. 1. Pet. 1. Ephe. 5. Ephe. 2. Heb. 4. Ro. 3. Mat. 25. Iohn. 14. Luke. 12. Luke. 22. Apo. 2. Phil. 3. Ephe. 2. Ephe 1. Apo. 13. that by hym alone thou doest acknowledge vs to be thy chyldren and heires: that by hym alone we haue entrance to the throne of thy grace: that by him alone we are possessed in our spi¦rituall kingdome, to eate and drinke at his table, with whom we haue our con∣uersation presentely in heauen, and by whom our bodies shal be raysed vppe a∣gayne from the dust, and shal be placed with him in that endeles ioye, whiche thou (O father of mercie) hast prepared for thine elect before the foūdatiō of the worlde was layed. And these most ines∣timable benefites we acknowledge and confesse to haue receiued of thy fre mer∣cie and grace,Ro. 3. Ephe. 2. Tit. 3. by thine only beloued son Iesus Christe. For the whiche therfore we thy congregation, moued by thy ho∣ly spiryte,Ro. 8. render to thee all thanckes prayse and glory for euer and euer. ¶ A Thankesgeuinge after the receauiuge of the com∣munyon. *
MOste mercyfull Father, we render vnto thee all prayse, thankes, honour and glory, for that it hath pleased thee of thy great mercies to graūt vnto vs miserable sinners so ercellent a gift and treasure, as to receaue vs into the felowship and company of thy deare sonne Iesus christ our lord,1. Cor. 10. whom thou hast deliuered to death for vs, and haste geuen him vnto vs as a necessary fode & nourishment vnto euerlasting life.Rom. 4.Io. 6. And nowe wee besech thee also (O heauenly father) to graunt vs this request, ye thou neuer suffer vs to become so vnkind, as to forget so worthy benefites, but rather imprint and fasten them sure in our har¦tes, that we may growe & increase day∣ly more and more in true faythe,Luke. 17. whych continually is exercised in all maner of good workes:Gala. 5. and so muche the rather, (O Lorde) confirme vs in these perilous dayes and rages of Sathan,1. Tim. 4. Ephe. 5. 2. Pet. 3. Mat. 5. 1. Pet. 2. that wee maye constantly stande and continue in the confessiō of the same, to the aduance∣ment of thy glory, which art God ouer all thinges blessed for euer. So be it.
¶ A prayer to be sayde before meate. ** O Eternall god,Ebre. 13. the very god of peace & all consolation, whych broughtest againe from death our lorde Iesus the great shep herde of the shepe throughe ye bloud of ye euerlastinge couenante, make vs frute∣full in all good workes to do thy will, & worke in vs that which is acceptable in thy sighte: sanctify vs throughout, and kepe our whole spyrite, soule, and bodye fautlesse vnto the comming of thy deare sonne our lord Iesus Christ. Thou art faythfull O father who haste promysed this, who also shall bringe it to passe, to thee therfore be geuē euerlasting praise, honour, and glory. Amen. ¶ A Thankesgeuing after meate. MOste bountifull & gracious god, which feedest all fleshe, and haste promised that asking of thee, we shall not lacke, if we first seke thy king∣dome, and the righteousenes therof, we felinge presently the benefite of this thy
gracious promise in feeding our bodies with these corporall benefites, do render vnto the most harty thaks for the same, besechīg the likewise to fede our soules with that heuenly fode which perisheth not,Ihon. 6. but abideth into euerlasting life: so that we being noryshed by thy goodnes both in body and soule, may be apte and redy to doe all good workes which thou hast prepared for vs to walk in, through Iesus Christ our Lorde. Vnto hym that loued vs & wasshed vs from our sinnes in his bloud and made vs kinges & priestes vnto God his father,1. Pet. 5. be all glory, power, and dominion for euermore. Amen. ¶ A prayer for true mortification. O God my creatour, preseruer, & euerlastinge defendour, where fyrst in my creatiō I was made lyke vnto thyne owne likenesse: the de∣uyll (alas) hath synce by Adams faule, made me oughlye, monstruous, and lyke euyll fauoured to hym selfe. For what
are now lord mine earthly mēbres,Colo. 3. but as is written in the .iii. to the Colloss. adulterie, whoredome, vncleannes, vn∣natural lustes, euyl cōcupiscence, coue∣tousnes (which is the worshippynge of Idoles) and suche other, for the whiche thy wrath is wōt to come vpon the chil∣dren of vnbelefe. Neuerthelesse (lorde) of thy gret mercie and goodnes against this very great mischiefe, a much grea∣ter remedy thy fatherly prouidence hath ordeined.1. Io. 3. For thou hast sent Iesus christ thy deere and onely naturall sonne into this worlde, the vale of miseries, to lose the workes of the deuyll, and to take a∣way my sinnes. Therfore Sathan hath now nothing to bragge of, for through Christ all that beleue in thee and so be∣come thy children,1. Ihon. 5. do ouercome ye world the fleshe and the deuyl.1. Ihon. 5. And this is the victorie whiche ouercommeth them all, euen our Fayth.Io. 3. That Faith I meane which is perswaden that who so euer be leueth in christ shal not perishe but haue euerlasting life.1. Iohn. 5. That fayth whiche be∣loueth the testimonie to be true whiche thou (God the Father) doeste testifie of thy sonne, so making thee no lyer, and
this is that testimonie, that thou haste geuen vs eternall life.Ro. 8. That faith whe∣che beleueth that thou father, who ray∣sedst vp Christ frō death shalt also quic∣ken our mortall bodies through thy ho∣ly spirite dwellig in vs.Io. 14. That faith whi¦che beleueth it to be true which thy son Christe affirmed, with a double othe, saying: Verely, verely, I say vnto you, he that beleueth in mee the workes that I do, the same shall he do, and greatter workes then these shall he do, because I go vnto my father.Iohn. 12. And fynally yt fayth whiche beleueth, that now Christ hath ben lifte vppe on the crosse, he shal draw all thinges vnto hym: this fayth (I say) is the victory whicke ouercommeth our ennemies, the deuyll, the worlde, and our fleshe.Iohn. 14. Thou therfore (lorde father) whiche hast promised to geue what so e∣uer I shall aske in thy deere Sonne Ie∣sus name, for thy great mercy and infal¦lible truethes sake, do nowe in mee the thynge that he came for: lose in me the workes of the deuyl,1. Iho. 3. and take away my synnes I beseche thee, make stedfast my Faithe confidence in thy promised mer∣cies & merciful promises:Iohn. 3. so that I assu∣redly
beleuīg in thee may haue (as thou promisest) euerlasting lyfe, & makynge thee (deere God) no lyar, maye beleue, feele, and knowe in my hart and consci∣ence, ye the same euerlastyng lyfe is thy mere & free gift vnto me, yea already of thy great goodnesse, vndoubtedly geuen mee, beinge now translated frō death to life. Of a thanckefulnes wherof Lorde cause me now dayly to mortifie my erth¦ly membres.Ro. 8. Yea (dere father) sithe thy spirite which raised vp Christ frō death, dwelleth within mee, do thou (who rai∣sedst Christ frō death) quickē my mortal body through thy spirite so dwellyng in me, I beseche thee.Iohn. 14. Yea lorde Iesu ac∣cording to thy promise (because thou art now gone to thy father) make me work this wōderful great worke ye thou spea∣kest of: I meane, make me,Collo. 3. being of my self but a lumpe of synne and a monster moste ougly (as the vyces whereon the membres of my earthly body aboue de∣clared to be compacte doo proue) make me (I saye) yet throughe thy grace, to hate, abhorre, flee and subdue all adul∣tery, whoredome, vncleannes, vnnatu¦rall lustes, euyl concupiscence, vnordi∣nate
desyres, wantonnes, tendernes, de∣licatenes, idlenes, drunkennes, glut∣tony, slouthfulnes, distruste, dispaire, ignoraunce, weakenes, wilfulnes, Ido¦latry, superstition, hypocrisie, heresye, errour, sectes, variaunce, strife, wrath, enuie, slaunders, lyeng, swearing, cur∣syng, vayne glory, pride, couetousenes, thefte, disceite, flattery, and what so e∣uer elles (lord) feighteth or rebelleth a∣gainst thy holy spirite. And then (lorde Father) I will boast and make vaunte agaynste myne ennemie the deuyll, that I haue doone greater workes then thy dere sonne Iesus dyd, at what tyme he spake these wordes amōg the iewes, because,Iohn. 14. albeit he vanquissehed Sathan, yet in as muche as he hym selfe was vt∣terly without synne, the victorie semed the wore easy: But I to vanquishe sa∣than, being my selfe altogether synful, yea contrary to my most synfull nature to subdue synne, the deuyll, and myne owne fleshe, it seemeth a more victorye and greater worke then the other. For the whiche neuerthelesse, I wyll with all submission acknowledge vnto thy di¦uyne maiestie taht ye whole victory lord
in deede is thine, and thy holy spirit the begynner and fynisher bothe of the will and worke. Nowe therfore, Lorde Ie∣su, strēthen me with thy grace & myght, that thou mayste by me a moste synfull wretch, drawe al these my earthly mem¦bres and horrible vices before rehersed, vnder my feete, that I maye not onely mightely fyght againste them, but also subdue them, so that they may al turne to the best for me,Rom. 8. Io. 12. as mete matter wher∣on I may exercise my fayth powre forth harty prayer, and geue thee most hartye thanckes for victorie: whereby I maye learne & haue experience that thou haste in me drawen althinges vnto thee in so muche as thou thus (lord) of thy diuine power, drawest bothe the deuill and the synne that dwelleth in mee, to set forth thy honour and glory. whiche thyng for thy mercies sake brynge to passe, O God my crea∣toure, preseruer, and euerla∣stinge de∣fēdour.
¶ A Prayer of a christian man, expressing his great anguishe & heuines of minde that he had before time for his sinnes, & for that he felt not his hart cōforted in the ioy of gods great loue towardes him, with the maner of his prayers & groninges which he then made, & nowe pow∣reth forth againe vnto god for his grace & assistance in his new assaultes. wherby the broken harted & afflicted for their sinnes maye learne to stirre vp & strengthen their faith and hope in like dangers and trou∣ble of conscience. 1.EVen in the myddes of the desperate assaultes of my soule, the intollerable he∣uinesse of my minde hath heretofore (Lorde) cryed as shrill in thine eares as thoughe I had shryked and with lamen¦tations cryed out, saying: Help, helpe me my god, my creatour, my most pro∣uident keper, and euerlasting defender, for beholde I peryshe. 2 On this occasion (Lorde) that hea∣uines of mynd did heretofore assault me I remembred that thou haddeste manye tymes set before myne eyes the wonder∣full greatues of thy most tender loue to∣wardes
me by great multitude of thy be¦nefites powred vpon me, whiche bene∣fytes euery of thy workes (as they came before mine eyes) gaue me iuste occasy∣on to be mindefull of. 3 Wolde not (thought I) if I had in a maner any grace at all, wolde not su∣the loue brynge nowe into my harte a wonderfull delectation, comforte & ioye in god for the same? 4 And againe, coulde suche delyghte in goddes swete mercy and tender loue towardes me (if I were not as euyll as a cast awaye that were none of goddes chyldren) be without lothing of my syn, and lust & desire to do goddes holy wyl? And these thinges thought I (fye vpon the vnthankeful wretche) are either not at all in me, or elles in deede so coldelye and sclenderly that they beynge truelye waied and compared to righteousenes,Esa. 64. are more vile then a sylthye clothe star∣ched in corrupte bloudde. 5 Oh (thought I) I am aferd I haue deceyued my selfe: for thy seruauntes at al times (I trowe) feele otherwise then I nowe do, the fruites of thy spirite: as Loue, Ioye, Peace and suche lyke.
But my loue (alas) towards thee, what is it? my ioye (oh woe is my hart there∣fore) is not once almost felte of me, for my very soule within me (as Dauid in his heuynes said) refuseth comfort, and fareth as though it dyd vtterly despaire.Psal. 77. And what peace can I feele then, or cer∣taintie of thy fauoure and loue? Iustely may I powre out this dolorous lamen∣tation of Sion: the lorde hath forsaken me,Esai. 49. and my lorde hath forgotten mee: 6 Euen in the middes (I say) of these my former desperate assaultes, myne in tollerable heuines cryed to my god, and from heauen he heard my gronynges, & therupon first prepared my hert to aske comfort of him, & then he heard my prai¦er and gaue me plētefully my asking. 7 Oh my soule, consider wel that thou art neuer hable to declare the excedynge goodnes of god in this that he heard the very desires of thee being afflicted. who is soo redy fauourablye to graunte the requestes of the afflicted, that often ty∣mes he taryeth not vntyll they do call, but or euer they cal vpon him, he fauou¦rably heareth thē: as the psalmist saith, the desires of the afflicted thou heareste
(O lorde) thou preparest theyr hartes & thine care heareth fauourably.Psal. 10. 8 Oh lorde my god, marueilous thin∣ges are these, whether I consyder this marueilous maner of thy hearing, orels the marueilous nature and propertye of thy goodnes. Marueilous (no doubt) is that thy hearinge, wherby the very de∣sires of the afflicted are hearde, but mu∣che more marueilous is this thye good∣nesse which taryeth not vntyl the afflic∣ted do desire thy help, but prepareth first their hartes to desyre, and then thou ge∣uest them their desires. 9 Yea Lorde (worthye of all praise) it can not otherwise be. For how shouldst thou do otherwise then thy nature and propertie is? art not thou very goodnes and mercy it self? how canst thou then, but pitie and helpe miserie? 10 Art not thou both the creatour and also the conseruer of all thinges? In so much as the lyons whelpes roaryng af∣ter their pray do seeke their foode at thy handes,Psa. 104. Psal. 147. and the rauens byrdes lackyng meate do call vpon thee. 11 If then thy fatherly prouidence and tender care (O lorde) vpon all thy crea∣tures
be so great, that the very beastes & foules haue this experiēce of thy good∣nes in their necessities, that their rorin∣ges and criynges haue the strengthe of earnest callinges and besechinges: how muche rather do these syghinges, gro∣ninges, and desperate heuines of men, but chiefely of all those whiche beleue in thee, crye & call loude in thine eares, though they speake neuer a word at all? 12 Shulde I then nowe dispeire of thy fatherly mercy, whiles presently I feele thee stirre vp my soule & harte to craue helpe at thy hande?Psal. 77. shulde I thinke that thou wilt absent thy selfe for euer? that thou wylte be noo more intreated? that thy mercy is cleane gone, and thy pro∣mise come vtterly to an ende, and that thou wilt now shut vp thy louing kind∣nes in displeasure? 13 Nay god forbydde: for all alterati∣ons are of thy right hande and turne a∣way to the best, to them that feare thee. All this is no more but myne owne in∣firmitie,Psal. 77. for god is euer one, his promi∣ses be vnfallible, and his loue towardes his euerlastingly duringe. 14 I wyll therfore in this my present
temptation and greuous assault, powre out my heuines of hart before thee (dere father) yea I will with gronynges lifte vp my soule vnto thee, from whence I assuredly knowe my helpe is comming. I will also for my present comforte,Psal. 77. cal to remembraunce (O lorde my god) thy tender mercies towardes me alredy she∣wed, the multitude of thy benefites, the greatnes of the same, the longe conti∣nuaunce of theim, euen from my con∣ception vntyll this instante, and fynally thy continuall lust and desyre to powre them vpon me. 15. And moreouer sith thy goodnes is so great (O lord) that thou doest not on∣ly pitty misery, but also callest the heuy harted and afflicted vnto the, promising that thou wilt ease their misery: and for as muche as,Mat. 11. by the motion of thy good spirite I loth & abhorre my sines, I felt the greuousenes of them, and thy heauy wrath towardes me for the same, and fi∣nally what nede I haue of thy gracious aide and succoure: therfore (Lord father) in thy sonne Christes name, wyth sure confidence and truste in thine infallible promise, in this mine anguish and trou∣ble
I come vnto thee at thy mercyfull calling, and craue comfort at thy hand. For this I know wel, that when I loth my sinnes, thou doest vtterly forget thē, whē I fele the greuous burden of them, thy mercy swalloweth them vp, when I fele what I wante, thou wylt assuredly graunt it me. For sith thou mouest my harte to desire helpe, how should I mis∣trust but thou wilt for thy truthes sake, geue me mine askinge? 16. Yea, where I knowe not howe or what to desire as I ought, thy holy spi∣rite graciously workinge in me, maketh intercession mightely for me,Rom. 8. with gro∣nings which can not be expressed, & ther withal certifieth my spirite that by adop¦tion, through thy great mercy and good¦nes, I am become thy childe and heire. 17. Why should I not then be of good cōfort & ioyfull in thee my God? For if thou be on my side, who can be againste me?Rom. 8. who diddeste not spare thine owne sonne, but gauest him for me, euen whē I was thine enemy, how shalt thou not with him nowe that by his deathe I am broughte into thy fauoure, geue me all thinges with him and for his sake? who
shal lay any thing to the charge of thine elects? it is thou lord that iustifiest me, who then shall condempne me? It is Christe that hath died for me, yea rather that is risen againe for me, who also is set on thy right hande, and hathe taken possession, yea and perpetually maketh there intercession for me, vntil that ioy∣full day be come when I shall haue full fruition of the most glorious presence of thy diuyne maiestie in that kingedome whych thou hast prepared before the be∣ginning of the world,Ephe. 1. but in time (to thy gracious goodnes thoughte beste) made knowen to me by geuinge thy holy spy∣rite into my hart, wherby when I fyrste Lorde beleued thy holy worde (whych is thine own power to saue al that beleue) I was sealed,Rom. 1. confyrmed and stablyshed in certaynty of that thyne euerlastynge kingdome and inheritaunce. For the which inestimable benefite of thy rich grace (Oh Lorde my God) I be∣seche thee (euen for the loue thou barest to Christ Iesu thy sonne, and the mercy thou haddeste on him when he cryed on the Crosse,Mat. 27. my God my God why haste thou forsaken me) helpe, help I say, and
inflame my hart with loue so plenteous∣ly towardes thee againe, that I may be euē swallowed vp in the ioyful feling of the same, in such sort that I may of very thankfulnesse loue thee my God alone, thee I say my deare God, and nothinge but thee and for thy sake. Oh holy spi∣rite whose worke this is in me, increase this thy worke, of thyne infinite mercy, & preserue me that I neuer become vn∣thankfull vnto thee therefore. Amen, deare god. Amen. ¶ Remedies against synfull motions and voluptuous tēptations. 1. FIrst remember that sinne is so heynous a thing that god by his iustice might worthe¦ly dampne the for the same, and is therfore to be abhor∣red as a swete poison; a flattering death & destruction of thy sowle, which wold cutte thee of from god thy fauiour, and make thee bonde slaue to Sathan thye deadly enemie. 2 Auoyde therfore euen at the first, the occasions thereof, and betymes quashe
out the braines of the children of Baby∣lon against the hard stones,Psal. 137. whiles they be yet younge & weake, least when they be growne elder & stronger, they dashe thee to peeces. 3 And for remedy against the same, flee vnto god, who cōmaundeth thee to call vpō hym in thy troubles, and promiseth to delyuer thee, and will not suffer thee to be further tempted then he wil make awaye out wherby thou shalte escape:1. Cor. 10. & doubte not but he that causeth thee to hate the synne whiche thy nature is to loue, wyl deliuer thee also frō the daun¦ger therof, and make thee to triumphe ouer Sathan, to his confusion, to gods glory, and to thy great comforte. which are the causes that our tender louynge father sendeth tēptations vnto vs & and he that is not tempted, what is he?1. . 1 4 Nowe after thou hast obteyned the victory; remembre two thinges, first to geue most harty thanckes to god for his grace and assistance, wherby thou haste ouercome, and he not vnthanckefull in any wyse: and then, that he who con∣tinually goeth about lyke a roaryng ly∣on seekyng whom he may deuoure, will
not be long or farre away from the, but wyll attempte agayne the same or as e∣uyll wayes to ouercome thee. Watche therfore and praye. ¶ A prayer for presente helpe in temptation.** DEare father, to whome it is more easie to do all thinges then for me to thyncke anye one good thing, Lo do thou but speake a worde and thy deadly sicke seruaunte my soule shall be made whole. Helpe (O Lord) & let thy strength suffise against my weakenesse, and thy holy spirite againste my synfull fleshe and olde man. Thou art true and faithfull (O Father) who hast promysed that I shall not bee tempted further then thou wile make me able to beare.1. Cor. 10. Geue therefore thy power vnto thy ser∣uaunt, that I may with a stronge fayth in thyne infallible truthe and promysed mercy, vanquishe & subdue what so ouer rebelleth against thy most blessed wills Do this O Father, for thy sonne Iesus Christes sake our deare Lorde and gra∣cious redemer. Amen
¶ A Prayer to God the Father for the true knowledge of the mystery of our redēption in Christ. O Almyghty God and fa∣ther of our lorde Iesus Christ, and by hym also our father, the father of all mercy and god of all consolation, haue mer∣cye vppon vs and heare our prayers. We most humbly beseche thee for thy deere sonne Iesus Chrystes sake, his merites and cruel death, whi∣che he suffered to delyuer vs from eter∣nall deathe and the power of darkenes, geue into our harts the spirite of truth, to worke in vs a true, liuely, and sted∣faste faithe, that the cleare lyghte and brightenesse of thy gospell the glorye of Christ, may shyne vnto vs and lyghten our myndes, that we may learne & vn∣derstande the wonderfull and vnspeake∣able rychesse of the misteric of our redēp¦tion in Christ and by Chryst. O father of glory geue vnto vs the spirite of wise¦dome, & brynge vs vnto the true know∣ledge of this thy beloued sonne Iesus
Christe and the knowledge of thy selfe. Open and lyghten the eyes of our min∣des and vnderstandinge,Ephe. 1. that we maye knowe what the hope is wherunto thou hast called vs, and howe ryche the glo∣ry of thine inheritaunce is vppon thy sainctes, and the excedinge greatnes of thy power towardes vs: that by trewe fayth, vnderstanding and knowledge of thine eternall wisedome (whiche is Ie∣sus Christe) we may be in deede as wee are called, true christians and vnfained professours of thye holy name, to wor∣shippe thee in spirite and truthe, and to sette forthe the glory of thy grace geuen vnto vs in Christ Iesus our lord. Amen O dere father write in our hartes loue to thy lawe, hate to all synne, thanke∣fulnesse of heart and continual heate of thy holy spirite for thy sonne Ie∣sus Christes sake. To whom with thee and thy holy spirite be all honour, maiestie, glory, thankes, rule, empire, and do∣minion for euer more.
¶ A prayer to be vsed of all sortes of men and at all times. O Lord God for thy great mer∣cies sake, graūt vnto me these my petycions whych I shall make vnto the in Iesus Chri∣stes name, and endue me with thy grace that I maye aske of thee in such sorte as thou requirest, to the honour, glory, and prayse of thy holy name, to the furthe∣raunce of thy worde, the profitte of thy people, and to my consolation and com∣forte, throughe Iesus Christe our onely sauiour and readeuter. So be it. O Lord thou great and terryble god, thou that kepest couenant & merry with theym that loue thee and doe thy com∣maundementes, let thyne eares be open that thou mayst heare the praiers of thy seruaunte, which I make before thee at this time, haue mercy vpon me thy pore creature, & worke of thine handes, for I haue sinned, & done wickedly, and haue offended thy maiesty greuously, in that I haue gone backe, & departed from all thy preceptes and iudgementes, & haue not folowed thy seruaūtes the prophets
ye spake vnto me in thy name, but haue from day to day prouoked thy iust wrath and indignation agaynst me. O Lorde I knowledge and confesse my manifolde sinnes and wyckednesse, the whiche I haue vnrighteousely com∣mitted against thee in thought, worde, & dede, fro my youth vp vntill this day, for the which I am hartely sory, and do vnfainedly repent, purposing euermore through the assistaunce of thy grace, to walke in a newe life. Remember not lord the numbre of my misdedes I besech the, but accordinge to thy great mercyes thinke vpon me. Call to remembraunce for Christes sake thy louing kindnes and thy tender mercy, the which hath euer bene of olde. Hyde not thou thy face from me, nor cast not of thy seruaunte in thy displea∣sure, for I confesse my sinnes vnto thee, and hide not mine vnrighteousnesse. For thy mercies sake deliuer me from al my sinnes, and make me not a scorne vnto the folyshe. Tourne not away thy mercy frō me, but let thy most louing kindnes & truth alwaies preserue me.
Helpe me for thy names sake, and de∣liuer me in thy strength. Heare my prayer (O lord) and consi∣der the wordes of my mouth, for my mis¦dedes preuayle agaynst me. O be thou mercifull vnto my sinnes. Let the sorowfull sighyng of thy pry∣soner come before thee, and according to the power of thyne arme preserue those ye be appoynted to dye for thy iust cause. O Lord comforte the soule of thy ser∣uant, for vnto thee do I flee for succour. Teache me to number my dayes that I may apply my hart vnto wisdome. Satisfie me with thy mercy, and that sone, so shall I reioyce and be gladde in thee all the dayes of my lyfe. Looke not extremely what is done a∣mysse in me, for I haue sinned againste heauen and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy sonne: yet lorde of thy great goodnes, powre down some of the cromes that fall frō thy childrens table and make me as one of the least of them. Rewarde me not accordyng to my de∣seruings, for then I must nedes perishe: for vnto me perteyneth nothinge but o∣pen
shame, confusion, and damnation: but with thee ther is mercy, forgeuenes, and saluacion. O Lorde therefore doe I come vnto thee, not hopyng in myne owne righte∣ousnes, but trusting onely in thy greate mercies and promises made vnto me in Chryst Iesu my lorde, for whose sake, I beseth thee to clense me from al my sin∣nes, and do away all mine iniquities. For thy tender mercy sake, lay not my sinnes to my charge, but forgeue that is paste and geue me grace to amende my lyfe, to declyne from sinne, and incline to vertue, that I may walke in a perfect harte, a cleue comience, and single eye before thee this daye or nyght and euer∣more. Remember not forde myne offences, nor the offences of my forefathers, ney∣ther take thou beingeance of my sinnes, spare me good Lorde, spare me, whome thou hast redemed with thy most precy∣ous blonde, and be not angrye with me for euer: spare me good lord, spare me. Put me not frō thy presence (oh thou god of al comfort) but incline thine eare vnto my callyng.
Strengthen thy Seruaunte with the power of thy right hande, and helpe the Sonne of thy handmayden. Replenyshe my hart with grace wise∣dome and vnderstanding. Comforte my soule with thy swete promyses, and let thy mercies couer my infirmities. For the deathe and bloudshedynge of thy Christ (O Lord) consider myne in∣firmities, which are many, and helpe to heale myne imperfection, & delyuer me from al kyndes of euilles, that I do not obey vnto them: as from adultery, for∣nication, vncleannesse, wantonnes, ydo¦latry, good lord deliuer mee. Frō witch craft, lyeng, hatred, varyaunce, zeale, wrath, strife, sedition, good lorde dely∣uer mee. From sectes, enuiyng, whys∣pering, backebityng, bringing vp of e∣uyll tumours, good lorde delyuer mee. From murther, drunkennes, gluttony, and from the spirite of euyl telosie, good lorde deliuer me. From enuiynge of o∣ther which loue thee & thy people more then I, or be beloued of thee or of thye people more than I am: from swelling at other mennes giftes, good lorde deli∣uer
mee. From surmisynge, murmu∣ringe, lowring, grudging, mutteringe when wordes be not spokē to my mind, good lorde for thy great mercies sake de¦liuer mee, and geue me grace that I do at no tyme enuye any good man or wo∣maunes loue, but labour to increase it, that their prosperstie in worde & prayse of other may be my consolation and re∣ioysynge. O lord graunt me that I may be low in myne owne syght, to submit my self to beare all occasions, to wrestle wyth fleshe and bloudde and get the victory. Graunt me this gyfte that I maye be swyft to heare, slowe to speake, & slowe to wrathe, that my hart do not go after any euyll and wicked imaginations. Geue me grace to walke soo that I geue none euill occasions, and to auoid all suspitious thinges wherby euyll oc∣casions maye growe. O Lorde assist mee with thye spirite, that I may labour to mainteyne peace, to increase loue, and to further vertue. Graunte (O mercifull father) that I may prosper in all vertue, in long suffe∣ring, gentlenes, goodnes, faithfulnes,
mekenes, temperaunce, strength, and pacience, with all suche like vertues as are cōmaunded in thy holy law for mee to walke in. O lorde geue me ioye in thy holy spi∣rite, that I may reioyce in thy holy scrip¦tures, that al my whole pleasure, fely∣citie, and consolation, may be in thy ho¦ly woorde night and daye, in readinge, thinking, & talkinge of the same, to thy glory and my edifienge. Assist thy seruaūt against this world with the vaine pompe, pleasure & beau∣tie thereof, that it maye be vnto me as vile dust, slime, fylthynes, and asshes, that I maye vse it as thoughe I vsed it not, and that it may serue me, and I not it, that I may take my part therof vnto my necessitie, with thankesgeuing, that I do not vse thy creatures voluptuouse∣ly, but that I may at al tymes liue righ¦teously, soberly, and godly in this lyfe. Geue me grace to walke with a good conscience bothe before thee and towar∣des all men, in bying and sellinge, and in all other my doinges, to cast away al¦lyinge, craft, and disceite, that I be not a reader of thy holy worde, and a talker
onely, but that it may appere also in my lyfe and conuersation. O Lorde graunte vnto thy seruaunte the strengthe of thy holy spirite, to sub∣due this bodye of synne with the whele lustes therof, that it may be made obe∣dient both in wyll, minde, & membres, to do thy will, yt it may be weake, vile, simple, and of no reputation in it selfe by the way of fastinge, prayer, and me∣ditation of thy lawe, that I may be low harted, humble minded, gentle spry∣ted and to all vertues obedient. Geue me grace O lorde to brydle my mouth from al vayne and lyght commu¦nication, and geue me an vnderstāding hearte with suche discretyon, that ney∣ther fylthynes nor folishe talkinge, nor iestinge whiche are not comely, procede out of my mouthe, but rather geuing of thankes. O Lord my sauiour, increase my faith in thee, and in thy Christe, and make it stronge to beleue thy promyses. O Lorde my redemer, increase in me a loue to do thy wyll, and to thy ryghte∣ous people. O Lorde my iustifyer, increase in me
a sure hope of my saluation withoute doubt or wauering in aduersitie, & with out pride or presumption in prosperytie: so that in aduersitie I maye be pacient, and geue thankes in prosperitie, & serue thee with reuerence and godly feare all the dayes of my lyfe. Increase in me Lord al other vertues agreable to a godly lyfe, for I come vn∣to thee my god as vnto the wel & euerla∣sting fountaine of health and saluation. O heauenly father, graunt vnto mee & al other, wheresoeuer they be dispersed throughout the whole world, which pro¦fesse thy holy worde, so to lyue that we may dye to sinne, and leade a godly con∣uersatiō walking innocētly before thee. Preserue and defende thy seruaunte from all false opinions, that I be not deceyued and caryed awaye in errour of the wicked, but that I maye growe in grace and knoweledge of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ. O Lord geue me a reuerent and pure vnderstanding of thy holy word, that I may therby auoyde al rashe iudgemente and peruerse interpretations. O Lorde geue me wisedome knowe∣ledge
and vnderstandinge to perceyue those false, lying, & flatteryng spirytes, whiche doe deceyue the hartes of inne∣centes and begyle vnstable soules. O Lorde make me to be content with thys woman which thou hast geuen me to be my wyfe that we maye godly lyue together accordynge to thy holy ordy∣naunce. Geue her an hearte of vnderstanding, and set thy feare alway before her eyes, that she may be obedient in word, dede, and thought to all that is thy wil. O Lord geue vs the power of thy holy Spirite, to rule, gouerne, and bryng vp these our children and familie, in al god lye feare and knoweledge of thy holye worde, and that we maye be vnto them an example in all godlynes and vertue, to the prayse of thy holy name. Saue my soule (oh my God) whether it be throughe prosperitie or aduersitie, losse or gayne, sickenes or health, life or deathe. Ayde, strengthen, succour, and defend thy seruaunt, in all aduersitye, tribula∣tion, and temptaciō, and suffer not him to be tempted aboue his strength.
Increase my ioye, that I may reioyce in persecution, & embrace it to my cōsola¦cion & comfort, & thinke my felfe happie and blessed, when I am counted worthy to suffer rebuke for thy names sake. Take from my hearte the care of all worldly thinges, only set before my eies the ioye of the crosse of Christe, that I maye take comforte therin, and despyse the shame, for the great rewarde that is laide vppe in heauen for all those that with pacience suffer in aduersitie, & con∣tinue in well doinge vnto the ende. O Lorde neither lay thou presumpti∣on vnto thy seruauntes charge, nor loke not vppon my vilenes, whiche am but dust, earth, and ashes: yet lorde I haue taken vpon me & am bolde to come vn∣to thee, throughe the merites of Chry∣stes death and bloud shedyng, to lay my prayers before thee, requiringe merry, pardon, and forgeuenesse of all my sin∣nes, and also the assistance of thy grace, to do thy wyll all the dayes of my lyfe, and to obteyne all these my peticions, through Iesus Christ thy dere sonne, & my onely sauiour: To whom be all ho∣nour and glory nowe and euer. Amen. Iohn Lydley.
¶ A Godly Prayer for all Christen men. O Almighty & euer liuynge god, thou God of all power, before whose eyes all thinges lye na∣ked and bare, haue regarde vn¦to me, moste miserable synner, & shews me the light of thy mercies, let my prai∣ers ascende vp before thy presence, and be accepted in thy sight, for Iesus Chri∣stes sake. Geue thy holy spirite into my heart (Oh Lord) and lighten my vnder∣standing that I maye dwell in the feare of thy name al the dayes of my life, that I maye knowe thee, the onely true god and Iesus Christ whom thou hast sente. For I come vnto thee (Oh Lorde thou louer of our soules) not hoping in mine owne righteousenes, but trusting onely vpon the multitude of thy great mercies whiche thou hast layde forthe before the eyes of all people, offering saluation to the whole worlde, and haste promysed that who so euer he be of the whole ge∣neration of man, that wyll obey to thy grace, Repent, and tourne vnfaynedly from his synnes, he shall haue free re∣mission
and forgeuenes through Iesus Christ our lord, whiche is our onely ad∣uocate and mediatour, in whom our sal¦uation lyeth, of whom thou hast sayde: This is my deere sonne, in whom I am well pleased, & well pacifyed. For this thy sonnes sake (by whom I am bold to come vnto thee, whiche appereth nowe inthy syght, making continuall inter∣cession for vs) Haue mercy vpon me (O thou mightye God) and forgeue mee all my synnes, which I haue vnrighteouse¦ly committed against thee, in thoughte, worde & dede. Oh let me feele thy mer∣cies towardes mee, for I do confesse my synnes vnto thee (Oh lord) and hide not mine vnrighteousenes, I doo acknow∣ledge mine offences, and accuse my selfe before thee of all my misdeedes. Helpe me, O God my sauioure for the glorye of thy name: O delyuer and forgeue me my synnes for thy riche mercies sake. Remember not the offences of my youth (O Lorde) but thinke vppon thy great mercies and couenaunt, made vn∣to me in Christ Iesus. O most merciful father consider mine infirmities, which are many and great,
and beare myne imperfection for thy sonne my Sauiour Iesus Christes sake, which had good erperience of our infir∣mitie, that he might be merciful vnto al them that are tempted: consider how the ennemye hath gotten an open way into my fleshe, wherein I confesse that there dwelleth nothynge but synne wretched∣nes, and miserie. Therefore I come vn∣to thee (O Lord my God) desiringe thee for Christes sake, to renewe in mee a right spirite, that I may receaue stren∣gth and hablenes to do thy wyll, and to stande againste all the assaultes of the deuill, that they maye haue no place in me, but that the olde man which I bear about in my body, may be crucified, and dayly dye in me, that the lustes of synne maye vtterly be destroyed, that I maye euermore be renewed in the spyrite of my minde: that the lyfe of Christ may alwayes appeare in me. Good lord deliuer me from all kyndes of euyll, as fornycation, couetousenes, malyciousnes, enuy, murder, debate, de∣ceyte, from whisperynge, backbitinge, contempt of the & my neyghbour, good lord deliuer me, from euyll ielosie, from
doinge of wronge, pride, boasting, from adultery, vaine glory, hipocrisie, wan∣tonnes, ydolatry, witchecrafte, hatred variaunce, zeale, wrath, strife, seditiō, sectes, enuying, drunkennes, gluttony, and other suche lyke. Good lord for thy great mercies sake, deliuer me and graunt me grace to haue thee alwaies before myne eyes, that I may also haue a respect vnto thy iudge∣mentes, that whatsoeuer I say, thincke or do, may be agreable to thy holy word, that I be not mynded as the vngodlye & wycked men are. Let me haue no plea∣sure in such thinges as please thē: make me lowe in mine owne sighte (O lorde) that pryde & selfe loue ouertake me not. Let not the hand of the vngodly cast me downe, but bowe my harte alwaies vn∣to thee, that I may serue thee withoute feare all the daies of my lyfe in such ho∣linesse and righteousenesse, as is accep∣table before thee. Remoue frō me al va∣nities and lies, take fro me the iustes of the bodye, let not the desires of vnclen∣nes take holde vppon me, and geue me not ouer vnto an vnshamefast or obsty∣nate
minde, but holde me alwayes vn∣der thy nurture and correction. Of thy fatherly mercy leaue me not to my self, but stand thou alwaies by me: for I am to weake of myne owne power to do a∣ny thinge that is good, but my ryghte∣ousenesse & strength lyeth onely in thee. Therfore (O lord) I come vnto thee, re¦quirynge mercy in thy sight, and the as∣sistance of thy grace, yt I may be streng∣thened with power in the inwarde mā, & be armed with thy holy armour, whi∣che is the brestplate of ryghteousenes, the shylde of Fayth, the hope of saluati∣on for an helmet, and the sworde of the spirite, whiche is thy holy worde, that I may stand parfecte in al that is thy wil, and be founde worthy through Chryst, to receyue a crowne of lyfe whiche thou hast promised to all them that loue thee in purenesse of mynde. O Lord plant in me true obedience to thy holy lawe & let not the cares of this world choke thi word in me. Kepe me al so from all desceitefulnes of richesse and vncleane desyres, that all vertues maye be planted in me. Good Lorde geue me grace to walke before thee all the dayes
of thys my Pilgrimage with good con∣science and pure minde, that when thou shalt appeare to rewarde euery man ac∣cording to hys dedes, I may reioyce and not be ashamed of the at thy comming. Increase my faith (O Lorde my sauy∣our) in thee and in thy Christ. Increase my loue (O my Redemer) to thee, and to thy ryghteous people. Increase a sure hope in me of my saluation, O my Ius∣tifier. Increase strength in me to ouer∣come synne, and to stande agaynste all euil temptaciōs that they haue no place in me. Encrease in me true vnderstan∣ding and pure iudgement in thy worde, that I be not deceaued and caryed away in the errour of the wicked: But graūte (O lord) that I may grow in thy grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord & Sa¦uiour Iesus Christ. Let thy kingdome come vnto me, whiche is righteousnes, peace, and ioye in thy holy ghost, longe sufferyng, gentlenes, goodnes, faithful∣nes, mekenes, temperaunce, strength, & pacience, with all suche like vertues as ar prescribed vnto me in thy holy word, that in prosperous thinges I may geue thee thankes, and in aduersitie be paci∣ent:
that I be not lifted vp with the one nor oppressed with the other. Oh let al worldly things be vile vnto me for thee. Let me not be mery with the ioy that is without thee, and let me desire nothing beside thee. Make me to lift vp my hart oftentimes to thee, and if I chaunce to fall or slip, make me to thincke on thee, and be sory with a stedfast purpose of a∣mendmente. O Lorde I gene ouer my selfe into thy holy hande, desiryng thee for Christes sake, that I maye remayne vnder thy mighty protection and strong defence of thy power, and that thy holy aungel may alway pitch his tent roūde about me, and compasse me alwaies. Good lorde geue me ioyfulnes of harte, and peace of conscience, continual glad∣nes and consolation in thy worde & pro∣mises, that I may euermore be thancke∣full vnto thee, and prayse thy name for euer. O Lorde thinke vpon all thy people, which are straied here and ther from the farthest part of the earthe, which be en∣tred into couenaunte with thee, and are minded to walke after thy will, graunt (Oh lorde) that we may grow together
in loue throughe the knoweledge of thy worde to keepe the vnitie of the spirite, through the bonde of peace, to the vtter confounding of erroure and al false opi∣nions, and to kepe vs cleane from hipo∣crysy and superstycyon, and to make vs stronge in persecution. We besech thee fauourably to heare vs good Lorde, and graunt our requestes. Geue prayse to god. I. H. ¶ A Prayer for the forgeuenes of our fynnes and auoydinge of the plague due and at hand for the same. O Lorde most mighty and feare∣ful God, to all them that hate thee and followe theyr owne waies, and seke not to doe thy holy wil, we thy poore creatures, which labour & do desire to do thy wyl, do se by thy righ∣teous Iudgemēt of thy word, thy fyerce wrath and terrible indignation readye to fall vpon thys realme of Englande, for despising of thy Preachers and Mes∣sangers, and for the vnthanckful recea∣uing, yea treading vnderfote of thy most
holy word. Vnworthy were we of such a iewell, therfore worthely was it takē away from vs, & lesse worthy were wee to haue it restored to vs agayn, but now least worthy of al ar we to injoy the be∣nefite therof. And now we se thy wrath is kyndled (O Lorde,) who shall be able to quenche it? For our partes we do con¦fesse that we be worthy of al ye plagues that thou haste deuised agaynste vs: yet neuerthelesse we besech thee vnworthe∣lye to be called thy chyldren: looke not vpon oure desertes or worthynesse, but vpon thy Chryst & thy fauourable mer∣cy, which thou haddest in the olde tyme vpon thy chyldren of Israell if they re∣pented and turned vnto thee. O Lorde thou diddest preserue them, & kepe them from captiuitie of al other nations, and dyddest euer prouide them a faythful go∣uernour or ruler. And furthermore most merciful father, although they were de∣stroyed for their wickednes, and left but a small people: yet neuerthelesse when they tourned vnfaynedly to thee, thou e¦uer gauest thē the victory ouer all their enemies, so that they might dwel as bre¦therne together peaceably in their own
lande whiche thou gaueste them. Thou art the same lorde and thy mercy endu∣reth for euer. And nowe (O lorde) we that seke to do thy wil being but a smal people, do beseche the of thy great mercie for Iesus Christes sake our only Peace maker, to tourne away thy great wrath and terrible indignatiō which we haue deserued in this realme of Englande, & shewe thy compassion vpon vs (as thou dyddest vppon the children of Israell in the olde time) though not for our sakes whiche haue soo wyckedly deserued thy wrath, but for thy most mighty and glo¦ryous names sake. For if thou shuldest destroy vs and bringe vs vnto desolati∣on as we haue deserued, than shuld thy moste mighty name and thy holy worde be euyll spoken of, through vs in al the worlde. Therfore we beseche thee most mercifull father to chasten and correcte vs, not as we haue deserued, but accor∣dynge to thy fauourable mercy: not in thy furie, but with thy fatherly pitis: & delyuer vs not ouer into the handes of our ennemies, neyther take thy holye worde from vs O lorde, thoughe of all other we do moste deserue it, and haue
moste vnreuerently and vnthanckeful∣ly abused the same. And here we con∣fesse vnto thee all oure iniquities, the which are more in numbre thē the hea∣res of our heades, and they presse vs so downe, that our hartes fayle vs and we dare scarsely presume vnto thee: yet ne∣uerthelesse through Christ which is our righteousnes & hath pacified thy wrath, we are bold to come vnto thee (O lord) being sory for our faultes euen frō our very hartes, desyring thee for his death and passion sake, to forgeue vs all our synnes that euer we haue committed ei∣ther in thought, worde, or dede. O lord, we geue ouer oure selues into thy holy hands, & with al our hartes do desyre to doe what so euer thy good wyll is that wee shoulde doe, besechinge thee, to as∣sist vs with the grace of thy holy spirit, that we henseforth may liue accordyng to that thy most godly and blessed wyll, and laboure and studye to serue thee in newenes of lyfe, taking vppe thy crosse & folowing thy steppes (O lord Christe) willingly & cherefully al the days of our lyfe. And furthermore (O lord) we be∣seche thee to geue vs grace to be alway
thākefull both in hart & in our conuer∣sation & lyuynge, for al the great bene∣fites that we haue receiued at thy hand, so that we maye enioy thē to thy glory, and our comforte: euen as at this pre∣sente we render vnto thee moste humble thanckes, fyrste for thy goodnes in the worke of our creation: secōdly for that, when we were fallen into euerlastinge destruction through our consentynge to the subtilte of the ennemie, thou of thy great mercy through Iesus christe didst raise vs vp agayn: & thirdly that it hath pleased thee to suffer thy holy word, the foode of our sowles, to haue fre passage ones agayne amongest vs, and hast ge∣uen vs an harte and a wyl to seeke it, to beleue it, and to followe it in our liuing and conuersation. Moreouer we render vnto thee moste harty thanckes (O heauenly father) for Elyzabeth oure gracious Queene and Gouernoure, whom in muche mercye thou dyddest delyuer with thy myghtye arme from the handes of her ennemyes and from the lyons mouthe, and we be∣seche thee so to worke in her harte, that of a thankefulnes towards thee for this
her great deliueraunce, and thy synccu∣ler blessing, consideryng whose minister she is, she may sincerly seke and zelous∣ly promote thy true honour and glorye, buylde vppe thy house, confounde thy sworne aduersaries, and carefully tra∣uell to brynge thy people committed to her charge, remaynyng yet almost in al partes of this realme either in mysera∣ble blyndenes and darke ignoraunce, or wylfully & stubbernly kickynge against the pricke, to the true knowledge of the and thy blessed word. Make all that are in auctoritie vnder her vpryght & faith∣full in their callyng, fauourers and fur∣therers of thy holy gospell, followers & practisers therof, mainteyners and de∣fenders of the Preachers and mynisters of the same, and suche as in synglenesse of heart wyll seeke, not them selues but the commoditie of thy people: & graunt that we maye all liue as faythefull sub∣iectes, in al godly & due obedience, firste to the Quene as supreme head and go∣uernour, and then to al other, according to their degree and callynge. Fynally we beseche thee O lorde, that we maye altogether bothe highe & lowe
walke in a lyfe and cōuersation worthy for our profession, to thy glory the good exāple of other, and the stopping of the mouthes of thy ennemies and oures for thy truthes sake, that where as they slā¦der vs as euyll doers they maye see our good workes & prayse the in thee day of visitation. Amen. ¶ A prayer necessary to be sayde at all tymes. O Bountiful Iesu, O swete Sauioure, O Christe the Sonne of god, haue pitie vpon me, mercifully here me & despyse not my pray∣ers. Thou haste created me of nothynge, thou haste redemed me from the bondage of synne, deathe, and Hell, neyther with Golde nor Siluer, but with thy moste precious bodye once offered vpon the crosse, and thyne owne blood shed once for al, for my raunsome. Therfore cast me not away, whom thou by thy great wisdome hast made, despise me not whome thou hast redemed with suche a precious treasure. Nor lette my
wickednes destroye that which thy good¦nes hath builded. Nowe whiles I liue, O Iesu haue mercy on me: for if I dye oute of thy fauour, it wyll be to late af∣terwarde to call for thy mercy. Whiles I haue time to repente, looke vppon me with thy mercifull eies, as thou dyddest vouchsafe to looke vpon Peter thyne A∣postle, that I maye bewayle my synfull life, and obtaine thy fauour and die ther∣in. I acknowledge that if thou shuldest deale with me according to thy Iustice, I haue deserued euerlastynge deathe. Therfore I appeale to thy high throne of mercy, trusting to obtaine thy fauour not for my merites, but for thy merites (O Iesu) who hast geuen thy self an ac∣ceptable sacrifics to thy father to please his wrath, and to bryng al sinners true∣lye repenting and amendinge their euil life, vnto his fauour agayne. Accept me (O Lorde) among the number of theym that shall be saued, forgeue me my syn∣nes, geue me grace to leade a godly and innocent life, graunte me thy heauenlys wisedome, inspire my hart with Faith, Hope and Charity, geue me grace to be humble in prosperitie, pacient in aduer∣sitie
obedient to my rulers, faithful vn∣to theym that truste me, dealing truclye with all men, to lyue chastlye in wed∣locke, to abhorre adulterye, fornication and all vncleanes, to doo good after my power vnto al menne, to hurte no man that thy name mays be glorified in me duringe this present lyfe, & that I after∣warde maye attayne euerlastinge lyfe, through thy mercye and the merites of thy greuous Passion. Amen ¶ A Prayer for true mortification and quietnes of the harte in God. MOste blessed Lorde Iesu, graunt me thy grace that it maye be alwaye wyth mee, woorke in me and perseuere with me vnto the ende, and that I maye euer desire and will that is most pleasaunt and moste acceptable to thee: thy will be my will, and my will alway to followe thy will: be there al∣way in me one will and one desire with thee, so that I maye haue noo power to wil or not to wil, but euen as thou wilt or wilt not, and graunt me that I may
dye to all thinges that be in the world, and for thee to loue & be glad to be dys∣pised, and to be as a man vnknowen to this worlde. Graunt me also, aboue al that can be desired, that I may reste me in thee, and fully in thee may pacify my hearte: for thou lorde art the very true peace of harte, and the perfect reste both of body and soule, and without thee all thinges be greuous and vnquiet. Wher¦fore let my hart finde peace and comfort in that peace yt is in thee on highe, one blessed and one endlesse goodnes, & reste therin for euermore. So be it. ¶ A prayer to be sayd before the hearing or readynge of goddes word. ALmighty God and most mercifull father, whose word is a lanterne to our fete and a lighte vnto oure steppes, we most humblye besech thee to illuminate our mindes, that we may vn¦derstand the mysteries conteyned in thy holy lawe, and into the selfe same thing that we godly vnderstande, we maye be vertuousely transeformed, so that of no parte wee offende thy dyuine maiestye, through our Sauiour Iesus Christ.
An prayer for remission of synnes. WHen we loke backe and behold our sinfull life paste (O Lorde) what a dūgeon of errours, vice, and wickednes openeth it selfe vnto vs? so that ther is no mā but he must nedes be ashamed of him self, when he calleth to mind what he hath bene: and tremble when he considereth the wickednes and sinfull course of his lyfe to come. For who shall vndertake that the rest of our lyfe shalbe any better then that is past? howe can we then sufficiently magnifie and prayse thy great mercy which haste differred thy punishement so longe? be∣holdynge therfore this our daungerous & miserable state, we come vnto thee (O thou great & mighty iudge) in trēblyng & feare, hūbly besechig thee not to heape vpon vs thy deserued vēgeaunce, but let thy tender kyndnesse and loue thou bea∣rest to Iesus christ thy dere son our gra∣cious lorde & redemer, couer our iniqui∣ties: for whose sake (though we deserue al extremitie) thou doest pardon vs. If thou lord shalt straitly marke our iniquities (O lord) who shalbe hable to abide it?Psal. 130.
A prayer against our spiritual enne∣mies, the deuyll, the worlde, and the fleshe. O Lorde god, the deuyl go∣eth about lyke a roaryng lyon sekyng whō he may deuoure, the fleshe lusteth agaynste the spirits, the worlde perswadeth vnto vanities, that we maye forget thee our Lorde God and so for euer be dampned. Thus are we miserablye on euery syde beset and besieged of cruell and vnrest∣full ennemies, and lyke at euery momēt to perish if we be not defended with thy godly power agaynste theyr tyranny. We therfore poore & wretched synners, dispayring of our owne strength (which in dede is none) most hartely praye thee to endue vs with strength from aboue that we may be hable through thy helpe with stronge faith to resist Sathā, with feruent prayer to mortifie the lustes of the fleshe, with continual meditation of thy holy lawe to auoyd the foolyshe va∣nities and transitorye pleasures of this wicked worlde: that through thy grace
beinge set at lybertie from the power of these our mortall ennemies, maye lyue and serue thee in holynesse and ryghte∣ousnesse al the dayes of our lyfe. worke this in vs O holy and blessed spirite, to∣gether with the Father & the sonne one true and euerliuing god, ful of maiestie and power, whiche with thy heauenlye inspirations quickeneste the myndes of them that afore were dead in sinne, ma∣kest ioyful the hartes of the faythful pe∣nitent, bringest into the waye of truthe al suche as haue erred and gone astray, comfortest the sowles of them that hun∣ger and thyrst after ryghteousnesse, and plenteously enrychest those with diuerse gyftes which aske them in Iesus Chry∣stes name: purifie our hartes we besech thee, inflame them with the fyre of thy loue, arme vs against the crafty assaul∣tes of subtyl sathan, agaynst the vayne plcsures of the wicked world, & agaynst the sinfull lustes of fylthy fleshe, ye we beynge endued with grace from aboue by thy holy inspiration, may walke for∣wardes in newenesse of lyfe, in true ho∣lynes and righteousnes all the dayes of our lyfe. Fyl our hartes with newe af∣ctes
and spirituall motions, & renewe vs both in body and sowle that we may dye vnto olde Adam; & lyue vnto righte∣ousenes through a liuely faythe whiche worketh by Charitie: whiche synguler gyfte of faythe graunt vnto vs, that we truely beleuing in thee (O eternal God the father the sonne and the holy ghost) and fully perswaded of the truthe of thy holy word, may be made thy sonnes and inheritours of the euerlastynge ioyes: whiche as they are great and vnspeake∣able, so are there fewe that do inioy thē. For straite is the way & narrowe is the gate that leadeth therunto, & fewe there be that fynde it. Notwithstandinge O god thou hast a lyttell flocke, to whō it is thy pleasure to geue that ioyful king∣dome, whose names are wrytten in the boke of lyfe. Make vs therfore of that nombre (for Iesus Christes sake) & place vs amongest those thy shepe whiche shall stande on thy ryght hande to receiue that blessed inhe∣rytance and dwell with thee for euermore.
An other prayer. REmēbre not O lorde god our olde iniquites, but let thy mercy spede¦ly preuent vs, for we be very my∣serable: help vs god our sauiour, and for the glory of thy name deliuer vs, be mer¦ciful & forgeue our synnes. Let not the wicked people saye, where is their god? we be thy people & the shepe of thy pas∣sture, we shal geue thākes vnto thee for euer: frō age to age we shal set forth thy lawde and praise: to thee be honour and glory world without ende. Amen. 2. Peter. 3. The day of the Lord will come as a theefe in the night, in the which day the heauens shall peryshe with ter∣rible noise, and the Elementes shall melt with heate, and the earth with the worckes yt are therin shal burne vp. Seinge therfore that all these things shall perish, what maner per¦sons oughte ye to be in holy conuer∣sacion and godlines, loking for and hastening vnto the day of God.
¶ The Letany and suffrages. O GOD the father of heauen: haue mercye vppon vs myse∣rable sinners. O God the father. &c. O god the Son redemer of the worlde: haue mercy vpon vs myserable sinners. O God the sonne redemer. &c. O God the holy ghoste procedinge from the father, and the sonne: haue mercye vpon vs myserable sinners. O God the holy ghost. &c. O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinitie, three persons and one god: haue mercye vpon vs miserable sinners. O holye, blessed, and glorious. &c. Remember not Lorde oure offences nor the offences of oure forefathers, neyther take thou vengeaunce of oure synnes: Spare vs good Lorde, spare thy people whom thou hast redemed wyth thy most precious bludde, and be not angry with vs for euer. Spare vs good lorde. From all euyl and mischiefe, from syn, from the craftes & assaultes of the deuil, from thy wrathe and from euerlastynge
dampnation. Good lorde deliuer vs. From all blindnes of hart, from pryde, vayne glorye and hipocrisie, from enuie hatred and malice, and al vncharitable∣nes. Good Lorde deliuer vs. From Fornication, and al other deadly synne, and from al the deceyptes of the world, the fleshe, and the deuyl. Good Lorde deliuer vs. From lightnynge and tempeste, from plague pestilence and famine, from bat∣tel and murder, and from sodain death. Good Lorde deliuer vs. From al sedicion and priuie conspiracy, from all false doctrine and heresy, from hardnes of harte, and contempte of thy worde and commaundement. Good Lorde deliuer vs. By the mistery of thy holy incarnacion, by thy holy natiuitie and circumsition, by thy baptisme fasting, and temptaciō. Good Lorde deliuer. By thyne agony and blouddy sweat, by thy Crosse and Passion, by thy precious death and burial, by thy glorious resur∣rection and ascention, and by the com∣myng
of the holy ghost. Good Lorde deliuer vs. In al time of our tribulation, in al time of our wealth, in the houre of death, and in the day of iudgement. Good Lorde deliuer vs. We synners do beseche thee to heare vs (O Lorde God) & that it may please the to rule and gouerne thy holy churche v∣niuersally in the right waye. We beseche thee to heare vs. &c. That it maye please thee to keepe and strengthen in the true worshippinge of thee, in ryghteousnes and bolines of life thy seruaunt Elizabeth our most gracy∣ous Queene and gouernour. We besech thee to heare vs. &c. That it may please the to rule her hart in thy faythe, feare, and loue, and that she may euermore haue affiaunce in thee and euer seke thy honour and glorye. We besech thee to heare vs. &c. That it may please thee to be her defen∣der and keper geuing her the victory o∣uer all her enemies. We besech thee to heare vs. &c. That it maye please thee to illuminate all Byshoppes Pastours and ministers
of the church with trew knowledge and vnderstandyng of thy woorde, and that both by theyr preachynge and lyuinge, they maye set it foorth and shewe it ac∣cordynglye. We besech thee to heare vs. &c. That it maye please thee to endue the lordes of the counsell, and all the nobi∣litye, with grace, wisedome, and vnder∣standynge. We besech thee to heare vs. &c. That it may please thee to blesse & kepe the Magistrates, geuyng them grace to execute iustice and to mainteine truth. We besech thee to heare vs. &c. That it maye please thee to blesse and keepe all thy people. We besech thee to heare vs. &c. That it maye please thee to geue to all nacions, vnitie, peace, and concorde. We besech thee to heare vs. &c. That it maye please thee to geue vs an harte to loue and dreade thee, and dily∣gentlye to lyue after thy commaunde∣mentes. We besech thee to heare vs. &c. That it maye please thee to geue al thy people increase of grace to heare meke∣ly
thy word, and to receyue it with pure affection and to bryng forthe the fruites of the spiryte. We besech thee to heare vs. &c. That it may please thee to brynge into the waye of truth all such as haue erred and are deceyued. We besech thee to heare vs. &c. That it maye please thee to strengthen suche as do stande, and to comforte and helpe the weake hearted, and to raise vp thē that fal, and finally to beate downe Sathan vnder our fete. We besech thee to heare vs. &c. That it maye please thee to succoure, helpe, and comforte all that be in daun∣ger, necessitie and tribulacion. We besech thee to heare vs. &c. That it maye please thee to preserue all that trauayle by lande or by water, all women labouryng of chyld, al sicke per∣sons and younge chyldren and to shewe thy pytie vpon all prysoners & captiues. We besech thee to heare vs. &c. That it maye please thee to defend, and prouyde for the fatherles chyldren and wydowes, and all that be desolate and oppressed
We besech thee to heare vs. &c. That it maye please thee to haue mercy vpon all men. We besech thee to heare vs. &c. That it maye please thee to forgeue our enemies, persecutours and slaunderers, and to tourne their hartes. We besech thee to heare vs. &c. That it may please thee to giue and pre¦serue to our vse the kindly fruites of the earth, so as in due tyme we maye enioy them. We besech thee to heare vs. &c. That it may please thee to gyue vs true repentaunce, to forgeue vs all oure syn∣nes, negligences, and ignoraunces, and to endue vs with the grace of thy holye spirite, to amend our lyues accordyng to thy holy worde. We besech thee to heare vs. &c. Sonne of God, we beseche thee to heare vs. Sonne of god we besech. &c. O Lambe of God that takest awaye the synnes of the world. Graunt vs thy peace. O Lambe of God, that takest away the sinnes of the world.
Haue mercy vpon vs. O Christ heare vs. O Christ heare vs. Lord haue mercy vpon vs. Christ haue mercy vpon vs. Christ haue mercy vpon vs. Lorde haue mercy vpon vs. Lorde haue mercy vpon vs. Our father which art. &c. And leade vs not into temptation. But deliuer vs from euil. Amen. The versicle. O Lorde deale not with vs after our sinnes. Aunswere. Neither reward vs after our iniquities. Let vs praye. O God mercifull father, that des∣pisest not the sighing of a con∣trite hart, nor the desire of such as be sorowfull, mercifully as∣syste oure prayers that we make before thee in all our troubles and aduersities when so euer they oppresse vs, and gra∣ciousely heare vs, that those euils whi∣che the craft and subtilty of the deuill or man worketh against vs, be brought to
naughte, and by the prouidence of thy goodnes they may be disperied, that we thy seruantes being hurt by no persecu∣tion, maye euermore geue thankes vnto thee in thy holy church thorough Iesus Christ our lorde. Amen. O Lord arise, helpe vs, and deliuer vs for thy names sake. O God we haue heard with our eares, and oure fathers haue declared vnto vs the noble works that thou didst in theyr dayes, and in the olde time before them. O Lord arise, helpe vs, and deliuer vs for thy honour. Glory be to the father. &c. As it was in the beginnyng. &c. Frō our ennemies defend vs, O Christ. Graciously looke vppon our afflic∣tions. Pitifullye beholde the sorowes of oure harte. Mercifullye forgeue the synnes of thy people. Fauourably with mercy heare our pra∣yers. O sonne of Dauid haue mercy vp∣pon vs. Both now and euer vouchsafe to heare
vs, O Christ. Graciously heare vs, O Christ, gra¦ciously heare vs, O Lord Christ. Versicle. O Lorde let thy mercye be shewed vpon vs. Aunswere As we do put our trust in thee. Let vs praye. WE humblye beseche thee (O father) mercyfully to looke vpon oure infirmities, and for the glorye of thy names sake, turne from vs all those euyls, that we most righteously haue deserued. And graunte that in al our troubles we may put oure whole truste and confidence in thy mercye and euermore serue thee in holynes and purenes of liuinge, to thy honoure and glory through our onelye mediatour and aduocate Iesus Christe our Lorde. Amen. ¶ A prayer for the Queenes Maiestie. O Lord our heauenly Father, high & mightye, Kyng of Kynges, Lorde
of Lordes, the onely Ruler of Prynces, which doest frō thy throne behold al the dwellers vpō the earth: most hartely we besech thee, wyth thy fauour to beholde our mooste gracyous Souerayne Ladye Queene Elizabeth, and so replenishe her with the grace of thy holye spyrite, that she may alwaye inclyne to thy wyll, and walke in thy way. Indue her plentifully with heauenlye gyftes: Graunte her in health and welth long to lyue, strength her that shee maye vanquishe and ouer∣come all her enemyes. And finally after thys lyfe, she maye attaine euerlastinge ioy and felicitie. Through Iesus Christ our Lorde. Amen. ¶ A prayer for pastours and mynis∣ters of the Church. ALmyghty and euerlastinge God, which onely woorkest great mar∣vailes, sende downe vppon oure Pastours, and Mynisters and al congre∣gacions committed to their charge, the healthfull spiryte of thy grace, and that they may truely please thee: Powre vp∣on them the continuall due of thy bles∣sing: Graunte thys (O Lorde) for the ho∣noure
of oure aduocate and mediatoure Iesus Chryst. ¶ For rayne yf the time require. O God, heauenly Father, which by thy Sonne Iesus Christ hast promysed to all them that seke thy kyngdome, & the righteousnes ther∣of, all thynges necessary to theyr bodily sustenaunce: Sende vs we beseche thee, in this oure necessitye, suche moderate raine and shewres, that we may receaue the fruites of the earth to our comforte, & to thy honoure, through Iesus Christe our Lord. Amen. ¶ For faire weather. O Lorde God, which for the synne of man dyddeste once drowne all the worlde excepte. viii. persons, and after∣warde of thy greate mercye diddest pro∣mise neuer to destroye it so agayne: wee humblye beseche thee that although we for our iniquities: haue worthely deser∣ued this plague of rayne & waters, yet vppon oure true repentaunce thou wilt
sende vs suche weather, wherby we may receyue the fruictes of the earth in due season, and learne both by thy punyshe∣mente to amende oure liues, and for thy clemency to geue thee prayse and glory, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ In the time of dearth and famine. O God heauenlye father, whose gifte it is that the rayne dooeth¦fal, the earth is fruitful, beastes encrease, and fyshes do multyplye: Be∣holde, we besech thee, the afflyctions of thy people, and graunt that the scarcitie and derth (which we do now most iustly suffer for oure iniquitie) maye throughe thy goodnes be mercifullie tourned into cheapenes and plentye, for the loue of Iesus Christ oure lord, to whome wyth thee and the holye ghoste, be prayse for euer. Amen. ¶ In the time of warre. O Almightie GOD, kinge of al Kynges and gouernoure of all thinges, whose power no crea∣ture
is able to resiste, to whom it belon∣geth iustly to punysh synners, and to be merciful vnto them that truelye repent: Saue and deliuer vs (we humbly besech thee) from the handes of our enemies, a∣bate theyr pryde, asswage their malyce, and confounde theyr deuises, that we be∣ynge armed wyth thy defence maye be preserued euermore from all perylles to glorify thee, which art ye only giuer of al victory through the merytes of thy one∣ly sonne: Iesus Christ our lord. Amen ¶ A praier of Chrisostome. ALmyghty God which hast geuen vs grace at this time with one ac∣corde to make oure common sup∣plycations vnto thee, and doest promyse that when two or thre be gathered toge¦ther in thy name, thou wilt graunt their requestes: fulfyl now O lord the desires and peticions of thy seruauntes as may be moste expedient for them grauntinge vs in thys worlde knoweledge of thy trueth, and in the worlde to come life e∣uerlastinge. Amen. FINIS.
