11107 99838148 2511
THE WONDERFVL DISCOVERIE OF THE Witchcrafts of Margaret and Phillip Flower, daughters of Ioan Flower neere Beuer Castle: Executed at Lincolne, March 11. 1618. Who were specially arraigned and condemned before Sir Henry Hobart, and Sir Edward Bromley, Iudges of As∣sise, for confessing themselues actors in the destruction of Henry Lord Rosse, with their damnable practises against others the Children of the Right Honourable FRANCIS Earle of Rutland. Together with the seuerall Examinations and Confessions of Anne Baker, Ioan Willimot, and Ellen Greene, Witches in Leicestershire.
THE WONDERFVLL DISCOVERIE OF THE Witch-craftes of Margraet and Phillip Flower▪ Daughters of Ioan Flower, by BEAVER CASTLE, and ex∣ecuted at LINCOLNE the 11. of March. 1618. MY meaning is not to make any contentious Argu∣ments about the discour∣ses, distinction or de∣finition of Witchcraft, the power of Diuells, the nature of Spirits, the force of Charmes, the secrets of Incantation, and such like; because the Scriptures are full of prohibitions to this purpose, and pro∣claimes death to the presumptuous attemp∣ters
of the same: Besides both Princes (yea our owne learned and most iudicious King) Philosophers, Poets, Chronologers, Histo∣riographers, and many worthy Writers, haue concurred and concluded in this; that diuers impious and facinorous mischiefes haue beene effectuated through the instru∣ments of the Diuell, by permission of God, so that the actors of the same haue carried away the opinion of the world, to doe that which they did by Witchcraft, or at least to be esteemed Witches, for bringing such and such things to passe: For howsoeuer the learned haue charactred delinquents in this kinde by titles of sundry sortes, and most significant attributes; as Pythonissae dealing with artificiall Charmes; Magi anciently re∣puted so, for extraordinary wisedome and knowledge in the secrets of simples and hearbes; Chaldei, famous for Astronomy and Astrology; Necromancers for practising to raise dead bodies, and by them to foretell e∣uents of the earth; Geomantici, for conuer∣sing with Spirits, and vsing Inchantations;
Genethliaci, for presuming on the calculating of Natiuities, or if you will, assuming the credit of Figure-casting; Ventriloqui, for speaking with hollow voyces as if they were possessed with Diuells; Venefici, for dealing with Poyson, and either killing or curing that way: For you must vnderstand howe∣uer the Professors aforesaid practise mur∣ther and mischiefe, yet many times they Pre∣tend cures and preseruation; with many o∣thers, carrying the shew of great learning and admired knowledge; yet haue they all but one familier tearme with vs in English called Witches. As for the conceit of wise-men or wise woemen, they are all meerely coseners and deceiuers; so that if they make you beleeue that by their meanes you shall heare of things lost or stolne, it is either done by Confederacy, or put off by protraction to deceiue you of your money. Only (as I said before) there bee certaine men and women growne in yeares, and ouer-growne with Melancholly and A∣theisme, who out of a malicious dispositi∣on
against their betters, or others thriuing by them; but most times from a heart-bur∣ning desire of reuenge, hauing entertained some impression of displeasure, and vnkind∣nesse, study nothing but mischiefe and exo∣ticke practises of loathsome Artes and Sci∣ences: yet I must needes say, that sometimes the fained reputation of wisedome, cunning, and to be reputed a dangerous and skilfull person, hath so preuailed with diuers, that they haue taken vpon them indeed to know more then God euer afforded any creature, & to performe no lesse then the Creator both of Heauen & earth; making you beleeue with Medea, that they can raise tempests, turne the Sunne into blood, pull the Moone out of her Spheare, and saile ouer the Sea in a coc∣kle shell, according to the Poet. Flectere si nequeam Superos, Acheronta mouebo. If Art doe faile to moue the Gods consent vnto my minde: I will the Diuells raise, to doe what they can in their kinde.
But howsoeuer speciall persons are trans∣ported with an opinion of their owne worth, and preuailing in this kinde, yet by lamenta∣ble experience we know too well, what mon∣strous effects haue bene produced, euen to the horror of the hearers, and damnation of their owne soules by such kinde of people: For as it is in the tale of the enuious man, that put out one of his eyes to haue his companion loose both; so fareth it with them and worse, to giue away their soules to bee reuenged of their aduersaries bodies, wherein the monstrous subtilty of the Di∣uell is so apparant, that it is wonderfull one way to relate, and lamentable another way to obserue the same. For no sooner shall such motiues poyson the inward con∣ceite or apprehension of such damnable Caitiffes: But then steppeth forth the Di∣uell, and not onely sheweth them the way, but prescribeth the manner of effecting the same, with facility and easinesse, assu∣ring that hee himselfe will attend them in some familiar shape of Rat, Cat, Toad,
Bird, Cricket, &c: yea effectuate whatsoeuer they shall demaund or desire, and for their better assurance and corroboration of their credulity, they shall haue palpable and forci∣ble touches of sucking, pinching, kissing, clo∣sing, colling and such like: wherevpon, with∣out any feare of God or Man, knowledge of Christ, hope of redemption, confidence of mercy, or true beleefe that there is any other thing to bee looked after but this present World; according to that Athiesticall posi∣tion of Epicurus. Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas. Eat, drink, sport, play and take thy pleasures rest: For after death, who knowes what shall be best. They admit of those execrable conditions of commutation of soules for the entertai∣ning of the spirits, and so fall to their abho∣minable practises, continuing in the same till God laugh them to scorne, and will by no meanes suffer them to abuse his holy name nor deceiue others by their prophane liues
any longer: Witnesse for the generall those infinite Treatises of many of them conuin∣ced by Law, and condemned to death, to the fearefull example of all carnall and hypo∣criticall Christians: but more especially you may ouer-looke (if you please) that learned Discourse of Daemonologie, composed in forme of a Dialogue, by the High and mighty Prince, IAMES by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, &c. and printed (as I take it) accor∣ding to the coppy of Edenburgh, 1603. As also a Treatise of Witch-craft made by that learned Mr. Alexander Roberts Preacher at Kings-Line in Norfolke, 1615. vpon the discouery of the Witch-crafts of Mary Smith, wife of Henry Smith Glouer, with her vocall contract betweene the Diuell and her selfe, in sollemne tearmes, and such like impostu∣ring filthinesse: with many hurts and mis∣chiefes which thereby she procured: As al∣so a certaine discouery 1611. made by Iohn Cotta Doctor of Phisicke in Northampton of Empericks, woemen about sicke persons:
Quacksaluers, and fugitiues, which seeme to worke iuggling wonders, Surgeons, Apothe∣caries, practisers by spells, the true discouery of Witch-craft, especially in the sicke with many instances in that kind, Wisards, and seruants, of Phisitions, who may bee called ministring helpers: To this hee hath added the Methodian learned deceiuer, or hereticke Phisition, Astrologers, Ephemerides-maisters, Coniecters by vrine, Trauellers, and last of all, the true Artist his right description and election. As also a Dialogue concerning Witches and Witchcraft, composed by George Gifford, Minister of Gods word in Maldon, 1603. Wherein the cunning of the Diuell is discouered, both concerning the deceiuing of witches, and seducing of o∣thers into many great errors: As also an an∣cient discourse of the fearefull practises of foure notorious French Witches, with the manner of their strange execution. As also the seuerall and damnable practises of Mo∣ther Sutton of Milton Miles in the County of Bedford, and Mary Sutton her Daughter,
who were arraigned, condemned, and execu∣ted for the same: As also 1612. the wonder∣full discouery of Witches in Lancashire, be∣ing 19. in number, notorious for many infa∣med actions, and conuicted before Sr. Iames Altham, and S. Edward Bromley, Barons of the Exchequer, together with the arraign∣ment and triall of Iennet Preston, at Yorke, with her fearefull execution for the murthe∣ring of Mr. Lisker by Witch-craft; with infi∣nite other relations concerning the generall conuiction of Witches, and their practises, and condemnation of the particular opinion of some men, who suppose there bee none at all, or at least that they doe not personally or truely effect such things as are imputed vnto them, and which out of some dangerous im∣pression of melancholly, vaineglory, or some other diseased operation, they assume to themselues by reason of a former contract with the Diuell. And so much for the certain∣ty of Story, and fearefulnesse of the truth con∣cerning the damnable practises of Witches and cunning of the Diuell to deceiue them.
But yet because the mind of man may be carried away with many idle coniectures, ei∣ther that woemen confessed these things by extreamiy of torture, or that ancient exam∣ples are by this time forgotten (although the particulars are vpon record, for the benefit of all posteritie:) Or that they were besides themselues, or subiect to some weake deuise or other, rather to bring in question the in∣tegrity of Iustice; then to make odious the liues of such horrible offendors. I haue pre∣sumed to present on the Stage of verity for the good of my Country & the loue of truth, the late wofull Tragedy of the destruction of the Right Honourable the Earle of Rutlands Children, who to his eternall praise procee∣ded yet both religiously and charitably a∣gainst the offenders, leauing their prosecuti∣on to the law and submitting himselfe, and deplorable case to the prouidence of God, who afflicteth his best seruants with punish∣ments, and many times, sendeth extraordi∣nary vengeance as well on the innocent, as the bad deseruer, to manifest his glory:
Therefore by way of Caution I aduise thee (gentle Reader) whosoeuer thou art, to take heede how thou doest either despise the power of God in his Creatures, or vilipend the subtilty and fury of the Diuell, as Gods instrument of vengeance, considering that truth in despight of gaine sayers will pre∣uaile, according to that principle: Magna est veritas & preualebit. The Story followes. AFter the Right Honourable Sr. Francis Manners succeeded his Brother in the Earledome of Rutland: and so not onely tooke possession of Beauer Castle, but of all other his demeanes, Lordships, Townes, Mannors, Lands, and Reuennues appropri∣ate to the same Earledome: hee proceeded so honourably in the course of his life, as neither displacing Tenants, dischar∣ging seruants, denying the accesse of the poore, welcoming of strangers, and per∣forming all the duties of a noble Lord, that
hee fastened as it were vnto himselfe the loue and good opinion of the Countrey wherein he walked the more cheerefully and remark∣able, because his honourable Countesse mar∣ched arme in arme with him in the same race; so that Beauer Castle was a continuall Pallace of entertainment, and a daily recep∣tacle for all sorts both rich and poore, especi∣ally such auncient people as neighboured the same; amongst whom one Ioane Flower, with her Daughters Margaret and Phillp were not onely relieued at the first from thence, but quickly entertained as Chair-women, and Margaret admitted as a continuall dweller in the Castle, looking both to the poultrey a∣broad and the wash-house within dores: In which life they continued with equall cor∣respondency, till something was discouered to the noble Lady, which concerned the misdemeanour of these women. And al∣though such honourable persons shall not want of all sorts of people, either to bring thē newes, tales, reports, or to serue their turne in all offices whatsoeuer; so that it may well
bee said of them, as it is of great Kings and Princes, that they haue large hands, wide eares, and piercing sights to discouer the vn∣swept corners of their remotest confines, to reach euen to their furthest borders, and to vnderstand the secrets of their meanest sub∣iects: yet in this matter, neither were they busie-bodies, flatterers, malicious politi∣ans, vnderminers, nor supplanters one of anothers good fortune; but went simply to worke, as regarding the honor of the Earle and his Lady, and so by degrees gaue light to their vnderstanding to apprehend their com∣plaints. First, that Ioane Flower the Mother was a monstrous malicious woman, full of oathes, curses, and imprecations irreligious, and for any thing they saw by her, a plaine Atheist; besides of late dayes her very coun∣tenance was estranged, her eyes were fiery and hollow, her speech fell and enuious, her deeanour strange and exoticke, and her conuersation sequestred; so that the whole course of her life gaue great suspition that she was a notorious Witch, yea some of her
neighbours dared to affirme that shee dealt with familiar spirits, and terrified them all with curses and threatning of reuenge, if there were neuer so little cause of displeasure and vnkindnesse. Concerning Margaret, that shee often resorted from the Castle to her Mother, bringing such prouision as they thought was vnbefitting for a seruant to pur∣loyne, and comming at such vnseasonable houres, that they could not but coniecture some mischiefe between them, and that their extraordinary ryot & expences, tended both to rob the Lady, & to maintaine certaine de∣boist and base company which frequented this Ioane Flowers house the mother, & espe∣cially her youngest Daughter. Concerning Phillip, that she was lewdly transported with the loue of one Th: Simpson, who presumed to say, that shee had bewitched him: for hee had no power to leaue her, and was as hee supposed maruellously altred both in mde and body, since her acquainted company: these complaints began many yeares be∣fore either their conuiction, or publique
apprehension: Notwithstanding such was the honour of this Earle and his Lady; such was the cunning of this monstrous wo∣man in obseruation towards them; such was the subtilty of the Diuell to bring his purposes to passe; such was the pleasure of God to make tryall of his seruants; and such was the effect of a damnable womans wit and malitious enuy, that all things were carried away in the smooth Channell of li∣king and good entertainment on euery side, vntill the Earle by degrees conceiued some mislike against her; and so, peraduenture estranged himselfe from that familiaritie and accustomed conferrences hee was wont to haue with her: vntill one Peate offered her some wrong; against whom shee com∣plained, but found that my Lord did not affect her clamours, and malicious infor∣mation, vntill one Mr. Vauasor abando∣ned her company, as either suspicious of her lewd life, or distasted with his owne misliking of such base and poore Crea∣tures, whom no body loued but the Earles
houshold; vntill the Countesse misconcei∣uing of her daughter Margaret, and discoue∣ring some vndecencies both in her life and neglect of her businesse, discharged her from lying any more in the Castle, yet gaue her 40. s. a bolster, & a mattresse of wooll: com∣manding her to go home, vntil the slacknesse of her repayring to the Castle, as shee was wont, did turne her loue and liking toward this honourable Earle and his family into hate and rancor: wherevpon despighted to bee so neglected, and exprobrated by her neighbours for her Daughters casting out of dores, and other conceiued displeasures, she grew past all shame and Woman-hood, and many times cursed them all that were the cause of this discontentment, and made her so loathsome to her former familiar friends, and beneficiall acquaintance. When the Diuell perceiued the inficious disposition of this wretch, and that she and her Daughters might easily bee made instru∣ments to enlarge his Kingdome, and bee as it were the executioners of his vengeance;
not caring whether it lighted vpon inno∣cents or no, he came more neerer vnto them, and in plaine tearmes to come quickly to the purpose, offered them his seruice, and that in such a manner, as they might easily com∣mand what they pleased: For hee would at∣tend you in such prety formes of dog, cat, or Rat, that they should neither be terrified, nor any body else suspicious of the matter. Vpon this they agree, and (as it should seeme) giue away their soules for the seruice of such spi∣rits, as he had promised them; which filthy conditions were ratified with abhominable kisses, and an odious sacrifice of blood, not leauing out certaine charmes and coniurati∣ons with which the Diuell deceiued them, as though nothing could bee done without ceremony, and a solemnity of orderly rati∣fication. By this time doth Sathan triumph, and goeth away satisfied to haue caught such fish in the net of his illusions: By this time are these women Diuels incarnate, and grow proud againe in their cunning and artificiall power, to doe what mischiefe they listed▪ By
this time they haue learnt the manner of in∣chantations, Spells and Charmes: By this time they kill what Cattle they list, and vn∣der the couert of flattery and familiar enter∣tainment, keepe hidden the stinging ser∣pent of mallice, and a venomous incli∣nation to mischiefe: By this time is the Earle and his familie threatened, and must feele the burthen of a terrible tempest, which from these womens Diuellish deuises fell vppon him, hee neither suspecting nor vn∣derstanding the same: By this time both himselfe and his honourable Countesse, are many times subiect to sicknesse and extra∣ordinary conuulsions, which they taking as gentle corrections from the hand of God, submit with quietnesse to his mercy, and study nothing more, then to glorifie their Creator in heauen, and beare his crosses on earth. At last, as mallice increased in these damnable Women; so his family felt the smart of their reuenge and inficious dis∣position. For his eldest Sonne Henry Lord
Rosse sickened very strangely, and after a while died: his next named Francis Lord Rosse accordingly, was seuerely tormented by them, and most barbarously and inhumane∣ly tortured by a strange sicknesse; not long after the Lady Katherine was set vpon by their dangerous and diuellish practises, and many times in great danger of life, through extreame maladies and vnusuall fits, nay (as it should seeme, and they afterwards confes∣sed) both the Earle and his Countesse were brought into their snares as they imagined, and indeed determined to keepe them from hauing any more children. Oh vnheard of wickednesse and mischieuous damnation? Notwithstanding all this did the noble Earle attend his Maiesty, both at New-market be∣fore Christmas, and at Christmas at White∣hall; bearing the losse of his Children most nobly, and little suspecting that they had miscarried by Witch-craft, or such like in∣uentions of the Diuell, vntill it pleased God to discouer the villanous practises of these Woemen, and to command the Diuell
from executing any further vengeance on innocents, but leaue them to their shames, and the handes of Iustice, that they might not onely be confounded for their villanous practises, but remaine as a notorious example to all ages of his iudgement and fury. Thus were they apprehended about Christmas, and carried to Lincolne Iayle, after due exa∣mination, before sufficient Iustices of the Peace, and discreete Maiestrates, who won∣dred at their audacious wickednes, but Ioane Flowr the Mother before conuiction, (as they say) called for Bread and Butter, and wished it might neuer goe through her if she were guilty of that wherevpon shee was ex∣amined; so mumbling it in her mouth, ne∣uer spake more wordes after, but fell downe and dyed as shee was carryed to Lincolne Goale, with a horrible excruciation of soule and body, and was buried at Ancaster. When the Earle heard of their apprehensi∣on, hee hasted downe with his brother Sr. George, and somtimes examining them him∣selfe, and sometimes sending them to others;
at last left them to the triall of Law, before the Iudges of assise at Lincolne; and so they were conuicted of murther and executed accor∣dingly, about the 11. of March, to the terror of all the beholders, and example of such dis∣solute and abhominable Creatures, and be∣cause you shall haue both cause to glorifie God for this discouery, and occasion to ap∣prehend the strangenesse of their liues, and truth of their proceedings: I thought it both meete and conuenient to lay open their own Examinations and Euidences against one another, with such apparrant circumstan∣ces, as doe not onely shew the cause of their mislike and distasting against the Earle and his family; but the manner of their procee∣dings and reuenges, with other particulars belonging to the true and plaine discouery of their villany and Witch-craft.
The Examinations of Anne Baker, Ioane Willimot, and Ellen Greene; as followeth, &c. Anne Baker. Ioane Willimot. Ellen Greene.
THE EXAMINATION of Anne Baker of Bottesford in the County of Leicester Spinster, taken March, 1. 1618. by the Right Honourable, Francis Earle of Rutland, Sir George Manners Knight, two of his Maiesties Iu∣stices of the peace for the Coun∣ty of Lincolne, and Samuel Fle∣ming Doctor of Diuinitie, one of his Maiesties Iustices of the peace for the County of Leicester a∣foresaid. SHE saith that there are foure colours of Planets, Blacke, Yellow, Greene, and Blew, and that Blacke is al∣waies death, and that shee sawe the Blew Plannet strike Thomas Fairebarne, the eldest sonne vnto William Fairebarne of
Bottesford aforesaid by the Pinfold there, within the which time the said William Faire-barne did beat her and breake her head, where∣vppon the said Thomas Faire-barne, did mend. And being asked who did send that Planet? an∣swered it was not I. Further shee saith, that shee saw a hand appeare vnto her, and that shee heard a voyce in the ayre said vnto her: Anne Baker, saue thy selfe, for to morrow thou and thy maister must be slaine: and the next day her maister and shee were in a Cart together; and suddainely shee saw a flash of fire, and said her prayers, and the fire went a∣way, and shortly after a Crow came and picked vpon her cloathes, and shee said her prayers againe, and bad the Crow go to whom he was sent, and the Crow went vnto her Maister, and did beat him to death, and shee with her prayers recouered him to life; but hee was sicke a fortnight after, and saith, that if shee had not had more knowledge then her maister, both he and shee and all the Cat∣tell had beene slaine. Being examined concerning a Childe of Anne Stannidge, which shee was suspected to haue be∣witched
to death; saith, the said Anne Stan∣nidge did deliuer her childe into her hands, and that shee did lay it vpon her skirt, but did no harme vnto it; And being charged by the Mother of the childe, that vpon the burning of the haire and the paring of the nailes of the said childe, the said Anne Baker came in and set her downe, and for one houres space could speake nothing; confesseth shee came into the house of the said Anne Stan∣nidge in great paine, but did not know of the bur∣ning of the haire and nailes of the said Childe; but said she was so sicke that she did not know whi∣ther she went. Being charged that shee bewitched Elizabeth Hough, the wife of William Hough to death, for that shee angred her in giuing her almes of her second bread; confesseth that she was angry with her and said she might haue giuen her of her better bread, for she had gone too often on her errands, but more she saith not. This Examinat confesseth that shee came to Ioane Gylles house, her child being sicke, and that shee intreated this Examinat to look on the Child, and to tell her whether it was forspoken or no, and
this Examinate said it was forspoken; but when the said child died she cannot tell. And being asked concerning Nortley carrying of his Child home vnto his owne house, where the said Anne Baker was, shee asked him, who gaue the said Child that loafe, he told her Antho∣ny Gill, to whom this Examinate said, he might haue had a Child of his owne if hee would haue sought in time for it; which words she confessed shee did speake. Being blamed by Henry Milles in this sort: A fire set on you, I haue had two or three ill nights; to whom shee made answere, you should haue let me alone then, which shee confesseth. The said Anne Baker, March 2. 1618. con∣fessed before Samuel Fleming Doctor of Di∣uinitie, that about 3. yeares agoe, shee went into Northamptonshire, and that at her comming back againe, one Peakes wife and Dennis his wife of Beluoyre told her that my young Lord Henry was dead, and that there was a gloue of the said Lord buried in the ground; and as that gloue did rot and wast, so did the liuer of the said Lord rot and wast.
Further shee said, March 3. 1618. before Sr. George Manners Knight, and Samuel Fle∣ming Doctor of Diuinity, that shee hath a Spirit which hath the shape of a white Dogge, which shee calleth her good Spirit. Samuel Fleming test.
The Examination of Ioan Willimot, taken the 28. of February, in the 16. yeare of the raigne of our So∣ueraigne Lord, IAMES, ouer Eng∣land King &c. and ouer Scotland the 52. before Alexander Am∣cotts Esquire, one of his Maie∣sties Iustices of the peace of the said parts and County. THis Examinat saith, that Ioane Flower told her that my Lord of Rutland had dealt badly with her and that they had put away her Daughter, and that although she could not haue her will of my Lord him∣selfe, yet she had spied my Lords Sonne and had stricken him to the heart. And she saih, that my Lords Sonne was striken with a white Spirit, and that shee can cure some that send vnto her, and that some reward her for her paines, and of some she taketh nothing.
She further saith, that vpon Fryday night last, her Spirit came to her and told her that there was a bad woman at Deeping who had giuen her soule to the Diuell: and that her said Spirit did then appeare vnto her in a more vgly forme then it had formerly done, and that it vrged her much to giue it some∣thing, although it were but a peece of her Girdle, and told her that it had taken great paines for her, but she saith that she would giue it nothing, and told it that she had sent it to no place but onely to see how my Lord Rosse did, and that her Spirit told her that he should doe well.
The Examination of the said Ioan Willimott, taken the second day of March in the yeare abouesaid, before the said Alexander Amcots. THis Examinate saith, That shee hath a Spirit which shee calleth Pretty, which was giuen vnto her by William Berry of Lang∣holme in Rutlandshire, whom she serued three yeares; and that her Master when hee gaue it vnto her, willed her to open her mouth, and hee would blow into her a Fairy which should doe her good; and that shee opened her mouth, and he did blow into her mouth; and that presently after his blowing, there came out of her mouth a Spirit, which stood vpon the ground in the the shape and forme of a Woman, which Spirit did aske of her her Soule, which shee then promised vnto it, being willed thereunto by her Master. Shee further confesseth, that shee neuer hurt any body, but did helpe diuers that sent for her,
which were stricken or fore-spoken: and that her Spirit came weekely to her, and would tell her of diuers persons that were stricken and forespoken. And shee saith, that the vse which shee had of the Spirit, was to know how those did which shee had vndertaken to amend; and that shee did helpe them by cer∣taine prayers which she vsed, and not by her owne Spirit; neyther did she imploy her Spi∣rit in any thing, but onely to bring word how those did which she had vndertaken to cure. And shee further saith, that her Spirit came vnto her this last night (as she thought) in the forme of a woman, mumbling, but she could not vnderstand what it said. And being as∣ked whether shee were not in a dreame or slumber when shee thought shee saw it, shee said no, and that she was as waking as at this present. Alexander Amcots. Thomas Robinson test.
The Examination of Ioane Willi∣mot of Goadby in the County of Leicester Widdow, taken the 17. of March, 1618▪ by Sir Henry Ha∣stings Knight, and Samuel Fleming Doctor of Diuinitie, two of his Maiesties Iustices of the Peace of the said County of Leicester. SHe saith that she tould one Cookes wife of Stathorne in the said County Labou∣rer, that Iohn Patchett might haue had his Child aliue, if he would haue sought forth for it in time, and if it were not death stricken in her wayes, and that Patchets wife had an euill thing within her, which should make an end of her, and that she knew by her Girdle. She saith further, that Gamaliel Greete of Waltham in the said County Shepheard, had a Spirit like a white Mouse put into him
in his swearing; and that if hee did looke vp∣on any thing with an intent to hurt, it should be hurt, and that hee had a marke on his left arme, which was cut away; and that her own spirit did tell her all this before it went from her. Further she saith, that Ioane Flower, Marga∣ret Flower and shee, did meet about a weeke before Ioane Flowers apprehension, in Black∣borrow-hill, and went from thence home to the said Ioan Flowers house, and there she saw two spirits, one like a Rat, and the other like an Owle; and one of them did sucke vnder her right eare, as shee thought: and the said Ioan told her, that her spirits did say that shee should neyther be hanged nor burnt. Further she saith, that the said Ioan Flower did take vp some earth and spet vpon it, and did worke it with her finger, and put it vp in∣to her purse, and said though shee could not hurt the Lord himselfe, yet shee had sped his Sonne, which is dead. H. Hastings. Samuel Fleming.
The Examination of Ellen Greene of Stathorne in the County of Lei∣cester, taken the 17. of March 1618. by Sir Henry Hastings Kt: and Samuel Fleming D. of Diuini∣tie, two of his Maiesties Iustices of the Peace of his said County. SHee saith, that one Ioan Willimot of Goadby came about sixe yeares since to her in the Wowlds, and perswaded this Examinate to forsake God, and betake her to the diuel, and she would giue her two spirits, to which shee gaue her consent, and thereupon the said Ioan Willimot called two spirits, one in the likenesse of a Kitlin, and the other of a Moldiwarp: the first the said Willimot called pusse, the other hiffe, hiffe, and they presently came to her, & she departing left them with this Examinate, and they leapt on her shoulder, and the kitlin suckt vnder her right eare on her neck, & the Moldiwarp on the left side in the like place.
After they had suckt her, shee sent the Kitlin to a Baker of that Towne, whose name shee remembers not, who had called her Witch & stricken her; and bad her said spirit goe and bewitch him to death: the Moldiwarpe shee then bad go to Anne Dawse of the same towne and bewitch her to death, because she had cal∣led this examinate witch, whore, jade, &c. and within one fortnight after they both dyed. And further this Examinate saith, that she sent both her spirits to Stonesby, to one Willison a husbandman, & Robert Williman a husband∣mans sonne, and bad the Kitlin goe to Willison and bewitch him to death, and the Moldy∣warp to the other, and bewitch him to death, which they did; and within tenne dayes they dyed. These foure were bewitched while this Examinate dwelt at Waltham aforesaid. About three yeares since, this Examinate remoued thence to Stathorne, where she now dwelt: vpon a difference betweene the said Willimot and the wife of Iohn Patchet of the said Stathorne Yeoman, shee the said Willimot called her this Examinate to goe and touch
the said Iohn Patchets Wife and her Childe, which shee did, touching the said Iohn Pat∣chets wife in her bed, and the childe in the Grace-wifes armes, and then sent her said spirits to bewitch them to death, which they did, and so the woman lay languishing by the space of a moneth and more, for then shee dyed; the childe dyed the next day after she touched it. And shee further saith, that the said Ioane Willimot had a spirit sucking on her, vnder the left flanke, in the likenesse of a little white Dogge, which this Examinate saith, that she saw the same sucking in Barley-haruest last, being then at the house of the said Ioan Willi∣mot. And for her selfe, this Examinate further saith, that shee gaue her soule to the Diuell to haue these spirits at her command; for a con∣firmation whereof, she suffered them to suck her alwayes as aforesaid about the change and full of the Moone. H. Hastings. Samuel Fleming.
The Examination of Phillip Flower, Sister of Margaret Flower, and Daughters of Ioane Flower, before Sr William Pelham, and Mr. Butler, Iustices of the Peace, Febr. 4. 1618. Which was brought in at the Assizes as e∣uidence against her Sister Margaret. SHe saith, that her mother and her sister ma∣liced the Earle of Rutland, his Countesse, and their Children, because her Sister Margaret, was put out of the Ladies seruice of Laundry, and exempted from other seruices about the house, wherevpon her said sister, by the commandement of her mother, brought from the Castle the right hand gloue of the Lord Henry Rosse, which she deli∣uered to her Mother; who presently rubd it on the backe of her Spirit Rutterkin, and then put it into hot boyling water, afterward shee pricked it often, and buried it in the yard, wishing the Lord Rosse might neuer thriue, and so her Sister Margaret con∣tinued with her mother, where shee often saw the cat Rutterkin leape on her shoulder, and sucke her necke. Shee further confessed, that shee heard her mo∣ther often curse the Earle and his Lady, and there∣vpon would boyle feathers and blood together, vsing many Diuellish speeches and strange gestures.
The Examination of Margaret Flower, Sister of Phillip Flower▪ &c. about the 22. of Ia∣nuary. 1618. SHe saith and confesseth, that about foure or fiue yeare since her Mother sent her for the right hand gloue of Henry Lord Rosse, after∣ward that her mother bade her goe againe in∣to the Castle of Beauer, and bring downe the gloue or some other thing of Henry Lord Rosse, and shee askt what to doe? Her Mother replyed to hurt my Lord Rosse: wherevpon she brought downe a gloue, and deliuered the same to her Mother, who stroked Rutterkin her Cat with it, after it was dipt in hot wa∣ter, and so prickt it often, after which Henry Lord Rosse fell sicke within a weeke, and was much tor∣mented with the same. She further saith, that finding a gloue about two or three yeares since of Francis Lord Rosse, on a dung-hill, she deliuered it to her mother, who put it into hot water, and after tooke it out and rubd it on Rutterkin the Cat, and bad him goe vpwards, and af∣ter her mother buried it in the yard, and said a mis∣chiefe light on him, but he will mend againe. Shee further saith, that her Mother and shee, and her Sister agreed together to bewitch the Earle and his Lady, that they might haue no more children: and being demanded the cause of this their mallice and ill will; shee saith, that about foure yeares since
the Countesse (growing into some mislike with her) gaue her forty shillings, a bolster, & a mattresse, and bad her lye at home, and come no more to dwell at the Castle; which she not onely tooke in ill part, but grudged at it exceedingly, swearing in her heart to be reuenged. After this, her Mother complained to the Earle against one Peake, who had offered her some wrong, wherein she conceiued that the Earle tooke not her part, as shee expected, which dislike with the rest, exasperated her displeasure against him, and so she watched an opportunity to bee re∣uenged: wherevpon she tooke wooll out of the said mattresse, and a paire of gloues, which were giuen her by Mr. Vauasor, and put them into warme water, mingling them with some blood, and stirring it to∣gether, then she tooke the wooll and gloues out of the water, and rubd them on the belly of Rutterkin her Cat, saying the Lord and the Lady should haue more Children, but it would be long first. Shee further confesseth, that by her mothers com∣mandement, shee brought to her a peece of a hand∣kercher of the Lady Katherine the Earles daughter, and her mother put it into hot water, & then taking it out, rubd it on Rutterkin, bidding him flye, and go; wherevpon Rutterkin whined and cryed Mew: whereupon shee said, that Rutterkin had no power ouer the Lady Katherine to hurt her.
The Examination of Phillip Flower, the 25. of February, 1618. before Francis Earle of Rutland, Francis Lord Willoughby of Ersby, Sr. George Manners, and Sr. William Pelham. SHee confesseth and saith, that shee hath a Spi∣rit sucking on her in the forme of a white Rat, which keepeth her left breast, and hath so done for three or foure yeares, and concerning the agreement betwixt her Spirit and her selfe, she con∣fesseth and saith, that when it came first vnto her, shee gaue her Soule to it, and it promised to doe her good, and cause Thomas Simpson to loue her, if shee would suffer it to sucke her, which shee agreed vnto; and so the last time it suckt was on Tuesday at night, the 23. of February.
The Examination of Margaret Flower, at the same time, &c. SHee confesseth, that she hath two familiar Spi∣rits sucking on her, the one white, the other black spotted; the white sucked vnder her left brest, and the blacke spotted within the inward parts of her secrets. When shee first entertained them she promised them her soule, and they couenanted to doe all things which she commanded them▪ &c. Shee further saith, that about the 30. of Ianuary, last past, being Saturday, foure Diuells appeared vn∣to her in Lincolne layle, at eleauen or twelue a clocke at midnight: The one stood at her beds feete, with a blacke head like an Ape, and spake vnto her; but what, shee cannot well remember, at which shee was very angry because hee would speake no plainer, or let her vnderstand his meaning: the other three were Rutterkin, Little Robin, and Spirit; but shee neuer mistrusted them, nor suspected her selfe, till then. There is another Examination of the said Margaret Flower, taken the fourth of Fe∣bruary, 1618. tending to this effect. THat being asked what shee knoweth concer∣ning the bewitching of the Earle of Rutland, his wife, and children, shee saith, that it is
true, that her selfe, her mother, and sister were all displeased with him, especially with the Countesse, for turning her out of seruice, wherevppon some foure yeare since, her mother commanded her to goe vp to the Castle, and bring her the right hand gloue of the Lord Henry Rosse, the Earles eldest sonne; which gloue she found on the rushes in the Nurcery, and deliuered the same to her Mother, who put it into hot water, prickt it often with her knife, then tooke it out of the water, and rubd it vp∣pon Rutterkin, bidding him height and goe, and doe some hurt to Henry Lord Rosse, wherevpon hee fell sicke, and shortly after dyed, which her Mother hea∣ring of, said it was well: but after shee had rubd the gloue on the Spirit Rutterkin, shee threw it into the fire and burnt it, &c. THese Examinations and some others were taken and charily preserued for the contri∣uing of sufficient euidences against them, and when the Iudges of Assise came downe to Lincolne about the first weeke of March, being Sr. Henry Hobert, Lord chiefe Iustice of the Common Pleas, and Sr. Ed: Bromley one of the Barons of the Ex∣chequer, they were presented vnto them, who not only wondred at the wickednesse of these persons, but were amazed at their practises and horrible contracts with the Diuel to damne their own soules: And although the Right Honorable Earle had suffi∣cient griefe for the losse of his Children; yet no
doubt it was the greater to consider the manner, and how it pleased God to inflict on him such a fashion of visitation: Besides, as it amazed the hearers to vnderstand the particulars, and the circumstances of this diuellish contract, so was it as wonderfull to see their desperate impenitency, and horrible di∣straction, according to the rest of that sort, exclai∣ming against the Diuell for deluding them, and now breaking promise with them, when they stood in most need of his helpe. Notwithstanding all these aggrauations, such was the vnparalleld magnanimity, wisedome, and patience of this generous Noble-man, that hee vrged nothing against them more then their owne confessions, and so quietly left them to iudiciall tri∣all, desiring of God mercy for their soules, and of men charity to censure them in their condemna∣tion: but God is not mocked, and so gaue them o∣uer to iudgement, nor man so reformed, but for the Earles sake, they cursed them to that place which they themselues long before had bargained for. What now remaines (gentle Reader) but for thee to make vse of so wonderfull a Story, and remarka∣ble an accident, out of which, to draw to a conclu∣sion, thou maist collect these particulars. First, that God is the supreame commander of all things, and permitteth wonderfull actions in the World, for the tryall of the godly, the punishment of the wicked, and his owne glory: of which man shall neuer attaine to know the reason or occasion. Se∣condly, that the Diuell is the meere seruant and
agent of God, to prosecute whatsoeuer hee shall command rather then giue leaue vnto; limiting him yet thus farre in his owne nature, that he can go no further then the bounds within which hee is hedged. Thirdly, that this God hath punishments, ad correctionem, that is to say, chasticements of the godly, & ad ruim, Videlicet, Iudgements against the wicked, wherein yet man must disclaime any knowledge, and forsake preiudicate opinions. For the very iust shall be tried like gold, and no man ex∣empted from castigation whom God doth loue. Fourthly, that this Diuell, though he bee Gods In∣strument, yet worketh altogether by deceit: for as hee was a lyer from the beginning; so let no man trust him, because he aymeth at the confusion of all Mankinde. Fiftly, that the wicked, (howeuer they may thriue and prosper for a time) yet in the end are sure to be payed home, either with punishment in this life or in the life to come, or both, as a finall reward of monstrous impiety. Sixtly, that Man in his frailty must not presume of prosperity; but prepare a kinde of stooping vnder the hand of God, when it pleaseth him to strike or punish vs. Sea∣uenthly, that there is no murmuring nor repining against God, but quietly to tolerate his inflictings, whensoeuer they chance, of which this worthy Earle is a memorable example to all men and Ages. Eightly, that the punishments of the wicked are so many warnings to all irregular sinners to amend their liues, and auoid the iudgement to come, by penitency and newnesse of life. Ninthly, that
though man could bee content to passe ouer blas∣phemies and offences against the Statutes of Prin∣ces, yet God will ouertake them in their own walks, and pull them backe by the sleeue into a slaughter-house, as here you know the euidences against these people tooke life and power from their owne Con∣fessions. Tenthly, and last of all, that priuate opi∣nion cannot preuaile against publique censures: for here you see the learned and religious Iudges cryed out with our Sauiour, Ex ore tuo. Therefore though it were so, that neither Witch nor Diuell could doe these things, yet Let not a Witch liue, saith God, and Let them dye (saith the Law of England) that haue conuersation with spirits, and presume to blaspheme the name of God with spels and incantation. O then you sonnes of men, take warning by these examples, and eyther diuert your steps from the broad way of destruction, and inrecouerable gulph of damnation, or with Iosuahs counsell to Achan, blesse God for the discouery of wickednesse, and take thy death pa∣tiently, as the preuention of thy future iudgement, and sauing innocents from punishment, who other∣wise may be suspected without a cause. Vtinam tam facile vera inuenire possem, quam fal∣sa conuincere. FINIS.
