13191 99854898 20354
EUROPA SOME YEARES TRAVELS INTO AFRICA & ASIA the Great. Especially Describing the Famous Empires of PERSIA and INDUSTANT. As also Divers other Kingdoms in the Orientall INDIES, and I'les Adjacent By Tho: Herbert. Esq LONDON Printed by R Br. for Iacob Blome and Richard Bishop. 1638 W. M. sculp: PAR MER. Herbert coat of arms Pawb yn ŷ Arver. PAR TERRE.
SOME YEARES TRAVELS INTO DIVERS PARTS OF ASIA and AFRIQUE. Describing especially the two famous Empires, the Persian, and great Mogull: weaved with the History of these later Times As also, many rich and spatious Kingdomes in the Orientall INDIA, and other parts of ASIA; Together with the adjacent Iles. Severally relating the Religion, Language, Qualities, Customes, Habit, Descent, Fashions, and other Observations touching them. With a revivall of the first Discoverer of AMERICA. Revised and Enlarged by the Author. Segniùs irritant Animos demissa per Aures Quam quae sunt Oculis Subjecta fidelibus, & Quae Ipse sibi praebet Spectator. Horat. SHALT LABOR FOR THOV PEACE PLENTIE LONDON, Printed by R. Bip. for Iacob Blome and Richard Bishop. 1638.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE PHILIP Earle of Pembroke and Mountgomery: Baron Herbert of Caerdiff' and Sherland; Lord Parr and Ross' of Kendall; Lord Fitz-Hugh, Marmyon, and Saint Quin∣tin: Lord Chamberlain of his MA∣IESTIES most honourable Houshold, Lord Lieftenant of Kent, Wiltes, &c. Lord Warden of the Stanneries in Corn-Wales and Devon: Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter: and one of his MAIESTIES most honourable Privie Councell. MY LORD, HAving past the Pikes, I take new courage to come on againe. One blow more and I have done. Ten to one it lights on my owne pate: but if my head stand free, my hand shall not bee guilty of more Intrusion: No more pressure to the Presse:
the Crowd is too strong already: and I will get out by Head and Shoulders rather than faile. Your Lordships word may passe for me: and I dare not break it. Greatnesse hath a great stroak over Men, but Goodnesse a greater; Men choo∣sing to obey for Love, rather than Feare. In both, you have a strong Interest, and in both sorts of Men they have taken Possession, and like Twyns grow up together: Quam bene con∣veniunt! And may their residence be as immova∣ble as your Constancy to Good: yea may the Title of plain Dealing and honest Man bee the worst Reproach, Malice or double Dealing can fix upon your Name and Memory, who have gained much honour and ease too in Court and Country, by that excellent Dialect and generall Beliefe. The Dedication like a fayre Frontispice to a meane House, or a beautifull Signe to an ill Lodging, hath tempted Travellers to look in and make some stay: But I feare to have used my Readers, as my Host the Guests, that set a mark on the Doore, to passe by, and call in no more. Tis my feare only; which being begot of Modesty, may serve to invite the best and most ingenious Company. To please all is my Desire; but my Choice a few: taking the bigger Number to be the lesser in Vertue, and swollen only with a timpany of Wind and Water.
The Boat is in your Lordships hand, which steares as you direct it. Yours is the greatest In∣terest: you are our Chiefe: yours is the leading Iudgement: do but approve, the Mark is hit, and you make many Followers; Which is the Request of Your Lordships humblest Servant Tho. Herbert
To his vertuous Kinsman THO. HERBERT Esquire. WHat! is't the Love thou bear'st the Southern Clyme? Or Care to instruct us? That the second time Thou ingagest Fame. Or is't thy Love to pay, Thanks to mild censures? or thy Friends to obay? Or to Inlarge? or deck thy Mayden lines? Like to a Nurse whose eyes on th'Infant shines. Which of them all? or all it be: 'Tis well▪ Who threats good-will imparts a part of hell. CH. HERBERT. Nobili suo amico THO. HERBERTO armigero APpulit Eôis Herbertus sospes ab Oris, Vicit & immensi mille periclâ Maris. Non tulit hinc secum piper, aurum, balsama, gemmos, Costum, aloen, myrrham, cinnama, thura, crocum. Rettulit hic Mores Hominûm{que} Ʋiator, & Vrbes, Regna, habitus, lingvas, praelia, jura, deos. Divite ne post hac quaeras è Perside gazas, Anglia nunc Anglis Persia tota domi est. AR. IONSTONUS Med. Reg.
Descriptio decoris reciproci, inter Arborem Nobilem seu Familiam de Herbert; & Authorem vere ramum ejusdem arboris seu Familiae. NIl tantum decorat ramum quam nobilis arbor, Florentem ramum sic Decus Arbor habet. MAR. BELWOOD Dr. Med. Amico suo nobilissimo THO. HERBERTO armigero. VRbes quod varias solers vidisset Vlisses Et Mores hominûm, clarus honore fuit. Sola inter Phrygiam licet errans Hesperiamque Littora lustrasset per duo lustra Maris. Tuspatia ut saperes immensa emensus es Orbis Herberte inque Salo gnaviter inque Solo. Comperta unde tibi nova multa & mira Brittannis Candidus impertis veridicus{que} tuis. Fallacem hoc Ithacum superasque peritia rerum Quod tua candori sit fideique comes. WALT. O-QVIN Armig.
To the Reader. HEre thou at greater Ease than hee Mayst behold what hee did see; Thou participates his gaines, But he alone reserves the paines. He traded not with luker sotted. He went for knowledge and he got it. Then thank the Author: thanks is light, Who hath presented to thy sight, Seas, Lands, Men, Beasts, Fishes, and Birds, The rarest that the World affoords. THO. Lord FAYRFAX Baron of Cameron.
TRAVELS BEGUN Anno 1626. DE∣SCRIBING DIVERS parts of Africk, and Asia the Great; but principally the two famous Monarchies, the Mogull and Persian. THE FIRST BOOK. ALL things are the more,The Indu∣ction. most things the better for Addition. In honour and wealth no fault is found with encrease; full meales & full pleasures too; brim-full have no guard upon them. The fuller the better: If the husbandry bestowed up∣on this Book hath improv'd the soile, since you view'd it last, the Lyme was yours and charge of bringing; the spreading only belongs to mee as your day-labourer. To improve on your incouragement, is for your credit, my delight; both our benefits. The gale you late so favourably lent me spred my affection, and againe lancht me into another Ocean. And, Turpe mihi abire domo, vacuum{que} redire est. I know my new Relations must endure the touch; yea, and the handling too. So should all Books: But in this Age it fares with Books as with French toyes, faire to the eyes, well coverd with your empty Gallants, who take the people with the out-side bravery; Give me good Lynings. My minde is like my habit, plaine; and my expressions (I hope so) too. If my new thoughts have added to your bottom, I know you will unwinde gent∣ly for feare of ravelling, and tie a knot where the thread breaks. But if I have made no Topographic mistakes, I feare no other deviations. The first (the fruits of youth and haste) came abortive into your hands; and fail'd not of respective welcome. Yet in so cold, so nipping a Zone, more cloathing may be accepted of, and which I have woven with some toyle, but
very willingly, hoping it may discover more maturity. I formerly obeyed my friends, who thought the first too short; this then may prove the happier, since I have laboured to give them a ready acknowledgement. Let my errors therefore reflect on them, and impale me in your favour, for peradventure I may give boldnesse to your Factors, to fetch exotique rarities in a new divisi∣on of the world, and in assuring their Barques to bring you home, what may prove worthy your sight and mony. But this lucky gale will suffer no longer complement. The relation of our Sea-voyage, is first enjoyned me. 1626.VPon Good-Friday, we took ship at Dover, having six great & well-man'd ships along with us. In few houres coasting close by the Ile of Wight (call'd so from Gwydh a Brittish word signifying, seene at distance; Vectis in Pliny, Vecta in Eutropius;) where, a sudden and violent gust assaulted us; which, after an houres rage, spent it selfe, and blew us the third day (double solem∣niz'd by being the feasts of Mother and Sonne) upon the Lizards point or lands end of England, the utmost promontory of Cornwall; and from whence, to the extreamest cape of Afrique, wee compute our longitude, and not from the Azores the first Meridian. The wind blew faire, so as the seven and twentieth day wee entred the Spa∣nish Ocean, the coast of Biscay neighbouring us. Ere long, we descried seven tall ships, whom reputing enemies, we bore up to speake with, but they pro∣ved friends, Hollanders out of the Levant, who drunk our healths as they past, by a roring Culverin; and we vomited out a like eccho of thunder, plow∣ing up the liquid Seas in merrinesse, till the nine and twentieth day made us the sport of Danger, dancing upon the raging billowes, Aeolus from his iron whistle blustering melancholly tunes, a good while heaven and sea seeming undivided. To which Tune Horace, Od. 3. lib. 1. Illi robur et aes triplex circa pectus erat, qui fragilem truci Commisit pelago ratem — Primus; nèc timuit praecipitem Africum Decertantem Aquilonibus, nèc tristes hyadas, nèc rabiem Noti. A heart of brasse that man had sure, Who in a Barque durst first endure The raging waves, not valuing life Midst fierce South-west and North winds strife. The Hyads (who clouds seldome want) Nor blustring South his sprite could dant. Violence has no permanence; in thirty houres, the quarell 'twixt wind and sea was ended, and joy in a serene sky reanimated us, so as wee ended March in chase of a Turkish Pirat, whom with top-gallant top-sailes we pur∣sued 6 houres, but (to our griefe) he out-sailed us. The first of April we cut our passage into the vast Atlantick Ocean, by Arabs call'd Magribana, as saith Marmolius,Atlantic Ocean. (nam'd from Atlas Maurus, (brother to the star-gazer Prometheus) from whom two famous Mounts, one in Mauritania, th'other in Lybia, are de∣nominate.) Long we had not been in these seas, but another Barbarian Sally man of Warre came up to us, sculking all night in hope to board the first hee saw divided; at day break we found the villaine, who, loath to parlee in fire and shot, fled amaine and left us; who swum so well, that the third of April at Titans first blush we got sight of Porto Santo, a holy Port, (call'd Cerne in
Ptolomy) commanded by the superstitious Spaniard, and of Madaera (or Ile of Wood) from the Canaries 300 miles; the first, discovered by Perestrellus, anno 1419. 5398 undiscovered; given him upon condition he would people it, which he found difficult, the Conies in such numbers resisting and undermining him. The other the same yeere by Gonzalvo Zarco from incouragement of Henry, sonne to King Iohn the first, of Portugall. The holy Port has five and twenty miles compasse, notable in Wheat, Ry, Rice, Oxen, Sheep, Bores, Conies. Sanguis Draconûm, Fruits, Flowers, and Grapes, at 8 leagues distance thus re∣specting us. Porto Sancto The sixt of Aprill we had 27 degrees and a halfe, at that instant descrying the Iles Canariae, of old, fortunate in name though not in quality, undiscover'd till the yeare 1328 accidentally by one Machan (or Marcham) an English man, from whose relation Lewes de Cerdezo two yeare after sail'd thither, and by con∣sent of his King, Pedro of Arragon, had liberty of conquest and benefit; but long enjoyed neither, Iohn 2. the Castilian King, Anno 1405 extruding him: From whom also, Ventacurtius a French man snatches them, but by Iohn de Betancour a well-descended Gentleman, kinsman to Bracamonté the French Admirall, is dispossest, Anno 1417 shipping 10000 voluntiers, by whose valour and constancie he subdued five of the Iles, La Palma, La Gomera, Lanzarota, Ferro, and Fortéventura, an atchievement honourable, yet such vexation pos∣sest the ambitious Gaule that Canarie masterd him, as made him entertaine death with an uselesse complement; his Nephew Menaldus left heire to what he had got, and (has added) his misfortunes; Myndus a haughty Bishop incen∣sing the Castilian King, by whose greatnesse Menaldus is forced thence, glad of some composition pay'd him by Don Barba the Bishops kinsman. But see va∣riety! Barba repents the purchase, and for small profit assignes his Title to Don Fernando Perazzo, whose brain taking like infection, growes weary of his toile, and for other imployment parts with his claime to the Prince of Castile, from whom 'twas torne by Don Henrico Infant of Spaine, to this day constant to Spanish servitude. These Iles (perhaps the same Ptolomy and Mela call Deorum currus) are from the Morocco or Lybian continent 20 leagues, from Spaine 200. six com∣monly numbred (Cadamastus, ten; three by speculation) by old Authors, Ptolo∣my, Pliny, Strabo, and others, Canaria, Capraria, Nivaria, Iunonia, Ombrian (or Pluvialia,) Aprosita (or fracta lancea) and, as Martian adds, Casperia (or Fortu∣nata.) At this day thus; Canaria, La-palma, Teneriffa, Lancaerota, Hierro, La Gomera, and Fortéventura. A word of what they were and are. They knew no God, but Nature, were ignorant of the use of fire, shaved with flint stones,
gave their children to be nurst by Goats, cultured the earth with hornes of Oxen, abhominated the slaughter of beasts. —For how can they be good Who dare each day imbrue their hands in blood. Like beasts us'd women in common. No meum tuum. Lust and carelesnesse so vailing them, that little difference was 'twixt them and their cattell. Sylva domus erat, cibus— herba, cubilia frondes. The Woods their dwelling was, the herbes their Diet, And on the leaves and boughes they slept in quiet. Some glimmering they had of superstition: having alwayes two Kings, one alive, one dead. The dead they wash and erect him in a Cave, a staffe in one hand, a payle of milk and wine set by him, to support and help him in his Travell. At this day are Spanish Christians. The Inquisition affrighting honest men to come among 'em. Grand Canarie is the residence of the Inquisitor, whither all the other Iles repaire for Justice and other businesse. Canarie has 120 miles circumference, full of many good things, Goats, Beeves, Asses, Hoggs, Barly, Rye, Rice, variety of Flowers, Grapes, and other excellent fruits. The Ile as I tooke it, thus seemes at 8 leagues distance. Grand Canaria. Teneriffa, in multitude of Inhabitants compares with great Canary. Exceeds it in Grapes, yeelding yearely eight and twenty thousand Butts of Sack, out∣braves all the earth for supereminence. Her high peak Teyda towring so loftily into the ayre, as seemes not only to penetrate the middle Region, but in a sort to peepe into heaven it selfe, from whence Laerius metaphorically calls it At∣las and Olympus. 'Tis accounted 15 miles high, and seene (in faire weather) six-score (some say 300) English miles distant, and serves as an excellent Pharoe, exceeding those at Cayro on the otherside of Nylus. The shape I thus present, badly formed.
Teneriffa: Teneriffa is 20 leagues from Grand Canaria. Hyerro or Ferrum gave it selfe very high, and beares from grand Canary South and by West; which Ile (as be the rest) such time as Phoebus is to us vernall, growes insufferable scortching. Famous in one tree (it has but one) which (like the miraculous rock in the De∣sart) affoords sweet water to all th'Inhabitants, by a heavenly moisture distil∣ling constantly to the peoples benefit. Heare Sylvester. In th' Ile of Iron (one of those same seven Whereto our Elders, happy name have given) The savage people never drink the streames Of Wells and Rivers, as in other Realmes. Their drink is in the Ayre! their gushing spring, A weeping Tree out of it selfe doth wring. A Tree whose tender bearded root being spred In dryest sand, his sweating leafe doth shed. A most sweet liquor; and (like as the Vine Vntimely cut, weepes (at her wound) the Wine In pearled teares,) incessantly distills A royall streame, which all their Cesterns fills Throughout the Iland; for all hither by, And all their vessells, cannot draw it dry! Of these Iles, Lancaerota was taken by that English Leonidas the Earle of Cumberland, anno 1596. and Teneriffa 4 yeares after by the Dutch; the first pil∣laged, the other burnt; since when, both are better fortified. The ninth of Aprill wee crost the Tropick of Cancer,Tropic. Cancri. of like distance from the Aequator, the utmost limit of the temperate Zone is from the Pole, called Cancer from Apollo's Crablike retrogradation, moving back in Iune from that signe in the Zodiac: The 12 day, wee had the wind high and large, so that in two dayes saile we made the Sunne our Zenith or verticall point, his declina∣tion at that instant 14. degrees North; where note; that only then, when we are Nadyr to the Sunne, wee have no shadow; as also, whereas to all in the temperate Zone, in the Sunnes Meridian their shadowes cast North, having past the Zenith, the shade or umbra becomes contrary.
An Observation forcing wonder in the Sunne-burnt Arabs upon their de∣scent into Thessaly, As Lucan notes. Ignotum vobis (Arabes,) venistis in Orbem Vmbras mirati Nemorûm non ire sinistras: An unknowne world (Arabians) you invade! Wondring to see the Groves yeeld right-hand shade. And because we have nilnisi pontus et Aer to observe upon, let us theorize a little upon the Mathematiques. The Inhabitants within this Zone (the torrid) we are now in, are call'd Amphiscij, in respect they cast their shadowes both wayes according as the Sunne is in declination, and Ascij or shadowlesse, when Sol-is Zenith, from which point when it fleets either North or South the shadow ever darts contrarily, as falls out when ever the gnomon or coela∣ted body is interposed. The periscij have their shadow circulating, their meridionall shadowes having no existence from the vertice, but oblique and extended to the plaine of the terrestriall Horizon, glomerating the gnomon or body opacous; these sort of people freezing within the polar circles (of like distance from the pole, the Tropicks are from the Aequinoctiall) the pole being their vertex, and Aequator (90 degrees) their direct Horizon. The Hete∣roscij are such as live in the temperate Zone, whose shadowes at noone day turne but one way. And this the Mathematicks teach us, that the Heteroscij comprehend 41 parellells, the Amphiscij seven, the Periscij (those in the fro∣zen Zone) halfe the yeare. With these, goe others as they stand compara∣tively, the Periaeci, Antoeci, Antichthones. The first being such as dwell in two opposite points of a like circle, one from the other a semicircle or 180 de∣grees, so they be numbred after lesser parellells. The Antoeci are also opposite, but vary neither in Meridian nor aequidistance from the Horizon, respecting either Hemisphere. The Antipodes are such as be feet to feet, a precise straight line passing tho∣row the Center from one side to another: differing frō the Periaeci by degrees of a smaller circle, whence we observe, that such as be to us Periaeci, be Antoeci to our Antichthones, each inverted to other in a perfect contrary. Nor doubt wee that there be, Antipodes, (the vaile of stupid ignorance being rent away) the sphericity of the world, and that every place in the earth (tho op∣posite) is habitable, now so well knowne as nothing seemes more familiar. Not∣withstanding, it was not so of old, when Boniface Bishop of Mentz (a Clerke well learned in that blockish age) was excommunicated by Pope Zachary, Anno 745. for maintaining such a paradox, yea was sentenc'd to be burnt for a heretick except hee had re canted: the holy Father bringing in Saint Augustin against it in his 16. book de civit. Dei, Qui Antipodas esse fabulantur, &c. nul∣lo modo credendum est: and Lactantius another great Scholler deriding it in his third booke of Institutions. Very strange, such famous men to bee so ill read in Chorography: especially, since such a tenet was proved before them by many: by Euclyde, by Cicero in his 4. lib. de Academ. question. by Tyberia∣nus who records an old letter beginning, Superi inferis, Salutem, by Strabo, and of all others most ingeniously by Lucretius, lib. 1. Illi cum videant Solem, nos sydera noctis Cernere, & alternis nobiscum tempora coeli Dividere, & noctes pariles agitare diebus: Sed vanus stolidis haec omnia parturit error. When they see Sunne, we see the lamps of night, And with alternall courses times do change, Dividing equall darke with equall light: But error vaine in fooles makes these seeme strange.
To returne: in changing so many parellels, the weather increast from warme to raging hot, the Sunne flaming all day, insomuch that Calentures begun to vexe us. A sailer either by accident or infection falling from the shrowds into the mercilesse waves aggravating our extremity, increased by a violent gust and storme of wind and raine which in 6 degrees suddenly affrigh∣ted us, the squiffe (fastned to the upper deck) in lesse than two houres being fild with nasty raine, ending in thunder and flash, mingling terribly,Tornathos. a great while the Tornado troubling us, a weather so incertaine and variable as is ad∣mirable; now blowing fresh and faire, and forthwith storming outragiously, in one houres space the wind veering about every point of the compasse: The winds from East, West, North, and South advance Their force, and urge the furious waves to dance. Vna Eurus{que} Notus{que} ruunt, Zephirus{que} maligne flumine, tum Boreas.— The infectious raines most damnifying the poore saylers, who must be up∣on the decks to hand in their sailes, abiding the brunt, and (which is worse) commonly get forthwith into their beds (or hamackoes) resting their tyred bodies in wet nasty clothes, thereby breeding many furious and mortall dis∣eases, as burning Feavers, Calentures, Fluxes, Aches, Scurvy, and the like; which doubtlesse, did they moderate their bibbing strong waters, and shift their filthy apparell, might be prevented: Other unlucky accidents happen in these seas to vexe them, as when (in most becalmings) they swim in the bearing Ocean, the greedy Tuberon or Shark arm'd with a double row of venemous teeth pursues them, directed by a little Rhombus, Musculus or pilot-fish that scuds to and fro to bring intelligence, His body is right faire, though seeming small, And fitly him by name of Guide they call. Musculus est parvus visu, sed corpore pulchro, Hinc piscem vero ductorem nomine dicunt. the Shark for his kindnesse, suffring it to suck when it pleaseth. Many have beene devoured by this ravenous Dogge-fish, more have suffered in their members, whose shape (mistaken in the posture by the Ingraver) is thus resembled. a Sharke fish
By this, under 13. degrees we are parrellel with Sierra Leon a Cape land upon the Lybian shoare, by old Geographers improperly cal'd Deorum currus, Frons Africae, Tagazza and Zanguebai in Thevet and Marmolius: strengthned by a Castle built by the Spaniard, famoused for refreshing our English Neptune, Drake, at his returne from circumnavigating the body of the whole Earth: and that thence to Bab-mandel, (the entrance into the red Sea) Africk is no where broader. The Inhabitants here along the Guinea coast, Bynnin, Cape Palmas, Lopez Gonzalvo, &c. know no God, nor are willing to bee instructed by Nature. Scire nihil, jucundissimum. Howbeit, the divell (who will not want his cere∣mony) has infused demonomy and prodigious idolatry into their hearts, enough to rellish the divells pallat and agrandize their owne tortures, when hee gets power to fry their soules, as the raging Sunne has scorcht their bodies. A Ship of ours coasting along and landing for discovery, was so admired at by the Salvages, as if they never had seene men nor Ship afore. Two of our men adventured the shoare, (some hostages kept in the boat till they return'd) and are welcom'd by thousands of those naked black skind Aethiopians, who were so farre from injury, that they loaded them with Flowers, Fruits, Toddy and what they judged acceptable: after immeasurable admirations returning them safe aboard all contented. Cape Verd.April the 18. wee had 15. degrees, and ere morne were in height of Cape Verd in 14. degr. so named by Florian Hesperion cornu & Surrentium in Pliny, Lybiae promontorium in Strabo, of old cald Arsinarium, at this day by the Ne∣groes Mandangan, Hacdar by the Alfarabes. Discovered by Dio Fernandezo, or Antonio di Nolle a Genoan,Hesperidae. Anno 1445. at the charge of King Alphonsus 5. Famoused especially in the Hesperian Garden, enricht with Golden Apples, robd by Alcides in despight of that hundred-headed Dragon, engendred by Typhon on Echydna. 'Twas a Greeke fable: who surpast for lyes. The morall this. The garden was a spacious, greene and pleasant Field; the apples of gold, good sheep worth gold (such sheep and fleece as Iason had) the errour partly arising from the word , admitting a double construction, sheep and apple. The Dragon, no other than a meare or fluxe of the Sea, in forme or nature of a Dragon or Serpent invironing it, swelling in 100 armes or sluces: which Hercules (to enrich Spaine) passed over and exported. The three faire daughters of Hesperus, were three honest Ilands in the West, ad∣joyning this garden; their names Aeglae, Arethusa, and Hesperthusa; now new named, Mayo, Sal, and Bonavista: three other neighbouring them, the Atlan∣tiades, which we have no leisure now to treat of, the magnifique Fabrick of Anthaeus calling us away to look upon, but alas we find nothing extant save memory; a pallace doubtlesse brave and capacious, the Lord of it being no meane nor little man: he grew 70. cubits high (a dozen ordinary mens pro∣portion) a proper man, and an excellent log for Hercules to smite at: yet (the Greekes perswade us) his sword could not conquer, nor was he overcome when by prodigious force Ioves sonne threw him thrice upon the ground, the Earth his mother still reanimating him; till being perceiv'd, he strangled or choakt him in the helplesse Aire. Extreame heatApril 21. Aeolus was a sleep, one breath of Ayre not comforting us, the
Sunne over-topping us and darting out such fiery beames that the Ayre in∣flamed, the Seas seemed to burne, our Ship sulphureous, no decks, no awnings nor invention possible able to refresh us, so that for 7 dayes (70. are better endured in a zone more temperate) wee sweat and broyle, unable to sleep, rest, eat or drink without much faintnesse; in this space our Ship making no way (no current is felt in the vast Ocean) till the fift day the billowes began to rowle and the Ayre troubled, travelling with an abortive cloud, which suddenly fell downe in forme of an inverted Piramid, wonderfull and dan∣gerous. A cloud (as I apprehend) exhaled by the Sun (a powerfull Magnet) not agitated by the wind, and missing the retentive property in the lowest re∣gion, distills not in sweet drops, but diffudes or falls hideously the whole cloud together, so impetuously into the Ocean,Spouts of raine. that many great ships (as if a thousand milstones or cataracts had fallen) have beene dasht and sunke past all recovery; and what's little lesse formidable, the stinking raine is no sooner in the Sea, but (as a fearefull farwell) a whirlewind circles with such vio∣lence as helps the cloud to lash the murmuring Seas so furiously that oftimes the waves or surges rebound top gallant height, as if it meant to retaliate the Ayre in another region: God be praised, we mist the rage of raine, the gust somewhat affrighted us; but it contraried Seneca's Philosophy. Finis alterius mali, gradus est futuri: a pleasant Breese first, increasing into a happy gale, cooled the Ayre and posted us out of those exuberances of nature: so that on May day we crost under the Aequinoctiall,Aequator. a circle imagined to divide the world into two equalls, from either Pole ninety degrees, and where we lost sight of the Sydus salutare, the Pole-starre, of a third magnitude, fixt in the tip of the little Beares tayle: the Sunne at this time was in the 19. degree of Taurus; in Artick declination 17. degrees, 31. minutes. May 6. We had some thunder and lightning or corpo sanctos, such as seeme good Omens to the superstitious Portugalls; and at night, past by Santo croix, the holy crosse, every houre expecting the Monzoon,Monzoons. an anniversary wind that blowes one way six moneths, and the other halfe yeer the contrary way constantly; which if Sea-men neglect they lose their happy passage in∣to India. But how preposterous the yeere and wind proved elsewhere I know not, doubtlesse it is the Emblem of inconstancy, experience taught it us; so long time proving our Antagonist that our passage to the Cape of good Hope became sixe weekes longer than we looked for, forc't to runne into much more longitude than we desired. May 8. We had 8. degr. 10. minutes Antartick latitude, the Monomotapan on the one side, the Brasilian coast on the other siding us to the west. The Afrique shore runs on in divers names, Congo in 6. degr. Angola in 9. Manicongo, Loanga, Monomotapa, Benomotapa, and Caffaria, full of wretched black skin'd wret∣ches; rich in earth, but miserable in demonomy: the discovery is given to many men (the first not agreed upon), to Petrus Cavillanius, to Iacobus Ca∣nus, Bartolmeo de Dyos, Vasco de Gama, and such as Iohn 2 King of Portu∣gall imployed about it, Anno 1497. or thereabouts. Let one character serve them all: they look like chimney sweepers; are of no profession, except ra∣pine, and villany makes one. Demonis omnia plena. Mokisses or deformed Idolls are indeered amongst them, the red Dragon usurping worship in a Dra∣gons
shape, a Goate, an Owle, a Batt, a Snake, a Cat, a Dogge, or what the witches (acheronta movebunt) urge them to, and to adore in an infernall po∣sture; gaping, whooping, groveling, soyling their hellish carkasses with juyce of herbs, ryce, roots, fruits, or what the old impostor infatuates them with; the female sex each new Moone defying pale fac't Cynthia by turning up their bummes, imagining her the cause of their distempers. A Dogge is of An Inhabitant of Angola. such value here, that 20. salvage men have been made the price of one: their coyne, are beads of glasse, shells, stones or trash: they marry not: they bury thus; the dead are washt, painted, apparrel'd, and laid to sleep in a neat and spacious dormitory, his Armolets, Bracelets, and voluntary shackles accom∣pany him, they circle the grave with mimmick gestures and ejaculations, concluding by the sacrifice of a lusty Goate, and so go satisfied. In Longa and
the Anzigui (whence Nilus drawes his origin, even from Zayre a lake neere the mountaines of the Moone) the people (if Gonsalvo Soza say true) are divels incarnate; not satisfied with natures treasures, as gold, precious stones, strength, and the like; the destruction of men and women neighbouring them, better contenting them, whose dead carkasses they devoure with a vultures appetite; whom if they misse, they serve their friends (so they mis-call them) such scurvy sauce, butchering them, thinking they excuse all in a comple∣ment, that they knew no rarer way to expresse true love than in making (not two soules) two bodies one in an inseparable union: yea, some (worne by age, or worme-eaten by the pox) proffer themselves to the shambles, and accordingly are joynted and set to sell upon the stalls. Iuvenal had notice of them. The slaughter of a man doth not suffice These caniballs we see, but breasts, armes, eyes, Like dainty meat they eat. Aspicimus populos, quorum non sufficit itae Occidisse aliquem; sed pectora, brachia, vultum Crediderint genus esse cibi. Nothing commendable in them but their Archery, in which they excell; shooting a dozen shafts ere the first touch ground; their Amazonian neigh∣bours forcing their care and diligence. The only ornament they have, is slashing and cutting their skinne and faces; the Sunne and Moone are man and wife, the Starres their children, in their religion; the divell is their Oracle. May 24. We had 19 degrees and a halfe, from whence to the thirtieth degr. the wind was large and prosperous, nothing in that great distance observable, save that on the 26 day, our Admirall the Mary (in which one Hall comman∣ded) early discryed a saile, which he made after with his barge, long boat, and 80. men; at two leagues distance they perceived her a Carrack of 1500 Tun, who durst not adventure her hulk against our shot, and therefore made all sailes draw and that night escaped; tho to grapple her, our fleet divided all night, but saw her not till the 27. day, and but saw her, her velocity so much excelled ours; till the 7. of Iune she againe deluded us, after two houres chase as a phantasma vanishing towards God. Vpon May day we crost the line, and last of May the Tropick of Capricorne,Tropicus. Capricorni. the utmost limit of Apollo's progresse towards the Antartick; and 53 dayes we swet within the burning Zone ere we past under both the Tropiques. The first of Iune, our observation was in 24 degrees 42 minutes South latitude,Iunij. 1. the Sunne then in 23. degrees, 8l. North, in the 20. degree of Gemini. In which height, we had many sudden and violent gusts and stormes, contrary to our desires, unable thereby to direct our course, being driven to Lee-ward 100 leagues upon the coast of Brazeel, to 25. degr. latitude and 27. of lon∣gitude from the Lizard. Howbeit, post multos sequitur una serena dies, for on the 13. day, in the first watch, our long lookt for Favonius blew sweetly upon us. —The West wind (most men know) From the vast sea is ever felt to blow. — Semper lenis aura Favoni Spirat ab Oceano.— At which time, some Boobyes, weary of flight, made our Ship their pearch, an animall so simple as suffers any to take her without feare, as if a stupid
sense made her carelesse of danger, which to sympathize I have as simply for your sport depicted. A Boobie Tis not long, since I told you how favourably Aeolus entertained us, but his other adjunct is inconstancy; for, veering into another quarter, he began to puffe and bluster, yea so furiously, that Neptune sweld with rage in such impatience, that the Tritons (Marriners) grew agast, not without reason, the Cape land thought (not neere enough, and yet) too neere us: for foure dayes and nights not daring to beare any saile, but lay ahull, driving whither the storme compelled us, all that while the sea surges so sublime and impetu∣ous, that wee were tost up into the Ayre, and forth with throwne downe as into an Abisse, sometimes dancing upon the liquid ridge of a dreadfull wave, and anon inveloped with many others all seeming to swallow us, heaven and sea roaring and commixing in an undivided manner; yet the Lord be praised (having Sea roome and good tite Ships) his providence saved us; in 16 dayes more, meeting together joyfully at the Cape of good hope: and I con∣fesse ingeniously, not till then did I feele that Ironic Satyre of Iuvenal biting us. I, nunc & ventis animam committe, doloso Confisus ligno; Digitis â morte remotus Quattuor, aut septem; si sit latissimataeda. Goe, now and to the winds thy life commit, Trust the smooth wood foure or seven fingers set From death, the broadest heart of Pine admit. Iune 24. Wee rais'd the Pole Antartick six and thirty degrees, our longi∣tude from the Meridian of the Lyzard five and twenty degrees, wanting three to the Cape; variation three degrees; our course E. S. E. the Sunnes declina∣tion, two and twenty degrees, twenty sixe minutes, and as many seconds North, in the 17. degree of Gemini. The same time mid-summer in England, and mid-winter with us in those South clymats. The 7. of Iuly, betimes wee descried land and tho threescore miles distant (from its height) seemed very nigh us, proving the place wee aimed at, that famous promontory (now no longer Tormentozo, but) of good Hope. Howbeit, we could not flie upon the wings of desire, the wind withstanding our hast, wherby we let fall our Anchor (14 leagues short of the Bay of Soldania) and went a shore upon a little Ile (3 miles round) corruptly cal'd Cony Ile, from the Welsh Cain-yne or white
Ile, where we kil'd many Conies (or Cats rather) great and rammish, bad and waterish, commended for dainty meat by hungry Sailers, Ie junus raro stoma∣chus vulgaria temnit: It also superabounds with Seales (piscis marinus) as big as Lyons, and though doggedly visaged, can out barke them, yea bellow like Bulls, and from such as not till then see any, may challenge wonder. They turne to oyle, and give their skins for buffe coates, soft and serviceable. Here are also birds cal'd Pen-gwins (white-head in Welch) like Pigmies walk∣ing upright, their sinns or wings hanging very orderly downe like sleeves, a creature, fish and flesh, participating sea and shore, feeding in the one, breed∣ing in the other; easie to be caught on land (but that their undermining the sandy ground for habitacles makes the passage bad,) at sea, diving like a Duck, swift as a Dolphin; fat, but oylie; some dare eat them, curiosity may invite a taste, but to make a meale on, unsapory and offensive: to which May-game of nature I may inculcate that, made on her acquaintance. Divide her, I desire but neck and brest, They savour well: the Cooke may eat the rest. Tota quidem ponatur anas; sed pectore tantum & cervice sapit; caetera redde coquo. For whose further satisfaction the Idaea I present you, not drawne by Phydias. A Pen-gwin Pen-gwin Ile is 6 or 7 leagues from the continent, which when wee got afterne we grew becalm'd, land-lockt in a sort, and were sported all the way (till we dropt anchor) by Whales, the Seas Leviathan, who after their man∣ner thundred our welcome into Aethiopia, fuzzing or spouting part of the briny Ocean in wantonnesse out of their oylie pipes bored by nature a top their prodigious shoulders, like so many floating Ilands concomitating us. The 1. of Iuly wee anchor'd with safety in the Soldania Bay, 12 leagues short of the utmost Cape: a Road worthily cald good Hope, by King Iohn 2. of Portugall rejecting that of Tempestuous first imposed by Gama; in that if any attaine hither, their Indian voyage is halfe done, and the other part lesse solitary, so many excellent Ilands entertaining them. The Soldania Bay is of a semi-lunary forme; large and safe; high, 5 or 6 miles from the sea; towards the shoare, low and fruitfull. Where we pitch our Tents, is a small streame of Chrystallin water, exceeding sweet, trickling from
a mighty mountaine 4 miles from the Sea; and in a perpendicular eleven thousand eight hundred and sixty foot; from its resemblance, commonly cald the Table; the ascent uneasie, but most pleasant at the top, discerning thence 100 miles into the Ocean, and looking S. S. W. we see the Cape or extreame point of Africk 12 leagues off, whose character in the inhabitants seemes long since to be drawne in this same distich. Extremique hominum maris ad vadasalsa seorsim Degimus: ac nobiscum nemo negocia miscet. By salt seas limited, the Worlds end wee Inhabit, none with us to trade agree. And from this Table, or from Herberts mount (a Piramid adjoyning, like the Sugar loafe, another hill so named) we see Cape Falso S. and by E. ten leagues; either of these great Promontories are divided by a Bay, but inconvenient to ride in: the distance of each Cape is 10 miles from North to South; either side environed with mountaines so lofty as seeme to penetrate the middle region with their aspiring foreheads, where they find sufficient moysture to coole their ambition: another river cal'd Iaquelina, streames upon the N. side of the roade, halfe a league from our Tents (under King Iames his mount we usually pitch them) broader than our rio dulce: but by a low course and too long sporting with the briny Ocean it tasts brackish and insalubrious; it is foordable without boate or Elephant, and gives variety of Shell-fish, as Tortoises, Limpits, Mussels, Cockels, Crabs, Rock-fish, and Mullets, Cra∣fish, Thornback, Gudgeon, Eeeles, &c. The Earth abounds with roots, herbs and grasse aromatique, redolent and beneficiall: such as I took notice of, I may dare to name; Agrimony, Mynt, Calamint, Betony, Plantain, Ribwort, Spinage, Sorell, Scabious, Holy Thistle, and (of which beware) Coliquintida: all the yeer long, nature roabing the fruitfull earth with her choisest Tapistry, Flora seeming to dresse her selfe with artlesse Garlands; Alcinoe and Tempe serving as Emblems to this Elysium. Quamvis enim montosa appareat, & col∣libus multis distincta, interim tamen multis vallibus, silvis, pratisque decorata est, gramina & flores suavissimè olentes, magna copia producit. Cervosque & faeras & leones multo numero nutrit, quae omnia visu & aspectu longe jucun∣dissime existunt: preterea, limpidissimis fontibus scatet quamplurimis, qui non sine gratissimo susurro, de montibus altis prorumpentes, fluminibus sese passim insinuant, & cum eis postmodum in mare exonerantur. The Mountaines, without doubt, abound with Marquisate and all rich Mi∣neralls, which for want of search are yet undilucidated: the chiefe refresh∣ment we get here is water, bunch-backt Buffolos and Sheep, not of Iasons race; these in leiw of wooll, have haire parti-coloured, long leg'd, leane bo∣died, not caus'd by want of pasture, rather from too high feeding, or from restlesse moving with their tripping Masters. But, the land exuberates in many other Animalls. Lyons, (which usually steale Beefe out of the water when Ships are here, fire or a lighted match only scaring thē) Dromidaries, Antilopes, Apes, Baboons, (venerious ones) Zebrae, Wolves, Foxes, Iackalls, Doggs, Cats, and others; and in birds, as Estriches, Vultures, Cranes, and Passe flemingoes, whose feathers (equallizing the birds of Paradise) are rich crimson and pure white so amiably commixed, that above others it inticed my pains to present it you, which shall terminate our curiosity touching the earth, & commence an Anatomy lecture of the most savage (of all savage) inhabitants.
Pasche-Flemingo. The Cape of good Hope elevates the Antartick-Pole foure and thirty de∣grees 3 minutes; has longitude from the Meridian of the Lyzard 28 degrees, and Westerly variation, one degree, and about forty minutes: distant from England about 6600 miles English; (or 2200 leagues, which at Sea we usually reckon by) from Saint Helena S.E. 600 leagues; from Iava major 1850 leagues; from Surat 1800. This land is the furthest part of the old knowne world, god Terminus here especially triumphing. Afrique in holy writ is called (from Cham) Chamesia: Lybia by the Greeks: Besecath by the Indians: by Leo, Iphrychia: by Thevet, Alkebulan: by Pliny, Atlantia & Aetheria. Aphrica and Aethiopia in their Etimon are not discrepant: the first from  and , without cold: the other from  and  to scorch the face: but some would have the one from Afer sonne of Abram and Getura: the other from Aethiops sonne of (Cham or) Vulcan. That it is part of Aethiopia, wee must prove against inconsiderat Laudinus who will not be perswaded, any part so nam'd, exceeds the Tropicks. Aethiopia is (therefore) either superiour, from 6 degrees North to the Ne plus ultra, comprising Mauritania, Lybia, Guiney, Cape Verd, &c. or inferiour, from thence stretching South to this promontory by Zanzibar, Monomotapa, Manicongo, Angola, Caffaria, &c. by Homer also, di∣vided into two extra et intra, allowing it the better halfe of Africk, termina∣ted (saith he) on East, West, and South by the Ocean; Aethiopes, Aetherij & Macrobij qui Africum ad Australe mare habitant. Herod. lib. 3. admitting which, it must needs transcend the Tropicks: the most Authentique of Poets is of this opinion. Od. 13. The utmost sort of people (knowne to man) Is the divided Aethiopian. Extremos homin ûm Aethiopes, geminis{que} diremptos partibus. Let us then examine the discoverer. Ptolomy nor Pliny knew it not; that report of Herodotus gayning little cre∣dit, who labours to perswade us in his fourth book, how Pharao Necho (after
his losse of 1200000 men imploy'd to make the red and mid-land Sea as one) incouraged the Phoenicians (then, proud of their Art in Navigation) to sur∣round Afrique, which to please him but more for glory, they undertook, and in three yeares effected. But sure, so excellent an adventure (if it had beene so) could not have escaped the busie pens of the Aegyptians and Greeks, who for want of true matter, invented a thousand Fables. The first threfore we can ho∣nour (as sayes Osorius) is, Vasco de Gama or Bartolo de Dios, Lusitanians, anno 1497. from Adam 5467. by importunity of that excellent Prince, Iohn 2. coast∣ing hither and so into the Orient. The Country is rich and fruitfull in her womb, but owned by an accursed Progeny of Cham, who differ in nothing from bruit beasts save forme; a peo∣ple by some call'd (metonimically) Caffarrs or Atheists; Anarchy confounds order, no Prince of power or policie awing them: each Canton commanded by a Captaine, not chosen by voice but as force urges it. Captain Fitz-Her∣bert some yeares since ceremoniously devoted the Title to our King, in a me∣moriall new naming two little rising Mounts 'twixt the Sea and Sugar loafe, King Iames and Prince Charles their Mounts, (our now dread Soveraigne;) Give we an exact Idaea of the Inhabitants. The People described.Their colour is ugly black, are strongly limbd, desperate, crafty, and inju∣rious. Their heads are long; their haire, woolly and crispt, no apparell in any place shewing more variety. Some shave one side and leave the other long and curled. Another cuts all away, a little tuft atop, excepted; a third (think∣ing his invention best) shaves here and there, the bald scull appearing in many places; and othersome, (not unlike Occasion) shave away all save a lock be∣fore, of no use, save ornament. Such as have tufts, or haire, plait brasse but∣tons, spurre-rowells, pieces of pewter, or what else the mirthfull Sayler ex∣change for Beefe, Mutton, Woodsorrell, Oestrich egge-shells, little Tor∣toises, &c. their eares are long, made longer by ponderous Bables they hang there, some using links of brasse, of iron, others have glasse-beads, chains, blew stones, bullets, or Oyster-shells. And such as cannot reach to such jewells (rather than be without) have singles of Deare, beaks of birds, Doggs or Cats stones, Egg-shells, or the like: their noses are flat, crusht so in their infancie; great lips, description cannot make them greater; quick crafty eyes; and about their necks (in imitation of the Dutch Commandores chaines) have guts and raw-puddings, serving both for food and complement, eating and speaking both together. Yet of late they have got hoopes of iron, and long links of brasse, grasse wreathes, or greasie thongs of stinking leather. Their armes are loaden with voluntary shackles of iron, Jvory, rusty brasse, or musty copper. The rest of their bodies are naked, save that a thong or girdle of raw leather circles them, a square peece (like the back of a Glove) is fastned to it, serving to cover their pudenda. But I cannot commend their modesty, the women (upon receipt of any thing) returning her gratitude by discovering her shame, a curtesie taught them by some ill-bred Boore, our men I hope have more civility. The grand Seigniors among them have better cloathing; a nasty un∣tand hide or skin of a Lyon, Leopard, Calfe, Baboon, or Sheep (the haire in∣verted) is as a roabe put about their shoulders reaching to their waste, thighes and legges never covered, their feet fastned to a broad peece of leather, tied by a little strap, resembling the Roman crepidula, not alwayes worne; their
hands for the most part hold them, not that they feare to weare them out, but that their feet may have their liberty to steale, which with their toes they can doe most daintily, all the while looking you in the face as if they knew not how to deceive any. Most of the men are Semi-Eunuchs, one stone ever be∣ing tane away by the Nurse, either to dististinguish them from ordinary men, or that Mistresse Venus allure them not from Pallas. The women also excise themselves, not from a Notion of religion but as an ornament: Both sex, hi∣deously cut, and gash, and pink in sundry works, their browes, nose, cheeks, armes, brest, back, belly, thighes and legges in Acherontick order: in a word, are so deformed, that if they had studied to become antick, they might be praised for invention. Antrae lares, dumeta thoros, caenacula rupes; They have no houses, Caves and holes they delight to dwell in, or Lyons dennes, unfurnished, but per∣fum'd I warrant you, a whole Tribe commonly keeping together, equally vil∣lanous, coupling without distinction, the name of wife or brother unknowne among these incestuous Troglodites: feeding, sleeping, speaking all together without order or law; in the night sleeping round a fire, a Centinell regarding the Lyons their adversaries, 'twixt whom is such hate and stratagems, Vivitur ex rapto that one eat other, the Lyon suddenly tearing some of them, and they other times trayning the Lyons over cover'd pits, which catches them, and so retaliating; slaying and eating them to day, who perhaps were Sepulchres to their friends or parents the day before. Other times they dawb and rub their skinne with grease and coale, and so indent it, drying them in the Sunne, by that trick becomming Monsters to all civill eyes that look them upon. By what I have said, you may imagine their pallats are not very delicate. Solinus calls the tawny Africans, Agriophagi (or Panther and Lyon-eaters) we now call them Icthio and Anthropophagi, a degree more barbarous than the Lyons, of whom 'tis said, Mortuorum cadavera non gustant; quod vivit, corri∣piunt et ex comedunt. But these Savages eat men alive or dead, as in both kinds many poore men have lamentably made experience of. Which whē they faile of, dead Whales, Seales, Pengwins, grease or raw Puddings diet them. Safety is scarce among themselves, for when the frost of old age benums their vigour, unapting them to provide their owne food, they either eat them, or leave them destitute of defence upon some Mountain, pittied by none, where famine kills them, or the ravening Lions. With these, no violent death nor 'stroying rage Of Lust, is halfe so dreadfull as old age. Non praematuri cineres, nec funus acerbum Luxuriae, sed morte magis metuenda senectus, The lesse to be admired at, for where God is not knowne, what villany is unwarrantable. Aristotle a Heathen (I remember) could make it a maxime. 1 lib. de coelo. Omnes homines Notionem Deorûm habent, &c. And another. Vni∣versum genus humanum ubi{que} Terrarum colit Deum verum vel falsum. Which is beleev'd by most men, and I dare not oppose it. Notwithstanding, though I made all signes, and tried each way possible to discover some spark of devotion, of the knowledge of God, heaven, hell, or imortality; I could not finde any thing that way, no place of worship, no day of rest, no order in Nature, no shame, no truth, no ceremony in births, or burials, meere brutishnesse and stu∣pidnesse wholly shadowing them.
The women give suck, the Vberous dugg stretched over her naked shoul∣der: the shape of which Soldanias with a landskip of the Table and other Mounts, loe here presented. A man and woman att the Cape of good Hope Their language is apishly sounded (with whom tis thought they mixe unna∣turally) the idiom very hard to be counterfeited, some words I gather'd from one of the gravest of them, which (being voyced like the Irish) if I give it hardly to be pronounced, you may excuse mee, in that Pliny confesses in the Proem of his 5 lib. Nat. histor. That their names and Townes were ineffable, or not to be distinguished. These be Anonimi and so more barbarous. Their Arithmatick exceeds not ten. Istwee 1. Istum 2. Istgwunny 3. Hacky 4. Croe 5. Istgunny 6. Chowhawgh 7. Kishow 8. Cusho 9. and Gheshy 10. A knife droaf, a quill guasaco, a hatt twubba, a nose tweam, a sword dushingro, a book bueem, a
ship chikunny, water chtammey, brasse hadderchereef, a skin gwummey, a brace∣let whohoop, eggshells sun, seales harkash, a woman traqueosh, bread bara, give me quoy, the yard gwammey, stones wchraef, womb wchieep, paps semigwe, ge∣niter Istcoom, &c. To draw to an end, (lest Mindus gates be opened) many beasts we got here for refreshment, such and the good sallads and baths quickly recuring above 300 of our men (till their landing) nigh dead of the scurvie. Anno 1600 Sir Iames Lancaster had 1000 Sheep and 50 Oxen for Trifles. Wee had no want, and might have had more but for a trick the Hollanders put upon our Nation; riding here with our Colours out, and killing some of the people when they had got their ends, that at our arrivall wee might be the baselier used; they traine their cattell to such obedience, as with a Call or Whistle (impossible to be counterfeited) a great Heard will follow them like dogges, and being sold, with a like Call will as readily runne after them, to the purchasers costly mirth and admiration; a deceit so long so unjustly acted, that now (to prevent them) our men upon delivery of each beast, either kill it quickly, or fasten their hornes with cords to stakes plac'd here of purpose: and to say truly, by the friendship and good dealing our men use to them (Nomen amicitiae barbara cor∣da movet) our esteeme among them is more gratious than of Portugall, Dane, or Flemmin. Their Art in Warre is guided by disorder, their weapon no other than a Javelin headed with iron, and directed by some feathers, which they take off and on at pleasure; some quarrels happend (by some mens indiscretion) twixt us and them, and I know a dozen Musquets will chase 1000, at every discharge falling downe as thunder-struck. Yet let me advise our Men to avoid need∣lesse bravadoes, and not contemne them from their indefensive nakednesse, or by a supercilious conceit of their owne weapons and field practises. Exem∣pla docent. Almeyda the bravest Captaine the Portugals ever had, after many glorious achievements in Asia and Africk, thought invincible, and returning home anno 1510 out of India: Hee, eleven Captaines and many other gallant men, upon a small affront putting some of the Savages to death (who grew desperate in revenge) were set upon by these naked Barbarians, and slaine every one of them. Qui (saith Osorius) cumper medias flammas, per pilas innu∣merabiles, per tela, per gladios, sine ulla formidinis significatione ruentes, maxi∣mum terrorem hostibus intulissent et insignes victorias contra innumerabiles ini∣micos adepti fuissent, tunc à paucis hominibus inermibus at{que} nudis interfecti et spoliati fuerunt. And as simple as they seeme, they are witty enough in craft, revenge, and villany. I will end all in a succinct character Salvian libro de vero judicio has made of all the Africans. Omnes quippe gentes habent sicut peculia∣ria mala, ita etiam quaedam bona; in Afris pene omnibus insunt omnia mala: inhumani, impuri, ebriosi, falsissimi, fraudulentissimi, cupidissimi, perfidissimi, & obscaenis libidinum omnium impuritati & blasphaemiis addictissimi, &c. The 19. of Iuly we weighed anchor frō the Cape of Good Hope,Our parting frō the Cape. bending our course towards Madagascar; the wind was favourable till such time as Cape Falso was doubled, for then being off to Sea we perceiv'd a storme intended us, happy in sight of a small black bird, long wingd (in-justly by Seamen call'd the divells bird) an Antimilago never seene but against stormy weather; doubtlesse it is a warning from God rather, as bee the Pantado birds (like Iayes in colours) who about these remote seas are ever flying and give Sea∣men
an infallible incouragement (when neither sounding nor observation from Sunne, Moone nor Planets for many dayes are had) they are upon this coast, these birds and Sargasses or Trumbaes (eradicated by stormes) being never seene in such quantity in any other part of the universe, upon these for 50. leagues into the sea seldome failing our intelligence. The three and twentieth of Iuly the wind got up, inraging the restlesse Ocean; one surging wave (I well remember) striking us so pat upon our broad side, as forced our Ship in despight of her helme (then close by the Lee) to turne about above 5 points in the compasse, the noyse not inferiour to a Cannon; insomuch, our Captaine cryed out we had struck upon a rock, but his error quickly appea∣red (after so great a thunder) the wave flashing upon our decks so much salt water as soundly washt us all; the storme continuing till the eight and twen∣tieth day, when veering into a milder quarter (our course E. N. E.) it grew calme and moderate. And now that the Seas are peaceable, the Ayre calme, the Skie serene; let us look about for some Ile or other, that; (if possible) which Venetus (per∣haps from an Optick glasse upon a Tarrase beyond Tartary) descried in this sea and about this place; where we find none resembling; but hee not only assures an Ile, but saw a bird there (his multiplying glasse deceived him) so big as a Ship, and so strong as in her tallons can easily gripe and trusse up an Elephant: I will not paraphrase, take his phantasma in his owne expansion, Nam falsa est veris affinia multa locutus. In quadam Insula versus Meridiem prope Madagascar, certo Anni tempore apparet mirabilis species Avis, quae Ruc appellatur. Aquilae quidem habens effigiem, sed immensae magnitudinis: pleras∣que alarum pennas habet, in longitudine continentes duodecim passus, spissitudi∣nem vero ejus proportionem tenere longitudinis, & totum Avis corpus pennis proportione respondet. Est etiam tantae fortitudinis, ut sola sine aliquo admini∣culo Elephantem capeat & in sublime sustollit, atque iterum ad terram cadere sinat quo carnibus ejus vesci posset. A bird worthy of Gesners knowledge, and which we will ranck with those Gryffins that guard the Ophyrian Mounts of gold against the Arimaspi (who from wincking when they shoot are said to be Monoculi) not seldome from their Scythie holes attempting the con∣quest of Mammon inclos'd in the Rhyphean hills, as Tostatus ex Rabano, Aes∣chilus, Dionysius and Herodotus would perswade us: rejecting which, let us rest a while upon Madagascar the Empresse of all the Ilands in the Vniverse. MADAGASCAR, so called by the Natives; by Ptolomy, Menuthyas; by M. Paulus Venetus, Magaster; by Thevetus, Albagra; by Marcator, Do Cerne; (both unwisely:) by Tristan d' Acuna the Portuguise (who discovered it Anno Dom. 1508.) Saint Lawrence; that day he first veiwed it: howbeit I find great difference in Spanish writers about the first that landed here. Some saying that Emanuel Telezo de Menezes anchor'd here two yeere before d' Acuna: and Osorius in his 4. lib. de vitae Emanuelis reg. port. fo. 140. saies, that Fernando Suario and Roderigo Frierio, two Marriners in two Ships returning from India to Lisbon, Anno 1506. accidentally fell upon this Ile, and suffered from the trechery of the savage inhabitants, and that in honor of Lawrence sonne of Almeida the Admirall and Commander of all the Forts in India, from his name named it; but in his 5. book fol. 162. that D' Acuna named it. Let us now a shoare; our observation may prove more consequentious.
Madagascar (that name sounds best) is questionlesse the greatest Iland in the world: accounting its extent from Cape Roma in the South, to point Saint Sebastian, from 16 to six and twenty degrees; the North end, parralel∣ling Cuama in Quiloa (a famous part of the Africk continent:) and to the South, the great River of Magnice in 26 degrees in length; a thousand Eng∣lish miles (some report 1200.) in breadth, in some part 230. Osorius numbers 400. and a hundred where 'tis narrowest, full of Townes, People, Mineralls, Beasts, Wood, Water, and what's requirable. map of southeastern Africa Such Marittim townes and ports as be knowne to us are these: Roma, Au∣gustine, Antabosta, St. Iacobo, Matatana, Angoda, Ferendo, Fermoso, Anton-gill and Iungomar; the 2. last almost opposite: Augustine (under the South Tro∣pick) (and Anton-gill (upon the East side) affoord best anchoring: the first, we usually ride in passing to Surat, the other home bound is best; as Sir Iames Lancaster Anno 1600. made proofe of, in 8. fadom water, in the bot∣tome of the Bay (a small Ile behind them to sea) ozie ground, the place good for victualling, ayre quick and healthfull. Howbeit, the Dutch, at this place 2. moneths formerly (through distempers) lost 200. men, of agues and fluxes: the variation at Augustine Bay is 16. degrees. The whole Ile is Tetrarchicall, 4. severall Kings swaying their Ebony Scepters in each Toparchy; jealous each of one anothers greatnesse. The
Sea townes are infected with Mahometisme; the Mediterran, are eclips'd in black Idolatry: Nature has given them lawes, murder being punisht by death, adultery with publique shame, and theft with banishment. Fishing delights them more than tillage: Thetis is better accounted of then Ceres: yet I ra∣ther think, their ignorance in agriculture so disposes it. The people are gene∣rally strong, couragious, and proper; the male sort, from their infancy pra∣ctising the rude postures of Mars, cover their naked bodies with long and massie Targets, their right hand brandishing a long neat pike or lance of Ebo∣ny, barb'd with iron, kept as bright as silver, and which they know how to use and jaculate as excellently as any people in the Universe: they are black, at no time shading their bodies from the parching Sunne, rather delight to rub and annoint all over with grease and tallow, proud to see their flesh shine, the stinck never offending them: their haire is black, and long, and curled; the length is an especiall ornament; a few leaves plaited about their waists, elsewhere naked; their eares are bor'd and wide enough; pincking and cutting the flesh, is here also in fashion: whiles the better sex seeke prey abroad, the women (therein, like themselves) keep constant home and spin: bigamy is tolerated; they affect copulation very early, the youth scarce know∣ing 12. the maiden 10. yeeres in the world the name Virginity. They are de∣lighted with sports and novelties; hunting, hawking, fishing, (of which, the Ile affoords variety) and dancing, in Maeanders winding, beating and clapping their breasts and hands, their feete spurning the yeelding fands, forcing the spectators further of; during which, the women with savage harmony, mo∣dulate with hands and eyes, observing an exact measure, equall if not exceed the men in their more laborious treadings. They know not letters, Arts are burdensome to idle savages, they com∣pleat that jeere of Sophocles, Nihil scire, nil jucundius: howbeit, necessity has taught them some parts of the rudiments of Arithmetick; the number 10. limits their invention, Isso, 1. Tone, 2. Tello, 3. Effad, 4. Fruto, 5. Woubla, 6. Sidda, 7. Fonlo, 8. Malo, 9. Nel, 10. The earth is rich in myneralls and mer∣quisate, Gold, Silver, (and as Edoard Lopezo) Iron and Copper: but, by hearing the cruelty and avarice of the Portugall, prohibit the use and dig∣ging it, contenting themselves rather with usefull hearbs and graine (of which they have great store) than by the Magique of gold and pearle to allure the hearts of greedy men; a vice, the Portugall is more branded with than any other Nation. Nec Babylonis opes, Lydae, nec pondera gazae, Indorum{que} dapes, Saerum{que} Arabum{que} potentes Divitias, mallim cum paupertate pudica Intemerata mori, quam famam impendere vitae. Not Croesus wealth, nor Babels vast command, India, Arabia nor of Saeres land Can speake me rich or happy; if with them I throw away my more price worthy fame. But, if you will buy any thing the Ile affoords (I think the Ile it selfe) you must furnish you with Agats, Helitropians, Iasper, and (which they value more than all the Dyamonds and pearles in India) with long red Cornelian beades, of which they are so proud, that the owner be it King or subject is oft dethroned, spoyled for it, one string able to put them all in a cumbusti∣on: bracelets, copper chaines, bells and babies are valuable also here, and for which, (or one bead of cornelion) you shall have in exchange, Sheep (big tail'd like those in Syria and Persia) Beeves and Buffoles, big-bond, fat, and
Camel-backt: Camells, Antilopes, red Deere, Leopards, Pards, Goats, Milk, Hens, Egges, Wheat, Barley, Rice and Cuscus, with what fruit yon like; Orenges, Lemons, Lymes, Pomcitrons, Plantans, Sugercanes, Ginger, Toddy, Cocoes, &c. Nor are the Lyzards, Camelion and Salamanders to bee lost in oblivion. The Camelion (the hyeroglyphic of a dissembler) take thus from Alciat. She alwayes gapes, she eates the slender Ayre, Changing her lookes, she varies colours rare. Even so the Flatterer applauding feeds, Clawing his Princes most opprobrious deeds. Semper hiat, semper tenuem qua vescitur Auram, Et mutat faciem, varios sumitque colores. Sic & adulator populari vescitur Aura, Et solum Mores imitatur principis atros. The Salamander, is in shape not much unlike; extreame cold by nature, from whence (like Ice) she can long time indure the fire, yea (if little) extin∣guish flames: The Salamander, endures fire without danger. Seu Salamandra potens Nullis{que} ob noxia flammis. commonly obscuring themselves in moyst and umbragious places, seene against stormes, their teeth and tongues are mortally venemous, the other parts eaten without hurt. If ere the Salamander hap to bite thee, Thy coffin and thy winding sheet invite thee. Si mordu t'a une Arissade, Pren's ton linceul é la flassade We have said enough: let my vale-dictum now be this; the Land mournes to see it selfe so trod upon by a people, strangers to God and vertue: concea∣ling such usefull treasures, and making unusefull so many ports, obscured farre beyond her meriting; seated so advantagiously for traffique with all the world, both the Indies possible to be awed by her; and vicinating those gol∣den countries of Mozambiq', Quiloa, Soffala, Mombassa, Magadoxa and other parts of Aegisimba; proffering also many petty Ilands under her, as those of Cumrho, Primero, Mascarenas, Castle Ile, Moritius, Dygarrois, and Englands Forrest, environing and in a sort defending her upon occasions. Nine leagues from Madagascar (in a North-East course) we had welnigh (for want of heed) runne upon the sholes of Iudaea; sands memorably dan∣gerous, since Annius a French man with all his Navy here perished; our vari∣ation at this time being 13 degrees, 18 minutes in longitude from the Cape, Whence wee steered N. E. and by E. aiming at Mohelia. By the way, one of our men tooke a Shark (a man eating fish, and who seldome misse the hook, out of too much greedinesse) 9 foot she was in length and a halfe by the rule, I speak it in this respect, wee found in her paunch five and fifty young ones, every fish a Geometricall foot in length, (100 of our Ship saw it) all which, go out and in at pleasure: that night, wee sailed merrily by the Mascarenas, a Charybdis in 21 degrees, var. 13 and 17 minutes, where suspe∣cting no danger, the wind favouring us, wee were at tenne at night throwne (by an insensible current) upon the shoalds of Mozambique, and sounding (where wee thought wee had a 1000 fadome) the plummet or lead found bare eight fadome: the wind was high, sea rough, and Cinthya clouded; it stood our Captaine upon to give speedy notice (that night we bore the light in our maine top) by eccho of 2. roring Culverings warning our Fleet,
guided by our Lanterne to tack about, loring our top-sailes, and hovering till day light might help us by discovery: at our second sounding wee had 14 fathoms, 12.15. and 14. after that; then 22 24.33.35. and 40. fadoms by which wee saw, the Lord in mercy had (as by a thred) directed our course from out these flats of death, and where (if his providence, which let us ever magnifie, had not prevented it) in halfe an houres sayle further we had beene cast away most miserably: —Cave fis ibi tu sorbente charybdi, Nam neque Neptunus posset tibi ferre salutem. From us, learne to avoid that deadly sand, Where Neptune cannot lend a helping hand. Iohn de Novo, Primero and other dangerous Iles on every side invironing us: we had here 17 degr. 37 min. lat. 20 degr. 20 min. long. cape var. 13 degr. 52. min. the current sets S. W. At day break we were close by the Peninsule Mozambique (part of Quiloa) inhabited by Negroes; abundant in Gold, Silver, and Ambergreece; at small distance, that part wee saw appeared thus unto us: Mozambique. which we scarce lost sight of, when an Armado of Dolphins assaulted us; and such we saulted as we could intice to taste our hooks or fissgiggs: a fish (it me∣rits your patience) from its swiftnesse metonymically surnam'd the Prince and Arrow of the Sea: celebrated by many learned pens, by many Epethites; Phi∣lanthropoi, foraffecting men; Mono-gamoi, for their turtle constancy; genera∣ted of sperme, nourisht like man, imbrace, joyne, and go great 10 months. In faciem versi dulces celebrant hymenaeos Dolphines, similes hominis complexique haerent: a carefull husband oves his gravid associate, detesting incest, abhorring bigamy, tenderly affecting their parents, who when 300 yeers old, they feed and defend against other hungry fishes; and when dead (to avoid the Sharks and like marine Tyants) carry it ashoare and there (if Aristotle, Aelyan, and Pliny erre not) inhume him and bedew his sepulcher: they were glad of our com∣pany many hundred miles concomitating and frisking about us. Vndi{que} dant saltus, multaque aspergine rorant Emergunt{que} itetum, redeunt{que} sub aequora rursus Inque chori ludunt speciem, lascivaque jactant Corpora; & acceptum patulis mare maribus efflant. On every side they leap and dew their fyn, Advance from Sea and bathe againe therein In sport, and measur'd dances, nimbly fling Themselves, whilst seas do from their nostrils spring. Six leagues North-East from the last land, we discried another Ile, full of Palmeto trees; the current here set us 20 leagues forward in 24 houres, the latitude of this Ile 16 degrees and a halfe, longitude 21 degrees and 28 min. thus shaped.
Castle Iland The 7 of September we discried land, it prov'd Meortey one of the Iles of Chumro, seated at the North end of Madagascar. It rises very high to the East as we sailed by it, mounts in a piramid and views far into the Ocean. Its lati∣tude is 12 degr. 56 min. South, and longitude 23 degr. 59 min. in this shape pro∣fering it selfe unto my Table book. Meottys Ile These Iles, (call'd the Iles of Cumro) be 5: either because Chumro (or Cumr-yne the Welshmens Ile) is greater, than the rest, or that it was first disco∣vered: named Cumro, Meottis, Ioanna, Mohelia & Gazidia: by others thus; St. Iohn di Castro, Spirito Sancto, Sancto Christofero, Anguzezia, and Mayotto: each of them excellent for refreshing passengers, abounding with delicate fruit and such cattell as are had at easie prices: none of them are above a hun∣dred miles about yet very populous and full of natures blessings. Chumro is the highest and best land, but branded with the most subtle and bloody Sava∣ges: Ioanna has courteous people, and such as readily help strangers in ne∣cessity: It lately obeyed a Queen rectrix much commended for sagacity, but now submits to a King, who tho tyrannicall yet better so (as Tacitus pro∣tests) than be anarchicall; to these Iles we sent our boates ashoare (intending to ride at Mohelia) and returned with Oxen and Buffolls, Goats, and variety of Fruits, all which were very heartily wellcomed. And tho our Randezvous be now in sight, suffer me (whiles in memory) to tell you of a fish or 2 which in these seas were obvious. The Sea Tortoise is not much differing from those at land, her house or shell is only flatter;Sea Tortoyse by overturning them they are easily taken, disabled then to sinck or help themselves: some we tooke, for pastime more than food, they taste waterish and inforce fluxes; they su∣perabound in eggs, in those we took every one having neere 2000, pale and
round, but never made hard though extremely boyled: some eat them and the flesh (or fish as you please to call it), but by the Leviticall law it was for∣bidden; and tho our religion consists not in ceremonies (ending in the proto∣tipe, our Saviour) yet except famine or novelty so invite mee, with such cates my pallat craves not to be refreshed. The Mannatee is good meat, and from their using the shoare have a fleshie taste, resembling in shew and eating, Veale;Mannaty a strange fish. the intralls differing little from a Cow, and from whom in respect of its phisnomy, some new name her: her face is like a Buffolos, her eyes small and round, hard gums in stead of teeth: the stone generated in the head is most valuable, soveraigne against choler adust, the stone chollick and dissen∣tery, so it be beat small, infus'd in wine and drunk fasting: the body of this fish is commonly 3 yards long and one broad, slow in swimming, wanting fins, in their place ayded with 2 paps which are not only suckles but stilts to creep a shoare upon such time shes grazes; where shes sleep long, sucking the coole Ayre, unable (contrary to other watery inhabitants) to be halfe an houre under water: are famoused (like Lizards) for their love to man, whose face they delight to look upon, and in weaknesse have refreshed them; tho most unhappy to our Captaine Andrew Evans, who by striking one at the Moritius with his harping-iron, and leaping into the sea to make short work with his steletto, was so crusht, that he dyed shortly after, as I speak in our description of St. Helena, were we intombed him. The Carvel.The Carvell is a meere sea fome, every where floating upon the surface of the Ocean, of a globous forme, like so many lines throwing abroad her strings, which she can spread at pleasure, angling for small fishes which she captivates at leisure: a sea spider she may be cal'd, for when she sees her webb too weak, she can blow an infectious breath, foming death, or such a sting as if she had borrowed it from the Scorpion. We are now ready to cast Anchor, hopefull of fresh refreshment. September the eleventh, we rode in five and twenty fadoms, the ensuing morne wafting neerer shoare, dropping it againe in seventeene fathoms, at the West side of Mohelia, a bow shot from a small scatter'd village of straw, unworthy a name, yet called Meriangwy, governed by a Sha-bander, Alicusary by name, a blacke big-bon'd knave, savage in shew, but slie and crafty in curtesie and bartring. Mohelyae pars Insulae. Mohelia elevates the Pole Antartick twelve degrees, fifteene minutes; has longitude from the Meridian of the Cape of good Hope, foure and twenty degrees, and variation of the Compasse 16 degrees, 20 minutes; is about three∣score miles in circuit: from Cumroh South East 14 leagues, and from Ioannae East and by South about 10: the Marittim places rising gently, the inland
woody and mountanous; a little village here and there scattered; the houses are of reeds and straw, fitted to the heat of such a torrid climate. Moella some pronounce it, Molala others, and worst of all one Best (thinking the derivation would carry it) Mal-Ilha or bad Ile, an incongruity, that from his ill judgement, so sweet and usefull a place should be defamed. From Madagascar it is removed about 50 leagues, from Quiloa in the Africk continent sixty; the Inhabitants are a mixture of Gentiles and Ma∣homitans: the Portugall has preacht Christ, but have few Proselites; some fragments of their language take thus in their owne idiom. A King, Sultan; Bracelets, Arembo; a Hen, Coquo; an Oxe, Gumbey; Coco-nuts, Sejavoye; Plan∣tains, Figo; a Goat, Buze; an Orenge, Tudah; Lemon, Demon; Water, Ma∣ge; Paper, Cartassa; a Needle, Sinzano, &c. a mish-mash of Arabick and Portuguise. A Mohelian. The people are cole black, have great heads, big lips, are flat nos'd, sharp chind, huge limbd, affecting Adams garb, a few Plantaine leaves girding their wasts, vailing their modest parts; cut and pinckt in severall works, upon their duretto skins, face, armes, and thighs, striving to exceed each other for varie∣ty: The Meccan zealists have here a few poore built Mosques, straw and wood without, matted and neat within, admitting no entrance with shooes
on; the other sort of men are doubtlesse magicall: I thus imagine it; ano∣ther Gentleman and I, one evening got us under a Tree to avoid the storme, at that time thundring and raining excessively. A Negro stood by all the while trembling, now and then lifting up his hands and eyes, muttering his black Art to some hobgoblin, and (when we least suspected it) skips out, and in a limphatic rapture drew a long knife which he brandisht about his head 7 or 8 times, and after so many spells put it up againe; hee then kisses the humid earth 3 times and rises merrily: upon a sudden, the skie cleared and no more noise affrighted us. Two Kings of late commanded them, Phancomall and Synal-beg; the one a Native, th'other an Arabian; both made great by their wives, the only daugh∣ters of the late King Sultan Sheriph Booboocharee, and Queene Nannan-galla, both of them alive in lesse than 20 yeares passed. The two Kings (envious of one anothers greatnesse) live at defiance, and oft times the poore Savages pay deerely for eithers ambition; the two sisters (whom Nature has united) burne in jealousie, and exasperate their Lords, so as (tis thought) one of them will downe the streame ere long, if the proverb say right; that Non bene cum focijs Regna Venus{que} manent. Love and Scepters ill agree, To admit Societie. Tobacco is of great account here; not strong (as our men love) but weake and leafie; suckt out of long canes call'd hubble-bubbles; sneezing-powder is not more frequent with the Irish, than chawing Arec, (by Arab and Indians call'd Tauffet and Suparee) is with these Savages: the Arecca (resembling the Nutmeg, the Tree the Toddy) is not us'd alone, they add to it Betele, which like the Jvie leafe involves the Arec and combured oyster-shells, a chalky sub∣stance, good in operative property, as colouring their white teeth to a pure crimson; it also sweetens the breath, kills wormes, giddies the braine, dries rheumes, helps Venus, and begets an appetite. If I erre, blame the Interpre∣ter I had there; I professe no Physick. The Ile inricht us with many good things; Buffolls, Goats, Turtles, Hens, huge Batts, Camelions, Rice, Pease, Cuscus, Hony, Oysters, Breams, Cavalloes, and store of other fish; also with Toddy, Cocos, Plantains, Orenges, Lemons, Lymes, Pomcitrons; Ananas, Cowcumbers, Tamarind, and Sugar canes; Mother of pearle and good pearle too if it were div'd for; an Ile so verdant all the yeare (each day a gentle breese and showre bedewing the earth, and lenifying the flaming Sunne) atti∣red in Flora's Summer livery, yea roabed with Natures best Arras; so pleasant, so refresht with silver purling streames, so shaded, as may parallell the proud Paradise of Alcinoe. Of fruits we will select but three, such as may merit our acceptance. The Plan∣tain fruit.The Plantaine (for taste and odour second to none in Mohelia) is a fruit so good and vailed with so broad a leafe that Goropius (if he be worht be∣leeving) perswades us, Adam offended in eating it, and with these leaves made his transgression manifest; and that also, which was brought Moses out of the Holy Land: by the Arabians it is called Musa-mawm, Pican by the In∣dians: they hang in great clusters, their shape is long and round, not unlike a Soffage; the rind peels off, the fruit is gold-yellow, relisht like a Windsor Peare; good for urine, but bad for fluxes, cold crude stomacks, and dis∣senteries.
The Coco (an excellent fruit) is cover'd with a thick rynd; both together,Coco. equall in bignesse to a Cabbage: the shell is like the skull of man, or rather a Deaths head; eyes, nose and mouth, being easily discerned; intus vita! with∣in, we find better than the out-side promised; a quart of Ambrosie, coloured like new white Wine, but farre more aromatick tasted; the meat or kernell cleaves to the shell, and is not easily parted; above an inch thick, better relisht than our Philberts, and enough to satiate the appetite of two reasonable men. It has other excellencies, The Tree (which is straight and lofty, not branch∣ing save at the very top, where it spreads in beautifying plumes, the Nuts like pendants or pearles adorning them) is good for timber, or Canooes, Masts, Anchors: the leaves for Tents or thatching; the rynd for Sailes, Mattresses, Cables and Linnen; the shell for furniture; the meat for victualling: rare blessings! I will give thee them contracted in that excellent Poem of my Cosen Herbert, late Cambridge Orator. —The Indian Nut alone Is cloathing, meat and trencher, drink and kan, Boat, Cable, Saile, Mast, Needle, all in one. The Toddy Tree is not unlike the Date or Palmeto,Toddy. the Wine is got by pearcing and putting a Iar or Pitcher under, that the liquor may distill into it, at the very top it has a pith or marrow, which being boyl'd is like a Colli-flower, but the taking that part is as if another Tree should be eradicated, the soule therein consisting; these (as the Dates) thrive not nor fructifie, except the flowring male and female be united. The Toddy is like Whay in colour, in taste and quality like Rhenish wine, at first draught uncouthly relisht, but every draught tasts better and better, and will easily inebriate; a little makes men merry; too much makes them mad; extreame is mortall: in the mor∣ning tis laxative; in the eve costive; at midnight dangerous. Of this or the Coco, Herodotus and Pliny write thus: Ex quibus, panem, mel, vinum, acetum & vestitum conficiunt. To end, these are bought without much charges; thirty Orenges or Lemons for a sheet of paper: for two sheets tenne Coco Nuts: an Ox for a ryall of eight: a Goat for six pence. They have no Ships, nor Boats, save such as are hewed out of one stump or tree, capable to receive three Fishermen in faire weather; and if they sink, their swimming helps them: but though of no use with us, yet for rarity sake I give thee the shape better to be imagined. a Canoe The 15 of September we had farewell to Mohelia, by benefit of a faire gale that fild all our sailes, plowing up the yeelding Ocean. The long billowes
made us dance apace, but without dread; the whistler with his iron Pipe en∣couraging the Marriners; who made so good use of this advantage, that in foure dayes wee found our selves but foure degrees from the Aequinoctiall; that night the 19 of September,White-Sea. the Sea was for 10 leagues as white as snow, not froathy or by agitation of wind, but in calmest weather (as many say) is here still the same, from whence caused is not now to be disputed. Next day we made the Sunne our Zenith: in this Latitude opposing that rich part of Afrique we call Soffala and Mombassa (in three degrees 50 min. South:) Maga∣doxa (in 3 degrees:) Zanzibar, Pata, and Brava, terminating one another, till with Bernagasso (the Port to the great Neguz or Priest Iohn) the red Sea limits Africk from Asia. Antartic Starres.The three and twentieth day wee once more sail'd under the Aequator and againe bad farewell to those late usefull Antartique constellations: the Crosiers (foure starres like a crosse, of a second magnitude 17 degrees 30 min. from the Pole) Noahs Dove, Polophilax and others: the two Beares now ri∣sing in our Horizon againe, and at eight degrees North, the wind grew wea∣rie of too much constancie, veering into E.N.E, so that the Monzoon affronted us, and we could lie no neerer than South-East; at which time many of your company died, imputing the cause of their Calentures, Fluxes, Aches, Scur∣vie, Feavers, and the like, to the sulphurous heat there, stinking water, rotten meat, and worm-eaten Biskets (in the Torrid Zone, no mans care can better it, but in the temperate they all recover and become sweet and nourishing again) But rather I beleeve, their over-eating themselves at Mohelia, where they far∣cinated their crude stomacks with unsalted flesh, and gulped downe too much Toddy, caused it; here our Admirall threw over-board five and thirty dead men: the Hopewell, eleven; the Starre, five: every ship lost some, too many if God had pleased. But of most note were Harvey Keynell, an expert Masters Mate in the Starre, Captaine Goodall, all good, if skill in Navigation, huma∣nity, courage, and piety may have it: at whose putting into the Sea (a spati∣ous grave) a volley of one and twenty great Gunns awaked the watery Citi∣zens to safeguard such a Treasure, heaven it selfe at that instant weeping so abundantly, that I never saw a sadder raine and of lesse continuance. The Ma∣ster of our ship was removed into the Vice Admirall, and Captaine Malim out of the Hopewell into ours, who also died shortly after, a Sea-man as wise and valiant as any other: most memorable in that never to be forgot pollicie hee us'd in the Levant Seas after a brave fight to save his men and ship from fury of Algier Pirats: for whom we may fitly apply that of the Prince of Poets. Facta Ducie vivunt, operosa{que} gloria rerum haec manet. —The Heroick deeds of all Brave men, are written in Fames glorious roll. The wind added to our affliction: the boisterous waves breaking against our broad side, patient in all those checks, close hal'd, cutting her way slowly, and almost forc't upon Socotora, an Ile as we goe into the Red-sea; where we will stay you a while, the Sea is so dangerous. Socotora or Succaba (Diosco∣rida,Socotora. of old I judge, call'd also Topazo from pretious Topaz stones had here, as Pliny in his sixth book has it: by Turks call'd Katukomar, by Persians Caebar, by the Spaniard Acebar and Aceur;) is in 13 degrees latitude North: a little Ile it is, yet for pleasant sight and choise of good things no way despicable; one
part rising into wholsome hills, other parts falling into fruitfull dales; all pla∣ces garnisht with spreading trees, sweet grasse, fragrant flowers, and rich corne, Olives, Aloes, Sempervivum, Sanguis draconum, Coquos, Dates, Pistachoes, Orenges, Pomgranats, Pome-citrons, Melons, Suger canes, Limons; and of fish, fowle, and flesh no where penurious: the civit Catts also are here obtained. These and the people were of late made slaves by Emir-ben-said King (or Vice-Roy rather, the Turk commanding him) of Fartack, in which Aden is builded; but expulst by d' Cugua anno 1507. who made the Snakee (the Prince) fly to Caeshem, and hisse at harmlesse distance: the Portugall free∣ing the miserable Christians, by whose help he rais'd a Castle, planted a Colo∣ny, but by Albuquerque was cashier'd five yeares after, the Merchandise pro∣ving not equivolent to their charges. The Inhabitants are true black, the Sunne twice every yeare darting his fiery rayes perpendicular amongst them; by profession they are Christians; converted the third yeare after our Saviours passion, by the Aethiopian Eu∣nuch some say; some say by St. Thomas the Apostle of the Orient: their Chur∣ches are built in forme of the Crosse, like ours: kept sweet and neat, without seats and images: they have a Patriarch, whom they reverence; and other of the Clergy to whom they duly pay Tythes; their Feasts and Fasts like ours; the seniority are much regarded, humility commanded and commended; se∣cond Marriages are not allowed, except they had no children, use the crosse in Baptisme, the other Sacrament in both kinds, and being dead, lament not, but involve them in cleane linnen, and so bury them that they looke towards Jerusalem. Aden (now, so neere us) seemes to invite a small relation; It has 12 degrees 35 min. North, var. West. 19 degrees: Madaena of old, Adana in Calistus, Adedi and Achanis in Eupolemus: opposed to Azana, in the Arabian shoare, but snatcht anno 1458. from the Arabs by the Turks, a ragged obscure sort of Lo∣custs till then, then swarming and mounting towards Trepizond. The road or Bay is none of the safest, in the change flowing eight foot wa∣ter; a S.E. and N.W. Moone makes a full sea there; from Bab-mandel 18 leagues; from Moha (old Beronice or Moco rather, a Towne in Arabia Petrea after Ptol.) two and thirty. Aden is seated low, sulphuriously shaded by a high barren Mountaine; whose brazen front scorching the miserable Towne, yeelds a perfect character of Turkish basenesse. It is a Peninsule, and a good way (to get breath) thrusts it selfe into the blushing Sea; big in circuit, but has not many houses, nor those curious; their outsides discovering a discontented slavery, the inside shewes poverty and wretchednesse. A Castle it has set neer the sea, not to be entred but by a long narrow dissected path or trench; the Castle is very strong and lofty, strengthned by so many rampiers and bulwarks, stored with so many roring Cannons, as if Mars dwelt there, or that it kept a Mammon of treasure, having in truth nothing but iron bullets, armour, and miserable raggamuffians to defend it: the red Sea (on whose bancks 'tis sea∣ted) borrowes not the name from colour, rather from sand, which on the shoare and from the bottome has (when Apollo visits the Antipodes) a ruddy reflection: shall I tell you the severall names it has; some say 'tis called red, from Erethreus sonne of Perseus and Andromida, a Prince (in the worlds ado∣lescency) much regarded, from whose name (as the Aegean and Icarian) the
Sea was named; and by the Septuagint from  so translated: other some, from Edom (Idumea a part of the Desart Arabia, confining it) the Sea of Edom; the Hebrewes call it Zuph or Saph, or Mare Algosum, from Sea weeds or Sar∣gassoes here abounding: Some Mare Elanixicum from Aelana a neighbouring Port and Towne: and others the Gulph of Mecca and Arabia; fictitious The∣vet calls it Zocoroph, Bohar Colzun the Arabs, Zahara some, and others Brachia: a Sea most memorable for the miraculous passage Almighty God gave Moses and the Israelites neere the Sues, of old Arsinoe: and for Solomons fleet at Ezion Geber (or Moha) thence setting out for the gold of Ophyr. To returne, when the Portugalls had got Socotora, and a hundred other places in India and Ara∣by, Albuquerque their Golias by much adoe anno 1520 took Aden, boasting that he was then sole Emperour of India, Qua victa (saith Osorius) putabat Indiae Imperium fore sempiternum: Humanum est errare, or else Albuquerk might be blemished; for, in few yeares they not only lost this, but many other Forts of greater consequence in India. October 18 we had the wind pretty faire. Our observation that day being 17 degrees, our longitude 19 from Mohelia; the wind less'ned, and weather grew flaming hot; no Stove or Sudatory exceeding it: it made us very faint, yet having past through as bad, it seemed lesse torment to us. But Mahomet the Persian Merchant (whose father Hodgee Suare died in London the yeare before) could hold out no longer, a Feaver drawing him through the path of death;Mahomet converted. a happy man, if (throwing away the raggs of Mawmetry) hee roab'd his soule with true faith in Christ; they say he call'd upon him, twice happy man, if unfaignedly: At his putting into the Sea, the Captain honour'd his fu∣neral with the sky rending clamour of foure Culverin shot, leaving his carcasse to the mercy of the Sea and Fish, a sure treasurie till the resurrection. The six and twentieth of October we found we were got North from the Aequinoctiall 19 degrees 40 minutes and longitude from Mohelia 20 degrees, our stearage at that time South East, the Sea pacifique, the wind moderate, but heat offensive: where also we had such shoales of flying fishies as dark∣ned the glorious Sunne by their interposing multitude; a fish most excellent depiction of a flying fish
in its eyes, which flame like a rolling Dyamond; the body is equall to a well fed Herring, big enough for those complementall wings (or fins) Nature has provided it to avoid the swift chase of Sea Tyrants, Sharks, Albicores, Dol∣phins, Bonetaes and such as feed upon small fishes; but alas! a Scilla in Cha∣ribdin: no sooner taking the advantage of her wings (imitating a bird 200 pa∣ces, a dozen yards high from the face of the Ocean, so long as she keeps moi∣sture) when an Armado of starv'd birds and hawks as readily prey upon them; by this, becomming the most miserable of all creatures, blest with 2 shifts but neither availeable, in the water not so full of bravery as upon the wing, yet that becomes the only gin and cause of her destruction. The seventeenth of November, to our comfort we descried (terra ter ex optata) the coast of India; in fifteene degrees latitude, and 32 of longitude (the ill weather having driven us to Lee-ward many leagues) that very place where Goa (Barigaza of old) is seated; the bravest, best defended Citie in the Orient; the Magazeen, refuge, seat of Justice, of the insolent and gold-thirsty Portugall. The Citie is not visible to such as Navigate in the Ocean, being built three houres journey within the land, in Tilsoare, an Ile of 30 miles cir∣cuit, surrounded by a river streaming from the mighty mountaine Bellaguate. Goa, is compast with a strong and beautifull wall, proud in her aspiring Tur∣rets, dreadfull in many sorts of tormenting Cannons: her strength and beauty begun from the Decan Emperours, Zabaym and Idalcan,Goa. from whom anno 1509 Albuquerque conquer'd it, but agrandiz'd from the Lusitanian; the great Buzzar (or Market) is in center of the Towne, richly built, pleasant and ca∣pacious. The other streets are (after the Indian mode) narrow and nasty; the buildings in generall, are spatious and comly; dark within, tarrassed and sutable to the seasons: 'tis watered with a delicious streame, which (by bene∣volence of the ayre) refreshes the fields, forcing Flora to dismantle; the gar∣dens be also fill'd with variety of sweet and eye-pleasing flowers: the whole Ile abounds with grasse, corne, groves, cattell, fruits, and such sence ravishing delights a reasonable man can require: above 20 little Townes are seene in this 30 miles compasse. In Goa is nothing more observable than the fortifica∣tions, the Viceroy and Archbishops Pallaces, and the Churches: Field peeces here are numbred above 300; the Pallaces are strong, of good stone, furnisht within with rich Arras and painting: the Churches of best rank are, that de∣dicated to the blessed Virgin Mother of God, (in which, is kept the bones and skull of Saint Thomas the Apostle, holy Reliques brought 50 yeares agoe from Meliapore by Emanuel Frias at command of Iohn, successour to Emanuel, Kings of Portugall.) St. Pauls, St. Dominie, St. Katherine, St. Savior, and others; in which, are prest downe the bones of restlesse Albuquerque, buried in the yeare 1516; of d' Acugnia, of Don Francisco, and that late canonized Chyna St. Fran∣cis Shyvier the Navarrean Jesuit, who died anno 1552. 4 December, aged 55, and rubricated by Pope Gregory 15. 12 March 1622, when many more were Sainted. We hasted hence towards Swally, judging the worst past, the Indian shoare all our way in view us, and the sea every where 20 leagues from land an∣chorable: But, sure all peace comes from above, and mans heart abounds with vanity; for upon a sudden, the element grew dreadfull, the wind to rore, the sea sublime and wrathfull, for three dayes space raging incessantly with such
fury, that we verily beleeved a Tuffon or Herocane was begun, a Tempest of 30 dayes continuance, so terrible that houses and trees are like dust afore it, many great ships having beene blowne a shoare and shattered; once in nine yeares it uses to thunder among them, presag'd by birds, and beasts who three or foure dayes before it bluster, cry out and runne under ground for shelter, as if an overture of all the world were ensuing: But praised be God wee were deceived, we mist a Tuffon, but not a second disadventure, this storme forcing a Mallabar Junck, a Pirat in view of us; our Ordnance could not reach them, though the longest Saker we had vomited the fire of defiance at them, where∣by we were forced (in way of honour) to chase her with Barges mann'd with fifty Musquetiers: But, Vela damus, quamvis remige Navis eat. We made too much haste in boarding her, being entertain'd with such store of Fire-works and Granados, a volley of cruell shafts; in a word, we were opposed with so much desperate courage that after small hurt to them, wee retreated with shame, the better halfe slaine, hurt, and scalded, our ships all the while being made an unwilling Theater of this Affront, the wind forbidding them to retaliate. The 22 of November the wind abated, and wee found ground at forty fa∣domes, many Snakes swimming about our ships, which (with the waters chan∣ging colour) assured us we were neere the shoare (the last storme had puzled us) and soone after we discerned land in 19 degrees 35 minutes latitude, and 29 in longitude, which by its towring height we knew to be Dabul, and then St. Iohn de vacas, a Towne subject to the Portugall, at the South end especi∣ally mounting in an ambitious piramid of Natures work, named Saint Valen∣tin's peake, the land continuing high from thence to Gundavee, a hill six leagues short of Swalley road, a round hillock and bay of importance unto Mariners. St. John. The seven and twentieth day of November, we hal'd an Indian piscadoro abord us, never was Antick better habited; he told us of many enemies, but we were fearelesse; after long toyle tiding up with streame anchors, every sixt houre weighing and dropping, in short time we got to Choul, and then against Daman, a lovely towne lorded by the Portugalls, and conspicuous to passengers; at the North end it has a Castle large, strong and daring; the materiall is good white chalky stone, flanckt with Ordnance and mounted high to play at advantage; At the South end we perceived a faire Church, with white battlements a top, the houses of like stone, strong and beautifull, 3 other Temples affoording joy and pleasure to the heart and eye. The nine and twentieth day we got neere the barre at Swalley, and there cast Anchor, because wee perceiv'd 13 saile of great ships, and knew not whether they were friends or enemies: the last day of November we adventured over the Barre, 'twixt two boas, in 4 fadome water, a hundred paces asunder, set there to manifest the passage, either side without being very dangerous: the Ships
at Anchor proved our friends, 6 English, and 7 Dutch, the most of them 1000 Tunne: those of our Nation were good men of Warre. The Palsgrave, Ex∣change, the William, the Blessing, &c. each of which (to do them right) feasted our Lord Ambassadors with hearty welcome: we rode in 5 fadome (others in 9) twixt the sholds and continent. The same day we came to an Anchor in Swalley roade, Nogdi-Ally-beg the Persian Ambassador (Sir Robert Sherley's Antagonist) dyed; having desperate∣ly poisoned himselfe; for 4 dayes, eating only Ophium: the Mary (where he dyed) gave him eleven great Ordnance, whose thundring Ecchoes solem∣niz'd his carrying ashoare: his sonne Ebrahim-chan got him conveighed to Surrat (10 miles thence) where they intombed him, not a stones cast from Tom Coryats grave, knowne but by two poore stones,Tom. Cory∣ats grave. there resting till the resurrection. Doubtlesse, Nogdibeg had a guilty conscience, hee had very basely mis∣behav'd himselfe in England, and feared the extreame rigour of Abbas a just (but too severe) Master, at no time to bee jested with in money matters or reputation; so as neither his past good service, alliance at Court, skill in armes, nor brave aspect, could animate his defence, assured of most horrid torture: Other mens sufferings upon lesse cause made his seeme more unpar∣donable: in the yeere 1612. a Persian Ambassador at Constantinople (for assen∣ting to such Articles 'twixt his Master and the Grand Seignior, as seem'd ad∣vantagious to him, but odious to the Persian Monarck) was upon his returne, beheaded at Cazbyn by command of his inraged Master: the conditions were indeed dishonourable, That the Prince of Persia should arrogate no other Title but Bashaw of Tauris: that the Persian should pay tribute for Gheylan, yeerly 400 bal's of silk: that the Cadi of Tauris should bee of the Turkes Election, &c. which Abbas kickt back to Achmat with great indignation. Tamas∣coolibeg also came into his mind, who dyed miserably (tho once second in Persia) upon spleene ill grounded by the King; and of Turkish barbarisme, not a few exemplaries. Ebrahim Bassa, Cycala, Synon Bassa and Nassuf, each of them in their times sitting at the Sterne, guiding as they listed the Turkish greatnesse, yet ere death cald for them, they were cald for, by precipitating ends, such as made the remembrance of their passed glory, relish the sowrer & more deformed: and Nogdibeg, (as we heard the King protest) if he had not prevented it, should first have beene hackt in peeces, and then in the open market place burnt with dogs turds, a perfume not fetcht from Arabia, a staine indeleble, branding with shame all his posterity. Returne we to the roade againe. Swalley road is from the Aequator 20 degrees, and six and fifty min. North:Swally road. westerly variation 16. degrees and a halfe: longit. from Mohelia 28 degr. at a low ebbe it resembles an Ile, beyond the sands Goga is easily discovered. The first of December, with some Pe-unes (or black foot-boyes who can pratle some English) we rode to Surat, our Chariot drawn by 2 Buffolls who by pra∣ctise are nimble in their trot and well managed; we past thorow Swalley Town, Batty (famous for good Toddy) Damkee, to Surat. Surat is the chiefe factory of the East India Marchants, the station of their President; at that time one Master Wyld was in that office, a modest, understanding Gentleman, to whose kind respect I owe acknowledgement, and in whose house (the English house)
we had tidings of Sultan Curroon's Coronation at Agra, Anno 1627. whose history we will prosecute, after we have view'd the Towne, which may well challenge a particular description. SVRRAT, (perhaps so cald by the Surae, whom Pliny places here,) is that old Muziris named by Ptol. if my judgement deceive me not: nor am I ig∣norant, Choul and Onor are imagin'd it by Molelius and Ramusius; a Town at this day great, famous, rich, & populous: nor ayre nor soyle agree with strangers; the one inflamed by the torridnesse of the Zone, the other sandy and sulphu∣reous; the Artick Pole is here elevated one and twenty degrees, three min. subject in Iune to become Nadyr to the burning Sunne, thence to September the clouds showring continually an insalubrious moysture, the wind and thunder so commixing, that no place in the world seemes more unhealthy, all the other 8 moneths either parching or freezing. Surat is accounted the third best Towne in the Gujurat Kingdome, Amadavad & Cambaya excelling her; from the first removed foure from the other two good dayes journey, all now adding lustre to the Moguls rich replendent Diadem. Whether Gusurat comply with the Greekidiom , or from Gezurat in Arabick an Ile, I question not; a Province it is so usefull to the Mogull, that his annuall tribute out of this one shire amounts (as Marchants say) to 150 Tunne of gold. Su∣rat is at this day not very strong, neither in scite nor Ordnance; a 100. yeere agoe Antonio Siverio a Portuguise with 200 men enter'd it, sackt and burnt it; a 1000 would now find it a hard enterprise. It was after that subjected to Ecbar Anno Dom. 1566. of the Hegira 946. by valour of Chan Azem, whose care defeated the confederacy of Mirza-chan, Hussan, Mirza Mahomet, Chan Goga and other conspirators. Surat is now in a quiet government, watered with a sweet river named Tappee (or Tindy) as broad as the Thames at Windsor which arising out of the Decan Mountaines, glides thorow Brampore (220 miles distant thence) and in many Maeanders runnes by Surat, and after 20 miles playing to and fro, a league from Swalley road wanders into the Indian Ocean. 'Tis circled with a mud-wall, a Castle of stone is strongly built at the South-West side, the river washing it; planted with great Ordnance and other shot; awed by a Garrison, who make dainty to admit a stranger to see their fortifi∣cations or parapets; The West opens into the Buzzar thorow a faire gate of stone, where toll-gatherers are ever ready to search and exact sound tribute for the great Mogull their Master: the Medon is of no great beauty, nor do the shops give splendor; the crafty Banuyan desiring rather to be rich indeed then so accounted. The houses are indifferently beautifull; some are of carv'd wood, others of bricks dryed in the Sunne, the English and Dutch houses at the North end excelling the other for space and furniture; the Suburbs also have 3 posterns, pointing out 3 severall wayes; one to Variaw and to Cambaya; a second to Brampore; the third to Nansary ten course thence, whence the road is to Gundavee, to Balsac, and to Daman upon the Ocean. The Towne affoords no Monuments, no Mosques worth the taking notice of: the English garden without the Towne has pretty walks, sweet flowers and a water-worke, but scarce commendable: Only adjoyning Nancery gate, I saw a Tanck or Magazen of water, a brave work and worthy the noting: It is of good free stone, circling in above 100 sides and angles; eight and twenty Ells twixt every angle, in compasse very neere a thousand paces. It diminishes
its largnesse gradatim by 16 degrees or steps towards the bottome, of most use to receive a great quantity of raine water, to quench the flagrant thirst of the Sunne-burnt Indians: the river by this, seemes somewhat unwholsome, if good neither for drink nor navigation, what serves it for, save to mundifie the idolatrous Banuyan and superstitious Mahometans: the Bannyans are the grea∣ter number here, but the Moores command them: they have a native lan∣guage of their owne, but the Persian tongue is understood by most, and is most courtly. The Indian Mahometans, are a crafty, cowardly sort of peo∣ple, (most of the great men being either Rashbootes or Persians) yet love to go arm'd all day with sword and buckler, bow, arrowes, and daggers, as if they stood in danger of some enemies: their habit is a quilted coat of Calico, tyed under the left arme, a small shash upon their head, large stockings and some∣times sandalls: in an ordinary garbe are thus resembled. A man and woman of Industant. The other sort of people are Marchants, Bramin's, Gentiles, and Persae. With whom in order I will tempt your patience; this first remembred, that when any Ships ride at Swalley (from September to March commonly) the Bannians all along the sea side pitch Booths or Tents and straw Houses in great num∣bers, where they sell Callicoes, Chena-satten, Purcellan ware, Scrutores or Cabbinets of mother of Pearle, of Ebony, of Ivory, Agats, Turquoises, He∣liotropes,
Cornelians, Rice, Sugar, Plantans, Arack, &c. Also there is con∣stantly many little boyes or pe-unes, who are ready for 4 pice a day (2 pence of our money) to serve you, either to interpret, to runne, go arrands or the like: they will not eat nor drink with a Christian, nor out of the same leafe we drink our Toddy: the Bannyan and other Indian Females are seldome visible, their jealous husbands mew them up in darknesse. Here are Ele∣phants and Horses, but 'twixt Swalley and Surat Oxen do most labour. The most currant Coynes here and through India, are Pice, Mammoodees, Roopees and Dynaes;Mogulls coignes. the Pice are heavy round peeces of brasse, 30 of them make our shilling; the Mammoody and Roopee are good silver, round, thick, and (after the Saracenic sort who hate Images in Coyne) cover'd with Arabick letters, naming the King and Mahomet; a Mammoody is our shilling, a Roopee two shillings and three pence, the Dina is gold worth thirty shillings; but Spanish Rialls, Pistolets, and Persian Larrees, Abassees and English gold (each peece in Persia going for 26 shillings) goe here also. And againe, as I have beene told by Merchants, a hundred thousand Roopees make one Leck, a hundred Lack make on Crou, tenne Crou (or Carrors) one Areb: againe, in silver 14 Roopees make a Masse, 1150 Masse make a hundred Tolls; tenne Tolls of silver value one of gold: in brasse, thirty Tacks or Pice make one Roopee in weights; the Batman is 82 pound English, but fifty five of their pounds, the Mawnd is as much; Howbeit, as in Persia, the Mawnd Shaw and Tabriz differ, and as our Troy and Haverdepois are not the same; so in all parts of the world where wealth and traffick is, are such distinguishments: in a word, the Bannyans (as crafty the proverb goes, as the divell) by a moderate outside and excesse in superstition, make many well minded simple men lose them∣selves, when by a heedlesse stupid admiration of their sincere hypocrisie they intangle themselves by crediting their sugred words in way of trade or com∣plement, baits pleasingly swallowed when wee contemplate their tem∣perance. The Bannyans (or Vanyans) are tawny of complexion, faire spoken, crafty, and above measure superstitious; they let their haire grow long, their head is covered with a small wreath or shash for the most part white; their habit, a long coat or vest of white quilted Callico of the Dalmatick sort; their shooes are variable in colour and fashion; some checkerd and ingraled in ele∣gant order, wrought to each mans ingenious fancy; with out latchets, sharp and turning up at the toe, thin sol'd, high heeld, surrounded with steele, fast and durable: The women are whiter than the men, yet want the san∣guine mixture to adorne them, which they supply by Art, there being found the best vermilion: they weare their haire long and disheveled; part obscu∣red by a fine thin Lawne, by whose transparency it seemes more lovely; their eares, noses, armes, and legs, are loaden with many voluntary rings and fetters of Brasse, Gold and Ivory; their behaviour is silently modest, but full gorg'd with libidinous fantasies and distempers. Marriage is so honored, that they contract at 7 commonly, and at 10 yeeres old are often parents: but if an infant die ere he be married, the parents of him that dyed procure some virgin or other (to whom they give some Dynaes of Gold in lieu of Ioyn∣cture) to be his bed-fellow one night, to avoid the reproachfull proverb, he dyed unmarried.
An Indyan Marchant or Bannyan: Poligamy is odious among them, in which respect they cease not to villi∣fie Mahomitans as people of an impure soule, and stuft with turpitude; yea, in this they paralell the Antick Romans, who (as Tacitus, Marcellin, and Ter∣tullian tell us) so hated Digamy (both in enjoying two wives at one time, and being twice married) as no Holocaust was ever offred, no holy fire lookt unto by such, nor such as issued from such parents. Their Funeralls are of the old stamp (recorded by Curtius) sacring the corps to ashes in a holy fire, compounded of all sorts of costly woods and Aromatick spices: the wife also (in expectation to enjoy her husband 'mongst incomparable pleasures) inve∣lops her dainty body with the mercilesse flames, for which kindnesse she ob∣taines a living memory. Their Priests are called Bramyni or Brachmani; such as in old times from their quality, were nam'd Gymno-sophi, as Porphirius the great Platonist in his 4. lib. de abstinen. ab esu carnium, dictates concerning them, and thus: If by descent he continued constant to his study and con∣templation, he then attained great Aestimation, and the title Brachman:
if he sought this degree by election, he was seven yeares (sayes Bardesanes of Babilon) stiled Calanus and Samanaeus, and then by that other Nomencla∣tion; of all sorts of Philosophers these were held most excellent, and con∣templative. Tertullian cals them gloriae animalia, Apollonius sayes, they were and were not earthly; their thoughts so transcendent, as if they were ravisht by the sweetnesse of that harmony the rolling Orbs in an exact diapazan send forth in their forced Motion. Their imaginatiō flew beyond nature, beleiving that this Fabrick of the inferiour world was created of nothing, and made sphericall, yet subject to dissolution; that it had an efficient cause, it being unable to forme it selfe, and that that cause is the commander of nature. Our byrth to be no other, then a quick conception, perfected by death, which is the true Nativity of the soule, and entrance to immortality. A Tenent however oppugned by the Stoicks, yet by these Bramyns from the Tradition of the Phenix, observation of corne, and the like, was so maintained that from hence arose that magnanimity of Calanus the Bramyn, who to injoy it burnt himselfe in sight of Alexander. But, how they have (by over∣ture of their wits and country,) forgot these and broacht new opinions, more fantastick and rediculous. I shall gleane a little out of that their masse of confusion, and dedicate it to your attent patience. Religion of the Banny∣ans.The Bannyan religion at this day, is of these Tenents. That the whole frame or body of the world had a beginning, created by a God of immense power, eternall and provident: that after he had made man, to associate him created woman to simpathize in similitude of body, and disposition. These be named Pourous and Parcouty, a coople so innnocent, and contented, that they had no ill thoughts, but fed only upon herbs and fruits, not touch∣ing ought had bloud or life in it. From this chast couple sprung two couple of boyes, the Embleams of the foure complexions, Brammon, Cuttery, Shuddery, and Wise. Of different constitutions. Bramon melancholy, Cuttery chollerick, Shudddery flegmatick; and Wise sanguin: Each affecting his se∣verall calling. The first a Priest, the second a Warrior, the third a Mer∣chant, the last a Pesant. Brammon the Priest (from whom the Brahman have their title, and not from Abraham and Keturah, as Postellus thinketh) was commanded (sayes their Shaster or booke of lawes) to travell East to finde a wife; it being re∣vealed to him, that God had formed foure women for him and his brethren, on whom to propagate; (for the reason they had no sisters to generate upon, was, because so pure and holy a race as they, should not discend from filthy Incest.) After long and tedious pilgrimage and much prayer, he espies his long lookt for Virgin, cloathed with naked innocence, her face yellow like gold, her hayre and eyes black, of a compleat stature, who without much courting he won and marryed: this Lady Savatree proved the mother of a holy generation. Cuttery was sent west to find his mate, his sword in's hand, habited after his nature, all the while fretting for want of resistance, and that his patience was so long trod upon: at length, he espies a farre off one comming towards him, aequally inflamed with impatience; without much complement, they forthwith assailed each other, with such fury, and so much bravery, that the first dayes fight the victory was not to be decided; next day, they renew their courage, giving and receiving wounds
insensibly, till in conclusion Cuttery grapled, and seiz'd Toddicastree by the tresses of her haire, but instead of subjecting her, is (by the fresh out breaking of her beauty) captivated; yet after submission and repentance for his rage against such an earthly Angell, shee is reconcil'd, and from them the West swarmed with a generation of Radiaes and Souldiers. Shuddery the third sonne of Pourous and Parcouty, travell North in equall hope to find his Mi∣stresse; farre he went and many strange adventures passed thorow and saw, wit∣nesse that rock of Diamonds he alight on, many of which (as any other Mer∣chant would have done) he carried along with him, enamoured of their lustre and sparkling excellencies: till at last he also met Visagundah, whom he soone woone, being of a tractable sweet nature and condition, (as be all the Bannyan daughters descended from her) and of her begot so many sonnes, that the North quickly became pregnant and inhabited. Now come we to Wyse (the simplest of Sir Pourous sonnes) a man of much plaine honesty and comport∣ment. Southward goes hee, having strange intelligence that his female was thereabouts, whom (after he had passed seven Seas (the breadth and way is concealed in the Shaster) and built him a faire Mansion, whither Iejunogundah (his future wife) came to admire so rare a structure; he saw her, & not knowing how to court her, is o'recome with Loves passion; but long time is rejected and thought basely of, till (by divine providence) shee is mollified and made to yeeld, upon condition, hee should build many Pagods or Idols for Gods worship, and adore pictures under greene Trees and under Arbours, which to this day, his posterity observe ceremoniously. Thus from these two the South was filled with mechanick men, and such as practize tillage and husbandry. When these foure young men had spent some yeares in those contrary quarters of the world, whither Fate had directed them. All foure becam equal∣ly mindfull of their first home, desirous to visit their aged parents, not onely to propagate there also, and furnish that Meditallium of the earth, but also to recount their memorable fortunes and adventures. After much circumstance and toile they arrived at the place from whence they came, each of them at∣tended by a troope of their owne younglins: tis in vaine to decipher the joy and mutuall embraces twixt them and their aged Parents, revived by this good hap from the benumming Frost of old age; as also the reciprocall kindnesse and love amongst the 4 Travellers, a dull sense may easily comprehend, it was without all mixture of discōtent or malady. Notwithstanding, to shew, no sum∣mum bonum can be had in this life, in processe of time (the issue of these foure multiplying) the world began to lose her virgin purity and candor; discord, pride, and rapine mingling amongst them, whereby all brotherly love was layd aside, and no appearance now but of violence & voluptuousnesse: Bramon growes idle and carelesse in his devotion. Cuttery becomes insolent and aspi∣ring, regarding neither the venerable advice & admonition of his Parents, nor the dignity of Bramon his elder brother. Shuddery also invents deceit, not re∣garding justice nor equity, but delights in cheating his other brethren. Wyse also growes unthrift in a good conscience, banishing his innate honesty to en∣tertaine ryot: For which, his cruell brother Cuttery domineeres and makes an Asse of him, imposing such taxes and burdens on that silly Countryman, that Wyse is now the object of casheered ryot, and the abject of his Lordly brother; who also picks a quarell with Shuddery, and admits not of any recon∣ciliation,
till the poore Merchant had satisfied his Avarice with halfe his store; so that such hate and feare grew amongst 'em, that all their Designes are in∣volv'd in a dark Chaos of confusion. But though deceit, ryot, and tyrannie sway a while, an all-seeing Majesty sits above, who in his owne time retaliates in the extremity of justice. And so it now hapned: for upon a sudden, when they were most busied in their villany and least dreame of account, God roab's himselfe with clouds and flashes terrour, whereat the seas multiply their noise, and swell so formidably, that they threaten an universall deluge and destru∣ction: In the interim the amazed people are confounded with such horrible cracks of thunder, and such thick flashes of flame and lightning, that the en∣trailes of the earth seemed to gaspe and quake with terrour and feare: which done, in a moment the sea breaks ore her bounds, and sweepes away in eter∣nall darknesse and silence all creatures on the earth, purging away that nasty smell of their late wickednesse and pollution. But God who delights in Mercy, and grieves at any mans confusion, repents him of his severity, and resolves againe to furnish the earth with a new gene∣ration of men repleat with more purity, mercy and perfection. To which end he descends, and upon a very high mountaine call'd Meropurbateé commands Bremaw to rise up, who (though till then not created) obeyed and worshipped his Maker. In like sort at two other calls, came up Vistney and Kuddery, who performed equall obeysance. Bremaw (to avoyd sloath) has power to create all other creatures. Vistney has order given to preserve them; and Rud∣dery has strength to massacre and be Gods executioner by way of death, plague, famine, diseases, warre, or the like. And according to this appointment, these three new created Lords performe and regard their particular affaires, to each of them a set period of time being alotted to live on earth. Bremaw at the end of the second Age in a fiery chariot was elevated. Vistney stayes double his time and then departs, leaving the issue to Ruddery, (at the end of three times so long commorance) to destroy the world, and to translate the soules of good men into a garden of most ravishing delights and glory. But ere this were ac∣complished, It is fit to acquaint you that how Bremaw came to furnish the earth with more Inhabitants. The Shaster or their Cabalisticall Thalmud tells us, that as Bremaw was ruminating how to act it, suddenly he fell into a trance, and upon recovery felt his body troubled beyond measure, purporting some im∣mediate chance or alteration. Nor did his thoughts deceive him; for loe, forthwith his body begun to swell, yea so great anguish to afflict him, that in all points it resembled a womans travaile, and indeed it had Analogie, in that his bowels began to extend more and more and his dolour to encrease, till (af∣ter much toyle) the second swellings found vent, broke, and deliver'd their burthen, two faire Twins, one of each sex whom hee needed not to give suck unto, in that by like miracle they immediatly grew up to a perfect stature, fur∣nisht with language, and many symptomes of education; Bremaw the Parent named them Manaw and Ceteroupa, whom after hee had blessed, he sent East to the great mountaine Mounder purvool, where strait way Mistresse Ceteroupa brought forth three sonnes and so many daughters: The Boyes she call'd, Pri∣auretta, Outanapautha, and Soomeraut. The Girles Cammah, Sounerettaw, and Sumboo: The eldest sonne and daughter went West to a huge mountaine Se∣gund. The two seconds North, to Bipola: The two last of each sex to Suparr,
where they so generated, that they quickly peopled each their quarter. Which done, God perceiving the hearts of men enclined to vice and all sorts of vile∣nesse, to give them directions how to live vertuously and avoyd temptation, he left heaven a while and alighted on the high Mount Meropurbatee, whither he call'd Bremaw, to whom hee spake many things out of a dusky dark cloud or mist, now and than flashing some glimpses of his Majesty, acquainting him why he destroy'd the first world, their sinnes provoking him, and how desi∣rous he was, never to doe so againe: and to that end deliver'd Bremaw a Book (the Shaster by name) fill'd with excellent stories, divided into three Tracts, dedicated to the three great Casts or Tribes: the first containing Morall pre∣cepts: the second, the ceremonies of their Worship: the third, a division of them into three, with peculiar notes and instructions to each Cast or Tribe. Their Morall law (read and taught them by Bremaw out of the Shaster) has eight commandements. 1. Thou shalt not kill nor destroy any living creature, for thou and it are both my creatures. 2. Thou shalt not sinne in any of thy five senses: thy eyes not beholding vanity: thy eares to be stopt in hearing evill: thy tongue not to utter any fil∣thinesse: thy pallat hating wine, flesh, and all other vive things: thy hands ab∣horring things defiled. 3. Thou shalt duly performe the set times of devotion, praying, washing, elevating, prostrating, &c. 4. Thou shalt not lie nor dissemble. 5. Thou shalt not be hard hearted, but helpfull to others. 6. Thou shalt not oppresse nor tyrannize. 7. Thou shalt observe certaine Festivalls and fasting dayes: 8. Thou shalt not steale. These eight precepts are sub-divided into foure: each of the foure old Casts retaining them. Bramon and Shuddery,. i.e. the Braminy and Bannyan are tyed to most severe and strict observance in the decorum of their worship. Cuttery and Wyse. i.e. the Justice and Labourer agree in theirs. From whence the Priest and Merchants (appropriating the first and second to themselves) are more superstitious, than the two other Casts of Souldiers and Mechanicks, who assume a great liberty in meats and wine. Notwithstanding, all of them beleeve the Metempsychosis of Pythagoras, whose conceits we will parallel by and by with these Bannyans. In this place drawing your judgement to a re∣membrance of what is already related: wherein, we may perceive the delusi∣on Sathan charmes them with, whose custome it has ever been to erect to him∣selfe worship and Idolatry in some things (to make 'em more authenticall) co∣hering with the Story of our Bible, and in imitation of the Jewes: and that this Cabala or Shaster of the Bannyans is a depraved Story of the Bible, either obtain'd by some Jewes, such time as Solomon traded to Ophyr (neere these parts) or from the father of lyes, who peradventure did dictate it for his ser∣vants. For in the Shaster, speaking of the Creation of the world out of a Chaos, and forming of Pourous and Parcoutee successively: who is so blind that sees not the making of Adam and Eve: the other of the Creation (delivered by Moses) shadowed in't: the universall deluge and destruction of mankind pointing out that of Noah? By Bremaws receiving the Law from God (in a dark cloud and
lightning) upon the high Mount Meropurbatee, 'tis doubtlesse from Moses his being on Mount Syna in Arabya, where was given the Decalogue for the Is∣raelites instruction. And in Bremaws departure from earth to heaven, is meant the translation of Elias. The Bannyans are commanded (as in most hot Countries in all other Pagan Religious is observed) to wash often. First, dawbing their naked bodies with dirt and mud (the Embleam of sinne) then, diving three times in the water, their faces to the East, shaking a few graines of Rice as a Thanksgiving to that element for purging them: A three-fold ducking and tripartite thred is hung at three holes in a stone about the neck, the Rice fixed in their forehead each morne in an unguent of red paint, is a Symbol of Baptisme: Their turning to the East, in memory of the judgement and creation, and to adore the Sun and Moone, in that they take them to be Gods eyes, full of purity, heat and nurture. But this their attending the blushing Sunne at his arising, the eleva∣tion of their hands, murmurs, plashing the water in Magick order, diving, wri∣thing and acting other promiscuous foperies, heare them condemned by a neighbour of theirs Iob,Iob 31, 26.7, 8. that patient Edomite. If I beheld the Sunne when it shined, or the Moone walking in brightnesse, and my heart hath been secretly inti∣ced, or my mouth hath kissed my hand: this also were an iniquity to be punished by the Iudge, for I should thereby have denied the God which is above. And by the Psalmist, Psal. 44 41. If wee have forgotten the Name of our God, and holden up our hands to any strange god, shall not God (who knowes the secrets of the heart) search it out? But above all, their horrid Idolatry to Pagods (or Images of deformed de∣vils) is most observable: Placed in Chappels most commonly built under the Bannyan Trees (or that which Linschot call'd Arbor de Rays or tree of roots, Sir Wal. Ral. improperly Ficus Indicus) a tree of such repute amongst 'em, that they hold it impiety to abuse it, either in breaking a branch or otherwise, but contrarily adorne it with Streamers of silk and ribbons of all colours. The Pagods are of sundry sorts and resemblances, in such shape as Satan visibly ap∣peares unto them: ugly faced, long black haire, gogl'd eyes, wide mouth, a forked beard, hornes and stradling, mishapen and horrible, after the old filthy forme of Pan and Priapus. Under these holy Trees they sit and actuate their Idolatrous devotion: there they pay their Tythes and Offrings, there receive the sacred unction and sprinklings of sundry colour'd powders: there they performe their ceremo∣nies, which they denotate by the wooden sound of a little Bell: there they repeat their Orizons, make Processions, ring their Bells, sing and performe ma∣ny mysteries; yea, so numerous grew their Idoll Temples, that (till the Mus∣sulmen mixt among them) each Village had its severall Pagods, and many to this day are standing. The chiefe in Industan is at Variaw neere Surrat, at Ni∣gracut where the Dewry is seel'd and paved with gold, yeerely visited by 1000 Bannyans, who in way of devotion cut out part of their tongues as a holy sa∣crifice, and whereby to speake the Sibboleth better ever after: at Bannaras upon Ganges, at Ecbarpore, at Iallamexa, Elabass, Sibah, and many other places. Other parts of their Religion consists in invocating holy men famoused for many vertues. In Warres (the Cutterys or Radieas onely) call upon Bemo∣hem: the rich upon Mycasser; the poore upon Syer: the labourers upon
Gunner: the married, upon Hurmount, &c. Moreover, they effect Pilgrima∣ges to rivers, especially Gonga (Ganges) more venerable then any other, in that they say Bremaw frequented it, and that it has (at Siba where it springs out of a rock) a head in forme of a Cow their beloved Idol: wherein they Wash oft, and thereby suppose themselves purified from sinne (and durt:) and in requitall enrich her womb with Gold and Jewels, hoping to thrive the better, especi∣ally when they die to have their mouthes madefied with a drop of that water of the terrestriall Paradise. In Baptisme, the Priests children and Marchants (that is to say Bramins and Bannyans) anoynt with Oyle, and clense by water. The other prophaner sort, the men of warre and manifactures have onely water, with the point of a pen opposed to their forehead, as wishing that God will write good things there, to which the company say Amen. Their Marriages (as I have said) are at seven yeares old, and if any die unmarried, they conclude him in limbo: so that oft times they marry them, when dead, afore they be buried: the Marri∣age ceremonies are not many nor frivolous; the Boy riding about the Towne attended with all the little ones that can ride, roab'd with Jewels, Scarfes, &c. one day. And the Mayden Bride the next with a like trayne of dainty virgins no lesse richly attired, the Bride and her Husband knowne from the rest by their Crownes and Coronets, celebrated by many Kettle Drummes, Trum∣pets, Pageants, and the like; the Bride has no money Portion, they hold it contemptible: onely some Jewels and Dinaes of gold, such as they that day are attired with. I dare not say those Dinaes are those  or Marriage gifts mentioned by Homer 9 Ilyad, Suydas, &c. The Wedding is thus, a fire is interpos'd, intimating the purity and heat of their affections: a silken string circles both their bodies as the Hyerogliphic or bond of Wedlock; then a linnen cloath is put betwixt them, in token that till then they were unknowne to one another in nakednesse. This done, the Bramyn blesses them, prayes that she may prove as gentle and fruitfull as a Cow, the cloath is torne away, the string untyed, and they are one anothers ever after. Also they never marry out of their owne Casts or Tribe: as Bramins the daughters of Bramyns: Cutterys, the daughters of Cutterys: Shudderys Shudderys; and Wyses not onely so, but also compere in their owne Trades: as Taylers, the daughters of Taylers: Barbers, Barbers daughters &c. In sicknesse they call upon Marrawn (an Epithite of God) expressing mercy. If they perceive he is going the way of all flesh, then they expand his hand, and moysten it with holy water, the water of Ganges: when he is dead they wash the carcasse and carry it silently to the water side, where they utter two or three words to that element, then burne his body in sweet wood or spices, which as earth mixes with the corps, and throwing the ashes into the River, they think they have given every Element his peculiar due, and so depart home well satisfied forthwith. The Priests present his sonne the roll of his deceased fore-fathers, and bid him fulfill the ceremoniall law of deploring for ten dayes, neither using his wife, laughing, eating Opium nor Betele, put∣ting on no cleane cloathes nor oyle on's head, but that day moneth for that yeare ever after make a feast, and pay a complementall visit to that River, that drunk his Fathers ashes. Oft times the wife (to expresse her love) incenerates her selfe at that time her Husbands body was incendiated. They affect no se∣cond
marriages, the Raieaes and Wyses excepted. Now the reason why they burne their dead, is either in imitation of those recorded by the Prophet Amos 6.10. or in way of pitty and piety, lest the enemy should offer it villany; or if buried, it would stink (an improper thing in a Bannyan) and so putrifie the grasse and make Kine unhealthy: besides, out of their carcasses would issue wormes, who would starve when the dead body was consumed, a sinne un∣pardonable. The Braminy or Priests (to speake in common) are of 82 Casts or Tribes, the Vertaes are of higher note and fewer: their habit is a girdle of an Anti∣lops skinne tied about their middle, a thong of the same hide from the necke to the left arme, and elsewhere naked; some of them weare a threefold thred from the right shoulder to the left arme as a badge of their profession and in memory of the 3 sonnes of the second creation. The Cutteries are more prophane; men of warre, shedders of blood, flesh-eaters, and libidinous; they are for the greater part called Rajas or Kings; have six and thirty Casts among themselves, from some of which none of them but is descended: of these, are the Tribes of Dodepuchaes, some Chaw∣ah, some Solenkees, some Vaggelaes, and some Paramors; of long times owners of Indostant, till Aladin, a patan, King of Delly, wrested Guzzarat from them, and since then, most is taken away by the issue of Tamerlange: at this day they call themselves Rashpootes (or sonnes of Kings) and live law∣lesse to the Moores, the chiefe of which at this day are Rana Radgee Mardout, Radga Surmul-gee, Raia Berumshaw, Mahobet-chan, Radia Barmulgee, Radgea Ramnagar, Radgea Iooh', Iessingh, Tzettersing, and Mansuigh, &c. The Shudderyes or Bannyans are Merchants, and (contrary to their name, which significs harmlesse) are the most crafty people throughout India. Full of flegmatick feare and superstition: they are indeed very mercifull, grieving to see other people so hard-hearted to feed upon fish, flesh, Raddish, and such things as have life or any resemblance. They will not kill a Louse, Flea, or Kakaroch, or the like for 1000 pound; but contrariwise buy their liberty of such Saylers as of necessity must crush them: yea, they have Hospitalls for old, lame, sick, or starved creatures, birds, beasts, Cats, Rats, or the like, and have no worse men to oversee them than the Pushelans, the greatest and best respected sorts of Brammins of all Casts whatsoever: they are of Pythagora's do∣ctrinating, not only in beleeving the Metempsychosis of the soule of each man into a beast: as for example, the soule of a drunkard and Epicure into a Swine, the lustfull and incestuous into Goats and Dogs; the dissemblers into Apes, Crocodiles, and Foxes: the lazie into Beares, the wrathfull into Tygers, the proud into Lyons, the bloud thirsty into Wolves, Ounces, Snakes; the per∣jur'd into Toads, and the like: but the soules of good men, abstemious, pitti∣full and courteous, into Kine, Buffalaes, Sheepe, Storks, Doves, Turtles, &c. An opinion memoriz'd by Ovid 15 Metamor. Heu quantum scelus est in viscere viscera condi, Congesto{que} Avidum pinguescere corpore corpus, Alteriusque animantem animantis vivere leto, Parcite (vaticinor) cognatas caedenefanda, Exturbare Animas, nec sanguine sanguis alatur. Flesh fed with flesh; oh what impiety, Thy greedy corps with corps to fat thereby, One living thing to live by others death: Oh spare! I warne you, to disturbe the breath, Of kinsmen by fool-slaughter; for your blood, With others blood to feed is no wayes good.
The last Sect or Cast of Gentiles are the Wises, a name albeit derived from Wise the youngest sonne of Pourous and Parcootee, yet in their tongue pro∣perly signifying a labouring man: these be of two sorts, the Wise and Coolee; the first agreeing with the Bannyan in abstinence, the other not forbearing to eat any manducable creature; the purer sort are subdevided into 36 Casts or Families. The conclusion is, that all these 4 Casts in time grew so impious and un∣thankfull, that God commanded Ruddery to command a blast of wind to sweep away this wretched generation, which accordingly he did; that tem∣pest raging so violently that the mountaines and rocks were hurled to and fro like dust or tennis-balls, the seas out of their course, yea Ganges out of her holy channell, wherein all (save a few honest men and women left to reple∣nish) perished; this was the second confusion. Soone after, God gave them a King, propagate from the seed of the Bramyns cald Ducerat, who begat Ram, a King so famous for piety and high attempts, that to this day his name is ex∣ceedingly honoured, so that when they say Ram Rame, 'tis as if they should say, all good betide you. But to shew the imbecillity of mans nature, his weak condition and frailty: in processe of time the world again grew abominable and treacherous: so that Ruddery commands the earth to open and swallow down quick those ungodly wretches; a few excepted, who the third time peopled the earth with humane inhabitants, and then (as Bremaw had formerly) Vistney the mediator of mer∣cy ascended into heaven, leaving cruell Ruddery to over rule this age of Iron, at the end of which he also shall be rapt into paradise: these 4 ages they call Curtain, Duauper, Tetrajoo and Kolee. Touching the last Iudgement, they hold it shall be more dreadfull than the other; the Moone to look blood red, the Sunne to shed his light like purling brimstone, an universall flashing of fire, with loudest thundring; then a flammy rednesse will orespread the heavens, and the 4 Elements (of which the world consists) shall maintaine a dreadfull fight so long, so fiercely one against another, that at last all shall be revolved into a dark confusion: the soules of such as were good men, Ruddery will transport to heaven, the wicked perish; but the bodies of both rise no more, being too incredulous of the resurrection. Now albeit these people in a continued series of wilfulnesse and ignorance beleeve that their Shaster or Cabala was immediately from God, yet that it is wholly grounded upon tradition, and parched out of many Histories, Iewish and Gentilisme, I have already shewed what is in imitation of the holy Scrip∣ture and from the rule and practise of other Nations: and we may adde, that their burning the dead, is borrowed from the 6 of Amos 10. their marriage after death from Cerinthus and Marcyon, old hereticks who used to baptize after death in case they were not pre-baptiz'd; the thred tripartite hung about their neck is a misterious denotation of the Trinity; rice and painting in their forehead is not only as a symbole of Baptisme, but in imitation of the Starre Rempham fixed in the brow of the Idoll Moloch, or of Iul. Caesar, who had one in his forehead as an embleme of immortality. And also, let us see in how many things they concurre with the rules of Pythagoras (to this day famous among them). These Bramins or Bannyans in their schooles and other places
affect silence: for 5 yeeres are not suffered to speake in the Schooles; under∣stand one another by dumb signes in most things; adore toward the Sunne; honor Angels; observe a Munday Sabbath; abstaine from second marriages, (some from the first) affect white garments, loath coughing, spitting and the like, forbeare swearing and blasphemy, shun pleasures, drink water, beleeve the transmigration of mens soules into beasts, offer inanimate sacrifices, deny the bodies resurrectiō, hate to touch a pot or cup with their mouth, but rather powre the liquor in at a good distance, reverence Elders, eat nor drink with men of other religions, use washings much, touch no uncleane thing and ma∣ny other, in nothing differing with the Pithagoreans, as may be gathered out of Iosephus, Suydas, Philo, Laertius and other writers. Having tyred out your patience with this Sect; for variety sake, turne wee to another sort of Gentiles in Surrat & Guzzurat the Persees, a people descen∣ded out of Persia, banisht hither (to avoid Mahomitry & circumcision) upon the death of valiant Iezdgird the Persian King, Anno Dom. 635. or thereabouts; whose life and doctrine (as it is gathered from the Daroo or Priests of this sect by Master Lord a worthy Minister, for some yeeres resident in the Factory of Surat) I will epitomize, that we may move (after this repose) onward in our travailes. Religion of the Persaes.Into India I say these Persees came, (such time as Omar the second Chaliph after Mabumet had subjected Persia) in 5 Iuncks from Iasquez sayling to Surrat, where after some treaty with the Raieas and Bannyans they got entertain∣ment and leave to exercise their owne religion. A religion deduced from the raigne of Gustaph King of Persia Anno Mundi 3500, and before our Sa∣viours Incarnation 500 yeeres, written in their Zundavastaw (or law Booke) in this manner. Such time as Gustasp (the 14 King of Persia from Kuyomarraz, by some, thought Naah) swayed the Imperiall Scepter of that famous Monarchy: It chanced that Espintaman and Dodoo two poore people, man and wife, Chynaes by nation, lived long together in a good report, but without Fortunes bles∣sings, in estate or children: howbeit, at Dodooes earnest request, a sonne was given her who in his conception promised (by some rare and fearfull dreames the mother hatched) great matters, not only to the astonishment of his sim∣ple parents but amazement of the China King, who (out of jealousie and dis∣position to credit any report) sought to prevent all events by killing or poy∣soning him: but (to shew a superior power swayes us and never misses to ac∣complish its designes tho by man never so much oppugned) nothing could do him harme; for fearing his parents ruine, and to ease the King of his feares, they all consent to give China a farewell, and seek a securer abode in a region more remote, and where they might more freely meditate. Farre they travelled, saw many rare things, past over many great rivers on foot, for Zertoost (so was this young prophet named) turned them by a trick that he had into solid Ice, and after thawed them at his pleasure and many rare adventures found, (all which are to be left out, in that religion is the marke we shoot at) not staying long in any place till they arrived in Persia, where they rested and intended to settle: Zertoost (as all good men use to doe) spent most of his time in meditation; and on a time especially, obser∣ving the disorder of mens living, sorrow overcame him, and a desire to re∣forme
them totally possessed him: but finding the place he was in not solitary enough or fit for revelations, away he goes, not resting till he came into a dark valley, surrounded and obscured by two lofty mountaines, there he inge∣minates his silent murmures, with dejected eyes, erected hands, and knees bended, when loe, a glorious Angell, whose face was more coruscant than the Sunne, salutes him thus, Hayle, Zertoost, a man of God, what wouldst thou? he strait answers; The presence of God, to receive his will, to instruct my nation: his prayer is granted, his body purged; his eyes sealed; till being past the Element of fire and higher orbes, he is presented afore the supreame Majesty, arrayed with such refulgent glory, that (till he had Angells eyes put into his head) he could not gaze on such a daz'ling excellency: there, he re∣ceived his lawes (no place but heaven will serve to fetch Philosophy, as La∣ertius writes of Socrates) uttered by the Almighty (whose words were in∣compast with flames of fire:) such lawes, such secrets, as some of them are not fit to be promulgated. Being upon his departure, he desires of God, that he might live so long as the world indured, that in that protract hee might the easier make all people on the earth imbrace his doctrine: God pitties his simplicity and in a mirrour shewes him the alteration of times, the villany of Lucifer, the misery of man, and many other rarities such as quite altred his first desires; so that, when he had worshipped, he takes his Zundavastaw or Book in 's left hand, and some celestiall Fire in 's right, and by Baha∣man Vmshauspan the foresaid Angell (who cleft the Ayre with his gol∣den wings) is set downe in that same valley where the spirit found him. Zertoost (by this time a man of great experience) armes himselfe against all disasters and temptations, and bidding his Hermitage farewell, travells home∣ward, to publish his law and joy his too long afflicted parents: Satan (who all this while lookt asquint at Zertoosts determinations) intends to seduce him, and after a short excuse for his rude intrusion, protests himselfe his unfained friend, assuring him the Angell had deluded him; that God hated his novell indeavors; that if he had loved him, he had not so soone so willingly parted with him, that his denying him to live till the day of doome, argued Gods neglect of him; that his travaile to reclaime the world was in vaine, mens minds so doated upon freedome and vanity; that his booke was stuft with lies, and in publishing it great shame and perill should betide him: that his fire, was a mercilesse Element, rediculous and of small use in those hot regi∣ons. And in conclusion, if he would reject these and depend on him, hee would furnish him with all delights, honours and pleasures possible, give him power to do strange things, whereby hee should bee worshipped for a God, which if he refused he was a foole and unworthy his charity. Zertoost soone saw that tempter was no better nor worse than Lucifer: he bad him avoid, and call to mind to his addition of terror, how by his ambiti∣ous impiety he had lost heaven, and how meere malice made him desirous to draw all other into like damnation: he also told him how that booke he so scoft at should condemne him, that fire torture him and all such black mouth'd lyers and detracters as himselfe; whereat the Fiend was horribly affrighted and left him: the divell is no sooner gone, but on goes Zertoost and at length arrived where he found his parents who (you doubt not of) received him glad∣ly; to whom he imparted his passed fortunes and intended occasions. Dodoo
his mother (that good old woman) imagines it a sinne unpardonable, that so excellent a young prophet (as she thought her sonne) should be longer con∣cealed from the world; yea grew so transported, that she thought all men wicked blockheads that could not find it out without her babling it: but see∣ing them dull, to them she goes and without longer circumstance tells them the whole story of her sonnes conception, her dreams, his piety, his enthu∣siasticks, revelations, visions, the excellency of his booke, his authority to command all men to believe and obey his lawes and ordinances. The people admire and blazon it, so that in short time Gustasp the Persian King had notice of it, who desiring to see the man and know the truth, sends for him, is so well satified and instructed, that he forthwith wavered in his owne religion, judging Zertoosts better and more plausible; insomuch, as his owne Priest became dejected, and invented all wayes possible to reclaime him; and to ef∣fect it, bribes Zertoosts servants to convey under his bed the bones of dead men and dead dogs carkasses, things most hatefull to the Persians, possessing the King that this stranger was a banisht man, a man of a most impure conver∣sation, witnesse the stuffing of the bed he slept upon: the King is brought to view that nasty deceit, abominates him, and for his reward shuts him in a loathsome dungeon, but this misery of his endured not long; for the King, ha∣ving a horse of great account deadly ill, proposes great rewards to any could recover him; many desired it, but none durst undertake it, fearing the pe∣nalty, till Zertoost heard it who administers a potion and recovers him: an act so acceptable to Gustasp that he receives the poore prophet into grace again, wherby he had the way to discover the Kings priests knavery and to illustrate his owne integrity; yea, a means whereby to publish his owne doctrine, and by some miracles intermixt to have it credited. It chanced that the King (either stimulated by his Churchmen, or judg∣ing Zertoost able to do any thing) calls for him, professing his propensity to be of his religion, and which he and all his would entertaine, upon condition Zertoost would grant him 4 things: the first, that he might never die; the se∣cond, that hee might ascend heaven and come downe againe without hurt as often as hee listed; the third, that hee might know what God had done, did, and intended; the fourth, that his body might bee in∣vulnerable. Zertoost is somewhat thunder-struck with these demands: But perceiving it otherwise impossible to have his Dogmataes believed, hee tells the King, that for one man to have all those properties was to make him a God, more than a man; that the King should choose any one for himselfe, and the other 3 things be given any other three men he pleasd to nominate: 'tis accepted, and Gustasp makes the second his choice, that he might ascend and descend at pleasure; to know the secrets of heaven was granted the Kings Churchman, the better thereby to governe; to live for ever, is confer'd upon Pischiton (the Kings eldest sonne) who they say lives yet upon Damoan's high moun∣taine guarded by 30 immortall men, to forbid all others the entrance, lest by footing that holy ground they should also live for ever; and to be free in battell or otherwise from hurt or torment was granted to Espandiar the Kings youngest sonne; after which the Zundavastaw is opened, the new broacht doctrine read and generally accepted on.
It has a tripartit division; the first treates of judiciall Astrologie, cal'd Astoodeger, and is committed to the care of such as they call Iesopps or Sages: The second speaks of naturall Philosophy or Physick, and is studyed by the Hackeams or Physitians: The last is a compound of religion, named (from the Inventor) Zertoost, and kept by the Daroos or Predicants: each of these three containe seven chapters: A little only of their religion. The Zertoost is also of three parts; pointing at 3 sorts of men; the Lay∣men, Clergy, and Archbishop; to every of them it directs an increase of commandements; to the first sort 5, to the second 11, to the third 13; the com∣pendium of which we will only manifest. The Behedins or Lay-mens 5 precepts be these. 1. To cherish modesty and shame fastnesse: a vertue deterring all sorts of ugly vices and concupiscence, as pride, revenge, theft, adultery, drunken∣nesse, and perfidy. The 2, to cherish feare. 3. To use premeditation in what they are to do; that if bad, reject it; if good, to act it. 4. Each dayes first object to be a memento of Gods love to urge our gratitude. 5. To pray daily to the Sunne, and nightly to the Moone, as the only 2 great lamps and wit∣nesses, and most opposite to the divell who delights in darknesse. The 11, given the Herboods, Daroos or Priests to practise, are these (the other also of the Behedin they observe). 1. To be constant in that forme of worship set downe precisely in the Zundevastaw. 2. Not to covet what belongs to any other man. 3. To abhorre lyes. 4. Not to be worldly minded. 5. To learne the Zundavastaw by rote. 6. To keep himselfe free from all manner of pollu∣tion. 7. To forgive all sorts of injuries. 8. To teach the Laity how to pray and convene in adoration. 9. To license Matrimony. 10. To be frequent at Church. 11. Vpon paine of fire eternall, to beleeve in no other law, neither to adde nor to diminish it. 3. The Distoore or Pope (never but one at once) has 13, and as hee per∣cedes the rest in dignity, so is his life most strict and observable; he performes not onely his owne but the two former Tables also. 1. He must never so much as touch any prophane thing or person, no not the Laymen or Dae∣roos of his owne beliefe, without washing or purifying. 2. He must do every thing having relation to himselfe with his owne hands, as planting, sowing, cooking, &c. 3. That hee duly receive his Tith or the Tenth of what the Layety are possessers of. 4. That hee avoid pompe and vaine-glory, but ra∣ther with his great income do acts of charity. 5. That his house so con∣joyne the Church, as hee may be there oft and go and come without being much seene or taken notice of. 6. That his washings be more frequent than others, his food purer, and that he refraine his wives company during her pollution. 7. That he not only be perfect in the Zertoost (a capite ad calcem) as is the Herbood, but also be of greatest knowledge in the other parts, as Iudiciall and Naturall Philosophy. 8. That his dyet be very moderate. 9. That he feare none but God. 10. That he tell every man (how great soever) of his offences. 11. That he distinguish twixt good and counterfeit visions or fancies, and give right judgement. 12 That whensoever God reveales or communicates his goodnesse or glory to him in nightly visions, he admire his mercy and keep them secret. 13. That the Pyree or holy fires (that which Zertoost brought from heaven) be ever kindled, yea never extinguish, till fire
destroy the world: And that he pray (to and) over it. This is the true con∣tents of the Zundavast which holy Zertoost brought from heaven. Declare we now their Feasts, Fasts, Weddings and Burialls. They are tollerated all sorts of meat; but (in obedience to the Mahomitan and Bannyan 'mongst whom they live) refraine Beefe and Hog flesh: they seldome feed together, lest they might participate one anothers impurity: each has his owne cap; and if any of his owne Cast chance to use it, hee washes it three times, and forbeares it a good while after: they observe six solemne Fe∣stivalls annually; the first call'd Meduserum, kept the 15 of Fere or February; 2. Petusahan, on the 26 of Sheruar or Aprill; 3. Yatrum, on the 26 of Mahar or May; 4. Medearum, on the 16 of Deh or August, 5. Homespetamadum, on the 30 of Spindamud or October; 6. Medusan, on the 11 of Adebese or Decem∣ber; all of them in memory of the Creation and monethly benefits. After each of these Feasts they eat but one small meale a day for five dayes after, and whensoe're that lay men eat any flesh, they bring part to their Eggaree or Temple to pacifie the Lord, in that for their sustenance the lives of those good creatures are annihilated. Now concerning the Fire they adore, tis in memory of that Zertoost brought from heaven, wherein they memorize the vestalls, or rather in an apish imitation of the Jewish law (the devill as neere as may be, desiring to counterfeit the Law of God) in the 6. of Levit. 13. where tis commanded that the fire (that came from heaven) should be ever burning upon the Altar and never goe out. In Persia they had many Pyree of this ve∣stall fire, most of which were destroyed by Heraclius the Romane Emperour in his Warres with Kozchoes (at that time Mahomet serving in his Army.) Some to this day are remaining, having the Idolatrous Fire from 1000 yeares un∣extinguished. In Indya also these banisht Persee have their Eggarees or Tem∣ples, one of which is at Nuncery (not farre from Surratt) whose Fire has con∣tinued without fomenting this 200 yeares: where note that this their God-fire is not composed of common combustibles, as wood, straw, coales, slates, &c. nor blowne by any bellowes, breath of man, wafting, or like prophane things; No, tis compounded of sparks flying from a hot burning temper'd steele, and kindled either by lightning from heaven, by an ignis fatuus, the beames from a burning glasse, or such like; for, but such onely is proper for that their Antis∣beheraun or Idoll fire. But if it chance the fire have need of cherishing, the Distoore and other Lay-men (at 12 foot distance) surround the holy Diety and after some ge∣stures, the Priests adds fewell and returning to the other people, altogether worship it, beseeching it, that they may not onely give it due reverence, but also honour solemnly all other things that resemble it; as Sunne, Moon, Starrs, and common fire, which also they so divinely estimate, that they hold it a most ungodly part to spet in it, throw water into it, or put it to any vile or unne∣cessary imployment; but reverence wood and such things as it receives life and vigour from. The Baptisme of these Heathen Idolaters is of this nature: so soone as it is borne, the Daroo is call'd upon, who delayes not, but being instructed in the precise time of his Nativity, calculates his fortunes: the Daroo invents the name, the mother imposes it: this done, they all together haste to the Eggaree or Temple, where the Priest puts a little pure water into the barque of a holy
tree the name is Holme, the place it growes in, Yezd, a Citie in Persia not farre from Spahawn, where at this day are many of this religion, who upon the mountaine Albors, have a Pyree wherein is a Fire-god, which has never beene extinguished (they say from Gustasps time, contempory with Abraham) a tree, Zertoost blessed and in this more memorable, that it never admits of any shadow: the water out of this holy rind is powred upon the Infant, and a prayer made that it may be clensed from all impurity: at seven yeares age it is confirmed by the Daroo, and made to say his prayers o're the fire (but with a cloath fastned about his head, which covers his mouth and nostrils lest his sinfull breath might taint the holy Fire,) drinks a little water, chaw's a Pom∣granat leafe, washes in a Tanck, cloathes his naked body with a fine Shuddero or linnen reaching to his wast, tyes a zone or girdle of Cushee or Camells haire about his loynes, woven with Inkle of the Herboods making (which hee weares ever after) and after a short prayer, that he may never prove an Apo∣state or prophane wretch, but continue a Fire-worshipper; eating no mans meat, nor drinking no mans drink but his owne; he is then blessed and held a Persee most warrantable. Their Marriages in briefe are thus: distinguisht into five orders. 1. Shaulan, or a marrying of two young children agreed on by each parents, but unknown to the children; the vertue being, that if either die they goe to heaven. 2. Chockerson, a second marriage. 3. Codesherahasan, when the woman is her owne chooser. 4. Ecksan, when a dead body (not being married before) is married. 5. Ceterson, when having no sonnes, he adopts his daughters son, &c. the Coremony this: at midnight the Daroo or Priest enters the house, (they wed not in Churches) finds the two parties (to be married) upon a bed toge∣ther; opposite to each other stands two Churchmen with Ryce in their hands (the Emblem of fruitfulnesse:) then first, one laying his fore-finger on the Brides forehead, he asks if she be willing to take that man to be her Husband, who saying yea: the like rite and question is by the other Priest done to the man; the Bridegroome makes a promise to infeoff her in a certaine number of Dynaes: she replyes, she and all she has is his; the Priests then scatter the Ryce upon their heads and pray, that they may multiply as Ryce; the wo∣mans parents give the Dowry, and eight dayes are spent in joviality and com∣plement. Their Funeralls are these: They put the dead body into a winding sheet, all the way his kindred beat themselves but in great silence till they come within 50 or 100 paces of the buriall place: where the Herbood or Priest meets them (observing ten foot distance) attired in a yellow scarfe and a thin Turbant: the Necesselars or bearers carry the corps upon an iron Beere (wood is forbidden, in that it is sacred to the fire) to a little Shed or Furnace, where (so soone as some mistique Antiques are acted) they hoyse it up to the top of a round stone building, twelve foot high and 80 in circuit: the entrance is only at the N. E. side, where through a small grate or hole they conveigh the car∣casse into a common Monument, the good men into one, the bad into another; tis flat above, wholy open, plaistered with smooth white loame, hard and smooth like that of Paris; in the midst thereof is a hole descending to the bot∣tome, made to let in the putrifaction issuing from the melted bodies, which are there-upon layd naked in two rowes, exposed to the Sunnes flaming rage,
and mercilesse appetite of ravening Vultures, who commonly are fed by these carcases, tearing the raw flesh asunder, and deforming it in an ugly sort; so that the abominable stink of those unburied bodies (in some places 300) is so loath∣some and strong, that (did not a desire to see strange sights allure a Traveller) they would prove worse seene than spoken of; Nor doe the Persees delight that any stranger should goe op to view them. The Buriall place of the Persees in India. The History of the great Mogull. LEt us now into Industan, and by the best helps and enquiries we can make, weave the variable History of the great Mogulls; their pedegree; their descent from Tartary: their severall conquests and successe in Indya; with other most remarkable occurrents hapning there, these last 50 yeares: also the description of such Cities, Provinces, and Forts as either enrich or support that glorious Empire: the knowing which may peradventure (I doubt it not) finde gratious acceptance amongst the more ingenuous, who know that man is the compendium of the world, and admirable in his Designes, which yet are crost by the awfull finger of God, when men intend that which thwarts his providence. Nor can you lend your eares to any nobler part of the Uni∣verse, which for spatiousnesse, abundance of faire Townes, numberlesse Inha∣bitants, infinite treasure, mines, food and all sorts of Merchandizes, exceeds all Kings and Potentates in the Mahometan world: his vast (but well com∣pacted) Monarchy, extending East and West to the Bengalan Gulph and Indian Ocean. The South to the Decan and Mallabar; North and North West
to the Maurenahar Tartar, and Persian: 2600 miles some wayes, 5000 in ci∣cuit: in which he has 38 large Provinces; rich and containing the rest are Gujurat (where we now are,) Malva, Pengab, Bengala, and part of Decanee, (Ariacae in Ptol.) together comprehending 30 large Cities, 3000 wall'd Towns, and such Castles as for Naturall defences seeme impregnable; his yearely re∣venue is ordinarily accounted 50 crow of roopees; each crow is a hundred leck, a leck is a hundred thousand roopees, a roopee is 2 s. 3 pence, somtimes 2 s. six pence. Howbeit, out of this prodigious rent, goes yearely many great payments: to his Leiftenants of Provinces, and Vmbraves of Townes and Forts; having also in continuall pay three hundred thousand Horse, and 2000 Elephants, fed with Donna or Poulse boil'd with Butter and unrefined Sugar; to these onely, his Fiscall or Treasurer yearely giving out above forty milli∣ons of crownes; his continuall warres are no lesse chargeable. The pedigree of these Mogulls is thus upon their owne seales blazoned. 1. Aben-Emyr-Temir-Saheb-Queran (i.e. Tamberlane, great Prince of the foure quarters of the world:) 2. Aben-Miram-Sha: 3. Aben Mirza Sultan Mohum∣med: 4. Aben Sultan Abusaid: 5. Aben mirza-Emir-sha: 6. Aben Baber-potshaugh: 7. Aben Homayon potshaw: 8, Aben Ecbar, cald also Abdul fetta ghelaladyn Ma∣humed Achbar: 9. Shaw Selim or Aben Almozapher Nordin Iangheer potshaugh Gazi: 10. Sultan Curroon or Shaw Iehan, now cald Sultan potshaugh Bedin Mohumet. They have a larger genealogy; from Cingis-chan a Prince of Tartary (whom some have feigned) sonne of Babur, sonne of Portan, of Philcan, of Phonama, of Bizanbeg, of Shaw-dub-chan, of Tomincan, of Bubacan, sonne of Buzamer all of them brave men as story warrants us. Cingis-chan (as Haithon and others say, his contemporaries) was at first by profession a Vulcan or Black-smith, by condition a good honest simple man: but the influence of heaven new moulded him, in little time in stead of his hammer, putting into his hands the Globe and Scepter: his ambitious thoughts begun from the frequent incouragements a man in white Armour (mounted upon a white phantasma) gave him, promising his helpe, and stimu∣lating his courage, tells the vision to some chiefe hoords or cantons, who give credit to his destiny and make him their generall; he shewes quickly how his grosse mettall was refined by a better fire, with a troop of Mogli (one of the 7 hoords) marching South subduing as farre as mount Belgian, part of Imaus, at this day cald Nigrakott, and Copizat by the Indians; there the sea stopt his carriere, but he prostrates himselfe and 9 times over fumbles out his prayers: the effect followes; the hill clove asunder, the sea parts in two and yeelds them 9 foot safe passage: but being upon the continent he hammers out his way with rusty iron, doing such marvellous feates of Armes as to a good faith seemes wonderfull. I shall as briefly as may be trace his posterity to Tamber∣lane: for from his grand-sonnes, we must borrow our maine history. Cingis-chan King of the South-East Tartar after some victories against the Russe, and Tartarrs, dyed at Ketoa kotan,A.M. 1596. A.D 1228. Heg. 608. An. 1228. of the Hegira 608. having divided amongst his 4 sons what was his by birth or conquest. To Tusha-chan he gave the provinces royall of D'hast, Kapecha, Rhoz' and Abulgharr; to Chaga∣tay-cawn, Maurenahar, Aygor and Chorazan; to Ogg, part of Bactria and Cau∣casus; to Tuli-chan, his Jewells and Treasure. Tusha or Tuxichan dyed two
yeeres after his father; Kagathay dyed in the yeere 1242, both of them with∣out issue; whereby, their Seigniories discended upon Ogg', or Ogtay-chawn, who in all his affaires at home and abroad really prov'd himselfe the sonne of Cingis-chan; compelling all the Persian Monarchy as farre as Babylon to ac∣knowledge him their soveraigne, but in the yeere 1252 was conquered by death, followed the fate of his predecessors, commended his Monarchy to his infant sonne Gayuc-chan, and him to be ordered by the care and provi∣dence of Minchonna his wife, but in the third yeer, impartiall death cald him also away, and gave Manchu-cawn sonne to Tuli-cawn (youngest Tetrarch) ad∣vantage to claime the soveraignty of all, by right of surviving succession. This young Prince (by such an accident mounted to the Imperiall great∣nesse) perceives the eyes of all about him inflam'd with envy, and threatning his expulsion, inraged by the villany of some that whisperd out his guilt in the last infants death: so that (albeit hee was armd with integrity and a just Title) he contracts for his defence with some confining potentates, and gave them the honour and command of severall provinces of his Empire upon condition they would hold of him in chiefe, and be ready upon all occasions to defend him; To Rablay-cawn he gave Ketoachotan and the royall City Cam∣baleck: to Vlakuc-cawn (his brother,) Persia, Chusistan, and Cherman: and to Chun-cawn, Gaznehen: but ere hee had occasion to try the malice and incon∣stancy of his men or chance of warre, death summond him away, Anno 1260 but not before hee had nominated Vlacuk-cawn for Emperour; who proved of another spirit, his best delight being to dance in Armour to Bellonaes Trumpe, and to defend his owne in despight of all his adversaries by his owne vertue, without secundary props or other allyances: he first quiets his dome∣stick broyles composing peace at home, then magnifies his excellencies in for∣raine parts, in circling and adding to the lustre of his dyadem, Babylon, a great part of Arabia, and in Syria, Aleppo and Damascus; all which, during his life he kept in subjection and loyalty, and ruled with much magnificence, to the yeer 1270. when, (by the extremity of his disease finding death at hand) hee calls his 3 sonnes afore him, exhorts them to unity, divides his lands among them, dyes, and at Meragah 15 farsangs from Tauris was solemnly buried. Hab∣kay-cawn the eldest, had the provinces of Hyerac, Mozendram, and Korazan; (comprehending Medya, Parthya, Hyrcania, Bactria, and Sogdiana.) To Hya-Shawmet, Aro & Adarbayon (part of Armenia and Iberia comprizing Salmas, Coy, Nazivan, Maraga and Merent, Cities of quality.) To Tawdon-cawn the Seig∣niories of Dyarbec and Rabaion (or Mesopotamia, part of Syria and what was made fruitfull by Euphrates and Tygris.) And to his sons by another venture, Nicador-oglan and Targahe-cawn, he gave money portions. Habkay-cawn, that yeere dyed at Hamadan in Persia, and made protector to his sonne, Nycador-Oglan,A.M. 5245. A.D. 1275. A. Heg. 655. who so long and with such delight represented the young King, that by a divellish art and ambition he sent him to an untimely grave, and establi∣shes himselfe by name of Hameth-cawn, but all his raigne is so pursued by divine vengeance, that in the yeere 1275 he dyes mad and is buried at Cashan: in his place, came the right heire (from banishment) Argon-cawn, who by the people is joyfully welcommed, and at his Coronation assumes the name Tangador-habkay zedda, sonne to Habkay-cawn. This man swayed the Scepter 5 yeeres with much tyranny, not only massacring Nycadors sons and alliances,
but amongst the Innocent bath'd his sword in blood, so that hee became hatefull to his owne, and stimulated the Parthian to revenge, by whom in a battell hee is overcome, and by Argon-chan upbraided with his cruelty, yea to compensate the like measure, is cruelly tormented, his belly ript open, and his guts given to the doggs. To Tangador (the inveterate Ene∣mie of all Christians) succeeds his brother Giviatoc-chan, who in the fourth yeare of his reigne perisht by Balduc-chan his Uncle, who also after five yeares rule died issue-lesse. Badu sonne of Targahe youngest sonne to Vla∣cuk-chan, by assent of all that Nation succeeding in the throne of great∣nesse, whose affections he answered with so much respect, clemency, and care, that never any before him was more belov'd and honored: howbeit, when he openly profest himselfe to be a Christian, the peoples regard drew back, and many treasons (fomented by Satan) were hatched against him, so that at last he was slaine (or rather martyr'd) by Gazun-chan, Co∣zen to Tangador, who had small cause to bragge of his treachery, or time to surfet of his glory; for, by the permissive hand of God, in Cazbyn, when he lest suspected treason, hee is wounded to death by his owne houshold-servants Anno 1305, and of the Hegira 685, and lay long time unburied. His brother Aliaptu Abuzayd (or Mahumet ben Argon) by many attempts and shewes of valour purchased the restlesse Diadem: to whom, followed Hoharo-mirza, or Abusaid Bahador-chan anno 1337, who consumed his life in venerous exercises: so that for want of issue, the Kingdome became a Theater of many troubles, no lesse than 30 at one time contending for the Soveraignty: whereby the distressed people were compelled to look for help from home: And none more safe to trust to, than the Lord of Sa∣merchand, Tamberlayne, much famoused for his justice and victories, against the Sarmatique Tartar, Praecopense, and Chynaeses. Him they invocate by many presents of their love, and a letter fill'd with hideous complaints, describing their miseries, the confusion of their Kingdome, and insuffer∣able pride of the thirty competitors. The Scythic Emperour promises his best ayde, and with fifty thousand horse forthwith enters Persia, without doing any hurt, save against the Tyrants, all whom he persecuted with such fury, that in three moneths (by the industry of the Inhabitants) they are all taken and made to quaffe their farewell in the bitter cup of tormenting Death: for which, the people urged Tamberlayne to accept the Diadem, and to establish it by all meanes possible in his posterity. But after seven and twenty yeeres most honourable and succesfull government (in that time captivating the great Turk Bajazet, whom hee brought away in an iron Cage, subduing all Asia; yea, in eight yeares conquering more King∣domes and Provinces than the Romans did in eight hundred:) this Mo∣narch of the Asiatique world is subjected by imperious Death, & intombed anno 1405, of the Heg. 785. at Anzar in Cathayo: leaving his sonnes and grand children to inherit his victories: Ioon-gwyr, Hameth-cheque, Myram∣sha, and Mirza-sharock, by some call'd Soutochio and Letrochio; of which, Ioon gwir died (three yeares before his father,) in Palestine, leaving two sonnes Mamet Sultan, and Pyr-Mahomet; which Pir Mahomet was by his Grandsire placed in Gaznehen and Industan, where he ruled till Pir Ally slew him villanously. Hameth Chec was slaine in Laurestan, some say in his fa∣thers
last combat with Bajazet. Myramsha, the third sonne, was slaine in battell anno 1480 by Chara-Issuff the Turkoman in Aderbayon (but left is∣sue Sultan Mahumed from whom the great Mogul is descended:) and Mirza-Sharoc the youngest of Tamerlans sonnes (surviving the other) held most parts of the Empire, till dying in the yeare 1447, he left Aberdayon (or part of Media) to Mirza Ioonsha sonne of Kara-Issuf the Turk new entred Persia. Whiles Miramsha's issue preserve the splendour and magnificence of the Tartarian Emperour. Myramsha (by some call'd Allan-Chan) left issue (as is said) Mahumet, call'd Aben Mirza Sultan Mahomet, who died anno 1453, leaving to his sonne Barchan (at his Coronation new named Mirza Sultan Abuzaed) many rich and spatious Provinces, as Badashon, Gaznehen, Cabul, Sistan, Kerman, Chorazan, and Khoemuz: all which were not sufficient by bribe not force to secure him against the incensed Persian, who having en∣dured much affliction for triall of conquest, at last, Ioonsha with Acen Ally his sonne, grand sonne to Kara Issuff were beaten downe, and Vsan Cassan (call'd also Acembeg) Lord of the White Sheepe, governed. Vnder this Vsan Cassan (an Arminian) the people fall upon Sultan Abusaid, and in a pitcht field vanquish him and eighty thousand men, himselfe slaine, three hundred Elephants taken, and all his Countries ransacked: yet by reason of many discords amongst the Persians, they revived and set Abusaids sonne upon the Throne by name of Aben Mirza hameth cheque, whose foure and twenty yeares were spent in sweet ease and plenty. At's death his Empire des∣cends anno 1493 upon his brothers sonne Babur Mirza, named upon the ad∣dition of his greatnesse, Aben Babur Padshaw; intituled prince of Maure∣nahar, Balke and Samerchand; but, in the seventh yeare of his reigne is ex∣peld his Kingdome by practise and conspiracie of Sha-Mahumed (called also Sha beg chan) who layd claime to the Crowne, pretending hee was sonne and true heire of Aben-Mirza-hameth-cheque late Emperour, being (as hee said) by craft stolne from his Nurse, and conveighed amongst the Ouzbeag Tartars, whence (for some offence he had made) hee fled with his lawlesse troopes, enters Indya and attempts the conquest; where after hee had ty∣rannized long time,A.M. 5502. A.D. 1532. A. Heg 912. was in the yeare 1532, of the Mahometan account 912, sore against his will, compell'd to trot the knotty path of inevitable desti∣nie, leaving no issue; so that the Crown descended by right of Inheritance upon the eldest sonne of Aben Babur, Homayon by name, who suffered no small affliction by the malice and envie of Mirza Kameron his younger bro∣ther, that confederated with Tzeerchan, and by long practise forced him into Persia, where he was royally entertained, and after three moneths stay sent with great and royall succours back againe. This also is remarkable (the story of it is painted in Lohor palace) that king Badur thirsting after the conquest of Indya, disguises himselfe and thirty Noble men in his company in the habit of Kalenders or Friers, as if they were upon a Rummery or pilgrimage. The better by this craft to espie their advantage: but being in Delly (the greatest Citie of the Potan King) could not so behave themselves but that Tzecander the King discovered them, who pardoned them upon condition they would sweare never to attempt the conquest during either of their lives. But when both were dead, Homayon (Baburs son) entred & dispossest Abram and Shec-Sha-Selym
Secanders sonnes) of the Diadem. Howbeit, Tzeerchan a brave Bengalan Prince, fights against this new come Tartar, & foiles his Army neere Ganges forcing him into Persia, where hee married the Kings sister, and with her and Byram chan, and two hundred horse and returnes, is reseated in Delly, and acknowledged King. Homayon (son of Babur great-grand-son of Termir-Lan or Tamberlain) being re-invested with the Imperiall Title and Diadem of Indostan by meanes of Tamas the Persian King, and returned triumphant by the over∣throw of Tzeer-chawn the intruding King of Patan, who anno dom. 1550. and of the Hegira or Mahomitan account 960. died disconsolate. Homayon, I say after hee had committed his eldest son Abdul Fetta Gelaladin Mahomet (a while after sirnamed Eckbar) to the trust and care of Beyranghano chawn, (a discreet and valiant man) being in Delly, having one evening chawed too much sence confounding Opium, hasting to his Orisons, upon the watch∣word from a high Tower, suddenly he slipt downe forty steps or degrees, which so bruised him, that after three dayes torment he deceased, leaving Achbar his son inheritor to his Greatnesse and miseries.A.M. 5522. A.D. 1552. A. Hcy. 932 This hapned in the yeare of our Lord God 1552. from which time, to this yeare out of our owne and Belgick fragments congested by de Laet, I think it partly convenient with our other passages and observations of Indya to present these, which to the observant may prove acceptable. Ecbar, having by help of Beyrangano-Kawn, and Chawn-Channa his son, dispeld some clouds caused by Abdal-Chawn, was with solemnity crowned King or great Mogul in Delly; after which, hee bent his whole endeavours to enlarge his Territories and make knowne, that he was verely the great grand son of victorious Teymerlan. In the first, taking full revenge of He∣mow, who had formerly chased Turdichan, but three months after by mis∣chance of warre comming under command of Badur chawn, his head is cut off and eleuated in Delly, and that Province for some time quieted: then, by Ally Cooclinchan he subdues Doab (by some call'd Sanbal a Province sur∣rounded by Ieminy and Ganges, fruitfull and well peopled:) at that time Beyramgano-chan (otherwise call'd Byramchan the Persian) aging fast and ty∣red with the fopperies of this world, having well discharged the trust re∣pos'd by his old Master, and finding Ecbar warie and valiant to regard the dignity of his Empire, obtaines leave to spend the residue of his time at Mahomets Sepulcher, in contemplation: but (in his Roomery in the way to Medina) at Pathang in Cambaya is wounded to death by an obscure slave of his, whose father he had formerly slaine, so that by Abdal Radgee his son (not fourteene yeares old) and much sad company this great Captaine is brought back to Agray, and there buried: Ecbar laments his death though thought an Agent, but nothing can recover him: hee labours to forget it, and spends some time in building the Castle at Agra, formerly of mud, but by him pull'd downe & so altred, that it scarce admits comparison through all Asia: tis of durable stone, polisht and so spatious that it comprehends three miles circular, is built upon the pleasant banks of Shemeny, circled with a strong stone wall, moated, and to be entred by many draw Bridges; has foure brave gates, many bulwarks and counterscarps to defend it. Agray (from Surat East seven hundred and seventy miles) the Navel ofAgra
the Moguls territories, and Empresse of Indya, has 28 degr. 37 min. North latit. is watered by Ieminy (Iomanes in Pliny, and Hynamanes in Poliaenus his 8 lib. Semiramidis) which from Delly glides hither, and commixing with Ganges, flowes into the Bengalan Sea. Agra was of old call'd Nagra, and ere that, Dionysia; whence some say 'twas founded by Bacchus: but I beleeve it not; partly, in that Fettipore till of late (no longer than fifty yeares agoe) bore away the fame for beauty and grandeur, and in that Bacchus (sayes S. Augustine) was contemporary with Moses in the yeare from Adam 2515: rather from the river Agranis, which hence streams into Ganges, as Arrian lib. de Indicis has it. The shape is semilunary, like London: the streets long and narrow, and nasty; of seven miles continuance: in part 'tis wall'd about, the ditch the remainder, which too oft smels infectiously. From Agra to Lahore (through a delicate shade of trees) are five hundred miles. To Bram∣pore one thousand; to Asmeer two hundred; to Surat seven hundred and seventy. Radgee Rana the most potent and noble Prince of Indya, at this time lost his strong and stately Castle Chyttor, by treason of Zimet Padsha his substi∣tute, not content therewith, till he had made many inroades into Gujurat in contempt of the Moguls forces. Echar is glad of the occasion, hasting with fifty thousand horse to be revenged. Some months he spent in besie∣ging it, but so fruitlesly, that he attempts the conquest by stratagem, under∣mining the Fort, and to the admiration and terrour of the besieged, blowes it up with powder, causing such a breach as himselfe and twenty thousand men immediatly entred pel-mel with such haste & fury, that Zimet the re∣bell perceiving treaty of no value, gathering in one his Family, consum'd himselfe and them in flames, to prevent the tortures provided for him by Ecbar, and Mardout his enraged Master. In this sort this famous Fort is ta∣ken, which Aladin by twelve yeares siege could doe no hurt to. A victory so great and valuable, that Eckbar causes it be exprest in sculpture, and for a Trophy placed in Agra as a wonder. Hee had no time to surfet of this victory, receiving letters from Rajea Bagwander Viceroy of Lahore, that Mirza Mamet Hagee his brother with thirty thousand horse out of Kabul, had attempted to prey upon Lahore: Ecbar delayes no time, but with his Army presents himselfe so suddenly to the Enemie, that without any re∣sistance or stay Mahomet flyes away, leaving his men and camp to the rage of Ecbars company. This occasion drew the King to view all advantagious places of defence, which hee both bettered by his care, and gave them in charge to such hee trusted. He also takes a survay of Pang-Ob, out of which he is called by let∣ters from his mother in Agra, assuring him of the rebellion of Badur-kawn Ally-Kooli-Kawn and Zemaen, sent that spring against the Patanians, whom in Doab they put to flight, at Sambel also, and at Lachnoun got a greater vi∣ctory, and three weekes after, at Ioonpore utterly defeated them, subduing to the Mogul all such Provinces as lie ingirt 'twixt Ganges and Tsatsa, con∣quests of so great note, that they grew efflated beyond measure, conceiting all Indostan under like hazard, and which they resolved to make tryall of. But the reward and destiny due to Traytors overtakes them: for Ecbar by swift marches long before the Rebels expected him pitches on the East of
Ieminy (the river at Agra) which wounded the adverse part with such amazement, that forfeiting the memory of their passed victories, they begin a shamefull flight; Ecbar greedily pursues them, beating downe the silly men immeasurably, and after long pursuit, the heads are taken: Allyculi-cawn is troden under foot by the inraged horses, and Badur-cawn (by Ec∣bars command and in his sight) strangled: this done, Ganganna is sent to Ioonpore against Mirza Sulyman and the King retreats to Agra, where, hee fancies a pilgrimage to Asmeer a hundred and thirty course or two hun∣dred English miles distant thence, by invocation of Mandee a reverent Hodgee or disciple of Mahomet, by his favour to obtaine some issue mascu∣line; after much foot toyle (at every miles end a faire stone being pitcht to rest upon, as yet remaining) he gets thither, where bare foot very devout∣ly he intreats dead Mondee for children: this Prophet is intombed in a rich and stately monument, graced with 3 faire Courts, each paved with singu∣lar good stone, the Fabrick (after the Persian mode) polisht and pargetted in Mosaick order. Asmeer, is under 25 degr. 15 min. North lat. seated upon a high impregnable mount, the greater part of the City being below,Asmeer. fairely built, of small value in resistance, yet moated and wald about with solid stone; not much distant is Godah, once, the habitacle and seat of the valiant Rashboot: the country is champaigne and very fruitfully, in many pla∣ces affoording the ruines of much antique magnificence, time and war made desolate and obscured: these, Ecbar coupled to the rest of his spatious Empire. Ecbar by this has made an end of his oblations, and in his returne visits a holy Derwis, Siet Selym by name, who tooke it for so great a favour, that out of his delphick notions, he foretold the Mogul how ere long hee should be father of three gallant men children; it proved so, in which re∣gard, his first borne (from the Dervys) is called Selym; after, Sha Selym: the other two, Chan Morad or Amurath, and D'haen-sha or Danyell: a prophecy so grateful to Ecbar the Mogul, that there he consecrates a brave and magni∣fique Mosque, walls the old towne Tzickerin or Sycary, and from this holy occasion new names it Fettipore i.e. a place of pleasure; yea grew so affected to it, that he added a pallace for himselfe and a Buzzar,Fettipore scarce out-beauti∣fied by any other in the Orient, and had made it the Metropolis had the river affected him, by whose unwholsomnesse he forsooke it, from whence ruine and neglect have moatheaten her, at this day prostrate and become the object of danger and misery; tis from Agra eighteene miles English. Whiles things were in this sort digesting, newes comes to King Ecbar (then in Fettipore) that a great rebellion was begun in Gujurat by Ebra∣him Hossen, Mirza-cawn, Mahomet Hossen and Ioon-cawn, who had most audaciously forraged as farre as Baroch and were marching to Amadavad, hoping with his troopes of Theeves and Coolyes to make a prey of that Emperiall City. Amadavad, undoubtedly seemes to me,Amadavad. to be that City Amacastis in Ptol Amadavastis in Arrhian. Howbeit, some say it has denomination from King Hamet who in the yeere of Mahomet 375 made it large and beauti∣full: the pole Articke is there elevated 23 degrees 18 minutes: tis at this present the Megapolis of Cambaya or Guzurat, watered by a sweet river and circled by a beautifull strong stone wall of sixe miles compasse, well
and orderly advanc't with many pretty Towers and a dozen Posterns: out of which few passe or repasse without a Passe, fearing treason from Prince Badur, who in our times with a hundred thousand horse ransackt Cambaya thirty seven courses hence, and dayly threatens this faire Citty. The streets are many, pretty large and comely; most shops redundant with Aromatick gummes, perfumes and spices; silkes, cotton, callicoes, and choise of Indian and China rarities, owned and sold by the abstemious, faire spoken, crafty Bannians, who here surpasse for number the other Inhabitants: of most note is the Buzzar, rich and uniforme; the Castle is strong, large, moated; and the receiving place of the Cambayan Governour: the houses in ge∣nerall are of Sunne-burnt bricks, low, large and tarrassed: adjoyning, is seene the momument of a certaine pedagogue, so deerly beloved by Sha-Reer the King, that by a stately Mausoleum he strove to make him seeme immortall: both building and pavement are of well polishtmarble. It has 3 Courts of great beauty and respect, one of them fastidious in foure hun∣dred porphirian pillars framed in Corinthiack architecture: conjoyning, is a Tanck of refreshing water, compassed with cloisters adorned with spatious windowes, most of which, give the observer a delicate horizon: at Sesques also (one houres riding thence) are seene the Dormitories of many Cambayan Potentates, lodged in a brave and princely Temple, much resorted to by the Idolatrous Vannyans: and two miles neerer the City, behold the gardens and pallace of Chawn Chonna sonne to the great By∣ramchan the Persian; an Indian Ombrave, by whose valour of late yeeres the last of the Cambayan Kings in that very place by losse of his life, gave conquest to this warriour, and dominion to Ecbar the Mogull his Master. But returne we to Ecbar; who no sooner received intelligence of Hossens rebellion, but with incredible haste, winged with fury, he gets thither (each twenty foure houres posting seventy, in seven dayes foure hundred cour∣ses) and gives those rebells battell at Titans first uprising, and with their noise and clamour so terrifies them, that after small resistance their whole Army is disordered, many slaine, and by a fresh supply of twelve thou∣sand Horse led by Chan Goga an expert souldier, after some skirmish they are chased, and in flight Ebrahim Hossen and Mirza-cawn slaine, Mohomet Hossen taken prisoner and beheaded; and by this advantage not only Ama∣davar recovered and is fortified, but Surat also conquered and most of Gu∣zurat made subject to Ecbars diadem: this done, hee returnes Crown'd with Triumph, and begins the Castle in Agray, built of such good stone, made so large and vast, that she may deserve the Title of princesse of Asia: twelve yeers scarce finisht it, tho twelve hundred at some time were im∣ployed about it: he expended fifty thousand crow of Tacks▪ (a crow is a hundred lack,The Castle of Agra built. each lack a hundred thousand) thirty, sometime twenty tack make one roopee; a roopee is two shillings three pence, so that accoun∣ting but twenty tack to a roopee, the totall he disbursed, amounts to two millions and five hundred thousand roopees: at Fettipore, at that time also he spent about the wall and pallace a millions and five hundred thousand roopees, in all, foure million: at Tzekander likewise, three course (or five miles from Agra as we go to Labor) the Mousoleum of the great Mogulls, begun by Ecbar, augmented by Iangheer his sonne, and yet scarce finished,
having already consumed fourteene millions of roopees in that wonder of India. It would require an exact description, in little thus. The place is Scander, a place where the greatest of Kings made his ne plus. Ecbar the most magnifique of Tamberlans race is here buried: tis a Mausoleum of foure large squares, each about three hundred paces; the materiall is free stone, polisht, at each Angle a small Tower of particoloured marble; ten foot higher is another tarrasse, on every side beautified with three Tow∣ers; the third gallery has two on each side; the fourth, one; the fifth, halfe; & a small square gallery mounting to a royall pyree; within, is the mummy of Ecbar bedded in a coffin of pure gold, the whole structure is built in midst a spacious and curious garden, surrounded with a wall of red stone, and in that a brave raile mounted by sixe staires, which discovers a little garden, but exquisitely beautifull and odorifferous. Whiles these vast buildings were erecting, Ganganna prosecutes Mirza Sulyman, who (whe∣ther of griefe or age is doubted) dyed suddenly, commending the successe to Skander his sonne, in short time made away by rascall conspirators, in's place Douwett, Bazat-cawn sonne, a man both effeminate and hated, so that now occasion gave it selfe richly for Ecbar to linck Bengala to his Crowne Imperiall: he apprehends it, and with a brave army of fifty thou∣sand horse and sixe hundred Elephants marches against the Pathan and is past Ganges ere Sha-Douwet has notice of his comming, which when hee is assured of, sends Radgee B'han with 20000 horse to encounter them: twixt Ziotsa and Moheb-Alli-poor they affront one another, and for three houres skirmish gallantly, but Ecbar at length has the mastery and coura∣giously pursues them to Pathan, where King Douwet had fortified. Ecbar by no means could commove them to battell, nor in 3 moneths siege enter the City, for Patan is both great and well fortified, yet in the fourth hee forces it, giving it as a prey to his men, who used all sort of hostill violence, the unlucky King buried in drink, all that time senselesse of any losse, till too late to repent it, is convaied away in a boat, at three dayes end made headlesse, and sent to Ecbar, as a Simbol of their love and his vanity: the King having thus fortunately proceeded in Bengala, goes back to Fetti∣pore, where whiles he oversees his buildings, is mindfull to increase and bring to maturity his Empire which then was but in adolescency, and to that end by the valour and vigilancy of Rustan-cawn and Zadoc-cawn the strong Castle Rhantipore is taken from the Radgees who of many hundred yeeres had lorded it; after which, the Castle Rota or Roughtaz in Berar in Bengala (some thinke Oreophanta of old) by a merry sleight or strata∣gem: this Castle for many ages has acknowledged the Radgee her Gover∣nour, her building both from Art and Nature excellent and impregnable:Rotas. tis seated upon a perpendicular hill, the ascent cut oblique out of the firme rock for three miles continuance, the rest round about, precipitious; the top is a plaine of eight miles every way, the circuit twenty foure, heal∣thy, wealthy, and abounding in all good things necessary, as water, corne, fruits, wood, and sixteene villages included by the Castle wall, which gives the defence twofold wonderfull; in a word, not any Fort or Castle in Asia (or it may bee in the universe) is more delightfull or of greater strength and safety.
This, the great Mogull lookes upon with a lustfull eye, imeasurably thirsting after it, but knowes neither by bribe nor valour how to compasse it; pollicy must actuate, and tho he comprehends no way, yet ceases not to torture his invention, till his bombast is spent and the enterprise under∣taken by Mohebally-cawn a wise and daring Captaine, who having leave, without acquainting Ecbar or any other with his fantasies, proceeds with foure hundred young men, armd with cryzes, and his Seraglio in two hundred doolaes or cajuaes as if hee were upon a Iourney into Bengala: and in this order passing on, when he came within view of the Castle, he showes a Rajea his concubines and bribes him to procure leave of the Lord above, that in regard of his haste he might with safety leave there his Seralio till his returne, which he would take as a reall favour and stu∣dy to remunerate: the message is delivered, the Radgee (who loved wo∣men well) entertains the motion, and Ally-cawn imparting the secret to a prudent Eunuch, disroabs the women; and with their apparell cloaths himselfe and the foure hundred youths, commanding the women in mas∣culine attire to continue the Journey to Orixa, the Eunuchs, twelve in number, with bowes and arrowes gard the Selaglio and by the Radgees command are entred (but like Synons horse into wretched Troy:) for, Ally-cawn (giving the word) the Doolaes are dismounted, and out of which, the warlike Amazons. In the first place they kill the porters of the Castle gate, then with incredible speed and courage assaile the astonisht Inhabi∣tants, whom they take prisoners, and in the end the Radgee himself, who (to prevent excuse) they send to Erebus: thus is this Castle wonne, which (but by stratagem) was not to bee taken by all the hostile force of India. Ecbar heares it with incredible delight, and joyes the more in his beliefe, when he viewes that masse of treasure sent him thence by Ally-cawn to confirme the conquest. After which the invincible Castle Ieloore is by Gidney-cawn an Apostat Mahometan betrayed to the Mogull tho to his own brothers confusion.Ieloor taken. The fame thereof afflicts many Princes of the Rajeas, each of them labouring to conserve their owne against this overspread∣ing Tartar: some, couragiously defie his greatnesse, of which ranck is Roop Mathii, a Lady both faire and valiant; her face was fitter to subdue Mars then any Javelin, yet she confides more in her lance than in her beauty; so that, cheering up her obedient troopes, very bravely she spoiles the Mo∣gulls dominions, but in the midst of her boast and hopes shee is affronted by Adam-cawn, a hard-hearted warriour, who with his regiment so furi∣ously opposed her, that most of her Pattans were slaine, and her selfe (tho shee might have lived) to prevent shame and inchastity, by poison gave over being: Masoffer-cawn also this yeere 1588, of the Hegira 968 conspires against Ecbar, in Guzurat: first he strangles Gotobdas Mamet-cawn the Kings Viceroy in Amadabat and some Ombraves, & then seizes upon all the Forts & advantageous places for the bettering his villanous rebellion; but by Abdall Radgee (Beirangana-cawns sonne) is vanquisht, and fearing to obtaine pardon destroyed himselfe as did the late nam'd Amazon. The report of whose death was no sooner bruited, but the fame also of Mirza Mahomet Hackim (brother to Ecbar) his death, occasions Ecbar to assure himselfe of Cabul, which during Hackims life was impossible; but using
with all kind respect his wives and children, yea giving Chabec-cawn, Ha∣metbeg and Mamet Maxuen-cawn his best Vmbraves large wages and com∣mand in Mesulipatan, Orixa and other places; at the same time Zebbar-cawn (late President of Kabul and ovated for his victory that yeere against Maxuen-cawn, Bama-cawn and other rebells in Bengala) is made Viceroy of that Province, and Radzia Thormiel cald to Fettipore, such time as Rad∣gee Ramgiend Lord of Bando (a Province adjoyning to Agra, redundant onely in sand and stones) by perswasion of Radgee Bhyrmiel presents him∣selfe to Ecbar at Fettipore, and inrolls his countrey as a member of the Mogulls Seigniory, by whose example many other petty Gentile Kings came and submitted unto Ecbar, and yeerely (as a symbol of their love and acknowledgement of subjection) present him their daughters to bee his concubines; to the Mogull a gratefull tribute: and for their better satisfa∣ction to court them in, at Praije (an 110 course from Agra, Chrysoborca in Pliny;) advances a triumphant pallace upon a promontory, where Iemi∣ny empties her selfe into Ganges; the materiall is hard stone, fram'd & pol∣lisht with great beauty, & calls it Elabasse; in nothing more observable,Elabass builded. then a deep dark cave, in which are preserv'd (as holy relicks) divers deformed Pagotha's, rediculously supposed Babba Adam, Mamma Evah, Seth, Enosh and Methuselah, whom they affirme were created and lived here; and to whom (from all parts of India) resort innumerable Bannyans for benedi∣ction: first purifying themselves in Ganges (reputed holy, and no doubt ex∣cellent, for we find that a pint of Ganges water weighes lesse by an ounce then any other water) and shaving off all haire as uncleane excrements, and without them meritorious: the whole, is surrounded with a triple wall; the first, of quadrated red stones and highest; the inmost of white, retaining an Obeliske fifty cubits high, and as many under ground to make it durable; fixt there it may be by proud Alexander. In this (which many Potan Kings formerly in vaine attempted by reason of the rivers) the King spent a myriad and two hundred thousand of roopees. Here also they shew a holy Tree, which many Potan Kings have sought to eradicate and destroy, but never could prevaile in it. Neere Elabasse also is worth our seeing the stately Tombe which Iangheer built for his first wife (Raja Ma∣misenghs sister) who poison'd her selfe upon the report of her sonne Sul∣tan Gushroes rebellion. The Mogulls affaires succeeding thus fortunately, no clouds, no tumults appearing, Ecbar broaches new Chymeraes, and fancies the intire conquest of Purop, Patan, Chormandel, yea of all Bengala to the South; and to stretch his Empire North as farre as Tartary: to further which, he heares, that Abdul-cawn, sonne and heire to Skander-chan King of Maurenahar (part of Tartary) was comming to Fettipore to visit him; he prevents the most part of his journey, & meets him at Lahore; where, he was with much ceremony entertained, but after small stay departed home againe. Newes being brought King Achbar that Mirsa Sharoph in Badaxan had beene mi∣serably abused by the Ouzbeg Tattars; the King resolves their punishment: but as more considerable, bends towards Orixa that he might at once lord it over Ganges. At Atteck he orders his Army: to Radjea Byrmiel he gave one part, to Iehan-cawn another, to himselfe the third: Byrmiel leads the
Van', and outstripping the Army falls furiously upon the Patanians, who by th' incouragement of Zel-Ally receive them with no lesse fury, but an∣swer blow for blow, so long, so bravely, that Byrmiel is beaten downe with most part of his inconsiderate Army; Ecbar by such as fled heares the tragedy, and inflam'd with desire of conquest and revenge, hastens upon them, and with such order and force, that Zel-Ally and Turkoft are dis∣comfited, fifteene thousand slaine, and Bengala subjected: the conquest of Kandahor is next recorded, for hearing of a great variance twixt the two Princes Hussan and Rustan, (sonnes of Mirza Beyram the Kandahor Gover∣nour) and the Persian: he consederates with the two young men, and sends Chabeec-cawn with five thousand horse, who at midnight are let in by the two brethren, and the Citty made a vassall of Ecbars greatnesse: but in short time Abas the Persian King reducted it from the Indian. Ecbars Ambi∣tion growes endlesse, so he can overcome he cares not how, nor where he conquers: for, hearing of the old King of Maurenahars death, hee covets to become his successor. First, to espie their strength and winne black hearted fauters to his intentions, hee sends, Tzedder-cawn and Hackeem-cawn to work it, who under pretence of comforting Abdul-cawn play their parts, and at the yeeres end returne well doctrinated: the great Mo∣gull reserves the practice for himselfe, but perceiving Cassimeer interpo∣sing and not under him, sends Ally Mirza in Ambassie to Iustoff-cawn (a fearefull King) that if hee would with his sonne forthwith come to La∣hore and do homage to him, he should re-accept his seniory and his best power at all times to defend him: if he would referre it to the chance of warre, he would dethrone, and make him a perpetuall slave, and his son a stranger. The Casmirian King, affrighted at it, goes instantly to Ecbar and confirmes his vassalage; but Iacob-cawn his sonne, not able any lon∣ger to dissemble, flies home, and is so followed by such as loved him, that he expells the Indians out of the Citty and is acknowledged King; but his Halcyon dayes are of small continuance; for Ecbar stormes, and accile∣rates Ally Mirza and Cassem-cawn with thirty thousand horse to fetter him; they chase him; not daring upon equall termes to combate it, he flyes to the high Mountaines of Bimbery, but Cassem-cawn, directed by some na∣tives, so hotly pursue, that they are Lords of those hills, whence Iacob hasts to Sirhenakar, but there also they beleaguer him, whose strength in men nor walls were sufficient to repell the enemy, but in despight of both, is taken and manacled, yea, made to bend under the iron yoake of slavish bondage. Cassimer is part of that part of Asia, of old call'd Sogdian. The North Pole is there raised 41 deg. nine min. from Agra three hundred; from Su∣rat, three thousand English miles distant: the Province in generall is moun∣tainous barren, cold and windy. Her Metropolis Shyrenaker is three miles in compasse, watered by Behat, a river, which from Caucasus after many glo∣merating dances increases Indus: nothing more observable than a lake (eight leagues thence) fifteen miles about, in center is a pretty Isle, bearing a faire and pleasant Palace, out of which is seene variety of sports, fishing, hawking, rowing, &c. This done, restlesse Ecbar (a while deferring the conquest of Bactria)
aymes at Tutta and all Indus; knowing how odious Mirza Iehan by reason of his tyrannie was to his inferiours, he sends Ganganna with twelve thou∣sand men, and by Boat sayling downe Ravee into Indus, ere long they ar∣rive at Tatta, which for six moneths held out, but in the seventh the Ty∣rant yeelds it up, and is upon conditions entertain'd friendly, and by this all Synde to Loore Bander upon the Ocean, acknowledge Ecbar King of the Mogulls their head and Soveraigne. Tutta or Tatta (till now,Tutta. commanded by the Rashboot) East from Iesel∣meer, & West frō Buckor, is one of the most celebrated Marts of Indya: from Lahore thirty dayes journey, but by Indus in lesse attained. Vpon the Oce∣an shee has Loure-Bander, three easie dayes travell thence, observable in this, that such ships as ride at anchor there, are not so gnawed and spoiled with wormes, as at Swalley, Chaul, Dabul, Daman, Goah, and other places. About this time Nezamshaw the old King of Decan,A.D. 1593. A.H. 973. paid Nature her ut∣most Tribute, and Melec Amber his sonne is stated in his royall Throne and dignity: Ecbar is sick till he attempt the conquest; to doe which he re∣solves neither cost nor toile should hinder it; the enterprise more hope∣full, for that a woman was rectrix of the Marches. Ganganna is chosen Ge∣nerall, who with instructions and thirty thousand horse, from Lohore hasts to Brampore, where Radgee Alychan the Governour conjoynes five thou∣sand more, and after some moneths preparation set forward towards De∣can. Tziend Bieby, daughter to the last King, heares of the Mogulls ap∣proach, and to resist them fortifies Amdanagar, obtaining also some Forces from the Kings of Visiapore and Golcunda, in all forty thousand horse, which she commends to her Martiall Eunuch Godgee Shuhel, who stayes for them upon the Confines, first combatting with Ally Chawn, Mirza Gassem, and halfe the Army; the Pagans enter pel-mel, without order, guided only by bravery & desire of conquest, on both sides were many slain: now one then the other part growing victorious; so long, so couragiously, with such emu∣lation and fury the battell continued, that when Apollo (weary of so much bloodshed) had hid his golden tramells in Thetys bosome, they ceased not but by Cynthia's pale candor renued the fight with such alacrity, that of many yeares never was battell fought bravelier, in eighteene houres none knowing who were more victorious; till such time as Phoebus sparkling his flagrant beames againe in that Horizon, Changanna falls in with his Regi∣ment, so fresh, so violent, that after three houres skirmish the Decans turn back, leaving their heroick Captaine Godgee slaine in the field. The Mo∣gulls follow the chase fifteene miles, but the Princesse Baby charges them with fresh troopes, causing them retreat to Brampore till a second season. Ecbar, the great Mogull has notice of their successe, and to accilerate ano∣ther triall, intreats Sha Morad his beloved sonne to levie fifteene thousand horse, and from Brampore with the other Forces to spoile or conquer those meridionall Provinces: merrily the youthfull Prince advances thither∣ward, but during his stay in Brampore grew so excessively venerious and drunken, that his radicall vigour became spent, his lungs consum'd,Suddē death of Prince Morad. and death the period of his consumption. His sudden farwell struck the Army with such amazement, that many Vmbraves (to avoyd the suspitious fury of his Father) fled, nor caring to inhume the carcasse: Ecbar heares it, sweares
they had poyson'd him, and vowes requitall: his Chancellor (the Princes Schoolemaster) Abdul Fazel is sent, and (finding the dead Prince his owne consumer) assembles Ganganna, Iustoffchan, Tzadok-Mamet-Chan, Mirza Tzarok, and such Vmbraves as were at hand, affords them comfort, and re∣vokes such as had fled, satisfies Ecbar whose was the fault, undertakes the Princes charge (after hee had sent his carcasse to Delly there to be buried) and in small time subdues the Provinces of Chandys or Sanda, Berar, and many other wealthy places: by letters he acquaints the King, & desires him to forsake Lohore a while (having spent twelve Winters & Summers there) and come to Agra, hoping in small time to subject Decan. Gulcunda (by the Persians call'd Hydrahan) Visiapore and other parts of India to his Empire. Ecbar,A.D. 1595. A. Heg. 975 orders his sonne Selym to chastise with fifteene thousand horse, Radjea Rana Mardout, successour to King Porus, and of all the Radgees most powerfull and excellent, his rebellion excepted: Tzebber Chan followes him with five thousand horse, Sha-Cooligan Mharem with three thousand; Radgee Shagenat with three thousand; and other Vmbraves and Manceb∣dars with other Forces, which digested, the great Mogull, for Agray leaves Lahore the better to receive intelligences. Lahore.LAHORE, (a Citie both vast and famous) is competitor for the Title of Metropolis with Agray; but for circuit and bravery much more excellent: the pole Artick is there advanced 32 degrees 15 minutes: the ayre for eight moneths pure and restorative; the streets gracefull and pav'd; most are cleansed and refreshed by the river Ravee, which from the Cassmyrian or Caspiryan mountaines streames most pleasantly to this Citie, and after a stately flux of three thousand English miles, deepe enough for Juncks of threescore Tun, by Tutta flowes into Indus, and with her neere Diul at 23 degrees 15 minutes lodges in the Ocean. In Lahore are many things ob∣servable; Pallaces, Mosques, Hummums or Sudatories, Tancks, Gar∣dens, &c. The Castle is large, strong, uniforme, pleasant, and bravely sea∣ted; of stone, white, hard, and polished; arm'd with twelve Posterns, three of which respect the Towne, the rest the Country: within, a Palace sweet and lovely, entred by two gates and Courts; the last pointing out two wayes; one, to the Kings Durbar and Iarneo (where hee daily shewes him∣selfe unto his people) the other to the Devon-Kawn or great Hall (where every eve from eight to eleven he discourses with his Vmbraves:) On the wall are pictur'd sundry stories and pastimes. viz. Iangheer (otherwise call'd Sha Selym) croslegd upon a rich carpet, under a stately Throne or State, his sonnes Perwees on the right hand with Curroon and Tymoret, his bro∣thers, D' han-Shaw, and Sha Morad; about him Emirza Sheriff, Can Asoms elder brother, of such wealth and pride, that having above a hundred Concubines, he clad them daily, and each night tearing them off, buried them in the ground where they rotted, Mirza Rustan (once King of Can∣dahor,) Can Channa, Rajea Manisengh, Can Asam, Asaph Chan, and Radgee Iugonath (at whose death, his wives, sister, Nephew, and seven other friends burnt themselves with him for complement sake in the fire:) And on the left hand, Rajea Bousing fly-skarer, Rajea Randas sword-bearer, Mocrib-Chan Parasite, Radjea Rodorow rebell, Radgees Ransingh, Mansingh, Ber∣singh, & Bossou, &c. In another Goozelchan (and neere the former) is painted
the Mogull, under a state croslegd: upon the dores the Images of the Cru∣cifix, & of the blessed virgin Mother. In another, the Kings Progenitors, of whom, Babur, & thirty Nobles in the habit of Pilgrim Kalenders, &c. The Province wherein Lahore is seated is called Pangab, or rather from the Per∣sian word Panch-ob or five waters, watered with Ravee, Behat, Ob-Chan, Wi∣hy, and Synde or Sindar (increased by Paddar and Damiadee,) by Ptolomy and old Hydrographers, call'd Acesines, Cophys, Hidaspes, Zaradras, and Rhu∣adeb or Hispalis. In a word, no Province of Indya out-vyes it for pleasure, and riches, nor any part of the East for a continued shade of Ashy trees from hence to Agra five hundred miles distance, whose spreading growth and verdure lenifie the scorching flames of Titans motion, each eight miles a faire and convenient Saray or Lodge built for Travellers to repose in: To our story: Ecbar, now at Agra, resolves in person to prosecute the warres in Decan. Anno 1597. of the Heg. 977, he sets out towards Brampore, but (contrary to his expectation) so soone as he had past the river Nerebede, hee perceives Badursha, a couragious Radgee to fortifie Hasser a strong Castle against him: the Mogul likes not to leave so violent an Enemy behind him, but resolves to take it by force or famine. Hasser, is three Castles in one,Hasser. Chotzan and Commerghar, the last, mounted high, and so defended by Nature as is made impregnable: to force it is impossible, therefore Ecbar resolves to famish them, and halfe a yeere to that end he sits afore it, which the Radgee with∣in, seeing, repents his folly, and upon request to have life and goods (granted him) resignes, and followes the Camp or Leskar which goes on joyfully, till such time as newes is brought, how Sha-Selym and Tzebhaer-Cawn with the residue afore-named, going against Radgea Rana Mardout, in Assmeer,The Prince rebells. Tzeb∣haer dies (of poyson some thought) which alters the Princes progresse, for he forthwith seizes upon Tzebhaers treasure (amounting to a crow or ten lack of roopes) & therewith purchases the mercenary affection of so many souldiers, that, to Agra he returnes resolved to thrust his Father out of his Throne and Empire. Ecbar, is so amated with this unlucky rebellion, that what with feare of his sonnes popularity, and what to leave Decan uncon∣quered, his heart palpetates, he droopes and becomes hatefull to his owne imaginations; till Abdul Gazel rouses him, and by infusing wholsome en∣couragement, not onely revives, but exasperates his revenge to an imme∣diate action: whereupon, turning his back of Amnadagar, with halfe his Army, (his sonne Sha D'haen, Abdul Fezel, Chan-Channa, Badur-Shaw, and other Vmbraves prosecuting Decan) hee speeds towards Agra, whither Shaw-Selym got before him in hope to ransack his treasury, but missing his ayme, marches back by Rehen and Annewar, and at twelve dayes end came to El-Habasse, having already subjected Bahaer, Syaupore, Chalpy, Lacknoo, Mekpore, Chera, Gastanpore, Ghanoots, Chersam, Berage, and other Townes and Provinces: in all, putting Captains of his owne choosing. The King, now at Agra is sensible of his sonnes conspiracie, and wishes all were well againe; his letters first attempt it, discovering the shame and danger he was in, the curse of Mahomet, and deprivation of birth-right, promising pardon, with such perswasions, of small force with Shaw-Selym, who doating upon his owne exorbitancies, derides the Messenger, and ere long ore-runnes the
Empire to Bengala, hoping (but in vaine) the Viceroy there, Radgee Man∣sing would side with him. In this interim, his other sonne, Prince D'haen or D'haenyel with his Vmbraves and Army enter Decan, & come first to Gandetzin a Castle, in the scite favoured by Nature, and by Art of man made impregnable. Herein, the distressed Lady with all her Nobles and force had pent themselves, sto∣red with victualls for two yeares siege, and provided of all sorts of war∣lique instruments. Notwithstanding all which (the dice of Warre and Fate so ordering it) in the seventh moneth they forced it, depriving many of their lives, all of their wealth and liberty. Madam Bebey only, rather than suffer any indignity, chose to give her selfe (by poyson) the period of mi∣sery. But her Magazein of gold and silver came to the Conquerour, who giving that in charge to Abdul Gazel and Chanchanna, the Castle he trusted to Godgee Byckmirz, and without opposall reconquering the Counties Be∣rar and Gandes, receiving some acknowledgement from the faint-hearted Kings of Gulcunda and Visiapore, loaden with triumph and joy he returnes to Brampore most victorious. Brampore.BRAMPORE, (or Barampur,) Baramatis in Ptolomy; or Bracman-pore as my notion prompts me; of old & at this day a Seminary of Bramans, Iogues, Calans or Gimnosophs, whose Academy (about this place) is recorded by Porphyrius and Ptolomy; is in Artick elevation twenty eight degr. three min. From Surat, East, two hundred and twenty miles: from Asmer foure hundred and twenty: from Agray one thousand; the Province is, Chan∣dish or Sanda, where watered by Tapee or Tynde (the river Surat) it be∣comes fruitfull and pleasant; elsewhere, barren, unwholsome, scortching, sandy and pernitious: the Citty is low and in an unhealthy plaine: very spatious, but by Bannyans most inhabited: the streets are many and narrow; the houses not high and but meanly beautifull; the North East end it has a Castle (upon the flood) large and defensive; in the river, an artificiall Ele∣phant to skilfully shaped, that by the Bannyans 'tis adored, & by others ad∣mired: in times past, here resided the Decan Kings, but by the Mogul now beaten from it. Chan-Channa's gardens, and water devises calld Loll-baut two courses thence, are worthy a Travellers commendation. Ecbar is no sooner possest how fortunately his sonne Danyel proceeds Southward, but Godgee Iehan presents him a penetentiall letter from Sha Selim his rebellious sonne in the contrary quarter. After a little stay, hee returnes with the Mogulls answer, wherein was his assured pardon, so hee would dismisse his Army and aske forgivenesse. His ungratious sonne, re∣turnes this deriding reply, that having an Army of seventy thousand horse and many brave men at armes, to most of which he had given moneys and command; upon condition he would ratifie it, and in no sort imagine them rebells or conspirators, he was ready to obey; if not, he would take his owne courses. Ecbar resends him a tart message; and Selim to demonstate his neglect and boldnesse, posts to Elabasse, where he commands all sorts of Coine, of gold, silver, and brasse to be stamp't with his owne name and motto; yea, to vexe the old man more, affrights Anarkala his fathers wife whom he sirnamed Pomegranad, and sent him of his new stampt mony; a crime so strange, so audaciously odious, that the inraged Father curses
him, vowes reward, and with speed acquaints his Chancellour Abdul Fa∣zel with it, who first moderates his Masters passion, and then with all con∣venient haste (accompanied with three hundred horse) followes the post to do some service, but Sha Shelim, (having intelligence how all this pas∣sed) desirous to anticipate so sure an enemy, he writes to Radgee Bersingh (Lord of Soor) thorow whose countrey hee needs must passe, promising him a gratuity and the command of five thousand horse so hee would lay in wait for Abdul and send him his head: the Radgee promises his best per∣formance, and with a thousand horse and three thousand foot, lurks neere Gwaler, and such time poore Abdul Fazel (suspectlesse of any villany) pas∣ses by, Radgee falls upon him, and notwithstanding the great advantage he had, for three houres the fight was hotly continued, but ore-pressing them with men and troops in the end, his company were most part slaine, and Abdul himselfe (after twelve deep wounds) taken and beheaded; Selim re∣ceives it joyfully, but Ecbar, who loved him deerly becomes so passionate and sorrowfull, that for three dayes he conceald himselfe and would not a long time after be comforted: but (like waves) see another horror affli∣cting him, newes of his other sonne, Sha Danyel, kild in the same Citty, of the same disease, Morad was formerly; hereat, he afflicts his decaying body immeasurably, cryes and sighes, and vowes upon Chanchanna, revenge for not better regarding him, who comes to purge himselfe, but for some time is not admitted to Ecbars presence, till by mediation of others; and so re∣turnes to Decan, with an augmentation of power and dignity. But the sorrow hee suffers in his rebellious sonne cooles his courage and inflames his passion: some way he must tread to bring home or destroy him by per∣swasion or warre; but feares both: his sonne is so hardned and safegarded, somewhat he must doe; and therefore first (as a King) he rides against him with thirty thousand horse, but by his mothers death is recalled; whose body when he had most sumptuously interred in Delly in King Homayon her husbands Sepulcher, he resolves to proceed against Sha Selym, but his minde alters; hee feares his sonne's singular courage and way in fight; and (as a Father) tries once more, what perswasion can operate; he dictates a pathetique letter mixt of love and anger, reproving, perswading, diswading, promising pardon, and puts him in mind he was or should be at least his joy and comfort, he had no mo sonnes nor grand children; Myrad Zedda (once the Princes Tutor or Schoolemaster) carries it, who so forceably pene∣trates the yeelding conceits and nature of Sha Selym, that, forthwith taking Perwees his little sonne along) he leaves Halabassa, passes Semena, and after two dayes more (the Wizard allowing the day fortunate) with all his Um∣braves he arrives in Agray, and by Mortoza-Kawn is brought to Ecbars pre∣sence, then in the Guzel-Chan; who blushing to eye him so, leads him into the Mahael (or private lodging) where (forgetting his promise) remem∣bring the dances Selym had led him, into such a rage that rapt him, that,The Prince submits. af∣ter he had flasht terrour into his heart, by the sparkling fury of his eyes, and thunder struck him, with a storme of mighty words, with his fist he struck him so hard so oft upon the mouth, that Selym throwing himselfe down, re∣quests his Father at once to punish him, showes him his brest, the sword and hand ready to it. But Ecbar by this surfetting of choller intends no such sa∣crifice,
but commanding him to arise, derides him and termes him Asse and Foole, that commanding seventy thousand able men, would so doltishly forsake them to trust the sugred and deceitfull promises of a reconciled Enemie. That said, he brings him forth againe, and sends him back to pri∣son, giving all the Vmbraves his associates like welcome, Radgee Batso ex∣cepted, who (wiser than the rest) escaped. By this imprisonment, Sha Se∣lym contrary to his custome abstaines foure & twenty houres from Opium, which next day Ecbar himselfe gave him; and the third day by intercession of his Ladyes and Concubines, is freed and sent to his owne home, where he behav'd himselfe very orderly, in princely sort each day visiting Ecbar, till by some old mens malitious surmises, he is restrain'd againe and the Mo∣gull exasperated. But the folly of his unnaturall and ill grounded ran∣cour is not destinate against that object, the jealousie of his braine throw∣ing it upon Mirza Gashaw (the Viceroy of Tutta's sonne) for speaking one word, by Ecbar ill taken and interpreted. No recantation will satisfie, his life must pay it, the Kings Physitian is commanded to prepare two Pills of like shape but contrary operation, Gashaw is trusted with them, and brings them Ecbar,The great Mogul poy∣sons himself. who (imagining by a private mark hee knew the right one) bids Gasha swallow one and himselfe the other. Gasha ignorant of any deceit by chance devoures the best, and Ecbar is poysoned; too soone, too late the miserable Mogul perceives his mischance, repents his choller, and (for shame concealing the cause) after foureteene dayes violent torment and trialls to expell the poyson, yeelds up his ghost; and having victori∣ously reigned five and twenty yeares, in the 73 yeare of his age is by all his Umbraves with all possible state and solemnity in Tzekander three course from Agra in a new begun Monument, buried: and Sha Selym (though a while resisted by Radgee Mansingh and Chan Asem, who in vain endeavoured to make his sonne Cushroo Mogull,Sha-Selym crowned great Mo∣gull. nominated by Ecbar as they alledged) with such ceremony as was requisite is crowned by name of Iangheer, King. In the yeare of our Lord God 1604. and of Mahomet 984. We are now to present you upon the Asiatique stage, various Scaenes compos'd of a miscelany of subjects, excellent and remarkable. A.D. 1604. A.H. 984.Iangheer (so now we call him) by mediation of Morteza Chan, Cooly Ma∣metchan and others, receives Sultan Coshroe (or Gushrow) his late compe∣titor (and sonne) into favour: and (to begin his greatnesse in the good will of his people) receives Cham Asem and Radgee into grace againe. But Cush∣rooe (struck by his own guilt) suspects his pardon counterfeit, and entreats by letter Hussanbeg▪ (Viceroy of Cabul) his old friend, to meet him neere Fettypore with some Forces, that by his love and care he might fly away, assured if he stay'd long at Court, of death or blinding: by his Zantell the letter is speedily delivered him, who as readily obeyes the disconsolate Prince with three thousand horse posting to Achbar-pore (from Agra foure and twenty courses) whither the Prince (escaping in the twy-light from Court) comes, follow'd by five hundred young Gallants, and altogether hasten towards Lahore. Iangheer has immediate notice of his sonnes flight, and resenting how dangerous it might prove, charges Godgee Melec Allybeg, Captaine of the Guard, with such force as was about him to pursue Cushroo and bring him back, for which he should want no acknowledgement. The
Cutwall, with three hundred horse, rides after him, and Mortaza-Chan with fifteene hundred horse, all night posts after Godgee; yea after both, Iang∣heer himselfe (perswaded to it by Mirza Vmbrave) with fifty Elephants and eight thousand men: so that the poore Prince was every way pursued, yet such was the haste Hassanbeg made afore them, that none of the three came neere him by fifteene courses, (yea though all the way they spoiled the Villages, and made havock of all they could prey upon) and in the ninth day attain'd Lahore; but intending to enter the Castle, are kept out by Ebrahim Chan the Governour (premonisht of the Princes flight) and which was worse, by Sayet Chan (three course from the Citie, and in his way to Bange the place of his government, making as if hee would joyne with him, upon the river is imprisoned; but by bribe escaping returnes to Hussan; and receiving there a guilded bait) brought by Zalaladen Hassen, that the King passing by all offences, had assigned him the Provinces of Ca∣bul and Banasoed; with which seeming not contented, desires the addition of Zerhynd, all being but to dally and allure his stay till Iangheer came to catch him. Yet, the Prince is not so simple, but that hee discovers his Fa∣thers subtilties, so that after three weekes vaine attempt to sack the Castle, he forsakes the Citie, and with twenty thousand horse moves back againe, with a full determination to bid Iangheer battell. It happened, that hee pitcht one night, where Mortosa-Kawn with six hundred horse (hearing of Gushrooes comming) was ambushed; without any parlee, Mortosa falls upon him, but such was the premeditated care Hussan had of the place and fight, that in two houres space their Enemies were shrewdly beaten, and Sha-Chelyal the Captaine slaine; so that had not Godgee Meleck with the Kings standard entred, proclaiming with great out-cries that the great Mogull was at hand, the Kings side had wholly perished: but of such terrour was the Kings approach (past Sultanpore) that Abdul Rajea the Princes Ensigne-bearer most basely threw it away and fled; and by his dastardly example all the Army, most of them being by the rustick time-serving people chast and knockt downe, and all the baggage seized on. The King in memory of this deliverance and victory erects there, at Tziekerry i.e. a place of hunting, a stately Castle, and new names the place (which I have formerly descri∣bed) Fettipore, that is, a Paradise. Fettipore, if the water had bin good,Fettipore. by this time had triumphed over all the Cities in Indya: 'tis wall'd about, and to the N.N.W. discovers a lake or fish-pond five miles over. The N.E. has a faire Buzzar five hundred paces long, and well paved, built on all sides with pleasant Mansions: at one end is the Moguls house, and a Mohol most excellently framed: the other side is glorious in a Mosque ascended by thirty steps barr'd with a brave gate, in all so observable, that it is scarce equall'd throughout Indya: the top is full of Piramyds, the court within six times bigger than the Royall Exchange in London, singularly paved with free stone, the Iles are large and paved, the columns of one stone high & beau∣tifull, and affronting this gate is a most sumptuous Monument, covered with paint and Oyster pearle shells, proud in the Kalender there buried. The miserable Prince (accompanied with Hassenbeg, Abdul-Radgee, and Chan Badashaw) scarce lookes behind him till they attaine Lahore, where Radgee stayes; but Sultan Gushroo with Badasha crosse the Ravee, and labour
to arrive with safety at Rantas a Castle inexpugnable: but bad fortune fol∣lowes them; for, passing the river Tzenob, by the trecherous watermen they are brought into the power of Cassem-chawns sonnes (then besieging the Castle) who without delay & mercy speedily convay them to Iangheer, by that time past Latir a floud seven dayes travell thence. The King overjoyed with this good hap, returns to Lahore, and by the way puts to death many Vmbraves the Princes followers. The Prince was committed to the cu∣stody of Zemanaebeg (called after, Mahobet-chan, i. e. beloved Lord;) Hassenbeg, Bedasha, and Abdul Radgee are first publiquely disgrac't, and then imprisoned. Whether some Noblemen reputed Iangheer tyrannicall, or that they thought Gushroo had better title to the Empire, or that meere envie caused it, is uncertaine; but one of these so wrought, that one night some prime men of quality watching the Prince, agreed upon a conspiracie to take away the Mogulls life upon the high mountaines as he passed to Cabul, and to place Gushroo in his roome; the Traytors were Mirza Cherieff (brother of Assaph chan) Mirza Mouradyn his Cozen, Mirza Petulla, Mirza Shaf∣fenbeg, Hollabeg, and Murdoph-chan. Iangheer suspecting no treachery pas∣ses on, but by good fortune is so attended, that they could by no meanes effect their villany. In the interim, Ethaman Doulet the Treasurer is ac∣cus'd by one of his slaves to have converted to his owne use, and for th'in∣couragement of Traytors, 500000 roopees out of the Mogulls Trea∣sury; that, and the newes of Cheer Affenchan (Ethaman Doulets sonne in law) his trecherous murther of Cotopdy Mamet-chan Goga (Liefetenant of Bengala neere Radgee Mahal, (albeit Affenchann the Turk therefore was al∣so slaine by Gessadine and Kisswer-Chawn, brother and sonne to the Liefete∣nant, his Mother and Wife most basely abused) yet these reflected so much upon Doulet, that he is not only put from his place, but also his estate con∣fiscated and himselfe in Dianet-Chans house, to his owne great griefe and the astonishment of all Industan, imprisoned. But greater was Iangheers feare and choler, when by the open and reso∣lute defiance of Godgee Vehes hee is acquainted with the late named conspi∣racie, by men of power, such as he never injured, and as had relation to be neere him in all occasions; he is much confounded at it, but by Myrza Vm∣braves advice, throwes off all abject feare, and without more dispute or delay commands them all to execution, onely Ethaman Danlet at the re∣quest of his Keeper is pardoned (upon promise of 200000 roopees to the King and him for his life) but led back to prison most disgracefully. After which, he returnes (from Cabul) unto Lahore, and in the way remembring the danger he had escaped, and that Gushroo his sonne was partly causer, he commands his sonnes eyes by juice of Aeck to be forsetted, but the poy∣son is more mercifull, leaving one eye a little illuminated. Chan Asem also (Gushroo's Father in law) is clad in loathsome raggs and brought into the Guzelchan, where every Vmbrave is commanded to spet in his beard and face, is then fetterd, manacled, and led to prison, where two full yeares he remained, till by mediation of his wives he is delivered. This yeare anno 1609 Currown and other of his friends prevailed with the King that (to make his way the easier to the Crowne) his kinsmen
Sha-Selims brothers sonnes might be Christned: which accordingly was done in Agra and not without solemnity. The Jesuits named them Philippo, Carlo, and Henrico: most men thought them undone, but God knows they were bettered. That yeare also they baptised another Grandson of Ecbars by name of Don Edoard. This yeare 1019. and of our account 1609. Mirza Ombrave became apoplectique, and made incapable of his office: T'zalam-chan also in Cotopdy's place is made Viceroy of Bengala, and commanded to send up as prisoners, Affen-chans family; which hee did accordingly. In the way, the young Widdow Meher-Metzia (Daulets daughter and sister to Asseph-chan) was affronted by a Wizard who told her many stories of her insuing greatnesse, which after hapned: for they were no sooner arriv'd at Agray (whither Iangheer was also come) but are most kindly welcomed by Rockya Sultanna the mother Queene: and, one day being led into the Mahal with her little Girle, Iangheer accidentally lifts up her vayle, and discovers so rare and forceable a beauty, that thenceforward she is the sum of all he contemplates: hee studies now how to advance Doulet her de∣jected Father, the better to ingratiate himselfe into the affection of his faire Goddesse; hee forgets his state, and privatly each eve passes by boat to Ethaman Doulets house, and all night consumes himselfe and pretious time in wanton lookes and amorous dalliances: but to enjoy her everlastingly, at length commands Godzee Abdul Hossen to request Dawlets good will in his daughter, for hee meant to marry her; Hossen admires it, and layes be∣fore him the indignity he offers so great a Majesty; but Iangheer (now Cu∣pids slave) is deafe and blind; in choller bids him goe, or stay eternally. He speeds away and uses small perswasions: for Ethaman Dawlet (by this mi∣racle rapt from his discontented Orbe) after some profession of his base∣nesse, condiscends: and Meher Metsya is forthwith espoused with all solem∣nity, her name changed into Noursha begem (or Nor-mahal) i.e. light or glory of the Court, her Father is advanced above all other Umbraves, her brother Assaph-chan and most of her generation with th'addition of honors, wealth, or command exceedingly graced and established: and in this sun-shine of happinesse and content Iangheer spends some yeares without regarding ought save Cupids Currantoes. Anno 1610. of the Hegira 990. and the sixth yeare of his raigne,A.M. 5580 A.D. 1610 A. Heg. 990 Sultan Sherryar the Prince (under tutorship of Mortesa-chan) is sent Viceroy to Guzurat. Chan-Iehan to Brampore; and Mahobet-chan with an Army against Radgee Rana, or Rabanna of Mandou, at that instant time rebellious: the Country also of Radjea Cottz (a branch of Bengala) was that yeare sub∣jected under the Imperiall Crowne of Industan, by Tzalamchan a warie Captaine: during which, Mahobet-chan (by that time in Ranaes Provinces) goes on victoriously, and forces many Holds and Castles from those indo∣mitable Indyans, but (by envie of some at Court) is call'd home in the best of his endeavours, and Abdul-chan made Generall of his Company: this alteration did not much alter the estate of the Army, for he prosecutes Ra∣na with no lesse hast and fury, in conclusion urging him to a set battell at Siss-meer, where he got the better, chasing Radgee to Oudepore and Porman∣dell, killing many of his men, inriching themselves with abundance of spoile and Captives, and after much toyle and some losse, sackt Syavend
(Rana's strongest Castle) till then judg'd impregnable; wherein they had store of warlike provision,A.M. 5580. A.D. 1610. A. Heg. 990. and many valuable pagods or devils, which for above 1000 yeares had stood there superstitiously adored; these the Ma∣hometans burnt, and in place of them, reared a stupendious Mosque or Fabrique of Idolatry. Abdul-Cawn so fortunatly ordred the warre against Rana, that Iangheer the great Mogull sends him thanks, and desires him to live a while in Gusarat, by all possible meanes not onely to curb, but ex∣tirpate that rascall race of Coolyes and Bielsgrates that so unjustly and thee∣vishly robd the Caffilaes and lived upon honest passengers: he failes not in that command, for with fifteene thousand horse hee searches and pursues them in all places where he knew they lurked, and after many petty en∣counters tooke Eder their retreating place (70 course from Amadavad) yea fell upon them such time as they were all united, & put them to flight, slew halfe their company together with Lael-Cooly their Generall, whose head he sent to Amadabat, and commanded (as a memoriall of his victory, and to the terrour of all such Rebels) that it should be set upon a pinacle. Cawn-Iehan (during these broiles) wayting all occasions of conquest in Decan, by discord and envie of some Umbraves in the Army, finds his suc∣cesse worse and worse against Melec Amber. He knowes no remedy with∣out acquainting the Mogull, and entreating one of his sonnes to come thi∣ther, by whose greatnesse the Army might be better ordered. After some consideration, he sends Sultan Perwees and Radjea Ramdas who from Bram∣pore sends Chan Iehan, Radgee Ramdas, and Mansingh with an Army to Ballagate, where they send defiance to Melec, and ere long expect him: but Iangheer fearing the forces of Decan speeds Chan Asem with foure thou∣sand men more, and removes his Lescar to Asmeer, a place convenient for hunting: Chan Asem is no sooner come to Brampore, but entreats Ganganna (Lieutenant of Khoor) to joyne with him, and so hastens towards Bellagu∣ate, then in all 100000 men, 600 Elephants, and 12000 Camells, yea of such fame, grew this expedition, that ere they departed Cuncam they were 600000. With these huge Troops, Abdul-chan penetrates into the heart of Decan: no resistance is made by men in field, Towns, or Cittadells, so that in Beder, Aurdenagar, Gentfro and as farre as Kerchy (the seat Royall) they marcht victoriously; burning, spoiling, and imprisoning; Villages, Temples, and Inhabitants not to be counted. The Decan King (struck with feare & astonisht at their numbers) flies too and fro, nor resting any where, till he came to Daultabat, (ten miles from Kerky) a Castle reputed im∣pregnable. Some small skirmishes and ambuscadoes fell upon the Indyans, but to small purpose, so that Melec Amber consults by some deceitfull po∣licie to doe, what by force hee dared not adventure at, (albeit Mamet Lary and Wackhyl Adel-chun were new come to ayd him with above 20 thou∣sand horse, and some expert infantery) hee writes connterfeit letters, di∣rected from some Radgees about Iangheers Court, containing a private cer∣tainty of the Mogulls death, and of Curroons advancement; these he gives in charge to a crafty Bannyan, who circling as if hee came from Agray, is imprison'd as a spy, his letters read, and with their lying contents so asto∣nished, that without more consultation (giving credit to them) they di∣vide the Army, quit all such places where they had placed Garrisons, and
with confused haste speed home, each Captaine to his owne command and place of residence; Sultan Perwees to Brampore, Abdulchan to Surrat, and Chan Asem towards Agra, giving Amber easie re-admittance to al his Towns and Castles; which otherwise, without long warre, much hazard and vast expence would hardly have bin recovered. But so soone as Iangheer had in∣telligence of that their levity, he rages, & is halfe mad with anger, threat∣ning them all with punishment, and commanding Mahobet Chan to goe Go∣vernor to Brampore: and such was the incredible haste and good luck he had and used, hee subjects Berar, and devastates the Decan Empire unto Kerky returning triumphant and satiate for Melecks treachery: by which, Iangheer is partly pacified, but more, when (by Curroons intreaty, having first by many battels and pursuits tyred him) Rana Radjea presents himselfe, his sonne, and many gifts, amongst which an Elephant valued at 100000 roo∣pees, submitting all he had, by Iangheer to be disposed of, who embraces him with all affection, and offers his sonne his daughter, and returnes him the government of Pormandel, Oodepore, and other places; but soone after, (whether for griefe he had submitted, or some other cause) hee died, and with much ceremony amongst his noble progenitors, is buried.Rana Rad∣gea dies. Iangheer, having consumed eighteene moneths in ease and pleasure at Mandou, departs, & comes to Amadavad, where he discharged Abdul-chan, and ordaines him Viceroy of Calpi and Khoor: and after 12 moneths pastime and luxury there, returnes to Agray: Anno 994. and of our account 1614. That yeare, Chabeeg, Governour of Chandahar was displac't (by reason of his age) and Badar-chan there placed. Tzediat-chan also is sent to succeed Tzalam-chawn in Bengala, but at that time Ozman-chan a Patanian with a mighty Army besieging Daeck (the Metropolis:) hee and Ethaman-chawn with fifteene thousand men give Ozman battell, which is bravely fought on both sides; but by reason of a mad Elephant, on which Ozman sate, Tze∣diat-chan is unhorst and maymed, yea the Mogulls Forces discomfited: but by strange chance, a wounded man seeing Osman passe by, transfixes him, and by that the Patanians give back and at length fly, the Mogulls not only recovering Daeck, but piercing into the Gentiles Country, captivated his wife and children, forraging at pleasure, and making all his wealth (which was great, & sent to Agray) a joyfull testimony of their valour. That yeare the Mogull journeyed to Lahore. Abdul-chawn, after seven weekes triall arrives at Calpi where and of Koor he was to receive the government: he straightway executes his Com∣mission, in small time quieting and destroying those swarmes of rebellious Rashbotes till then there abounding; levelling their most defensive places with the ground; making sale of so many of the Inhabitants as pay'd the charges of the warre, amounting to 200000 roopees and upwards. Chan Asem also about this time goes Ambassadour from Iangheer to Abbas the Persian.Chan-Asem goes Ambas∣sadour to Persia. Not any in mans memory went more richly furnisht with Pre∣sents, or more bravely attended. He presented the King (then at Spahawn) twelve chests of choise linnen, and two with Shashes woven with gold and silver, many daggers whose hafts were richly set with stones of value, estee∣med at 70000 roopees. And for his owne port and travell had an addition out of the Mogulls Exchequer of sixty thousand roopees more, the better
to represent the Majesty of so great an Emperor. Abbas entertaines the Ambassador triumphantly, and wearies him with invitations, shows, sports, and pastimes: and at his departure makes five hundred Coselbashes, Ali∣culicawn, Rustan-beg and other Noblemen to attend him two dayes Iour∣ney towards Candahar, recommending his well-wishes to the Mogul in a present of five hundred swift and excellent Coursers, twenty Mules of great assize and beauty, five hundred Asses, one hundred and fifty Dromi∣daries, (or rather Cooselbash Camels) eighteene chests or Sandoughs full of delicate carpets and bezars; 20 Camels load of Shyraz wine, and eight of conserv'd Dates, pistachoes, &c: all which were with much affection re∣ceived by Iangheer, who that yeare journeyed to participate the plea∣sures of Cassimere, having first transferd Mahobet-chan from Brampore to Kabul and Banges. KABUL by Ptolomy in his 6 Book and 18 chapter cald Chabura (on the North confin'd by Caucasus, on the East with Cassmeer and Kakar) is now subject to the Mogul, but formerly to the Tartar and Persian: the name from the Siriaque signifies sterill, and agrees with the nature of the country, which is cold and windie; not over fruitfull, save where the Nylob fattens her; a river (by Ptolomy cald Choa) which hence arising, streames South into Indus, and is one of those five, which with her wan∣der into the sea. The City Cabul, is from Lahore twelve good dayes jour∣ney, hilly and dangerous; the people most part Bannians; the houses are low and strong; in nothing more observable than the Serrays or common Inns, and two well fortified Castles; in one of which was Babur borne, and swayed; from whom in three descents Iangheer is descended. Sultan Cushroo (upon his Fathers remove to Cassmeer) is taken from the custody of Assaph cawn and given to Cawn-Iehan to looke unto. Cheq'-Cassem is also made Leifetenant of Bengala in his brother Tzalam-cawns steed. Cherram-cawn (Tzalam-cawns sonne) hearing of his Vncles com∣ming (who ever hated him;) from Daeck travels towards Agra with all his Fathers wealth to give up an accompt to the Mogul; but in the way, neere Radgee-Mahal, Cassem-cawn meets him, takes violently away his best Elephants and some other things of value, which being by his Nephew to the full related, Cassem is immediatly displaced, disgrased, and Ebrahim-cawn (Queene Normalls cosen) estated in his place; meeting at Radgee-Com with Cassem-cawn (who with all his goods and people were packing away) Ebrahim demands restitution of the Elephants he tooke from Cher∣am-cawn, but Cassem is so inraged at these successive indignities, that after some foule words they fall to blowes, and in the skirmish Cassem finding his party weakest, retyres to his Haram, murders his miserable concubynes, flyes away, and leaves Ebrahym possessor of all his treasure; who by assent of some Umbraves, and most of the vulgar sort, is admitted Governor; after which hee falls upon Moeckham (the rebell) defeats him and his braving forces, killing some and selling others, yea inriches himselfe with so much spoyle, and arrogates so much glory, that Iangheer (in token of thanks) sends him a horse, a battle-axe, and a dagger; and as an augmentation of honour from Ebrahym, changes his name into Pherooz-Iehan-cawn. The same season Martasa cawn was sent by the King to beseige Changra (a
Castle so fenced by Art and Nature, as made many judge it invincible, and the rather, for contemning the best the Kings of Delly of many times could do against it,) notwithstanding all which, Martasa (after much danger of ambushments in that thick Wood, seventy miles broad, and trouble in passing his men over high and fearfull rocks) lay eight months before it, and then in despight of their best defence entred it, and subjected it to the Mogul; though he lived not three months after to meditate his victory. Which, when Iangheer heard, with a mixture of joy and sorrow, he leaves Cassemeer and removes to Lahore, where Sultan Cushrooe (the true idea of misery) is by perswasion of the Queene and Assaph-cawn taken from Cawn-Iehan, and put to Curroon to be his keeper. At that time, Iangheer affected his sonne Curroon beyond measure, imagi∣ning no honour too much, no command too great for so brave a Prince, so hopefull a warrior; so that (little knowing what would follow) hee gives him the charge of forty thousand horse, and attended by Godjea-Ab∣dul-Hussan and other great Umbraves hastens him to the conquest of Decan: and to spoyle the Kingdomes of Gulcunda and Visiapore, for omit∣ting their annuall Tribute of three pound weight of Diamonds. This yeare 1619 of Maho. 1029 Abdul-Azies-cawn succeeds Bador-cawn the Ouzbeg in his command of Candahar; Cawn-Iehan is made Leifetenant of Mult'an and Buchor; Sultan Perwees of Pathan: and Radgee Bertsingh Bondela, and Abdul-cawn, Governours of Kalpi, are commanded to raise some forces and follow Sultan Curroon into Decan. Sultan Currowne (by this time having leavied his forces,A.D. 1619. A. Heg. 999 and made all ready for his enterprize upon Decan) first commands all men to intitle him Sha-Iehan, or King of Hearts; then, with his whole Army in goodly equipage, travels to Brampore the Rendezvous, and whither Abdul-cawn and Radgee Bertzingh (according to command) come and wait upon him, with Thedder-cawn his Cosen, and many other Rashpootes of quality. Cur∣roon (for by that name wee can best remember him) swelling beyond measure to see himselfe Generall of so brave an Army, dallyes not, but with all speed gives order to Abdul cawn, Lala-Ragee Bertzingh, Abdul-Hassen, and many other Umbraves, to begin the Warre with Melec-Amber: and that he & the residue would follow them; Mirza Mackey and Shadour-cawn march to Gulcunda against Cotobel Melec; and Ma'met Tacky to Visi∣apore against Adel-cawn, either to receive by force or faire meanes the accustomed tribute due to the Dyadem of Iudustant. Abdul-cawn in the first place to effect his Commission,Bellagate. passes on without any let to Bellagate (a fastidious mountaine twixt Cunca and Decan, and for ought I know, may be Hippocura in Ptolomy) Curroon bringing up the other part of the Army at fifteene miles distance, to succour the Van on all occasions: the King of Decan at all advantages seekes to intercept them, opponing in many petty skirmishes; but Abdul-cawn (formerly acquainted with his ro∣domontadoes) passes on, burning and spoyling what they met withall; not resting till they came to Kerki (the Kings best house) which they levelled with the ground, inriching themselves with store of prey and treasure,Kerki. reducing Berar and Chandys into subjection, and forcing composition from all the Country as far as Amnadagar, and Tribute from the Kings of Gul∣cunda and Visiapore;
Iangheer is over joyed with so much good Fortune; and (to relish it the better) solaces himselfe in his sonne Perwees Gardens beyond the river. Ethaman Dowlet (Queene Normals Father) dyed at that time; his great estate is by the King given to his daughter and Assaph-cawn, but his Office is confer'd upon Godgee Abdul Hossen. Curroon also (who sate as Em∣perour in his owne ambition) with a greedy eye respects the Diadem; but perceives his imprisoned Brother interposing in the way: but such is the violence and magicke of pride and tyranny, that it runs on not caring how, though masqued with never so much deformity: he feignes himselfe sick; (his disease is horrible) nothing can recover him save his eldest Bro∣thers death; Ganganna is of his infernall councell, who applauds his hu∣mour, and promises his recovery; he presently acquaints some Mancebdars in the exployt, of all which rascall troope Reza (or Rajea Bandor) a very villain, is quickest of apprehension and least scrupulous; Curroon (as if he knew nothing) is conveighed out of Brampore to better his health; whiles that incarnate Divell at an unseasonable houre in the night knocks at Gou∣shroo's chamber,A.D. 1620. A. heg. 1000. who (as awakened out of a fearfull dream) starts up and de∣mands his errant; the villain replyes, he came from the Mogul his Father, with order for his delivery. The miserable Prince (affrighted with his Ravens voyce, and suspecting treason) desires him to stay till the morne: the villain (without further parlee, perceiving no entrance by entreaty) breaks open his doore, grapples with the amazed Prince, gets him downe and strangles him: that done, he layes him in his bed, locks the doore, and trots away as if the Prince dyed of some imposthume, and hee had done nothing. Curroon has quick newes of his Brothers death, and in∣wardly rejoyces; but ere Sun-rise, his afflicted wife (Cawn Azems daugh∣ter) goes to visit him; where finding him speechlesse, and (by his contus'd face) murdered; never did poore wretch shed more teares, or shew more passion; by tearing her faire hayre, deforming her sweet face so fiercely, so amazedly, that her Father and all his family heare her, and see it to their griefe and admiration. But when they see the cause also, they wonder not, none of them forbearing to expresse their sorrow after severall modes, without moderation. All Brampore rings of this Treason, suspects the author, and curses him; but Curroon, (cloath'd with deceipt) comes thither, falls upon the corps, and expresses so much sorrow, that many durst have sworne that he was innocent. After two dayes ceremony, they bury him, and Curroon writes his Father word of his brothers sudden death (concealing the occasion.) Iangheer weeps, and afterwards growes mad with rage, suspecting some violence; but not knowing upon the sud∣den how to discover it, he feeds upon melancholy and discontent, writes back a letter of reproofe and threats to Curroon and his Umbraves, swea∣ring revenge when they least suspected it; commands the body to be digd up, and brought with solemne state to Elabasse, where hee interres him in his Mothers monument; sends for Chan Asem and his afflicted daughter, comforts them, and takes them for his constant companions; to Sultan Bullochy or B'lochy his grandson (sonne to Prince Gushrooe) he intailes the Imperiall Crowne, gives him the command of ten thousand horse, and by Chan Asem his Grandsire (of the blood royall of Tartary) to be educated.
Curroon, by his Fathers love to Sultan Bullochy, perceives himselfe dis∣regarded, and thenceforth (not caring to please him) flies out into rebel∣lion. And Abdul-chan (winding his aymes) without leave taking, forsakes the Army and packs to Kalpi to his government, but by the Mogull (who was still desirous to continue the Decan warres) is rebuked and made to re∣turne. Yet ere long he is revoked, for at that time Abbas King of Persia with 30000 men besieges Kandahor, pretending it a member of his Em∣pire. The Citie was defended by Azief-chan, a Captaine of great valour and honesty, who for sixteene dayes kept it in despight of the Persian, but perceiving his Company too weake if they entred, hee writes to Iangheer, desiring speedy assistance. Iangheer is neerely touched with his distresse, and promises him imme∣diate succour; so that, posting to Lahore, he convocates his Vmbraves for advice and help, and first, commands Chan Iehan (then Liefetenant of Mul∣than, adjoyning Kandahar) with such force as he had in readinesse to haste thither, the Enemy in the interim attempting day and night the entrance, whiles Iangheer the great Mogull, ruminates whom to make his Generall; at last, by his owne assent and choise of all his Vmbraves, hee fixes upon Abdul-chan, by that, by Curroons leave againe returned. This famous Cap∣taine readily accepts the charge, speeds to Lahore, and is imbraced with such sudden joy by the Mogull, that hee presently contracts his faire grand daughter (D'haen Shaws child) to Mirza-chawn, Abdul-chawns eldest sonne, and so with fifteene thousand choise Cavalry, and one hundred Elephants, (five thousand of which hee himselfe brought with him) makes haste to give battell to the victorious Persian. But ere hee could attaine thither, Iangheer (having notice that the Persians were too strong to be beaten, and had vowed the conquest) by letters commands Azief-chan to surrender it unto the Enemy, but he, doubting they were counterfeit, holds out, till by a Mine, a great part of the wall is blown up, and Abbas is entring; which when Azieph-chan saw, hee mediates their yeelding it up, upon condition they might depart safely with their baggage. Abbas (who onely aymed at the Citie) condiscends, has it given him, wherein hee places Ally-Koli-cawn and returnes to Spahawn, whiles Assuph and Abdul-chan easily goe back to Lahore, where with welcome, by Iangheer they are entertained. CANDAHOR has Artick elevation foure and thirty degrees,Candahor. and longi∣tude from the first Meridian 98 degrees. The Province (South) is reasonable fruitfull, and redundant in all good things, yet by reason of so many Car∣ravans passing, and repassing from Lahore to Persia, all sort of provision is very deere, and the passage (in regard of many rascall troopes of Puttans, Agwans and Coolyes, which like the inhospitable Arabs prey upon all Caffi∣laes) chargeable and dangerous. The Citie is not very spatious, but strong; made defensive by many helps of nature and industry; to the South and East it is surrounded with an advantagious wall, to the West and North with high and precipitious mountaines. The Suburbs also (tho not well defended) are large, adding to the Citty, beauty and wealth; nothing want∣ing save good water, which there & all the way to Spahawn is brackish, and the earth for most part barren and uncomfortable. Iangheer, by the crafty perswasion of Assaph-chawn, sends him with pe∣remptory
command to the Castle-keeper of Agra, that without delay hee should transferre the treasure thence to Lahore, where hee then was (and resol'd to be of long time) abiding. It was a message of much wonder to Ethamat-chan, considering the strength where it was kept, his owne ho∣nesty, the danger of convaying so great a masse of gold and silver, a journey so long, so chargeable, and dangerous. These and many other perswasions hee used to Assaph kawn, but in vaine, had they beene trebled. So that on the one side, haste, threats, and the Mogulls command is urged; on the other, delay, disswasions, and diverting Iangheers meaning to another sense is objected on either part so violently, that from words, blowes became their uncivill moderatours. But in that exercise Assaph-chan (for all his greatnesse) found himselfe weakest, finding the Eunuchs Guard so strong, and Ethabar-chan Provost of Agray to second him: so that, he craves their pardon, and after some toyle, by many dissimulations at length wins them to his purpose. But, whiles the Eunuchs are preparing for the journey, this deceitfull man with all speed posts away a swift Zantell (or Footman) to his sonne in law Curroon (then upon the confines of Decan) advising his speed, and to ambush 'twixt Agra and Delly for his Fathers Treasure. The Prince (compos'd of courage and ambition) receives the letter with much joy,Curroon pre¦pares to rob his Fathers Exchequer. and without any check of conscience or respect of loyalty, immediatly commands all his Vmbraves out of such Provinces his Father had assign'd him, even from Brampore to Surrat, and all Gambaya to Amadabat; the Go∣vernors of Surrat, Baroch, Iaunbasser, Medapore, & of the marittim coast, Go∣ga, Diul, Nagsary, Mangerelpore, and Onnepore; as also out of Mandow, Gan∣dersee, Oudepore, Baraer, Amnadagar, &c. in a rebellion and enterprise so in∣famous and full of perill, desirous to ingage all his Lieutenants, to bring them under like hatred, and in some sort to oblige their dependance upon his acts and fortunes: and so, with a brave and sturdy Army of 70000 horse, he sets on towards Mandoa, if he intended a contrary Progresse:Mandow. Mandow (threescore courses from Brampore) is a Towne both antient and famous; seated on the side of a lofty precipitious hill, and ambitious in a Castle strong and stately, imcompast with a defensive wall of five miles (the whole had fifteen mile circuit) but the Citie later built, is of lesse assise yet fresher beauty, whether wee behold the Temples, (in one of which are intomb'd foure Kings) Pallaces, or Fortresses; especially that Tower elevated one hundred and seventy steps, supported by massie pillars, and adorn'd with gates and windowes very observable, and built by Chan Iehan who in it is buried: This Citie was lately owned by the Kings of Delly, till such time as Homayon the Mogull rapt it from Sheck Sha Selym King of Delly, at his re∣turne from Persia, whither Selym had forced him. From Baroch 'tis distant 150 English miles. Curroon after two dayes rest in Taxapore hasts away with such velocity, that his Army (ignorant of his intent) thought hee was mad, every day posting above forty miles, so that in thirteene dayes with all his troopes he attained Fettipore from Brampore neere 500 miles; yea ere Ethabar-chan knew of his being in the Country: but as it fell out, he made more haste, than good speed; for, long hee could not lurck with such a company, without the knowledge of Ethamat-cawn the carefull Treasurer; who (as if all the Enemies in the world were approaching)
unloads the Camels of their pretious burthens, convaies it in again, fortifies the Castle, and sends quickly to Iangheer of his sonnes trayterous intenti∣on, who is astonisht above measure, and presently sends every way for assi∣stance, to Sultan Perwees out of Pathan, to Chan-Iehan out of Multhan, and for Mahobet-chan out of Kabull; whiles Curroon (perceiving he was discove∣red) with his whole Army divided amongst severall Captaines, Ganganna, Rustan-chan, Radgee Bickermanse, Mirza-Darab, Sayet-chan, Mahomet Tack∣jeck, Tsossally, &c. shew themselves in front of Agray, making a bravado, as if the conquest were easie and no way doubled of. But the two Eunuchs keepe close in their defended Sconces, whiles Radgee Bickermanse at Cur∣roons intreaty, begins the churlish play, followed by Byrambeg, Rustanchan, Wazir-chan and Darab, whose onset tho it was full of gallant force and fury, yet Ethabar-Chan, desirous to sacrifice his best endeavours to expresse his loyalty retaliates such entertainment, that after three houres triall, having lost five hundred men, without any prevailing they retreat, well beaten and ashamed; so that (converting their power upon a more hopefull way) they draw back and fall a rifling the houses of such Vmbraves as were like∣ly to have booty. Byrambeg begins with the house of Mirza Abdull, Chan Azems sonne, but finds such hot and unexpected welcome that hee was forc't out, not without amazement. Howbeit, Radgee Bickermanse entred with better fortune Assaph-chans (which in this tumult found no excep∣tion) out of which they drew twenty leck of roopees; Rustan-chan out of Lascar-chans 16 leck, and Darab from Nouradyn Cooly's, ten; In all, about threescore leck of roopees, after which base theft, (as if they had done wonders) with great triumph they returned to Fettipore. Curroon, after three weekes stay about Fettipore; finding it impossible by force or subtilty to obtain the treasure, and no more prey in those parts, resolves to march back and give his Father battell, whom hee heard (from Assaph-chawn) was comming. To which end, after double allowance to each souldier, and protestations of his kind remembrances, hee retreats to∣wards Delly, in five dayes attaining Pherrybaud ten course from Delly, at such time as Iangheer with his Army pitcht three course from the Towne, and seven from Curroons trenches. Very early next morne, Curroon (longing to graspe the Diadem) com∣mands Radgee Byckermanse to begin the fight with eight thousand horse, against whom, Iangheer the great Mogull opposes Mahobet-chan, Abdul-Chan, Ethabar chan, Assaph-cawn, Godgee Abdel Hussan, Zadoc-chan, Immirza Mamet, Radgee Bertsingh, Tzeer-chan, Seberdeest-chan, and other principall Vmbraves; by advice of Mahobet-chan dividing the whole Army into three. One part to himselfe and Radgee Bertsingh, a second to Sultan Sheryar his yongest sonne and Mahomet-chan, the third to Abdul-chan and Zadoc-chawn: to all whom hee used many perswasions to fight bravely and with discre∣tion, as against exquisite warriours, most of which had beene in many con∣flicts; yet such was the justice of the cause, & each mans particular interest, that he knew they needed no exasperating. Then to each Commander (as they were entring combat) he sent some small token of his zeale, as re∣membrances of his love and ingagements upon his victory of great prefer∣ment: Zaber-deest-chan in the first place (carrying Abdulchan his Masters
present) by mischance falls among five hundred light horse of Curroons and perishes. Bickermanse with his large troop of horse, charges Bertsingh and the Moguls quarter so furiously, that many parted with their lives to expresse their loyalty. Whiles Ganganna and Curroon enter pelmell a∣gainst Mahobet-cawn, and Rustan-cawn with T'sossally upon Abdul-cawn, all which were Captaines of such valour and experience, and the armies on either side so irritate for honour and benefit, that for three houres the battell continued with rage, each part fighting so bravely, that no advan∣tage could be discovered, till victory at last inclines to Curroon, when Rad∣jea Byckermanse after a terrible slaughter of the Moguls squadron, in des∣pight of his guard, enters sternly (dyde in blood) Iangheers royall Tent, and arrested him as his prisoner, but he had scarcely meditated the greatnesse and excellency of his prize, when grim death directs the battle axe of a Mancebdar then in presence,Radjea Bic∣kermanse slaine, which fell so sore, so sure, that downe hee fell, with a curse breathing out his unwilling soule, and such terror into the hearts of his followers, that without any remembrance of their con∣quest, they all fled, and gave the Moguls part fresh advantage to re-inforce the victory. Curroon amazedly perceives upon the sudden his overthrow, and by and by has the reason of it. He does all hee can to alter their cowardize; he perswades, threats, opposes, and cries aloud that he was living, yea a hundred Captaines as good as Byckermanse were in the Army: but in vaine, for such was their preposterous feare and disorder, that he sees it impossi∣ble to revoke them: so that (vollying one a thousand curses, expressing all symptomes of rage and frenzie) he rides to and fro, not knowing whi∣ther he had better here put a period (by his death) to all future misfor∣tune, or to fly and hope for better afterwards: at last, by Ganganna's advice he hasts away, but leaves his men and treasure to the mercy of his enemies, and after long and swift flight with few of his freinds, attaines the desolate and high Mountaines of Mewat, in whose solitary rocks hee ruminates his misery and the justice of God upon his high rebellion. Sultan Perwees with a glad heart meets his victorious Father at Balzol; after which the Seralios are freed, and the Castle gates opened, as fearlesse of any more opposall. And now, the old Mogul cheeres up his late droo∣ping spirits, and solaces himselfe with Noormal, the light of his eyes, and the best object of his devotion: his delight and jocundities gave a faire occasion to Assaph-cawn, and Ganganna, to mediate a reconciliation for Curroon; and which the old man also inclined to; so that; from Asmeer, letters of peace and pardon are dispacht unto the rebellious Prince; who reads them with no small joy, and prepares for his submission: with Ganganna, Abdul cawn, Darab cawn, Beyram beg, and other Umbraves of quality, hee descends the Mountaines of Mewat, and through Bassawer, Hambyer and Lael-sod (unable to forbeare piltring all the way) at last hee came to Azmeer,Curroon it pardoned, but rebells afresh. where he throws himselfe at's Fathers feet, and upon his repentance and oath never more to fly out, is pardoned: but his submis∣sion (as by the sequell) appeared counterfeit, and upon this occasion. So soone as Rajea Bickermanse was slaine, Curroon in his place made Abdul-cawn Governor of Gusurat, Amadavad and Cambaya. Abdul-cawn,
though glad of so high preferment delays his journey; both in regard of his desire to see Curroon freed from his troubles, and to enjoy the command and gain he every day got in Curroons depredations: and obteyning leave to stay a while, he sends his Eunuch Baffadur-cawn as his deputy to repre∣sent his person, and to prepare things the better against his comming. The Eunuch in good equipage travels thither-ward, and by the inhabitants of Amadabat is received with much state and ceremonie; but, beholding himselfe mounted so high, incircled with such rayes of Majesty, & roabed with so much honour, his former vassalage is forgotten, and his genius so transcendently efflated with pride and ambition, that he beholds his equals with disdaine and anger, his inferiors with a squint and supercilious eye of scorne and tyranny: yet, such as knew his feathers were but borrowed, and that his glory was but the reflect of him hee counterfeited, gave him occasion to understand himselfe, by affronts, neglect and undervaluing him; especially Nadab-Tsaffi-chan the Moguls Chancellor, who by intrea∣ty and threats sought to reforme him, but by such meanes more exaspe∣rated; so that after many base and contumelious usages, hee is forced (to save his life) out of the City, but so inraged, that he vowes requitall: hee hasts to Nazar-cawn Viceroy of Patan and Baban-cawn of Chapperbenniz, whom by his complaints (and affront offered as he pretended to the Mogul their Master) hee inflames with fury; by this advantage also perceiving a way to defy Curroon their inveterate adversary: for hearing the Eunuch had not above five hundred horse, they presently prepare, and advance to Amadavad with a thousand horse and five Elephants, and (by leave of some that hated the Eunuch) enter the Cicy, and commit what villany they please, force the Castle, and imprison Baffador-cawn the Eunuch, with his branded associates Mirza Madary, Motzab-cawn and Mamet-Hassen the Cambayan Podestate, whom they disgrace, and depart at pleasure, lea∣ving the City satisfied, and the Country full of amazement. But ere long, Curroon has notice of it, and (finding it a plot to dishonour him) swells with rage, thunders out his discontent, and straight way breaks out into rebellion. But Abdul-cawn scoffes at this accident, as unworthy Cur∣roons impatience and his trouble, their Antagonists being but three, one of them a pallid Lawyer; the other two, Merchants of small wealth or reputation. Yet knowing satisfaction would not be had without a combat, and that Saffi-cawn might not too long feed upon their misery, hee convocates all his Umbraves, Amet-cawn, (Governour of Brodera) T'zalibeg, Rustan Ba∣dor, Mamet-hossen, Mercon-beg, Zerdzie-cawn, Matzael-cawn and others; to each of whom he relates the Princes dishonour and his owne griefe, not that hee feared such meane enemies, but that herein hee saw the fire of more wrath and discord a kindling; which by the constancy and valour of these his friends hee doubted not to extinguish. They heare him, un∣derstand, and professe their loyalty: yea unanimously with seven thou∣sand choyce horse make haste to chastise Saffi-chan & his associates: foure∣teene hundred thousand roopees are disburst by Abdul-cawn, to increase his army with ten thousand infantery; so that now hee makes sure to pu∣nish, yea to extirpate the very memory of his enemies: indeed, many
swell themselves with empty conceits and fancies, and by a foolish admi∣ration of their own power and bravery, judge all attempts, though chargd with never so much danger, inferiour to their worth and fortune; but tne event oftentimes discovers their shallow imaginations, and makes them ridiculous. We see it so in this Abdul-cawn, a man of great power, credit, and experience; yet at this time so whirld, yea so efflated with pride and scorne, that (by too much security and contempt of those hee was to grapple with) hee prepares his owne ruine. From Mandou with his Army, in five dayes hee comes to Brodera, and hasts thence to Wasset, judging all Gujurat affrighted at his comming; but Saffi-cawn and his were nothing troubled at it; no, although Sultan-Bullochy and Cawn-Azem were then at Tseroy a good way distant, nor that he wanted (the nerves of war) mony, and the people were (though his was the Moguls cause) neutrall and indifferent; but rather, inspir'd with new courage and pollicy, throwes off all apparition of feare, and (to adde somewhat to his treasury and pay) forrages such Townes as refused to contribute, forces the Exchequer, and spoyles that rich and glorious throne or state, Sultan Curroon had late∣ly set up in Amadavad, as an addition and monument of his glory; with this and his other helps he entertaines an Army of twenty thousand horse, five hundred Musketiers, thirty Elephants for warre; and (by Proclama∣tion, that all his provision was in defence of Iangheers prerogatives) above twenty Umbraves of quality, Mirza Cassen, Immirza Mockym, Radgea Cal∣licawn, Radgee Doola, Commel-cawn, Gokeldas, Phereez-cawn, Tzedchan, Tzed Iacob &c. associate him, to Kanckry, where hee incampt, and thence to Assempore; where hearing of Abdul-cawns comming, hee arose and came to Boubentalow, six course from Amadavad; where in a valiant posture, hee attended the comming of his enemies. Abdul-cawn at Anamogery receives intelligence of their incamping; in scornfull sort he tels the messenger he was comming, and upon his owne company lookes so merrily that they all condemn'd him of too much con∣fidence, but (loath he should perceive any want of valour in them) they equall his haste, and couragiously march to Nyriaed, and so to Momodabad, but six course from the Enemy: there, Abdul-cawn by assent of his other Vmbraves command Motzab-cawn to prison, and shackles him; (upon some intelligence passing twixt him and Saffin-cawn his enemy) and next day with his sonne Godgee Sultan upon an Elephant are sent to Mando to receive their tryall. The ensuing morne hee moves towards Kavise and there hearing how strong the Enemy was (his opinion somewhat altered) he travels to Baroch thinking to assaile them in the reare, but in vaine, for they discovered him; so that next day he resolved to encounter them in a maine battell, and accordingly at that time divides his Army into three; one, to Amet-cawn and Tzalibeg; another to Tzardi-cawn, Maxatbeg and Mamet-Cooly; and the last to himselfe: and in this equipage, the whole Camp removed to Zietelpore and Phettibeg; where Nahar-cawn, his five sonnes, and two sonnes in law, Karamamet-cawn and Kamamet-cawn, with three thousand horse, begin the fight, and charge so hotly upon Abdul-cawns troops, that they made them retire and lose their ground of advan∣tage; besides, they playd so fiercely on them with their Muskets, that
they disordered Abdul-cawns best cavalry, and by wounding their best Ele∣phant, forced him to turne and execute his wrath upon his own company. Curroons chiefe Captaine sees the perill, and knowes no way for pre∣vention, save by a challenge to a single combat with Nahar-cawn that was so valiant. The old man is so full of heat and fury that he accepts it, and with his Lance carreers so bravely, that Abdul-cawn smarts in the Arme; but the old man wounded in the head had perished, had not his sonnes then made proofe of their utmost valour and obedience: howbeit by this expression; three of them wel-nigh sacrific'd their lives, not sorry if they had terminated in so happie an occasion; but Kamamet was slaine, and the residue so discouraged, that but for Delawer-cawn (who reanima∣ted them) they had fled and left Abdul victorious. Whiles these were bandying for glory in the field of Mars, Tzed-cawn and T'zed-Iacup give a brave charge upon Tzalibeg and Amet-cawn; where after mutuall giving and receiving blowes Tzalibeg descends first a degree of misery by being unhorst by his adversaries Elephant, and by Tzed-cawn forc't to a deadly dormitorie. Amet-cawn (also adventring further than discretion warranted) is taken by Radjea Doola and beheaded: so is Tzalibeg, and both, sent to Saffinchan as a reall trophy and testimoniall of their victory. The death of these great men so afflicted the whole Armie, (that throwing away all hopes of conquest) each man fled which way his fancie directed him, Tzaitsi-chan Governour of Brodera excepted, who thought it too great a blemish to his honour to turne taile, having five hundred horse and three Elephants as yet lusty and couragious; but what could his opppsition do? when Saffin-cawn in person with his victori∣ous troops affronted him; to contend were madnesse, and therefore up∣on intreatie, yeelds, and has faire quarter gives him; but his example could work but little with Ma'met-Cooly his sonne, for hee (imagining his Father had done cowardly) with forty horse and one Elephant flies to Ab∣dul-cawn, who received little joy in such an untimely expression, being burthened with sorrow and disgrace, but bids him (do as he did) flie, to avoyd the swift rage and pursuit of the Enemy. In the flight, Motsaib-cawn is brought back to Saffin-cawn, and Abdul-cawn (by unexpected on∣sets of the Coolies and high-way roagues, as also by intollerable tempests, amazed, beaten, and discouraged) hastens to Baroch; next day to Surrat; and after eight daies refreshment, and some fresh companie, to Brampore; to attend Curroons command, and make provision for reparation of his honour, never till then so notoriously blemished. BAROCH (where the pole septentrionall is elevated twenty one degrees fifty five min.) is a Citie of good note in the Gusarat Province:Baroch. distant from Surrat (by Cosumbay and Periaw) foure and thirtie english miles, from Cambaya fifty foure, from Amadavad a hundred twenty foure, from Brampore two hundred and eleven or there abouts. It is seated in a beneficiall soyle, watered by Narvar (or Nardabah) a sweet and delight∣full river, which, from the Decan mountaines commixing with the Tappee, flowes through Brampore hither, and at Hansot (a Village eight course lower) separates, and makes a pretty Isle: and (a small houres travell thence) in two streames foure miles asunder, incorporates with the briny
Baroch is visible (by reason of her high standing) a good way distant; built upon the best advantages of Nature and Art: both, so excellently contending, as makes it at first view seeme impregnable: she is well peo∣pled, and with such as extract great wealth by land and water: the buil∣dings are generally submisse and low, especially those below the moun∣taine. In quondam times her royalties were more spacious, as soveranizing over many Townes of quality a great way removed: as Medapore seventy miles thence; Radgee-pore or Brodera eighty; Iownbasser thirty, &c. each of which now enjoy peculiar Podestates: howbeit (as Merchants tell us) the Mogul has received hereout as annuall tax or tribute, one Million two hundred and threescore thousand mammoodees (or shillings in our mo∣ney:) 'twixt Baroch and Amadavad is intombed Polly-Medinae a Mohumi∣tan Saint, excessively reputed of by the superstitious people; who in way of meritorious pilgrimage flock thither, loaden with chaines or stones, and locking up their mouthes from speaking vanity, by such penance to obtaine children, health, wealth, or what they lust after. But to our story. A.D. 1622. A.H. 1002.Iangheer, during these offenssive broyles, resides at Fettipore, and heares of Abdul-cawns presumption and Curroons new rebellions; hee sleepes unquietly, and can take no rest, till both of them receive due punishment: he calls Sultan Perwees his sonne, acquaints him with his affliction, gives him order to levy some forces, wherewith to persecute his traiterous Bro∣ther, and those out-lawed Umbraves that attended him. Curroon re∣bells and is beaten.Perwees (intreating Mahobet-chan to accompany him) with 50000 horse, moves against Curroon: by the way, he imprisons Mirza-chan, Abdul-chans sonne (but lately to Iangheers grandchild marryed) and by order is sent manacled to Ethabarchan, in Agra castle to be confined: whiles Abdul Azief-chan (by Abdulchans deceit brought to Curroons party) escapes, submitts to the Mogul, and is pardoned. Curroon has notice of the approach of his enemies, so that from Azmeer he hasts to Mandow to augment his Army, with a setled determination to bid them battell. Perwees followes him, and pitches ten English myles from his brothers campe; and next morning drawing out his men assayles him, who at the first shock (by mishap of Rustan chan and Berkendaschan) falls back and lets the enemy possesse his trenches: in a word, Perwees has the day and Cur∣roon flies to Brampore his old receptacle. Ganganna noting Curroons sad∣nesse, makes it an advantage of his treachery; he perswades the Prince to send him to mediate a peace with Perwees, with an intent to deliver him into his hands (having precontracted with Beyrambeg and Darab-chawn, to seize him, who to that end had ambushed neere the river Nardebah 20000 horse;) but Abdul chan disswades Curroon, assuring him of Gangan∣na's villany, Ganganna escapes, the conspiracy comes to light, and Bey∣rambeg with his associate is loaden with irons, placed on an Elephant and with some selected troopes, leaves Brampore and flyes into Decan, where by Melec Ambar (glad of such confusion) he is welcomed, and seat∣ed in Nassier-Throm, where he dictates patience; his Elephants and men are sent to Daultabat till he recalled them. Sultan Perwees and Mahobet-chan enter Brampore, and here whither
Curroon was travelled. They give Iangheer notice of their good fortune, and hee celebrates it with no lesse joy, than as if hee had triumpht over a dangerous enemy. But behold, this faire Sun-shine of content is inve∣loped with an unexpected cloud of storme and danger. I'hen Thouz an Ouzbeg Tartar (of long time watching some fit occasion to forrage the Moguls Territories, by Curroons unquietnesse spies it,) with thirty thou∣sand horse overruns Chabul, perpetrating all sorts of spoyle and mischefe. Iangheer, exclaimes and rages violently, but so soone as hee had given vent to this his swelling passion, he sends post to Zaed-cawn (son to Mahobet-cawn) Viceroy of Bange, to retaliate him: this young Gallant delaies not, but with twenty thousand horse interposes 'twixt the Citie and Tartarr, gives him so furious a charge, that Ihen Thouz is afraid to suffer it, by base flight leaving his honour, halfe his men, and store of wealth to Zaed-cawn, and by his joviall troopes to be rifled: after which, they enter Tartary, and as farre as Gassany, burne, spoyle, and make havock of what they meet with, returning with great wealth and many Elephants to Ka∣bul, where with all acclamations of joy they are welcomed, and by Iang∣heer so accepted of, that he sends Zaed-cawn many thanks, and adds to his former troopes 5000 as an augmentation of more honor and benefit. This cloud once over-blowne, the Horizon appeares more glorious, and Iangheer contemplates in what part to enjoy with his beloved Noor-mahall most pleasure. Cassimeer at length gets the preheminence: It a∣bounds with variety of choyce sports, but the progresse was long and re∣mote from most places whence in those active times hee was to receive in∣telligences; howbeit, delight swaied him against all objections, giving Curroon (by that distance) so faire an advantage, that with all speed (sen∣ding his Umbraves word to follow him) hee forsakes Decan, and through Gulcunda and Orixa, speeds into Bangala, yea with foure thousand horse, and three hundred Elephants passes the solitary deserts and so sud∣denly presents his forces afore Dehaka, that Abrahim-cawn, governing that Province (blasted with amazement) flies away first to Bannaras, then to Meslipatan, and knowes not where to rest securely: whiles Curroon smiles at it, & without stay or let, commands his treasure; with mony and faire words so bewitching most of the Umbraves of that fruitfull Country, that they immediatly came to do him service with horse, mony, & armory. Overjoyed with such good hap, this daring Prince breaks into Purop, flashing (as to the other) such terrour into the eyes and heart of Makolidis∣chan the Governour, that without any show of manhood or pollicie hee posts to Elabass to acquaint Rustan the Captaine with his danger, by whom (in stead of thanks) he is soundly rated, and for his cowardize imprisoned. Curroon heares of it: but so long as hee continues prosperous, hee re∣gards no mans misery, but rather by such, increases his activity; passing his Army over Ganges, he aymes at Kerry not doubting of the conquest; but by the way at Radgee Mahal is with such fury assaulted by Ebraim-chan (by this time reincouraged, and here ambuscadoed with six thousand horse) that little wanted of foiling him, had not Abdul-chan (behind with best part of his Army) hastily brought up his troope, and by 3 houres skirmish reco∣vered him, after three thousand were slaine of Curroons party, and foure thousand of Ebrahims, who also lost his life by his too great avarice amongst
his men, and out of too much appetite to regaine his honour so lately ble∣mished. Curroone rubricates this in the Kalendar of his greatest dangers and deliverances: it teaches him to travell with more care and vigilancie, but disswades not from the prosecuting his unjust designes, spoiling & rob∣bing all that wealthy Province, and entring as Conquerour Tanda and all Gouro, Banaras, Chatighan, and all such Townes in Orixa and Bengala as resisted him; preying upon their gold and jewels, acting many unchastities, and forcing their oaths and hostages to become his subjects: thence to Pa∣than, whither Radgee Vslem with five thousand horse and twenty thousand foot came to serve him. Perwees heares of Curroons extravagancies, and intends to curb him: he commits Brampore to Rustan-chan and Laskar-kawn; and with 50000 horse aymes with long toyle at Elebasse, and entring Lala Bersinghs territories, Lala meets him with 7000 horse, and gives him a Present of 3 leck of roopees. Iangheer lest hee should surfet of delight, at Cassmeer entertaines the newes of his sonne Curroons fresh outbreaking, as also of Ebrahims death and sad discomfiture: but fearing his vagrant sonne might grow too po∣tent (if too long suffered in his exorbitancies) hee rowses himselfe, and forthwith commands Chan Iehan out of Molthan and Buckarr to raise some Companies and to hasten into Gousurat, with the tribute of those Provin∣ces to advance a brave Army, and joyne with Perwees against the Rebells: Chan-Iehan being come to Fettipore, he there loyters, and as long at Agra wraps himselfe in idlenesse, forgetfull of the Mogulls command, the Prin∣ces need, and his owne honour; yet, Rustan, Captaine of Elabas, shewes himselfe of better temper; for having imprisoned Mokolidaschan for his feare, he thenceforth labours to fortifie his Castle with men, money, and provision: which when Curroon heard, hee alters his intent, and drawes his forces against Rantas (a strong defenced Castle) which by Syet Mon∣bark is yeelded upon small treaty: hee also assaults Tzinner, which tho a while well kept by Hastibeg, is in the end delivered: after this, Abdulchan forces Iangheer-Coolighan Captaine of Bonarce to Elabas, and Wazer-Chan to Ioonpore and other Townes, whereout they drew abundance of treasure; and hearing of his brothers approach with Mahobet-chan (to forfet preven∣tion) he intreats Abdulchan, Radgee Rhiem, and Byram-chan to try their for∣tune against Elabasse, by Rustan-chan so strongly defended: they obey him, and with all haste besiege it, and next day assault it with utmost fury, but by Rustan are as bravely beat off and forced to retreat with shame and danger. In that action the seed of so much emulation and spleene kindled twixt Abdul and Radgee Rhiem as was not quencht in long tyme, and with∣out both destructions. Sultan Perwees and Mahobet-chan hasten (if pos∣ssible) to be at Elabas ere the rebells rose from before it: they passe Bac∣kery and Municpore, but Abdul-chan hyes thence over Ganges and at Bo∣narce (or Banaras) joyne with Curroons army. Ghan-Ganna im∣prisoned.Ganganna (banckrupt in credit with Curroon and Abdul-chan,) had not beene long in Perwees army, but by Mohobet-chans command, for some unworthy plots is imprisoned; which a servant of his (M'hia Fehiem by name) took so impatiently, that he consorts with 500 men and ambushes twixt their passage to Kalpin and Lala's country, by force attempting his Lords delivery: his good will was much and good, but the successe bad
and bitter; for Mahobet-chan fearelesse of such a scarecrow, in small space slew him and his rash society. Ganganna thenceforth is more strickly look't to, his estate confiscated, his wife and son and family are upon Ele∣phants sent slaves to Agra; whiles Perwees, Mahobet, and the Army ar∣rive at Elabas; where by valiant and faithfull Rustan-chan they are wel∣comd and lodged in the castle with much pompe and joyfull entertain∣ment. Mahobet-chawn is impatient of stay till he could come to grapple with Curroones Army, who by that tyme had assembled a great company, al∣lured by the magick of his gold and tempting language, to runne a bold hazard with him to the gates of Death. neere Thonec 15 myles from Ba∣naras they pitch their camps in view of one another, either side resolv'd with the utmost of valor and policy to purchase victory. Ganges (that great, rich, and deified river, which say the Bannyans issues out of a rock at Siba formed like a Cowes head) a whiles forbad them, restrayning ei∣thers fury, save what volleyed from the roring guns to eithers prejudice. Beyrambeg began the play with 4000 horse and forraged towards Elabas but is by Mamet Shawma met upon Shawezi's bancks where his men were discomfited, himselfe slaine and his head severed. Mahobet-chan interprets this as a good Omen to the battell; inflamd with courage, he drawes out his troopes, but knowes not how (without apparant perill) to passe his men over Ganges, till by a Native he is directed to a safe ford, where he got over luckily: he gives his company some incouragement, and delayes not to affront Curroon to his face. Curroon willing rather to lose life than swallow such an indignity, orders his campe and desires Radgee Rhiem with his Elephants to answer him; this couragious Captaine most gladly undertakes it and gives Mahobet so hot a charge, yea with his warlick Ele∣phants so disordred him, that had Abdul-chan or Derra-chan seconded him (as was appoynted) Curroon had easily obtaind a glorious victory; but they swelling with envy against this brave man, ever since their attempt of Elabas, not only betray his hopes by hovering back, but are overjoyed when they behold Mahobet-chans company recovered, and Radgees Ele∣phants wounded and madded with rage to execute their wrath upon their owners,Radgee Rhiem slain. and in the end Radgee (after as much proofe of courage and skill as could be in man) slaine, and his whole squadron confounded: in this miserable sort, perisht one of the ablest men of India, and Abdul-chan most basely guilty of his death: revenge pursues him; for finding it high tyme to give over looking on, and do something, he sees Perwees entring with Radgee Zissing, Radgee Ziand, Radgee Bertzing and their Army. Curroon also falls on, doing what lay in the power of man, the battell now pelmel enduring for five houres with a great deale of martiall skill and bravery. Curroon is hurt in the arme. Perwees (though upon his Elephant) is by Derrhachan woùnded in the side, and but for the excellency of his mayle had there dyed. In the end, the Kings Army grew victorious by the unresistable fury Mahobet a fresh affords them, the rebells pusillanimously opposing that new torrent of destruction, gaze a while, and then remem∣bring the injustice of their side grow pale with feare, so as in the end they turne tayle and flie amayne, resolving not in haste to under∣take
such an occasion. Curroon is not able to alter it, his old accursed fate pursues him; and therefore (striking the ground with his lance) he leaves the battell, escapes away, and with 4000 horse of such as loved him, he flyes to the inexpugnable Castle of Rantas, yielded by Monbark, and wherin he had placed Radgee Gholam one of the murderers of Prince Gushrooe; leaving the residue of his Army to sip the bitter cup of death, the glory of a great and famous overthrow to his brother and Mahobet-chan, and the spoyle of his campe to Radges-Bertsingh, who from out of it brought of gold, silver, precious gemmes, Elephants, Camels, horses, and slaves of both sexes great abundance. Sultan Curroon in his strong Castle and at such a distance, has tyme to ruminate upon his miseries, and with a discontented mind sees how in∣sensibly he precipitates his hopes, at that instant fixed in the center of affliction: and as an aggravation to his melancholly, heares of Mahobet-chans re-approach towards him. He thereupon disparks his Seralio, and flyes thence to Potan with Assaph-chawns daughter only in his company (who had lately brought him a dainty gyrle) and by a Zantel or Post dis∣patches letters to Darab-chan (then in Bengala) to levy some forces and meet him at Radgee-Mahal, where he expected him. Mahobet-Chan, Prince Perwees, and captived Ganna pursue Curroon, scarce resting day or night till they came to Rantas, where hearing which way he tooke, they chase him to Patan, but there also they misse of him, having sure tidings of his flight to Radgee Mahal. At Patan they breath awhile, and hearing of Darabs obsequiousnesse to Currown, they get his aged Father Ganganna by letters to dehort him, and to promise him re∣quitall so he would joyne with them: Darab (incensed by Mahobet-chans severity to his father, and supposing his perswasions forced and counter∣feit) most unluckily denyes, and goes on to levy men to support the re∣bellion. Prince Perwees proclaymes him Traytor, and allots 4000 roopes to him would bring him to his campe alive or dead. The tyme-serving greedy Multitude (knowing Currown was fled) not only bring Darab-chan but his children and kinseman Morad, sonne to Sha Nabarkhan, all whose heads are struck off and sent to Perwees, and by Mahobet-chans com∣mand presented to Ganganna, by that a wretched Father, and thence (as a Trophy of their care and terror of others) unto Agra on poles to be ele∣vated. The report of this untoward massacre is soone knowne to Cur∣roone, so that he bids farewell to Mahal, and flyes to Medenpoore, and thence to Odjea; but is quested after by Mahobet to Medenpoore, where, mis∣sing him, he stayes for Prince Perwees, and sends Baker chan & 8000 horse in the pursuit after him. At this Oudee or Oujea (a citty in Bengala & felicitated by Ganges) are many Antick Monuments,Oudee. especially memorable is the pretty old castle Ranichand built by a Bannyan Pagod of that name about 994500 yeares ago after their accompt, from which to this the Bannyans haue repayred to offer here and to wash away their sinnes in Ganges, each of which is recorded by name by the laborious Bramyns who acquiantes this Pagod with their good progressions and charitable offerings. A.D. 1623 A.H. 1003During these domestique broyles, Melec Amber (perceiving the season advantagious to recover what he had lost,) advances with 50000 men,
and so unexpectedly chardges Laskar-chan, Mirza Mametsheir, and Ebrahim Hossen, that they had no warning for defence, but are compelled to give up their Forts and suffer the Decan to re-enter, what was his owne by law of Nations; 15000 Indians were slayne, and as many were expelld the country; the 3 Umbraves also are sent prisoners to Daultebad to attend the pleasure of their conquerer. Bacherchan having commission to perse∣cute Curroon, procrastinates not, but in few weeks attaines O' djea; where the Prince (though he had 5000 horse and 300 Elephants) dared not abide him battell, possest with feare and so terrified with precedent dan∣gers, that he flyes into Gulcundah,Curroon flies into Gulcunda. contrary to Bacherchans expectation who desired battell. The King of Gulcunda receives him with counter∣feit welcome, and attends him (where he passes) with 12000 horse, pre∣tending to safeguard him; but Curroon saw it was rather to secure his Dya∣mond mynes, (at that tyme open) too prevalent a bait for his needy Army. Melec Amber with lesse suspition and more subtilty (heartily glad of his re∣bellion, thereby debelitating the Mogul, and securing his owne Monar∣chy) sends an Ambassadour to Curroon, well attended, with letters of much affection, and plenty of money and other necessaries; with an in∣vitation into Decan, where at all assayes he should command his service. Curroon rejoyces in this sun-shine of happinesse, and accepts his motion: but after three moneths commorance in that country, weary of idlenesse, he projects the recovery of his old Eparchy of Brampore, and so without longer advice bids Amber farewell, and with ten thousand horse divided amongst Abdulchan, Mahumet Tackhieck and Iacup-chan, shewes himselfe before Brampore, but is forbid entrance by Radgee Rustan set there by Sultan Perwees; which so inrages Curroon, that after he had breathed out a thousand fruitlesse curses and threats, he assalts the wals with incredible haste and violence, but is also so churlishly compensated by valiant Rustan, that with great losse he retreats to Chan-channaes curious gardens there to ruminate: howbeit, Abdul-chan is so transported with flame, that he mounts againe and advances with his Standard; yet in the meridian of his hopes is dejected by valiant Rustang' and forced to fill the ditch with carcasses of his too forward followers. Mahomet Tackieck at twilight tryes his deste∣ny, and chardges so furiously and so close, that in despight he mounts the wall, and is so bravely backt by his owne regiment, that in small tyme he takes the principall cittadell or fortresse, and on many parts of the wall florisht his colours in signe of victory, and as a call to Abdulchan to to second him; but Abdul (poysoned with envy to see a Merchants sonne possessor of so much glory,) forbeares to succor him, so that this heroick Captaine (too farre ingaged) is assayled by Rustan Atset-chan and fresh troopes so long, and with such egernesse, that all his company are cut in peeces, and Mahomet struck dangerously in his eye, yea (after as much proofe of dexterity and valour as was possible) is taken and imprisoned. In this base sort (the second tyme) has Abdul-chan forfetted Curroon the victory, yet keepes the knowledge in his owne breast, and goes unpunish∣ed: whiles Sultan Perwees and Mahobet-chan continue their quest, and receiving notice of the siege of Brampore, they hast thither, with chan Alen, Radjea Stertsing, and a great Army of Rashpoots; but Curroon (premo∣nished)
seeing no good likely to bee done, arises and falls towards Bella∣guate, in the way attempting vainely Hasser; but missing it, redelivers Rantas also into his enemies hands, and once more visits Melec Amber at Rerki in Decan cloathed in his old sad habit of misfortune. Hasser, (five courses from Brampore as you passe to Agray, the strong∣est, and in all advantages the best defended Castle through Chandis) is built upon the top of a most high and precipitious Mountaine, wall'd by Nature, and capable to feed and lodge forty thousand horse: within, are springs of wholsome water, by vertue whereof the people are infi∣nitly inriched; the earth also is excellently fruitfull in hearbs and corne and what else is requirable for defence or pleasure: upon all sides are mounted great Ordinance of brasse, about six hundred, here placed by the last King of Gusurat: but one discommodity is commixed, making all the other delights relish unseasonably; Wormes ingendring in the legges and thighs of such as drinke the water; but lately noted; and which on∣ly gave Ecbar conquest of this Castle, otherwise inexpugnable. Iangheer the great Mogul rejoyces at the severall victories his son Per∣wees and Mahobet-cawn are crowned with: and to expresse how well hee took it, observing the valour & loyalty of Ganna-zied-cawn, (lately made Viceroy of Kabul) calls him to Court, expresses his good will in variety of complements, and more then so, addes five thousand horse to his com∣mand, and under seale makes him Governour of Bengala, of all the Pro∣vinces of Indostan most famous, rich, and populous: Bengala, is a Province in India, spacious, noble, and fruitfull; peopled with Mahometans and Idolaters, addict to Mars and Merchandize: reasonable in shape and co∣lour: well cloathed, extreamly lustfull; jealous, crafty, and suspicious: the ground is redundant in good Townes, Castles, fruits, flowers, corn, &c. mellowed by Ganges, which in two great branches flowes thorow her, and 200 miles asunder, at 23 degrees, commixes with the Ocean. Normal and Assaph-cawn cast a squint eye upon Ganna-zied-cawns, new glory, wishing fit occasion to eclipse it; and only for that he was son to Mahobet; no other reason caused it: they are no trewands in the schoole of mischiefe, and in the first place, to plot more mischievously, and af∣front Mahobet (whose miseries are now broaching) they get the old Mogul to command Mahobet without delay, to send Ganganna the Captaine, un∣to Agra, Meza-Arebdestoa-cawn (one of Normals creatures) delivers the message, and Mahobet (loth to shew any example of disobedience, though he knew langheer abused, and this a meere plot of his confusion) lets him go, who forth with begins to chatter and spit his utmost malice against Ma∣hobet, exhibiting many false complaints, and incensing as much as possible the old Mogul against his innocent Champion: that hee had most unjustly put to death his sonne and others of his kindred, out of malice; yea, after he had voluntarily left Curroon to serve in the Kings Armie. These ac∣cusations wrought somewhat in the credulous jealousie and weaknesse of the old Mogul; but more, when from the seeds of haste and distrust sown by Ganna in the heart of Perwee, by his letter he intreats his Father to call Mahobet, a detractor of his glory, and ambtious to ingulph the Monarchy. This so confirmes the Mogul, that without more dispute or memory of
his former services, he beleeves Gangannas reports no longer malicious, but presently condemnes him of pride and ingratitude, gives his com∣mand to Cawn Iehan, and commands him home to receive his deservings. Frau de perit virtus, Mahobet admires the villany of Ganganna, and Noor∣mall; and thinkes (by the purity of his owne conscience) it is impossible his Master should really beleeve such imputations; till remembring his dotage upon Normal and her inveterate spleen, hee grants it; but resolves to take another course till time might delucidate his innocency; and therefore as his love and dutie bound him, hee goes to Prince Perwees to bid farewell; but when hee perceived him so strangely altered, so coy and stately, it welnigh struck him dead with sorrow and amazement (an excellent sympathy and union, till Ganganna dissolv'd it, having beene till then betwixt 'em:) so that with a sad heart, and tormented eyes, he leaves the Camp, but carries along with him the hearts and courages of all the Army. From Brampore hee goes; many guesse, but none (no not himselfe) knowes whither his fortune led him: at length by advice of his best friends (that assured him if hee went to Court, hee should at least bee branded with the name of Traytor) hee travels to his Castle of Ran∣tampore, resolving to purge his honour by letter and proofe to Iangheer, and to safegard himselfe from the spite of Normal and all his enemies. The discord of Peiwees, Mahobet, and Normal, sounds sweetly in Cur∣roons eares; hoping by the confusion of them all, to ground stedfastly his owne ambitious practises: and perceiving his old Father so taken with fan∣tasmes and apparitions of love, he resolves to practise deceit, and in the Moguls weaknesse to fix the strength of his conspiracies: he presents him by Godgee Iehan (a crafty man, and Tutor to his two sonnes) a letter neat∣ly pend, but dictating nothing save hypocrisie and submission: hee knew also the greedy appetite of his Father after gold and rarities, and there∣fore addes a pishcash of rare coignes, a hundred choise Elephants, and some portraits hee borrowed from the Portugals. They are all well taken; his sonnes respected, and word is sent him from Assaph-cawn of hopes to re-ingraft him. In the meane time, Madoffer-cawn at Lahore receives the government or Provostship of Agra, from Cassem-cawns pride, who was placed there upon his marriage which Movissan-begem sister to the Queen, but is so impatiently digested by that ambitious woman, that shee ceast not till she had got him re-established. Six yeares past, viz. 1618. and of the Heg. 998. I told you, how Iangheer at request of Assaph-cawn took his eldest son Gushroo from Anna-Rha-Radia & Chan Iehan, delivering him to Curroon, who finding him a stumbling block to the Imperiall Crowne, by Radgee Bandor gets him removed: at that same time were committed to that Fratricide, Sha Hossen and Ethymor (sonnes to D' haen Shaw his brother who died of drink at Brampore) whom because hee saw towardly, and apt to revenge their Fathers untimely death, hee was desirous to send them in that bloody bath, to sudden de∣struction; but he durst not perpetrate such apparant butchery, perceaving all mens eyes and expectations after them, and the death of their Father and Uncle, not a little murmured at: so that he had no other way to pre∣vent their power and anticipate their claime unto the Empire, but by get∣ting
them instructed in the faith of our blessed Saviour Christ, and to bee baptized; by that trick out of the Alchoran, making them incapable of so great an earthly Monarchy, but heyres of a better; for, virtus locum habet inter astra. After this, he ever led them with him to keep them the strict∣lier, till such time as he was vanquisht at Elabas by Rustan-cawn: for then Ethamore escapes to Perwees, and thence to Labore where his Vncle en∣tertaines him gladly, and marries him to B'har Bannoo Begem his daughter: and at Curroons next flight from Brampore, Hussen also flies to Radgee Rustang, and thence to his brother, where hee lived safely and more honoured. Mahobet-cawn at his Castle at Rantampore (practizing to digest his af∣fronts with patience) receives a peremptorie command from Iangheer (Nor∣mal I might say) to yeeld up his house to the Queene,A.M. 5595. A.D. 1625. A.H. 1005.who had given the keeping of it to Bacher-cawn his enemy, and that hee should pack into Orixa to his sonne the Lieftenant there. The message is so tart and sent to one (then whom none more) impatient of injuries, that hee returnes his Master the Mogul this reply, he was ready (as a thousand times former∣ly) to spend his life and goods to do him service, but would never stoope to the lure of his inveterate enemies; he was ready to account the reason, but upon condition hee might bee free from the tallons of his rammage foes, whom he saw ready to prey upon him: with this answer the Post re∣turnes, with newes also, that Abdul-cawn (either weary of such vagaries, or that hee saw the winde of Curroons good fortune averse, or doubting his former envie might undo him) for some of these,Abdul cawn leaves Cur∣roons party. or all, flies from Curroon, and by Cown Iehan at Brampore with Perwees is joyfully wel∣comed. Iangheer wonders at Mahobet-cawns presumption, but Mahobet no lesse admires his ingratitude. But after much perswasion of his kindred & friends about him, hee assumes fresh courage, and attended by five thousand vo∣luntary Rashboots, issues from his Castle, and through Rassanwer journeyes to Lahore, resolving to make his owne defence to Iangheer, then removing to Kabul, or dy in doing it. The Queene and Assaph-cawn have notice of his intent, but fearing his force, and that (if hee had any private discourse with Iangheer) hee would re-ingratiate himselfe, they make the Mogull set to his seale to what they had indited, the command being that Mahobet should come in person, attended only with some few of his choyce friends to cleare his infamy: but hee smels their craft, and in his place, sends his sonne in law to make his excuse, and to treat upon surer tearmes than if he had gone in person: with a willing heart this young Gallant undertakes it, and at his first entrance into the Lescar (without ever seeing the Mo∣gul) hee is made to dismount his Elephant by the Queenes order, is dis∣roabed of his bravery, and clad in nasty ragges; is after that most mise∣rably chabuck't, or beat upon the soles of his feet with canes or rattans, bare-headed (the greatest shame possible) set backward upon a carrion Iade, with kettle-Drums led through the Army, and made a scoffe to all that rascall multitude; overjoyed, they had this good occasion to mani∣fest their hate upon the Idea of Mahobet-cawn and to delight the Em∣presse.
Mahobet-cawn is quickly certified of his sons disgrace, and that Iangheer knew it not; he questions not who, the whole Country blaming Normall and Ganganna for such barbarisme: in it, hee sees their hate and his owne misery, if he had harkened to their oaths for safety to come weakly ac∣companied: and now (more than ever, discovering the Queenes ambi∣tion to advance her sonne, and Assaph-cawn, Curroon, guarding themselves with a constant Army of thirty thousand horse, violently seazing the Mo∣guls treasure, and in all affaires abusing his authority and greatnesse, with other indignities apparant to all the Empire) he incourages himselfe, not regarding the hatefull epethite they branded him with in their Proclama∣tion; his innocency to Iangheer and zeale to Bullochy (next heire undoubted to the Crowne) re-animating him; so that after he had sent his old Master the Mogul a short, but pithy Apologie of his contempt, and portrayed the villany they offered his sonne; he surveighs his Army, gives strict com∣mand to offer no violence to Iangheer or his Tent, and with twenty thousand valiant Rashboots passes on to finde out Normalls Army and the Lescar, at that time consisting of above 50000 men: by accident part at that instant went by, led by Eradet-cawn; and the residue passed the river Phat, conducted by Godgee Abdul Hussan, in hope to finde Mahobets Army unprepared, but in vaine; for that experienced warrior knew hee should want no stratagems to destroy him, and therefore slept the Lions sleepe, with the eyes of prevention alwayes open; and now finding the advan∣tage his, gives the word unto his Camp, and with an undaunted heart charges Eradet first, and circles his troops with such speed and order, that in lesse than two houres (ere Abdul Hussan got over all his men) hee not only disordered, but slew above six thousand men, filling the residue with such feare, that each fled for his owne safety; but unluckily; the flood without mercy swollowed most of them, both dangers equally so confoun∣ding them, that with gastly lookes and loud outcries, such as escaped made knowne the horror of their conflict; so that the other part of Normalls Army stood still; till by Assaph-cawn, Abdul Hussen, and other Umbraves, they are cheered up, and prepare to encounter the rebells, who with Mahobet their Generall were come in front, and with victory in their fore∣heads (regarding neither their greatnesse nor multitude) rush couragiously on their adversaries, for five houres giving and receiving blowes, each side equally heated with rage, and inflamed with desire of conquest. The Queenes Army were fresh and excellently fitted, but by the overthrow of Eradet their companion not a little amazed; Mahobets men, though come from farre, yet of a more warlike constitution, and led by a second Mars, were hopefull of mighty gaine and glory; so that in the end, Normalls side gave back, well beaten, and unable any longer to abide the heavie strokes of their Iron adversaries; Assaph-cawn flies up and downe like a distracted man; upbraiding, intreating, and using all meanes possible to re-incourage them; but feare had slaine them, the Rashboots swords had flasht too much terror amongst them to revive againe; so that with a sad heart, upon his Arabian Courser he flies away, with Mirza Abontila his sonne, to a Castle not farre distant thence, but by accident are espied and chased by Mirsa Byrewer (Mahobets third sonne) and are forced out, and shackled in silver
fetters, are also brought to Attack and there kept, whiles Mahobet-cawn and his Army galloping in the Aire of good fortune beat downe the Queenes forces, at that time more willing to die than fight; so that with∣out more let, they proclaime themselves Lords of India, and prey upon infinite riches of all sorts in the Lescar now scattered and triumphed over. The old Mogul (not scared with Belloma brazen noyse and clangot) was found sleeping, yea luld in Morpheus golden bed, till by Mahobet-cawn hee is awaked and assured of his welfare; upon a stately Elephant they conveighed him to Attack, leaving slaine behind him twelve thousand men, and many Umbraves of note, Mirza Cassem, Radgee Doola Abdul-Gallec, Abdul Samet, Mirchan, Godgee Shawarchan and others: and taken prisoners, Iangheer, Queene Normall, Assaph-cawn, Mirza Abontila his son, Sultan Bullochy, Sultan Sheriar, Sha Ethimore, Sha Hossen, Eradet-cawn Mokendaschan, Mocrib-cawn, and Molena Mahomet; all which, to the amaze∣ment of the world, are led prisoners to Kabull to expect the pleasure of their conquerour. Now, is Mahobet-cawn elevated upon the majestick chariot of command and glory: yet resolves in no sort to derogate from the splendor of his Master, his only aime being to cleare his honour from scandall, and to retaliate his enemies what in his friends hee had for∣merly suffered. Normall (now clouded with shame and misery) is brought forth, and by the monster multitude exclaimed on; so that by assent of Mahobet and many other Umbraves she is censur'd to be beheaded. Not till then did shee perceive the thorny path shee had too long walked in, nor meditated upon the mutability of Fortune, nor till then could she frame her ambitious heart to feare or servitude. But seeing no remedy, she armes her selfe with patience, and craves a farewell of her Lord, to whom after much ado she is admitted, where she prostrates her selfe cloa∣thed in so much sorrow & repentance, that Iangheer melts into compassion, and intreats Mahobet for her freedome. The request seemes grievous unto Mahobet, but loath in any thing to discontent him, or shew disloyalty, hee condiscends, Normall is pardoned and set at liberty, and becomes more in∣raged by this his lenity and complement: the residue of the royall priso∣ners are used with all respect and noblenesse; Eradet, and Molena Mahomet excepted, who by too much rigor are inraged and Molena died, Zadoc-cawn sped best, for before the fight (upon some occasion iarring with his brother Assph-cawn,) he fled to Mahobet, and is for his service made Vice∣roy of Lahore, and Cassem-cawn (by mediation of Moweza-begem his wife, sister to the Queene) restored to his government of Agray, and Ma∣daffor-cawn displaced; so that now, Mahobet swayes Indus'tan, till by vi∣cissitude of time hee decayes, and all things are redacted to better order and existence. Curroon, is at this time in Decan lurking till hee might espie some good advantage to recover his lost fame, and once more shake off the dis∣honourable Title of a Rebellious exile: but when newes is brought him from Assaph-cawn, of the almost incredible change the Empire had, and with what a dismall vayle it was then inveloped, his Father and Fatherin∣law being in such base subjection, Sultan Bulloch and Prince Daniels sonnes imprisoned, and his owne two sonnes with Godghee Iehan their governour
brought also to Mahobet tyme-serving Madoffer-chan to abide his mercy. He disputes not what Mahobet meant, but what had hapned; so that, exaspe∣rated with a thousand fancies, he gives Melec Amber many thanks, and with Radgee Rhyem's sonne and 12000 horse he passes (under leave) Rana's ter∣ritories, and at last comes to Asmeer, intending suddenly to surprize Agra, and proclayme himselfe King: but his designe by Radgees sudden death is prevented, halfe his company forsaking him; whereat, doubting some treachery in the Asmerians (into such hate his robbing and other disor∣ders had brought him) and that Mahobet-chan had sent some force against him, and Sultan Perwees also had ambusht for him, he makes haste to Tat∣ta, hoping upon conquest thereof to command the river Indus and Cam∣baya; at his incamping afore it, the Captaine Xeriph-Melec sends him word, he had order to keep him out, and that if he attempted it, he should receive the entertainment of an enemy. He sends him word back againe, he was sonne unto his King; Melec confesses it, and a rebell; Curroon regreets him, he came to defie Mahobet-chan and to bring deliverance to his fa∣ther; Melec answers, rather by all their confusions to graspe the Dya∣dem. Curroon sees his fickle standing and deplores his folly, but by Der∣ra-chan is incouraged; after which he assaults the Citty in great bravery, but is beat off; & next day returning with more rage, Melec forsakes the fort, issues upon them, kills Derra-chan and 300 men, and forces Curroon (to his old shift) to flie to Delly; but finding no welcome there, hasts with his chaffed troopes to Baker (twixt Lahore and the sea) to breath a while. DELLY is the name of a City and Province of late belonging to the Potan Kings; but at this day is under the Imperiall crown of Industant: the citty now in being, is antient, large and pretty beautifull; such ap∣pearing in that variety of antick Monuments and Tombes of above 20 Kings and great ones there inhumed; admired by Travellers, and adored by infinite troopes of superstitious Indians. Not a little famous also in that Piramyd three myles distant (in old Delly, where lies buried King Ho∣mayon grandfather to Iangheer) by frame and inscription speaking Alex∣ander; at what tyme (as now) Delly was the Mausoleum of many Poten∣tates: new Delly is wald about, but with small security; is watred by part of Ieminy, over which we enter upon a twelfve archt bridge, which from a little spring in these mountaines drills to Agra, and after a great increase (in many meanders) at Prage flowes into Ganges, and with her, runnes in two mouthes 200 myles asunder, into the Bengalan gulfe at 22 degrees of North latitude. Melec Amber, so soone as Curroon was parted, (to get affection from Per∣wees also) gives liberty without treaty or ransome to Laskar-chan, Ebre∣hem-Hossen and Mirza Manout-sher, and with a convoy leaves them at Brampore. The same moneth Mahobet-chan received 26 leck of roopees from Channazeid-chan his sonne vice-roy of Bengala, which he extracted as annuall rent out of Pattana, Soughtar, Banaras, Sonargan, and Chatigan, rich and well peopled Citties upon Ganges; as also out of Sondiva (an isle 20 leagues from Catigan) than which is none more fruitfull in India. Ian∣gheer also removing from Chabull to Lahore, by Nomalls perswasion condescends to the slaughter of such Rashboots as Mahobet had mixed
with his own guard; and after that to destroy Mahobet, ere he received any supply of men from his kinsmen Chan-Alem and Radgee-Rustang then comming towards him: and for her part, to second him and leave no∣thing undone or unattempted that might conduce to the execution of such great designes, she empties all her husbands coffers, and hyres men from all places to serve her; so that Ouripargan Viceroy of Bassowere brings her 5000 horse, Godgee-Tzera 3000, Madoffer-chan 12000, and of her owne 19000 more: hoping also that Faedi-chan (fled from the battell of Atteck into the deserts of Thombel to Radgee Ghomanoo) would associate her: but he was so affraid of Mahobets fierce encounters, that he would no more of them; but went to Perwees at Brampore, to whom (by a com∣mendatory letter from Rajea-Bertzingh) he is welcome. Mahobet-chan (ignorant of Iangheers confederacy) has notice of the Queens pro∣ject and forces, and is not amated; but with a constant bravery goes on to fight with her. In the way (at his Masters request) he uses Assaph-chan and his sonne with more respect than formerly. Normall also hastens to∣wards him, having sent her sonne Sheryar to Labore with 8000 horse to secure that Imperiall city against Mahobet. In his passage, by great good hap he chances upon Sultan Bullochy and the two christned Princes, whom he rescued; and got so privately and with such haste into Lahore, that without resistance most of the Rashboots were cut off, and the castle mann'd with the Queens Army. Iangheer also, rowsed out of his long sleep playes his part; for being come to Rheed within 8 myles of Normall and her Army, (and having at all tymes the freedome of hunting, hank∣ing, and such like pastime, he makes it his advantage) escapes, and is joy∣fully welcomed by the Queen, who (crying out Mombarick) impales him in her armes, and cryes for joy; then, gives present order to march on to assaile the Traytors. Mahobet-chan (like all other motions, when at highest, descend) quickly knowes of Iangheers flight, and is not so grieved at his being gone, as in the manner, intending never to withhold him longer than he fancied: yet the revolt of 5000 of his men did not a little trouble him: howbeit, per∣ceiving his enemyes were approaching, and that it was no fit tyme to dwell upon circumstances, he apparrells himselfe in a rich and tryed coat of mayle, and with his shield and speare spurs up in view of the Moguls Lescar; where, by all signes he perceives the Mogulls affection estranged; he sighes at it, and returnes, orders his army, and after a short Oration goes on in front to begin the combat. Ere the Battell be∣gan, Balant-chan affronts him with a peremptory Message from the King, to this effect; that if he desired to be thought loyall, he should expresse it by releasing Assaph-chan and the other Umbraves whom he kept impri∣soned; by whose mediation he might peradventure obteine pardon for such his high rebellion: Mahobet-chan knowes it was Normalls device, yet loth in any thing to distate the King, sends him a protest of his zeale and loyalty, and that so soon as he came to the river Behed, his desires should be accomplished: so, he arises, and at the place presigned, calls for Assaph-chan and his sonne; shewes him he had power to confound him, but his vertue swayed him to another end; which sayd, he not only pulls away
his markes of servitude, but vests him with rich and princely roabes, mounts him upon his best courser, girds him with a pretious blade, and with a convoy of eight hundred horse presents him to Court, his farewell onely poynting to remember him. Iangheer receives him with teares of love, but Normall with supercilious looks and words of disdaine, upbraiding him with cowardize that durst not attend her tyme or depend upon her power to force him from a rebell she both scornd and hated. Assaph-chan laments her lunacy, but is affraid to contrary her; yet both in good will and private discourse at any tyme with the King, he speaks well of Mahobet and labours his reconciliation. The affaires of Industant subject to this variety, possesses all mens minds with astonishment. Whiles Iangheer and his beloved Amazon with the Lescar passe on to Lahore to advise with Sheriar, and to reduce all Majesty (too long divellicated) to the proper station: But what pleasure can the contemplation of her reviving glory afford her, so long as Mahobet her mortall Enemie lives unpunished? shee knowes not why shee is intituled sole Empresse of best parts of Asia, Commandresse of so much men and trea∣sure, so long as Mahobet an obscure Rashboote dares eclipse her splendor, and travell too and fro unresisted, guarded with such applause and popu∣larity: shee ruminates a thousand severall sorts of revenge, but by too much choise knowes not which to fasten on: the surest and most honou∣rable is by warre, and thereupon calls Amet-chan, (Brahim-chans cozen) Zeffer-chan, Nouradin-Cooly, Anna Rha Radia, Emyrchan, Mircomyr, Immir∣za Rustan, and other Nobles, desiring them to hasten Mahobets destruction, an imployment wherein they should finde a gratefull remuneration. Each man promises his best endeavour, and with fifteene thousand horse goe joyntly on to attempt it: in the first place (hearing of some treasure his sonne Zaedchan had sent him out of Bengala) they ambush neere Cheban-Chebaed (a Castle of strength) and break out upon the Rashboots that then were no more but eight hundred valiant men, who sold their money at a deere rate, two thousand of Normalls men giving their lives for it and for her ambition; but by their multitude were at last defeated, and most of them slaughtered; leaving 26 lack or 2600000 rupees to their avarice, which was brought to Lahore, and there some part given for salary, the rest was coffered. Ganganna, (Chan-Channa some men call him, by this time recovered) by bribery and great braggs is made Generall of Normalls Forces. Mahobet-chan is not troubled at it; but the revolt of his wild sonne Byrewer afflicts him sadly. This young Gallant had no sooner triumphed over Assaph-can, whom he delivered to his Father (as is spoken of) but with three thousand horse (his Father had made him Coronell of) hee is intreated to assaile Radgea Tzettersingh at Nornon his Enemy; but not regarding his Fathers instruction, turnes another way by Bengor to force his Fathers Castle of Rantipore, but in vaine, for Motzaibchan the Captaine suspecting him, fools him with faire words, and breakes his forces; and Beyrewer flying thence, is by Ray Ruttang at Bondy taken and imprisoned. Iangheer finding his thoughts free, and refresht by many new delights his youthfull Queene each day invented for his recreation, forgets the re∣bellion
of Curroon, and his late adversity; yea, gives his lascivious mind full scope, and involves himselfe with the effeminate roabes of sloth and wantonnesse: but in the plenitude of those his joyes, the glory of his estate growes cloudy, and his motion whirles into a malignant Orbe, by the dis∣consolate Newes hee receives from Brampore of his beloved sonnes death. His eyes grow dim, his heart turnes leady, and all conceits of pleasure re∣lish unsavourie when the departure of Perwees objects it selfe, and those hopes and comforts he had in him, seeme fantasticall. Goushroo and Sha Da∣niel are dead; Perwees is now no more: Sha Ethimore and Hussen his grand children made Christians: Bullochy is a child: Sheriare a foole, and Cur∣roon the very eye-sore of his conceptions; a rebell, wilde, proud, greedy, treacherous, and deceitfull: himselfe was old, and at his death the Empire subject to innovation or domestick consumption: in these and such like do∣lorous cogitations Iangheer spends the weary minutes of his life, till death ultima poena (as they call it) summons him in few moneths after to the resignation of his life and Empire: Whiles Maehobet Chawn chawes the af∣flicting newes also of Prince Perwees his death. 'Twixt whom (forgetting Gangannas trechery) was most exact friendship and sympathie. He sees (in him) the privation of all his joyes, the hopes he had in his suceession anni∣hilated, and the ambition of Normall and Assaph Cawn (suspected to have poysoned him) ingendring to a monstrous height; so that bidding farewell to the world and all other society and imployments, he contracts himselfe to privacie and solitude,Mahobet-cawn turnes Eremite. feeding upon contemplation of what had past, and the lubricity of terrestriall pleasures, vaine-glory, and other vanities: he forsakes his strong and delightfull Castle Rantampore, and through Zia∣lor comes to Radgee Zirmol, and under licence fixes at Zirmol where hee anchorites. But Curroones ayre swells with Chymaeraes, now more than ever af∣fecting the Empire, none but children interposing him: hee knew his Fa∣thers affection was easily recovered, and Assaph Kawn his restlesse projector carefull to state him in the chaire of Majesty: so that, arm'd with confi∣dence and accompanied with forty Elephants and fifteene hundred horse∣men he leaves Baker, Chytor, Tutta; and through Tesel, Chobager, and Ec∣clisser, comes to Masser Thormet in Decan, where Melec receives him with all joy, and adds to his troopes foure thousand horse with promise of forty thousand more to assist him upon any good occasion. CHYTOR (in mid-way 'twixt Brampore and Adsmeer) is yet a Citie, just∣ly clayming precedencie for antiquity amongst all the Cities of Indya. It was formerly called Taxila, and that Metropolis whence King Porus issued against great Alexander; Ranna Radgee Mardoot lineally descended from him, of late yeeres and (till by intreaty of Sultan Curroon Anno 1614. he came to Agra, and in slight sort did some obeysance) here soveraignizing and in Oodipore, The Citie is at this day but meanly beautifull, three miles in compasse, not a third part of what was formerly. Time and war have fur∣row'd her, not onely disroabing her of her bravery in buildings where men inhabited, but in huge Temples of Idolatry, the ruines of above a hundred (once lofty in fastidious Turrets) to this day remaining, of stone; strong, good, white, and well polisht, rare and observable; now inhabited by
Storks, Owles, Batts, and like birds, of whom the superstitious people have no small esteeme and veneration: the North pole is elevated in that place twenty five degrees. This Province is bounded by Cambaya on the South, by Chandys on the North; by Berar East, and on the West the Ocean: re∣turne we to our History. Ganganna,Gannaoa dies. selfe conceited by his late honour and imployment against Mahobet-cawn (whom hee verily thought had left the society of men for feare of him, resolves to ferret him, but) in the mid'st of his bravadoes and hopes is arrested by grim death, and his carkasse conveighed to Delly, to be intombed amongst his great Ancestors. At that time, Iacont-cawn an Umbrave of great wealth, honour and experience, commanding eight thousand horse to serve Curroon, by many affronts without cause put upon him by Mirzaladin Melecks sonne, is inflamed with rage, and flies to Chan Ie∣han Generall of Prince Perwee's Army at Brampore, who receives him with joy, and by his exaspiration, with foure hundred Elephants and forty thousand horse make haste to Bellagate (the widdow and child of Sultan Perwees being committed to the care of Lescarcawn,) where they use all extremities of warre, spoyling, burning, and captiviting all they had a minde; to and by rare chance,Abdul cawn disgrac't. intercepting some letters from Godgee Hes∣sary, they discover Abdul-cawn (whom some call Abdulla-cawn) (the wea∣thercock of those times) his intent, to turne from the Kings party and re∣tvtue to Curroon: hee is convicted, his estate confiscate, his honour re∣verst, himselfe manacled, cald the darling of inconstancy, and upon an Elephant in disgracefull sort from the Army sent to Brampore, where by Lascar-cawn hee is imprisoned. This done, they enter Decan with all speed, and pierce most fortunatly into the mid'st of Melecks Kingdome, doing what they pleased without opposition; so that after six weekes hostility, they returne loaden with abundance of wealth, and over-joyed with their easie victory. But (when they thought themselves most sure) Melec presents himselfe in an advantagious place with eighty thousand men, incircling them on the one side, & the stupendious hills on the other, so that surrounded with amazement, and clad with black ragges of discon∣tent, they incamp; not daring to hazard the fight, or by stratagem break out to hazard their deliverance; but in that miserable sort are lockt up, the Decan at on time offending them, till by famine finding no pleasure in their riches (where no meat on sure tearmes was to bee purchased) they were constrained to parle and submit, assured only of their lives, stript out of all their wealth and bravery, returning with more shame than they had honour formerly. Iangheer the great Mogull, has advertisement of this variable successe, but knowes not how to alter it; nor cares hee much, the death of Perwees so possesses him: yet, Normall ceases not to pursue her revenge against Maho∣bet; and finding him so hard to be dealt withall, begins will Channa-zeid-cawn his valiant sonne, whom sheere calls home and places Mocrib-cawn in his command, over five thousand horse and twelve thousand men; but he had small joy of his greatnes, for in lesse than three weekes being there, by accident (sailing over Ganges) the boat is over-turned, he drowned, and Fedi-cawn is made Viceroy of Bengala and Malacca after him: during
which Iangheer being at Lahore, an Ambassador Ziet Borka by name, arrives with presents and commends from the King of Maurenahar (or Manauwer) accompanied with the only Oracle and wonder of his time Hodgee-Abdul∣radgee (brother to Chojea Callaun) admired by all, and resorted to by many sorts of Tartars from Bochar, Tuza, Balck, Samerchand, Gaznahen, and other parts, none of which came empty-handed, so that in small time this Monck was comparable in riches with most Potentates of Asia. Hee is brought into Lahore with incredible joy and admiration, all the Umbraves of the Court (Assaph-cawn excepted) attending him, and was no sooner lodged, but is presented from the Queene with a goblet of pure gold, massie and of curious work, with so many Jewels as out-valued a lac of roupees. These he accepts most cheerefully, and scorning to be behind in courtesie, returnes her and her Lord, five hundred Dromidaries, swift and beautifull, a thousand horses of an excellent good shape and breed; some porcellan and other Chyna rarities: the Ambassador also presents the Mogull a double of such, 2000 horses, a thousand Dromidares, some sword blades, and other gifts of value, so great, that the report went, ne∣ver any Ambassador came so richly furnished, was better entertained, or went away more satisfied: Never let any Ambassador think himselfe wel∣come to any Asiatick Prince, that brings nothing for a present, save com∣plement, for not any Native dare petition, either the Mogull, or any of his great ones, without a present. Yet is not Normall suited with content, so long as Mahobet made fru∣strate her vowes to have him ruined: her power seems small, her indea∣vours idle, seeing (as she thought) his ease was in contempt of her; so that her thoughts project, her dreames fancie severall waies for his destructi∣on: it gladded her in part to see his sonne Zeid-cawn out of imployment, and at Court (by such as adored her) scorn'd and confronted, howbeit, by Assaphs meane Iangheer affects him; yea Normall (had not the over∣flowing hate she bore his Father hindred her) had doubtlesse become amo∣rous, and made him in Cupids Court, Iangheers competitor; but spight ore swayes her, and revenge predominates; she calls Amirhan, Nouradri Cooly, and Hemyr beg her minions, to whom she discovers her desires, and intreats their diligence: they obey, and promise their care and faithful∣nesse, and with fifteene thousand horse advance to fight with him (whiles Normall and the King journey to Cassimeer) his ne plus ultra: and Assaph-cawn (mindfull of Mahobets kindnesse to him, loth so brave a man should perish for the lust and malice of a woman, and especially by his advantage to draw him to Curroon) by a swift: and trusty messenger, sends him a gra∣cious letter discovering his sisters wrath and resolution, and sollicits young Rana Radgee to further him. The Queenes Army persecute poore Mahobet, who upon receit of As∣saph cawns letter, after some passion forsakes his cell in Zirmol, flies to Gessimeer, and thence to Radgee Rana who ever loved him. The Army has notice of his flight, they dare not enter Ranas country without leave, and therefore send post to Queene Normahall, who dictates a letter to Rana, mixt with intreaties and threats, makes Iangheer signe it, and after long and swift running is delivered him; Radgee Ranna at first contemnes her
bravadoes, but upon better consideration promises his good-will, but thus; he perswades Mahobet-cawn in no sort to think him either fearfull or trai∣terous, that (if hee pleased) he would do his best in his defence against all the power and rage of India, yet, so his judgement were of any force, (and to indeare Assaph-chawn,) he would perswade him (since his Enemies were so powerfull and implacable) to hast unto Curroon, where he should not only be intirely welcomed, but agrandize his honour so suddenly, that his name would flash terrour into the hearts of his most potent adversa∣ries. Mahobet-chan, loth to trespasse upon his patience, and by the circum∣stances of his speech, judging him fearefull of that army, tells him he in∣tended not to be any cause of losse or feare to him, or any other in the uni∣verse; and so mounts to be gone; but Rana will not him goe, till he pro∣mise him a delivery of a pacquet he had intituled to Curroon. After long perswasion he accords, and with 500 Rashboots, and one thousand other men led by Wazir-chan he flyes into Decan, where at Guyneer upon the limits of Nisamsha's kingdome he findes Curroon; but so affraid of his sudden comming, that he instantly armd his men for oppostion: yet when he saw the case otherwise, and had read his pacquet, after some amazement hee imbraces him with unspeakable joy, firmes a perpetuall friendship and gives him command of that castle and his other forces. All India admire at this agreement, and Normall (too late) repents her folly. — The mind oft in remorse May wish the thing undone Rage did inforce. —Qui non mederabitur irae Infectum volet esse dolor quod suaserit et mens, Iangheer also blames her incosiderate wrath, and growes so afflicted at it, that in a deep Melancholy he forsakes his pleasures at Cassimeer and re∣moves towards Lahore; but upon the high Mountaines of Bymberrie falls sick, and the three dayes end, after three and twenty yeares reigne, (to the astonishment of the Leskar, Normals endlesse sorrow, and grief of the whole Empyre) he dyes (suspected of poyson) the twelft of October or Ardabe∣hish, in the yeare of our accompt 1627 and of the Hegira 1007:Iangheer dyes. nomina∣ting upon his death-bed his grandsonne Bulloch (sonne of Sultan Gushroo, his eldest sonne) his successor: he also sweares all the Umbraves to see him crowned: and that Curroon should have no portion nor favour save what he might merit by submission: and accordingly (conveighing the old Mo∣guls dead body to Lahore, where preparing for his funerall they carry it to Tzecander three course from Agray and intomb him in King Eckbars Mo∣nument) at Delly they crowne Sultan Bullochy (aged thirteene yeares) their King, with all royall accustomed state and ceremony: and unanimous∣ly cry out alowd, Padshaw Salamant i. e. God save the King. Normall in Iangheers end feares the beginning of a world of miseries in her selfe and progeny; but being of an active spirit and not easily dis∣tracted, she instantly conceives and swels with the ambition of that Em∣pyre: her pregnancy is bettered by her having the whole Treasure in her hands, also animated in that Bulloch was too young to nourish opposition, his Councell carelesse, and Curroon a huge wayes absent thence: so that taking occasion by the forehead, she arms her selfe with confidence
and a pretended Title, and resolves to mount her sonne Sheriar to the su∣preame ascent of Majesty, or in the attempt to set all India on fire and consume her self as a sacrifice in so great an action. In this humor she hires 15000 horse, and sends in post haste to her son in Iengapore to levy as many moe; that done, she thinks to strangle her brother and Bullochy at that tyme comming towards her. But they assured of her bad meaning, leave Chotelen, & with 30000 horse post to Lahore to apprehend Sheryar whom they heard was baffled by Godgee Abdul-Hassen (once his stipendiary) and then incamp∣ed onely with 4000 horse: but in the way (to prevent Normalls speed after them) they block up the narrow passage upon the mountaines through which her Army must needs passe; so that, ere the Queen could come to joyne with simple Cheryar; Assaph-chan, Eradet-chan and other Umbraves with the young Mogul in their company come to Lahore, where they find Sheryars Army (by the expence of 90000 lac of roopees) trebled. They delay not, but with extremity of rage assayle him and in two houres (by villany of Amir-chan and Sheirgodgee his chiefe Captaines, who betrayed him) get the victory; forcing him into the castle, which for two dayes kept safe, but in the third was by treason entred, his men slaine, his trea∣sure taken, and to make him incapable of future ambition has his eyes put out, Sultan Bullochy not suffering him to be killed. That done, they againe proclayme Bulloch Emperor of Industant, and Lord of the Moguls; and send Eradet with 20000 horse against the Virago Queen; who (hearing how ill her sonne had sped and doubting treason in her Army,) lets fall the Maje∣sty of her spirit, sighs at the perfidy of her brother, grieves she slew him not when she had him in her power, complaynes of her owne wickednesse in continuing so long inraged against Mahobet-chan, deplores her abusing his valiant sonne, and with a dejected eye, beholding the sudden eclipse of her glory, and the inconstancy of her Friends, she wraps all up in dismissing her guard, and disroabed of her bravery, submits to Bulloch's mercy; who comforts her, gives her his oath of safety, and during his reigne affords her all respect and freedome. But long this good Prince injoyes not his soverainty: for, Assaph-chan seeing all as he desired, speeds away a sure post with letters to Curroon, who made such haste, that in 14 dayes he runne 2500 of our myles, to Daita, (8 course from Necanpore and from Brodera or Radjepore 120 to the East.) in Decan, there finding him overjoyed with such good newes, and send∣ing his excuse to Melec-Amber the Decan King, hasts on with Mahobet-chan, Zulpheckar-chan, and 7000 other rashboots, and mancibdars through Guzurat to Amadavad, where by Saffin-chan he is welcomed: there hee slept not long, for making Agra the object of his race, he bids farewell to Saffin-chan, and with a greater troope (feeding them with great promises when he had the crowne) in three weeks travell comes to Agra, where he claymes the Imperiall Title, and is by his owne favorites proclaymed King, by name of Pot Shaw-Iehan: then giving notice to his Father in law Azaph-chan how farre and with what successe he had travelled, as also, that so long as Sultan Bulloch was living his owne greatnesse was but coun∣terfeit; Assaph-chan, flesht in former homicides, and not caring how, so he could fixe the Dyadem on Curroon at that tyme tottering, he makes
Radgee Bandor of his counsell, who forthwith without examination of right or wrong posts to Lahore, and with Assaph-chans keyes, enters the hummum or Bath where the innocent Princes were, and with a horrid speed and infernall cruelty strangles them all, to lead Curroon through such a bloody path unto the crowne. In this miserable sort,A.M. 5598 A. D. 1628 A. H. 1008 dyed young Bulloch but three moneths Emperour of Industant or great Mogul; in that massacre accompanying him, Sultan Sheryar, Sha-Ethimore and Sha-Hossen (the baptised sonnes of Prince Daniel) two sonnes of Sultan Perwees, two sonnes of Sultan Morad or A∣murath; all whose carcasses were without any respect buried in a garden in Lahore neere the entrayls of Iangheer: but their heads (as an assurance of their death) sent to Curroon, to glut his eyes (by so horrid a Spectacle) with infernall ambition. The murther of the royall blood of Industand being known to Chan-Iehan, Zied-chan-and other Umbraves, they are orechardged with amaze∣ment and feare: they see Assaph-chan guilty, but want power to question him, especially (by inquisition) hearing it was Curroons commandement▪ they heap up a thousand maledictions on their heads and crave vengeance from above to recompence them. Curroon peceives the Empire storming at him, but his incantations quickly quiets them. And now after much toyle (having through the Ocean of inconstancy arrived at the port of greatnesse and ease as he thought) he gives order for his solemne coronation: which accordingly by a generall assembly of the great Umbraves, and Nobles of his Empire is performed; by second proclamation assuming the Name of Sultan-Sha-Bedyn-Mahumet. Then he orders the affaires of his Monar∣chy, placing and displacing at his pleasure; the Seraglio of his father is shut up: Normall and her three daughters are confined stricktly; Assaph-chan is made second in the Empyre; and next him Mahobet-chan; Abdul-chan is released; Channa-ziedchan is made viceroy of Bengala againe. Am∣bassadours from Persia, Arabia, Tartaria, and Decan come and joy him in his greatnesse. Divers Radgees, as Radgee-kessing from Nagor, Chan-Azem from Azimeer, the puissant Radgees Mainsingh, Tzettersingh, and Ghessingh, from Fettipore with 50000 horse move with great and solemne state to Agray; whither after (six weeks) came Assaph-chan, Zadoch-chan, Eradet-chan, Rustan-chan, Saffin-chan and Mirgomley: to all whom he gave thanks for ther severall Favours, remitting and putting in oblivion all offences and insults during his rebellion. After which, he proclaymes a Iubile ce∣lebrated by all men there, with all sports and delights possible! Thus has Curroon (through a sea of blood) attayned the highest port and dignity of the eastern world, surrounded with delights, and guarded by a power (in his conceiving) unresistable; but these sinnes he makes nothing of, have apparantly in these our tymes drawn downe the heavy Iudgments of God almighty: both, in taking his beloved wife away the week of his inauguration, since when he has made his daughter (by that dead Lady) his wife; incest of so high a nature that that yeare his whole Empire was so wounded with Gods arrowes of plague, pestilence and Fa∣mine, this thousand yeares before never so terrible.1634 1014 The sword also seemes to threaten him, the Persians having snatched from him Kermaen
and Candahar; the Tartar Kabull; Sheuph-Almuck indangers Tutta and Lourebander; Radgee Ioogh with his Coolyes trouble Brampore, and two counterfeit Bullochyes have sowne the seed of an universall rebellion. The event of all is in the hands of God, who in Infidells hates sinnes of blood, incest and dissembling: wee will close this story with a caveat from a heathen, but of more reason and temperance. —Quid? ille qui Mundum quatit Vibrans corusca fulmen Aetneum mann Stator Deorum? credis hoc posse effeci Intor videntes omnia, ut lateas? What? that great Iupiter the world that shakes When Aetna's thunderbolts in hands he takes? Think'st thou from him who all the world doth see In lurking holes concealed close to bee? To end all, at our being in his country he came within two dayes jour∣ney of Surrat; and in a ceremoniall way, the English merchants ships thundred out his health by 200 great shot, which he most thankfully ac∣cepted of: Tis high tyme now to renew our Travaile. Diu.Adjoyning this and in the Cambayan Territorie, is Diu, or Dew: (in for∣mer times call'd Delta, (frō a resemblance of that in Egipt) Patala, Patalena, and Hidespa, as Arrhian, Pliny and Strabo have it: seated at th'entrance into the gulph, in the latitude of 22 degrees 18 minutes North; from Or∣mus South, sixty leagues; and from Cape Comry two hundred: a streame or arme issuing from Indus so incompasses her, that she becomes a peninsule; the Haven before the Towne is so land-lockt, so good for anchorage, that at Swalley, Chaul, Danda-Rajapuree, and other Havens is no better riding, either for the ground or Fort, that so well safeguards them. Nearchus (great Alexanders Admirall) from this place begun his Voyage and sayled to Ormus, where hee repaired his weather-beaten Navie. The Towne it selfe is both large and hospitable; yet by reason of the Portugals pride and cruelty, Christians are lesse beloved here then in other places: 'twas of good Trade, affording Opium, Assa-foetida, Puchio, Cotton, Indico, Mira∣bolans, Sugar, Arack, Agats, Cornelians, Diaspries, Calcedons, Hematists, Pearl, & Elephants teeth; but since Surat and Cambaya (her next neighbors) have drawne the English and Dutch thither, her Traffick and other allure∣ments are contemned: what she best boasts of, is the Castle, built (after long fight and bloodshed) by Albuquerque the famous Portugall Anno 1515, of their account 895: by whose cost and care it was so advanced, that it compares at this day with any other Sea Towne in the Orient. Nor could it ever have succceded had not false protestations, bribes, threats, and other devices drawne beleife into the Pagans, that their desire to have so many Castles and Marittim Forts, was onely to defend themselves, in parts where they were altogether strangers: but it appeared afterwards, that avarice, rapine, Tyrannie, and lust allured them, as Osorius their Bishop in vita Emanuelis 11 libro. fol 347. speaks concerning them, Etsi Lusitani imprimis arces cupiebant ad se defendendas; postea tamen visum est, speciem faederis & amicitae, dominationem quaeri & Tyrannidem agitari, &c. Which caused such turmoyles, that in no other part of India they found so long, such strong resistance: partly by their owne valour, but chiefly by help of Mir¦hocem,
and his Mamalukes, Campson Gaurus the then great Sultan of Egipt sent thither to quell their insolencies; Notwithstanding, by the ruine of that Sultan (not long after, by Selim the first, 1516.) the Portugals by little and little grew victorious; though to obtaine it, Laurensius-Almeida (sonne to their Viceroy) the most excellent of all their Captaines at that time perished. The river Indus is by Pliny call'd Sandus, Sinthus by Arrhian, and now call'd Sinde not farre distant hence, at 23 deg. 15 min. lat. some observe 24 deg. 40 min. and West var. 16 degrees 30 min. commixes in two ostiums (Thevet foolishly names seaven) with the Ocean; after three thousand miles flux from the Casmirian (or as Mela in his third booke the Paropa∣misian) mountaines; in her discent receiving growth from many great and famous rivers, which from other hills derive their origin, mellow Indya, and at last incorporate with that famous flood from whose name the most noble part of the universe is named: the rivers are Behat, Ravee, Damiadee, Ob-chan, Wihy, &c. of old times, named Hidaspes, Acesinis, Cophis, Adris, Ob-itarmas, Coas, Suastes, Melzidas, Hirotas, Zaradas, Hispalis, &c. On the other side the gulph,Muskat. in Arabia the happy is seated Muscat (or Mascat) not farre from Cape Rozelgate (formerly call'd Ziagrum and Co∣rodamum) and almost Nadyr to the crabbed Topick: I dare not conclude that this was that old Raamah (from Raama sonne of Chush sonne of Cham) by Ptolomy Rhaguma, and Rhegma celebred by Ezekiel 27.22. The Merchants of Sheba (a Citie in Arabia whence came the Queene (and not from Aethio∣pia, Chush being misinterpreted) to visit Solomon: and Raamah were thy Mer∣chants (meaning Tyre) &c. howbeit 'tis certaine, it has beene much more populous, and famous then at this present; though now she begins (since Ormuz was lost) to revive her glory; being the best Port, Haven, and de∣fence for Frigots, Juncks, and other Vessels of Warre and Trade belong∣ing to the Portugalls: who first conquered it and the Ile Anno Dom. 1507. and after it other adjacent Townes; as Calajate, Curiate, Soar, Orfaza, and divers places till then under the Ormousian Empire: at that time Zeifadin was King (in nonage) ruled by Atar a spitefull Eunuch; whose deceit was so apparent, as not onely made this Towne to blush in flames, but had wel∣nigh ruin'd his Masters Empire. Torus (the King brother) then commanded here, with Mamadee the Kings sonne, undone by poyson given him from Nordino the second Officer: after which, it was betrayed to the Turks by Iack a Portugall; but after some cost, and toyle recovered: yet next yeere (by bribery) the Tunks re-entred; and wherein, Peribeg the Basha plants a Colony, and goes homeward: but, ere he got thither heares of its revolt and the slaughter of his silly Garrison; the Newes so amazing him, that hee goes to Mecha and turnes religious: but by command of Solyman the great Turk is forced thence; and (for a reward of his fifty yeares good service) is beheaded, and his estate forfeited. It now obeyes the Portugalls: the Towne is seated in a Plain, yet armed or propt with two rising advantagi∣ous mountaines; a ditch and parapet drawne from one hill to the other so inviron her, that she seemes inaccessible: the Castle is large and defensive, fill'd with men, and stored with great Ordnance: little else is worthy of our observation.
The seventeenth of December wee took ship in the William for Gombroon in Persia: the Exchange, the Hart, and other brave ships went along with us, and above three hundred slaves whom the Persians bought in India;Trop. Can∣cri. Persees, Ientews (gentiles) Bannaras and others. The eightenth day we crost the Tropick, and next day elevated the North pole twenty foure degrees odde minutes, the gulph in this place straitned, the shores of Carmania and Arabia in this forme appearing to us. The Persian Gulph. Arabia (denominated from Arabus sonne of Apollo and Madam Babilo∣nia) at this day is more obscured than in ancient times, such time as it was the seminary of famous men: worthily in those dayes called happie, Pan∣chaya and Eudaemonia. No part bred better Physitians, Mathematicians, and Philosophers. Galen, Hipocrates, Avicen, Algazales, Albumazar, Abu∣beer, Alfarabius, Mahomet-ben-Isaac, ben Abdilla, Siet Iooh, ben Cazem, ben sid' Ally and others, here borne or educated: the Arabick so inchanted men that it is a common hyperbole amongst them, the Saints in Heaven and Paradize speak it. In it the holy Decalogue was given; in it was hatcht the delusive Alcaron: if gums aromatick, succulent fruits, fragrant flow∣ers and such like delicacies can captivate thee, say then, Arabia is the Phoenix of the East, with Danaeus the epitomè of delight, and with Saint Augustin that it is Paradize. 'Tis tripartite; Deserta, Petrosa; and Felix. Deserta is also call'd hu∣milis, profunda and aspera; by Servius, Lucian and Aristides. Petrosa, In∣ferior by Strabo, Nabothaea by Ptolomy, and Barrha by Castoldus, Rathal Al∣haga by them habitants, and by Zieglerus Bengacalla. Foelix varies also in nomenclation, by Pliny, Sabaea; and Mamotta by Solinus; Ajaman and Giaman by ben Ally. In the first is Kedar oft named by the Psalmist. In the second, the mounts Horeb and Sinai, as also Iathrip and Mecca places of account among the Sarracens. The Happy call'd now Mamotta, is unhappy in Medi∣na Telnabi, but joyed in Iobs birth-place, and Saba, by Ptolomy, Save; & now nam'd Samiseashac, & many other Towns noteworthy. Adedi, Neopolis, Pho∣cidis Abissa, Teredon, Areopolis, Zebitum, Acadra, Iathrib, Alata, Mocha, Ezion∣geber. Acyna, Munichiates, Ambe, and others converted at this day into other names; as Aden, Zieth, Zidim, Iemina-bahrim, Huguer, Medina, Zarvall, Oran, Danchally, Muskat, Imbum, Zama, Moffa, Lazzach, Gubelcama, Bal∣sora,
Massad or Mosqued-Ally, Cuface, Damarchana, Barag, Eltarch and many more now under the Ajamites or Saracins; but in old times distinguisht into these Provinces, the Sabaei (whence, Guilandinus saies the Queene came to heare Solomoms wisdome, and the three Magi) the Panchaia, Alapeni, Mo∣abiti and Caedari (bordering the desert) Aorzi, Nabathea (Nabaths birth∣place, eldest sonne to Ismael) Atramitae, Massabathae, Canclaei, Stabaei, &c. enough to disturb our memories. And I cannot but note, how that the Hebrew (Chaldy, Arabick and Siriack drilling from the Hebrew) Greek nor Latin, in their times epedimic, are now no where spoken, save by de∣rivative: and that the heathen gods, Iove, Saturne, Marz, Apollo, Iuno, Di∣ana, Venus, and thirty thousand moe, once idolatriz'd all the earth over, are now no where invocated: all oracles ceast at the passion of our Saviour. We will leave Arabia, and passe by without smelling or tasting her magick delicacies, and rest satisfied in a word or two of her present tongue, and how the moneths differ in severall dialects. Arabick. English. Persian. Malle Salt Namack Sammach Fish Mohee Moihee Water Obb Narr Fire Attash Hattop Wood Yzom Degang Hens Moorgh Sallet Oyle Rogan-cherough Sammon Butter Rogan Bedda Egges Tough-morgh San a Dish Shecky or paola Cobbeer Great Buzzurck Sackeer Little Cowcheck Annestre I buy it Man mechorre Vntan aphe have you Dare suma Beet a House Connah
English. Greek. Hebrew. Arabick. Siriack. Aegyptick. Turkish. Aethiop. Persian. September Maimacterion Tizri or Ethanim Muharram Eylooll Toph Ramazan Turh Farwardin-maw October Puanepsion Bul or Marchisuan Sawphor Teshrin-owl Paophy Schewal Paap Ardabehish November Anthesterion Chysleu Rabbioul-owl' Teshrin-auchor Achir Silhcade Hatur Chodad-maw December Poseideon Tebeth or Tevet Rabbioul-auchor Kanoon-owl Cojac Scilhydze Cohia Tyr-maw January Gamelion Sebeth or Sevet Yowmadul-owl' Kanoon-auchor Tibhi Mucharren Tubah Mordad-maw February Elaphebolion Adar or Veadar Yowmadul-auchor Siubat Machir Sepher Amschyr Sharyr-maw March Moonuchion Nisan or Abib Radiab Adarr Phamenoth Rabuil-oul Parmahath Mihe-maw Aprill Thargelion Jarr or Zyn Sabaan Nisan Pharmuthy Rabuil-auchir Parmuda Aban-maw May Skirrophorion Syvan Ramulan Ejarr Pachon Gemaziel-oul Pashnes Adur-maw June Hecatombayon Tamuz Schowl Itaziran Paynhi Gemaziel-auchir Peuni Dei-maw July Matageitnion Abb Heidull-kaida Tamuz Epiphi Rbezib Epip Bahmen August Boedromion Elull Heidull-hazia Abb Mesorhi Saban Musrhi Asphendermaed
Leave we Arabia and crosse the Gulfe, cald the Babylonian sea by Plutarch in the life Lucullus, and Yowmachama by the Syrians: by some Mesendin; cald also by the Persians Deriob Farsistan, and by Arabians Bohar el Naharim, by Turks Elcatiph. But beware by Sir Robert Sherlyes example of Cape Gua∣der (Dendrobosa in old tymes) not farre from Goadell, in five and twenty de∣grees, and where the Compasse varies 17 degrees 15 minutes. An infa∣mous port and inhabited by a perfidious people. Under pretext of amity they allured Sherley and his Lady ashoare A. 1613; where but for a Hodgee that understood their drift, & honestly revealed it, they had been murdered with Newport their Captaine; and meerly to play the theeves with them. Come we then to Iasques, (or rather Iezdquis, Iezquird sonne of Shapore King of Carmania dying here: Pliny seemes to call it Cassandra) a Towne upon the Gulph in five and twenty degrees, eight and fifty min. lat. in Carmania seated (Cherman now cald, confind by Macron South, and North by Persia,) South from Ormus forty leagues. A place fortefied by the Portugall, who built a strong castle here, planted it with seventeene can∣non, o cannon pedro, two culverins, two demiculverins, foure brasse sakers, and a thousand musquets: unable altogether, to resist the English, who in dispight of their utmost bravery (to revenge the death of Captaine Shilling, slaine the yeare before) tooke it the second of February 1622, but unwisely by our men given to the Persian, who now keep it; and by shooting of so many peeces as they see ships, give an Alarme to Ormus, and they to Gombroon, loth to be intrapt by too much confidence. In this channell we begun the Ormuzian strait; Ormus is as it were the umbelick of the gulph, flowing from Balsorack to cape Rozelgate; next morne we came in view of Kishmy a pettite castle not farre from Iasques;Kishmy. where also they give warning how many ships, or friggats they see dance∣ing upon the gulph; and next night of Larac,Larac. another small Isle upon the Arabian shore, foure leagues from Ormus Iland. ORMVS is at this day a miserable forlorne city and Ile; although but a douzen yeares ago the onely brave place in all the Orient. Est soli∣tudo magna megalopolis. If all the world were made into a ring Ormus the gem and grace thereof should bring. Si Tarrarum Orbis (quaqua patet) Annulus esset. Illius Ormusium gemma decusque foret. An Ile (though none more wretched) yet not unknown unto Antiquity by name of Organa and Geru as Varrerius has it; of Necrokin and Zamrhi to the Tattars; of Ormusia in Iosephus libr. I. de Iud: of Harmozia in Arrian; of Armuzia in Pliny; of Armuza in Ptol. of Vorocta in Niger; of Ogyris in Thevet: and seemes by Pliny, Curtius, and Rufus out of Dionysius, to be the buriall place of that famous Prince Erethreus, from whose name the Redsea was denominate. Ogyris looks into the sea, from whence Carmania, and the place of residence Where princely Erethreus liv'd; whose fate This Tomb conteins in mountains desolate. Ogyris inde salo premit caput, aspera rupes Carmanidis, qua se pelagi procul invehit undis, Regis Ereth rei tellus; hic nota sepulchro Tenditur, & nudis juga tantum canibus horret. Named Ormus by meanes of Shaw-Mahomet an Arabian Dinast, who An. Dom. 700 for more safety crost over from Kostac in Mogestan (Margastana
of old) to Iasques; a place hatefull to Mirza Bahadin the fourteenth King after him, that for most quiet removed An. D. 1312 of the Heg. 692 to this Ile and from that Harmuz (part of Maceta) twelve leagues from Kostack where his predecessors dwelt, so named it. From which time to this it was ever disturbed: first by Ioonsha the Persian King slaine by Vsan Cassan, who for pearles broke through Lar and forced Melec Nazomadin into Arabia, and againe recoverd by Mirza-codbadin 5 yeares after, viz. An. 1488; but long slept not so, for An. 1507 Alfonsus Albuquerq the Portuguise (after much adoe) subjected it to Emanuel his Master, suffering Zedfadin to enjoy the Title, and a pension of fifteene hundred crownes, but all command to him∣selfe, himselfe de facto King; and lastly by Emangoly-chan the Arch-Duke of Shyraz, by help of the English it was taken An. 1622, and by them dela∣pidat and depopulated. Let us view it as it was and is. The Altitude of the pole here, is 27 degrees: and though it be with∣out the torrid zone, yet what by the sulphur of the earth, and oblique re∣flex of the burning Sun, for foure moneths (from May to September) no place in the world is more hot or scalding; it is the custome here to sleep in beds of rayne water, which is not very coole neither, all day naked: the City had a faire Bazzar, many Churches, and Frieries, brave Magazeens, stately houses, and as gallant a castle as any other in Orient; the castle is yet in good strength and repayre; the rest, levelled with the ground; of which I cannot say, Nunc seges ubi Troja fuit, the soile being uncapable of corne or other graine: at that end against Dozar (and the great Bannyan tree in the continent) the City was built; where the sea is so narrow that a Cannon may easily spit over: the whole Ile exceeds not fifteene myles compasse: it is the most barren ground in the world, neither tree nor spring of good water could we find in it. It has salt, silver shining sand, and mine∣ralls of sulphur; has nothing else worth the looking on: And yet from the advantagious standing, the laborious Portugal made it the staple and glory of the world; secured indeed by many naturall props, on all sides com∣manding Iles and townes to furnish her: Larac (Azgillia of old) Kishmy (by some cald Quexome or Broict) Keys or Queys Ile, Angen, Andreve (or de los pasharos) Kargh, Baharem (Icara in Pliny) Dozaro, Iasques, and Kostack in Margastan (now Mogestan) vicinating them. So as to the eye of man no place could be more offensive and defensive, garrisons of Portu∣galls ever lying in these Ilands; and yet, when the God of Nature had decreed a ruine, it could not be withstood, but was in some regard mira∣culously effected, and at such a tyme as they least suspected it. But to doe her all the favour I can: let us remember such Princes as have honourd her: Sha-Mahomet is the first I find, who in the 80 yeare of the Heg: Of Christ 700, left his seat at Aman in Arabia, and sat downe at Calciat upon the shoare, but disliking it, removed to Costac in Mogestan (six and twenty leagues from Iasques) and there built a city which he cald Ormuz, and from whence part of Arabia took name; to him succceded Soli∣man, to him Izachan, to who Mahobet 2, Shawran-shaw, (who bequeathed the crowne to his Nephew) Emer-sha-bedin-Molong, whose daughter and heire married Seyfadin Aben-Ezer sonne to Ally-shaw Lord of Keys Iland: the crown (they wanting issue) then came to Sha-Bedin Mahomet his
cozen: to whom followed Rocnadin Mamut, Hamets son, who dying An. Dom. 1278 left the rule to his Infant sonne, Seidfadin-Nocerat, who was slaine by his brother Morad or Masad eleaven yeares after, and he forc't to flie into Kermaen by his brothers servant Mir Bahadin: Mir Bahadin Ayaz or Ben-Seyfin Ben-Cabadin is forced to flie, unable to resist the Turks Morad brought against him, so with many of his friends (such as hated the Ty∣rant) removed to Kishny, but not liking the place, rises thence and sits down at this Ile Gerun (or wood) where he built, fortified (and from the others name) namd it Ormuz; in the yeare 1312, of the Heg. 692 and to him a man of noble extraction, Emir-Azadin-gurdan-shaw; to him his sonne Mabare-zadin-babron-sha, a brave Prince, but fell by the axe of treachery, Mir-sha-Bedin-Issuff stroke him with; who also fell by the late Princes youngest brother, Mirza-Codbadin was he cald, infortunately banisht by his cozen Melec-Nozamedin, at whose death Cobadin returnd and swayd the Ormou∣sian Scepter, and at his death left all to Paca-Turansha a victorious Prince yet by death An. 1488 conquered; to him Mozad-sha Bedin, to him Salger-sha, to him Shawez, and to him Safadin or Zedfadin 2, subdued by Albuquerq, An. 1507 and by him cruelly strangled: Nordino, Codjeature, and De lam-sha attempted the soverainty, but Mahomet the right heire was crowned King; he dying, his sonne Seyd-Mahomet-sha was called King, who Anno 1622 was subdued by the English and Persians, and at this day lives a pri∣soner at Shyraz. The Persian now is soveraine. The particular Acts and passages in taking this famous Citie, is thus (for some mens better satisfaction) remembred. At command of Shaw Abbas the Persian Monarch, Emangoly-chawn (chiefe Lord and Governour of those Territories that conjoyne the gulph of Persia) descends with nine thousand men, at such a time as he was confi∣dent to meet the English Fleet, resolv'd to further them in revenge of those many tyrannies they had endured by the braving Portugall: The Condi∣tions betwixt them, under hand and seale were these: 1. The Castle of Ormus (in case it were won) with all the Ordnance and Amunition to ac∣crue to the English. 2. The Persians were to build another Castle in the Ile at their owne cost, when and where they pleased. 3. The spoile to be equally devided. 4. The Christian prisoners to be disposed of by the English; the Pagans by the Persians. 5. The Persians to allow for halfe the charges of victualls, wages, shott, powder, &c. 6. And the English to be custome free in Bander-gum-broon for ever. The Captaines of best note in the Pagan Army under the Duke of Shyraz, were Alliculybeg, Pollotbeg, Shakulibeg, Shareearee, Mahomet Sultan and Alybeg King of the Port: these with the rest of their Army encamped before Bander-gom-broon: and two dayes after viz. the twentieth of Ianuary 1622. with small difficulty be∣came Masters of the Port. Upon which the Duke and the English Cap∣taines, Weddall, Blyth, and Woodcock agreed upon an immediate battery, and instantly played upon the Castle with a dozen peeces of Cannon for five houres, but gave them small hopes of sudden conquest: yet that neither pusillanimity nor doubt might be seene amongst them, the ninth of Fe∣bruary the English transported three thousand Persians in two Frigots lately taken, and two hundred Persian Boats good for little other service: these, so soone as they were landed, having formerly made Sconces or
Trenches for their men, and Bulwarks for the great Ordnance to play on, very furiously they made towards Ormus thinking to meet no great oppo∣sall; but the Portugalls though they let them land and passe quietly into the Towne, with equall resolution stopt the current of their fury, at first encounter from their barracadoes defended with shott and pike, slaying above three hundred, and with their Ordnance beat them back with more haste and amazednesse than their approach had courage: in this disorder a Flancker by mischance was blowne up, but the warre continued: little hurt accruing to either party, till the 24 of February, on which day the English advanced towards the Castle, (under which was riding the Portu∣gall Armado) and in despight of the Castle and best defence their Fleet could make, being then but five Gallyons and twenty Frigots, set fire on the Saint Pedro of one thousand five hundred Tun, and Admirall of their Armado: which mischance, the rest of the Spanish Fleet with no small sor∣row apprehended, and finding no repaire, to prevent more mischiefe and danger, cut the Cables, and in that flaming posture let her drive whither winde and tyde commanded her: the English saw her too hot to meddle with, and knew she could enrich the adventurer with no other booty, but Bellonaes furniture, so downe she went towards Larack, in the way a rabble of Arabians and Persians boorded her, & like Iackhalls with hunger starved fury and avarice tore her asunder: that rapine, being no lesse base and out∣ragious than the fire which two houres had assaulted her:March 17. 1627. the seaven∣teenth of March the Persians (to dispatch and shew they were not idle) gave fire to a Mine stuft with forty barrells of powder, which blew up a great part of the wall, through which breach the enraged Portugalls im∣mediatly sallyed & maintain'd the fight above one houre against the ama∣zed Persian, who had drawne out a mayne Battalion, but when the Trum∣pets sounded, Acha recovered sense and magnanimity, going on so coura∣giously, that the most slow and hindmost discovered plainly a full scorne of death, and powerfull desire of honourable execution: for nine houres this conflict continued with great fury, so that in fine the defendants were forced to retreat, advis'd to it as well by pollicie as need: for, the heated Persian supposing themselves victors, with great bravery begun to mount and enter the Citie in many quarters, at which the Portugalls were very joyfull, throwing on them such and so many Granadoes and burning fire∣balls, powder-pots, and scalding Lead, that the assailants in despight of their vowes and bravadoes were forced to retreat, and could not prevent a thousand of their men from perishing: which misery, when Shaculibeg at full had viewed, couragiously followed by two hundred men, hee past through the fury of those affrighting fires and took one of their Flanckers, but could not hold above halfe an houre, they were so outragiously fryed and tormented with shewers of flames of Lead and Sulphur, and in des∣cending were beaten off by fifty Haydalgoes, who for three houres affron∣ted them, repell'd them, and retyred crown'd with conquest. This enter∣tainment so cool'd their bravery, that for five dayes they did nothing but contemplate the valour and dexterity of their adversaries. But, the three and twentieth day assum'd more hopes, when they beheld the fight be∣twixt the English and them; our Cannon from the shore, playing so hotly
and battring their fortifications so soundly, that at length making the ships their object (after a great mutilation of shrowds and masts) they sunk the Vice & reare Admirall of Ru-Fryero's Fleet: by that, utterly losing their late hopes and ostentation of marine command and excellencie. March 28 necessity humble them (plague, famine, and fluxes raging in the City) so as five dayes after, two wel-bred Gentlemen, well attended, with great gravity mounted in a faire equipage to the Enemies Camp; they were usherd in by some Coozelbashes of Shaculybegs Regiment, and after small comple∣ment, begun to treat of peace, and that there might be a cessation of Armes, which favour if the Duke would grant, they were ready to acknowledge it, and for retribution to present him two hundred thousand Tomayns in hand, with good assurance of an annuall tribute of 140000 Ryalls, (which as afterwards they confessed was spoken in hypocrisie) the Captaine dis∣misses them, and appoints next day for answer, acquaints the Generall, who (wanting money) accepts their motion of peace, so they would depose five hundred thousand (amounting with us almost to two millions of pounds) and pay yeerely to the King of Persia hundred thousand: the Portugalls return'd him an answer, they were in no such distresse, to buy any favour so dishonourably, and that greedinesse so overwhelmed them, they assured, a fift part of that proportion should never buy their ablest benefits. After that, they mediated a reconciliation twixt the English and them, putting them in minde, how they were Christians, and by many reciprocall favours of old (when Iohn of Gant invaded them) and later times by allyances, prevalent enough to beget good will in noble spirits. If they had injured them, they were now sorry, and ready to satisfie in any punishment of paine or purse, their Kings were at that instant good friends, and how could such hostility be defended or answerd by law of Nations or Religion. These and the like were sent them, but whether the behavi∣our of the Fidalgo displeased our Sea men, or that they understood them not, or saw themselves so farre ingaged, that with reputation they could not desist, or that it was uttered with a faigned humility, or the like, I know not; the Messenger departed not well satisfied. And two dayes after, saw apparently signes of confusion and revenge: a hideous noise of hellish thunder amazing them, caus'd by the English their blowing up two seve∣rall Mynes, which gave open prospect into the Citie; but the hearts of the assaylants durst not travell with their sight, all their senses the last time were so confounded and disabled: so that very poorely they onely be∣came spectators, and gave new courage to the dying Portugall: all of them halfe dead, with fluxes, thirst, (the three pits in the Citie exhausted) fa∣mine or pestilence. The fourteenth day, a ship full of Moores from Kish∣mee, arrived at Ormus to help the Portugalls; perceiving themselves inter∣cepted, they returned back, thinking to land at some better quarter: the Persian Generall, swore they should receive no dammage by his Army, to which when they foolishly gave beliefe to, fourscore of their heads were forthwith struck off, and the rest inchayned. The Ormuzians languishing thus long under so many sorts of afflictions, every houre hoped for delivery from Ru-Friero, but he failed them. The seventeenth day another breach was made by giving fire to sixty barrels of
powder, through which the Moores entred in huge swarmes, but were beat back by eighteene Gentlemen without the Bulwark; howbeit, next day they re-entred and possessed it. The eighteenth of Aprill, two famisht renegadoes stole thence into the Camp of their Adversaries, and being brought before the Duke, confest the willingnesse of their departure, told him their expectation of supplies, together with their present miseries; assuring him, they could not endure long, death raging more furiously within the City, than the greatest forces they could oppose them with. At that report, the reanimated Persian againe beseiges her, intending the next breach to enter pellmell amongst them: which when the Portugall saw, and no safety any way appearing; the three and twentieth day (know∣ing no faith in the Mahomitans) they yeelded the Castle, and their trea∣sure unto the English; only craving of them that they might receive their lives, and be conveyed safely to Muskat in Arabia: the English assent, and very nobly transported three thousand of them, and entended like favour to the rest; but the envious Persian suddenly intercepted above three hundred Arabs halfe Christians, and Portugals: whom without par∣ley or any signe of pitty, contrarie to their oath and honour, they behead∣ed; and sent their heads to Gombroon for a Trophae, and as an assured signal of their conquest and blameworthy fury. After this, by unanime assent, the Magazeens of armour, victualls and treasure were sealed up with the signets of both Nations: the interim was imployed in massacring of more than halfe dead men, violating women, polluting Temples, and defacing verie brave and gallant houses; during which, an unworthie English man (contrarie to the order) breaks into a forbidden Monasterie stuft with riches, and in his returne is discried by the ratling of his burthensome sa∣criledge; at which the Persians flie to the Duke, and by consent break asunder everie thing was valuable, (the English all that time dreaming of no such accident) bus when it was known, much discourse intervened on both sides, but the Pagans accounted words but ayre, and seeing their de∣signes accomplished, made the fury and anger of the English meere pro∣vocatives of scorne and laughter: the Enlish had no more than twentie thousand pounds paid them for their service. The brasse Ordnance in the Castle and Rampires were divided, some say they were three hundred, others as many moe: Howbeit, our men say there were only fifty three great brasse peeces mounted, foure brasse cannon, six brasse demicannon, sixteen cannon pedroes of brasse, and one of iron, 9 culverin of brasse, two demiculverin of brasse, three of iron, ten brasse bases, seven brasse bastels, some basilisks of 22 foot long, and nintie two brasse peeces unmounted; which I the rather name, in that the Portugalls bragge they had small de∣fence, and few Ordnance; with either of which if they had beene fur∣nished, Ormus had never beene triumphed over. Those belonging to the Persian were transported to other Cittadells, to Gombroon, Larr, Shyraz, Hispahan, and Babylon. The King of Ormus, Seid Mahumet shaw, was made prisoner to the Persian, and at this day is at Shyraz under an allow∣ance of five markes a day; his other pension (during his prosperity paid him by the Portugalls) amounted yeerely to a hundred and forty thou∣sand ryalls. The Town at this day is wholly ruinous, the Castle excepted,
which aspect keepes her former beauty, strength, and greatnesse, and is owned by the Persian. As for the common Mariners, they found enough to throw away; by that little they got, shewing their luxurie, nothing but Alea, vina, Venus, in the ascendant of their devotion. Captain Woodcocks luck was best and worst; by rare chance he lighted upon a Frigot that was stealing away, loden with Pearles and inestimable treasure, above a Million of royalls for his part only; but what joy had he in that fading pelfe? pure clay is gold, who then so mad to make the earth his Idol? Whether poore (too rich) Woodcock minded more his tempting Mammon than the stearage of his ship, who can tell? but many felt by sad experience that the Whale his ship sunck close by Swally barre, the name neither of bird nor fish availing against the arrow of death, the mercilesse elements yeelding them no comfort: such catastrophes have ambition and too much greedinesse. For, but for too much pride (the Portugall upon all occasions braving the English) Ormus had stood; and but for too much avarice, who knows but the Whale might have swam still in the Ocean of security. Proeda faeras acies cinxit discordibus armis, Hinc cruor, hinc caedes, mors propiorque venit. Praeda vago jussit geminare pericula ponto, Bellica cum dubiis rostra dedit ratibus. Prey guirts feirce Armies oft with irefull swords. Hence blood, hence slaughter, hasty death affords. Prey doubles danger in th'inconstant deep, Whiles warlick beaks danger-fraught ships do keep. FINIS LIBRI PRIMI.
THE SECOND BOOKE. THE tenth of Ianuary, Sir Robert Sherley at our Ambassadors request, entred Gumbrown to acquaint the Sultan with his arrivall, and to demand such en∣tertainment and necessaries as befitted his excellen∣cy and Travaile to the Persian Court, though no lesse distant than the Caspian sea. It did not relish right to the covetous Sultan; but upon sight of his Phirman or letter of Command, he dissembled his humour, protesting he was transported with joy that so happy an occa∣sion was hapned, as well to expresse himselfe an obedient slave to Shaw-Abbas, as that the Towne should be honoured by so noble a stranger; sor∣ry onely he was so ill fitted to shew his humanity, his Lordships so sudden landing preventing the pomp he aymed him. Sir Robert Sherley returned his complement and forthwith invited my Lord Ambassador ashoare, who as readily accepted it. At his issuing from the ship, Captaine Browne (whom I name to honour him) thundred out his farewell by a hundred great Shot, whose Ecchoes not onely made Gombroon to tremble, but seemed to rend the higher regions with their bellowings. Wrapt in smoak and flame, we landed safely, tho Neptune made us dance upon his liquid billowes and with his salt breath seasoned the Epicinia or intended Tri∣umphs. At his landing the Cannons from the Castle and Cittadell vomit∣ed out their fiery choller, ten tymes roring out their wrathfull clamours, to our delight and terrour of the Pagans, who of all noyses most hate artifi∣ciall Thunder. The Sultan and Shawbander handed him out of his Bardge, and mounted him upon a stately Arabian Courser; the stirrops were of pure gold, the saddle (a Morocco sort) was most richly imbrodered with silver. All his followers had also such as pleased them. In this equi∣page, attended by his owne gentlemen, some sea Captaines, the English Agent Master Burt and two hundred Coozell-bashawes, we moved slowly towards the Sultans Pallace, all the way passing through a ranck, or file of
Archers and Musquetiers on either side doubled, and being alighted, usherd him into his Apollo; where upon rich carpets was plac't a neat and costly Banquet, store of Shyraz Wine, and choyce Violls from the ships; all which, with his protestations of welcome, (Hoshomody Suffowardy still dropping out of his mouth) gave us undoubted knowledge that either he was a grand hypocrite, or extreamely fearefull a complaint should be made to the great Duke of Shyraz against him of his past neglect; all which we gave a favourable interpretation unto: let us now into and about the towne, to see if ought will present it selfe a welcome object. GVMBROVVN (or Gomroon as some pronounce it) is by most Per∣sians  cald Bander or the Port Towne: seated upon the gulph, in the Carmanian desert (part whereof is now cald Larr) or in Kermoen as the Persians call it; albeit my fancie prompts me, that it is rather in Chu∣sistan, Shushan being so small a way removed from it. Some (but I com∣mend them not) write it Gamrou, others Gomrow, and other-some Cum∣meroon. The Artique pole mounts here to seven and twenty degrees and nine minutes. A Towne it is of no Antiquity, rising daily out of the ruines of late glorious (now most wretched) Ormus, an houres journey thence. I was told, that it had not twelve houses twelfve yeares ago; at this day encreased to a thousand: but how can I credit it, since one Newbery our country-man entitles it a Town at his being here, which was in the yeare 1581. Yet old it cannot be, since all agree the Portugals first founded it; after Ormous doubtlesse, and where the Castle was begun but in Anno 1513 by Albuquerq' the Portugall. Gumbroon is from Ormus nine english myles: it also viewes Arabia about sixteene leagues west, for there the Gulph is narrowest. It was forced from the Portugall in the yeare 1612 by Ally-Reec the Shyrazian, and is now compleatly governed by the Persian. It is in compasse about two myles, the earth is sandy, without gardens, springs, or grasse: from March to October so hot, as the Natives flie away to Larr and other Townes where Date trees shadow them against the ever burning Sunne, and ground or sand that scalds like hottest embers: a great Mountayne (reckned twenty miles distant, but by its height seemes not eight) anticipates the coole North-wind, which to other parts breaths sweetly and refreshes them. The houses are of Sunne-dried bricks, thick & sollid; within, are without much furniture; without simple to look upon. The windowes are large and trellised, made to open when any Favonius murmurs among them. The tops are tarrassed, made both to walk & sleep upon, so Carpets be spred to soften them. In the Summer season when few ships ride here, they sleep in troughs or beds fild with water. The Buzzar is very ordinary: tis covered atop to keep out the searching beames of the scortching Sunne; where under is sold Wine, Arack, Sher∣bet, Thlummery, and many other things to the eye and belly necessary. The entrance into the Sultans house, is at the East side of the Market place. His, the Shabanders, English, and Duch (distinguisht by their Flags or En∣signes, displayed by Aeolus atop their houses) are all are worth the entring in or my noting: of best note, are two Castles, at the North and South ends of the Towne, spatious and defensive; adorn'd with good Battlements and
Platformes to play their uselesse Cannons on. Fourescore brasse Peeces are planted here, and are part of those they got from Ormus Anno 1622; two hundred more being sent up to Larr, Spahawn and Babylon) of small ter∣rour, if no better Gunners exercise them. Whiles ships ride here, Gum∣broon is a garrison foure hundred horse and foot attend their Gene∣rall; but dare not fight against the Sonne, all summer billeting where they can find food and shelter. In winter you may find here, Merchants of sundry Nations; English, Ducth, Persians, Indians, Arabs, Armenians, Turks, Iewes, and others. The most common commodities here, are belly food; Wine, Rack, Sherbet, Rosewater, Sugar, Almonds, Dates, Pomgra∣nats, Figs, Currans, Orenges, Lemmons, Pomecitrons, Mirabolans, Ap∣ples, Peares, Quinces, and Flowers, in great variety. As also, Goates, Hens, egges (two yeare old,) Ryce, &c. most of which are sold by the crafty, faire spoken Bannyans, who swarme through all parts of Asia. They will readily trade or prattle with Christian, Turk, Iew, or Gentile, but have no good fellowship, for they hate to eat or drink with any save of their owne casts and religion; rice, plaintains, and some fruits they eat, drink water or sherbet (which is faire water, rosewater, sugar and juyce of Lemons put together): but for flesh, eggs, or such roots, as raddish and the like, resembling blood or wine, not one bitt would they eat, though you would give the poorest knave amongst them, a thousand pound; they are troubled with Pythagoras dreames, doubting thereby they might eat up the soules of their friends or parents; which transmigration of soules Tibullus elegantly thus detects to his Mistresse. Quin etiam mea tunc Tumulus cum texerit ossa Seu matura dies sato properat mihi mortem Longa manet seu vita, tamen mutata figura, Seu me fingit equum rigidos percurrere campos Doctum, seu cardi pecoris sing loria Taurus, Sive ego per liquidum volucris vehar aëra pennis. In quemcun{que} hominem me longa receperit aetas, Inceptis de te subtexam carmina chartis. When (furthermore) the grave my bones shal hide, Or ripened dayes to swift foot death shall glide, Or lengthned life remains, in shape exchangde Making me horse, well managed to range The fields, or Bull the glory of the heard Or through the liquid Ayre I flie a Bird. Into what man soere long tyme me makes, These works begun of thee, fresh verses takes. Some Sudatories (cald here Hummums,) some Mosques, some Syna∣gogues and Sanhedrins are here; but those so obscure, that the eye can scarce direct us to them. Most remarkable is the great Banayan Tree, a league East from the Towne, and opposite to Ormus Castle: a Tree (or rather twenty Trees, the boughs rooting and springing up a whole aker together rounded within and shaded in forme of a Theater, two hundred and nine paces about as I measured and wherein, or under, may ambush very secretly three hundred horse: some call it the arched Fig tree, some Arbor de Rays, (a tree of Roots) others de Goa: namd by us the Bannyan Tree, from their adorning and adoring it with ribbons and streamers of va∣ricoloured Taffata, a goodly Diety! such a one as Pliny observd long since in his Travayles amongst 'em. Haec fuere Numinûm Templa, priscoque ritu, etiam nunc simplicia rura Deo praecellentem Arborem dicant. Here under
also, they have a temple, supported on one side by the body of the tree, un∣seen to such as are without the branches; in which (for I adventured in) are three of the most deformed Pagods or Idols imaginable; invocated by the Bannyan in memoriall of Cuttery, shuddery, and Wyse, their three dei∣fied predecessors; kept by an old doting Braminy, who for above three∣score yeeres in this irreligious place has most wickedly sacrifizd his soule to Belzebub; for many yeeres hee had all the Pagods offerings, part being the virginity of the Brides (at ten yeeres commonly) which since he can∣not actuate, he is not asham'd (as I was told) to contract with Travellers, who in an infernall disguise reap the unripe and unholy Holocausts. The Inhabitants (I exclude strange Merchants) are Olive-coloured, white onely in their teeth: their apparell is a shash above, a Shuddero or linnen about their waists, and else-where naked. They cut their skin, A Persian Man & Woman neer the Gulph. and burne round circles in their flesh, to symbolize their pride and love, sir reverence; Cupid has not fire enough, but they must help him! Pompo∣nius Mela long since thus anatomiz'd them; Carmani sunt sine veste, fruge, & pecore, sedibus piscium se cute velant, vescuntur carne, &c. The female sex are wrapt in white (not from innocence;) some goe naked upwards; most valuable in their eares and noses, which are the richest parts about them, each eare being garnisht with a dozen silver Rings, and their fingers
with such like gingadoes, some which are looking-glasses to admire them∣selves (rare beauties) in; their armes and legges are laden with voluntary shackles of brasse and Ivory: in their noses they put their most pretious Jewels; brouches of gold, set with Garnats, Emralds, Turquoises, and like stones of value: and with it, other round Rings headed with ragged pearle, such as with their intollerable impudence makes me say, they are the most nasty, pocky Whores you shall find in any place, and who very fitly comply with Ovids remedy of love. To concomitate those carrion women, take notice of those troopes of Jackalls, which here more than any other where rally themselves, not only each night committing burglary in the Town, but commonly they teare the dead out of their graves, and with a vulture appetite devoure their carcasses; all the while ululating and in offensive noises barking and ecchoing out their sacriledge. Wee made good sport to hunt them with doggs and swords, but they are too many to be banisht, too unruly to be conquered. I take them for those the Romans call'd Crocutae, the Greeks Alopecidae, or Lyciscae (Multum latrante Lycisca) and are either an unnaturall mixture of a Bitch and Fox, or doggs from Europe; by diver∣sity of ayre and soile varying in specie from what they were formerly; observ'd in other things; the Indian Ounces, what be they but extract from Cats of Europe? Spanish doggs, in new Spaine, in the second litter doe they not become Wolves? good Melons being also transplanted in∣to a base and barren ground, turne quickly to ordinary Cowcumbers. Fourteene dayes are past since we entred Gombroon; the place has no such Magick to perswade us to inhabit here. Our end is travell, why stay we then? sure, wee were stayed three dayes by the Sultans superstition, who upon casting the Dice, if the chance prov'd right, would let us goe; if wrong, nigro carbone notatus. The foure and twentieth day the Die was right, and wee were mounted; our little Carravan consisted of twelve horse and 29 Camells: the English Agent and other of our owne, and some Dutch Merchants attended our Ambassadour a league out of the Towne; where, the Sultan met us, who (well pleas'd with the Piscash or Present our Ambassador had given him) payed us all a hundred Sallams and Tesselams: that is, God speed you well, God keepe you. And lifting up his eyes to heaven, his hands to his breast, and bending almost unto his stirrop, once more bad farewell & so returned. His men & he all the way back played at Giochi di Canni, darting at one another very dexterously. Wee heard the King was solacing at the Caspian Sea, whither now wee are travelling. Till then let us keepe an Ephemerides or day-journey. The first night (from Gumbroon) wee rode to Bandally, sixteene English miles (and most part along the gulph) or to compute it in the Persian tongue, five farsangs and a halfe; a farsang (Pliny calls it a parasang which containes thirty stades or foure Italian miles) is three of ours, or a Dutch league; in names only different. At Band Ally we found a neat Carravans-raw or Inne, the Turks call them Imareths, the Indians Sarrays; built by mens charity, to give all civill passengers a resting place gratis; to keepe them from the injury of theeves, beasts, weather, &c: for, through all Asia we find no other receptories, nor provision save what we carry along,
and Kitchin utensils to dresse it in; also wee have our water usually in Tancks or Store-houses, some made long, some round, pav'd below; above, archt and plaistered; fill'd by the beneficiall raynes (springs are rarely found) which albeit the clouds seldome here distill their happy moisture, they somtimes breake, and then in churlish sort diffude to some purpose; for, falling in Cattaracts they quickly fill their gaping Jarrs and Cesterns. Next night wee got to Gacheen, five farsangs further; the third night to Cowrestan, seven; next, to Tanghy-Dolon (i. e. a narrow way) praise-worthy in her Lodge or Carravans-raw, but especially in the sweet Crystallin water wee found there. It issues from a mighty mountain three miles East thence, and in an Aquae-duct sports wantonly to this Tanck, whose over plus is received (by another Pipe laid in an artificiall way cut mar∣vellously through the bottome of an adjoyning rockie hill) into a large Pond; which, richly mellowes all the Vally (resembling Tempe) and Town call'd Dolon, surrounded with studpendious hills on every side, so per∣pendicular, as with few men may bee made impregnable; a solitary place it is, but exceeding pleasant; when from the hill tops wee dazell our sights in view of that sandy, stony, sterill Desert. That dayes journey was foure farsangs. Our next daies travell was to Whormoot, eleven farsangs (thirty three miles) where we found a black pavillion; in it three old Arabians; who, out of their Alcoran ingeminated a dolefull requiem to their Brothers carcasse, over which they sat; their lookes were clouded with pathetick sadnesse; their cheekes bedewed with briny teares, intending (after the Jewish mode, Septem ad luctum) to solemnise his farewell seven daies, singing, sighing, weeping. —In teares we finde content, For, griefe would break our hearts without a vent. Est quaedam flere voluptas, Expletur lachrimis, egeriturque Dolor! Nigh Whormoot are Duzgun, Laztan-De, and other Townes, where is got the best Assa-Faetida through all the Orient: the tree is like our brier in height, the leaves resemble Fig leaves, the root the Radish: the vertue had need be much, it stincks so odiously. But, though the savour bee so base, the sapor is so excellent, that no meat, no sauce, no vessell pleases the Guzurats pallat, save what relishes of it. Next night we got to Our-mangell, five: and next day to Larr; two miles short of which old City, the Cawzy, Calantar and other of the prime Citizens welcomed us with wine and other adjuncts of complement. Wee had not rode halfe a mile further, when, loe an antick Persian out of a Poetick rapture, clamored out a song of welcome: the Epilog was resounded upon kettle Drums, Timbrells, and Barbarrous Jingle-jangling instruments; a homely Venus attired like a Bacchanell, attended by many other morisdancers, begun to caper and frisk their best lavoltoes; every limb strove to exceed each other, the Bells, brasse Cimbals, kettle musick and whistles, storming such a Phrygick discord, that to consort we might squeak'out. Their rustick pipes did jarre, with notes that horrid are. Barbaraque horribili stridebat tibia cantu.
For Bacchus then seemed alive agen: glasse bottles emptied of wine clashing one against another, the roaring of 200 Mules and Asses, and con∣tinuall shooting and whooping of above two thousand Plebeians all the way, so amazed us; that wee thought, never any civill strangers were bom∣basted with such a Triumph; the noyse that Vulcan and all his Cyclops make, were not comparable to these Mymallonians. But his quoque finem, wee got with much adoe to our lodging, infinitly wearied; for my owne part, I was somewhat deafe three dayes after. LARR, is a City and Province in Persia; on the North limited with Parc or Pharsistan; on the East with Carmoan or Carmania; has the Per∣sian gulph to the South; and to the West, Chusistan or Susiana; a region a thousand miles in circuit: barren and flaming hot, full of sand, stones, a few Date trees, Mines, and sulphur. The City Lar is in the navell of Larestan, and raises the North pole seven and twenty degrees and forty minutes; some have more, twenty eight degrees and thirtie minutes, in longitude from the cape Meridian ninty degrees: a very old City it is; if call'd Laodicaea by Antiochus, as Pine∣tus thinkes, (in Phrygia and Coelosyria were Townes of the same name in Ptolomy) Procopolis by another Greek; Corrha after that, and now Lar (or Laar as some pronounce it) a name given her foure hundred yeeres ago by Laarge-beg, sonne of Phiroe, and grandsonne to Pilaes, after whom ruled Gorgion Melec (of whom their Cabala feigns wonders) to whom fol∣lowed eighteen Kings, of whom Ebrahim-cawn was last, subjected (Anno hegirae 985. of ours 1605) by a stratagem Emangoli-cawn Duke of Shy∣raz overthrew him by, to satiate the hungry ambition of Abbas his Master, and (which is rare considering the great poverty of his Country) for the Kings part loaded away with treasure seven hundred Cammells. The captiv'd King Ebrahim had his life and a noble pension promist him, hee enjoyed them but awhile, an unexpected sword of death betraying his hopes, without which the Dyadem sat not right upon the head of Shaw-Abbas the soveraigne, Nine dayes we staid in Larr; a shame it were, if in so long time we had noted nothing. Lar is from Gumbroon seven small dayes riding; from Shyraz foureteene, from Babylon twenty: a very poore Towne it is, as being parcht with the scalding Sun, defaced by rage of warre, and thrown down by many fearfull Earth-quakes. Anno Domini 1400, it shook ter∣ribly, and made five hundred houses prostrate to its Tiranny. Anno 1593. of their account 973. she boasted of five thousand houses; but see how vain: is the pride of man: that very yeere, the earth sweld with such a dreadfull tympany, that in venting it selfe, it made all Larr to quake; and in fine, would not be supprest, but by the weight of three thousand houses turned topsi-turvie, quashing to death three thousand men in their de∣struction. The old Castle also on the East side of the Towne (it owes its foundation to Georgean Melec) though built atop a solid rock, groand in a like affrighting downfall: and to me it seemed strange, a City so strong∣ly, so surely founded, should be so subject to such unnaturall commotions. Whither it be (as Democritus dreamt) from the gaping Sun-torne earth quaffing in too greedily too much water, and (like a glutted drunkard)
overcharging her caverns, vomits it up in a forcible and discontented mo∣tion; or whether (as Aristotle teaches) from vapors ingendred in the bowels of the earth, and loth to bee imprisoned in a wrong orb, rends its passage by a viperous horrid motion: or whether from subterranean fires, the ayre inflamed upon sulphur, or such exuberances of nature, I dare not conclude, but leave such theories to those that study Meteors. Let us therefore see what Larr now is. Larr, the Metropolis of this Province, is not wald about; in that, Art is needlesse, the lofty rocks on East and North so naturally defend her: besides, a brave Castle at the North quarter (mounted upon an imperious hill) not only threatens an enemy, but awes the Towne in a frownig posture: the ascent is narrow and steep: the Castle of good stone: the walls are furnisht with usefull battlements: whereon are mounted twelve brasse cannon pedroes, and two basilisks (the spoiles of Ormus:) within the Castle wall are raisd a hundred houses, stored with men, most part soldatts, who have there a gallant Armory able to furnish with Lance, Bow, and Gun, three thousand men: it is a fort without, of a stately frame: within, is no lesse commendable: the Buzzar is also a gallant fabrick; the materiall is good chalkie stone; long, strong, and beautifull: a quadrant I cannot call it, the sides are so unequall: tis cover'd atop, archt, and (in piazza sort) a kinde of Burse; wherein each shop showes ware of severall qualities: the Alley from North to South, is 170 of my paces; from East to West, a hundred and sixty; the ovall in center is about a hundred and ninty: a building (to speak of the Asiaticks) in some hundreds of miles, scarce to be parrelled. Neere this Buzzar are coyned the Larrees, a fa∣mous sort of money, shap'd like a long Date stone, the Kings name stampt upon pure silver, in our money valuing ten pence. The Mosques here bee not many; one especiall Mosque (or Deer) it has, round (either shadowing out Aeternity, or from a patterne of the Alca∣ba the holy Temple in Mecca, whose shape they say Abraham had from heaven) in some part varnisht with Arabick letters, and painted knots, gar∣nisht in other parts with Mosaick fancies: tis low, and without glasse win∣dowes, wodden trellizes (excellently cut after their invention) supplying them: the entrance is through a brazen gate, neer which is hung a Mirrour whether to admire their tallow faces in, or internal deformities, I know not: some lamps it also has, for use and ornament: some Prophets rest their bones here, take one for all. Emeer-Ally-zedday-ameer, a long-namd-long-bon'd (if his grave bee right) long since rotten Prophet; the older Prophet, the fresher profit; zeale and charity oft times worship antiquity: but how can I credit them that he was a Mahometan; they say (if that will not please, they sweare) hee died a thousand five hundred yeeres ago, six hundred yeeres before Mahomet, and yet a Mussulman: their faith admits no questions nor answers, or if it did, wee will not trouble it: For I see variety of good fruit close by, to which I have a better appetite; here are the fairest Dates (Dactills in Latin from their finger like shape) Orenges, Lemons, & Pomcitrons you find in Persia; if those will not please, you buy here at easie rates, Goats, Hens, Rice, Rach, and Aquavitae: but for their water (wee drest our meat with it, the people drink it) they call it
Ob-baroon which in the language of Persia signifies rain-water: but with farre more reason I may call it Aqua-Mortis; death seeming to bubble in it. A base qualified water it is; whether that their Tancks or Magazeens are ill made, or nastily kept, and by that the water is corrupted; or whe∣ther the raine of it selfe is insalubrious and loathsome I cannot tell; but both it may bee makes it so bad as it is; so unsapory, so ill to the gust, as worse water for taste, and especially for property can scarce be relished: as little of it came in my belly as could be borrowed from extremity of thirst; and I suppose I had good reason to forbeare it: for, it causes Catarrhs, breeds sore eyes, ulcerates the guts, and which is more terrible than the raest, it ingenders small long worms in the legges of such as use to drink it; and, which sort of vermin is not more loathsome to look upon, than painfull to the itching disease of them that breed 'em; by no potion, no unguent, to bee remedied: they have no other way to destroy them, save by rowling them about a pin or peg, not unlike the treble of a Theorbo; the most danger being this, that if in the screwing the worme chance to break, it makes them very dolefull Musick, for it endangers the leg, apt to gangreen and (but by lancing) hardly curable. The water is the natu∣rall cause of this strange malady: and seemes to mee to bring the venome from the region where tis generated; for, commonly the clouds here at Larr are undigested (as in the Tornadoes I have formerly spoken of) and unagitated by the wind; Nor do the clouds distill their raine in drops as is usuall in colder regions, but in whole and violent irruptions; dange∣rous both in the fall, and no lesse hurtfull in the using. The Inhabitants are most part naked and merit as naked a relation: they are a mixture of Jewes and Mahomitans: both of them, a swarthy de∣formed generation: for generally in this City they are blear-eyd, rotten tooth'd, and mangy legd: the violent heat and poysonous waters causes it: the habit of the greater part of them is only a wreath of Callico tyed about their heads; their mid-parts are circled with a Zone of vari-colo∣red plad, and have Sandalls upon their feet, elsewhere being naked: some indeed have shashes of silke and gold, tulipanted about their heads; they roab themselves in coats or Cabays of Satten, and especially inrich their fin∣gers with rings of silver set with Turqueises or Cornelians, and in which they affect to have ingraven their owne name, or some selected posie out of the Alcoran: upon their thumb they commonly weare a ring of horne which makes the arrowes go off strong and easily: their crooked swords also afford them no small delight, the blades being exceeding good, the hilts no lesse valuable; for they are of gold: In this City should bee a river and that not a small one, if our Geographick Maps were true; but they erre egregiously, for here not only is no river, but also none else is to bee found in a hundred miles travell, go which way you will: for both by in∣quiring of many Persians & our own experience in further travell, I could neither heare of nor see any neerer us than Tabb, famous in her sepa∣rating Susiana from Carmania; and from Larr, westward about 5 small daies journey hence: or that other of Cyre, over which we rode twixt Shyraz and old Persepolis: some small brooks wee rode over; but rivers no man must dare to call them, since none of them in bredth or depth exceed 3 foot.
West of Larr is Iaarown, twenty farsangs (or threescorce English miles) thence: it is a Town consisting of a thousand Jewish families: some make it their rode to Shyraz, but the way is extreame stony and mountainous, bad for horsemen, worse for ill-shod Camells. These Jewes (or Jehuds as the Persians call them) are a remnant of those foure Tribes, Salmanassar son to Tyglath Pilezer the Assyrian King forc't from Samaria Anno Mundi 3220. placing them in Hala, Hara and Ghabor (by the river Gozan) Cities of the Medes: the Towne (I do but imagine so) is named from Iaarim a memo∣rable Towne in Canaan: they have some Sinagogues, but no high Priests; the Mosaicall Law they have wonderfully corrupted: they are to this day a hardharted subtle people; very cowardly, rich, but odious to all other religions: most remarkable, is a precious liquor or Mummy growing here, Mumnaky-koobas they call it, a liquor which none dare take, for all is carefully lookt to for the King. It distills (in June only) from the top of those stupendious Mountaines, every yeere about five ounces: a moist redolent gumme it is, soveraign against all sorts of poyson; and (if we may beleeve them) a Catholicon for all wounds and most diseases: when other Princes send this King presents of gold, pearle, or other costly devices; he sends them back, a little of this Balsome, as a full remuneration. These Mountaines are famosed in story; After Alexander had preyed and sacri∣ficed in Susa (betrayd by Abulites a time-serving Satrapa) he led his wanton Army towards Persepolis; his neerest passage was over these hills of Ia∣arown (in those dayes cald Pilae Persidis and Susaidae) where to his amaze∣ment, he was so beaten by Ariobarzanes a Martialist and his small company, that (contrary to the pace and honour of the worlds Monarch) he was constrain'd to retreat apace, and shamefully to avoyd that thundering storme of stones and arrowes. The eleventh of February we left Larr, Codges-Obdruzy the Governor furnished us (to Shyraz) with Mules, very poore ones; the Asses they return'd upon: no matter. Mules are Emblems of sobriety; our Harbinger (or Mammandore in Persian) was an honest Cozelbash, and would be sure, (hopefull of some reward, and because his part lay therein) at every place where we made our Manzeel or rest, to provide us good lodging, and such meat as the country would affoord us: by vertue of his authority do∣mineering over the wretched Rusticks more than pleased us; he would proffer them a little mony for what he liked; if they refused to take it, he took it then by force, and Alla Soldado payd them in big words and basti∣nadoes: in miserable slavery the pesants live; a soldiers life is here the most honourable and safest. The first night we pitcht our Tents not far from Larr, but were stopt next day by an immoderate flood of raine, that made the earth so slippery, as our Cammells glib-hoofes could not foot it; the raine falls seldome here, but when it comes, they both feele and heare it: some times it raises such a Deluge as sweeps men and houses away; six yeeres ago (in this place) a Caravan of two thousand Camels perisht by the fury of it. The foureteenth day wee rode to Deachow (or Techoo) which signifies a Towne under a hill; where we see many prettie Tombs, not any without his grave-stone and an Arabick memoriall. The Alcoran commands that none be buried in Cities, for feare the noysome Carcasses
infect the living, but in a Gemitery nigh the most publique highway; that by viewing the Sepulchers of the dead (the Romans did the like, the Ae∣gyptians had them in their banquetting houses) they might contemplate their mortality. A mile from this Towne we view'd threescore black Pa∣villions; black without; within full of female beauties: the Persians call them Vloches; the Arabs, Kabilai; the Turq'stans and Armenians, Taiphae; the Tartars, Hoords; the Antients, Nomades; of whom the Poet thus: Nulla domus, plaustris habitant, migrare per Arva Mos, at{que} errantes circumvectare Penates. Their Carts their houses are, their sole delight To wander with their house-Gods day and night. I cannot chuse but wander a little if I keepe such company. Vertue, the Trophy of a refin'd ambition, is purchased by embracing the excellent and wholsome Notions of an humble soule, of a well-temper'd spirit, whose heavenly radiance respects no other object with delight save vertue, from which pure streame flowes Moderation, to whose excellen∣cie (next to spirituall sacrifice) wee may safely devote our best endevours. So apt to every immodest Act, is mans corrupt disposition, that to enjoy sensuality he conceits vertue (though never so gorgeously arrayed) foule and deformed: till moderation force him to a strict account, and discover how much he erred, in preferring intemperance before the transcendent qualities of a vertuous life: and from whence, when we contemplate the contented life and poverty of these Vloches, needs must wee condemne our selves of lothsome ryot. For, how free from unseasonable care, pale Envie, affrighting Tumult, and nasty surfet doe these enjoy themselves; happy Conquerors! how mutually doe they accord, how joyfully satiate Nature, in what is requirable. Heare Lucan praising them. — O prodiga rerûm Luxuries! nunquam parvo contenta paratu. Discite quam parvo liceat producere vitam Et quantum Natura petat?— Non Auto Mirrha{que} bibunt, sed gurgite puro Vita redit; satis est populis fluvius{que} Ceres{que}. Base luxurie! wherein so much is spent. Learne with how little, Nature is content. In Gold and Mirrh, these drink not, but are best In health, when bread and water is their feast. To returne; so soone as Phoebus had runne thrice fifteene degrees in our Hemisphere, we mounted our melancholly Mules, and made our next Manzeel at Berry. Nothing was observable in the way, save a huge thick wall, of great length and height, cut by infinite toyle out of the sollid rock, to safeguard the Larians from the Shyrazians, Larr in that place termi∣nating. Berry is a small Village; it promises much at distance, but when there, deludes the expectation: yet is it famous through the Persian Territories, both from the prerogatives an ancient learned Syet endued it with, con∣firmed by all succeeding Princes; and from an Arabick Schoole, distin∣guisht into classes, of the civill Law, Astrologie, Physick, and such as leads to Mecca: commendable in their Pythagorean silence, learning to discourse by wincks, nods, and such dumb notions; for babling is in all Arabick Schooles wonderously hated: they also observe two rules especially, obe∣dience, and moving the body too & fro in reading: adjoyning this Schoole,
is a Deer or Mosquit, a venerable place, chiefly by being a Dormitory to their greatest Doctor Emawm-zeddey-a meer-a maddy-Ally, a Prophets sonne, and allyed to holy Ally; in this grave enjoying (say they) eight hun∣dred yeeres rest; a great antiquity. His Tomb is rais'd foure foot from the pavement, is eight foot long, covered with a white fine linnen cloth; the Tomb-stones are carved and painted with knots and poesies of Arabick; neere him are fixt two Lances to memorize his quondam profession, and some Ensignes not of ordinarie invention: Vpon his Coffin lie a set of goodly Beads, to help his devout memorie, and which to this day retaine their Masters vertue of working miracles. Atop the Chappell is a globe (or steele mirrour) pendant, wherein these Linx-eyed people view the deformity of their sinnes. They also shewed us a square stone pearced and hung neere the wall, a rare stone, a relique most notorious! the Prophet used to burthen the backs of impenitent sinners with it, telling them their impiety made it seeme heavie, a waight so ponderous as made them take the right path to be quit of it. A little pot comes next to our description, holding a soveraigne unguent made eight hundred yeeres since, oft us'd, and never exhausted: and is not only good to help sore eyes, but a Panacea against all diseases; to crowne all, his booke (no Alfurcan of devotion) is layd upon his carcasse; any body is suffered to see it a far off, but to touch it is counted a presumption, the impure breath of man peradventure infe∣cting it: in stormes and crosses they finde remedy with only naming it: the Church is neatly matted, a Mosque of so much holinesse, that none must enter with boots or shooes on: such as want issues (I meane not in their leggs) health, wealth, friends, or the like, upon their offring shall have satisfaction. The Oracle (the Priest) never cheats them. Sed non ego credulus illis: and with that I bid Berry farewell. Next night wee got to Bannarow. The last Towne feasted us with Tra∣ditions, this with good cheare, musick, three kettle drummes, and six dumb Musquets. The ruines of an ancient Castle (demolisht lately by the Persian) shewes its ribs, through which the coole ayre blowes, seldome failing from the top of that stupendious Mountaine: one side of the Castle wall is anatomized to the Town, the other to the stony Desart. Next night we lay in Goyeme, bragging in a thousand rotten houses. After we had re∣pos'd an houre, a Hocus-pocus affronted us, and performed rare tricks of Activity. I remember some of them. He trod upon two slicing hooked Semiters with his bare feet, then layd his naked back upon them, suffering a heavie Anvill to be layd on his belly, and two men to hammer out foure horshooes on it very forceably. That trick ended, he thrust his armes and thighes thorow with many Arrowes and Lances; then, by meere strength of his block-head he lift up a yard from the ground a great stone, weighing six hundred pound, and (as if hee had done nothing) knit his haire to an old Goats head, and with a scornfull pull tore it asunder, at that crying out Allough-whoddaw i.e. God help him; the standers by with a loud yell, ap∣plauded him: we gave him particular thanks, and told him he was a pret∣tie fellow. But what was hee? to speake of Marius (one of the thirty Ty∣rants) who with one of his fingers could overthrow a loaded Wayne: or of Polydamas, who with one hand would hold a wild Bull by his hinder
legg, and in despight of his best force stop him, as Cael. Rhod. and Treb. Pollio have it. But in remembring these, I had almost forgot to tell you, that in Goyeom, is fairely intombed one Melec Mahomet, famous for fomenting the authority of his Master Mahomet, when the Saracens begun to canvasse it. Next night we lost one another by a carelesse associating, and had a mi∣serable lodging in that vast and barren wildernesse: affording no grasse, no trees, no water, but stones and sand in great abundance, Ostriches, Storks, and Pellicans her sole Inhabitants. I beleeve the earth has worne Flora's livery; but, by the parching rage of Warre, or continued heat of the fla∣ming Sunne becomes thus miserably desart, or rather from the just wrath of Almighty God, who (as King David sings) makes a fruitfull land barren, for the ungodlinesse of them that dwell therein. Next day wee quested in search of our Carravan, and with much trouble recovered it: that night also pitching in the Desart, were welcom'd by such a sudden storm of rain, thunder, and lightning, as made our cheare more wretched, imprisoning us also in our Tents. Next day, wee had the weather comfortable, the sight of a few Date and Mastick tree, refreshing us; confuting Coriats con∣ceit, that Mastick is found no where but in Syo. By the way we tooke no∣tice of an od-devis'd Tomb (it inhum'd a harmlesse Shepheard) hung to and fro with threds tripartite (it may be, shadowing out the Trinity) each thred beautified with party-coloured wooll, at each end a Puppet to pro∣tect it, some Cypresses were added to condecorate and to revive the old Idoll ceremony. —Stant manibus Arae Caetuleis maestae vittis, atra{que} Cupresso. —Altars their ghosts to please Trim'd with blew fillets and sad Cypresses. The next (the two and twenty of February) by the way we had some sport in dislodging a wild Bore, but neither shot nor dogs reaching him we made Cut-bobbo our manzeil; Mohack our next (in which are buried Ma∣homet, Hodge, Izmael, and Ally, foure great Mussulmannish Doctors, in∣tombd here 400 yeares ago, resorted to with no small reverence.) Next day to Coughton, to Vnghea next, thence to Moyechaw, next day to Pully-pot-shaw (leaving Bobbaw-hodgee on our left hand) next night pitching a farsangh short of Shiraz; where we expected a ceremonious entrance: but seeing none came out to meet us, our Ambassadour (who was ever jealous of his honour) sent his Mammandar to the Governour, (the great Duke was hauking fifty myles thence, of purpose absent,) to demand fresh horses and a befitting welcome. The Daraguad in person came to dissem∣ble, first excusing his Lord the Duke, who would go neer to kill him for not acquainting him with this excellent Advantage to manifest his inte∣grity unto our Nation, in comparison of whom all other in the world were odious. In a word (perceiving our haste) he humby beseecht his Lordship to practize but three dayes patience, till the great Duke might honour his entrance, and display his radiance; a favour of a double reflex, in that it would infinitely content their Governour, and accumulate an incomparable splendor and triumph to his entrance, closing his hypocrisie with an if not, he was then prest to usher his Lordship to his lodging.
The Ambassador easily descryed him to be a Synon, sent meerly to betray his credulity: so as perceiving no remedy, the twilight helping his silent passage (Apollo had already drencht his fiery tramels in maddame Thetis lapp, Cynthia also lookt pale, as displeasd with so much knavery) we joggd leasurely on upon our Portugall Trumpetters, who (so soone as they wind∣ed the smoak and ayre of this excellent Citty,) spared the Persians a labour in their brasse pans, hoboyes and such Phrygick Musique, sometimes bray∣ing out, at other tymes ecchoing to one another in their Mymallonian Cornets, as if some Orgies to Liber Pater had been solemnizing: in so much as many ran out of doores, others fired their flambeauxes to know the cause and glut their wonder. After long circling we arrivd at Shock-Ally-Begs Pallace (the Dukes substitute) where our Lord was wearied with a prolix Apologie, and then made to taste a Banquet of dainties. After which they convoyd us to Ally-chan, a neat house at the East end of the City, belonging to the King, incompast with as brave Gardens and as spa∣cious as most in Asia. And now the vexation is past, why do we make it an indignity, as if Nocturnall entries had not equall lustre with the day; the Artificiall light we had (for ought you know) might eclipse the splen∣dor of the starry firmament. Holofernes chose the night to make a tri∣umphant entrance into Damas. Proud Antiochus took the same time into Hierusalem, Augustulus into Rome, and haughty Sapores, into this very City. Let us now triffle no longer, but view the City. SHERAZZ (so they pronounce it) the pleasantest of Asiatique Cities, is removed from the Aequator nine and twenty degrees, forty minutes, and in longitude 88 degrees. By Ben Ionas (500 yeares ago) cald Syaphaz, by Corn. de Iudaeis Sitas and Sivas, by Osorius Xiraz, by Raleigh Siras, by Stephanus Cyrecbatha, by Coelius Ciropolis, a frivolous conceit, since all old Topographers place it and the river Cyrus in Hyrcania in the latitude of thirty nine degrees and a halfe: and of longitude eighty three degrees, five and forty minutes. And of that name is one in Media as Ptol. in Sogdi∣ana one neere Iaxartes as Quintus Curtius, in India one, as Aelianus, a river also so called in Armenia as Pliny notes, but none, in Persia a Ciropolis. This name Sheraz (as I conjecture) is a derivative from Sheer (milk in the Per∣sian language) or Sherab a grape, no part of the orient shewing better or richer wine; from like reason, that Aleppo takes name from Halip milke, (and not from Alepius Leiftenant to Iulian as some dreame of) many other Townes in Persia denominating themselves from what they are abundant in, as Whormoote (a Towne of Dates.) Deachow (a hilly Towne) De-gar∣dow (a walnut Towne,) Baze-bakow, Periscow, Cutbobbaw &c. or from Syra∣ses the incolae of old, as Poliaenus has it in his 8 lib. de Semiramide. Or if greek Synonymaes would carrie it, I might borrow the name from  catena; or more properly  per aestum. But affectation is discommendable. For albeit she be raysed from the ruines of Persepolis, that does not styg∣matize her with an upstart name, two thousand yeares being past since it was burned. I may therefore reject the peoples Cronicle, alluding her first founder to be Iamshed fift King of Persia, after whom ruld Chedorlao∣mer, not long from Noah. Boterus may be taxed also, quando Syras erat Sy∣ras,
tunc Cayrus erat ejus pagus, an Adage never us'd by the inhabitants. Antient no doubt she is, her name in history confirming it, Rocnaduddaule (Sonne of Sha-Hussan Sonne of Abbaz Viez Lord of Bagdet, Kermoen, La∣ristan and Shyraz (so 'tis then named) being here buried Anno Dom. 980. of the Hegira 360. And questionlesse she has been much greater than at this present. Vlughbeg (a learned Geographer and Nephew to Tamber∣lang) gives her in his tyme fifteene myles compasse, Contarenus fifteene, and eightie thousand houses. Barbarus eightscore yeares ago, gives her twenty; Teishera after him, six and thirty myles circuit; Skikard upon Tarich a like vast circumference: Iohn of Persia in his time numbred her Inhabitants eightie thousand, Ben-Ally thee hundred thousand: we may not gainsay their reports, because no inquiry can disprove them; let us there∣fore rest contented in her present description, which I shall present you (God willing) without errour. Shiraz is distant from Ormus, one hundred and eight farsangs or three hun∣dred and foure and twenty myles English. From Larr one hundred eightie six miles, from Babylon three hundred, from Spahawn two hundred two and twenty, from the Caspian sea six hundred, from Cazbyn foure hundred and eighty six, from Periscow foure hundred and forty, from Candahor three hundred and sixtie, from Yezd two hundred and ninteeen, from Faza sixty miles English. The Antient dwellers hereabouts are named Artiatae, Tapiri, Cartii, and Orebatii. Masqued in Pare, Fure, Fares, and Farsistan. Shyraz, at this day is the second City for magnificence in the Monar∣chy of Persia; watered by Bindamyr (or Bradamyr) a sweet river that drawes her descent from the Tapirian Mountaines, and after two hundred miles circling in many wanton meanders, commixing with Choaspes (now Tab) and Vlay, with them not farre from Valdac (old Shushan) lose them∣selves in the Gulph and promiscuously thence into the vast Indian Ocean. It shewes some walls built by Vsan Cassan, but seems to scorne a limit∣ed bondage. It stretches from South-east to North-west, three miles; and not much lesse the other way; the compasse nine myles or there abouts: is pleasantly seated in the North-west end of a spacious plaine, twenty miles long, and six broad; circumvolved with stupendious hills, under one of which this Towne is placed. Defended by Nature, inricht by trade, by Art made lovely; the Vineyards, Gardens, Cypresses, Sudatories, and Temples, ravish the eye and smell, in every part sweet and delightfull. Here Art magick was first hatched. Here Nimrod (after Babells confusion) lived and was buried. Here Cyrus (the most excellent of hea∣then Princes) was borne, and (all but his head) intombed. Here the great Macedonian glutted his Ambition and Bacchisme. Here the first Sybilla sung our Saviours incarnation. Hence the Magi are thought to have set forth towards Bethleem, and here a series of two hundred Kings have swayd their Scepters. The houses here are of Sun-burnt-bricks, hard and durable: not very lofty; flat and tarrassed above, Belconies and the windowes curiously and largely trellized: within, spread with rich carpets; little other furniture
other where is noted. Sultan Shock-Allybegs house (where the first night we were banqueted) is inferiour to few; his dining roome was high and round and spacious. The archt roofe and side walls imbost with gold, and wrought into Imagery; so shadowed, that it was hard to judge whether imbost, inscult, or painted. The windowes were of painted glasse, the floore spred with curious Carpets. None are without their gardens, forrests rather of high Chenaers and Cypresses. Fifteen Mosques professe their bravery, round (after the holy Alkaba in Mecca) til'd without, and pargetted with azure stones resembling Tur∣quoises; lined within, with pure black polisht Marble; the tops dignified by many double guilded crescents or spires which gallantly reverberate Apollo's yellow flames in a rich and delightfull splendor. Two are especially note-worthy in their Antick steeples and Mosaick curiosity. The one is square, fifty foot high in the body, leaded in some part, covered with gold and blue; the walls varnisht and wrought with knots and poesies, vast and unfurnisht (or unfinisht) within; above, spiring in two columns or pillars of wood round, cut and garnisht with great bravery, very neer as high as Paules in London. The (other) rather resembling a royall Carvans-raw) is quadrangular; the superficies of Arabique invention, imbost with gold, flagd with porphyre, painted with azure, garnished in many od mazes, and made resplendent at some solemnities by a thousand Lamps and Torches. The other Mosques are not so excellent, nor yet so base as not to invite the busie eye, regarding novelties. What they want in Architecture, they supply in reliques, venerably accounted of for intombing the rotten car∣casses of some Alcorannish Doctors, whose hypocrisie have got such repute with those superstitious Ideots, that their Priests are fat, their Tombes in∣richt by superfluity of Zeale, no cost, no paines thought enough to manifest the integrity of (impious) devotion. Some sepulchers are framd of Marble, pure and shining. Others of wood, cut into Antique carving, others expresse the painters Art, and others the Sculpters skill in brasse, in plate and costly mettall. Where Art is defective, Nature (out of the treasures of darknesse) has dignified them. In one place, Shaw-meer-Ally-Hamzy a prophetique Mahomitan rests his bones, seven hundred yeares since ferried by Charon into Acheron for doating upon his deceitfull Alcaron. Threescore paces long I found the Mosque he is buried in, and in breadth just so many. In another, sleeps Sandant-Emyr-amahow contemporary with Mahomet, and equally holy; with many moe, who are like to sleep till the Trumpet raise them. Upon many of these Mosques the Storks have pyld their nests. A bird (as of the Aegyptians, so) of these people, divinely estemated. The famous Stork which buildeth in the Ayre Fosters her naked young with tender care▪ And by that love, their duty doth ingage When need requires to help her feeble Age. Nor faile her hopes; for when she cannot stir, The pious brood both feed and carry her. Aerio insignis pietate Ciconia nido Investes pullos pignora grata fovet. Taliaque expectat sibi mutua munera reddi Auxilio hoc quoties mater egebat anus. Nec pia spem soboles fallit; nam fessa parentum Corpora, fert humeris, praestat & ore cibos,
The gardens here are many, and those both large and beautifull. Many of them (as I paced) are eight hundred paces long, and foure hundred broad: Hony-shaw (the Kings) challendges superiority ore all the rest, being square and every way two thousand paces. All of them be safeguarded with walls, fourteen foot high, foure foot thick, and of exceeding good work: they rather resemble groves or wildernesses than gardens; but by that name (the Persian word is Bawt) are called; abounding in lofty pyramidall Cy∣presses, broad-spreading Chenawrs, tough Elme, streight Ash, knotty Pines, fragrant Masticks, Kingly Oaks, sweet Mittles, usefull Maple; and in fruit trees also, as Grapes, Pomgranads, Pomecitrons, Orenges, Lemmons, Pistachoes, Apples, Peares, Peaches, Chesnuts, Cherries, Quinces, Wal∣nuts, Apricocks, Plums, Almonds, Figgs, few Dates, and Mellons of both sorts, and Flowers rare to the eye, sweet to the smell, and usefull in phy∣sick: the earth is dry and green, the ayre salubrious and healthy, and such as may make good Tibullus his Fansies of Elysium. Hic choreae cantus{que} vigent passimque vagantes Dulce sonant tenui gutere carmen aves. Fert casiam non culta seges, totos{que} per agros Floret odoratis terra benigna rosis. Here songs and dances have esteem, and small Sweet-chirping birds with musick comfort all. Th'unculturd groūd sweet shrubs doth freely bring, Sense-sweetning roses without Art doe spring. I confine my commendations to a league, the residue being steril, moun∣tainous and unable to make Alexander an Epicure, (the wine excepted, which is famoused all ore the orient). Nothing so much troubles her as want of water, yet some it has, and might have more, were the Cittisens somewhat more industrious; a gallant river (Cirus of old) for two were so named) streaming sweetly not fifteen miles thence, in the way to old Persepolis. At the Nowrouz or spring, the Gardens are opened for all to walk in. The women for fourteene dayes have liberty to walk, and when loose (like birds infranschisd) lose themselves in a labyrinth of wanton sports. The men also, some riding, some sitting, some walking, are all in one tune, for drinking, singing, playing, till the bottles prove empty, songs spent, and strings break, or that Morpheus lay his Caduceus over them. In all my life I never saw people more jocund, and lesse quarelsome. Hic noctem ludo ducunt, & pocula laeti Confundunt cerebris, somno vino{que} sepultis. They revell all the night, and drink the round, Till wine and sleep their giddy brains confound. Somewhat of Emangoly-cawn, the great Duke and his Banquet. This brave man is a Georgian by discent, a Muslulman by profession, a Time-server for preferment: is one of those foure Tetrarchs, that under Abbas rule the Empire: his Territories reach every way welnigh six hun∣dred miles, and affoord him the Titles of Arck-Duke of Shyraz, Sultan of Larr and Iaarown, Lord of Ormus, Maqueroon, Kermoen, Chusistan, Si∣gestan and Farsistan, Prince of the gulph of Persia, and Iles there; the great Beglerbeg, commander of twelve Sultans, fifty thousand horse, slave to
Shaw-Abbas, protector of Musselmen, flower of courtesy, second in glory, Nutmeg of comfort, and Rose of delight. Hee is of a miraculous descent for noblenesse (as honour goes in these parts) his father and grand-father being Dukes afore him; and which is no lesse admirable, is priviledg'd from degradation by oath from Abbas: up∣on this occasion: Aliculican his father was victorious in many pitcht bat∣tells against Turk and Tartar, adding no small lustre to Mahomet Codoban∣daes Diadem: most memorably, when (by command of Amurath) the sawcy Basha of Rhyvan with fifteene hundred musquets breath'd defiance against Morad the Chielfall governor in Armenia, for daring to side with Ismael in that famous overthrow they gave the insolent Turks, Anno 1514 in the Calderan plains. Morad thus suddenly assaulted, sends a timerous excuse, which rather inrages the Bassa, implacable till Morad had glutted his greedie appetite with burnisht gold, two thousand pound comman∣ding him thence to Nassivan (old Artaxata) by that time hungry againe. Alicolichan (Shaw Mahomets Lieftenant in Georgia) rates Morad, & vows to make the Turk to eat cold Iron, meat the Basha car'd not for, but by Ally-cu∣licans fierce charge with a gallant troop of six thousand horse, made him returne his bribe, and flie as if the Devill had beene in his guts, without more prating over Anti Taurus (calld Mezis Taur) scarce thinking him∣selfe safe in any place, whiles the valiant Georgian extracted a treble summe from Morad for his levity, returning a triumphant victor to the Court, recompenced with the Sheraz Dukedome and his sonne after him, who has prov'd no lesse fortunate in Sha Abbas his field-services, having quieted Georgia, subdued Larr, part of Arabia, Diarbec, & Ormus. All which it seemes is now forgotten, the young Sha-Soffy first cutting off his sonnes head the young Beglerbeg, and when the great Duke was singing to him∣selfe, Tutum me copia fecit. Anno 1632, had such another trick serv'd him, his greatnesse pressing him to destruction. But though he be dead, his ban∣quet and respect to us must not bee forgotten, Ingrato homine terra pejus nil creat; sayes Ausonius. At our being here, he had absented himselfe of purpose: and albeit Sir Robert Sherley took the paines to ride to him, and tell him his error, hee answered; It was no dishonour for any man (his Master excepted) to stay his leasure: but if our Lord Ambassador had had his guard and other furniture, wee had gone away without his Licence. After six dayes at∣tendance his Greatnesse was pleasd to visit Sheraz, followed by two thousand horse, & most unmanerly took his ease two dayes after, without any respect or note taking of the Ambassador. At length, he sent a gentle∣man to bid him come and visit him, returning with this answer, hee was weary having come a great journey, and that his businesse was to see his Master, hee knew not him. The Duke storms to be so slighted, but durst not affront him, (knowing the King had commanded his whole Kingdome to honour and bid him heartily welcome) so after some pause, sent word he meant next day to visit him; but faild in his promise, his sonne the Beglerbeg (eighteene yeere old) being sent to excuse him. Next day, our Ambassador sent word by Shoc-Ally-beg to the Dukes sonne, his visit should be retaliated. Emangoly-cawn is angry no more respect was had of him,
wondring what kind of people wee were, since his owne in a sort adored him. But see how subtilly they intrapt him; for he was no sooner aligh∣ted at the Dukes Pallace, but by Shoc-Ally-beg is welcomed, and by him ushered (our Lord knew not whither) into a long gallery, rich in beauties, plate, carpets, and other furniture, where (like a Statua) the Duke himselfe at the very end sat crosse-legd, not moving one jot till the Ambassador was at him; when (as if he had beene afrighted) hee skipt up, and bad him welcome; vouchsafeing also (upon knowledge that we were gentlemen) to imbrace us, and provide us a banquet. So after two houres merriment departed, invited to returne next day to a more solemne welcome. Next day being come, wee were ushered by a Sultan thorw two great courts into a rich and stately banqueting house, a large open roome, supported with twenty richly guilded pillars, the roofe imbost with flaming gold, the ground spread with rich carpets of silke and gold, a state at one end of crimson satten, thick imbroydered with pearles and gold, under which hee was to in-throne himselfe; one side most excellently depicted his Ormus Trophyes; no cost, no Art left out to do it to the life; their incamp∣ing upon the shoare, their assaults, scaladoes, and entrance; the massacre of the Ormousians, some beheaded, some cheyn'd, some their heads ser∣ving for girdles: as also the English ships and sea skirmishes, without whose help it never had beene gained, and the like so well painted. Velutsi, revera pugnent feriant vitentque Moventes, Arma Vri.— —As seem'd indeed Men armd to fight, ward, strike, till each man bleed. And when the greene and crimson scaenes of silke were drawne, from this Apollo, wee lookt into a great square court, which at this occasion was round beset with the prime men of the City: and into another court, where I think I told five hundred Plebeyans, invited to illustrate the Dukes magnificence. Before the proud Duke meant to display his radiance: my Lord Am∣bassador was seated on the left side of the state (you may note if you please, that all Asia over, the left hand as the sword hand, is most honorable) upon the other side sat the discontented Prince of Tartary; at my Lords left hand was seated the Beglerbeg, and next him the captive King of Or∣mus. Next to the Tartar Prince sat Threbis-cawn a disconsolate Prince of Georgia, a brave warrior, a constant Christian: opposite to the state Sir Robert seated himselfe: and with us were placed the two Princes of Or∣mus, and some Sultans. The rest of the great banquetting roome was fild with men of especiall note, Sultans; rich Merchants, and Cooselbashaes: young Ganimeds arrayed in cloth of gold, went up and downe with fla∣gons of pure gold to powre out wine to such as noded for it: upon the car∣pets were spread fine coloured pintado Table cloaths, forty ells long; broad thin pancakes six one upon another served for trenchers, neere which were scattered wodden spoons, whose handles were almost a yard long; the spoone it selfe so thick, so wide, as requir'd a right spatious mouth for entertainment: The feast begins: it was compounded of a hundred sorts of pelo and candid dried meats; as also of Dates, Peares,
and Peaches curiously conserved, such I took best notice of (I meane as pleasd me best) were Iaacks, Myrabolans, Duroyens, Pistachoes, Almonds, Apricocks, Quinces, Cherries, and the rest I leave to the confectioner to inquire after. It seemes we are so infatuated with our banquet and wine, that the Duke is not taken notice of, pray pardon: he is not yet come, that when our bellies are full, our eyes may have the better leisure to surveigh his greatnesse. The feast being ended, the vulgar multitude strove to rend the sky with Yough Ally-Whoddaw-Bashat, i.e. Ally and God bee thanked: the Eccho was as a watch-word to the ambitious Duke that hee might en∣ter: his way was made by thirty gallant young gentlemen vested in crim∣son satten; their Tulipants were of silk and silver wreath'd about with cheynes of gold, of Pearle, of Rubies, Turquoises, and Emeralds: all of them were girded with rich swords and imbroydered scabards; they had Hawkes upon their fists, each hood valuing a hundred pound. To these succeeded their Lord, the Arch-Duke of Sheraz: his coat was of blew sat∣ten richly imbroydered with silver, upon which he wore a Vest or Roab of great length, so glorious to the eye, so thick powdered with Orientall glittering Gemms, as made the ground of it invisible, the price invalu∣able: his Turbant was of pure fine silke and gold, be studded wih pearle and Carbuncles; his scabbard was set all over with Rubies, Pearles, and Emralds; his Sandalls resembled the bespangled Firmament. To this Idoll, all the people of his religion sacrifiz'd a hundred Sizaedaes, and Tes∣salems, bowing and knocking their cocks-combs against the ground: Sir Robert Sherley also sizaedaed very formally, and in a cup of pure gold drunk his Graces health, and then put it in his pocket; paying him home with this complement; That after so mean a person as himselfe had breath'd in it, it was impiety to offer it him: the Duke accepts it as good coyne, and perceiving our Ambassador very sad, darted him a smile, drunk his Masters health, bad him and his heartily welcome, and so went in againe: our Lord Ambassador also scarce well pleased at the Dukes proud carri∣age, dissembled it; and after reciprocall Sallams or bendings (none but a few Coselbashaws attending him to his horse) departed: Well may this grand Duke buy his renowne at those high rates, his rents being bruited so great, so wonderfull: hee has (say Merchants) foure hundred thousand Tomans a yeere (a Toman is five marks sterling) but out of this hee payes wages yeerely to fifty thousand horsemen: his plate and jewels is valued at three hundred thousand pounds, some say three Millions, and is pretty well descried by that New-yeeres gift hee sent the King (upon Meloembeg the Fiscalls prompting) three yeeres since: viz: fifty great flagons of pure gold, seventy two of refined silver: in Larrees foure hundred sixty five thousand floryns: the whole, loading three hun∣dred and fifty cozel-bash Camels, a valuable present: and for which the King (as a Symbole of his gratitude) remunerates the Duke with fifty gal∣lant Arabian Coursers, six change of rich garments, a sword, and (of more value than the rest) the assurance of his health and dignity. This Duke here and in other Seralios (or Harams, as the Persians term them) has above three hundred Concubines; Mawmetry commending it: there is no other way in these Pagan countries to distinguish one mans
greatnesse from another, save by exceeding in their females: hee hunts elsewhere, other sports serving as a provocation to base venery: nor do they refraine more manly exercises; chasing the Lion, hunting the Tygre, dislodging the Bore, unkennelling the Iackall, and the like; at which so∣lemne sports he besets whole countries with above twenty thousand men, who serve to rouze all kind of savage game, and when the whole heard are in battelled upon some spacious Mountaine, impales it with a huge Toyle of wyre and cord stak't with wood (six hundred Cammels load) and so either dart them from without the raile, or venture in, and (by drawing a crosse line) single what beast they please to fight with. Two dayes after the great feast, the Duke with a gallant traine of thirty Sultans and Cooselbashaws came galloping to Ally-cawn, (so is the house named we lodged at;) and albeit he endeavoured to assault us with a sudden visit, yet such was the excellent fore-sight and vivacity of our Ambassador, attending all occasions of advantage; that at his alighting, he found a choice shade for his recreation, chambers neatly furnisht, from his Balcony look∣ing into a most fragrant & pleasant garden, where the Paphyan cipresses, & other rare trees in their aparel, repeld the guilded rayes of wanton Phaeton: here the facetious Duke incampt and all his company; resolv'd to incoun∣ter the utmost fury of his owne strong wine, and our English chymick wa∣ters: three houres the fight continued hot, charging one another with equall valour; many stout bottles and flagons were emptied and buried, but by strange stratagem revived afresh, thundring so fierce a storme in the Dukes braines, that hee sell back and had undone himselfe, had not my Lord Ambassador by great chance upheld and horst him: the rest percei∣ving their Generall so strangely vanquisht, sound a retreat, and study how to untwist their braines from out that magick labyrinth: Mr. Stodart of Caernarvan, a bold Britton, and Mr.Emery playd Bóotes: Next day the Duke made his excuse, and returnd his thanks in a Present of twelve brave horses, with bridles and saddles suting them; by which it seemes all of them were pleas'd and the Ambassador (who without such an entertain∣ment had never pleas'd them, though infinitly contrary to his temper) was crownd with th' applause of a noble, discreet, liberall, and well fasho∣ned Gentleman. After many other ceremonies of welcome (in which time, piscashes and gifts were not left out) we had leave to set on towards the Court; I call it leave, the Duke was so unwilling to part with us: wee were bravely mounted, furnisht with fresh Cammells and Asinegoes, able to endure the brunt of travell. Six and twenty dayes wee consumed in Sheraz, forced to so long com∣morance by the merry Duke; and on Lady day in Lent, departed thence for Spahawn the Persian Metropolis. But I cannot ride farre, till I cele∣brate my vale-dictum in this Charistery. Why should our wits dispute where Eden stood? If in the Earth, or Ayre, or if the Flood Did spoyle the Surface; thus we fell from thence! And too much knowledge lost the residence.
Yet if that place remaine: for us to guesse By outward attributes of happinesse, Why should thy Plaines (Shyrazz) give place to those Where fruitfull Nyle and Ganges overflowes? Thy curious prospect, lodges, soyle, the rich Variety of pleasures that bewitch Each gazing eye, would make the looker on Think Paradise had no destruction, Or else replanted there. The swelling grape In dangling clusters tempts another rape To taste the relish, as the Apple did, And some would touch thy fruit although forbid. Thy Towers, Baths, Gardens, Temples, make thee seeme Like Memphis, Troy, Thebes, or Ierusalem. Thy Natives (Natures Modells) to compose Inferior Beauty by the lookes of those. Farewell sweet place; for as from thee I went, My thoughts did runne on Adams banishment. But ere we go further, suffer me to trouble you with such Monarchs as have ruled Persia, I will only give you later Kings, such as had their seat royall in Sheraz, begunne 700 yeeres ago, and but lately ended: The first, is Abuzvez Deilamshaw (injuriously suppos'd a fisherman, from his use of Navigation, as was Tamberlan a shepheard from the Tartarrs vagrancy:) this (Deylamshaw sirnamed Boia (or Moheia rather, from fish a calumny) had three sonnes; Ally, Hushan, Achmet. Ally sirnm'd Aben∣hassen had no issue: his father and he were both buried in Sheraz An. Dom. 940, heg. 320. Hussan by death of his elder brother, was Lord of Parc, Hery, Hierac, and Corasan; Acmet had Kerman and Macron. To Hussan succeeded a stranger Zedday-Mohee by name, brought in by Mustapha the Ba∣bylonian Calyph; to whom succeeded Eyna-duddaule that had no issue. So Rocnadaul (Hussans sonne) got possession of his fathers seigniories, and dy∣ed Anno Domini 980. heg. 360. dividing first his crowne lands amongst his three sonnes; Sherfa-daule, Shamsdaules, and Bahao-daules. The eldest had Shyraztan, Larestan and Kerman: the second, Hierac and Diarbec: the youngest had Gerioom and Taburstan, Sherfadaule dyed issules Anno Dom. 990. heg. 370. the second brother inherited; but the envie of traitors gave him small joy, for hee was buried not long after his Coronation; whereby the seigniory came to Bahao-daules the youngest sonne of King Rocknadaule. Bahaodaule governed twelve yeeres very succesfully, and at's death commanded his eldest son Sultandaule to succeed him: this Prince was train'd up in field exercises from his cradle, and by his valour much in∣larged his Empire, yet could not defend himselfe from Hocem Masharaf∣daule his restlesse brother, till by agreement the Kingdome was divided: to Sultandaule, Farsistan, and Aywaz: to Hocen, Hyerakeyn. At that time Gelaldaul their brother was invested with the Caliph-ship of Bagdat Anno Domini 1021. heg. 401. and Sultan-daul at last dyes, and is Anno Domini 1025. buried in Shyraz with great solemnity. Abdul-cawn his sonne ruled
after him: but perceives the Crowne to totter, yea, to fall off by the un∣naturall practises of Syarfuddaul (call'd also Abul-favar) his traiterous Uncle; forced thereby to fly to Gelaladaul his other Uncle the late made Kaliph, who is glad of this occasion, having long lookt with a squint eye of ambition upon his Nephews Diadem: but dissembing it, with a brave Army he descends from Bagdat, and with ease dethrones Abul-favar, but mounts himselfe into the throne to Abdul-cawns amazement, who to save his life flies into Arabia: whiles Mahomet Gaznehy from Hindostant falls upon Ayrac and Shervan, but is repeld most shamefully into Sablestan, Parc at that instant being miserably trod under-foot by the Turquemen and Deylamans: ere long Abul-favor gets so highly into the Calyphs fa∣vour that hee is confirmed in his former title, but in the way death cut off his claime, leaving Abdul-cawn the banisht Prince his right, who upon this faire advantage returnes, and is joyfully welcomed: but surfetting of too much joy, hee lived not long after it; for, commending his body to the earth, he gave the royalty to Aben-melec-Rahim his sonne, who dyed Anno Domini 1054. heg. 434. without issue, and in whom (after a race of fif∣teene Kings) took end the Moheyan pedegree. To him succeeded Abumansor, who pretended himselfe true sonne of Gelaladaul the Caliph: he took to wife Danta daughter of Toshalbeg, and dyed (after five yeeres greatnesse) in Kermoen, and lyes buried at Hur∣kawn not farre from Iasquis: he had five sonnes by that Lady, Abumansor∣phulad-sotun, Chozroe-pheruz, Abu-becr, Abuzeddai, and Aboally-kay-koz∣rao. Abumansor inlarged Shyraz, and did his best to make it strong and beautifull; but whiles he busied his fancie at home, he looks not abroad, such time his ambitious brother Cosroe-pheruz gripes him, and takes unjust possession of his Territories: but revenge pursues him, for being invited to Bagdat to see his sick grandsire Toshalbeg; for his cruelty to his brother, he is put into a loathsome prison, where famine and stench made an end of him. But this could not terrifie Abuzedday the fourth brother from intruding into Abumansors right: albeit, his injured brother had escaped and gathered a resolute Army, who so stoutly stood his friends that Zedday is slaine and his associates banished. It seemes Abumansor was borne to an iron destiny, unable at his second returne, to safegard himselfe from Fazele his Liefetenant, that unawares detrudes him into a deadly prison, adorning his rascall browes with his Masters Diadem: Aboally will none of that, he takes a happy advantage, and pulls it from Fazel's brows and crownes him with one (better becomming Traitors) of flaming iron. Aboally after hee had soveraniz'd seven yeeres, is arrested by grim death Anno Domini 1100. heg. 480. and for want of issue the Scepter falls to Mahummed Abutalip Togrulbeg, sonne of Michael, sonne of Salgucius, sonne of Didacus, a Tur∣queman. In the Salgucian family it continued till Mahummed Abul-casen dyed Anno Domini 1220. heg. 600. without any issue. A race of Tattarrs fol∣lowed: led by Cingis-cawn Lord of Ketoa-kotan, Maurenahar, and Gazne∣hen. (Almostansor-bila-Mansor then sitting Caliph of Mecca and Bagdat.) To Cingis-cawn (who dyed Anno Domini 1228. heg. 608.) followed Tuki-cawn, and Chagatay-cawn; from Chagatay-cawn descended Tamberlan,
whose issue now rule Hindustant. After the Tartars, the Turks a fresh planted here, led by Chara-Mohummed An. Dom. 1415. Heg. 795. a Karakula guspan or black sheepe as they call themselves, banisht Anno Dom. 1470. Heg. 850. by Acen-beg (call'd also Vsan-cassan) an Armenian Christian, whose grandson Alvan was the last white sheepe, or Acorlu-guspan shorne mortally by Izmael-Sophy his ambitious kinsman An. 1504. Heg. 884. This Izmael was great Grandfather to Abbas now Persian King, of the Ben-Ally or Sophian Genealogie. Let us now (what pace you please) to Perse-polis, not much out of the road: but were it a thousand times further, it merits our paines to view it; being indeed the only bravo Antique-Monument (not in Persia alone) but through all the Orient. PERSEPOLIS, (first call'd Elamis from Elam sonne of Sem sonne of Noah) was built (enlarg'd rather) by Sosarmus a Median Dynast, third from Arbaces that put a period (by death of Sardanapalus) to the Assyrian Monarchy, begun by Belus (Nymrod and Iupiter) and in a glorious successi∣on of one and forty Emperours commanding the world, till Arbaces sub∣jected Babylon. By Cambyses (sonne to Cyrus the magnificent) it was most beautified, and from him to Darius Codomanus continued Empresse of Asia two hundred & thirty yeares in a line of thirteen Monarchs, till Alexander by conquest of all Asia made prostrate also this glorious Citie, betrayed by Teredates, and demolisht by vehement perswasion of Thais an Athenian harlot, who (in revenge of Xerxe's expedition into Greece) never gave over exasperating the giddy Macedonian, till shee saw it flaming; an act so unworthy Alexander as hee sought to quench it with his teares. A Citie so excellent, that Quintus Curtius and Diodorus Siculus intitle it the richest and most lovely Citie under the Sunne. A high and stately Tower it had, circled with a triple Wall: sixteene cubits high the first, adorn'd with battlements; the second was two and thirty; the third of threescore cubits high, of delicate polisht Marble, entred by many gates of burnisht brasse. To the East rose amiably a hill of foure Akers, in which (in state∣ly Mausoleums) were intombed the Monarchs of the world. Many rare and admirable buildings it had, amongst which, the glorious Temple of Diana (mother to that at Ephesus) by Iosephus report was at that time the most exquisite for Art & material in the world. The stones were of richest Marble and Porphire, the roofe of refined gold. A bayt Antiochus the ava∣ritious Atheist long had nibled at, but could not swallow it, as he had done Jerusalems, whence sacrilegiously he ravisht ten tunne of gold. The Pa∣lace royall here, was cut out of the marble rock, above two miles about; the roofe and casements were of Gold, Silver, Amber, & Ivory. The State within, was of gold and orientall glittering gems, in one roome an artifi∣ciall Vine (presented by Pythius) the stalk pure gold, the clusters of pearls and carbuncles; his bolster was valued at five thousand Talents of gold, his footstoole worth three thousand; such, as (after the unruly Greeks had pillag'd three dayes) gave the Macedonian Victor for his part, 120000 Talents, or 72 millions of crownes, a masse of gold: yet very possible, if it be true old Histories report (Herodotus is one) how that at that time, the Monarchs of Persia (besides the Tribute of other Kingdomes) had yeerely
out of Indya three hundred and threescore Talents of gold. Easily then might the Greek load away (as story sayes) three thousand Mules, with two and thirty millions and 750000 pounds in coyne, though in that ado∣lescency of the world, one would wonder so much treasure was found. But we may beleeve it, since sacred writ tells us that in Solomons reigne, in Jerusalem gold and silver was as common as stones. Also Xenophon, that when Cyrus descended into Asia the lesse, hee brought back no lesse than 125 millions of pounds. But why stand we gaping at these prodigious sums. Pauper enim non est, cui rerum suppetit usus. These sparkling Diamonds, what are they but Mammons eyes; this Chaos of gold, but refined clay. What Magick then to make Idolaters. For my part (by Gods help) I in∣tend rather to admire the Anatomy of this glorious ruine, which Don Garzia de Silva Figuroa (Ambassador Anno 1619 to Abbas from Philip the third) calls it the only Monument of the world, without Imposture; yea farre exceeding (sayes he) all other miracles in the world, wee can either heare or see at this day. Miserable in my poore description. The ribs or ruines of Persepolis are at this day call'd Chil-Manor or Che∣hel-Manor (i.e. forty Towers) in the idiom of Persia: and might more properly have said Hashtot-Manor, or eighty Towers, for so many are easily told two yards out of the ground; and if from so many pillars as are perfect and lofty, then may they say Nouzda-Manor or nineteene Towers, at this day no more standing, one excepted at the East below, above a bow shot thence. The whole Basis is cu by incredible toyle, out of the solid marble rock, twice the compasse of Wyndsor Castle, ascended by fourescore and fifteene easie staires, dissected from the durable black Marble, so broad that a dozen horse may goe abreast: the perpendicular is two and twenty Geometric feet, and where the staires are not, the rock is precipitious. Neere the highest step, is the entrance into the Palace; the breadth is visi∣ble, in despight of flame and weather: on one side the gate stands a monstrous great Elephant, on the other a Rhinoceros; the distance is about twenty foot, the portraicts are out of the shining Marble, ten yards high either of them, fixt and perpetuall: a few paces thence, are of like work, bulk and matter two gallant Towers, and (to finish the Porters Lodge) neere them is an other ruine, a Pegasus an invention of the Sculptor to il∣lustrate his Art: and being past this portall, the Apollo opens, a faire even ground, deplorable in many ruines, a hundred white Marble pillars, whole and broken dignifying this once most excellent structure. Upon many of these white Marble pillars the Storks have builded them their nests, where the rage of winde and weather is more offensive to them than any dread they have of the people who inhabit neere them: in all unseasonable stormy or cold weather they forsake the Region and fly where the Sunne can comfort them: the Persians have many superstitious stories concern∣ing 'em, and suppose them (as else-where I have noted) the Emblems of piety and gratitude. The Pillars which are at this day standing, (but seeme to groane under the tyrannie of Time) are twixt fifteene & twenty cubits high, & rise beautifully in forty squares or concave parallels; every square has three full inches; whereby the circuit may be gathered: most excel∣lent is the matter, most elegant the work, and no lesse commendable, the
order and shape how they are placed: in posture, in shew, to this day ad∣mirable; but when they stood in lustre and perfection, were else-where scarce imitable. From the ordinary standing, we easily enjoyed a most de∣lightfull prospect: but in the summity or advantage a brave Horizon of thirty miles unlimitted Plains every way gave it selfe to this Emperial Pal∣lace, as seeming to submit it selfe in a happy lowlinesse. Ruines of Persaepolis. In part of this great roome (not farre from the portall) in a mirrour of polisht marble, wee noted above a dozen lynes of strange characters, very
faire and apparent to the eye, but so mysticall, so odly framed, as no Hie∣rogliphick, no other deep conceit can be more difficultly fancied, more ad∣verse to the intellect. These consisting of Figures, obelisk, triangular, and pyramidall, yet in such Simmetry and order as cannot well be called barba∣rous. Some resemblance, I thought some words had of the Antick Greek, shadowing out Ahashuerus Theos. And though it have small concordance with the Hebrew, Greek, or Latine letter, yet questionlesse to the In∣venter it was well knowne; and peradventure may conceale some excel∣lent matter, though to this day wrapt up in the dim leafes of envious ob∣scuritie. Adjoyning this, is another square roome, from angle to angle ninety paces, in circuit three hundred and threescore paces: beautified with eight dores, foure of them are six paces broad; the other foure, three a peece: all eight severally composd of seven great polisht Marbles fixt one upon another; each of those stones are foure yards logn, five quarters high, most excellently ingraven with Images of Lyons, Gryffins, Tigres, and Bulls: and in other places (for the wals are durable) Battailes, Heca∣tombs, Triumphs, Olympick games, and the like, in very rare Sculpture and proportion. Above each doore is ingraven the Idea of a Majestique Monarch; his roabe is long, a Tiara or Mithra on his head, his hayre very long and curled; in one hand he holds a Globe, in the other his Scepter, a garbe and session never used by Persian Princes. The silly inhabitants (who made no accompt of it till of late) name him, Iamshet, and Aaron, & Sampson, and Salomon, a wonder they leave out Rustan their Hercules, and as easie for invention. A third chamber conjoynes the last we spoke of, this (if they lie not that told us so) was a Gynecie or Nursery; it has foure un∣equall angles, two sides are sixtie; the other two, seventy of my largest paces. From that we issued into a fourth roome, two sides are twenty, the other two, thirty paces. The walls are very eminent in this chamber, of black shining Marble, in many places so bright and jetty, as we could easily view our reflex, no steel mirror comparing with it. In most parts the walls are cut into Gygantive Images, illustrated with Gold, to this day permanent. Somewhat further, over heaps of stones of valewable portraictures, we mount towards the most lofty part of this Pallace, where we saw the resemblances of a devout King, adoring his three Dietyes, the Sunne, the Fire, a Serpent, all which are cut upon the perpendicu∣lar Mountaine. The other side of this high hill is a precipice, downe which is no descending. But whether this Fabrick was Ionick, Dorick, or Corinthiack, in the perfection, I cannot determine, the ruines forbid a positive judgement. But such at this day it is, that a ready Lymmer in three moneths space can hardly (to do it well) depict out all her excellencies. Pitty it is, it is not done, the barbarous people every day defacing it and cleaving it asunder for grave-stones and benches to sit upon. Five miles West from Chehel-manor is also a gallant Monument, a Giant cut into a monstruous proportion, whom the illiterate Persians say was Rustan, and from him cald Nocta-Rustan. I rather judge it the Image of great Alex∣ander, who had a desire, that after ages might think him more than a man, and his men more than Monsters, as appeared in his conceit to make
many Armors, bigg enough for three men, and scatter them in India that the people might not dare to rebell, lest those Poliphems came to lash them. Neere Chilmanor is Mardash (corruptly by the Spaniard cald Margate∣an) a Towne of two hundred houses, the people so superstitious that such houses as we came in they perfumd and ayr'd (some were happily fired) for that we were not Mussulmen. From this place to Sheraz are ten far∣sangs; interposd by some craggy hills and a pleasant river (Rhogomana of old) over which is a bridge, the best till then we saw in Persia. This river is by Quintus Curtius lib. 5. and Strabo lib. 15. named Araxis (Cho-Araxes is a fitter name) streaming (sayes he) twentie furlongs from Persepolis. Another of that name, so often mentioned by Ptol. Mela, Plutarch, and Lucan, is in Armenia, and indeed divides it from Medya, at this day cald Arash) and very famous. After two dayes stay in view of old Persepolis, the eight and twentieth day we took horse, and that night rid foure and twentie miles to a Town cald Moy own; in midway twixt which two Townes, we noted a high im∣pregnable mount, at whose top, stood desperately a Castle so fortified by Nature and industrie, as may be thought impregnable. A late rebel∣lious Sultan (weary of slavery) man'd it against his Prince victorious Ab∣bas, who (to terrifie others by his example) came in person to chastise him. But such was the precipitious height where the Castle stood, and the narrow entrance so bravely defended, that in six moneths siege hee could see no signe of victory. Loth he is to leave it so, and what strata∣gem to take, cannot imagin. A great reward he promises to any would ef∣fect it. Valour is invalidable. Art Magique perpetrates it. An old wi∣zard covetous of so much money promises the Divells best, and according∣ly, by his infernall spells so possest with threats and phantasmaes the wretched Sultan, that upon the witches assurance of pardon he descends, the block rewards him. But Abbas acknowledges the Inchanter had me∣rited his price and grudgingly gave it him. The foolish man so doates upon his gold, that he sees not danger. The King repents the losse of it, and knowes no way to recover it but by sending him to Satan without his head, the reason of his Justice was for his Sorcery. A quality at other times he commended deeply, but now abhorred it: a pretty pollicy. To re∣turne. Moyown, is delightfully seated; enricht with sweet water, excel∣lent Wine, much wood, and Natures Carpets. It properly belongs to the highly reverenced Prophet Izmael, whose tombe Emoom-Izmael is here seen, by liberality of many Kings, and great men not a little honoured: to∣wards its maintenance (and the Priests) the Towne gives yearly twelve thousand mawnd-shaw of Rice, and foure thousand of Barley. Next night we lodgd (slept I cannot say) in O-jone, a village of thirty Families, all of them Prophets or Prophets children. We ever found least profit, where Prophets dwelt, no wine nor grapes allowd to grow amongst them; not that wine is bad, but out of a Tradition they have, that it is the blood of those Gyants that warr'd against the Gods. Next day we rode over most craggy, steep, and terrible high hills, and at night made Tartang
our Manzeil; a small Towne, only famous in a high Sepulcher, clothd with violet coloured velvet, under which is buried a great Uncle of the Kings. Next night to Assepose, notable only in an old mud Castle, sometimes a garrison; in and about which, are fourty thousand Georgians and Sarcasshes, by profession Christians; by quality, Captives; a people much honouring Saint George the Cappadocian Bishop their converter. They differ from Mahomitans (not in habit, but) in their gray eyes and long white hayre (Albani ab albo crine) after the mode of Antick Gallants, recorded by Pliny and Lucian, tissued with fillets of gold or sil∣ver. If any of these turne Mahomitan, they are preferd beyond vulgar mer∣rit. Poore soules, hearing that we were Christians, they flockt about us, yea wept to see us. Not much distant hence, is Thymar, memorable if Byzar erre not, in a brave and Antient Monument, by some Hebrew characters supposd the buryall place of Bathsheba, Mother of King Salomon: tis cald Musqued-Zulzimen, i.e. Solomons Chappell; a place if truly so, worthy the seeing. Next night we lay in Whoomgesh, next in Cuzcuzat, next day to Bazeba-chow, and next to Degardow, eight leagues from which place, (and neerer Tezdycaus) we rode over a steepe Mountaine of black shining Marble, (and where are Quarries of Serpentine and Porphyre, if the earth were lookt into) the descent was so percipicious, that but by ragged steps and those not a little dangerous, was no riding downe: howbeit downe we got, and that night rode to Gumbazellello (famous in a Carvans-raw and the best wheat bread in Persia;) next night to Yezdecawz a Towne built in the bottome of a valley, sunck downe in mid a great plaine, whereby it is scarce to be found, did not a Castle point it out, raisd by Yezdgyrd a Persian King above the Towne, and where is a very stately Carravans-raw, the best from thence to Bander on the Gulph of Persia. Next day (through De-Moxalbeg) we got to Amno-baut (by some cald Boyall) a village of thirty families, all of them a postat Georgians, inclosd, to exclude their shame, by a high, strong, round wall raisd with battlements, resembling a Castle; commanded by Daut (or David) Chawn (brother to the Duke of Sheraz) an Apostate, for which he was made an Eparch, and honourd with three silly temporary Tittles, bought with losse of an eternall Crowne of hap∣pinesse: he has here a pretty Carvan-sraw and Summer houses for his owne delight, wherein are five neat roomes curiously painted in Imagery and imbost with gold; his Gardens are also sweet and prettily contrivd into grotts, mazes, vollieres, and the like, equall to that of Aladeul' at Ca∣ramit for his Assassinates; but nasty and deformed if compard with Para∣dize: from Amno-baut we rode next day to Commeshaw, a Towne boasting in a thousand houses and much Antiquitie. It may be either that same Towne which Pliny cald Parodana, or that Ore-batys in Ptolomy: Sir Ro∣bert Sherley was once her Governour, under that wicked parricide Con∣standel chawn; but it seems they bore small love to either of their memo∣ries, neither vouchsafing to bid us welcome (as most Townes did we hitherto past through, although I have omitted to speak their ceremo∣nies) nor a lodging, a base respect to so noble a passenger. At this place Persia is limited, and where Ayrac (or Parthya) takes her beginning: Chi∣raef, Gardon-achow, Nowbengan, Kazeron, Pherushabad, Estacher, Nabandi∣oem,
are reckned Townes in Farsistan, I have but named them. But that you may the better go along with us; and especially in that the latest Maps of Persia are so erronious, both in rivers, the scituation of places, and their true names (for to say truly, none of them have five right names;) I have therefore inserted this of the Persian Empyre; in which, neither the po∣sition of Places are false, nor names of Townes fictitious or borrowed: map of Persian empire THE PERSIAN Empire Next day we got to Moyeor; agrandiz'd by a thousand families; but none of their houses compare with their dove-houses for neat and curious out∣sides: they have some excuse for it; some of them are descended (not
from Columba Noae but) from those holy Pigeons, who fed at Mahomets eare and advanced his reputation not a little, perswading the simple peo∣ple they brought him newes from some (bad) Angels, concerning their happinesse. Next night we were usherd to Spawhawnet by a servant of Me∣loyembegs the Kings Fiscall who intreated the Ambassadors to repose a day or two there, till Spahawn had fitted it selfe for a solemne intertainment: where whiles we repose we may remember, that most of those Manzeils we have past from Chehelmanor to his place, are twixt twenty and thirtie miles asunder. The whole distance is somewhat above two hundred miles, as I computed them. The tenth of Aprill wee set out from Spahawnet a village six miles South from Spahawn: when we had gone a farsang (three miles,) we were stayed by the way to taste a banquet in a spacious garden of the Kings, whither the English Agent and such other Christian Merchants as were in Spahawn came out to attend our Lord Ambassador: a mile neerer the Citie, the Visier, the Sultan of Spahawn, Meloyembeg and Hodge-nazar the Armenian Prince with foure thousand horse and innumerable foot, came to bid us a happy entrance: the fields two miles from the towne were re∣plenisht with vulgar men, women and childen; the Bannyans like caterpil∣lers swarmd about us; all together, in a volley of thundering acclamations cried out Hoshomody, Suffowardy, the better sort Hoshgaldom i.e. welcome, heartily welcome: forty kettle Drums, Fifes, Tabrets Tymbrels, dancing wenches, Hocus Pocusses, and other Anticks past my numbring inobled the ceremony: the bridge was full of women on both sides, many of them in faire deportment unmasqued their faces. The first place we alighted at was the Conna-potshaugh, the Kings Pallace, placed at the West side of the Medan or great Market: there the Noble men kneeled downe, and tessalemd, three times kissing the Kings threshold, and as many times knock∣ing their heads against the ground in an awfull obeysance: Sir Robert Sher∣ley sizedaed also and contented them; a Coselbash ended the ceremo∣ny in a panegyrick to this purpose: That the Fame and excellency of Shaw-Abbas was so great as had attracted a great Prince and other Gentlemen from the extreamest Angle of the world, to see whether fame had been partiall in his magnificence: no wonder, since his radiant beames spread themselves over all the Universe: that done, some bottles of good Wine were lavisht out, after which with a continued clamour of the Plebeyans, we were conducted to a brave house of the Kings, at the South-East end of the City, through which, a deep broad water had its course into the Sindery. The fourth day after our being in Spahawn, the English Agent banquet∣ed our Lord Ambassador, and shewed us a rich and hearty welcome: to agrandize it, at night a Tanck of water was beset with lighted Tapers, ar∣tificially uniting the two contrary Elements; squibs also and other fire∣works, that made all the City gaze and gape with wonder. Next day Hodge∣nazar was visited at his house in Ielphea; a Christian he professes himselfe, but (I must be bold to tell him) his house is furnisht with such beastly pi∣ctures, as no way relish of honest or Christian invention: amongst our other
cates, we had a rosted pig, a meat to Jew and Persian infinitely offen∣sive: the Wine flagons and Bowles here, were of purest gold. I desire to speak a little of these Armenians, that the rest of our Travailes may be woven with more ease and fewer mixtures. These Armenians are cald also Ielphelyns from the City they dwell in here, nam'd from their Metropole neere Ararat. In habit they differ not from the Persians, but live in equall freedome: they professe Christ, and account Saint George their Patron, from whom some think Georgia takes name, and not from , Husbandmen; they and the Georgians are habited alike: this is their greatest difference, that the Georgians excell in warre, the Armenians in merchandize: this Image may well represent them both. A Georgian man and woman. They both are honored by the memory of twenty thousand Martyrs in the last persecution, Sapores tyrannising then ore Persia: the Country derives her name from Armenus a Thessalian (Iasons kinsman)▪
It is divided into major & minor: the greater is confind by Tartary to the North, by Media and Assyria to the South: the West and East with the Euxin and Caspian seas: It includes Colchis, Albania, Georgia, Iberia, &c. obscured in other barbarous names, as Zuria, Goweria, Mengrellia, Turq'mania, Cara-culia. Gurgee, Haloen, and Sarlochya (from Gog and Magog,) and to which place, the ten Tribes were brought by Salma∣nasser the Assyrian. They have two Patriarchs or Protomists; one at Ierusalem; the other at Syna in Arabia; sometimes they reside at Sis neer Tharsus or at Ecmea∣zin neer Rhivan, or Ervan in Shervan. Antioch their old Sea they dare not chalenge. They have the three first generall Councells in great honour, study the Latin tongue, (rare in Asia); they have twelve titular Bishops, three hundred some say; poore, but no way despicable. They have the old and new Testaments in their mother tongue; the Letany also, part of which, is every Lords day read and expounded in the Churches: they ad∣minister the Lords Supper in both kinds, Bread and Wine; and deny a reall presence; they allow but our two Sacraments: Baptisme they celebrate after the Eutichyan sort, as Iacobus (father of the Iacobites) and Iohannes Philipponus Anno Dom. 550 mis-taught them: the proselit gentiles or Mo∣humedans in the fore-head with a burning crosse, others they baptise with two fingers, and signe the Infant with the crosse, as glorying in that hyerogliphick the Jews and Mussulmen esteeme so ignominiously of: are also great lovers of Tradition: they pray not for the dead, imagining that till the generall day of doom they are without joy or torture. Five Sabbaths in every yeare they abstaine from flesh, fish, cheese, and butter; in memory of those five Ages, wherein their barbarous forefathers used to immolate their children unto the old red Dragon: all wednesdayes and fridayes also in the yeare except from Easter to Ascention they fast pre∣cisely: and no other Christians are such strict Lent-observers: for they re∣frayne their wives that time; and from flesh, fish, milk, egges, butter; those forty dayes feeding only upon oyle, bread, honey, water, dates, cowcumbers, melons, herbs, and the like. At other times they eat hogs flesh. Before the three great Festivalls, they fast twelve dayes: they mar∣ry betimes at nine or twelve yeers: the Layety are permitted to wed twice the Ecclesiastiques but once: trigamy to all is hatefull. The Presbitry are much honoured. Images in their Churches they detest, but at home have pictures of Venus and Priapus. The crosse they regard, but worship not, beleeve not purgatory▪ their Temples are but meanely beautifull. Obedience and respect to the better and elder sort is much practisd. They punish theft and adultery severely. In some things they are but refind Ido∣laters: as in some burialls, they lead about the Church an unspotted Lambe with much solemnity; they then sacrifice, divide and give each there a bitt to eat; as a Simbol, or superstitious bond, obliging one another in love and charity: to mee it seems they derive this custome from that of the Hebrews, who used to divide a calfe, as Moses records in 15. Gen. 9. and as Ieremie notes in the 34 Ch. 18.19. verses. On good Friday they represent the passion and buriall of our Saviour: during which, they weep and ingeminate their ejaculations. On Easter they intimate the resurre∣ction
by a representative body, using all that morning the old salute of joy; He is risen indeed: an Angelicall note they call it. That day they celebrate with great Feasts, the Mahomitans nor Iews not daring to min∣gle among them; The King allowes them that priviledge. They fast upon the Nativity of our Saviour. The Iesuits labour to knit them into Rome; but in vaine: they stand much upon their Antiquity, and name two hun∣dred grave and learned Bishops since their conversion, many of which were noble Martyrs or witnesses: the report of an envious Doeg that they had submitted to Rome, agnising the Pope their head, made Abbas storme and not to be pacified, till a thousand of them were made headlesse: up∣on which the rest implore help and revenge from the Turk, raising a bloody scean of ensuing Troubles. Some say that Lodovic Grangier a Ie∣suite lately crost the black sea into Mengrellia, where Threbis-chawn en∣treated him gently and by his charity they are much purged from super∣stition: which if so, I wonder that his name is of no more fame amongst them. I feare I have made too large a parenthesis. Let us therefore to Spa∣hawn againe, the Metropolis of the Persian Monarchy; yea the greatest and best built City throughout the Orient. Et quô te carmine dicam. Must Babells lofty Towres submit to thee Tauris, Perse-polis and Nynivee? Shushan, Arsacia, and Nabarca, fall Before thy seat and power Provinciall? Had that ambitious Nymrod thought on this, Cambyses or the proud Semyramis, With all those princely Rulers which did sway The Eastern Scepters, when thou didst obay: It would have queld their pride and let them know, All humane Actions have both ebb and flow. The greatest Monarchs cannot conquer Fate, Time doth by turnes advance and subjugate. Now royall Abbas rules, Spahawn must rise. (Where Kings affect, there most men cast their eyes, There flock the people:) 'tis his power not thine Which hath eclipst their light, to make thee shine. Then use thy Fortune so, that none from thence May wish thy fall, or grudge thy eminence. SPAWHAWN, (at this day the Persian Metropolis) is in Artick elevation 32 degrees 39 minutes; in longitude 86 degrees 30 minutes: dif∣fering from Don Garcias accompt, whose height exceeded not 31 degrees 30 minutes. In whose description if I seeme prolix, impute it to my desire to give thee every thing usefull and observable. And in the first place, in regard some suppose her (like Agra) a start-up Towne, wee will trace her in her variations as farre as my poore reading will well afford it us. That it was Echatan (as Niger thinks) is ridiculous to imagin: two thousand
three hundred yeere ago it was called Dura; but whether in that Dura the haughty Assyrian erected his golden Colosse, I finde it not. Hecatom∣pylos is the next name it had; recorded by Apollodorus, Polibius, Ptolomy, and Pliny, lib. 6. c. 8. so denominated from her hundred gates; whereby we may imagine her in those dayes great and stately; and though in Alexan∣ders conquest Curtius name her not, it seemes she then varied into that Greekish nomenclation: and of this name we have a story, that Demetrius Nycanor (Sotors sonne) thirsting after Syria and Jerusalem, was (upon his trecherous killing Antiochus, Alexanders sonne, to make the conquest easier) affronted by Tryphon Lieftenant of Syria, and forced to flie to Ar∣baces the Persian King for succour, who being acquainted with his unna∣turall ambition, not only denied him the law of hospitality, but sent him prisoner to Hecatompylon, where he was fettered; till upon submission and promise of more obedience hee was releast, and by Arbaces reseated in his owne Dominions. After that, Nymzamaena, or halfe the world: (an Hyperbole borrowed from Rome, Epitomen Vniversi:) by Ben Ionas who was here Anno Hegirae 540. of our Lord 1160) Ashbahan or Acspachan; by Mandevil our coun∣triman (three hundred & forty yeers ago) Saphaon; and at this day is call'd Spawhawn (or as they Sibboleth, Sphawhawn) and by most writers diffe∣rently spelled, Spaha, Spachen, Acbaban, Aspachan, Izpaan, Spahan, and Hispahan, the errors springing from diversity of Idioms. From whence the name Spawhawn derives it selfe, is not knowne unto the Natives (I askt it them) how then shall wee get intelligence? tis a thing for certainty impossible, yet will I venture a conjecture that it is either that old Town Spada, where Eunuches were first gelded, or from a compound of Aspa (a horse) and Chawna (a house, or stable, or the like) Spawhawn per Aphe∣resin & Syncopen euphonically contracted; the rather conjectured, in that the Hypodrome (the body of the great Mydan) was an old famous place, for view of horses: if that content not. I must ingeniously confesse, I think this City was never named Hecatompylon: such a one I know there was famoused in many Authors: but by observing the position 37 degrees 50 minutes in Ptolomy, I take Coom or Cazbyn to bee the relict of it: the rather, in that Ptolomy, Pliny, and Strabo in their Geography, place Aspa in Parthia, in 36 deg.; a name from whence Aspahawn may credibly have been deduced: besides, the lat. is more agreeable: or peradventure from Aspadana which they place in 33 deg. Spawhawns latitude. First, speak we what she has been for grandeur in older times, and with that we will couple our present observation. If I exceed, excuse it, prestat de Carthagine tacere, quam pauca dicere. A. D. 645. of the Heg. 25, by com∣mand of Omar then Calyph of Mecca, Siet-ben-Abivakez with a few troops of victorious Sarazens attempts to pluck violently from Yezdgirds head the then tottering Diadem of Persia, & at the third pull (having twice over∣throwne him) effected it, the glorious command of that Monarchy then eclipsing: which done, this Ben Abivakez sacks his two best Townes Elmedin in Chaldea (built Anno Domini 520, by Kozrao, sonne to Kobödes, and yet the Alcoran sayes it sprung out of hell) and Spahawn in Parthia. Also we may memorise her from Tangrolipix (a Turqueman, and Lord of
the Zelzuccian Family, of whom the Ottomans) who in the yeere 1030. of the Hegira 410. (Edward the Confessor ruling England, Gruffyth ap Llewellyn Wales,) was intreated by Mahomet then Prince of Persia to ayd him against Pysastris an incroaching Babylonian, which Tangrolipix did and prospered in. After that, he helped him against the invading Indyan, and in recompence of his good services, the Turque desires leave to passe Araxis to visit his countrimen, betwixt the two seas the Hyrcan and Euxine; and by jealous Mahomet denyed and so enraged, that lurking awhile in the Carmanian Desert, the Persian gulph was at his pleasure. But (vexing to be so confin'd) marches against the King, and at Shyraz beats his twenty thousand darstardly soldiers; and after that, opposes 60000, then also victo∣rious; whereby Mahomet fled, & with two much haste to get into Spahawn, fell from's horse, and broke his neck, the Turks then subjecting Parthya. Rached-bila also, sonne of Almoster-sha was slaine by Mazud, Anno 1130. of the Heg. 510 and buried in Spahawn: which few for many, shall speak her antiquity in the name she is now triumphant in. Speak we now of the magnificence: wee have told you how the story of ben-Abivakez a thousand yeeres ago, cals her a great City, but gives us no better description, Ben-Ionas (who sayes he saw it foure hundred seventy six yeeres ago) affoords her twelve miles compasse, rich, and populous. Man∣devel, A.D. 1300 (which is above 300 yeeres since) saies that in his time she was a noble City. A. D. 1474, Ioseph Barbarus was here (Vsan Cassan reign∣ing) and hee describes Spahawn to bee a great and famous City, peopled with 1500000 soules, the Towne and Suburbs ten miles in compasse. Rab∣bi Benjamin and Contarenus the Venetian Ambass. 80 yeere ago, relate that then shee had 20 Italian miles in circuit, and Lemius the Portuguise sent by Albuquerq to Sha-Ismael, An. Dom. 1513. reports her glorious. I shall now more largely, and truly acquaint you with her present stan∣ding. Spawhawn, Metropolis of the Persian Monarchy, is seated in the Parthian Territory now cal'd Ayrack, & as Umbelic to that spacious bodie at this day awed by the Persian Scepter: from the Persian gulph removed a hundred seventie nine farsangs, (of English miles five hundred thirtie seven,) from the Caspian sea a hundred and twenty farsangs (three hundred and sixty miles;) from Shyraz two hundred twenty two miles, from Babylon foure hundred and fifty, from Candahor eight hundred and seventie, from Cazbyn 270. In compasse at this day nine English miles,Circuit. including seventy thousand houses, and of soules above two hundred thousand, com∣pos'd (besides Natives) of English, Duch, Portuguiz', Pole, Muscovit, In∣dian, Arabian, Armenian, Georgian, Turk, Jew, and others, drawne thi∣ther by the magnetick power of gaine and novelty: many things here are memorable; which for order sake I will present you thus divided. The Mydan, Mosques, Hummums, Gates, Pallaces, Gardens, Monuments, and Ielphey the City adjoyning. Let me lead you into the Mydan, into the which ere I can bring you,River. we passe over a well-built Bridge of stone, supported by five and thirty pillars, through which the Syndery (or Zindaren) from the Acrocerau∣nian Mountaines streames gently; spreading in rainie seasons here welnigh so broad as the Thames at London, but nothing so navigable; in Summer
her Channells being discovered. The Mydan or great Market, is without doubt the most spacious,Mydan. pleasant, and Aromatick Market in the Vni∣verse; a thousand paces from North to South, the other way above two hundred, resembling our Exchange, or the place Royall in Paris, but six times larger: the building is of Brick, well made, and in delightfull man∣ner fabricated; the whole Mydan joyntly continued: the inside is full of shops, each shop full of ware, archt above (and in a Cupolo) atop tarras∣wise framed, and with plaister (like that of Paris) cemented. This My∣dan being the noblest part, is so placed in the heart of this triumphant City. The Kings Pallace (or Chonna-Potshaugh) conjoynes the West side of the Mydan, possessing a large quantity backwards, but juts not to the street further than the other buildings, nor to the street side gives any magnifick front or state, her best bravery being in the trimme, pargetted and pain∣ted with blew and gold, in mosaick or antick sort, interlac't with posies of Arabick, either savoring of ostentation (they deifie their Kings) or for instruction from the Alcoran; within, the roomes are archt, enlighten'd by curious trellizes, the roofe imbost above with red, white, blew, and gold, the sides with sports and painted Images; the ground spread with rich and curious carpets of silke and gold, without other furniture. Tar∣rassed above, garnisht with a Pharoe over-topping many Mosques, and ex∣cellent for view and breathing. The wildernesse behinde, is fild with ayery Citizens, priviledg'd from hurt or affrights, and for which they returne their thankfull notes in a more swift melodious consort, than if they were in the exactest vollyere in the Vniverse. The North Ile in the Medan, shews eight or nine spacious archt rooms, hung with Lamps and latten Candlesticks, which being lighted, gives a curious splendor. Thither the Potshaw and others go to see pastimes of tumbling, dancing girls, and painted Catamites, that damned sinne being tolerated by the Alcoran. The furthest end North is appropriate for Mynts; the first day silver, gold the second, next day brasse. Not farre thence are victualling shops, wherein, to feed the helpfull belly, after the busie eye and painfull feet are satiated. Afore the Kings doore, and within the Hippodrome, lye unmounted one and thirty Demicannons of brasse, and twelve iron Culverins, brought hither (by some late over-throw they gave the Portugall or Turk) from Ormus or Babylon. Opposite to this Pallace is a faire Mosque, but that at the South end (of all others) most excellent; the outside stone, not form'd to the Crosse (the hyerogliphic of our salvation) as ours bee; but round, either from the Talmud, figuring out Aeternity, or from the Alcaba in Mecca, the shape whereof was reveal'd to Abraham from heaven, pat∣tern'd from that, Adam (sayes their Alcoran) reard in Paradise: within 'tis distinguisht into Iles, the wals lined 15 geometrick foot high from the sole with white well polisht Marble; without pews or seats: in center is a state∣ly Tanck; and at the portall another, octanguler, fild with cristall streams which is first forced to glide round the inside the Medan through a stone channell six foot deep, and six in bredth, which after a pleasant drilling murmur, flowes into this Tanck (or watery Magazeen) whence it is suckt out by subterranean passages into many private houses and gardens. With∣in
the Medan the shops be uniforme, the trades are no where severed, but united. Some be of Mercers, of Lapidaries some, and most of them of gums, drugs, and spices; so sweet, so delicate, as not till then, could I see the Poet sung well. We suckt the Aromatick ayre of Persia. Auras madentes Persicorum Aromatum. Take the outside of this brave Fabrick thus presented. Hippo dromos The Mydan or great Merkitt in Spahawne. A. is a Mosque South. B. is an archt way to the North. C. is the kings house. D. is a Mosque East.
Mosques.The other Mosques (call'd here Dear' and Zunae) are orbicular for shape; for sight, low and indifferently pleasant: the materials are Sun-burnt Bricks, varnisht, and beautified with painted posies; few are without their Tancks (or cesterns of holy water) wherein all Musselmen wash their hands, armes, eyes, (having formerly bath'd their face, eares, breast, feet,) as an operative work to purge sinne, and conferre devotion: their other Church ceremonies I will contract in the latter end of this book, under Title of their religion. Hummums.The Hummums or Sudatories in this Citie are many and very beauti∣full; quadrated some, but most be globous. The stone is white, polisht and durable: the windows are large without, crossed, and to the inner side, made narrow; the glasse is thick, anneald and darkning; the top or covering, round; and tyld with a counterfeit Turquoise, perfect blew, and very fresh and lasting: The inside of these hot houses are divided into many cells or concamerations, some for delight, others for sweating in, all for use; of pure stone all, all pav'd with jetty Marble: men use them com∣monly in the mornings, women towards night; the price is small, but so generally us'd as makes the gaine abundant; tis the Catholicon against all diseases, colds, Catarrhs, flegm, aches, agues, Luesvenerea &c. the womens being there, is knowne by a linnen cloth displayed at the doore, set there (as a warning peece) by the jealous Eunuchs. The City is ovall, each house delighted by large Cypresse gardens:Walls. the wall is of no force against the confounding vomit of the flaming Cannon; it is of use against horse, and shock of Launces; some parapets and bulwarks it has, of more imitation than use; the Persian magnanimity ever choosing to dye rather than be inclos'd or seiged. It has a dozen Portresses, of which, foure are shut up. Gouldest, Chaly, Mergh, and Cherbaugh, made th'entrance of a royall garden. The eight are these, Hazena-bawt (opening towards Shy∣raz and the gulph) De-cridest (to Babylon and Ardaveil.) Tockzy (to Ca∣shan, Casbyn and Tabryz.) Kerroen (to Yezd and Cawrestan) Lamboen (to Ha∣madan.) Sheydack Madayan (opens to Candahor and Indya.) Yowbara and Dalwaet. Pallaces.The Pallaces are few, the Kings house in the Medan; that where wee were lodged, belonging to the King, but made ready for our Lord Am∣bassador: Conna Meloyembeg, Tamas-coolibeg and Haram Beguna are all I saw, worth remembring: the first, is low, painted without, guilt within, well watred and inclosed with fragrant gardens. The last, a Seralio, fa∣mous for pretious treasure and as valuable beauties, of which (being dan∣gerous to inquire or view) wee will speake in silence; the Castle is very large, well wall'd and deeply moated: arm'd with some brazen peeces, but better defended by a troop of leane fac't, beardlesse, memberlesse Eunuchs, who like so many angry Sagittaries guard their Ladies. The bat∣tlements are pleasant to looke on, but no doubt the Horyzontall plaine which is easily discovered from thirty rising Turrets there, yeelds most pleasure. Gardens.The gardens challenge our attention; than which for grandeur and fragor, no Citie in Asia out-vies her. It incloses so many, that at some di∣stance from the City, you would judge it a Forest; so sweet, you would
call it Paradize: all whose excellencies we will joyne in one at the South-West end of Spawhawn, Nazer-jareeb by name, a garden famoused deser∣vedly over all this Monarchy. If you go from the Medan, you passe by Cherbaugh, through an even delicate street two miles long at the least, most part of the way wall'd on both sides, bestrew'd with Moholls or Summer houses, but more remark∣able in that abundance of greene, broad, spreading, Chenore trees, yeel∣ding shade, and incomparable order and beauty; the garden (or rather fruit Forrest) of Nazerjareeb is circled with a stately wall about three miles in compasse, entred by three gates strong and elegantly shaped. From North to South it gave mee a thausand paces, from East to West seven hundred, from one end to the other easily discovered, by reason a faire open Ally (like that in Fountain b'leau) runs along in parellell, distinguisht into nine Ascents, each surmounting other a large foot, each distance smooth and even. In center, is a spatious Tanck, made into twelve equal sides, each side or square is five foot, fild, and round set with pipes of lead which (after the Italick sort) spouts out the liquid element in variety of conceits and postures; that sort of pastime continuing thence to the North gate, where is rais'd a pile of pleasure, antickly garnisht without; within, divided into foure or six chambers; the lower, is set out with Tancks of rich white Marble, and fumes out a coole breese, by quaffing up so much chrystaline water as makes it bubble thither by a constreyned mo∣tion, cut by incredible toyle thorow the Coronian Mountaine. The higher roomes are garnisht with variety of landskips, and repre∣sents their way of sporting, hawking, fishing, riding, shooting, wrastling, courting, and other fancies; the roofe or seeling is inricht with beaten gold, imbost with azure. But, what seemd to mee most excellent, was the view we enjoyed from her Tarrasses, which affoorded us a dainty pro∣spect of most part of the City; which, (save at Rustans Tombe, upon a hill two miles thence) elsewhere cannot be obteyned. This garden is replenisht with trees of all sorts; for medicine, for shade, for fruit: all so greene, so sweet, so pleasant, as may well be term'd a compendium of sense-ravishing delights, or King Abbas his Paradise. Monuments should come now to our description:Monuments but I found few to feed my eyes upon. Rustans Tomb must be one (two miles from Spa∣hawn) behind the Garden wee last spoke of: a Tomb scarce discern'd by shape, but by the Gowers Cabala preserv'd from Oblivion. To see it, wee foot it to the very top of an Imperious Mount, where is only a hollow Cave, whether cut by Art or Nature scarce discernable. His grave is here, his Image, at a place neere Shyraz (from his gigantive shape ingraven of old in a black-marble precipitious mountaine) Noctae or Nogdi Rustan, a brave Cavalier such time as Artaxerxes (Queen Hesters husband) wore that Di∣adem. A.D. 3500. but envie (the heyre of perdition) so burnt in the wrath∣full heart of his unnaturall brother Shawgad, that when Rustan was hot in chase, he fell into a dreadfull pit, cover'd with boughes as if it had hatcht no danger, but in prosecuting his hate was also slaine by a Dart Rustan flung up to retaliate him. Such was the end of valiant Rustan, of whom the Gowers (the old Persians) fable more than we of Bellyanis or Ogero the Dane.
Neere which, and neerer the Citie is Darius (or rather Xerxes) mount: a rising hillock, and whence, Xerxes viewd the innumerable Army he had in that large Plain, weeping, upon a meditation that in so few yeeres none should be living; a Notion true, and sooner than he predicted; for what by Themistocles ashore, and Leonidas at sea, at Salamys and Thermopilae, his huge Armie melted away, and quickly became numerous. Not farre thence, ride we to the Acroceraunian hills (I meane not those of Epire knowne to Ptolomy) hard and loftie. Through which, bold daring Abbas is forcing passage, though he effect it not under twenty yeeres, and by th'incessant toyle of 40000 (somtimes 200000) men, to invite a sweet river to Spahawn, that runnes contentedly to it selfe fifty miles thence, and is by this I beleeve effected: which when it is, may well compare with that old wonder, intended by vaine-glorious Nero 'twixt Ostia and Avernus, now call'd Licola. Within Spahawn I found none, save that Columne or Pillar of heads of men and beasts, erected as a Trophy of the Kings oath, and as a Monument of the peoples levity. At the base tis twenty foot round and threescore high or there-abouts, for (to my shame I confesse it) I forgot to measure it. The occasion this, of erecting it. Anno 1500. Heg. 880. such time as Tamas shaw ruled Persia, and Guinza added to the lustre of that Diadem: this Citie (surfetting with luxurie, for Vbi uber, ibi tuber, sayes Apuleius) refus'd not only to contribute reasonably to the Kings occasions (at that time troubled with Turk and Tattar) but most audatiously with stood his desired entrance; a rebellion so insufferable as made him sweare a revenge scarce to be paralleld. With fury he assaults, in rage enters, firing a great part and in all hostile severity pillaging each house; and to conclude, regarding neither the outcries of old men, weak women, nor innocent children, in two dayes be made headlesse 300000 of those late Spahawnians, and (from Tamberlan's rigid example at Damascus) erects a Trophy (this pillar) of their heads, as a memoriall of their basenes: En, quò discordia cives perduxit miseros. Another followes. Abbas, by hastie death of Father and elder Brother (impatient of cor∣rivalship) Nulla fides regni socijs, omnis{que} potestas Impatiens consortis erit. No faith in fellow rulers, power or state Admit of consort to participate. lops off all such branches as might eclipse the splendour of his crowne, by power or Title, speeding to Spahawn to make knowne his possession by such ceremonies as befitted him. The Citizens in stead of meeting him, send him a choking message reviving the cruelty done Hemyr Hamze Mir∣zey his brother, and old Mahomet, which so exasperates Abbas that by his fathers soule, the seven refulgent Orbes, by Bismilla and Mahomet he vowes their payment. They bid him doe his worst; hee besieges them; they regard it not; they expell his fury with equall force, and for a moneths space hold together and doe like men. Yet in the end victuals grow short and he diverts the river; so as many steale away, chusing rather to die by hazard than endure a famine: Abbas takes his time and enters it, killing
for two houres, men, women, and children, commanding a pillar to be advanc't of the deads of all the Rebells, which had been done had not the Mufti (in imitation of Aurelian, who when he took Thyana (having sworne The Piller of Heades: in Spaawne. the death of them all) made all the doggs be hang'd up) in commiseration feigned a vision from their Prophet, that (so the pillar were rais'd of heads) no matter though beasts heads did it; Abbas pardons them: and forthwith a generall massacre of all kind of beasts insued, the Innocent suffering for the Nocent, and of whose heads and those mens already slaine, this Monument of mercilesse mercy was reared, outbra∣ving for height all the Mosques within Spahawn, though now growne ruinous. Such another is in Sumachy twixt Erez and Derbent. Ielphey is the last part wee propos'd concerning this great Citie: the scite resembles Pera to Constantinople, or Southwark to London, the river Syn∣dery interposing. Tis call'd a Suburb as be Gower-abaut, Abbas-ebaut, Chan∣zabaut, Azenabaut, and Cheigh-Saban. Though indeed they are peopled with men of one religion, admitting very little mixture. Ielphy is govern'd by a peculiar Podestate an Armenian Prince, Hodge Nazar by name, indeed a Christian Merchant: hee and his en∣joy freedome of conscience, but for mony matters are at the disposition of the avaritious King. In Ielphea (nam'd from another of that name in Armenia (old Ariaramnes I beleeve, mentioned by Tortelius) the people are numbred ten thousand, in Azenabaut foure thousand families. Ielphè is by some writ Golfa and Chiulfa, but I think I have better hit our Dialect. The Jelphe∣lyns are habited like the Persians, but differ in face; most of these and the Georgians having brighter haire, and more modest eyes than the Maho∣mitans. They are generally Merchants, and to say truly, but Factors for the King, who exacts an account at their death, and inherits their posessions. They professe Christianity taught them erroniously by Iacobus the Syrian Monothelite. They have two Protomists, one here in Ielphey, th'other re∣sides somtimes at Sib neere Tharsus, other-times at Ecmeasin not farre from Rivan or Ervan. Their religion I have already spoken of.
Gowerabaut is another Suburb, named from the Gowers that people it; nick-nam'd from their Idolatry, being Relicts of the ancient Persians, and such as at this day be the Persees in Indya. The Persians account not of them, partly from their tytle to the Country, partly from their industrie ashaming the Persians in their idlenesse. They adored the Sunne (call'd Mythra) a representator of a more powerfull Diety; their Flamens a sort of Platonists, acknowledging many creatures to be most excellent, but no way comparable to God the Creator, the exact center of all perfection, Pulchrum coelum, pulchra terra, sed pulchrior qui fecit ista, &c. Howbeit they have falne from that, and at this day deifie an elementall fire, which like the vestalls never extinguishes, Zertoost their Lawgiver in his Zundavastaw above two thousand yeeres agoe (they say) commanding them. Their An Old Inhabitant of Persia. marriages are such as we have spoken of at Surat among the banisht Per∣sees now; their burials differ. The Indyan Gowers or Persees expose the dead carcasses to the Suns rage till he have eaten them, but these put them in the hollow of a sacred Tree, standing upright, supported by the bole, till Magick observation release them, that if the Vultur pick out his right eye
first, he is in Paradise; if the left, a Cacodaemon vexes him; they feast or fast hereby, as joy or sorrow is occasioned. These people are most of them mechanicks and husbandmen: few of them either Schollers, Soldats, or Soldagars (as they terme their Merchants:) their habit varies but little from the common mode, save that their headpeece is fashioned to the garbe of Hyrcania. The women shew their faces (a thing very observable) their apparel is tinctur'd with yellow (resembling the burnisht imbrodery of the Sunne) a flame-coloured scarfe hanging loose behind them, many of them whether out of zeale or poverty (I know not) use neither shooes nor sandalls. The farewell to these Gowers shall terminate our description of Spawhawn; this onely remembred, that the Portuguize Friers have two houses here, of the rules of Carmel and Augustin; their Chappell is guilt and furnisht with Organs, Altars, Crucifixes, Images, &c. with which, they hope to convert men to the Papacie: but Armenians love no Innovation, and the Persians in their zeale contemne Images; yet, they serve for espialls, to send Intelligences to Goa and Christendome. We entred Spahawn the tenth of April, and on May day departed thence for the Court, then at Asharaff in Mozendram about foure hundred English miles distant North. Our first nights journey was to Reegue (or Reig) an houres riding from Spahawne. Thence-forward we made (by reason of the intollerable heat) pale Cynthia and Arcturus our night guides, all day refreshing in the Car∣ravans-raws, good resting places if gnats forbid it not. From Reigue we travell'd to Sardahan sixteene English miles, & next nght we made Whomg our Manzeil being seven and twenty miles from Sardahan. Next night to Towgebawt a house and garden of the Kings, for beauty add sweetnesse com∣parable to any other in Parthya; the more observable, being seated in a barren cursed sandie soile, champaigne, and terrible to inhabit in. But The blushing Rose growes here! the Violet And Parthyan Mirtle in choise order set! Hic rosa purpureo crescit rubicunda colore Et Viole omne genus hic est, & Parthyca mirtus? for five hundred paces it every way gives a series of all sorts of Persian fruits and flowers, Pomgranads, Peaches, Apricocks, Plums, Apples, Peares, Cherries, Chesnuts, Damask, red and white Roses, and other flowers in∣numerable, fructified by a crystall rivolet, intermixt with many delicate na∣turall and artificiall Grottoes, Labyrinths, Meanders, and Volliers, with Sudatories or Hummums of good stone, pav'd with choise white Marble; the Mohull or Summer Lodge bragging of a dozen chambers, delicate in view, rich in gold imbosments, and proud in th'Architect, all safeguarded from sand and stealth, by a defensive wall that hinders (save in one rising hillock in midst of the six descents) the affrighting sight of the circumvol∣ving Wildernesse. Who calls himselfe a Traveller, must not imagine pleasure his Object, 'tis paine and miserie must entertaine him oftnest. Otherwise, I could have lull'd my selfe in this last Paradise: but on wee must and try the diffe∣rence. From Tawgebagh wee got next night to Bawt six farsangs or 18 miles
distant, nothing memorable, save an old Castle in the way, which, by Cyn∣thia's palenesse, we could hardly discover. From Bawt wee got by break of day to Obigarmy, both of them houses of the Kings, who has at every twelve miles end a severall Lodge betwixt Spawhawn and the Caspian Sea like these, and wherein our Ambassadour had the honour to repose. And now we are past the danger; let me tell it you. Most part of the last night wee crost a miserable inhospitable sandie Desart, ten long miles broad, in length a hundred: where we beheld mountaines of loose sand, accumula∣ted by the winds fury in such heaps as upon any great wind the tract is lost, and passengers (too oft) involv'd and stifled by that impetuous mercilesse Tyrant, yea Camels, Horses, Mules, or other beasts, though strong, swift and steady, perish without mercy: Albeit the King (to do as much as may be for prevention) has rais'd at every 3 miles end a Castle, but by the un∣stable foundation, is in March & September in despight of their best props yeerely peece-meale torne asunder, without any remaines of their late standing. This our last nights travell was thirty miles. Next night wee rode one and twenty miles to Suffedaw, an old rotten weather-beaten Inn or Carravans-raw, and placed in part of an unsociable Desart. Our next nights lodging was at Syacow ten farsangs (or parassangs as Pliny calls them) thirty miles English, notable in her Carravans-raw, built from the ground of good free stone, white and polisht, and was the first building of that ma∣teriall I saw in eight hundred miles riding; a word of our last nights jour∣ney. The most part of the night we rode upon a causey broad enough for ten horse abreast, built by incredible labour and expence over a most dreadfull Desart, eeven and affoording a plaine Horizon of boggy loose ground, cover'd a top, a yards depth with pure salt, as white as snow; a mi∣serable passage, for if either the wind force the salt abroad like dust, or that by any accident Horse or Camell mistake the way, the quaggy bogg up∣holds them not, but suffers them to sinck past all recoverie; a passage more feared, from some forlorne hopes that pillage passengers; God be blest, wee escaped this, but not another, little lesse formidable; for wee had no sooner past the salt Desart, but of necessity wee must climb over and about hills, so high and glomerating, as if Olympus had beene cut out into Deda∣lian labyrinths. From Syacow wee rode next night 22 miles, most part was over other salt vast Desarts wherein thousands have perished, and would yet, did not a like large deepe grounded causey secure the passage: And here we pitcht our Tents, old god Terminus in this place limitting Parthya from further branching North, from whose high tops looke wee back and memorize her that was once Mistresse of Asya, and formidable to the Roman Emperours. In the Scythick tongue shee meanes a stranger, (as Iustin in his twelfth book) given by the rude Tartar, as to us the name Welch, by the barbarous Saxon. The Parthyan Diadem was once garnisht with two and twenty Kingdomes, encircling most part of Asya. From which lustre shee fell; but after long eclipse, by vertue of the Sophyan stemme, has recover'd a great part of her former bravery. Tis now call'd Hyerac, sirnam'd Agemy, to distinguish it from that including Babylon. Her old Shires were Rhagaea, Apamea, Tapira, Choama, Araciana, Semina, and Mizia; her mountaines, Orontes, Abicoronii, Mardoranii, and Parchoatri; not
eight hundred miles in circuit, hilly and barren, yet breeding men both wise and valiant. Next night (Diana running cheerfully through her Zodiac) wee rode eighteene long miles to Gezz a pretty Lodge belonging to the King: the greater part of this nights journey was through the bottoms of transected Taurus, whose stupendious forehead wets it selfe in the ayery middle re∣gion: the fretum or lane is abut forty yards broad, even below, and be∣strew'd with pibbles; either side is wall'd with an amazing hill, higher than to reach up at twice shooting, and for eight miles so continues, agreeing with the relation Pliny and Solinus make of it: a prodigious pas∣sage, whether by Art or Nature questionable: I allude it unto Nature (Gods hand-maid.) But if it bee the same which Pliny calls Caspiae portae; Bertius, Caspiarum Claustra; Strabo, and Ptolomy, Pilae Caspiae, Mediae vel Zagriae; and Zarzaeae by Dio. Siculus; I then grant Semyramys (who did what she could to eternize her name) effected it, and from her was call'd Pilae Semyramidae, as Niger has it. Howbeit, the Persians appropriate it to Mortys-Ally; who with his slicing Shamsheer for the ease of his people made it; a sword after their Cabala a hundred cubits long; and where∣with at one blow he beheaded ten (or as some say, a hundred) thousand Christians: of no credit, in that Pliny (ere Mortis-Ally was horne) thus writes of it, Ruptura est Montis longitudine octo mill: pass: angustissima, &c. But though they ratifie their story of Ally with an oath, from mee they get no other beliefe concerning it than this. Hanc fabulam longi temporis mendacia finxit. Of more certainty is this, a Persian in our company told me. That a dozen yeeres ago, a valiant thiefe with five hundred horse and three hun∣dred Musquets defended this narrow roade against all passengers; none pas∣sing nor re-passing without Tribute. The King of Larry-Ioon, and other mountaneers frown'd at his sawsinesse, and threatned his banishment; but such stormes made good musick to his eares: Abbas growes cholerick to bee so bearded by an ordinary fellow, and scornes to honour his over∣throw by an Army: for knowing he had many Cavalleers about him, he doubted not by their courages to fetter him: he moves it and proposes a reward: but they had heard the thiefe was of incomparable fortitude and dexterity; so as by long silence Abbas findes their feare, and grows pale at it: yet ere hee could give his rage a vent, a bold Armenian under-takes it: the King embraces him, and breaths fresh courage into the hardy Chri∣stian, who excellently mounted, singles out the gladded thiefe, that doub∣ted not to master so faire a beast with small opposall. It was his custome to give good play; usually commanding his company to look on, if one or lesse than five entred the strait; such high confidence had he in his va∣lour and dexterity; in short space they met, but parlee in Mars his language; the Armenian (in all points fitted for a sterne encounter) fol∣lowed his blowes with such skill and fury, that after long fight and much bloodshed on either party, upon close hee made death a passage: a victory so irksome to his men (whose lives depended on his safety) that like robd Beares they fell upon the victor Armenian, who had doubtlesse there ex∣pired, had not an Ambush of many brave Coosel-bashaes broke out and
relieved him; by whose sudden assault the wretched theeves were quick∣ly sacrifiz'd unto their Master. The Christian returnes to Court crown'd with a glorious Laurell. Abbas addes to his lustre and gives him a brave command, so insupportable to the weak soule of this too-strong Cham∣pion, that to content the King and ground his standing, he renyes his pro∣fession, though an Ocean of teares shed by his beloved countrymen sought to wast him from the Alcoran. But see the end of such Apostacy. Al∣beit the King had cause to hug him in his bosome, so excellent and fortu∣nate prov'd he against the Tartarrs; yet jealosie (rather divine vengeance) so stung old Abbas that without any triall or acquainting any man with his reason, hee commands Lolla-beg to cut his head off, such time as hee was singing a lullaby to his good fortune. Our next nights manzeil was at Halvary (eighteene miles from Gezz) a well built Towne it is, and pleasantly seated, the earth being mellowed by a sweet rivolet, that purls from the tops of Taurus, from whose ver∣tue the ground is richly appareld in greene, and requites the painfull hus∣bandman with a happy acknoledgement of Olives, Walnuts, Rice, Wheat, and Wood in great abundance: bidding a sad farewell to that healthy Village, the next night we rode 20 miles to Periscow i.e. a broken Moun∣tain: a Town somtimes honoured with the Kings residence; not that the beauty of his house (but ordinary) allures him, choyse hawking, Phesants and other game more delighting him here than any other part of Parthia. The Pole is here elevated six and thirty degrees: the Towne is refresht with chrystallin water, sweet and advantagious to the earth and her inha∣bitants: tis built upon the brow of a high (well woodded) divided hill, whose top has beene crown'd with a vast Castle, but now by age or warre (the canckerwormes of all temporaries) is moath-eaten, her ribbs onely appeare, expressing desolation and famine. One Mahummed commands the Towne, and keepes the sword and skale, but is I feare dame Astreas corrupted servant: no marvell if in a discontented humour shee has left the earth, in Persia (especially in Periscow) Justice is so odly ballanced. At our entrance into this Towne, (to extort a bribe from the Ambassador) he hangd one Persian, cut off anothers nose, and mutilated a third man, to shew his authority more than otherwise; their fault was, for stealing a trifle of two shillings value from a footman serving the English Agent: another was ready to bee trust up, but a message was sent to my Lord Ambassador, that if hee pleas'd to beg his life it should be granted him: my Lord Ambassador very gladly ransom'd him with somewhat more than a meere complement. Complaint was also made against a Farmour for thrashing a whore against her will; Monsieur Radamanth bids geld him, and to hang his stones at her eares as two pendants, the gulph of Persia afforded none so pretious: the poore wrench humbly beseecht him to spare his usefull parts, so did his astonisht wife, so as after much medi∣ation of friends and thirty pounds fyne, upon promise to grinde in his owne mill ever after, all is husht, and each part satisfied. But each man cried out, a severe Censor is this Daraguod. I read that the barbarous Gaules had such a custome, si furaverit quod valet 40 denar. aut moecha∣bitur, vel castretur &c. But here many times they have such tricks
to encompasse money. Well may they therefore clamour out. Gold forfeits faith, perverts the poore mans right. Gold makes the Law a slave, where shame wants sight. Auro pulsa fides, auro vaenalia Iura, Aurum lex sequitur, mox sine lege pudor. After two dayes repose in Periscow, we jogd on; the Court then being little more than a hundred miles from us. Our first nights journey from Periscow, was to Gheer, foure and twenty long miles, and tedious: some part was over terrible hills, other part through whistling dales; in both which we were so weather-beaten with a raging storme of wind and haile bred in Tartary, and forc't over the Caspian sea (which from hence if the season had permitted wee might have seene) that it not onely tooke away our sight and hearing, but threatned our braines; for in despight of our best skill and closing one with another, it separated us; insomuch as we had hardly recovered our companies, had not the melodious noyse of the braying Mules, and jingling of the Cammells bells revoked, yea untwisted us out of these Caspian or Zagrian straits; through which, when neither Sunne, nor Moone, nor Starre befriends, whosoever hereafter travell, let them (if they would prevent precipitious falls) borrow Theseus his thred, or be content to wander in endlesse labyrinths. From Gheer wee rode next night foure and twenty miles, to a small Village whose name I have infortunatly lost: the Frogs (the Bul-bulls or Philomels of this mar∣rish place) it may be were the causers of it, assembled in such troopes, and chirping such lothsome tunes, that we wisht Iupiter had been to give them another King: for The prutling Frogg (thinking his language good) Croakes fruitfully in his beloved mud. Garrula limosis rana. coaxat aquis. To Aliavarr, one and twenty miles from the Town of Frogs we rode next night: a very sweet and pleasant place in water, wood, and store of Phe∣sants; a bird in these Hyrcanian Towns, and neere the river Phasis in Men∣grellya (Cholcos of old) originally breeding: Iason and his Argonauts first made them knowne to Greece, when hence he forc't their Sheep, bearing fleeces of gold, or gold-meriting fleeces. Next night we got to Necaw, five and twenty miles from Alliavar, observable in the Kings house, and that the common Mansions and Churches here, differ not in shape from ours of the poorer sort in England. Next night wee got into Asharaff; a Citie upon the Mare Caspium. The Emperour of Persia was here, and had long expected the Ambassadour; unwilling to remove hence, till he came, that he might see the extent of his Empire, and lest wee should report in Europe that there was no grasse (nor grace) in Persia. The Sultan of the Towne and fifty Coselbashaes brought us into Asharaff, and usher'd us to our lodg∣ing; I may say us, for the ceremony befitted not so great a person as an Ambassador. ASHARAFF (or Ahasuraff, I dare not say frō Ahasuerus) is 2 long miles from the Caspian Sea. It is seated low, and many salt Marishes circum∣volve her; is but meanly watered; no other but a small spring trickling
from the Taurisian Mountains drils in two branches thorow it, the broader of which is not five yards over. The ground is reasonable fat, but inculti∣vated: the greater part of her Inhabitants ploughing in campo martio. I judge two thousand Families live in this Towne, and no doubt encreases daily, the King having but of late affected this place, his Pallace but newly finished, and Farrabant the Hyrcan Metropolis but five miles West remo∣ved hence, where the seat Royall has beene kept for many Ages. Abasse∣baut also, two miles hence, surpasses for a curious Summer house, excells all his other houses for a delicate view, Imagery, Hummum, Water-works, and a Forrest stored with game of all sorts: it I say, attracts the King, who (where ever hee stayes long) makes great Cities of small Villages. The Buzzar here is but ordinarie; the Mosques are not to be admired, the Kings Pallace is vast, and notable only in her Gardens: the building itselfe is confusedly divided into three or foure Mohols or banquetting houses, great and gorgeously painted; which, were they united might better de∣light the eye, and cause the Architect to be commended. I will speak more of it at the Ambassadors audience. The pole Artick is here elevated eight and thirty degrees, seventeene minutes; it is due North from Spahawn, as wee observed in our star-light travell, (for the dayes are raging hot, and not to be travell'd in or jeasted with) Arcturus was ever just before us: from Ormus to this place are a thou∣sand English miles: from Spahawn, three hundred and fifty, or there-abouts; as reckoned. The Am∣bassador has Audience.But before I give you a survay of Hircania, let mee present an essay of my Lord Ambassadours audience and entertainment. After foure dayes rest, the King (or Emperour, Potshaw they call him) was pleas'd, without long warning to assigne him his day of audience. It was the five and twen∣tieth of May, our Sabbath, and the fag-end of their Ramazen or Lent; ad∣vantageous to the Pot-shaugh, for it spared him the charge of a royall Ban∣quet. My Lord Ambassadour had Sir Sobert Sherley in his company, and seven or eight other English Gentlemen, his followers: good reason it was some Sultan or other should have convoy'd and shewed him the way; (the Court being a quarter of a mile distant from our house) but it seemes they wanted breeding, or, that some other mysterie was in it: for, no other than a footman from Mahomet-Ally-beg proffer'd a complement, every way so course that the Ambassador had no patience to digest it, save by equall contempt to inculcate in the Persian mode, and send him thanklesse back againe. To the Court at length wee got, no noise, no admirers, saw wee there neither; by which we presumed, the Towne knew not of our going thither, which I wonder at, since Abbas of all sorts of honours counted to have strangers at his Court, the highest. At our alighting, an ordinarie Of∣ficer bad us Hosh-galdom and usher'd us into a little Court du guard, that stood in the center of a spatious Court: in it was no other furniture save a few Persian Carpets spread about a pretty white marble Tanck or Pond fill'd with water: here we all stayed, and for two houres space junketted upon Pelo and wine, nothing so good in taste as the materiall they were served in, the flaggons, cups, dishes, plates and covers, being of pure beaten gold; thence, wee were led by many Sultans, thorow a spatious and fra∣grant
Garden which was curious to the eye, and delicate to the smell; to another Summer house, rich in gold imbosments and painting; but farre more excellent in a free and royall prospect; for from the Tarrasses wee viewed the Caspian Sea one way, and another way the tops of Taurus. The ground chambers were large, quadrangular, archt and richly guilded above and ont her sides; below, spread with most valuable Carpets of silk and gold: in center were Tancks full of crystallin water (an element of no meane account in these torrid habitations;) round about the Tancks were placed (pomparum fercula) Goblets, Flagons, Cesternes, and other Stand∣ards of pure massie gold, some of which were fill'd with Perfumes, other some with Rosewater, with Wine some, and others with choisest flowers: and after wee had rested so long as wee might at full feed our hungry eyes with that food of ostentation, wee were brought thence into ano∣ther square large upper Chamber, where the roofe was formed into an Artificiall Element, many golden Planets attracting the wandring eye to help their motion. The ground was cover'd with richer Carpets than the other were, the Tanck was larger, the materia more rich in Iaspar, and porphyr; the silver purling streame was forced up into another Region, yet seem'd to bubble wantonly here as in her proper center: this sea of rich stone, so deepe and so capatious seem'd an Ocean rather, where the spoiles of shipwracks were conjur'd out to please the appetite of Mydas or god Mammon: so much gold, in vessels, for use and ostentation, being set for us to looke upon, that some Merchants there, adjudg'd it worth twenty millions of pounds sterlin: another watery Magazeen there was, circled with a wall of gold and richest Iemms: no flagons, cups, nor other there, but what were very thick and cover'd with Rubies, Diamonds, Pearles, Emralds, Turquoises, Iacinths, &c. The Chamber was gallery wise, the seeling garnisht with Poetique fancies, gold, and choisest colours; all which seem'd to strive whether Art or Nature should be to a judicious eye more valuable: one Iohn a Dutchman, who had long serv'd the King celebrated his skill, to the astonishment of the Persians and his owne advantage: the ground in this roome also was over-layd with such Carpets as befitted the Monarch of Persia: round all the roome were placed tacite Mirzaes, Chawns, Sultans, and Beglerbegs, above threescore; who like so many in∣animate Statues sat crosse-legg'd; and joyned their bumms to the ground, their backs to the wall, their eyes to a constant object; not daring to speak one to another, sneeze, cough, spet, or the like, it being held in the Pot∣shaws presence a sinne of too great presumption; In breach of any them fearing his spleen, who (as Caesar told Metellus) could by the fulgur of his eye dart them dead, sooner then speak the word to have them killed: the Ganimed Boyes in vests of gold, rich bespangled Turbants and choise san∣dalls, their curl'd haires dangling about their shoulders, rolling eyes, and vermillion cheeks, with Flagons of most glorious mettall, went up and downe, and proffered the delight of Bacchus to such would relish it. At the upper end (and surmounting the rest, so much as two or three white silken shags would elevate) sat the Pot-shaw or Emperor of Persia, Abbas; more belov'd at home, more famous abroad, more formidable to his Ene∣mies, than any of his predicessours. His Grandeur was this, (circled with
such a world of wealth) to cloath himselfe that day in a plaine red callico coat quilted with cotten: as if he should have said, we might see his digni∣ty consisted in his parts and prudence, not (furtivis coloribus) to steale re∣spect by borrowed colours or rich embroderies: crosse-leg'd hee sat: his Shash or Turbant was white and bungie; his waist was girded with a thong of leather, the scaberd of his sword was red, the hilt of gold, the blade for∣med like a hemi-cicle, and doubtlesse well tempered: the Courtiers (Regis ad exemplum) were but ordinarily attired. My Lord Ambassador by his In∣terpretor (or Callimachee as the Persians name it) quickly acquainted Shaw Abbas why hee had undertaken so great a journey; to congratulate his good successe against the common enemy of Christendome, the Turk; to agrandize the traffick of raw silke, and other Persian staple merchan∣dizes; to see Sir Robert Sherley purge his honour from those scandalous imputations Nogdi-Ally-beg his late Ambassador had blemisht him with; and, that perpetuall amity might be continued 'twixt the two famous Mo∣narks of Great Brittayn and Persia. The Pot-shaugh rose up; and in the Turkish Tongue gave him a gratious answer. To the first, that the Turks were a base people compared with the generous minds and vertue of the Persians; in fifteene battells he had given them ample proofe of their magnanimity, and that no people in the world were to him so odious and offensive. He wisht unity amongst all Christian Princes, the Ottomans grounding their conquests meerely from their discord: which if otherwise, they would readily retreat to Tarta∣ry. Concerning Trade, the King of Great Brittayn, should if he so pleasd have yearely ten thousand bales of silk delivered him at Ormus every Ianu∣ary, and for payment would accept of so many thousand Clothes as would equall in value his raw silks; which as he knew the silk was a farre greater quantity then he could use in his owne Dominions, so were the clothes to him; but he would hazard the venting them by his Merchants, to serve the Tartars, Arabs, Georgians, and Muscovians. And by this, neither we nor he should have any need to traffique or correspond with Turkie. It would infinitely redound to his honour and content; for hereby he shoul'd disappoynt the grand Seignior of his yearly customes which he is forct to pay, when his carravans go to Aleppo or other parts of Turkie to deliver the silk, to the Venetian, Genoan, French, or other European Merchants; and an unexpressable torment and vexation to his heart and soule it must needs be, to see the whole band of Ianizaryes maintained meerly out of those his customes. What was this? but to cherish thorns to prick his eyes, or to make the swords of his inveterate Enemies sharp and fitted for his destruction. Concerning Sherley he had been long of his acquaintance and done more for him, than any of his native subjects; that if Nog-dibeg had layd aspersions unjustly on him, he should have decent satisfaction. It argued indeed Nogdibeg was guilty of some heynous cryme, in that he rather choose to kill himselfe, than stand to his purgation from so impar∣tiall a Justice: in some sort he presag'd my rigor, for if he had come, by my head (an oath of no small force) I had cut him in as many peeces as there are dayes in a yeare, and burnt them in the open market with stinck∣ing dogs turds. But touching a perpetuall league of true friendship, with
the Monarch of Great Brittayne your Master, I embrace it most heartily and wish them accurst that go about to eclipse it. And you are truly wel∣come (speaking to my Lord Ambassador) that have done me that ho∣nour, none of my famous Predicessors ever had before me: for as you are the first Ambassador ever came hither out of your Nation, so I ac∣count your Master the first of the worshippers of Iesus, and of you in a higher respect than any other Ambassadors: which said, Abbas sat downe againe. And whereas all Mahomitans sizeda, or knock their heads against the ground and kisse his foot or garment; most friendly he puld our Am∣bassador downe, seated him close to his side, smiling to see he could not sitt (after the Asiatique sort) crosse-legd: and calling for a bowle of Wine, drunk his Masters health, at which the Ambassador uncoverd his head; and to complement beyond all expectation, the Pot-shaugh puld of his Turbant; by discovering his bald head symbolizing his Affection: and after an houres merriment departed. But by what meanes the current of the Kings good will became diverted afterwards I cannot divine. I could afterwards perceive that Mahomitan Princes are terrible crafty or mysteriously politicious: for from that day till we got Cazbyn, neither was our Ambassador feasted at Court, neither saw he the King, nor did any other Sultan invite, or come to visite him: we partly found the cause, Mahomet-Allybeg was by bribery made our enemy; a Persian lately ad∣vanc't from a base beginning, and for his neat faculty in diving into all mens doings, acquainting the Potshaw who grumble, who are contented; by such his parasitick facetiousnesse has ingrost his favour from all others, insomuch as all things passe through this impure conveighance; for whom he loves the King honours, such as he hates the King crushes all to peeces. So that to have his good opinion, each great man out-vies others by guifts and such lincks of corrupt esteeme, insomuch that his An∣nuall commings in, are bruited sevenscore thousand pounds sterling. And well may be, since Myter-beg (the overseer of the Kings Harams or Se∣ralios) has a hundred thousand pound yearly, if it be true, some here assured me. Sors nostra humilior! poore Tamer-begs house at the North end of the Towne imprisond us twelve long dayes and nights, (so long the Court stayd, after we got thither;) where the Sunne darted his outragious beames so full upon us, that no part of the burning Zone could broile more than did Asharaffe at that present: but the Sunne did not more torment us all the day time, than those innumerable swarmes of Gnats, Mus-ke-toes, and such like excrements, stung and pesterd us each night; they biting us, we thrashing them like mad folks. Notwithstanding, some better use I desire to make of this time, than in spider-catching: and in the first place commemorate we the Kings justice, (Tiranny I may rather call it) for which, he is famoused above all other Mahomitan Emperors: that by view of others miseries, ours may appeare but reall flea-bitings. A poore distressed wretch, upon some businesse bestowed a long and tedious pilgrimage from Cabull in India to this miserable place; where ere he knew how the successe would be, rested his weary limbs upon a field carpet, chosing to refresh himselfe rather upon the coole grasse than be tormented by the mercilesse vermin within the Towne: but poore
man he fell á malo in pejus, for snorting in a climacterick houre, the same time the King set forth to hunt and many Nobles after him, his pamperd jade winded and startled at him, the King examines not the cause but sent an eternall Arrow of sleep into the poore mans heart, jeasting as (Iphi∣crates did when hee slew his sleepy Centinel) I did the man no wrong, I found him sleeping, and asleep I left him: a comfortlesse complement: poore wretch! happy only in this, Aeneae magni dextra cecidit! the Courti∣ers also (as the Negroes in Manicongo do, who when their Captain receives a hurt by warre or accident, sympathize by voluntary mayming themselves in the like part) to applaud his justice, made him their common marke; killing him a hundred times over, if so many lives could have beene for∣feited: but how highly soever they extoll their King, I preferre those ancient pagans before him, who out of Natures poetry could sing, Nulla unquam de morte hominis cunctatio longa est. A Soldats wife (or concubin if you please to call her) having fed too high, in a lustfull bravado petiti∣ond the King for help, her good man proving too weak to conquer her: a dangerous impudence! the King finds it to reflect upon himselfe, (old at that time, and Master of foure thousand Concubines) he promises her a present satisfaction: he calls his Physitians, and when Phlebotomy was held too meane a remedy, they give an Assinego an ophiat lustfull potion, which inrages the beast, who by a forced connexion, basely glutted her; but in the end banisht her life also. A needy souldier, drawes up a cata∣logue of his good services and closes it in want, humbly intreating favour and some stipend from his god of warre for such and such good services. In bello non bis peccatur: for, for his saucinesse he is almost drubd (with ma∣ny terrible bastinadoes on the soles of his feet) to death; and (imitating Pyso the cruell Judge in Seneca, lib. 1. c. 16.) examines who it was that writ it: the Clarke apologizes, the King quarrells at his scurvie writing; and that hee should never write worse, makes his hand to bee cut off; giving the poore wretch just cause to ingeminate: Oh! quam vellem nescirem literas. Two needy knaves were brought into the Divan, and condemn'd for stealing: many grievous tants the Pot-shaw leveld at them, assuring them they deserved death for daring to come so neere his Court, so lousie and so ragged: they confesse they therefore stole, to wrap themselves in better cloathing. Abbas is not satisfied with any reason: hee commands two new vests bee brought and to apparell them; but winding sheets had beene more proper; for the executioner forthwith drag'd them away, and upon two sticks most cruelly stak'd them upon their fundaments. Such, and such other was his inhumane pastime during our stay at the Cas∣pian sea, enough on such a subject; by the foot of Hercules the whole bo∣dy is discerned: for if I should summe up his variety of tortures; his men, men-eating hags of hell; his caniball hounds, his Capigi and their death twanging bowstrings, his ripping mens guts and the like; what could be the effect but an odious remembrance: and such is the hard-hear∣tednesse of Mahomitans, a wicked people for cruell inventions: the ten∣der mercies of the wicked are cruelties: a good man is mercifull to his beast; but nor beast nor men, are here commiserated. And, albeit no∣thing
be more commendable in Princes than Justice, (for it is that that makes them gods) yet clemency is no lesse honourable. Tully a heathen could affirme it, in his oration to Caesar for the life of Lygarius: Thy cle∣mency (O Caesar) is most excellent, yea more honourable than thy other vertues: Fortune hath made thee great, Nature advanc't thee higher in thy inclination unto mercy. Nor can they well bee separated. A Prince (exalted above others in dignity and Title) is tyed to an impartiall way, neither hating nor fearing any, but rewarding and punishing as cause re∣quireth; without which, contempt or confusion followeth. But to these of Abbas I cannot give the glorious Attribute of Justice: since, if the pu∣nishment exceed the fault, it then degenerates into cruelty: a vice, odi∣ous to God, (the Father and fountaine of mercy:) to men, by imitating their deformities; conceiting any Act, though never so unnaturall (if moul∣ded after such a pattern) good and commendable. And heathen Po∣tentates swerving from the rule of divine Justice, pamper the corrupt ha∣bit and disposition of their minds, out of a monstrous appetite and opini∣on that they are above all law, and may every way inebriate their lust, by sportfull tyranny: such were the inhumane games in the Roman Amphy∣theators: such was the barbarisme, Xerxes (as Xenophon notes) practiz'd on Masistes his brother, & other Satrapaes; such in Dejoces (father to Phraortes) who utterly exterminated the Persian generosity: such in most Mahume∣dans at this day governing: I cannot chuse but adde the miserable Tra∣gedy of his sonne, the memory whereof is recent through most of Asia. Abbas, by divers Paramours had divers children; many of which hee educated with great cost, care, and experience. Of most hope, fame, and vertue; where Ismael, Sophy-mirza, Codobanda-Sultan, and Emangoly; foure brave young Princes; the two first, begot on Gordina daughter of Simon-cawn; the later two, of Martha daughter of Scander-mirza: both Georgians, both Christians: the first Lady was brought thence by Kurchi∣ki-cawn; the other by Shaw-Tamas-Coolibeg; both Persians, both favo∣rites: all of them so deare to Abbas, that it seemed hee then had got the Elixar of earthly happinesse: his wives were so incomparably beautifull; his favorites so exactly faithfull; his sonnes so lively the characters of his person, policy and courage: reciprocally joying the aged King, and over∣joying the warlike Persians. But it is commonly observed that as the most excellent things fade, perish, and alter soonest: so this admirable candor and perfection in these youthfull Princes quickly vanished, Saturn acting it. Ismael (when by reason of his innate delight in Armes and many quick signes of magnanimity, the Asiatick world gazed and admired him) in a black infernall cloud of poyson went down to an untimely grave at nine∣teene, in the Meridian of his splendor. Soffy-mirza, dogd by a like ad∣verse destiny, though elevated at first for revealing a conspiracy, was in the end, at equall yeeres throwne downe and crusht to death, after the dumb Capigi had got a hatefull victory, meere jealosie in the King commanding it. Emanguly, ere his popular applause could hatch his ruine, upon confe∣rence with a witch that hee saw (by the Almuten of his nativity) short life attended him, growes fearfull of his Syres inconstancy, and in a deep
disconsolate melancholy evaporates his sad spirits, leaving the expectation of hazard and soveraignty to Codobanda Sultan, sirnamed Soffee, who (made wise by his brothers miseries) so exquisitly behaved himselfe, in duty to his King, in a pleasing distance to the people; that Abbas doates, the peo∣ple celebrate, and an uncontroulable good Fortune seemes to dandle him, Affability, bounty, loyalty, courage, and experience in Armes, at home, abroad, the Persian Monarchy, Turk, Arab, Mogul, and Tartar, admiring, fearing, and commending him in severall Eulogies and acclamations: his owne, left nothing unsaid or uninvented that might honour him; his ene∣mies without giving their thoughts the lye, could not but idolize him: who for all that, (not like our common spirits, efflated by every vulgar breath, upon every act, deifie themselves, and conceit all great addi∣tions of honour under their merits) stood immovable, sorry he grew so popular; modestly chiding them for flattery, condemned himselfe of hypocrisy by suffring his victories to bee so guilded, since what he had or did was but a reflex of his Fathers vertue, which he doubted might suffer an eclipse by his accumulations. Oh! how execrable is this marrow fret∣ting scab of jealousie and envie? it converts that reason which only makes us Men, without any regard of justice, into brutishnesse; yea to exceed in cruelty the most unreasonable, most violent creatures! Is not Abbas a King, a Father? does clemency belong to any attribute so properly? Is not Soffee-Sultan-mirza a Prince, his sonne? on whom can he more justly conferre his love? in whom should vertue rather dwell? where can there be a better center? poore Prince! the path he treads to adde lustre to his Fathers Diadem, to do his Country good, to be accounted commendable; betrayes his steps, and intices him to an affrighting precipice: the more he labours to delight his Father, it serves as fuell to an unjust jealousie; the more hee dignifies his countries honour, the more applause the people crowne him with; and Abbas feares his popularity: yea so farre cherishes dishonourable thoughts, so much degenerates from paternall piety, that without all pitty or regard of justice (which makes Kings more beautifull and glorious than when circled with a Tyrants sparkling Diadem) hee ru∣minates his speedy destruction. During these his cabinet machinations, the harmelesse Prince brandishes his steele in proud Arabia, but after many conquests, himselfe becomes captivated. An Arabian Princesse of good re∣port, great beauty (in such bodies usually are impaled the fairest soules) and other excellent indowments fettered him: but by his bravery and worth quickly redeem'd himselfe and vanquisht her. Such magick has love, such magnetick power is in vertue. By this Lady he had (in few yeeres) two children, Soffy and Fatyma: no lesse loved by their Syre, than beloved, doated on by the Grandsyre Abbas; a strange affection, to distinguish so unnaturally; to separate where nature had so strongly joyned, to hate the graft, and have the fruit endeared to him. But that his hate might flow more currantly and lesse suspected, hee lookes one way and shoots ano∣ther; seekes to inrage by abusing him hee lov'd most dearly, Magar an Arab, the Princes Tutor, a sober, faithfull, and valiant servant. Abbas calls for him, and in leiu of applause or rewarding him for his sonnes noble education, he lends him a sterne frowne, accuses him of pride, and charges
him that hee had bewitcht the Prince with base ambition. Magar sees not the venome prepared for him; and therefore in an humble, but confi∣dent excuse, seekes to quiet him; but the better hee apologuiz'd in his owne behalfe, and the clearer hee made the Mirzaes loyalty appeare, the more hee exasperates the King, the higher his rage inflamed: so that first hee amazes him with a volley of rigorous defamations, and in that maze gives the signe, a dreadfull signe: for forthwith the Capigies break out and strangle him. An unparaleld barbarisme! an act so unbeseeming that fa∣mous King, as amongst the common sort to this day it is not credited: but, Fames brazen shrill-mouth'd Trump sounds it abroad, and ere long the Prince (then in action against the Tartar) has notice of his Syres injustice: hee leaves the Camp, and after many signalls of sorrow, beseeches the King hee may know the reason of it: who flashes him this thundring rea∣son, for thy rebellion; he calls heaven to witnesse his integrity and obedi∣ence, but Abbas provokes him further, to intrap and have some colour to satisfie the world in his destruction. The Prince madded with heat and passion, imagines hee saw Magar a strangling; and in that extasie unsheaths his sword, vowing to rescue him: the King sorrowes not at his distraction, but at this advantage (upon some faire termes disarming him) calls him in∣to another roome, and (pretending he was not very well) goes out, com∣manding seven big-bon'd villanies, deafe and dumbe, through a trap doore to issue upon him, arm'd with bloody minds and deadly bow-strings: their habit and weapons bewray their cruelty, they needed no other interpre∣tors: the Prince admires the cause, and if oratory or other submissive signes of entreaty could have gotten remorse or delay from these hell∣hounds, but till he knew the ground of this unnaturall project, he had af∣foorded it: but, assured they were inexorable, with an incomparable rage and suddennesse he flies upon them, now one, then another receiving such horrid blowes, that (ere they could fasten on him, or insnare him with their ghastly twanging bowstrings) hee sent three of them to the Divell; and long time defended himselfe, offending those blood-hounds with ad∣mirable courage and dexterity, insomuch that had hee mastered any wea∣pon, hee had doubtlesse saved himselfe; but wanting it, his breath failed, and longer his valour could not nourish him, for, facile est vincere non re∣pugnantem: so that at last thay fastened their noozes on him, who now was as a dead man; for all which, the villains had triumpht in his further tor∣tures, had not the King prevented it, commanding them to pinnion him, and (before hee could recover his sences) to draw a flaming steele afore his eyes, and so to blind him; forbidding him the sight of what hee loved ever after; wife, babes, friends, soldiers, or Magars carcasse: And by this impiety, Asia lost her fairest jewell, Persia her Crown of honour, and Mars his darling. The losse of so brave a Prince is quickly rumord: All Persia mourns, and in many threnodies sing his farewell: his Army swells with passion, but seeing no remedy, by a forced silence murmur their imprecations: the Prince, when he perceived his undoing (the eye of reason lent him such a sight) falls frantick; hee curses his birth, his fame, his loyalty, his cruell parent; and by many contumatious threats, vowes his destruction: but
vana sine viribus ira; he findes his revenge impossible; but at that conceit roares hidiously, and is not to be comforted, till Suliman-mirza, Curchi∣ki-cawn and other his kinsmen and quondam favorits, flockt about him, and by their miserable examples dictated patience; for none there but in some measure had swolne big with the Kings infusion in their times, and by like jealousie were crusht downe, mutilated, and damnd to perpetuall imprisonment. In those discontented times, Abbas kept his Orb, moving like another Saturn: now he imagines his Crowne fixt closely to his head, his seat steddy, every way free from stormes and other accidentall causes that might disturb his quiet: he swum hourely in an ocean of delight, and relisht it: but nothing so much inchanted him, as young Fatyma; no other Syren was melodious in song, or delicate in feature, save pretty Fatyma; if any stood in feare, he is pacified by Fatyma; Court and Kingdome admired his love, but joyed at it; for by this Lady they found a way to expell his rage, and how to pleasure him; the prisoners also by this Fatyma got some livelyhood; for want of which, they were oft times welnigh famished; none (but shee) daring to mediate: and thus by this good infant gained they what formerly they pined for, food and comfort. But what joy findes the blinded Prince, since hee cannot participate: revenge delights him more, that word as musick pleases the infernall fancie of this melancho∣ly Mirza, not caring how detestable, so Abbas suffered. The Divell inspires new rage, and blowes the coales of (more than cruell) assassination: for albeit he loved Fatima, yet hearing how his Father doated on her, that be∣gets his hate, yea hatches the innocents confusion. Oh! in him behold the savage and transcendent cruelty of cursed man: revenge had plung'd him headlong into a whirle-poole of unnaturall barbarisme; insomuch, as when the pious child came (in an unluckie houre) to bring him comfort, and by all symptoms of duty to expatiate her obedience; the wretch graspes her, & in a lymphatick fury whirles her neck about, unable to un∣twist her selfe from his strong and wrathfull hands, miserable Fatima ex∣piring by her hellish Father: and in her, the joy of parents, delight of Abbas, candor of Persia, and comfort of the distressed, vanishing. The amazed Princesse his wife cries out his sight deceived him, that it was Fatyma, little dreaming that he therefore martyr'd her, because Fatyma. And, as if that had not beene enough, (to prevent the King of a successor) hearing young Soffees voyce, dolorously crying out for Fatima, wingd with rage he gropes for him, but by the Princesses interposing, the boy escapt, or else had lost (what he now victoriously enjoyes) the Monarchy of Persia. When Abbas heard her Tragedy, he growes so outragiously passionate, that many feared he would become his owne executioner. But, when hee had drencht his sorrow in a sea of salt teares, hee moderates his spleen, and revives upon hopes of punishment, and vowes to retaliate him in the height of cruel∣ty: but, receives so terrible a reply from the distracted Prince, who had return'd a million of dismall curses, that he is stupified with amazement: And to end the Catastrophe, after he had tyred out two dayes with much impatience, the third, hee put a period to his loathed life, by quaffing up a cup of deadly poyson: the King shewing needlesse mercy in his solemne buriall. The sad Princesse mewed her selfe up from sight of man; but since
her sonnes comming to the Crowne, whether hee have made her sociable or no I know not: Abbas dyed just at our departure. Let us now to ano∣ther subject, and in a briefe description survey the pleasures of Hyrcania, which we have partly relished, and are now enclosed in. HYRCANIA (whether denominated from her fruitfulnesse in Goats, or from Harcoon in the Scythic tongue importing solitarinesse, or from Hadora as Montanus call'd her, I dare not determine;) is now call'd Mo∣zendram (a derivative I think from Mandagarsis in Ptolomy) and Kabonkara: by some (whose fancies I approve not of) this Province is call'd Karizath, Corca, Girgia, Caspia, Steana, Casson, and Diurgument, relatives meerly, of invention; the North is limited by the Caspian sea, the East with Sa∣gathy or Bactria, the South with Mount Taurus, the West with Medya and Armenia. Hyrcania is most part (a great part wee travelled) woody and champaign; watered with many sweet and spatious (but not navigable) rivers; such be Araxis, (descending sayes Ptolomy from Sacapen or Sadu∣cen) Cyrus, Obsel, Connack, Mazaeras, Bundama, Hydero, (from the Desarts of Lop) Aragus, (falsly said to descend from the Molossians) and others, which from the Taurisian Mountains stream violently, and after they have mellowed the humyd earth in many divided branches, wander into the Mare Caspium: at this day it abounds with many sorts of beasts, birds, fruits, fish, and villages: Sheep, Buffoloes, Camells, Asses, Goats, Horses, Cowes, Antilopes, red and fallow Deer; with Silkwormes also, and Phe∣sants, Partrich, Quaile, Woodcock, Pellican, Heron, Pouts, Thrush, Hens, Philomels; and in fruits of most sorts; with fishes also, as Trowt, Pike, Carp, Sturgeon, Conger, Lamprey, Tuneys, Gudgeon, Thornback, Cockles, Oysters, Mussells, Crabs, Limpits, Dog-fish, and Cackrell; most of these the Caspian sea affoorded us: and (which we will sequestere from others) with Lyons, Wolves, Wild-catts, Bores, Scorpions, and Tygers, supposed to nurse the people, as sung the Poet Them with their duggs the Hyrcan Tygres fed. Hyrcanaeque admorunt ubera Tygres, Gnatts, Flyes, and Snakes (to our sad remembrances) in insufficient num∣bers. Townes of old were, Talebrota, Sarramanna, Adrapsa, Sorba, As∣murna, Tapen, Carta, and Mauzoca; lost by protract of consuming time, or from new names as new Inhabitants have succeeded here; at this day are these, Farrabaut, Asharaff, Periscow, Omoall, Barfrushdea Chacoporo, Caban, Baezd, Darabgier, Gengee, Shamaky, Erez, Bachu, Byldith, and Derbent; flou∣rishing with people, famoused by trade, and admired in her plenty. The Hircanians are but lately civilized, no longer than since Shaw-Abbas in despight of their resistance came amongst them: but how may we cre∣dit the Persians (for 'twas they that told it us) in that at this day, they ex∣cell the Persians, for husbandry, trade in raw silks, and other imployments; such as has made them rich, and famous; yea happy, till the Persian Soul∣diers intermingled & suckt their hony from them: The Hyrcan language is understood by every Persian. Their habit resembles the Irish troozes: upon their heads they weare Piramidall caps of cloth lined with delicate sheeps wooll: the vulgar Hyrcanian take thus represented.
An Hyrcanyan. They are generally affable, merry, curious in rarities, and nothing jealous aftet the manner of other Mahomitans: we must not beleeve the merry re∣ports the Persians told us of their virgin curtesies: of old, they thought to have forbad the valiant Greek desired entrance, by twisting one tree to another, (as did our Abbat of St. Albons against the Normans) but hee that had diffected Gordions knot (though mysticall,) with equall pollicie subjugated these Hyrcanians. Upon Whitson-monday wee left Asharaff; the King at that same time journeyed into Medya to Casbyn: our Travells were different, hee went by Periscow, but sent us by Larry-Ioon, that we might have the better view of those his richest Provinces: this night we lay in Farrabaut, a Citie five miles distant from Asharaff, late spoken of. FARRABAVT (or rather Farrag-baut, from King Farrag-zed (baut is garden, Zed is sonne,) successor to Shezyr sonne of Iezan Zeddah, and pre∣decessour to Tezdgird the Hyrcanian King slaine by the Romans in the yeere of our Lord God 595. five and twenty yeeres before the hegira or
banishment of Mahomet) is not unlikely to be that old Amarusa noted by Ptolomy: and the same Citie per paranomasiam (if opinion delude me not) which Vlughbeg and Teixera call Strabatt and Estrabaut. The scituation of Farabatt is low, in a marrish and insalubrious plaine; whereby it sucks in the salt fumes and cold fomes the Caspian sea (a little mile, North) evo∣merates. Tis watered by a fresh streame, forty paces broad; which ari∣sing in mount Taurus, bubbles downe, and at this Town incorporates with the briny Caspian: in place of solyd walls, it is ingirt with liquid moats or trenches, planted with willowes and other trees, which give both shade and ornament: the houses differ from the common mode of Persia; they be without Tarrasses or flat tops, and resemble ours in England rather, in shape, in windowes, and in tyling; the whole Towne brags of three thou∣sand families; of most Note, are the two Buzzarrs, equally spatious, neat and beautifull; many choice and fragrant Gardens also condecorate her, which together make a combined beauty though seeming separate: but, more notable than the rest, is a sumptuous Pallace of the Emperours; at the North side of the Citie, whose balconyes view, whose Gardens extend to the Mare Caspium. It has two large Courts (comparable to Fountain bleaus) either of which expresse an elaborat Art in the skilfull gardiner; paild they are in many shapes, the ground is forced into pretty knots, the spreading Elms, Chenores, and Sicamores surrounding and commixing so pleasantly, so artificially, that from each chamber the prospect is amiable, the eye and smell contending who should surfet soonest of variety. The house is low; but each chamber, high & capacious; rich in work, cōmend∣able in uniformity; we could not enter with our shooes on (a cōmon Assia∣tick trick at meales & houres of devotion; the Romans also used it, as Terence in his Heautont: Accurrunt servi soleas detrahunt, &c.) some are square, some gallery-wise, but all are arched: three were especially rich and love∣ly; whose sides were set with Mirrors or Looking-glasses; and whose tops or seeling, were gloriously imbost with flaming gold; the casements were of large square Muscovian glasse, cemented with gold; the ground was over-spread with crimson velvet, some stuft with Down; others with mat∣teresses of azure coloured velvet; coverd with Calzoons of bodkin or cloth of beaten gold: and in Winter the Pot-shaugh sleepes either in sheets of costly Sables, or of delicate shagg or sheep wooll of Corasan: in those gallaries of Mirrors the King has sundry representations of venereous gambolls, his Concubines studying by amorous postures to illure his favor, to glut his fancie: the other chambers are richly furnisht, the walls var∣nisht & painted in oyle, but by an uncivill pencil, the genius of some goatish Apelles; such Lavaltoes of the Persian Iupiter are there, such immodest po∣stures of men and women, nay of Paederastyes, as makes the modest eye swell with shame, the curious smell winde nothing from those artificiall flowers, save loathsome invention. Let us goe cent the Caspyan ayre, and taste the unruly waves, compared with the quiet houses, sweet and whol∣some. The first object are those prams or ships, wherein the Moscovite sailes downe Volga (70 mouth'd Volga, issuing from the Hyperborean and Rhyphaean hills) and from Astra-can (in six and forty degrees) crosse over the Caspian sea, and at this Port or Demir-cape (in 40 degrees 20 minutes)
ride at anchor, till they have loaded away raw silks, exchang'd for Sables, usually in March, in Iuly returning; with a good winde they crosse the sea in 8 dayes, though by adverse stormes Sir Anthony Sherley was fourescore: these vessells (resembling our old Corraghs, recorded by Caesar and Lucan) are without ordinance, the Sea is free of Pyrats: they are sowed with hemp and cord (made of the husk of Cocoes,) and have little iron work; the Marriners are as meanly furnist with skill or use of Compasse. Here also we saw many Canoos, of one peece of wood hewd out of some grown Oke (Hyrcania has store, yet little used) capable to receive eight men in faire weather without much danger. The Caspian Sea (call'd by the Persians Deriob-Mozendram, by the Arabs as all other Ponds, Bobar corsun) is brackish, and very turbulent, yet land∣lock on every side; the Hyrcanian, Armenian Russ, and Tartar circum∣volving her: nor has shee commerce with any other sea, except it be sub∣terranean with the Euxine. They are three hundred miles asunder, yet may admit so vast an intercourse, if wee consider the like (though not so much) in other places: as in Zioberis, which springs from Taurus, and after thirty miles concealment under ground, againe discovers it selfe and com∣mixing with Rhodago, in one streame, wander into the Caspian; great Alex∣ander at Aristotles request made triall by two Oxen, who confirmed it: as also in Niger an Afrique river, and others in other places. Some vent or other it has questionlesse, otherwise it would overflow or putrifie; for it receives many great and navigable rivers, as Volga, Araxis, Cyrus, Connack, Obsel, Rhodago, Mazaeras, Hydero, Aragus, Phasis, Ilment, Sirto, Chesel, Oxus, Edel, Rha, (some call Volga so) Iehun, Habyn, &c. by many ostiums swelling her womb or concave channell. It has three thousand English miles com∣passe: map of the Caspian Sea and its environs from Farrabat to Astra-can or from N. to S. are six hundred miles: from East to West, above seven hundred; in some sort Ovall: made dan∣gerous by many syrtes and rocks; made happy in abundance of watery In∣habiters:
Porpice, Conger, Sturgeon, Caveare (the roe of Sturgeon cut and salted) Goodgion, Thornback, Turbut, Cackrell, Skate, Soles, and shell-fish innumerable. Nicanor the Syrian Anno Mundi 3666, made a vaine attempt to bring the Euxin and this Sea into one, to make it soci∣able and navigable; but had such issue joynd to his cost and paines, as Se∣sostris, Xerxes, Alexander, Nero, Lucyus, and other Monsters of the world had in that and other their impossibilities. Foure dayes wee spent in easie journeys upon this remote shoare; the first night wee got to Chacoporo, a big Towne; twelve long miles West from Farrabat, and upon which, the sea oftentimes beats outragiously: a river, a stones cast over refreshes her, but (if they told us the truth) is not alwayes potable; for one month every yeer it tasts brackish. Next night we got to Barfrush de, a great Towne; well peopled, inriched with silk-wormes, wood, and excellent water; and therefore they may the better forbeare wine; for the law here forbids the use of it, under a grievous penalty. This place is from Chacoporo 12 miles, many of the men here de∣light in Archery, and have long beene famous'd in that manly exercise. —the Yew Into Ithyrean Bows is made to bow. Ithyreos taxi curvantur in arcus. Hyrcania is a continued Forrest, and of all the trees I saw, none excee∣ded the Mulberies, for numberlesse numbers, none more notable for use; ten, yea thirty miles spreading in them: the berries if white, refresht our bellies, the colour our eyes, the leaves our observation. In every Village and Cottage wee might behold sheds fild with industrious people, and in∣riching silk-worms, seaming the seminary of that valuable Fly, so accoun∣ted of through all the world, so advantageous to the Persian Emperour; who from hence (besides those many rich Carpets of silk and gold, silk, silk and silver yeerely woven for their owne uses) extracts an annuall quantity of raw silke, seven thousand six hundred Batmans (or bales I think) expor∣ted through Turkie into Europe, to his great benefit. The silk-worme (as in quality, so in diversity of shape) varies from other wormes: her first generation arising from a small round black sperme (like Gunpowder or Musturd-seed) which by moderate heat increases to an inch, assuming (at first) the shape of a palmer worme, from which resemblance in six months she two times changes: her common food are leaves and boughs of trees; but of all other, the white Mulbery most delights her, strewed dayly all over thier sheds, kept sweet, and warme, and cleanly. Having satiated their usefull appetites, they forthwith become enemy to idlenesse, sur∣cease their creeping, and with their excretiated vertue intwine them∣selves, in some sort making their lawne both winding-sheet and Sepulcher. The silke co-operates with such colours as be laid afore them, white, yel∣low, greene, and sandy. And albeit they be involved, yet are they visible to the eye, such is the transparency of their excrement. Their exterior part, is a pale gold commixt with lemon, rough and hayry. The interior more hard and form ovated, the better to inhume th'included Fly. Whose task being ended, the silken cods or balls are straightway spread afore
Apolloes corruscant rayes, by whose radiant candor the distressed worme is broyld to death; not unlike a glorious miser faelicitating his death, so it be in contemplation of his rich idolatry. And by this expansion the silk becomes much finer and purer, than if shee were suffered from her owne notion to issue forth and break her habitacle: After this the silke cods are thrown into a large caldron, fild with water, and made meanly hot; then, with a penetrated cane the people stir thē about, at once drawing the slimy silke from as many as his instrument can lay hold upon, or convene in ad∣vantage; lastly with a wheele they are turned round; it attracts the silk, and leaves (nothing worth the getting) indivellicated. But that they affoord hony, yeeld wax, build nests, and are a sort of spyder, Aristotle, and Pliny may conjecture so, but experience derides their supposition. By this time we are got to Omoall a City as well known as any other in Mozendram. OMOALL, (of old, Zarama I imagin) is thought to bee that Na∣borca or Naborea, where the Oracle of dreames was so much famoused. It is built under the North side of the imperious Mountaine Taurus; of such Grandeur, that three thousand Families inhabit in her, of severall countries and languages, Armenians, Georgeans, Hyrcans, Persians, Jewes, Curdies, and Muscovians, who make a Babel of seven tongues amongst them. The place is fruitfull, and blest in present prosperity and antick greatnesse, the ruines compleating the report of her being once Metropo∣lis; the houses at this day are not builded in the meanest fashion, glorying above the rest, in an old but strong and stately Castle, second to none about her; which, besides the well composed Architecture (affoording no small pleasure to the eye) is observable in a deep trench fild with water, of good defence against the pilfering and rodomantadoes of the adjoyn∣ing Taurisians: commendable also in some sweet gardens usefull and de∣lectable: within the Towne and neere the Castle, is a famous Mosque, honoured by foure hundred and foure and forty Princes and Prophets of that Kingdome intombed there, whose Sepulchers raise admiration in the beholders; that especially of Meer Agowmadeen is famous, to whose shrine are daily offered serious devotion. As I entred, I found twenty reverent and well apparelled Arabians in a round, close by the Princes Dormitory, with each an Arabic Alcoran before him; out of which, with great modesty and good musick they chanted a dolefull requiem to his ghost; in which they were so serious, that notwithstanding I came sudden∣ly amongst them, and in such a habit as others admired, they sung on and in a Dorick sweetnesse continued till they had finisht that their Threno∣dy; which ended, they arose and bad me heartily welcome, readily poyn∣ting out the rarities of their Temple. Thence, I went to the river side (over which upon a Bridge we rode the night before) hoping to shade my selfe (from outrageous Phaeton) under some Poplars there abounding; but quickly left the place againe: for 7 or eight beautious (but not bashful) Damosells (like so many Dorids) sprung suddenly out from the water, to admire my cloaths, never regarding they were naked; some my hat, my hayre others, other-some thought my spurres an antick. I wondred no lesse at their immodesty, and left them with a frowne, dictating their base carriage and my impatience. And till by inquiry I saw it came from a
greedy novelty, I thought them Layesians: but it seem'd I erred; for when the men (such time as Phoebus mounts in his meridian) go to sleep, the women then enjoy the river and coole their heat, in both kinds too much abounding there. Their habit is only a smock of transparent lawne, wrought at hands, neck, and skirt, with an imbroydery of silk and gold; the men are cloathed like the other Hyrcanians. From Omoall we travel∣led to Larry-Iohn or Ioon; (I cannot tell if that Ionaca in Ptolomy) thirty miles thence; at which place the Kingdome of Hyrcania takes end and Mount Taurus, or Taur-achow beginning. Taurus (sayes Dion. Alexan.) Totius Orbis terrarum maximus, sic dictus quod instar Tauri elato capite ince∣dit, &c. But Eustathius thus, Veteres omnia grandia & robusta Tauros vocavere, &c. Our journey lay sometimes through inhospitable straits, other times over most stupendious hills; the bredth from one side to another about fifty English miles, from Omoall to Damoan; the length fifteene hundred: towring in a hedge of hills from Armenia to the furthest part of Indya: and after two dayes painfull climbing got so high, that wee might see the middle region under us, and we involved in chill exhalations. Taurus, Mons omnium maximus, sayes Aristotle; yet the sublime height did not dis∣aminate us, as did the danger of descending, the path was so uneven and craggy; yea, the rocks so unskilfully cut out for a passage; that great heed must be taken in the treading or a terrible precipice into a bottomlesse lake indangers us; in one hill for three miles together the way was carved (by some unskilfull workman) in the mid-part of a most horrible aspiring perpendicular Mountaine, the lane in some places a yard, in some but halfe a yard in breadth, so as if by accident two horsemen meet, I could not see how both could have safe passage, nor is it higher than ones head if mounted; a wretched passage! for whiles I was sometimes looking at the wonderfull height above us, and anon casting my sight downwards into that dark Abisse, a rock bending ill-favoredly into the narrow way struck me such a blow, as for a great while I was astonied, and happily delivered from a downfall; a rock, demanding an uncivell tribute from all carelesse passengers. At length wee got safe out of that formidable path of death into the broad and lofty Mountaines, from whence the lying Greekes be∣held Prometheus (sonne of Iapeth by Asia his wife and brother to Atlas) cheyned to these rocks, his heart gnawed by a Vultur, for daring (though Pallas helpt him up) to steale celestiall flames from Apollo's Chariot wheeles, to inspire life into his Images. The mythology is this, from these high Mountaines Prometheus first studied and observed the firmamen∣tall motion, the acronicall rising and setting of the Stars and other bodies celestiall, the causes of Meteors, eclipses, and other hidden rarities of nature. Hence Pyrrha's stones are fabled, Saturn's reigne, The birds of Taurus, Promeths theevish veine. Hinc lapides Pyrrhae jactos, Saturnia regna, Caucasias{que} refert volucres, furtum{que} Promethei. Hence also let us view (from this highest Tarrasse of the world) North East, and fix our dim sight upon Corason. Corazon I take for that, old wri∣ters
intitled Coraxi in Pliny, Corziana in Procopius; Corasphy in Ptolomy; Cho∣rasmia in Athaeneus, vicinating the Seres (part of Sogdiana the one, of Aria the other) famous in silk and delicate wooll, by Lucan memorized. Quid Nemora Aethyopum molli canentia lana, Velleraque ut foliis despectant tenua Seres. What Aethiops woods made white with tendrest wooll, Or Seres leaves, which scorns soft fleece to pull. Tzetza thus in their commendations. Seres atque Tochares (the first seat of the Turks or Turqu'stans) gentes prope Iudiam, texturas pulcherrimas texentes omnium, & quae praeciosiores antiquis temporibus Iberes occidentales (now Georgia) & Coraxi (now Corazon) similiter texturas pulcherrimas lana operianur, &c. Nunc autem abuteus ut multi, dixeram illud ex Thebis, ex Sericis non ignarus ut alli, &c. Whereby it seemes though silke in the Latin is from the Seres, yet they had it from the Iberians, and they from Aegypt; so likewise now Hyrcania is most excellent. Sydonius Apollina∣rius also thus: Assyrius gemmas Ser vellera, thura, Sabaeus. Assur yeelds gems, wooll Seres, Saby fumes. Corazon (included twixt 36 and 40 degrees) is divided into three large Provinces. Hery, Farghan, and Tocharistan, (i.e. Aria, Paropamisa, Tocha∣ria) all at this day adding lustre to the Persian Diadem. Of Hery and Farghan I have elsewhere spoken. Tocharistan or Turquestan is a member of the Ouzbeg-Tartar in 40 degrees, adjoyning Gaznehen and S'marcand. Townes of note there, are Tuz (in 38 degrees, the birth-place of Nazarradyn the great Mathemati∣cian, & Commentator upon Euclyde) Nishapore, Sarkas, Gelack, &c. exten∣ding from this part of Taurus to the river Nycaphtac, of old call'd Oxus, the Terminus to the ambitious Persians; subdivided into many Topar∣chies, the Camae, Camaecae, Alizonii, Basilei, Vrgi, &c. buried at this day in oblivion, or wrapt up in other Nomenclations. Maurenahar, part of Sogdiana has the river Iehun on the South, (Gihon or Gychon) and Kora∣zon with Gaznehen to the South East; and to the West the Mare Caspium; it is a part of Tartary, spatious, populous, but barren, mountainous; the people affecting rape and idlenesse. Some make it a part of Turquestan (a remnant of those, Alexander shut up) and from whom are sprung those Caterpillers of the world, the Turks, the of-spring of Hagar, and though to us but lately knowne, yet to old Geographors the name Torc was fami∣liar, repeated by Rabbi Benjamin-ben Ionas in his Itinerary, who notes that the captive Jewes brought hither by Salmanasser, associated with the Torqs neere Nyshabur, by Ptolomy Nisibi, by others the mountains of Ni∣sebon; Hayton also commemorates them and Vlughbeghius. Townes of account are, Buchar and Seonargant, (Maracanda in Arrhyan, Samracha∣tan in Chalcondiles, Paracanda in Strabo, Sarmagana in Ptolomy.) (Bokar and Samarchand) the birth places of Avicen (call'd Honain-Ali-ben-sein) borne Anno Heg. 370, a famous scholler, in ninety bookes of Physicks, Chymicks, and Philosophy helping others: and of Tamerlan borne Anno Heg. 760. Balk, Thalan, Arzan, Kaz, Sychamest, &c. inhabited by a
Scythic people then and now removing too and fro in Tents; a warlike race, but illiterate and blockish; great Idolators, carving the Devill in many ugly postures; very ceremonious, abstaing from bread, drink, wine, but to raw flesh of horse and man, had a terrible appetite. An Ouz-beg man. And if we were to give every hill and Province their old nomenclations from Armenia to Indya, it would savour of presumption and prolixity; the quest is so obscure, so ship-wrackt in the gulph of dim oblivion, Heni∣ochus (in Mengrellia) Gordiaei, or Ghibel-Noae in Haiton (in Iberia,) Niphates, Moschici (from Mesech, and whence of Moscovite,) Pariaedri, Coraxici, and Baris (in Armenia:) and those rabble of incertain Incolae: the Massagets, Taburaei, Suaebi, Bomaraei, Alinorsi, Cadusii, Comari, Sagazini, Caerasini, Pratitae, Paredoni, Cythaeni, Marucaei, Harmatatrophi, Mandradani, Sari∣phi, Turquemanni, Bochari, Gaznehi, and other Prouinces, all of them comprised in these foure Ararat, Caucasus, Taurus, and Imaus, at this day new-named Arar, Adozar, Taur, and Kopizath.
Nam hoc scito probe neque te lateat, Vt Abasgi & Alani, & Sacae & Dacae, Rhos atque Soromatae, & qui proprie Scythae, Et quicunque finitima gens flatibus Boreae, Communiter denominantur Scythae, Scytharum nomine. But more usefull to our intellect, is the long time famous'd Mountaine Albors, neere this place; infamous in the Pyreē or Temple of Idolatrous Fyre, which has never gone out for fifty Ages. Strabo in his fifteen and Procopius in his second book of the warrs and jarrs in Persia remember it: Ben-Ionas also, a vagabond Jew records it. Within the Fane (round and low) is an Altar elevated five steps from the ground: afore this Altar is a Trench or ditch, wherein the Fyre-god is placed; a fire not as is other elementall fire, fed by cumbustibles; but of that, Prometheus stole from Don-Phoebus Cart-wheeles, or which Zertoost their Law-giver stole from heaven, (a cabala of equall truth, and chuse you which likes you best) and is, no doubt in imitation of the Jewish fire which Moses comman∣ded should never bee extinguisht or prophan'd, 6 Levit. 13, the Devill ever frameing his worship (to make it better accounted of) after the best patterne. In this Tophet, they commonly immolated their little children, and somtimes men of more yeers than discretion, thinking by this volunta∣ry to purchase an (iron) crowne, of (hellish) martyrdome. After he had vow'd himselfe to bee a sacrifice, his friends in great troopes, and with no lesse joy flockt about him; clapping him on the shoulders with this greeting. Hayle, blessed man! When? when wilt thou burne thy impure carcasse, to have it purg'd & made glorious in Paradize? he appoints a day, and they prepare towards the ceremony: the time being come, they as∣semble at his gate; & he issues crown'd with garlands; they mount him upon a Mule, (for after hee has vow'd, hee must no more honour the profane earth with his foot-steps) the Iesop annoints him with a hallowed oyle, and after many loving farewells, he incinerates in flame to ashes. Ere his chil∣dren depart, or musick cease roaring, the Priest having consulted with the Devill, tells them their duty; bids them sanctifie themselves, and provide a costly banquet against such a day, when their fathers ghost means to visit them: they leap for joy, and think each houre a day till the time accom∣plishes. At last old Satan comes, that subtle lyar, and in their fathers shape or phantasme, enters amongst them, and at some distance deludes their eyes, and readily satisfies their curiosities; they inquire how Paradize con∣tents him; hee replies, by prospect it is a garden of such delights as are ineffable, but as yet cannot possesse it. They aske why? he tells them, because his will is unperformed; they aske who he left it with, the Priest produces it: the tenor is of one note, his goods must be divided into three, the Altar one, the Priests another, his children a third: without which spell the ghost affrights them ever after. The Gowers in many parts of Persia are of this religion; the Persees also in Indya. Upon these Mountains they fable, that Pischyton (Guztasps eldest sonne, who in Iacobs dayes govern'd Persia) lives here and thirty Immorall Chyrons, who by a grant
of Zertoost (the fire-bringer) are to abide here till Doomsday, and if any steale in by chance, they likewise may become immortall. No doubt, but Abbas attempted it. Here also, upon Quequits high hill are some reliques of the furious Gyantesse Lamasaque, and of Arneost her husband, a Gyant of monstrous shape and proportion: I have forgotten how many score of cubits hee was high, but arm'd hee was (if you will beleeve the Persians) with two hornes as big as the tusks of an Elephant; his eyes were terrible big, his taile like to a Cows, but in fight as powerfull as was that club of Hercules: This great theife and his wife were both slaine by Saint Ham-sha Honcoir such another souldier as was Saint Romayn at Rohan. But leaving these ignes fatui, let mee draw your eyes to our ensuing journeys: After many laborious steps wee got to a Village called Ryna, twelve miles short of Damoan; where wee beheld a Castle, so built upon the best advantages of Art and Nature, that it seemes impregnable: above, it wants no ground fitted for ease and warre, sweet gardens fild with fruits and flowers, made happy in a rivolet of pure water springing there, and thence delightful∣ly streaming in many oblique meanders into the bottome. In this place, five and twenty yeere ago, lived one Meleck Bahaman,Late cōquest of Mount-Taurus. who like a second Pluto commanded many hills and dales in Gelack and Taurus; a King, albeit confined to the middle region, most commonly for∣ced with great cost and care to uphold his dignity against Tartar and Per∣sian his great cost and quarrelsome neighbours: yet such was his good fortune, policy, valour, and mutuall love twixt him and his subjects, that though often invaded, he stood secure, yea, lived to heare the ruine of many, his late enemies; his only aime tending to preserve what his predecessors had justly made him heyre unto, and that his gray hayres might go in peace to an eternall dormitory. Thus thought Bahaman, and added his endeavors to compleat his thoughts. But Abbas the ambitious Persian, returning from the conquest of Mozendram (forcing Shalley-mirza sonne of King Ab∣dalla-cawn to become his pentioner) looks up upon Taurus which seemed to threaten his undaunted heart, and vowes to bee no longer bearded by that mountanous King, taking his Motto out of Tacitus, id aequius quod va∣lidius; charging him also that from his lofty dwelling hee peered into his two Kingdomes Medya and Mozendram, by that advantage ransacking his Townes, robbing his Carravans, illuring his wormes, anticipating his progresse to the Caspian Sea, and diverting many rivers into other sources; which springing upon Taurus, stream'd gallantly into Hyrcania & Shervan, without whose felicitating, those Provinces became barren and barbarous. Meleck Bahaman readily answers Abbas, and finds his drift, comparing him to that fable of the Wolfe who drinking at the spring-head, quarrelled with the silly Lambe for troubling his draught by quenching his flagrant thirst at the stream below. Whiles Abbas in an impatient delay resolves to try the chance of war, appointing Methiculibeg with an army of Coo∣sel-bashawes to perfect his designes, and not to descend thence without victory. It could not be so secretly intended, but aged Bahaman has intelligence of his immediate purposes. At first it troubled him, in that his gray haires were more propense to ease than tumult. Yet, lest his subjects from his
example might be discouraged, he throwes away his dull thoughts, and as a common father provides for safety, in armes and victualls furnishing his large Cittadell for many yeares siege, yea, omitting nothing that might in∣title him a carefull and expert Souldier. In each defensive place he plants a Garrison, and makes every part naked and comfortlesse where the Ene∣mie might march, that in nothing he might be advantagious to the Persian. That done, he mews himselfe, his Queene, two sonnes, and ten thousand able men in his defended Castle, not fearing any thing they could attempt against him. The Persian generall with thirty thousand men mount up∣wards and at their first ascent, find the way so tedious, made more dange∣rous by many dismall showres of Darts and stones thundering on them, that they grumbled at such stratagems, and would needs tumble downe againe, till Methiculibeg by many promises of reward, and exposing his owne head in the front of danger drew them up, and after some petty skir∣mishes, incampt himselfe before this Castle; where he was told, the King and victory was included. When they had long viewd this inaccessible fortresse, they halfe dispaired of subduing it. Such was the height of that Castle, and such the perpendicular ascent, two excellent defences Art and Nature had inricht it with. Some Attempts he made, invalidable; to shoot their Arrowes at it, was one with ayming at the Moone. Small shott they had and many Lances, but of small force to batter rocks; so that after ma∣ny tedious bravadoes (wherein the Persian had stones for payment) the Generall, finding force not valuable, turnes Matchiavillian. He summons them above to parlee with him; which granted, he assaults them with ma∣ny protestations of truce and friendship. And that hee might the better shadow truth, presents the aged King with choise Tulipants, Shamsheers, Pearles, and other guilded baits, meane enough to angle for a Kingdome, intreating him to descend and taste a banquet: solemnly swearing by Mor∣tus Ally, the head of Shaw Abbas, by Paradise, by eight transparent Orbs, and other panym attestations, that he should have royall quarter, come and goe as pleased him; no other reason inducing his invitation, than a hearty good will hee bore him, and hopes of agreement upon parlee. The peace∣full King, unused to deceit and warres rotten stratagems, swallowes the tempting hook, and is credulous they had no perfidy. His wife and sonnes disswade, adding fresh examples of their hypocrisie. But neither those nor the teares his men shed to beg his stay, vowing their constancie to the last man, could divert his destiny: but downe he goes and findes the Crocodile below ready to embrace him with teares of joy: but after a short banquet, gives him an iron bed; regarding neither vow, honour, nor ingagement. Bahaman too late repents his dotage. The Pagan Generall thinks all his owne now, and therefore sends his sonne a message of intreaty upon a Speares point, that if they wisht their fathers safety, an end of warre, truce with Abbas, and new Grandeur to their fortunes, they should come down; all which by obstinacie would be forfeited and denied them, yea prove a basis of perpetuall trouble, and a common monumentall shame unto po∣sterity. Nature, enriches man with reason; Time, with knowledge and expe∣rience. Hence, the two gallant youths, regardlesse of the rodomantadoes
of the fastidious Pagan, commix discretion and pollicy, throw downe this choking answer, They would beleeve hee was an honest man and condis∣cend to any reason, so the King might have his liberty to come up againe; otherwise he might count them Ideots, the villany and perjury to their fa∣ther being so fresh amongst them: from equall reason, they might de∣mand the Castle and Crowne, as them by whom those things subsisted; other satisfaction they would not give so vile a miscreant, this excepted, That the King of Persia's ill-grounded ambition would never prosper; that though of long time he had politely avoyded the Epithite of a Tyrant, this would rub afresh his former injustice, yea anatomize him so clearely, that all Asya would account him odious: that all the world might tax him of dishonourable avarice, who commanding over many fruitfull Provinces, could not rest contented, without subjugating a Nation never wronging him; a King whose Ante-cessors had for more ages govern'd Larry-Iohn, than Izmaels posterity had done Persia; a Country so cold and barren, that of more than Title he could not any way better himselfe: an unholy ostentation. Sua retinere privatae Domus, de alienis certare regia laus est, sayes Taci∣tus; private men do well to think their owne enough, great ones think all too little for their ambition. Abbas must not be circumscrib'd, the General remembers it. So that retorting him this lawlesse title, Ius mihi objectas, accincto gladio? without more plea; invites them, from their consoli∣dated cloud, to view their Fathers head off: they resolutely bid him do as pleased him, and to call to minde, murther is inexpiable in their Alcoran. Methiculibeg has torne his foxes skin with overstreching it, seeing this de∣vice prove ayre, & knows no way now to blow them up, himselfe is so fine∣ly undermined. But giving his rage a vent, in heat of fury he againe assaul∣ted them, they retaliate his hate with such dexterity that many Coosel∣bashes expir'd their last, and so many others were bruis'd, that they begun a common mutiny, protesting to returne whiles possible, upbray∣ding the Generall, that he knew not how to use a victory, that Bahaman was theirs, Mount Taurus theirs, and doubted not, but they would do ho∣mage if the Shaw would so honour him, that with more credit and gaine they could oppose the Turk or Indyan. The Generall is plung'd into a deadly Dylemma. If he could infuse patience and make them stay, hee knew not how to mount the Castle; if he returned without full conquest, he knew his head should off; Ferrat-cawn, Oliverdi-cawn, Kurchichy-cawn, and other brave Captaines for like faults, being that yeere beheaded. Hee machinates at length another triall; he releases Bahaman, upon his knees beseeches pardon: vowing he us'd this seeming discourtesie, but to try his excellent temper; that his leave to go back was granted him, either to go or stay as pleased him; that Abbas his Master had sent for him, and that he should depart more joyfully, could he but be so happy to see his sons, whom for valour and policy he admired above all mortall creatures, that if any Articles and Truce might reciprocally bee signed to, oh! what content it would affoord, and fetter him in a thousand slavish ingagements. Bahaman, is over-joyed at this Syren, never did musick to his dull eares sound more melodiously; some Magick spell sure had infatuated him; he
beleeves the Persian, and gives a Sardonick smile to think how blest hee was in this attonement: he dictates a pathetick letter, and is permitted to shew his joy at a distance to his sonnes. A nefarious messenger delivers it and bewitches the well-nigh distracted Princes with such piscashes and pre∣sents of worth, that accepting them, and joying at the easie Articles, they consult and (fearing to irritate so Potent a neighbour to further mischiefe, the Queene also provoking them downe, contrary to the soldiers who presag'd by many submissive diswasions their ruine) downe they go, rely∣ing on the perfidy of the Generall; who sounds for joy, and carries them to their endeared Father, twixt whom was shewed love and obedience in the height of both; the Generall presents them a solemne banquet, but death attended them. For when these three were blessing their good destiny, smiling in a mutuall consent of love, the Generall gives the signe, and at one instant three Coosel-bashes standing by, with their slicing Se∣miters whipt off their heads, all three at one moment made immortall; and ere this villany was spread abroad, by vertue of their seales, they made the men above descend and yeeld the Castle, some receiving mercy, some destruction. By that detested policy yoaking in slavery, this late thought indomitable Nation; such was the miserable end of Meleq' Bahaman and two hopefull Princes, forgetfull of warres subtleties: and how Aladeule their neighbour King of Anti-Taurus for playing fast and loose with Selim first Emperour of Turqs, by equall credulity gave a like issue to his life and Kingdome. Opposit to this Castle is erected the Sepulcher of Ba∣hamans beloved Queene, in the high-way as wee passed: tis of foure equi∣lateralls, elevated eight yards high; the materiall is of stone, well squar'd and plaster'd with white, very apparant and comely. A long mile from this Sepulcher and higher up into the Aire, is the high peak of Damoan (by Strabo in his 11. lib. call'd Iasonia,) whose top (shaped like a Pyramid) surmounts all the other parts of Taurus; up which defa∣tigating hill we crambled with no small difficulty, and from whence wee could discover the Caspian Sea, eightscore long miles distant thence; 'tis above compos'd of sulphur, which causes it to sparkle each night like Aetna; a pleasant object to the eye, but is so offensive to the smell, that it requires a nosegay of Garlick in the ascending; hence, most part of Persia and Chaldaea has their brimstone: the reason why we rode up was out of curi∣osity, to see the baths so generally resorted to, so excellently famous. Three are incircled with strong stone-walls and two are open. The first are for those of quality, the other in common: and hither in August, peo∣ple flock apace from remote parts, decrepit and diseased in mighty mul∣titudes. How are we tost by Fortune? when we keep At Sea, we see the wonders of the deep, And tremble at the danger, where we dive Under the hideous waves. When we arrive On land, we think us happy; But ere long We must to work againe and climb the strong And craggy Mountains reaching up to Heaven, Each down-cast look is death, each way uneven
Dants our thick-panting hearts; lest if we misse One step, we head-long fall the precipisse. The top (like fierce Vesuvim) Sulphur spits; The mid-way wholsome Baths, which cute all fits Of agues, aches, palsie, and the stone, All epileptick fumes; as if alone Nature had chose this place, to plant in these The Art of Galen and Hypocrates. Now, whether this hill take denomination from Damoan, five farsangs thence, or the Towne from it I cannot argue; but from the signification a Second plantation, the Jewes have a Cabala that Noahs Ark rested here;Noahs Ark. not only from the super-eminency of the hill, but Vines and Zone fitting a seminary better than any part of the Armenian mountains. Besides, this hill where Taurus rises up higher than elsewhere, is part of Paropamisa, & where Becanus places the Ark, denying that Ararat is in Armenia, though Hayton to make it be beleeved, calls it Aremnoē. But how improbable so ere that be, this seemes more congruous, that at this Towne of Damoan and mountaines about it, the Idolatrous Tribes removed by Salmanasser, were here seated; those especially of Dan, Zebulon, Assur, and Nepthaly; the other of Ruben, Gad, and halfe Manasses, by Tiglath Pillesar about Lar, Iaarown, and other parts of Chusistan. For albeit Ptolomy makes Gozana (in his 6. lib. 18. chap.) a branch of Oxus, in above 40 degrees: and at Ha∣ra, and Hala, and Ghabor Cities of Medya, neere the river Gozan sacred story saies they were placed by the Assyrian; it cannot be that Gozan mixes with Oxus, since no part of Medya is within three hundred miles of it. Gozan then is in Medya; and seeing that Araxis waters Armenia from Ara∣rat, and runnes into the West side of the Caspian sea; this river here of a great bredth streaming from Taurus both into Medya and Hyrcania (cut in many small rivolets by the people to draw her many wayes) must needs be Gozan, and the Jewes inhabiting here for many ages confirme my con∣jecture, saying also that they were brought hither captives, and here have rested during many overtures and changes of the Persian Monarchy. East of Damoans high peak is a Towne call'd Nova, in it a hundred fami∣lies. A young man (sonne to Hodge-Suare the Persian Merchant that dyed in London, Anno Domini 1625, and brother to Mahomet, whom we buried at sea) hearing of our passing by, accompanied with all his loving kindred, came to invite us to his home; he was apparelled in a long robe of cloth of gold, his head was wreath'd with a huge Shash or Tulipant of silk and gold, he bestowed a banquet and hearty welcome, with an invitation of longer time: but after mutuall thanks and ceremony, we return'd a long farewell, and thence hastned towards Damoan: where, as wee descended a steep hill, wee past by a large black Tent, stuft with above thirty antick women, & as many men; I thought they had been solemnizing their Tau∣rilia and Boalia, but it prov'd a wedding; the bride was of ten yeeres, the groome of thirty; she a Venus, he a Vulcan: many bride-maids came out to admire at us, wee staid awhile no lesse wondring at them: their faces, hands, and feet were painted in divers formes of birds, beasts, castles, and flowers, resembling our predecessors in Brittaine in Caesars time; their
leggs were chain'd with voluntarie fetters of brasse and silver, which in their Morisco Pastorall made them appeare more excellent in that sport than any description of the Arcadian Sheepheardesses; wee gave them a a small offering and so left them, that night making Damoan our Manzeil or Lodging. Damoan, (whether the relict of Ghabor or Halah is incertaine; but by the Jewes (in these parts call'd Iehuds) their long captivity and abode here, seemes to be one of them) is a Town well known unto the Persians; some write it Damawan, but erroneously. The North Pole is elevated at this place, six and thirty degrees, twenty minutes; longitude 88. It is in∣cluded by the skirt of Taurus, in the Kaboncharion Province (part of Ghe∣lack) and the limit of Medya, North; a Towne pretty well watered, a branch of Gozan refreshes her: peopled most part with Jewes, who in this place are two hundred Families: The Buzzar is built aloft, and scarce worth the climbing to, except it be to buy wine and fruit, which is had here in plenty and at easie prices. Two dayes wee stay'd in Domoan to re∣creat our wearied bodies; on the thirteenth of June we departed thence, and that day rode to Bomaheem, five and twenty miles from Damoan. And now we are in Medya, a word of her; it takes name either from Me∣deus sonne to Iason and Medaea, th'infortunate daughter of King Aeta; or from Madai third sonne of Iaphet sonne of Noah: on the North it has mount Taurus; has Parthia South; confin'd by Bactria to the East; West by Armenia and Assyria. Media was anciently divided into two (as Trogus, Adephius, Strabo, and others witnesse,) Atropatia, (Tropataena in Ptolomy, Atropataena in Pliny, from Atropatus one of Alexanders men) and Azarka or Sheervan i. e. milky Plain. At this day tis sub-divided into Gheylan (Gheylae in Ptolomy, Caddufia in Pliny) Deylan, Vaaz-pracan, and Thezican, those are Atropatia; in which we might include part of Armenia. Sheirvan has Aderbayon, Harran, Sul∣tavia, and Tabriztan. A rich and puissant Country it was in the worlds In∣fancie; but whether by the consuming hand of warre or Gods justice, in revenge of so many holy Christians Chozroë massacred, I cannot say; this I can, that it is a barren and miserable soile, compared with the Phoenix of Iles great Brittain, who in her selfe exceeds the best compacted plea∣sures of these Asiatique Provinces. It has beene fruitfull you may say, if Pope Pius the second had good information out of Strabo. lib. 11. an Hip∣pobotos or horse pasture here nourishing fiftie thousand breeders; but little grasse is to be found at this day over most part of the Persian Monar∣chy; as you may see, if you please to journey thither. But in stead of them, as many Camells abound here in sandie Desarts, and crop the boughes of trees or shrubs such as they meet with: a beast, albeit generally known, yet may have a small memoriall. The Dromodarie and it are of one descent, but varie according to the Countrie they breed in: in Bactria (where of old were reckoned a thousand Cities) and Persia they have but one gib or bunch, the Arabian is doubled. The males in one moneth every yeare burne with too much heat, and grow foaming frantick towards copulation, yet in that distraction cannot be brought to commit incest, nor will they goe any whither without their consort: the females are not so cholerick;
they couple backward, goe great ten moneths, commonly have but one young one at one birth, which they suckle two yeares apart from compa∣nie, not loosing their milk till a second conception: They live threescore yeares, labour much, feed little; refraine drink three dayes, but then quench their thirst immeasurably: their milk is cordiall, their flesh ranck and lean, yet in Asia preferr'd before Beefe, Veale, Pork, in that Mahomet's Alcaron or Ozmon's Parady, licentiats it. This Kingdome was first conquered by Semeramys; some say by her simple husband Nynus, Anno mundi 1900. Ninus was sonne of Belus (dei∣fied by names of Bel, Baal, and Iupiter Babylonicus;) sonne of Nymrod (call'd Mars by some, by others Saturne) sixt sonne of Cush, Chams eldest sonne, the cursed brat of Noah: or thus, Noah had Cham, father of Cush (begot some say in the Ark) father of Nymrod who begat Baladan, father to Berodac pre∣decessour to Nabuchadnezar, father of Evel-Merodach, father of Bel-shazzer, who (as Daniel fore-told) was the last of that Assyrian pedegree, Darius Medus supplanting him, Anno M. 3426. by some call'd Cyaxares secundus, whose daughter and heire was married to Cyrus the Fortunate, who by slaughter of Astiages became sole Monarch of Persia. Since when, it has groaned under twenty changes, but wee will not speak them here; for by this time we are hous'd in Tyroan. TYROAN, by her continued greatnesse and Antiquity seemes to be that Rhazunda, mentioned by Strabo and Ptolomy. It is seated in the midst of a faire large Plain; which albeit it be invironed with hills of stupendious height in most parts at good distance, yet some wayes it affoords a delicate Horizon. The ayre here is fresh and sweet in the morning and towards Sunset, but in the Sunnes perpendicular glances, wee found it hot and ra∣ging: the houses are of white bricks, hardned in the Sunne; above three thousand houses are numbred in Tyroan; of which, the Dukes & Buzzar are the fairest and most observable; yet neither so excellent as to beget won∣der: the Market is divided, some part thereof is open and some arched: a sweet rivolet playes wantonly in two streames through the Towne, fer∣tilitating the Groves and Gardens, who for such a favour returne a thank∣full Tribute to the Gardiner: adjoyning the Citie, the King has a spatious Garden, succinct with a great Towring wall of mud, as much in circuit as is the Citie: The house wherein we lodged overtopped all the other, and from whose highest Tarrasse (early one morne) I tooke a dainty prospect both of Towne and Country; every house top was spread with Carpets, whereon each night slept the Master of the house and his Seralio; some (I easily perceived) had three, some six women about them, wrapt in lin∣nen; the curiosity (or rashnesse rather) might have cost me deerely, the penalty being no lesse than to shoot an Arrow into his braines that dares to doe it. The Carravans lodge here, exceeds the Mosque; the men in this Towne are proud, the women lovely, both are curious in novelties; but the jealousie of the men confines the temper of the weaker sexes; yet by that little they adventured at, we might see, Vetitis rebus gliscit volun∣tas. One Zenal-chan is the Sultan of this Citie, a man of no worth in our opinion: he had been Ambassador from Shaw-Abbas to Rodulph the second, German Emperour; but his late imployment, his favour with Abbas, his
wealth, his vexation for Nogdi-beg his Cozen; made him so proud, so dis∣courteous, that albeit the Ambassadour sent to visit him, hee return'd no thanks, he took no notice of his being there. The pole Artick is elevated in Tyroan, thirty five degrees, forty minutes: fourescore in longitude. From Tyroan we rode to a Village call'd Charah, a base inhospitable place; it affoorded us no sustenance, but torment, so much as the scalding sands and frying Sunne could operate, as in too great measure we had experi∣ence of: From hence to Taurys is two dayes riding. The Carravans-raw is thus shaped. Carravan-raw TAVRYS, the late Median Metropolis takes name from that prodigious mountaine Taurus, under which tis builded. The Turk and Perse call it Taberyz; in the worlds adolescencie 'twas known by other names; of Ach∣metha as I read in Ezra; after that, of Echatana spoken of in the Apocrypha; of Amatha also as Cortestan; and Cordina, others have called her; by ana∣logie some have placed her in Syria, from a Citie Egbatan, converted into Epiphania, by Antiochus. The primier founder of this noble Citie is Ar∣phaxad
as we find in Iudiths History: Anno Domini 3290. some say Dejoces, predicessor to that valiant Phraortes, who flourisht in the yeare of the world 3300, the sixt Dynast of Medya after Arbaces, who begun it from Adam 3146. It was agrandiz'd (not built, as Pliny dreamt of) by Seluchus, 300 yeares after; who at that time begun to build Seleucya 200 pharsangs thence, to eclipse the pride of mighty Babylon. Such time as shee was cal∣led Ecbaton, she was farre greater than at this present. It was fifteene Ita∣lian miles about (sayes Strabo.) The walls were strong and stately, seventy cubits high and fifty broad, beautified with many loftie Turrets and battle∣ments: within, were numbred many great and excellent Pallaces; that which Daniel built (the Mausoleum afterwards of the Median Kings) was most magnificent, and which remained undemolisht in Iosephus his time, and some whiles after: That, built by Darius was no lesse memorable: most part whereof was of Cedar wood, the roofe studded and plaited with burnisht gold; of both which nothing now remaines save memory and ashes. I can hardly say memorie, since it is become a question whether Tauryz be old Ecbatan; and whether it be in Media or no. If to be under Baronta, (Diodorus, Polybius, and Ptolomy call it Orontes,) if to be in 36 de∣grees 50 minutes, if to have the ruines of Tobyas his grave, if to be the bu∣riall place of Kings, if to be the Metropolis time out of mind, if to be the Citie from Ierusalem N. E. foure hundred forsangs can make it Ecbatan; or if the authority of Ananias, Petrus de la valle, Leunclavius, Teixera, and of Ortelius will serve, let it then be Ecbatan and in Medya. Ptolomy's con∣ceit of Tabryz (mistaken in the Tau, a Gamma printed erroniously for it) to be in Assyria, by Cedrenus in Armenia, by Chalcondyles in Persia, by Niger in Pers-Armenia, or by Paulus Venetus in Parthya; what were these con∣jectures but from the Monarchique Arch-Titles, as Assyrian, Armenian, or Parthyan as they swayed then; and chiefly from the mistake, how Armenia is devided; part of Armenia major extending South of Araxis into Atro∣patia, a part of Medya; and from whence the name Pers-Armeniae is com∣pounded: for by Abulfeda, Vlughbeg, and others, the latitude of Taurys complies with Ecbatan. At this day Tabryz is great, and well peopled: traded to from farre, al∣beit it keepes a Garrison. It is compast with a mud wall, five miles about: the houses are flat a top: their materiall Sunne-dried Bricks: the Buzzar large, the Gardens lovely: that to the South-East planted by King Tamas was famous, but the Turks horses have lately grazed there. It wants wa∣ter in the greatest measure, yet of that is not wholy destitute. What it lacks in that, fire and flame supplies it; the Sunne, warres rage, and civill broyles having more than sufficiently parched her. To passe by the mu∣tations of the Empire, the Turks first passage six hundred yeares since, Tamberlayns rage and the like, remember we those two deadly factions the Envicaydarlai and Namidlai for three hundred yeares persecuting one ano∣ther with implacable wrath, drawing into their quarrell nine other Pro∣vinces, who grew so hatefull amongst themselves, that not only this Citie but Medya & Armenia were therby half depopulated: the Gibelyns nor Ro∣ses outmatched them. They made an easie entrance to any invader. Selym the grand Signieur first espies it, and to become an eye-sore to Tamas sonne
of Izmael their inveterate Adversarie, sends a Bashaw who ransackt it Anno Dom. 1514. Heg. 894. without much resistance. And Anno 1530. Soly∣man seconded it with so much furie, that it flam'd many dayes, the insa∣tiate Turks pillaging without mercie, and turning topsie-turvie all they met with, and into a Chaos those elaborat walks and gardens Shaw-Tah∣mas so much gloried in. It reviv'd againe, and againe is made prostrate to Ebrahim Bassa's luxurie, sent by Solyman at the villanous instigation of Vle∣mus a Persian Traytor, and brother in law to the King. At which time An∣no 1534. Heg. 914. the greedie Turks new ransackt it. But Anno Dom. 1585. Heg. 965. it groaned under most affliction, when Ozman the wrathfull Bassa and slave to Amurat the third, subdued it, and perpetrated all sorts of hostile crueltie: till thirtie yeares after, by that incomparable Pagan Prince Emyr-hamze-myrza elder brother to Shaw Abbas it was regained, rebuilt and fortified against the future insolence of those Barbarians. Tau∣rys is distant from Cazbyn seven dayes easie journey; from the Mare Caspi∣um as many; from Araz six; from Derbent eight, from Spahawn seven∣teene, from Shyraz thirty, from Ormus fifty, and from Babylon thirty. Next night we made our Manzeill at Sangurrabaut, a Town consisting of an hundred Cottages. In this place we buried a civill Gentleman, Mr. Welflit our comrade, under a broad spreading Chenoar tree, and fixt a brazen scrole over him, which spoke his Name and Nation. Mors tua non careat fletu; linquamus amicis Maerorem ut celebrent funera cum lachrymis. We have deplor'd thy death: th'insuing yeares Thy kin shall pay thee Tribute with their teares. Next night we slept in the open fields under a bespangled Canopie the Firmament; and next in Shaw-De, i.e. the Kings Towne, his Purgatorie ra∣ther; if a conspiracie of loose & scalding sand, the burning Sun, and filthie Cottages can make one: the houses there, differ nothing in shape nor closenesse from Ovens; the people all day bake themselves in them; a people so discourteous, that our miserie nothing afflicted them; from that hatefull Towne we hasted, and next night got into Casbyn. CAZBYN, (or Kazvyn after the lisp of Persia) is that same City known to the ancient Topo-graphers by name of Arsacia, from Arsaces the valiant Persian Anno Mundi 3720. from whom the ensuing Kings were stil'd Arsacidae; two hundred and fifty yeeres before the th'incarnation of our Savior Christ: and is accounted the first that made Medya an Empire, in despight of proud Seleuchus son to the great Monarch of Syria, Antiochus sirnamed Theos. By command of Nycanor it was afterwards call'd Euro∣pus, and lost that name too when it bended under the next conquest. It is likely this was that Rages (a City in Medya as appeares in Tobit) whither the Angell went from Ecbatan to receive the ten Talents (of our money two thousand pounds) Tobias was to have from Gabael sonne to Gabrias his kinsman. I am not ignorant, that some imagine Edissa in Mesopotamia to be it; but that is most unlikely, for then what businesse had they from Ninivy to go to Ecbatan (in the way no doubt, or not farre deviat to Rages) a contrary way leading to Edissa twixt Tigris and Euphrates: besides, it is said in the Apocrypha, that Rages was in Medya, Edissa is not; and no
part of Medya is neerer than a thousand miles from the holy City, but Edissa not five hundred. Whence the word Cazbyn is fetcht I could not learne; I suppose from Cowz-van i.e. a vale of barley; as Sheir-van a plain of milke, &c. or from King Cazvan as they call Acembeg the Armenian; or that it is the relict of Casbira, an old City in Strabo placed here: for if I should deduce it from Chazbi as the 70 Interpreters translate it in Gen. 38.5. it would relish of too much antiquity. The signification of Exile is un∣known by interpretation or occasion to the inhabitants, except the broa∣cher of that conceit had recourse to the idiom of the old Parthians. The North pole is in this famous City elevated 36 deg. and 15 min. long. 85 degrees 30 minutes: by King Tamas (sonne of Ismael) made the Metro∣lis of this Monarchy, the better to affront the intruding Ottomans; the Kingdome it stands in, is Medya; the Province Sheirvan, that part call'd Deylan: from Tabryz a hundred and eighty miles; from Hamadan (the sepulture of Queen Ester & Mordecay) a hundred & ten; from Sultany (the residence of six Sultans) ninety; from Ardavyl (the Seigniory of the Aba∣sians) eighty; from Gheylan seventy; from Farabaut two hundred; from Sa∣marchand five hundred; from Ormus eight hundred; from Babilon five hundred; from Ierusalem a thousand; from Spahawn two hundred and se∣venty; from Shyraz foure hundred and ninety; from Kandahar five hundred and fifty miles English, or thereupon. It is at this day for multitude of buildings and inhabitants the chiefe in Medya, and equall for other grandeur to any other City in the Persian Em∣pire, Spawhawn excepted. It is seated in a faire even plaine, no hill of note in thirty miles compasse overlooking her; a champaigne yeelding graine and grapes, but little wood saw I growing any where. It has a small streame flowing from Abonda (Baronta of old) which gives the thirsty drink; and mellowes the gardens: from whence by its refreshment and the peoples industry, they have abundance of fruits and roots and in varieties. I think the reason why wee saw no great rivers in any place, is from their forcing it into many sluces, to bring it by subterranian passa∣ges, to such Townes as have none but by derivative, in so much, that if Indus, Euphrates, and Ganges were amongst them (I meane where the Country is most peopled) doubtlesse they would make them kisse the sea in five hundred ostiums or branches. Such fruits as I remember, were Grapes, Orenges, Lymes, Lemons, Pomcytrons, Musk and water Mel∣lons, Plums, Cherryes, Peaches, Apricocks, Figgs, Gooseberries, Peares, Apples, Pistachoes, Filberds, Hasel-Nuts, Wallnuts, Almonds, and ex∣cellent Pomgranads, Dates, but such as came from Laristan. Casbyn is circled with a complementall wall, of no force in any adversity; the com∣passe is about 7 miles; the families are twenty thousand, people about two hundred thousand, nourisht by the Ayre, and a few roots and rice, such dyet as best complies with such torrid regions. The Buzzars here are large and pleasant, but inferiour to some about her. The Mydan is uniform and beautifull, the Kings Pallace and Haram are nigh the great Market, low, of raw-bricks, varnisht after the notion of Paynim painting, in blew, red, and yellow tinctures, commixt with Arabiq knots & letters, azure & gold; the windowes are spatious, trellized and neatly carved; within, of usuall
splendor; neere his gate, is a great Tanck or Magazyn of water made at the common charge at our being here. The Hummums (or sweating pla∣ces) are many, resplendent in the azure pargetting and tyling wherewith they are ceruleated; the vulgar buildings content the inhabitants, but to a busie eye yeeld small wonder or amazement: the gardens are best to view and smell to, but compared with those in Spahawn and Shyraz, prove but ordinary and lesse fruitfull. The Mosq's, or superstitious houses, are not two thirds so many as Iohn of Persia computed long ago, above six hundred. Nor those so fastidious in Pyramidall aspirings, nor curious in Architecture, nor inside glory as in many lesser Towns obeying Mahomet. I cannot inlarge her praises, save that in Spring and Autumne I beleeve it may be a temperate and inticing climat: but Sommer and Winter are ex∣treame in contraries; Apollo frying them with his oblique flaming glan∣ces, and Hyems no lesse benumming them with his icycles. Here we met the Pot-shaw again, who got into Casbyn two dayes afore us. At which time, forty Cammells entred loaden with Tobacco out of Indya, the owners and drivers being ignorant that any such prohibition had gone out, to forbid the using it; (the King sometimes commanding and restrayning three or foure times every yeere, to shew his Monarchic power, and as the humor taketh him,) an ill spirit directed them, for Mamet-Ally-beg the pernitious Favorite (wanting his piscash it seemes, ex∣asperates Abbas, and he forth-with payes the men unwelcome wages; com∣manding an Officer to crop off their eares, and to benose them; offering to his angry Justice, the forty Cammells burthen of Tutoon or Tobacco, by making a great deep hole the pipe, which being inflam'd, in a black va∣por gave the Citizens gratis two whole dayes and nights infernall incense. Let me give you somewhat to memorise Casbyn, wherein have been acted many Tragick scenes, in their times very terrible. Mahomet the purblind King of Persia and Syre to Shaw-Abbas, of him∣selfe was peaceable and mercifull; but could rest never the quieter for such a temper. Morad the third, and sonne to Selym that arch-Atheist, and Emperour of Turq's (who call'd himselfe God of the Earth, and com∣mander of the whole World) squinted still upon the Easterne Monarchs, and found none a greater eye-sore and rub to his conquests than Mahomet and Persia: many attempts he made to subject it, but of no force, the hap∣py influence of destiny so safeguarded it, Nature it selfe laboured to op∣pugne that rebell of Nature. But let us first look back to see what stormes were rais'd, what incanta∣tions ingendred, ere he could make the tottering Dyadem sit close; Tamas-Shaw (sonne to Ismael-Sophy the Jewes reputed Messias, till by the just hand of God, they found him crueller than Tytus) by a Georgian Lady (they are the rarest in the Orient) had twelve sonnes, Mahomet, Ismael, Aydar-cawn, Solyman, Emangoly, Mamut-Ally, Mustapha, Ally-cawn, Amet-cawn, Ebrahym, Hamze, and Izma-cawn; the daughters are seldom reckned, yet one of them a Virago, Periacon-Conna by name plaid her part, and rather than do as other women, spin or bee imprisoned, shee chose to practice Armes, and to revive the infamy, yea in every thing to imitate Semyramis. King Tamas was scarce dead (hastned some thinke before
his time) when Ayder his third sonne took advantage of his brethrens ab∣sence: Mahomet he jeered at, as unworthy the crowne by reason of his imperfection; hee could not see to fight, to discerne, to governe. Ismael was abroad upon some imployment, and therefore Periacon-Conna encou∣raging, he graspt the Scepter and impald his browes with his Fathers Di∣adem, his brothers right, his owne confusion: for he had not swayed full foure dayes, when Sahamel-cawn (his insinuating Uncle) most audatiously struck off the crowne, and (to adde presumption) made the losse of his head satisfie his too hasty ambition. Zenall-cawn his friend grumbles at it, but had not power to question him. Periacon-Conna finding her ingage∣ment past to Ayder, shewes her selfe a right woman in her constancy: for without any revenge of Ayders death or sorrowing to his grave, she trans∣fers her love to Ismael, who by her foot-post has notice of his brothers ill-end and favour of the Sultans towards him. Ambition lends him wings, so that he quickly arrives at Casbyn, and by men of note is joyfully welcom∣ed, by the monster multitude saluted King. His conscience accuses him of intrusion, but checks him not to make such a construction as Law and Nature required from him: he resolves to rule, and to cut off such rubbs as made the way unsafe to mount upon: his brothers had no title to it, (I meane, none but Mahomet) yet the name affrights him: 8 innocent Prin∣ces were slaine to quench his infernall inflammation, regarding neither grace, his Fathers soule, the perfume of that name, the name of Tyrant, justice, nor the peoples mutability, who by that cruelty begun to hate him, and to wish the right heyre in his lawfull royalties. Mahomet also begins to stirre, if not for the crowne, at least to free himselfe from his brothers blood-thirstinesse; but he no sooner practis'd to bee active, when the peo∣ple ground their loyalty and affection on him, and in great troopes flock about him, vowing to have him King in Casbyn, or in the attemp to sacri∣fice themselves. Whiles Ismael growes odious to God and Man: for, see∣ing the vulgar sort and others fall away, in a high contempt of them, and to ruine all, he confederates with the Turq, intending to betray the honor of his crowne, and to shade himselfe under their greatnesse; yea to vex his owne, and to ingratiate the Turks the more, apostatizes, proclaiming the error of the Persian reformation, crying out that Ally was no body, compared to Mahomets three successors, and the like frantick impostures; which how subtlely so ere hee cloakt, his tricks deceived him; for one night (a dismall night to him) his sister weather-cock and foure inraged Sultans, Chalyle, Emyr, Mohummed, and Curchy-cawn entred his bed-cham∣ber in womens apparell, where Ismael thinking to coole his lascivious ap∣petite, was by those Amazons strangled in a cord of silke, foming out his infected spirit, unable to resist the fury of those conspirators, and disheart∣ned when hee saw his sister one of them. Casbyn was clouded with shame and amazement, but cleares up when Mahomet enters circled with the re∣fulgent Diadem. Periacon-conna dreames not of an account: but Maho∣met, acquainted with her turbulent and variable nature, commands Salmas∣mirza to arrest her with the axe of death, which accordingly hee executes, and sends her Gorgons head, the hayre dishevelling upon a speares poynt as a symboll of his obedience unto the King: her complices upon the ter∣rour
of this, posting for their lives into Georgia, some unto Babylon. Ecce, patrem Nati perimunt, Natosque parentes Matuaque armati coëunt in vulnera fratres. Thus, children slay their Syres, parents their brood, Armd brethren brethen wound in deadly fewd. Amurath the Grand-seignior heares by Vstref-beg (an Armenian Tray∣tor) of Izmaels catastrophe; in whose revenge (he so colour'd it, to make Mahomet neglected) he forages the Persian Territores, ordering Mustapha the Bashaw with a hundred thousand men to perpetrate their utmost rage, which he greedily obeyes, till Sultan Tokomac the Persian Generall affronts him face to face, and examines him with such fury in the Calderan plains (famous for many memorable conflicts) that Mustapha is forced thence in despight of his bravadoes, a shamed that 20000 could not only ban∣dy but beat downe his Army, consisting of five times his number. Six and thirty thousand Turks there breath'd their last, and eight thousand Persi∣ans, Anno Domini 1578. Heg. 958, of whose heads the bragging Turk made a Bulwark, thinking it would bee a scar-crow to the Persian; who retaliated them in a more terrible measure that yeere, by the valour of Arez-beg and Emanculy-cawn; thirty thousand other Turks parting with their heads (as they past the Conac in Hyrcania) to erect a higher Trophy to their victory; praying Mustapha and his Master to come no more unsent for, lest they gave them such another harsh welcome: wondring they had so soone forgot, the famous overthrow King Tamas gave Solyman and Ebra∣him-bassa, three and forty yeeres since, by a handfull of Coosel-bashaes (and the assistance of a divine hand) scattering as wind does clouds, three hundred and fourescore thousand men. Mustapha gives his reply in a grim look, wishing hee could do more than hee was able. But Mahomet is not yet secure, for the Tattars (allyed to the Turk) in revenge upon Mosen∣dram, violate and commit all kinds of rage and turpitude, hoping when they had joynd with Osman-bassa (left by Mustapha) to over-runne all Me∣dya without opposall: but they reckned without their host, for Arez beg with ten thousand gallant Persians surprise the Tattars with such haste and dexterity, that they routed a great part of the Army, and had return'd crown'd with a most happy conquest, had not Abdel-chery the Generall us'd a stratagem, who with some selected companies entring upon the backs of the halfe tyred Persians, by great clamours made them beleeve Osman was come; and by that, turn'd the fortune of the day, eclips'd by that interposi∣tion, and made to dy there in an honourable conquest, the cheife Captain Arezbeg, unhorst, imprisoned, and at Sumachy most basely hang'd, to give the terrified Tattars fresh incouragement. Sumachy or Shamaky (as some call it) has North latitude 39 degrees: a frontier Town it is, Medya, Armenia, and Hyrcania, parting there; it was founded by Shamuc-Zeddaule An. Dom. 990. Heg. 370. and from whom peradventure it was named. It has foure thousand families, the houses are low & little gracefull; seated in a pleasant plain or valley, to the Notth and West, allowing a delightfull prospect. Anno Domini 1566. Heg. 946. her last Native King Obdolow-cawn dyed, and his sonne Syrvan-Shaw was for∣ced to inroll himselfe a Tributary to Shaw-Abbas. In this Towne is a Tower of heads rais'd by the insolent Turq's, such as is in Spahawn, and
which the old knave Mustapha made be erected. But to returne. Mahomet Codobanda has quick newes of the shamefull death Arez-beg had suffred: He sorrowes for the losse of so brave a man, is sick of revenge, and intreats his couragious sonne Emyr-Hamzè-Mirza, (the wonder of his time) to recompence that villany; who most cheerefully with twelve thousand men hasts out of Casbyn, and in nineteene dayes presents his men in the face of Abdulchery and his Tattars, flashing such pannique feare amongst them, that after two houres fight hee rowts his Armie, and with much shame and losse forces them away to seek more shelter: that done, he enters Erez, and massacres the Turkish Garrisons: Caytas the Bassa hee made to imitate Arezbeg in the grizely play of Death; he recovered also two hundred peeces of Artillery, those very same, his Grandsire Tamas had lost to the grand Signieur, Solyman: he stayes not there, but hearing where the Tartars had re-incampt, with his speedy Army he re-encounters them, & cut most of them in peeces, whereby the birds of the ayre might more easily prey upon their carcasses. Abdulchery (by fortune of warre) was unhorst by the gallant Prince, and sent captive to Eres where the Be∣gun or Queene mother lay: during which, Osman and his Turks enter Su∣machy without resistance, but the Persian Prince hasts thither, and with such furie, that amazed Osman takes th'advantage of the night, and stole away, leaving Sumachy to the Princes mercy; who for her perfidy made a fire of her houses, and seem'd to quench it with blood of the Inhabitants. Returning back to Erez, he forces his Mother and he youthfull Tartar to follow him to Casbyn, where he was received with Epiciniaes and songs of joy and triumph. Osman in the interim sculks in Derbent, whither we will take the paines to follow him. DERBENT is a strong and famous Port Town upon the Caspian sea, viewing from her loftie Tarrasses the Armenian and Hyrcan Territories, Ararat and the sea: knowne to our predecessors by many names, as Alex∣andria (from the great Macedonian, who built many Townes, and gave them his name,) Morcosa, Demyrcapi, and now Derbent; memorable in her best passage from Armenia major, Medya, &c. into Mosendram, Gheylan, Shervan, Tartary, &c. it is removed one hundred and twenty miles from Sumachy, from Bildih 180. it elevates the North Pole one and forty de∣grees, fifteene minutes; and admits three miles compasse and better: is circled with a strong, high and usefull stone wall: the houses, Hummums, and Churches are but meanly beautifull; such rage, the Prince Emir-Hamze shewed here Anno 1568. Heg. 948. such time as he unkenneld with smoke and flame Osman Bassa and his Turkish varlets; and made the Inha∣bitants feele the temper of his biting sword, the houses the fire of his wrath, an object of his justice, of their levity and rebellion. In Derbent, the strong Castle Kastow is most observable, pleasant and every way advantagious: that wall also which runnes thence to Tephlys in Georgia, built by Alexander the great (upon like occasion Offa drew his ditch to terminate the valiant Brittans) call'd also Caucasiae vel Iberiae portae, is one of the wonders of Asia; but at this day moath-eaten by iron tooth'd Time and warres inconsiderate furie: returne againe. Abdul-chery and the Queen-mother by this are so linkt in Cupyds chains,
that the Tattar finds himselfe double fettered: but after much parlee and fight they tooke truce and grew so co-united, that the Sultans in Casbyn took notice of it; but neither regarding her Majestie nor his youth, forget∣ting also that the King intended to make him his sonne in law (no disho∣nour, being the great Cams brother) all these neglected, they broke in, at such an unluckie time as they were acting some inchastity; a sight so odi∣ous to the jealous Sultans, that they first made him an Eunuch, and after that slew them both; concluding so, Anno Heg. 958. the end and tryumphs of the Praecopensian Tartar. After some stay in Cazbeen, our Ambassador to swiften his dispatch, vi∣sited the Load-starre of Persia, the grand Favorite Mahomet Ally-beg; who entertain'd him with a loftie look, and wisht him to trust his secrets to his Cabinet, wherein the mysteries of the whole state was lockt, the King shewing himselfe unwilling to be further troubled. The Ambassadour might in any other place than Persia have return'd him the Lye; but per∣ceiving no remedy, and desiring to haste home, imparted so much as hee saw necessarie. Touching Sir Robert Sherley, hee was to expect no other satisfaction; his enemie was dead, and at the Caspian sea the King had suffi∣ciently honoured him: but to speak truly, the Pot-shaugh had then no af∣fection to him, when by reason of his age hee was disabled to doe him fur∣ther service; adding (but out of an Enemies mouth) that all his Ambassies and messages to the Princes of Christendome were frivolous and counter∣feit: But when our Ambassadour objected, he was in person there to justi∣fie his authority, that he had the Kings Letter of credence to testifie, sign'd and stampt by the Shaugh himselfe; and that it had beene a ridiculous pre∣sumption in Sherley to have dared to contest with Abbas to his face, if hee had beene an Impostor; the Favorite had not wherewith to answer, save that so our Ambassador pleas'd to lend him that Phirman Sir Robert Sherley had brought in his defence, hee would returne it him next day, with his Masters speach concerning it. A vexation it must needs be to my Lord Ambassadour, to treat in this uncivill sort by a malicious proxy: necessitie forced it. Three dayes passed, ere Mahomet-Ally-beg would vouchsafe to returne the Letter, or give that satisfaction he had promised; at length he came and told the Ambassadour that the King had lookt upon it, had denied it to be his, and in a great rage had burnt it; wishing Sir Robert Sherley would depart his Kingdome, be∣cause (old, and as hee thought) troublesom. It was in vaine to chalenge the pragmatique Pagan in point of honour, nor knew he any recourse by justice to ease himselfe. We all were verily perswaded, he never shew'd it to the King, nor had any way enquired of him concerning it. The truth is, he had beene brib'd, but by whom, is unnecessarie to speak of, it may be wee did but conjecture it; yet no doubt, Abbas was hereby too much de∣famed; his justice, and discretion, and courage would have proceeded otherwise: besides, his protestation against Nogdibeg (as wee have noted) and Ebrahym Chan his sonne, not daring to shew himselfe in Court, till Synall Chan mediated his peace, (not that he, but his Father had offended) made it as apparant as the Sunne, that there was jugling: the truth is, Sir Robert Sherley's old age and disability to serve the Persian,
made them sleight and cashier his pension; even then when hee most ex∣pected thanks and other acknowledgements. But, such is the weak na∣ture of man, especially when they trust too much upon worldly Princes or any arme of flesh, that God is angry: for thereby we rely too strongly upon secondarie helps, and contemne in some sort, Gods gracious provi∣dence: hence came those discontents, nay that arrow of Death that arre∣sted him; the 13 of July (and in lesse than a fortnight after our entring Casbyn) he gave this miserable & fickle world an ultimum vale in his great clymacterick: and (wanting a fitter place of buriall) we intombed him un∣der the threshold of his owne house in this Citie, without much ceremo∣nie. Hee was brother to two active Gentlemen Sir Anthony and Sir Tho∣mas Sherleys: a family not needing hyperboles. Hee was the greatest tra∣veller in his time, and no man had eaten more salt than he, none had more relisht the mutabilities of Fortune. He had a heart as free as any man: his patience was more Philosophicall than his Intellect, having small acquain∣tance with the Muses: many Cities he saw, many hills climb'd over, and tasted of many severall waters; yet Athens, Parnassus, Hippocrene were strangers to him, his Notion prompted him to other imployments: hee had tasted of sundry Princes favours: by Rodulph the second hee was created a Palatine of the Empire; and by Pope Paul. 3. an Earle of the sa∣cred Pallace of Lateran; from whom he had power to legitimate the In∣dians; and from the Persian Monarch had enricht himselfe by many me∣riting services: but obtained least (as Scipio, Caesar, Bellisarius, &c.) when he best deserved, and most expected it. Ranck mee with those that honour him: and in that he wants the guilded trophees and hyeroglyphicks of ho∣nour to illustrate his wretched Sepulchre (his vertue can out-brave those bubbles of vanitie, Facta ducis vivunt: and till some will doe it better) ac∣cept this Vltima amoris expressio, from him, who so long traveld with him, that so much honour'd him. After land-sweats, and many a storme by Sea, This hillock aged Sherleys rest must be. He well had view'd Armes, men, and fashions strange In divers Lands. Desire so makes us range. But turning course, whilst th' Persian Tyrant he With well dispatched charge, hop'd glad would be; See Fortunes scorn! under this Doore he lyes, Who living, had no place to rest his eyes. With what sad thoughts, mans mind long hopes doe twine, Learn by anothers losse, but not by thine. Post exant latos terrae{que} maris{que} laboree, Parvula Sherleyum nunc tenet urna senem. Arma, viros, habitus, diversas nomine gentes Contemplans, placuit sic novitatis Amor. Deinde retro relegens cursū mādata Tyranno Vndi{que} Persarum, dum placitura refert. Ludibrium fati! tegitur sub limine tecti, Viventi nullus cui modo limes erat. Quam deplorandis spes long as inchoat ausis Mens hominum; exemplo sed sine disce tuo. Nor can it seeme impertinent, if I add somwhat to the deserving Memo∣rie of his Wife, that thrice worthy and undaunted Lady, Teresia; to this day constant to our company. The Country shee first drew breath in, is Cyrcashia, that which Pomp. Mela called Sargacia; upon Palus Maeotis (ad∣joyning Georgia) & 'twixt the black and Caspian seas. Her birth was Christi∣an; her degree Noble: by accident she was mewd in the Haram of Persia, (10000 more he never sees:) was of no kin to the King, but by his benevo∣lence
bestowed on this man she so long liv'd with, she so much cherished. At what time her beloved Lord lay dead, and she halfe dead through a long dissentery, to comfort her (after the fashion of Persia) one Iohn a Dutch man, a Jew, a Painter; regarding neither her sex, her faith, her melancholly; complots with Mamet-Ally-beg to undoe her, by pretending a deepe engagement her husband was in to one Crole a Flemmin, & (know∣ing hee was dead) bad her ask him if it were not true; if hee denied it, it should be forfeited. She might have pay'd them by like Sophistry, that if he would affirme it, she would pay it them. But, they haste to the Cawsee or Justice to attach her goods, and a faithfull honest Gentleman of our company has quick notice of it, Mr. Robert Hedges by name, who hastens to her house and perswades her to make quick conveyance: at which, the amazed Lady tears the Sattin quilt she lay upon, and with her feeble hands shewes that pathetique vertue a stronger could not well have bettered; and taking thence a Cabinet, some Jewells and rich Jems, intreats that worthy Gentleman to safegard them, till the danger was gone: he readily obeyes, and is no sooner out of doores, when Iohn the Boor enters with supercilious looks, attended by some Pagan Sergeants, who (without much talk to her, or pitty to her distresse) rifled about, broke-ope her Chests, and carried away what was valuable or vendible; some rich Vests, costly Tarbants, and a Dagger of great price; but finding no Jewells (such they had seene him weare, and the Oestrich Feather also, which they had wooried in their Ostrich appetite) they grew madded with shame, and made her Horses, Camells, and Asses beare them company, not caring if the Lady starved. The Gentleman, so soone as the skie was cleare, re∣turn'd, and besides his words of comfort, gladded her heart in delivering her her Jewels againe, of double value by that conquest: without which good hap, I am perswaded her other fortune reacht not to fifty pound: a small revenue for so brave a Lady; and especially usefull is money in those uncharitable Regions, where women are made slaves to libidinous Pa∣gans: but God provided better for her, and (beyond our expectation) has placed her in Rome, where I heare shee now most happily enjoyes her selfe. Like discontents, long conflict with flames of Adversity, and foureteene dayes consuming of a deadly flux (it may be eating too much fruit, or suck∣ing in too much chil ayre on Taurus caused it) brought that religious Gen∣tleman Sir Dodmore Cotton the Ambassador, in the vigour of his age, to an immortall home: the 23 of July (14 dayes after Sir Sobert Sherley) he bad us Adieu; our duty commanding us to see him buried in the best sort wee could. A dormitory we obtained in Cazbyn amongst the Armenian graves, who also with their Priests assisted the holy ceremonie: his horse (which was led before) had a black velvet Saddle on his back: his Coffin wee co∣vered with a crimson satten quilt (black they account not of) lyned with purple Taffata; upon the horse were lay'd, his Bible, Sword, and Hatt: Mr. Hedges, Mr. Stodoart, Mr. Emmery, Mr. Molam, Dick th'Interpreter, and such others of his followers as were healthy, attended the Corps; & Doctor Goch a reverent Gentleman, buried him: where hee rests peaceably till the resurrection: And, although his singular vertue and memorie cannot
perish (evehit ad Aethera virtus) yet I wish with all my heart, hee had a Monument; some more eminent memoriall. He was I assure you, vivum omnis virtutis exemplar; and I wish I could better expresse my love, than by decking his herse with this impolisht Epicaedium. Lo! Noble Cotton far from home hath found A resting place in the Assyrian ground. His countries Love, his Duty to his King So far, a willing heart from home did bring. Harden thy tendernesse; no danger feare: The way to heaven alike is every where. En! procul a patriis situs est Cottonius oris, Anglus in Assyria contmulatus humo. prestitit haec Patriae, jussisque potentibus almi Principis, obsequiis officiosus amor. Excute mollitiem, quicunque pericula lentus Causaris, Coelo par fit ubique via. Wee have small joy to stay here any longer: three Ambassadors wee have buried: and though the Pot-shaugh seeme to pitty us (for as an assurance of his kind respect, he sent each of us, two long coats or vests of cloth of gold) yet, hee may call himselfe a miserable man that hangs his welfare upon the smiles of Persia. We are ready to be gone, but cannot go till Mahomet-Ally-beg blow us away; and we danc'd long attendance ere he would give us a Phirman for our safe travell, and that Letter we desired from the Persian King to our most gracious Soveraign. At length we got it, wrapt up in a peece of cloth of gold, fastned with a silken string, and sealed with a stamp of Arabic letters, after the mode of Asia. Our Phirman or Pasport of safety, sealed with a stamp of letters in Inck, take thus interpreted. THe high and mighty Starre, whose Head is covered with the Sunne; whose Motion is comparable to the highest Fyrma∣ment; whose Imperiall Majesty is come from Asharaph, and hath dispatched the Lord Ambassador of the English King, &c. The Command of the great King is this; That his Followers bee con∣ducted from our Pallace of Casbyn to Saway, and by the Daraguod of Saway to the City of Coom, and by the Sultan of Coom to the City of Cashan, &c. Through all my Territories, faile not my com∣mand. I also command them a safe and peaceable travell. From Casbyn POT-SHAVV ABBAS. August. An. Dom. 1628. Asfendermed-maw. Hegira. 1008. So, after thirty dayes stay in Cazbyn, about the midst of July wee de∣parted. But ere we go farre, let us bid farewell to Mahomet-Ally-beg our
small friend; and according to his worth let others know him. His birth∣place is Parthia (from Parah to fructifie,) his Almuten was calculated, the aspects found happy; If from a Costermonger to bee next the King may be call'd happy: and in him the matchavillyan motto was approved, a dram of good fortune is better than a pound of vertue. In that happy minute of all minutes, Abbas by accident cast his eye upon him; a magick infusion it had it seemes, for from the Apple-basket, he is roab'd in gold, and quickly made the Magnet of Persia; his yeerely revenue at our be∣ing there, I heard by many men estimated a hundred and forty thousand pounds sterlin: and well may bee, not any Mirza, Cawn, Sultan, nor Beg∣lerbeg that depended upon the Pot-shaughs smiles, but in an awfull com∣plement, made him their Anchor by some annuall piscash, bribe, or other: his presence was very comly, and taking; of a sweet countenance, made amiable by many complementall smiles: hee is of a big full body; large eyes and nose; and huge mustachoes: was at this time aged forty, a third part of which hee had beene Fortunes minion. But no sooner was old Abbas by bold death struck from the helme of Persia; and young Soffy his Grand-sonne made the royall Stear-man, but his supercilious glances grew humbled, yea, his dazeling splendor (eclipst in the setting of his Master) becomes quickly darkned: his late pride and avarice heaped all mens con∣tempt upon him, in so much as none now but dares to brand him with becoming Epethites; yea, his estate so vast that it threatned to presse him to eternal cōfusion. Of all others, the Shyrazian Dynast darted him frowns of death; but (non semper feriet, quodcun{que} minabitur arcus) a black mist of unexpected destruction fuming from young Soffees browes (of the right pedegree) sends poore Emangoly to an untimely grave, and the Beglerbeg his gallant sonne to beare him company: neither to be descended of loyall and Princely Syres; to have Abbas his oath of safety; to be Protector of Persia during the nonage of the Infant King; to have famoused the crown by many heroick services; nor to bee Emangoly-cawn, could repell the deadly shaft of jealosie: but in the Meridian of his course and glory, in the extreame of his hopes, and when so long a farewell was least thought on; hee and his are hewed downe; prophesied of by that Satyric Poet. Ad generum Cereris sine caede & vulnere pauci discendunt Tyranni, his great pride, his infamous cruelty at Ormus and Arabia, crying out for justice against him. Whiles Mahomet-Ally-beg shakes off his raggs of dis∣content, and a fresh ingratiates himselfe; at this day moving in a spheare of content and purest mettall. A word of Shaugh-Abbas also. Abbas the Persian Emperour, was of low stature, (a Gyant in policy) his aspect quick, his eyes small and flaming, and without any palpebrae or hayre over them: he had a low forehead; a high and hawked nose; a sharp chin; and after the mode of Persia, beardlesse; his mustachoes were exceeding long, and thick, and turned downwards. He was born in the yeere of Mahomet 938, King of Hery 50 yeeres, Emperour of Persia &c 43; dyed aged 70; in the yeere of our accompt 1628, of their Aera 1008, in Cazbeen. His heart, his bowells, his carcasse, were parted and bu∣ried in Ally-Mosched (neere Cufa,) in Cazbyn, in Ardaveel, at Coom some say, few know the certainty.
Abbas King of Persia The Easterne Monarchs at this day continue the custome of their an∣tient predicessors; who from time to time delighted more in Epethites of vertue, than in any Titles of Kingdomes or Provinces. They accoun∣ted it an effeminate vain-glory to stuffe their letters, or when they sent their Ambassadors abroad to forraine Potentates to guild their greatnesse by accumulation of Names: and in which respect, the German Emperor got little in that late Letter he sent to Abbas, the beginning of which was so fild with Titles and members of his Empire, that after hee had heard halfe a dozen of them read, he had no patience to stay the reading of the rest, but departed in anger; as finding those no way materiall to his bu∣sinesse. Instead of them, these Persian Kings, and other great ones of Asia, exceed (with no lesse prolixity) in adorning their Letters and dispatches with hyperboles of their resemblance to the Sunne; their affinity to the
Stars: and with the sweetest and rarest of fruits, flowers, gems, &c. As also of wise, famous, sweet, victorious, mercifull, just, beautifull, couragious, &c. Howbeit, the Titles of the Persian Monarch may be these: 1 Pharsy, 2 Arac, 3 Sher∣van, 4 Sablestan, 5 Canda∣hor, 6 Tocharistan, 7 E∣rey, 8 Zagathai, 9 Mozen∣dram, 10 Turquestan, 11 Syrian, 12 Phargan, 13 Thalecan, 14 Maurenahar, 15 Kalsistan, 16 Sigistan, 17 Maqueron, 18 Istigi∣az, 19 Kyrman, 20 La∣ristan, 21 Syndè, 22 Ar∣mussa, 23 Larr, 24 Iaziry, 25 Chusistan, 26 Ajaman, 27 Diarbeck, 28 Gorgè 29 Armeny, 30 Karkash, 31 Vaspracan, 32 Aramnoh, 33 Adozar, 34 owrachow, 35 Iarvall, 36 Deriob-ko∣rasan, 37 Deriob-Farsee, 38 Phrat, 39 Diglan, 40 Arass, 41 Syndè.ABBAS Emperour or Pot-shaw of 1 Persia, 2 Par∣thia, 3 Media, 4 Bactria, 5 Ortispana, 6 Chorasan, 7 and Harya; King over the Ouzbeg 8 Tattar, 9 Hyr∣cania, 10 Draconia, 11 Evergeta, 12 Parmenia, 13 Hydaspia, 14 Sogdiana, 15 Paropamisa, 16 Drangi∣ana, 17 Aracbosia, 18 Mergiana, 19 Carmania, 20 Gedrosia, & as far as the stately river 21 Indus. Sul∣tan of 22 Ormus, 23 Chorra, 24 Arabia, 25 Susiana, 26 Chaldaea, 27 Mesopotamia, 28 Georgia, 29 Arme∣nia, 30 Iberia, 31 Mengrellia. Mirza or Prince of the Imperious Mountains of 32 Ararat, 33 Taurus, 34 Caucasus, and 35 Periardo. Commander of all crea∣tures from the 36 Caspian Sea, to the 37 Gulph of Persia: Lord of the foure rivers of Paradize, 38 Eu∣phrates, 39 Tigris, 40 Araxis and 41 Indus: Of true discent from King Mortis-Ally: Governour of all Sultans, Emperour of Mussulmen; Bud of honour, Myrrour of vertue, Rose of delight, &c. And although to the modest reader a great deale of Ostentation may appeare in these blustering Titles and Epithites, yet will they seeme as nothing if we paralell them with the Kings of old, and at this day in other places. That of Cyrus may be excus'd; recorded by Ezra. An Mun.. 3419. The Lord God of Heaven, hath given me all the Kingdomes of the earth. Domitian (like Pharaoh, proudly scoffing, who is the Lord?) in all his pro∣clamations begun thus: I am your Lord God Domitian, (the God of Flyes:) Caligula wrote himselfe, Deus opt. max. & Iupiter Latialis. If he could have satisfied his Atheism with the title of an earthly God or of Iove, Menander and Tzetza had defended him, saying from Homer, Rex est viva Dei imago in terris, & Reges omnes olim vocarûnt Ioves. Sapores sonne to Misdates the Persian Monark, Anno Domini 315, began his letter to god∣ly Constantius the Emperour in this sort (as is in lib. 17. Marcellini) I Sapo∣res, King of Kings, equall to the Starres, and brother to the Sunne and Moone. Cozrhoes also (Ormisdaes sonne) in the yeere of grace 620 (the first of the Mahomitan accompt) scorning those of Deus terrhenus, or of homo a Deo secundus, blowes himselfe up in this swelling proem to Mori∣tius the unhappy Emperor: I Chozroe! great King of Kings, Lord of Lords, Ruler of Nations, Prince of peace, salvation of men; among gods, a man good and ever; among men, a God most glorious: the great Conque∣rour, arising with the Sun, giving lustre to the night, a Heroe in discent: from which affected pride, the idolatrous slaves begun to worship him, and to clamour out Tu es nostra salus, & in te credimus: and hence the Poet to illustrate his Bees sings thus of them. Preterea Regem non sic Aegyptus & ingens Lydia, nec populi Parthorum, aut Medus Hydaspes Observant, &c. Aegypt nor Lydia do their Kings obey Nor Medes nor Parthians halfe so much as they.
From their Examples other Pagans in these our times arrogate no lesse supereminency in Titles. Solyman T'saccus (that wrathfull Turq', thus in∣tituled his wormsmeat) King of Kings (of slaves hee should say) Lord of Lords, most huge Emperour of Const. and Trepiz. Ruler of Europe, Afriq, and Asia: Commander of the Ocean (of a few rotten boats hee meant) Conquerour of Assyria, Arabia, &c. And Amurat his Grand-son thus, God of the Earth, Captaine of the Universe, most sacred Angell, Mohu∣mets beloved, &c. At length the home-bred Chyna cryes roast-meat but th'other day sending his silly Ambassador to Abbas with a witty Epistle, thus directed, To his slave, the Sophy of Persia, th'undanted Emperour of the whole world (a well read man) sends greeting: Neither the Am∣bassadors bragges that his Master had six hundred great Cities, two thou∣sand wall'd Townes, a thousand impregnable Castles, sixty millions of slaves, and a hundred and twenty thousand millions of crownes yeerely revenue, could make his King admired, or priviledge himselfe from durty welcome, the haughty Persian spurning him back againe, to assure his Master they neither beleeved him to be The beauty of the whole Earth, nor (as he also writes himselfe) heyre apparant to the glorious Sun. His next neighbour and he are at odds for Title, the Tattar I meane (vulgarly the great Cham) a Cam indeed in his mistaken genealogy: for forgetting that his great Grandsyre Cingis Cham was a black-smith, he proclaims him∣selfe Sun to the highest God, & quintessence of the purest spirit: & thence is ingendred that frantick custome of his, every day after dinner to have his Herald by sound of Trumpet, eccho out to all other Kings and Po∣tentates of the World, that hee has din'd, and they have leave to go to dinner: a notable favour if they have not dyn'd before him: what think you of the Peguan Monark, of him of Mattacala, and Manicongo, that nourish so good a conceit of their radiant beauty and Majesty, that Am∣bassadors and others are commanded (when they have businesse) to creep like worms, and to hide their faces, and grovell on the ground, lest their eyes bee forfeited in daring to gaze on so much lustre: or of that brave Monomotaphan, that seldome goes abroad or shewes himselfe, in compas∣sion to his people, lest they should bee struck blind in eying him, a cur∣taine reverberats the beames that issue from his face of glory; they are permitted to use their eares to admire his champs when he eat, and the gulps when hee drinks, but they pay soundly for it, at every gulp and cough the coughs sometimes you think of purpose) they shout for joy and by continued clamours not only revive Stentor but make the whole City ring againe. Alas good Prester-Iohn (the Neguz they call him) osten∣tation tickles thee; hast thou never read Saint Cypian ad Quir. In nullo gloriandum est, nam nostrum nihil est: for want of such helps thou deck'st thy Myter with fifteene provinciall Titles, and that thou art the head of the Church; the favorite of God, the pillar of Faith; issued from Solo∣mon, David Indah, and Abraham; Syons prop, extract from the Virgins hand, sonne of Saint Peter and Saint Paul by the spirit, of Nahu by the flesh; in these more vagrant, than thy other restlesse motions: and in vain dost thou seclude thy selfe from view of man by a thin lawne, since in thy welling impostumes thy Portraict is discovered; a Canker spreading North
after the other way, to that other kind of Christian, by name Inanowich a tyrannick Muscovite, whose Coronation Anno Domini 1584 was cele∣brated with wonderfull magnificence, besides his furrs loading himselfe two and thirty bubbles ostentation. Welfare Aurelius, Saladyn, and Tamberlane, Heroes as great, as victorious, and as terrible to the world as any of these monsters wee have named; who all their lives detested flattery, blusht at their praises, and thought themselves unworthy any fa∣stidous Epethites, at their burialls causing their wynding-sheet to bee dis∣playd as an Epitomè of all they merited; and this a high and oft proclai∣med, Pulvis & Vmbra sumus, fumus, fuimus, &c. We left Cazbyn at ten at night, therby avoyding Sol's too much warmth; and at his first discovery from the Antipodes, got into Perissophoon; a small Towne, but memorable in the sweet coole water we had there to quench our thirst with; an Element more usefull than fire, in Sun-burnt Asia. Our next Manzeil was at Asaph, at Begun our next, observable in a royall Car∣vans-raw or Hospitall of charity, erected at the cost and care of Tahamas late King of Persia: and did the water (too brackish and unhealthy there) but correspond with other delights, it might better merit commendation. To Saway we got next night, a Towne both great and fruitfull; but that it is the ruine of old Tygranocerta (as Bonacciolus guesses at) I shall never cre∣dit: that it was Messabatha, or Artacana I more easily beleeve it. The Pole is here raised 35 degrees, 7 minutes; a City I may call it: It pleasantly upon a rising hill gives ground to twelve hundred houses, a sweet rivolet from Baronta refreshing it; from which and the peoples industry, the thankfull earth retributes a Tribute in variety of choyce fruits, and grain, as Wheat, Rice, Barley, Figs, Pomgranads, Olives, and Honey; the seven, the promist land in the 8 Deut. 8. is commended for: but whether it bee the relict of Vologocerta built by Vologeses the Parthian I know not; I am sure of this, no place I ever came in more delighted mee for Aëriall musick: of all the Quire the Nightingale twenty together (here call'd Bulbulls) clayming the preheminence. And after so much melancholy, with Ovid let me chirp for company. Scribere me voces avium Phylomela coëgit, Quae cantu cuncta sexuperat volucres. Duleis amica veni! noctis solatia praestans, Inter aves eteanim nulla tibi similis, Tu phylomela potes vocûm discrimina mille, Mille potis vatios ipsa reserit modos. Nam quamvis aliae volucres modulamina tentent, Nulla potest modulis aequidare tuis. Insuper est avium spatiis garrire diurnis, Tu cantare simul nocte dieque potes. I must salute the curious Phylomel, Which all the birds in singing doth excel. Come pretty friend! my solace in the night, In all the Grove I find no such delight. A Thousand warbling Notes thy throat displayes, Which thy sweet musick chants as many wayes. The vulgar birds may strive to equall thee, Yet never can attaine like harmony. Their mirth doth last no longer than the day, But thine doth chase the silent night away. Our next nights travell was over large plains, elevated in many parts by artificiall mounts, cut into many trenches; shewing many famous ruines of passed warres. Notable no doubt in many gallant skirmishes and most memorable in Luoullus his captivating Methridates that learned
King of Pontus; but what that grand Epicure fortunatly got, Marc' Cras∣sus the most covetous and richest Roman lost, after his impidus sacriledge at Ierusalem, ravishing thence the holy relicks, and so much treasure as out-valued six Tun of gold, puft up with so much wealth, and his victories amongst the Jewes, resolves with his fifty thousand men to forrage Persia, but Herodes (sonne of Methridat the third) couragiously opposes him, cuts his Army in peeces, takes his baggage, and the avaritious Consul by Spur∣nia the Generall is made his prisoner; and to glut his thirst (divine ven∣geance so ordering) as Tomyris did to Cyrus, the Parth' serv'd Crassus so; forcing him to quaffe, health to death, in pouring downe his throat mol∣ten gold, and by which Tryumph the Romans power was exterminate in Parthia 53 yeeres before the birth of Christ, yet, long the Romans sorrowed not, for Mark Antony five yeeres after by his Generall, affronted them with better successe: the Parthians fight nor flight at that time help∣ed them, their Prince Pacorus by death disminating them: affrighted in greater measure, when Phraortes (Mezentis, some name the parricide) depos'd the valiant Orodes from crowne and life, treason (the Devills ver∣tue) perpetrating that, the Romans could not do by generous conflict. Antony attempts revenge and conquest; but adverse luck made him thrive in neither. Augustus (in whose reigne our blessed Saviour became flesh, and Ianus Temple Was opened) did by treaty what his predecessors could not do by force; prevailing with Phraortes to vaile bonet to the Romans sparkling Dyadem. But 230 yeeres after, one Artaxerxes a native Per∣sian, and royally discended, shakes off that loathed servitude, not only out-braving the Roman, but by a three dayes fight and victory over Arta∣banus, revived the Persian title and name, Parthia for above 500 yeeres formerly monarchizing. Alexander Severus (from Iulius Caesar the 24 Emperour) succeeded Heliogahalus or Bassianus the lustfull, and receives a pragmatick letter from the new King to re-deliver what antiently ador∣ned the crowne of Persia. It repugn'd the Roman Majesty, and there∣upon marches to give an account, but in carelesse passing over Euphrates, is so suddenly charg'd by Artaxerxes, that hee is routed shamefully; his bad luck not ending there, for Maximinus the Thracian bereaved him of his Empire, the German villaines of his life; his vertuous mother Mam∣maea (Origens proselite) associating in his death, as shee had in glory for∣merly. Licinius Valerianus sirnamed Colobus; under-took to rule the Em∣pire; and took upon him to over-rule the rising Persian: but his big words, nor great Army could not do what a Supream Judge had decreed other∣wise; for Sapores with an undaunted company denies him entrance, and in the tryall the Romans were miserably defeated, and which was worse, Valerian himselfe is imprisoned, and to his dying day (to the astonishment of all proud Tyrants) made a foot-stoole for Sapores to tread upon, when∣soever he mounted: the Justice of Almighty God herein was singularly manifest, by compensating the cruell Emperor in this odious servitude, for his intollerable pride and rigor against the innocent Christians, many thou∣sands of whom he martyr'd, amongst whom Saint Lawrence cruelly broy∣led upon a gridiron. But wee have wandred too farre in reviving the me∣mory of Parthia: by this wee are entred Coom▪ where we refresht our
scorched and wearied bodies three dayes: In which time wee could not chuse but gather something. COOM, (in the latitude of 34 degrees 40 minutes) is a City of good note, in Parthia; placed in the mid-way 'twixt those two royall Cities, Cazbyn and Spawhawn. It is scituate in an ample and faire sandy plain, and yeelds every way an exact horizon. Coom, gives place to no other Towne in Persia for antiquity; the ruines appearing at this day, gaine some be∣leife in the inhabitants, whose common saying is, it was once compara∣ble to Babylon. She has varied into many severall names: the first I meet with is Gauna, it may bee that which some call Guriana; erroniously if so, since Guriana has 37 degrees; and Coom not 35. Arbacta after that (from Arbaces, who in the yeere after Adam 3146 tore asunder the Assyrian Dyadem, by overture of that monster Sardanapalus the thirty sixt Monarch of the world from Ninus) but by Diodore and Ptolomy, Coama: And by her latitude and antiquity, seemes to me to have beene Hecatompylon, rather than Spawhawn, whose old name was Aspa, and from which shee never wholly varied; and at this day (the latitude somewhat differing) chang∣ing no lesse in the ill pronunciation of divers men; Coim some call it, Kom and Kome others: the people there name it Koom. A pleasant, fruitfull, and salubrious place it is, I can assure you: shaken with no great winds, clouded with no moist foggs, nor so much parcht by flaming Sol, but can finde coole refrigerating breezes breathing favourably each morne and evening to refresh it. In the Sunnes ambition it has excellent houses to lenifie his beams, and umbrellaes in their orchards to shade and taste their delicious fruits in, in this City infinity abounding, (owing their mellow∣ing to a sweet rivolet, that streams in a silver current from tke Coronian or Acro-cerawnian hills,) and grapes also, good and in plenty; excellent Pomgranads, Mellons of both kinds, Pomcytrons, Apricocks, Plums, Peaches, Peares, Pistachoes, Almonds, Apples, Quinces, Cherryes, Figs, wall-Nuts, small-Nuts, Berryes, and the best Wheat-bread in Persia, Gum∣bazellello excepted: the Peach or Malae Persica is had here; a fruit and leafe so much resembling mans heart and tongue, that the Aegyptick Preists dedicated it unto their greatest Goddesse Isis as the truest Hyerogliphick or symbol of unfained affection. Coom has two thousand houses, most of them of more than common structure; well-built, well-form'd, well fur∣nished; the streets are spatious, the Buzzar beautifull, the Mosque is fa∣mous; made venerable, and richly adorn'd by enshrining the rotten car∣casse of once amiable Fatyma, Mortis-Ally's wife, and sole heyre to Ma∣homet the Prophet of all Moorish Mussulmen. The Temple is round, of epirotiq' forme; the Tomb is rais'd three yards high, and covered with velvit; the ascent is by three or foure steps of refined silver. Such time as Tamberlang the victorious Tattar (so I may well stile him; since in eight yeeres hee conquer'd more than the warlike Romans could in eight hundred) returned loaden with spoyle and majestick triumph, ha∣ving hammered the brazen face of the Turkish bravery An. Dom. 1397, Heg. 777, this poore Coom parched (among many others) in the insuffe∣rable heat of his incensed fury; not from any eye of rage or envie hee darted at him, but from that simple affront Hoharo-mirza (call'd allso
B'heder-cawn) spurr'd on by jealousie, put upon the triumphant Tattar; a complement so much mistaken, that losse both of life and Crowne were thereby forfeited, making many men & Towns concomitate his misery; this place esecially (which but for the Ardaveilyan Syet requesting mercie, and for Fatyma's Sepulchre) had beene levell'd with the lowly earth, ploughed up and salted: but in the sable weed she now is apparelled, shee may sigh with melancholy Statius. — Death is the common friend to all: for what ere yet begun shall end. Quicquid habet Ortus finem timet, ibimus omnes Ibimus.— From Coom we rode to Zenzen; and thence to Cashan, a gallant Citie; from Coom six and thirty miles: the way was easie and plaine, but somewhat sandie. CASHAN, (where the Artique elevation is 34 degrees, 7 minutes: longit. 86 deg.) is the second Towne in Parthya for all sorts of praises; Spawhawn is her Metropolis, whence shee is distant North, sixty English miles; and from Cazbyn South two hundred and ten, or there-abouts. Whence the name derives it selfe, the illiterat Cashanians could not tell; wee must therefore search the dim leaves of Time oblitterated by obli∣vion. I know not whether it be that old Ambrodax in many old Authors famoused; the position not name makes mee guesse it. I once thought it was Ctesiphon, the best seat of the Arsacidae; but I now perceive Ptolomy states that Towne 'twixt Seleucia and Babylon: more probably it may be that Tigranocerta recorded by Straho in his Chorography, than that Saway is it, after Bonacciolus. The name Cashan I imagine is borrowed either from Cushan, in the Syriack signifying heat or blacknesse: or from Cassan-Mirza sonne to Hocen sonne of Ally: or from Shaw-Cashan (sonne to Axan begot by Tangrolipix Anno Heg. 582 of our account 1202,) subjected by the great Cham: or (which best pleases me) from Vsan-Cashan the Armenian (Acen or Cassan-beg some call him) who in the yeare of our Lord 1470, of Ma∣homets hegira or flight from Mecca 850, vanquisht Malaoncres (call'd Ab∣dulla also) the last of Tamerlangs Progeny ruling Persia. Cashan at this day, is a great and lovely Citie; well seated, well built, well peopled: over-topt by no hill, unseasoned by no marishes, watered by no great streame; which augments the heat, chiefly when Sol resides in Cancer: which rages there in no lesse violence is Scorpio; not that in the Zodiack; but reall stinging Scorpions, which in great numbers in∣gender here. It is a little Serpent (a finger long) but of great terror in the sting, inflaming such they prick with their invenom'd Arrow so highly that some die, none avoyd madnesse a whole day; and as it was said of another Vna eadem{que} manus fert vulnus opem{que}: so to such as are stung by Scorpions is no such remedy as by the oyle of Scorpions to be cured. The Serpents head joyn'd to the wounded part, Fitly is said to heale th'infected smart. Like Telaphus cur'd by Achilles dart. Quae nocuit serpens, fertur caput illius apte Vulneribus jungi, sanat quae sauciat ipsa. Vt Larissaea curatus Telaphus hasta. And from hence growes that much us'd Persian adage and curse, May a Scorpion of Cashan sting thee. But which is more remarkable, they say it,
we found it true (some of them creeping into our Ruggs as we slept) they never hurt a stranger. Cashan is not lesse than York or Norwich, above foure thousand families are accounted in her: the houses are fairely built, the streets be large and comly; the Mosqus and Hummums are curiously painted and ceruleated, with a feigned Turquoise: the Buzzar is spatious and uniforme; furnished with Silks, Damasks, rich Carpets, Sattens, and cloth of gold; no part of the Persian Monarchy shewes better, or more variety, nor a people more exactly industrious. The gardens, and fruits, and corne, are by the ele∣borat Tymariots made to fructifie, and being cultivated retribute a gainfull acknowledgement. The Carravans-raw in this Citie is an inimitable (if not so, an unparaleld) Arch Fabrick, by many degrees preceding all Car∣ravans-raws in Persia; for this is able to lodge the Court of the greatest Potentate in Asia: but built by Abbas for Travellers to repose in gratis, to shew the world hee joyed in some act of charity: the whole building is grounded with Marble, six foot high; the residue is brick are fied in the Sunne, varnisht and coloured with knots and fancies of Arabick characters, in azure, red, and white, in oyle, after the common mode of Persia. It is a perfect quadrant; each angle is from one another two hundred paces, the whole eight hundred: in the umbelique or mid-part of this spatious Court is a quadrangular Tanck or Pond fill'd (by an Aquae-duct) with chrystallin water: this royall Inne, is also circum-volv'd with such fragrant and spati∣ous gardens as rather exceed than want to display the founders magnifi∣cence: more, I have not to denotate, save that many severall conjectures, by many severall learned men and Antiquaries, have passed, whence the Magi or wise men came, that presented our blessed Saviour with their of∣frings, and were without doubt the first fruits, and called of the Gentiles: and albeit call'd Magi (or deeply read in Nature) yet no question, they were illuminated and wayted the accomplishment of that Prophesie of Balaam, in 24 Num, 17. There shall come a Starre out of Iacob and a Scepter shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite the corners of Moab and destroy the chil∣dren of Seth.The Magi of Persia. They gathered, I say, more from this of their Prophet than any of their own Astrologick observations. That they were Gentiles is apparant; that they came from the East undeniable: but from what Citie or Province, very disputable; though not very necessary. The word Ma∣gus is most proper to Persia; Persia is East from Bethlehem. And many are of opinion they came from hence or Shushan, where then flourisht a famous Academy. The people here have such a Tradition, that hence went those three wise men or Kings, which some say were intomb'd in Cullen: but few are of this opinion: Some say they came from Saba or Sheba in Sabea or Arabia, from Aethiopia, South; deceiv'd in Cush, Aethiops, but first in Araby. From Babylon some think they came; from Shushan some sup∣pose; from Ormus some guesse, as likely as it was Paradise: from Ceyloon, from Tabropan, from any place, no matter where; since the sacred pen∣men have beene silent in it. But if you please to trust a Frier, Frier Odoric of Friuli by name, Cashan was it. Yet I tie not my beliefe to such imper∣tinencies. Let me rather busie my braines in quest of what a Magus was, since Simon Magus made the name odious and Magicall; and under which
Title many Witches, Sorcerers, Inchanters, Hydro and Pyro-mantiques, and other Diaboliques have cloakt their trumperies and ungodlinesse. The name Magi therefore was a peculiar Epethite in Persia, in old times given to such as were learned: such as in other Languages and Nations are called Idiots, Phylosophers, Gymnosophists, Brachmans, Chaldaeans, Druides, and Bardhs; all of them excellently studious in Natures best parts and ver∣tues. Magus (sayes Suidas) is a derivative from Magusaeus, a relative to Ma∣gog son of Iapheth, son of Noah. Peucerus lib. de divinit. thus Prae-erant Ma∣gi religioni Persicae, ut in populo Dei Levitae, studiis{que} verae Philo-sophiae erant dediti; nec quisquam rex Persarum poterat esse, qui non antea Magorum disci∣plinam scientiam{que} percepisset &c. Common custom (sayes St. Hierom) con∣ceits Magitians to be Inchanters, but falsly, for (sayes Peter Martyr also) by the name Magi, were understand wise and honest men: by which resto∣monialls wee see they were no way to be scandaliz'd, nor such as now a∣dayes Impostors term themselves. They were also thus called, from their laborious scrutinies & cōtemplations into hidden causes: for by experience in Astronomie they not only bettered the theory but practick part, by ob∣serving the motion of the heavens, & influence of the starrs; from whence they divined notable events in Nature, earthquakes, inundations, eclipses, heat, mutations, &c. and also bettered their agriculture, and alternated the earths unaptnesse to frucifie: whereby also by a meditation of the won∣derfull order, Simmetry, and providence by which each creature was made and governed, they came to magnifie the Creator, the God of Nature. And from their diving into the occult causes of Nature, were called Magi∣call, though no other than a connexion of agents and patients in Na∣ture, respecting one another; by learned men made to produce such effects as to such as are ignorant of their causes seeme strange and wonderfull, Of such heare Mantuan. A Persian Mage he called is Who knowes Herbs, Stars and Deities. All three learnt in Persepolus. Ille penes Persas Magus est, qui sydera novit, Qui sciat herbarum vires, cultus{que} Deorum. Persepolis facit ista Magos, prudentia triplex. Leaving these, and Cashan: on the 23 of August, wee made Bizdebode our Manzeil, 18 miles off. Thence we rode to Natane or Tane, where Darius Anno M. 3635. breath his last by the treacherous hands of Bessus the per∣fidious Bactrian. The Lodge here as asham'd of such a memorie, seemes to hide itselfe 'twixt two loftie hills, from the eye of heaven: but from whose tops wee might discerne large vallyes thick sowne with Villages, and wa∣terd in many circum-gyrings. Thirty miles our last nights travell was; and next night we got to Reig, more than that it was one and twenty miles from Natan, not worth the memorizing: unlesse you will accept its di∣stance from Spahawn, nine English miles or three farsangs. And from Cas∣byn 260 or thereupon. And where I will give over a Diary, desiring no longer to defraud thy patience. For to Corranda, Deacow, Miscarroon, Corryn, Laccary, Corbet, Nazareils, Sabber-cawn, to Buldat thou commest to Bagdat; 130 farsangs distant. Others from Spawhawn go thus, to Golpi∣chan fortie forsangs, to Tossarchan fortie, to Mando fiftie, Hemmomezter
and Baroe, to Babylon foureteene more, in all 144 leagues, a way more easie but of greater distance. Of which Citie, as it was and is, few lines may be remembred. BABYLON, in Caldaea (or Keldan as now named) hath its denomi∣nation from that memorable confusion of Languages God Almighty or∣dained to check the insolent pride of Nymrod and his confederates, intend∣ing to raise up such a pile as should secure them from a second deluge, af∣frighted by that first Cataclysme 130 yeares before, and from Adams crea∣tion 1788. 2180 yeares before the incarnation of our Saviour; and admi∣rable it is to consider what multitudes of men were in the world in seven-score yeares, encreasing from eight persons, those that issued from the Ark upon Ararat in Armenia. This building was hastned by five hundred thousand men, in few yeares raising it from its basis (which was nine miles about) to above five thousand paces into the skie (whence Ovid fabled his Giants warres) Affectasseferunt regnum Coeleste Gyants, Alta{que} congestos struxisse ad sydera Montes. The heavens look't pale with wonder to be behold, With what attempts and rage Giants bold Sought to affront the gods, by raising high Mount upon mount, to inhabit in the skie. intending no doubt to peepe into heaven. But hee that sits above, and ac∣counts the best of mans power and policie but meere weaknesse and folly, not only distracted their designe, but severed them into seventie Compa∣nies, sending them seventie wayes to better imployments: from one tongue, the Hebrew (Goropius dreamt it was Dutch) ordaining seventy other Languages. But though the Tower of Babel stood for ever unfinished (albeit Alex∣ander the great by some months labour in vaine of 100000 men (made to desist by strange diseases and affrights) thought to have finisht it) the Citie notwithstanding swell'd to a prodigious greatnesse: and though Arphaxad (sonne of Sem sonne of Noah) begun to inhabit in this vale of Shynaear, yet Nimrod (sonne of Cush, or Iupiter Belus sonne of Cam, or Iupiter Hamon the accursed sonne of Noah) wrested it from his other kindred, yea behaved himselfe so proudly amongst his brethren, that to gratifie his memorie they deified him by name of Sudormyn, by the Romans converted into Saturne. Nimrod lived six and fiftie yeares after the beginning of Babell; hee at last gave way to Death, and was buried I know not where, some say at this place, some say at Persepolis. Idolatrie was soone hatcht in the world; Nimrods successours strove to make their hellish progenitors earthly gods: for after Ninus his sonne had erected many Temples to put his Grandsires Images in, he attracted infinit people to inhabit there; by whose labours hee not only agrandiz'd this Citie, but by their helps grew to tyrannize in the world, and to augment his Empire; whence, he is accounted the first that incroacht on others rights to satiate his ambition: and as he is named the first Emperour of the earth, so none died so miserably; for his wife Semiramys detruded him into prison: where shee made him die a hatefull death, such as became a monster. The Virago Queene sat confidently at the helme, and steered through an Ocean of stormes and miraculous pas∣sages;
till burning in flames of lust, in stead of embraces, hersonne Nynias (thought Amraphel and Mars) to revenge his Fathers death, slew her: but by that murder became mad; and in that frenzie marched against King Cancasus (Iaphets great grand-son) and subdued him: howbeit he himselfe was so serv'd by Abraham, such time as he rescued his Nephew Lot, cap∣tivated by Arioch, Tydal, and Chedorlaomer. Semyramis to eternize her me∣morie fought many brave Combats, and return'd oft times victorious; she subjected many Kings, subjugated many Provinces, built many famous Castles, Cities and Gardens; the ruines of some of them are in Medya, to this houre remaining. Wee will confine her into Babylon: where shee erected two inimitable Pallaces; one, was at the East end, th'orher, at the West; the first extended thirty, the other sixty furlongs; both were im∣mured with walls of stupendious height and architecture; but excelling those, she built another in the heart or center of Babylon, which she de∣dicated to Cush or Iupiter Belus; the shape whereof was of foure equila∣teralls or sides; from every angle were one thousand, in all foure thou∣sand paces: 'twas circled with a thick and towring wall; entred by foure gates of polisht brasse: in midst, was elevated a strong and stately Tower, upon which, eight other Towers rose one upon another, farre above the middle region: whence (from a continued serenity of the sky) the Priests or Caldaean Astrologers precisely markt the planetary motions (and if pos∣sible, to heare their rowling harmony;) for being above the clouds, they delighted to regard the exact light and magnitude of the Starres; their heliacall, acronicall, matutine, and vespertine motions, rising and falling; Apollo's progresse, the constellations; aspects, influences, and the like: and at the top of all, a Turret inricht with three great golden Images or Sta∣tuas, representing Iupiter, Ops, and Iuno, i. e. her father in law, her husband Ninny, and her selfe; continuing there in divine esteeme for many ages; and whereto (sayes Herodatus) in way of sacrifice, was yeerly consumed a hundred thousand Talents in franc-incense: till Cyrus An. Mun. 3432. by drayning Euphrates into other channells, entred this Epitomè of the world and ransackt her bravery. But I have not spoken all. Semyramis also circled this gallant City with a wall, which in after ages was call'd a wonder; some say Nabucha∣donozar made it, but an ancient Poet sings otherwise. Semyramis built Persian Babylon. Persarum statuit Babylona Semyramis Vrbem. The circuit of which Wall was (after Solynus) threescore miles En∣glish, or as hee reckons it, foure hundred and eighty furlongs. Diodorus Siculus computes three hundred and sixty five, each day in the yeere cha∣lenging a furlong. Quintus Curtius numbers three hundred fifty and eight, differing in his Arithmetic but seven furlongs. The compasse I ad∣mire at, but am amazed at the height and spissitude; two hundred cubits high it was, and fifty cubits thick; so thick and spacious, that at the top six Chariots might take the ayre, driving together abrest, not one before another. Nynus and Semyramis begun it bravely, yet Nabuchadnezzer and Nytocris his wife (daughter of Aliattes) beautified it, in a stupid admi∣ration
crying out, Is not this great Babel that I have built? a boast so much offending the sacred Majesty of God, that hee rent the Kingdome from that proud Assyrian, and made him a companion for beasts and birds, to the astonishment of all such Atheists. Cyrus by one battell at Borsippa, prostrated it and wreathed his Persian brow with that Monarchic Dya∣dem, Anno Mundi 3432, seventeen yeeres after the captivity of Iudah and Israel by Nabuzaradan his Liefetenant; five hundred and fifty two yeeres before the birth of our Saviour: after which, it was often vassaled. Seven∣ty nine yeeres after, Anno Mundi 3511 Artaxerxes Longimanus ruling Persia, the Prophet Ezdras went hence to rebuild the Temple at Ierusa∣lem, and thirteene yeeres after that was seconded by Nehemiah from Shu∣shan. The victorious Macedonian conquered it, Anno Mun. 3633, at which time (as Aristotle reports) one part of the City knew not in three dayes after, that the enemy had entred it: a vast bignesse, but easily credited, if Pausanias in Assyr. say true: Babylon, omnium quas unquam Sol aspexit Vr∣bium maxima &c. either (to parallell it with Ierusalem destroyed by Vespa∣tian) in their solemne sacrifices, in which times the people multiplyed; or rather to fulfill that prophesie, 51 Ieremiah 31, One Post shall runne to meet another to shew the King of Babylon, that his City is taken at one end. But these mutations did not so eclipse her, as Selechus Nicanor did by envy and policy, Anno Mundi 3645 building a City in the conflux of Tigris into Euphrates, where Coch first stood and then Alexandriae, new naming it Seleucya 50 miles thence; 300 stades sayes Marcellien; and to add lustre to his owne by the decay of the other, illured from Babylon six hun∣dred thousand soules, in small time making that late triumphant Empresse of Townes sit naked and disconsolate; the reward of her incomparable pride and tyranny. Ieremiahs prophesie in the 50, 51, then being accomp∣lished. The violence done to mee and mine be upon Babylon. Behold I am against thee O thou most proud, &c. The broad walls of Babylon shall be utterly broken: her high gates shall be burnt with fire; she shall become a heap, a dwelling place for Dragons! and it shall be said, how is Babylon become an astonishment, a hissing and a desolation among all Nations. Alexander when he took it, inricht his coffers with two hundred thou∣sand Talents of gold, betrayed by Bagophanes the Eunuch: and here (Terrarum fatale malum & sydus iniquum gentibus, as a Critick calls him) Alexander, the worlds great victor disroab'd himselfe out of his life (by quaffing too much Oxe blood to Hercules, his emulated Progenitor) Anno Mundi 3647, 337, before the Incarnation: at the age of 32, having troubled the world 12 yeeres and 8 months: his death foretold him by a Calanus or Bracman. Thus much concerning Babylon: not that Al-Cayro in Aegypt (neere old Memphis, in the same place where Latopolis stood) built by Cambyses the Persian, and new named El-cayro by Gehoar, Leiftenant to El-Cayn the Kalyph: as I finde in the first and eight books of Leo's History of Afrique: by the Hebrews call'd Mezraim, by the Cal∣dees Alcabyr, Myzir by the Arabs, and Massarr by all Armenians. BAGDAT, (rais'd out of old Babells ruines;) is in 36 deg. 20 min. North: in 82 of longitude: built in that part of Meso-potamia the Persi∣ans call Yrakein; the Turks, Diarbec; the Arabs, Iazirey; the Armeni∣ans,
Meridin. It receives the name Bagdat, I suppose, from Bag-Deh, i. e. a Lordly Citie; or from Bawt-dat, i. e. a Princely garden: some say from Bugiafer the Babylonian Kalyph, who disburst two millions of gold to re∣edifie it, after that cruell devastation made there by Almerick King of Iewry. But long shee enjoyed not this glory, for Chyta a Tartar Prince gives order to Alako his brother to divest her; who accordingly sackt it with a barbarous rage and greedinesse, & cruelly tortured the then Lord or Chalyph Mustaed-zem: but in the yeere of our Lord 762. Heg. 142. Alman∣sor or Abviapher the Calyph pittied her delapidations, and taking a precise time, when by a good influence of the heavens it might in future times be fortunate, he begun to reare her up againe, and builded the Mosq' in that place where one Bagdet an Eremit had made his hermitage, and from whom it may be 'twas so called: Almansor gave it another name, Medina-Isalem, i. e. the City of peace; or as Ben-Casen thinks, Deer-Assla, i. e. the Church of peace. An ill spirit it seemes hanted it: for after shee be∣gun to breath anew, and to adorne her head with Majesty, another cold Northern blast benummed her; Tangrolipix or Sadoc Lord of the Zel∣zuccian family and father of the Ottemans, takes it in despight of the A∣rab and Persian An. Dom. 1031, Heg. 411, and forced her to bow under the yoak of miserable bondage. Howbeit, once more an Arabian Cha∣lyph re-comforts her, Negmeddin-Fidall-ally by name, sonne to Emyr-El∣mummyn: after whom Addaë-daul And Siet Saife-Daddaul did their best to inlarge her: and to them (according to Acmad-Abu-beker) followed Almo∣stacer-bilah sonne to Almoctadi-bila Anno Dom. 1100. Heg. 480. all which severall Calyphs were rich, and liberall, such as spared neither cost nor paine to redintigrate her bulk and memory. Ismael-Sophy conquer'd it from Bajazeth: but Solyman regained it from Sha-Tahamas: from him the Persian King Mahomet (sonne to Tamas) wrested it Anno Domini 1566. Heg. 946. by a neat stratagem, he entred unsuspected in disguize of a Mer∣chant, fifteene hundred other Noble warriors in like habit driving into Bagdat a Carravan of three thousand Camells; but upon the watch∣word, throwing off their gownes, they brandisht their glittering blades in the eyes of the astonisht garrison. The Persians kept it till the yeere of our Lord 1605. Heg. 985. when it reverted to Turkish thraldome; but Abbas could not suffer it, for An. Dom. 1625. Heg. 1005. most bravely he beat the Turqs thence, and the Tartars from Van in Armenia: and to this day holds both, though ten times the inraged Turqs have attempted to reco∣ver it. Let us now into the Towne. Bagdat, at this day scarce equalls Bristow in bulk or beauty: the circuit may be three miles and better, in∣cluding fifteene thousand familes. It is watered by Tigris call'd Diglat and Dyguilah, somewhat broader than the Thames, but not so navigable nor gentle: In all this City is nothing worthy the present observation, save the Bridge, the Mosque, the Sultans Pallace, the Coho house, the Buz∣zar, and the Gardens. The bridge resembles that at Rohan in Normandyl; it has a plain & easie passage over 30 long boats, concatenated and made to separate at pleasure. The Mosque is builded in the West side; large, round, and very pleasantly rais'd of white free-stone, brought from Mosul (old Ninivy.) The Sultans house adjoynes the great market; it is large but low:
and neere it are some brasse peeces the Turks left there against their will: a little Chappell also, Panch-Ally by name, is note-worthy; memorable in the impression of five fingers, Mortis Ally by a trick that he had made in the solid stone there. The Coho house is a house of good fellowship; in the evening many Mussulmen assemble to sip a sort of Stigian liquour; a black, thick, bitter potion, brewed out of Bunchie or Bunnu berries; more reputed of, in that it increases Venus, and purges melancholy: but most of all, from a tradition they have that Mahomet sipt no other sort of drink, save this which was first invented and brewed by Gabryel: in the Coho house they also inebriate their braines with Aracc and Tobacco. The Buzzar in Bagdat is square, and comely. The Gardens are sweet and love∣ly; all put together, shew no more artificiall strength, wealth nor brave∣ry than do many neighbouring and late up-start Townes about her. Twelve miles lower is seene a grosse confused Mount; by some thought the rubbish of Nimrods Tower: slimy bricks and mortar may be digd out of it. I rather imagin it the ruine of that monstrous Temple, which was erected by Semyramis in honour of Bell or Iupiter Belus, Grand-father to Nynus. At some distance it Is better perceiv'd than when neerer hand; the insensible rising all the way; it may bee occasions it: what more or more properly can I apply, than in our owne tongue, what an old Poet warbled in his idiom. Miramur periisse homines? monumenta fatescunt, Interitus saxis nominibus- que venit. Why wonder we that People die? since Monuments decay. Yea, flinty Stones, with mens great Names, Deaths tyranies obay. To see old Shushan is neither unworthy our labour, nor out of our way. SHVSHAN, is every where famoused. It was one of the three roy∣all Pallaces, the Medyan Monarchs so much gloried in; Babylon, Shushan, and Ecbatan: built by Darius sonne of Histaspis Anno Mundi 3444. as Pliny has it in his 6 lib. c. 28. Some say Laomedan built it, such time as Thola judg∣ed Israel. Others make Cyrus Lord of Pisogard (from Pison a branch of Hiddekel or Tigris) to bee the Architect, in memory of his good successe obteyned in that very place against Astiages the Median Emperour. It is spoken of in the 1. ch. of Hester: That there, Ahashuerus An. Mun. 3500. feasted his Liefetenants over a hundred twenty and seven Provinces, a hundred and eighty dayes with great cost and triumph. Nehemiah and Daniel also remember it to bee in Elam, Persia: and notwithstanding the many mutations and miseries it had from many avaritious Tyrants, yet was it able to smile upon Alexander, when hee extracted thence to pay his Sol∣dats and fill his bags with fifty thousand Talents in Bullyon, and nine Mil∣lions in coyned Gold: and well may bee, since Cassiodore in his 7. lib. 15. Epist: reports for truth, that Memnon (sonne to Tithon, and reckned by some, first founder) so gloried in his work that hee cemented the stones with gold; which made Aristagoras cry out to his men of warre, that if they could but master it, each poore knave there might then compare with Iove for riches and bravery. Some wrangle about the name Shushan, and its signification. Athenaeus interprets it from her plenty in Lillyes; but whence hee fetcht it I cannot tell; the Arabic nor Persian have no such meaning: as well I may say
from Suzan or Shuzan in the Persic tongue a needle or a glasse-bottle. But such Synonimaes may not carry it. I rather beleeve it is derived from Chus (Noahs grand-sonne) Susiana from him call'd Chusiana, and at this day not much discrepant in the name they call it by, Chusistan. More probable, in that Chus, Cams sonne planted a Colony here, ere hee journeyed into Arabia and Aethiopia, (a mistake, made the Septuagints imagine Nyle one of those foure, streaming from Paradise) his sonnes also here-abouts inhabi∣ting. Nymrod in Chaldaea. Seba in Arabia. Havilah in Indya. Raamah in Carmania &c. Let us dow into Shushan. At this day tis called Valdac, not farre from the Gulph: watered by Chozes or Choaspes; which arising from the Jaaroonian Mountains streames hither very pleasantly in many meanders circum-giring, and not far from Balsorac (Doridatis of old) participates with the brackish Gulph of Persia, where also Euphrates (call'd Phrat and Almacher) from Libanus some say, from Mount Abas in Armenia say others: and Tigris (now call'd Diglat and Hiddechel) from Taurus (or Pariedrus rather) imbowell themselves. A ri∣ver of such account which the Persian Emperours, that no water but Cho∣aspes, no bread but from Assos in Phrygia, no wine but the Chalyhonian in Syria, no salt but what they had from Memphis in Aegipt could please their pallats. Daniel calls it Vlai, Pliny, Eulaeus; an anti-stream glides to Persepolis. Shushan was in compasse 120 stades or furlongs; so Strabo. Policletus num∣bers 200, above twenty miles English. The wall about it quadrangular. In building, walls, houses, Temples, and the like, resembling Babylon. From whence Ecbatan & it had aequidistancie five hundred short miles. Val∣dac had some forme and beauty, till Moses sirnamed Askar (Omars kinsman) Anno Dom. 641. Heg. 21, depopulated it. It has now a resemblance of Mo∣ful or Ninivie; nothing but ruines covering her. Of which and other such once noble Cities I may say with King David, Psalm. 46 Come and be∣hold the works of the Lord, what desolations he hath made in all the earth! And that we are so neere the old locall place of Paradise, let me glance a little into it. PARADISE, or the terrestriall Garden of Eden (Hogea-del-Holan the Indians name it) (Gan-Eden the Hebre wes call it) wherein God placed Adam, is much controverted; and where it was, as much doubted of: some making it an Allegorie, others a locall place. Strange it is to confider the variety. Some say it was in the middle Region of the ayre, whence they will draw the foure great streames that water Paradise. Some place it in the mountaines of the Moone (in Aethyop whence Nilus springs,) other∣some in the circle of the Moone, some others under the circle, and that thence the foure rivers flow gliding under many large deepe Seas, and so into Paradise. Some think the 4 rivers signifie 4 cardinall vertues; the word Paradise, a metaphor of delight; mans fall, the banishment; the torryd Zone, the fierie sword; and such other fanatick fancies as made the brain∣sick Hermians and Seleucians sweare there never was a Paradise: whose phantasmaes I value not, in that the more judicious affirme there was, varying meerely in the place. Some (and those well read) imagine it was ten miles about, the Province Mesopotamia, the precise place Eden, to this
retaining both name and memory. St. Augustine judges it was in the happy Arabia. Amongst the Tartars dreames Goropius (in Holland hee might have said.) Vnder the N. pole thinks Postellus. In Syria, Beroaldus. Vpon the banks of Tygris sayes Xenophon. Every where, before Adam sinned thinks Ortelius. Some say it comprehended Meso-potamia, Armenia, Mount Taurus, in∣circling Shynaar; holding afterwards Selencia and Babylon. Others carry it further as that it included Nilus and Gangas, a too great limit for a Garden, six thousand miles distant; Nyle arising from Zair in Afrique, empties it selfe into the mid-land Sea; Ganges from Imaus in Scythia, into the Gan∣getick Sine or Bengalan Ocean. The Inhabitants in Ceyloon say Paradise was there, and shew Adams footsteps, Eves teares, &c. Some say Aegipt, Sy∣ria, and Iudaea: that the tree of knowledge grew on Mount Calvary, the se∣cond Adam suffering in the same place the first Adam had offended. Some dreame it is in a mountaine above the skie, where none are but Enoch and Elias. We can ascend no higher, without troubling our understandings. The best is this, That Nyle nor Ganges had no being there: the Septua∣gints mistake arising from their suppostion that Pison was Ganges, and Gi∣hon, Nyle. Mesopotamia no doubt was East from Arabia, where Moses (the Prince and first that ever wrote History) compleated his Pentateuch. And as questionlesse, the Garden of Eden was watered with Euphrates and Ty∣gris: who in their severall fluxes, one from Libanus, th'other from Ararat or Taurus, part themselves into foure branches; Pison one (streaming to Piso-gard in Persia;) Gibon th'other (commixing with Choaspes) both runne into the Gulph, at Balsora, For whereas 'tis said, Pison compasses the land of Hevilah, we must not imagine it that Havilah in Indya, whither Havilah sonne of Ioctan sonne of Eber sonne of Sem travelled: but that in Susiana or Chusiana, where Havilah sonne of Chus, sonne of Cham, son of Noah planted his Colony; before he descended into Aethiopia or Afrique. Or if that will not content, we may distend it, to make Mount Taurus a wall unto it East, and North: and that Euphrates, Tygris, Araxes (or Gozan if you please) and Indus watered it, a sufficient extendure, and in the adolescencie of the world fruitfull and delicious. The Au∣thor's sick∣nesse.I cannot choose a better place to seat your patience, than here, to make my selfe your object. After the death of some noble Gentlemen, my course came next, though not to die, yet to put my feet into the grave. Whether I had got cold on Taurus (by sucking in the refrigerating ayre, denudating my heating body) or that I play'd the Epicure too largely on delicate fruits, or that diversity of Meridians, or so long quaffing variety of waters, I know not: some or all of these (by Gods divine appointment) overcame me, and forced me into such a violent diffentery, that in twelve dayes I had a thousand bloudy stooles, and for forty dayes longer time was ore-charg'd with such cruelty, that (some can witnesse) I dare say, ne∣ver poore man was more enfeebled! I wanted not the help of the Kings best Physitians, they did mee little good: I tooke what they prescribed (dry Rice, Pomgranad pills, Barberries, Sloes in broth, and a hun∣dred other things) and gave them what so ere they craved: so that it was hard to judge whether my spirits or gold decayed faster. In this excreame
misery I was forced to travell 300 miles, hanging upon a Camel. Morod that great Aesculapius seeing I would rather die than part with any more mony (for whē it was gone, I knew not where to borrow, Merchants were strangers to mee, and I had above sixteene thousand miles home, to goe round Afrique) hee limited my life to but five dayes existence: but he that sits on high and accounts all humane knowledge, meere folly; in foure & twenty houres after, miraculously prov'd this famous Oraculizer a compleat lyer. I had then attending mee an Armenian call'd Magar and a Hecate of Tartary, to whom I daily gave for salary eight peace: many Succuby's shee implored (fore against my will) but finding they had no power to bewitch me; whether to accilerate Morods sentence, or whe∣ther to possesse my linnen and apparell (of which I had good plenty) I know not, but she resolv'd to poyson me. For, knowing wine was strictly forbidden me, shee presents me in an Agony of thirst, a Violl full of old strong intoxicating wine, which relisht curiously, and I powred downe without wit or measure: but (as it had beene so much ophium) it quickly banisht my vitall sences, and put mee for foure and twenty houres into a deadly trance, and in that time (had not a friend resisted) I had beene bu∣ried. But by Gods great mercie, this desperate Potion recovered me. For after I had disgorg'd abundantly, I fell into a sound sleepe (not having done so a moneth formerly, the people admiring such a recovery) so that by benefit of that little rest and binding quality of the wine, I grew every day better and stronger: but my desperate Doctresse (whiles my other servant wept over mee) like an old Hagg, opened my Truncks and robd me of all my linnen and some moneys. I would not pursue her, for then she had died for it. I will therfore say with David 71 Psal. O! what troubles and adversities hast thou shewed me? and yet didst thou turne and refresh mee, yea and broughtest me from the deeps of the earth againe! Observations concerning the Persian Empire. HItherto wee have beene practicall: let mee now draw your eyes to theorize in generall the severall properties and fashions of this great Empire; whose Monarchs have from the Infancie of Time either swayd the Scepter of the world, or adorn'd their browes with a Dyadem of braver lustre than any other Kings of Asia: and first speake wee by what severall Nomenclations Persia has beene call'd; than which, no other Kingdome in the Universe has beene more variable. In Nymrods dayes (that Monster of the world) 'twas called Chusa,Severall names of Pesia. from Chus sonne of Cham sonne of Noah, who removed his Colony thence into Arabia, and after into Aethyopia or Africk. In Chedorlaomars reigne (con∣temporary with Abraham) it was named Elam, from Elam sonne of Sem sonne of Noah; and brother (if prophane Authors say true) to (Madai or) Atlas Maurus sonnes of Iaphet sonne of Noah. From him the people were called Elamitae and Elamae, names much used amongst the Antients. The next it varied to, is Persia, whether from Perseus Ioves sonne by Danae
daughter to Acrisius, or from analogie with the Chaldee tongue, imply∣ing a horses hoofe, a hooked nose, or a division, I will not argue. But the Greeks not content with any of them, intitled it Panchaya and Cephoēne; in memory of their Countryman Cepheus (after King of part of Aethiope) bro∣ther of Cadmus, Agenor's famous children. This same Cepheus was father of Andromeda, wife to Perseus, parents of Perses the renowned Archer, living in the world before the building of Rome twelve hundred and seventy yeares. Gog and Magog some have also named her, and Magusaea too, but from whence arising needs no interpreter. Such time as Achemaenes son to Aegeus King of Athens ruled, it got an Achemaenian denomination, as Lucan, Herodotus, Suidas, Cedrenus, and others have it: after which race it was new named Arsaca, from Arsaces the Heroick Parthian not long af∣ter the Incarnation, Artea after that, by the Inhabitants importing a noble Country, and from whence many brave Princes assumed names, as Ar∣taxerxes, Artabanus, Artaphernes, Artaspes, &c. The Tartars in their over∣running a great part of Asia nam'd it Chorsoria, as Solynus notes; The Ara∣bians Anno Dom. 598 (such time as Mahomet grew notorious) call'd it Sa∣racaenia, in memory of their descent and doctrine. Azaemia some call it: by the Turks (in envie to Siet Gunet and his decadence from the Alco∣rannish Doctors) Etnizaria and Agamia: since when, they have added those of Chuba, Shaw-Izmaelia, Saic-Aideria, Curasaeniae, and some such, as (proceeding from particular malice) are unworthy our taking notice of, or to be inserted in the roll of memory. Let mee now give you the effigies of her present standing; which if I faile to pourtray exactly; I will willingly incur some blame, so you will copy it in a better posture. The derivative and severall names of Persia I have already drawne: the Provinces at this day obeying that famous Diadem, and how called I shall first essay; her bulk next; and then her fashions. Thus rancked: Persia, Parthia, Medya, Hyrcania, Bactria, Sogdiana, Evergeta, Aria, Drangiana, Mar∣giana, Paropamisa, Carmania, Gedrosia, Susiana, Arabia, Caldaea, Meso-po∣tamia, Armenia, Iberia, and Mengrellia, twenty noble Kingdomes of old, (at this day under the stroke of the Persian Scepter) are thus new named, Parse,Provinces of Persia how now named. Arac, Shervan, Mozendram, Sablestan, Maurenahar, Sirgian, Hery, Sigistan, Stigias, Kalsistan, Carmawn, Laristan, Chusistan, Iaziry, Keldhan, or Ajaman; Darbeq, Arminy, Carkash, and Vaspracan. The whole Empire is terminated on East, West, North, and South; with India, Arabia, the Caspian, and Persian Seas. From Candahor (equi-distant with Oxus in Bactria) to Babylon, East and West, it stretches foure hundred and forty farsangs,Extent of the Empire. or of English, a thousand three hundred and twenty miles, in seventy dayes usually travelled: and from Giulphall (or Ielphy neere Van in Georgia) to Cape Gwader in 25 degrees, the furthest part of Gedrosia or Macron on Indus, North and South, foure hundred ninety and six farsangs, or a thousand foure hundred eighty and eight English miles; in eighty dayes commonly journeyed: from which we may compute, the circuit is not lesse than foure thousand miles. The North and East is most part fruitfull in grasse, in corne, in fruit; the South and West (except where rivolets are) sandy, mountanous, sterile, and inhospitable: the vehement
heat scorches the earth and makes it barren; and from whence, the soyle yeelds no exhalations, the mother of clouds, and consequently wants rain to madifie: but in stead of it, God has blest them with frequent breeses. But how miserable so ere it seemes to others,The Kings revenue. the Persian King makes many happy harvests; filling every yeere his insatiate coffers with above three hundred and fifty seven thousand Tomans (a Toman is five markes sterlin,) in our money, 1190000 pound sterlin: a great revenue, the more to be admired at, since he extracts it from raw silke, customs and cotton; not thinking any way meane or dishonourable that brings in money. So thought Abbas; and thence deriv'd that unkinkly trade of sending into the market, his dayly presents of fruits and flowers (for without some piscash was no saluting him,) a kind of thrist,His dome∣stick pollicy. he not only boasted of (I imagin as Ageslaus did of his polt-foot) but seemed to complain of the too great nici∣ty of other Kings. And no doubt, if all the Potentates of the earth were inquired after, none would parallell this late old Monach of Persia for startagems in good husbandry, (for so, to respect the man, we had best call it.) He could finely dart his wonder upon such & such a Town by report or letter confessing his amazement at sight of some great Elephant, or Tower of gold he heard they had acted: they dare not reason against it, they know the meaning; and in pure gold get such a present; if rich and heavy, then tis dainty work, though never so disordered: if otherwise, then no way praised. Ninety wall'd Townes are under his command (the Villages are above forty thousand) none of which escape his policy; for though they practice nothing lesse than gold-smiths work and imagery, yet hee salutes them with a false report, desiring to see experimentally, whether fame had not beene a niggard in their elevation: they embrace the comple∣ment, and returne him in pure gold the Icon of an Elephant, Cammell, or Dromedary: some a Pegasus, a Cesterne or Bath some send to gaine his love, and some a Babel; or representation of such a great Citie as they know will take him, by comparison: considering which, I lesse admire that vast treasure of Mammonisme, commonly taken out for ostentation at the receit of Ambassadors or Travellers of note; such as in Mosendram our eyes were glutted with. In warre, no Asiatick Prince was master of more Art or sure experience; at home, his Genius travaili'd with no fewer fan∣cies, none withou its certaine end to agrandise his treasurie. A Merchant I may also call him, having many thousand factors, frugall and skilfull under him, all which hee sends through the wide universe with each his stock of money, or silke, or carpets to make money of: some of them returne in three, in five some, none exceeds seven yeeres to give their ac∣count, to the Kings infinite advantage: if they have loytered, or acciden∣tally lost, and returne meane profits, they had as good behang'd, hee is so incredulous and wrathfull: but when they come home multiplyed, and with increase, & to his liking, he rewards them with large thanks, a woman from his Haram, a horse, a sword, a Tulipant; but after a small repose packs them abroad againe, re-assuring them of his good affection, and that after such a voyage they shall end their motion in a happie rest, (but seldome does it, till death or diseases force him to it) that they and theirs shall enjoy such necessary summes as conduce to make them fortunate; but in event
finde that old proverb too too true, Pollicitis, dives quilibete esse potest. Againe, from Indostan, Tartary, and Araby, every yeere move towards Persia, many Carravans furnisht with rich and rare commodities: as Chy∣na ware, sattens, silks, stones, rich Tulipants, &c. of whose approach hee has quick notice: concerning which, either hee gives a private command that none shall dare to traffick with them, by that forcing them to his owne prices; or affronts them upon entring his Dominions with a false alarme, as that the passage further is long and hard, and dagerous, or that the late darth makes the country incapabde to entertaine them; by such heathen Mathematicks so startling them, that rather than move back to such hazards, or go on to incounter such, or to incur his hatred; they oft times condiscend to any mart, sometimes receiving money for their goods, or by exchange, for what the Persian Emperour can best spare; to his owne, and others, dispersing those new merchandizes at stretcht rates, yea at the height of ignoble avarice; and having coyne or bullion (to prevent its pilgrimage into other regions) hee molds it into plate of huge assize or the like, too heavie to go farre, worke very poore, in value rich and ponderous. Besides, by that law of Persia, hee makes himselfe heyre to all that dye, puts the young ones to some way of life, warre, or merchandize; none daring to call his title into question: hee also expects annuall presents from all men of quality; take notice of one mans offring a yeere or two before our being in Persia: the Duke of Sherazz was hee that sent it: foure hundred sixty and five thousand florens coyned; forty and nine goblets of good gold; seventy two refined silver, and so much of other valuable rarities, as in all, burthen'd three hundred Camells: a gallant present, a sure medicine to expell his melancholy. But this might all be tollerated, were Astraea any where adored: but contrarily, abhorred bribery aad corruption in Justice, renders so brave a Prince too much dis∣tempered. Quid faciant leges ubi sola pecunia regnat? Aut ubi paupertas vincere nulla potest? Where money over-rules, what good do lawes? Or where the poore is crusht without a cause? For albeit 'tis said that the lawes of the Medes and Persians never alter, yet doubtlesse in so many changes as have hapned there, their lawes may be corrupted or altered: At this day they have little written law; some∣what the law of Nature has dictated: they have no Termes, few Lawyers, no demurs in Justice: Lex Talionis is much used: and commonly upon complaint, (how difficil so ere the cause bee) the sword decides it before Sun-set. The vulgars habit and disposition next attend us. The Persians are generally big-limb'd, strong, streight, and proper; the Zone makes them Olive-coloured; the wine, cheerefull; opium, vene∣rious.The people ascribed. The women paint; the men love Armes; all love Poëtry: the grape inflames their passion, the law allayes it, example bridles it: they love not rule, the King is Iupiter in tenris, & by a panbasilay & forced will equalls the Duke and Peasant in his command (diffring them otherwayes) the name Colloom or slave being equally proper and hereditary; and in awlesse bravery hee values them as Agesilaus did Lisander, and from this tenet of dammed Matchiavell drawn from Phatinus.
A Tyrants power decayes when he respects Iustice or honesty; for he suspects His lawlesse lust produces best effects. Sceptrorum vis tota perit, si pendere justa Incipit, evertitque arces respectus honesti; Libertas scelerum est, quae regna invisa tuetur. troublesome to one, formidable to the other, to neither convenient, to none honourable. No part of their body is allowed hayre, the upper lip excepted, which growes very long and thick, they turne it downward; the oyle Dowae, but thrice applyed annihilates that excrement ever after. The meaner sort reserve a lock in mid their head, of double use, Mahomet by that, distinguishing them from other sectaries; and by helpe of it the easier to attaine Paradize: we heare it, they surely beleeve it.Their Habit Their eyes are black, their foreheads high, their noses hooked; about their heads they wreath great rowles of Callico, of silke and gold, higher, more beau∣tifull, and not so bungie as the Turkish Turbants; they call them Shashes, in past times (especially those worne by Kings) Cydarims or Tyaraes, with us call'd Mithers, a little fash or gold fringe hangs downe behinde, the Arab taught it them, and serves to distinguish of what quality. The King turnes the contrary side of his Shash forwards, in no other garb diffring from others: in Triumphs and great dayes I have seene them circle their Tulipants with ropes of great orient pearles, with chaines of Rubies, Tur∣quoises and other Stones. The Asiaticks weare no bands, they are the at∣tire of peace (not dwelling there,) their habit or out-side garment is usu∣ally of Callico, stitcht with Silke, quilted with Cotten; the better sort have them of party-coloured silkes, of Satten some, of rich gold, and fil∣ver chamlets others, and some of bod-kin and richest cloth of gold, figu∣red: variety in work and colours pleases them beyond measure, and serve as Emblems of joyes in Paradize: black is not knowne among them, they call it dismall, a type of hell, and unlunluckinesse. Their sleeves are straight and long (to varie from their enemies the Turq' who have them wide and short;) the vest or coat reaches down to their calves, & beares round; their waists are girt with towells of silke and gold above eight yards long, those and the Shashes discover (as they transcend and descend in value) the dignitie of those that weare them. The Dukes have them woven with gold, the Merchants and Cosel-bashes of silver, of silke and wooll, men of inferior quality: next their skin, they weare smocks of cotton, demi∣shirts in length, for colour resembling Scotch plad or Barbars aprons; their breeches are like the Irish trooze, hose and stockings sow'd together: the stocking falls not alwayes into their shooes, from the anckle down giving to the eye two inches naked: their shooes are of good leather and well sowed, but have no latchets; and are of what colour you can fanfie: they are commonly sharp at the toe, and turne upwards; the heeles are high and small, and shod with iron, or nales ingrailed. And this I noted, they do not so much wed themselves to these iron hemi-cycles for thrift or ease, or lasting; (they seldome journey far, or go swiftly) as to tread in a venerable path of antiquity. A custome actuated by their forefathers, and yet observed; either in symbolising with their great Mahomet, whose ambitious Armes was a Crescent, Diana; his Motto, Cresco: or else bor∣rowed
from the Cygales of the Athenians, or from the Romans who wore Crescents (or halfe Moones) upon their shoes as an Ensigne of ho∣nour, by Martiall and Pancirollus term'd Lunati calscei; Lunat anusquam pellis: and by Statius in his Boscages, primaque patritia clausit vestigia Luna, &c. Over all, the Persians (especially such as travell) throw short Calzoons or coats of cloth (without sleeves) furr'd with fables, foxes, mushwhormaws, squirrills, or of sheep, not a little estimated; and can (in hottest seasons) indure to weare short wide stockings of English cloth, whose heeles are covered with leather, and serve sometimes for boots to ride in; howbeit, they want not boots; wide, well sowed, ill cut, but prevalent in showres. Gloves are of no esteeme amongst them; nor rings of gold; of silver they have many: not that gold is lesse valuable (in other things most used) but because Mahomet forsooth had his of silver; left to Ozman as a legacie, and charm'd with many singular properties: none have their rings of iron, except slaves, and those of baser sort; a mettall they account and call a proper symboll of unnaturall slaverie. They paint their hands into a red or tawnie colour, which both cooles the liver, and in warre makes them (they say) victorious: their nailes are particoloured, white and vermillion; and why so I cannot say, unlesse in imitation of King Cyrus; who in augmentation of honour, commanded his Heroes to tincture their nailes and faces with vermillion, serving both to distin∣guish them from the vulgar sort, and (as did our warlike Brittains) in fight to shew more terrible. Their rings are sometimes set with Agats and let∣ters of Arabic conteyning either some spell, their names, or else some fragment of the Alcoran: not one amongst a thousand warriors knowes the benefit or use of letters; the Mullayes and Clergy ingrosse that Art, who when they write do it kneeling; either that that posture is easier, or that what they dictate in that sort, is supposed holy: nor use they goose∣quills, but reeds or canes of great assize and thicknesse; in that they imi∣tate the Antients: their paper is very glossie and varie-coloured, well prest; and the rarer in that their materialls are not raggs or skins, but cot∣ton wooll, course, and requiring much toyle to perfect it. Armes.They seldome go without their swords (shamsheers they call them) form'd like a Crescent, of pure mettall, broad, nd sharper than any rasor; nor do they value them, unlesse at one blow they can cut in two an Afi∣nego; the hilts are without ward, of gold, of steele, of wood; the scab∣bards are well made, of Camells hide, on solemne dayes covered with velvit embroydered with gold and stones of price: they seldome ride abroad without bow and arrow; the quiver and case wrought and cut ingeniously; the bow is short, and (not unlike a crosse bow) bended; and albeit some thinke incomparable in mischiefe to a gun, yet the time has beene they have got with that (as we in France) in many parts of Asia most memorable battels; as when Crassus lost his life, Valerian and others, occasioning those dirgees of the Roman Poets, Terga coversi metuenda Parthi: and Ovid thus, Gens fuit & terris & equis & tuta sagittis, &c. at this day of no credit in archerie, unlesse they can in a full carreer cleave an Orenge hanging in a string athwart the Hippo-drome, and (when past the mark) with another ready arrow as surely hit the rest, turning (in his
short stirrips and Morocco saddle) backwards. The women (in those parts scarce visible) might passe unspoken of,The women. I will only glance at them. Their stature is generally low, but streight and comely; more corpulent than leane, wine and musick fattens them; the splen is curable, where vexation domineeres not: their colour is pale, made sanguine by adulterate comolection; their haire is commonly black and curled: they haue high foreheads, pure skins, black diamond eyes, high noses, arge mouths, thick lips, round cheekes, fat and painted: ho∣nest women have liberty to go abroad to breath the Ayre or buy their necessaries, but dare not speak to any man in the way, nor unvaile their feces. When they follow the Camp or are to journey any whither they are mounted two and two upon Camells; and sit crosse-legg'd in cages (or cajuaes as they call them) of wood, covered with cloth to forbid any A Persian Woman
body the sight of them: their Guardants are lean-fac't Eunuchs, who are so jealous of them, that as we travelled, 'twas the hazard of our lives not to flie out of the way as soon as we saw them: or by throwing our selves upon the ground to cover us with some vaile or other, that the Eunuchs might be satisfied, we durst not view them. Those of the order of Lais are more sociable; have most freedome and are not worst esteemed of: No questi∣on (but to free themselves from slaverie and rage of jealous husbands) most there would be whores by profession:Common women. but with them 'tis a calling (sir reverence) of too high dignitie for all to mount unto; those there∣fore that are such, are admitted after long suit, many friends and much moneys; none dare abuse them: they are company for Kings and great ones of Mahomets faction: go brave, and richly habilimented: their haire curling, dishevells oft times about their shoulders, sometimes rounded or plaited in a caule of gold: about their faces and under their chin is hung a rope of pearle of great value, if not counterfeit: their cheekes are of a delicate dye, but Art (not Nature) causes it: their noses are set with rings and jewells of gold imbelisht with rich stones; their eares also have equall lustre. To shew they are servants to dame Flora (in her dayes, a good one) they illustrate their armes and hands, their leggs and feet, with painted flowers and birds, and in a naked garb dance every limb about them a Per∣sian Antick, elaboratly making their bells and Cymballs and Timbrells eccho their turnings. Their habit (not unlike themselves) is loose and gaudie, reaching to their mid-leg; of cloth of gold, of satten some, of tissued stuffs or costly inbroyderie. This wanton kind of creature is of no religion, except what the last Monach of Assyria (whose Motto was ede, bibe, lude,) preached to his Epicures. These look dangerously, drink and stink (of perfumes I meane) horrible strongly; laugh immeasurably, and covet greedily mens soules, moneys, and reputation; scorning all ho∣nest women, and upbraiding them, with the Epethites of slaves, rejected, unsociable, melancholy, and unworthie their speaking to: and it is true at this day what Trogus Pomp. observed long ago concerning them, Parthi Vxoribus & foeminis non convivia tantum virorum, sed etiam conspectu inter dicebant &c. Coat Armor of Persia.Many other things give themselves note-worthy. In Armes and Ar∣mories, fix therefore your next observation. The Persian Armes of old and at this day are somewhat doubtfull. Zonaras in his first book and nineteenth Chapter out of an ancient Monument observeth, that the Per∣sians bore in old times, Luna, an Eagle crowned of the Sunne, displayed Saturn; continued for many discents their royall Ensign, till Cyrus made (as in the Empire, in Escheucheon also) an alteration. Xenophon shall guide you to the view of it. Erat Cyro signum aurea Aquila in longa hasta suspensa, & nunc etiam id insigne Persarum Regibus manet, &c. borne till Crassus perisht by them, at that time a Sagittarie being blazon'd in their Royall Standard; alluding to their excellent skill in riding, and hope of good fortune; from whence also that coyne of Dariques came (fifteene shillings of our money) a round peece of gold, Darius the common name being stampt on one side, a Sagittarie (his coat Armour) on the other side, memoriz'd by Plutark in the life of Agesilaus, complaining that his ambi∣tious
designe of Asia's conquest was prevented by thirtie thousand Sagit∣taries or Archers; meaning a bribe of so many peeces of gold, which were given to betray his enterprise. But when Mahomet had insnar'd their soules, and yoakt their necks under Saracenic bondage, the other were rejected as impertinent to this new conquest, advancing as a Symbol of more ex∣cellencie and mystery in their banner, Mercury, a Crescent Luna with this impreza Totum dum impleat orbem: alluding (both in bodie and soule) to an universall command; but how unfitly and meanly borrowed by the French may easily appeare to such as go to Fountain-b'leau, where this heathen device is in every hall iterated. But Mahomets prediction failed him, when that memorable Saint of Ardaveil, Gunet, both obliterated many fundamentall texts of the Alcoran, and invented a new Ensigne in honour of his successor, viz. Venus, a Lyon couchant Sol, the Sun orient in his face, of the same: minted also in their brasse meddalls (and as a tye of amity) accepted of by the great Mogull, and some other Princes in In∣dya. The Cawns, Beglerbegs, Sultans, Agaes, Soldagars, and Coosel-bashes indeed beare no Armes; not that they are intituled slaves, but from their ignorance in pedegrees and heraldrie: and in regard no honour there is hereditarie: but this I can say truly; they are of very humane and noble natures, civill, mercifull, and liberall; yea differ in their ingenuity and love to any Gentleman (that is a stranger) as much from the Turks and their brazen barbarism, as gold is in comparison from iron: for the Persians distinguish degrees amongst themselves, and of other Nations honor high birth and qualitie in any man, yea and give him respect agreeable to his meriting, without any inquirie of his religion. Let us go a little further. In old times they were Idolaters, such as the Gowers be now,The old Per∣sians. the Per∣sees a sect in Indya, the Pegouans, &c. but by converse with Greeks and Ro∣mans abolisht their celestiall worship, and (as Strabo relates) received De∣monomanie, continued till Mahomet. The transparent Firmament they called Iupiter, the primum mobile of other gods, him they feared: but, Apollo (the Sonne, or Mithra as they term'd him) they doated on, and de∣dicated to him many gallant Temples, attiring him with many Epethites of honour, health and gentlenesse: a good opinion then, and not yet can∣celled; as yet memorizing his image in the stamp and coat Armor of their Emperours. The Moone no doubt had due respect and adoration amongst them, supposing her espoused to Apollo. Venus had equall reverence: the Earth also, the Water, Ayre, and Fire, wanted not the names of Dieties, especially the Fire and Water. Zertoost their Law-giver (in imitation of Moses) charged them to keepe a perpetuall fire, not to bee fed with com∣mon cumbustibles, nor to be kindled or inflamed with prophane Ayre, but such as came from the beames of that glorious eye of heaven the Sunne, lightning, flints, or the like. The water also by no means was to be corrup∣ted with dead carkasses, durt, urine, raggs, or what shewed sordiditie or na∣stinesse. They loved images but indifferently; usually actuating their ho∣ly rites, in groves, in mounts, and conspicuous places. Their marriages were commonly celebrated in the spring, such time as Phoebus makes the Aequinoctium; the Bridegroome the first day juncketting on nothing
save apples and Camels marrow, a dyet proper for that dayes festivall. Po∣ligamy they liked of, the King giving the example, and honouring them with most applause and gratuities who prov'd Fathers of most children. They seldome saw their Infants till past foure yeeres old, from which age to twenty, they learnt to ride, shoot, jaculate, and to speak the truth; as also, to fare meanely, lodge hard, to watch, to till the earth, and to bee content with small things. The old men went plaine; the young mens habit was rich, but in nothing so notable as when their armes and legs were fettered with voluntary lincks and chaines of burnisht gold, whose fulgor they adored from its conformitie with the Sunne: in warre their attire was steely or mailed work, curiously concatenated, their breast-plates skald, their Targets of Oxe hides, large and round, their cap (or helmet) was a Tyara of linen multiplicated; their Armes were darts, bowes, swords, and axes; all which in admirable equipage and order, through long practice they could manage gallantly. Their meales (the great mens tables I in∣vite you to) were splendid in rich furniture & dishes of gold; but in meats, verie ordinary, and sparing, Bacchus their countriman taught them the Art of drunkennesse (Noah some imagine him, of whom a moderne wri∣ter sayes boldly. Omnia vero Bacchanalia eorumque ritus a Noae ebrietate originem habent, &c. followed greedily by these epedemic drunkards, delighted in with no small redundancie; insomuch that (like the Duch at this day) no matter of moment past currant and with applause save what relisht of Bacchisme; yea, their frequent consultations and private bar∣gaines (we too much ape them) were rarely ratified, unlesse negotiated, and consolidated in froath and drunkennesse: Their complements were heartie and not various; to equalls, affoording imbraces; to superiours, bowing the head and knee, to this houre continued without much al∣teration: the rest I offer not, this in my conceit sufficing to parallell the moderne customes, and to set them off with better lustre. Of the Persi∣ans at this day.The religion of the Persians at this day, I have fitted by it selfe with∣out commixture. Speak wee of other observations. They are very superstitious, it may be noted from our adverse fortunes as we travelled; for when wee stood at their mercy to provide us Mules, Camells, and Horses, how hasty soever we appeared, they took no notice of it, nor ca∣red to set us forward,Their super∣stition. except, by throwing the dyce such a chance hapned as they thought fortunate; a ceremony diduced from the Romans who had their albi & atri dies. In every mischance also, or in sicknesse they use sor∣cery, prescribing charmes, crosse characters, letters, anticks, or the like, taken most commonly out of their Alcoran. Nicromantic studies are much applauded, as profound, and transcending vulgar capacities, many in those parts make a notable living of it: and few Siets there but can exorcize. Force.In battell they have few tricks or stratagems, yet prosper in an honest bravery. There are many severall rancks and degrees amongst them: foure, most remarkable; Chawns, Coozel-bashes, Agaes, and Cheliby or Corids∣chey. The Timarrs or Turqmars are more despicable. In a common muster the Persian King can easily advance (as appeares by roll, and pension,) three hundred thousand horse, and seventy thousand good musquetoons,
Such forces he can march withall, but seldome exceeds 50000. enough to live together in such barren Countries:Forces. to particularize (as some have partly) the Sultans and their Command may better prove it. Mirza Fetta has under his Regiment fiftie sub-Bashaes of note, each of them com∣manding three hundred men. His horse troopes are thus raised, Emangoly Chan of Shyraz has under his charge 30000 horse. Dav'd Chawn his bro∣ther; Kaza-can Lord of Sumachy, Assur-chawn Lord of Myreyvan, Zedder Lord of the Kaddyes and Gusseroft, Magar Sultan of Tabryz, each command 12000 horse. Soffy-chan Sultan of Bagdat, Akmet Kawn Lord of Miscar∣roon, Gusseraph-chawn Sultan of Koom, Zenal-cawn Lord of Tyroan, each his charge of 15000 horse. Isaac-beg 24000. Ethaman the Vizier 17000. Soffy Koolican 16000. Gosserat-chan Governour of Arabestan, Perker-cawn Lord of Gorgestan, Hussan-chawn Lord of Ery, Manwezir-can and Sinall-chawn Lord of Sigestan 10000 each of them. Mahomet Governor of Genge 8000. Ham-sha-cawn of Dara 7000. Aliculi of Periscow 4000. Morad of Asharaffe 6000. Badur-can the Darragod 6000, and Dargagoly sonne to Gange Ally-can Sultan of Candahor 4000: three hundred and twenty thousand horse or there-about: wonderfull, when I consider the mise∣rable pastures and want of other provant to encourage their horses with, making chopt straw and a little barley serve the turne; but by that thin dyet find them lesse apt to diseases and more couragious. In peace, they are not alwayes idle; solacing their active bodies in sun∣dry sorts of warlike exercises. They cannot dance, except as Pirrhus taught the Epyrots. They love to hunt and chase the Stagg, the Antilope, Gazal,Exercises. Tyger, Bore, Goat, Hare, Fox, Jackall, Woolfe, and the like, abounding there. In which pastimes they have singular skill, courage and dexterity; in Bow, Dart, Scemiter, Gun, and Javelin. Their Harquebuz is longer than ours, but thinner and not so good for service. They can use that very well, but detest the trouble of the Cannon, and such field peeces as require car∣riage. They have good Greyhounds not unlike the Irish, apt to encoun∣ter any Lyon. They have Spaniells also but not so good as their Hawkes may challenge. They have many excellent Eyeries of Eagles, Lannars, Goshawkes, and Hobbies: their best Falcons are out of Russia and other Scythick Provinces; they fly them at choise game; commonly at Hares, Jackalls, Partrich, Phesant, Herne, Pellican, Poot, Estrich, &c. Their Lures, Jesses, Varvills, & Hoods, are richly set with stones of great price & lustre. The vulgar sort delight in Morice dancing, wrastling, assaulting, bandying, Ram and Cock-fighting; wherein they spend much time: but value not their money to see Boyes dance, or Lavoltoes upon the rope, wherein they are very excellent. Their Physitians are great admirers of Nature,Physicians. and doat so much there∣upon, that they make that oft-times the first causer which indeed is but in∣strumentall or secundarie: morall men they are, and humane in language and garbe, both which beget esteeme and honor from all that know them: and did not avarice (a vice predominating there, and by occasion of sick∣nesse in me full dearly exemplified) and Magick studies too far sway them, I could value them above the rest; however as they are, they passe for a generation usefull and exquisite. They have degrees transcending one
another in Title, as their skill and Seniority merits. The Doctors are nam'd Haekeems (it may be radically from the Hebrew word Hachajim, that is, a life-preserver) Mulaii in the Arabick. Mountebanks or Im∣posters are nick-nam'd Shitan-Tabib, i.e. the Devills Chirurgion. They are Masters of much knowledge and ignore not the Mathematiques. Many Arabick Writers have flourisht in those parts, most of whose Bookes they read and practise by, namely Galen, Averroys, Hippocrates, Alfarabius, Avy∣cenna, Ben-Isaack, Abu-Ally, Mahummed-Abdilla, Ben-Eladib, Abu-becr, Rhazis, Algazzallys', and Albumazar. In Geography Abul-foeda and Alphra∣ganus, from whom they better their discourse, and by such Lectures be∣come admirable. Nor want they the knowledge of herbs, drugs, and gums, the Mydan in Spahawn abounding in singular variety, and than which, no place in the world can more aptly be termed a Panacaea, a Catholicon, of herbs, of drugs; a Magazein 'gainst all diseases: having also no lesse choice of delicious fruits, rare gums and aromatique odours. This I observed, that to such of us as had fluxes they gave Sloes, Ryce, Cynomon, Pomgranad, Barbaries; to purge melancholy, Alloës, Senna, Rhuparb; for phlegme Turbith; for colds & sweatings, oyles of Beaver, of Leopards, of Jackalls, herba maris, our Ladies Rose, &c. Which I note to shew you they have some skill and resembling Europaean prescriptions. Howbeit, sweating in Sudatories is the Epidemic Physick there, most us'd, of least charge and very usefull; insomuch that some Cities have above threescore hummums or baths: some say three hundred. Phlebotomy is but little us'd; not that it is bad, not perhaps because Galen and the other old Naturalists ne∣ver us'd it. They desire rather to tread in an antick path of ignorance, then by any new invention or wholsome study to wrong the judgements of their pre∣dicessors: because forsooth Eventus varios res nova semper habet. And hence it is (as I imagine) that they continue their maimed calculations, out of a blind conceit that antiquity commanded them; for they compute their yeares only by the Moone,Lame cal∣culations. not by that course and motion of the Sun; affirming, that the firmament or eighth heaven finishes its revolution in two and thirty yeares; which is false: his diurnall motion from East to West compleating it selfe in foure and twentie houres; his other from West to East, but one degree in a hundred yeares; such is the violence of the first mover. Notwithstanding, it may be they meane the heaven of Saturne adjoyning it, (whose revolution comes neere their time) finishing its journey from West to East in 30 yeares. And thus, their Lunarie ac∣count is subject to no small errour, reckning from the Autumnall Aequi∣nox 12 Moones, the number of dayes in a whole yeare 353. Our Solar computation exceeding theirs twelve dayes at least, every yeare; where∣by it comes to passe, that 30 of our yeares make 31 of theirs; whence, the difference arises 'twixt us and them in their Aera or Hegyrath, and doubt∣lesse by protract, will cause much more confusion. Such as practise manufactures, are meanly reputed of; but they live oft-times verie plentifully and more securely from the jealous eye of the King than doe many great ones,Inferior sort of Persians. who oft deceive their thoughts that they are happier. Of all others the Pesants are most miserable; they can call no∣thing
their owne, such is the rapine and pride of the great Begs of the Country; nay, every petrie Cosel-bash dares domineere over them. Yet upon too much abuse the Causee will yeeld them favourable justice. Generally, the Persians are facetious, harmlesse in discourse, not very inquisitive of exotique alterations, seldome transgressing this demand,Disposition. if such and such a Country have good wine, faire women, swift horses, and sharp weapons: choosing rather to fatten themselves by a contented No∣tion, than by curious inquisition to perplex their other recreations. Few of them know how to read, Bellona trayning them up in iron dances; but honour such as have it: the Church-men, Clerks, and Santos, attracting them. Some skill they have in Musick; the Dorick and Phrygick, a soft and loftie sort of Consort. But above all, Poetry lulls them, that Genius seeming properly to delight it selfe amongst them. Mimographers I needs must call them, their common Ballads resounding out the acts of Mars and his Mistresse, to which two Saints they vow their life and best devotion: Elgazzuly, Ibnul Farid, and Elfargani first taught it them: and how lame so ere the verses are, their gracefull chanting and quavering (after the French ayre) gives it to the eare, sound and harmonious. And, albeit the men af∣fect not to dance themselves, yet dancing is much esteemed there: the Ganimeds and Layesians (wanton Boyes and Girles) foot it most admirably and in order: I may call them Mymallonian dances; the bells, brasse ar∣molets, silver fetters, and the like recording Bacchus. They are in this pra∣ctise so elaborate, that each limb and member seemes to emulate, yea, to contend who may expresse the most taking motion; their hands, eyes, bums, gesticulating severally, swimming round, & cōforming themselves to a Dorique stilnesse, the Ganimeds with incanting voices & extorted bodies simpathizing; nothing but poesie, mirth, wine, & admiration condominating. But were this all, 'twere more excusable; for (though each has his seve∣rall Seralio) these whores seldome goe without their wages: and in a higher degree of perfect basenesse, these Paederasts (by Hellish permission and the Alcurran) affect those painted, antick roab'd Youths or Cata∣mites in a Sodomitic way (not till then compleating the Roman proverb Persicos odi Puer apparatus;) a vice so detestable, so damnable, so unnaturall as forces hell to shew its uglinesse before its season. Heare St. Chrysostom: Cogitato, quam grave illud sit peccatum, ut quod ipsam Gehennam etiam ante tempus apparere coegerat! The honest women never shew their faces, eclipsing (by a large white sheet, the note of innocence and chastnesse, which wholy vailes them) those Beauties which no doubt are not without splendour. No man da∣ring to praise anothers wife; such is their irefull jealousie, and such praise commonly dishonours them. A word of their circumcision, wedding and burialls: Circumcision is so necessarie, that without it none can call himselfe a Mussulman.Circum∣cision. Both men and women use it; the men for Paradise, the women for honours sake, or Ben-sidi-Ally lyes who so paraphrases of it: from nine to fifteen the Fe∣males may; the Males at Izmaels age (whom they imagine was Abrahams best beloved) are enjoyned it; ere twelve hoping he may be able to speake his Profession. A fee is to be paid amid the ceremonie, for want of which,
the poorer sort are seldome cut, as thought unfit to goe to Mahumet. The ceremonie differs,Circum∣cision. as is the difference of their degree, acted either at home or in the Mosques: if sonne to a Mirza, Chawn, Sultan, or Chelaby, it has more pomp than ordinarie; his kindred and friends in braverie and great troups assembling at the parents house; as a symbol of their joy presenting him with many gifts of sundry prices, and after small stay mount the Boy upon a rich trapt Courser, himselfe gallantly vested, holding in's right hand a sword, in's left his bridle: two Slaves goe on either side, one holding a Lance, th'other a Flambeaux; neither without their Allegories: musick is not wanting, it goes before, the Father next, and as they are in blood the other follow in a just dependance; the rest promiscuously, without order: the Hodgy attends them at th' entrance into their Mosque, helps him to alight and hallows him. To work they straightway goe: one holds his knee; a second, disroabs him; a third, holds his hands; others by some triviall conceit strive to win his thoughts, to extenuate his insuing tor∣ment. The Priest (having muttered his orizons) dilates the praepuce and in a trice (with his silver scissers) circumcises him, applies a healing powder of salt, Date-stones, and cotton-wooll; the standers by to joy his initia∣tion into Mawmetry throw downe their Munera Natalitia, and salute him by that canonick name of Mussulman. If the ceremonie be at home, they then provide a solemne banquet; ere which be done, the Boy enters well attended, is uncloath'd afore them all and circumciz'd; and in comme∣moration of such a benefit (imitating Abraham when Isaac was weaned) continue a feast three dayes together; at the end whereof, the child is led about in state, bath'd and purg'd from all sorts of sinnes; has a Turbant of white silk put on his head, and all the way as hee returnes is saluted with acclamations. But such an apostat rascall as to swill in luxurie the more, or to roabe himselve with some title or advancement (forgetting that for a base and momentanie applause or pleasure they disroabe their soule of everlasting happinesse, such as runnes paralell with the lines of Eter∣nitie) are brought before the Caddi, who upon his assent leads him into the Mosq' and without much stirre is cut and marked for a Mahomitan (or child of perdition;) which done, that devill incarnate to witnesse his rebellion, spurnes with his accursed feet the Crosse, the hyerogliphick of our salvation: which in the primitive and purest age was of such honour amongst the Christians, as not only they used it in baptisme, but upon their foreheads to despight the Jewes and Heathens, and to glory in that thing the more, they so branded them with as a calumnie. I hate super∣stition in my heart, but that so holy an example should be derided is mi∣serable and to be pittied. To returne; the Renegado in token of more defiance spets thrice at it (making him beleeve, Christ never suffered, but Iudas did) and then is to exult in this Battalogue La la, La-illah, Hyllulla, Allough, aybyr, Mahumed resul-Allough: God is first, and next him is Ma∣humet; he then elates his finger as denying a Trinity, and three Mussul∣men dart three staves three times towards heaven, which ere any touch the ground hee is new-named, then led slowly upon an Asse about the Citie, that every one there may note him for a Denizin, a Beleever and Proselite to Mahumet. But (praised be God) I never heard of any Euro∣paean
Christian who of late times renyed his Faith in Persia. Their weddings have not much variety to dwell upon; observe there∣fore that Poli-gamie is tolerable; Mahomet to excuse his owne infirmity,Marriages. and borrowing it from the Romans, honours such most as have most wives, and beget most children: to furnish the Emperour with souldiers for defence, Paradize with Saints, and to resound the meritorious praises of great Mahomet: the Deruisse an order of begging Frier excepted, who from a transcendent conceit of their owne purity, abhor matrimony, but suppose Sodomy and Natures blackest villanies no sinne, or sins pardona∣ble; producing Mahomet their prototype or example, who both by pre∣cept and custome warranted it: but I have tyed your chast eares too long to so impure a subject. Such therefore as dare wed (they need not feare in Asia, the women in those parts never predominate) they provide a sum of mony and buy her good-will, her parents being no further charged than to bathe and purifie her. They marry more from report than knowledge, the friends of either party commonly commending, perswading, and ef∣fecting it. The day appointed being come, the Bride is vailed with a fine lawne of callico, her armes and hands are only naked: they mount her bravely, and a great troop of friends and kin accompany her to Church, in the mid-way being met with an equall number of friends, all together agrandizing the ceremonie; after a joynt assent of him and her, they alight and enter the Mosque, where the Mulay takes the protest of their good liking; she demanding three things (as did the Jewish women of old,) bed-right, food, and cloathing: their Fathers also speak themselves conten∣ted; the Priest circles them with a sacred cord, conjoynes their hands, takes a reciprocall oath, and calls Mahomet to witnesse: the Caddy inrolls their names, the houre, day, month, and yeere of their nuptialls, and with an Eugè dismisses them. The first day vapors away in Tobacco, feasts, and other ordinary feastivalls, the men and women being severed: at night, the Bride enters a stove, and is soundly washt and perfum'd, that her degree may the better appeare, and her person be more accepted of: next night they bathe together, and seven dayes after; in which time if hee discover her to be no Virgin, she is return'd to her parents with no small dishonour; otherwise is kept till death part them. The Alcoran allowes incestuous mariages, pretending that thereby true love is better contracted, and lon∣ger conserved in families: in case also the man be weary of her, or that she is barren, he acquaints the Mulay with his distemper, who eases him upon his giving her a dowry; after which, it may be hee will require her againe, and if she agree, are secondly married; yea, five, six, seven times rejecting and revoking, as hate or lust can stimulate: by that disorder, love vanish∣ing, jealousie budding, rage advancing, clamours roaring; and by which, many times the Fathers neither know their own Children, nor they their parents. Their Burialls revive some ceremonies of old; us'd amongst Jewes and Gentiles: At his farewell to the world, the next of kin closes his eyes,Burialls. as did Ioseph in the 46 of Genesis: and Telemachus in Ovid, Ille meos ocu∣los comprimat, ille tuos: they then wash him with cleane water (as was Tabitha, Acts 9.) and carrie him to his grave with admirable silence, a gesture
well-becomming Funeralls; they lodge the Carcasse where none lay for∣merly: supposing it a vile part to disturb the dead, whom in the grave they think sensible of torment: they place his head towards Medyna and (after the old mode, septem ad Luctum, septem ad convivium) for seven dayes, his next of kinne watches to keep the evill Angell from his Tomb; during which, he incessantly warbles out his Elegiac Threnodies, as the last expres∣sion of love he can shew him.Other buri∣alls. Others are thus buried: In the first place, go those of his own blood and family, next them his slaves and other do∣mestic varlets naked to their waist, the rest in troozes: who to expresse their zeale the better, burne and scratch their armes and breasts, cutting their flesh, and printing circles, (a trick borrowed from the rebellious Jewes, and prohibited by Moses. Levit. 19.28. and in Deut. 14.1.) so ef∣fectually that the blood trickles out in many places. Next them are ranckt fifty young Gallants, whose shoulders are made to beare some texts taken out of the Alcoran; mixing with them selected Eulogies which they sing and ingeminate. Next these, follow a hundred or two hundred men of note, each holding the cord that drawes the Corps or Hearse: on every side throng the multitude; some bearing in their hands Lawrel or Cypresse boughs, others Coronets of flowers, fruits, or what best befits the season: some semi-naked horsemen play along, and oft times to demonstrate their love, spare not to wound themselves: and in the last place go the Preficae or women hyred to weep, to howle, to teare their periwiggs, to smell to onyons (hinc illae Lacrymae) and to do such impostures as did the antick Romans noted in Livy; and Jewes as Ieremy speaks, 9.17. In this Decorum they march slowly, and with great silence: but at his Dormitory ululate Lala-Hillulla, there uncloathing, and mundifying the carcasse, his sins there∣by also vanishing: they anoynt him with odours and pretious unguents, and so wrapt in fine linnen they burie him in the earth, and place his head towards Arabia; his face looking up to heauen (I note it in regard they put the other sex, their faces downwards,) his armes spread, as prepar'd to imbrace Mahomet: above him, they fix two stones, at's head and feet; which in Arabiq' characters ingrav'd and colour'd, denotates his name, quality, religion, and time of buriall: there they leave him, but give not over twice every day to come and sing his Requiem, beseeching Mahomet to suc∣cour him against his bad Angells, of whom they nourish this opinion. That so soone as any Mussulman is inhumed, forthwith Muengar and Quarequar two ougly,Legend of bad Angells. huge, black, and furious Devills do assaile him; the one being arm'd with an iron club, th'other with a hook of flaming brasse: in that terrible sort they view the Carcasse, and in as imperious sort command him to lift up his head, to fall prostrate upon his knees, and beg his soule, till then departed: the dead bodie revives and entertaines his soule again, and faile not both together to accompt their life, and how they have profest Don Mahomet: If it appeare his life was morally good, the two Devills ter∣ribly affrighted flie away and give way to two good Angels (apparreled in pure white silke) to comfort him; to the day of doome not budging from him, nor seeming wearie nor unwilling to protect him. But in case his life prov'd bad or repugnant to Mahometry; then without all pit∣ty or respect, the black-fac't Caco-Daemon with the iron club hits him so
pat, so fiercely on the head, as by its fury and force thumps him ten yards deep into the ground: but there hee sleepes not long; for immediatly the other spitefull helhound with the flaming hook pulls him up againe: in that horrid sort tormenting that miserable Mahomitan, till Mahomet calls a generall Parliament; where, in one place of his Alcoran hee pro∣mises to save them all, but in another (forgetting his promise it seemes) appoints them all to passe over a narrow Bridge (he calls it the Bridge of judgement) each man carrying his sinnes in a bagg behinde him; but in passing over, such as have heavie loads, the bridge breaks, and they all fall into hell; such as have lesse weight, into purgatory, &c. as I shall di∣sport you with in his Alcoram. The Persians at this day, when ere they receive a mandat or other letter from the King or wherein his name is used,Reverence to their King. give it no small reve∣rence; they bow their bodies at the receiving it, kisse it in divers places, & then open it: Such is their transcendent opinion of his Majesty, that they repute no lesse of him, than of old times they did of their Elementall Gods; they swear usually by his name, Sha-ambashy or Serry-shaw i.e. by the Kings head, and is of no lesse force to beget beleife than if they ratified a truth by Serry-Mortis-Ally, i.e. Mortis Alli's head, a Prophet than whom they think non greater: or by putting a finger to their eye, and saying chash, the King sees; then (though the story bee never so paradoxicall) if you please, you may beleeve them: yea, in most conceits they parallell Abbas with Mahomet; in every prayer desiring his content and increase of life, though by the losse of theirs it were augmented: By losse of ours, the Gods increase your life. De nostris annis tibi Iupiter augeat annos▪ acknowledging their happinesse from him, and entitling (not without much pride too) their lives, wives, and estates, by him wholly to be dispo∣sed of: they imagine hee knowes their thoughts; and when in his pre∣sence, never speak, cough, spit, or looke upon him, least the fulgor of his aspect might peradventure prove no lesse formidable than the Trisulk of Iupiter: they register (now, as of old) his acts and apophthegms, in Cae∣dar Tablets, gum'd with Cynabre, and seldome write his name but in characters of gold, upon paper of excellent glosse and finenesse, varied in∣to azure, vermillion, yellow, and other colours; in a word reputing him the true reptesentator of Ally and his glorie, whose perfections they com∣pare to Amber, Nutmegs, Roses, Flowers, and Odours; Animate Dei Imago in terris, and (with Homer) The best beloved sonne of Iove. We were yet abroad; now let me entertaine you in their houses, the cost what ere it be, you shall be welcome to; if it agree not with your ap∣petite I cannot help it, the countrie will afford no better: first satiate your eyes, and note their furniture, and remember that brave man who by Alcydes foot found out his monstrous big dimension. A pan, a platter,Dyet, and a carpet is the epitomè of all their domestic utensills: their dyet is soone dreft, soone eaten, soone digested, and soone described: their table is the solid ground, cover'd with some sort of carpet, over which they spread pintado cloths; afore each man they lay five or six thin cakes of wheat, or pancakes: every one his spoone also, very memorable woodden spoones;
their handles being well-nigh a yard long, the spoone it selfe so vast, as my mouth could seldome master it, though I gaped extreamly to welcome it: they seldome go beyond Pelo, but in that dish expresse they think a wit∣tie invention, setting before you fortie dishes, call'd by fortie names as Pelo, Chelo, Kishmy-pelo, &c. albeit indeed it differ but thus; all are of ryce, mutton, and hens boyl'd together; some have butter, some have none; some have fruit, some have none; some have turmerack & saffron, some have none; some have onyons and garlick, some have none; some have almonds and raisins, some have none; and so ad infinitum: making us also beleeve they make us gallant cheere and great varietie, though the ingredients bee one, diffring only in colour or complement; some comming to the Table as black as a coale, some as white as a curd; others (that you may know their Cooks are wittie) be yellow, greene, blew, red, or as they fan∣cie: and wot you forsooth why Rice is so generally eaten & so valuable? not that it exceeds wheat or other graine in goodnesse, finenesse, round∣nesse or the like; but from a most reverent tradition delivered by their grand Annalist Iacob-ben-siet-Ally, a right Cabalist. And this it is? On a time,Legend of Rice. Mahomet being earnest in his prayers was accidentally conveighed into Paradize, where being very earnest in beholding its rare varieties, at length hee cast his eyes upon the glorious Throne of the Almighty; and (perceiving the Lord to turne about) fearing he should bee severely whipt for such presumption, blushes for shame, and sweats with terror; but loth to have it seene, wipes off his brow the pretious sweat with his first finger, and threw it out of Paradise: it was not lost, for, forthwith dividing it selfe into six drops, all of them became miraculous creatures: the first drop became a fragrant Rose (therefore is rose-water so much used there, and in honor of the Rose an Annuall feast solemnized:) the second, a grain of Ryce, (a holy graine:) the other foure, foure famous Doctors, who (ha∣ving Pallas for their sister) helpt Mahomet to compile his holy Alcoran. You have not tasted all yet; sallads, a charrs, and hard egs, parti-coloured; and therefore hard, that their stomack be not too soone emptied: the mut∣ton there is sweet, but fat only in the taile, the weight commonly pon∣derizing above twentie pounds, sometimes the Carcasse: Camell, Goat, and Pheasant are also manducable; the countrie yeelds, the Law allowes it: contrary to Beefe, Veale, Swines-flesh, Hare, & Buffols, prohibited by Mahomet, either to collogue with Jewes, or that his owne pallat detested them. Camells flesh they sell commonly in the Buzzars roasted upon scu∣ets or cut in mammocks and carbonadode, three or foure spits valuing two pence. Bad pastery men they are, they put a lamb whole into a kinde of oven, and take it out as black as a cole; they say (I dare not second it) it tasts curiously; it may bee so, but I feare scarce well: well it may bee to a famisht martialist, not so in banquets. The poore are not so voluptuous: they content themselves with drie ryce, herbs, roots, fruit, lentills, and a meat resembling thlummery: Dates also preserved in sirrup commixt with butter-milk, is pretious food and physicall. But, to memorize their Cheese and Butter will make your mouths water at it; I ironize: in good earnest the cheese is the worst any ever tasted of, both that it wants Art and ma∣terialls: tis drie, and blew, and hard; ill to the eye, bad to the taste,
naught for digestion; of an unsaporie taste, rough, and in a month shewes no moysture: the worst is towards the Gulph; the best in Mozendram; neither of them praise worthie. Will you taste their butter? first,Butter. inquire how they make it: I enquired of some there, they say they sometimes take what is generated in the Guspans (or sheeps tailes) it saves them chur∣ning: others, boyle the cream soundly in a raw skin'd leather-bag, full of hayres and unsalted: this sort will keep fresh (sweet I say not) six months, in that poynt commendable; but when wee drew our knives thorow it, a thousand sluts haires were then discovered, therein abominable; yet they commend it, we no way condiscended: their liquour may perhaps better delight you; tis faire water, sugar, rose-water,Drink. and juyce of Le∣mons mixt, call'd Sherbets or Zerbet, wholsome and potable: they drink wine (coloured like a pale Claret,) Arac or Aquavitae, Tobacco, (suckt through water (that it inebriate not) by long canes or pipes issuing from a round vessell,) and above all the rest, Coho or Copha: by Turk and Arab calld Caphe and Cahua: a drink imitating that in the Stigian lake, black, thick, and better; destrain'd from Bunchy, Bunnu, or Bay berries; whol∣some they say, if hot, for it expells melancholy, purges choler, begets mirth, and an excellent concoction; but not so much regarded for those good properties, as from a Romance that it was invented & brew'd by Ga∣briel (what Gab. we despute not of) to restore the decayed radical moysture of kind hearted Mahomet; who (as he speaks himselfe to his inimitable glo∣ry) never drunk it, but immediatly by vertue thereof made it a matter of nothing to unhorse forty men, and in Venus Camp (with more than a Herculean fortitude) to bring under forty women. Opium (the juyce of Poppie) is of epidemick use there also, good if taken moderatly; bad, nay mortall if beyond measure; they chaw it much, it helps catarrhs, cowardise, and the epilepsie; strengthens Venus, and which is admirable, the Foot-posts by continuall chawing it, runne sleeping day and night in a constant dreame or giddinesse, seeing, but not knowing whom they meet, though well acquainted, and misse not their intended places; by a strange efficacie expulsing the tedious thoughts of travell, and rarely de∣ceiving the poore body of its seasonable rest and lodging. I have devi∣ated, this was discourse at dinner, not yet ended.Meales. They commonly eat in earth or porceline, not valuing silver (the King by such an Article of of their Faith, the neatlier attracting it to his own Table;) they have an∣other reason (very ridiculous,) that Mahomet at his stealing into hell disco∣vered the Devills at dinner, and served in silver; earthen ware was holier, and therefore better for all kind of Mussulmen. In feeding they use not knives, nor count they it luckie to imploy but one finger or two; three or foure is injoyned them from tradition. Nor do they cut their bread but break or rend it: equally fictitious; the storie lying thus; that Ozman in his parody assures them, The Devil (Shitan they call him) ever diets so: a palinody they might sing, knew they how Ozman borrow'd it from the Jewes, who ever us'd to break their bread; and from Xenophon, in his description of the Persians: but they owe all to miracle, deriding Historie. At meales they are the merriest men that may be: no people in the world have better stomacks, drinke more, or more affect voracity: yet
are harmlesly merry; a mixture of meat, and drink, and mirth, excellently becomming them: Qui canit arte canit, qui bibit arte bibat: and then are joviall in a high degree,Complement when women (Curtezans I meane, custome anticipates the honest sort) accompany them. They admire their breeding (to us they seemed barbarous;) especially when in an exact com∣plement, out of squallid wantonnesse they would overcharge their wide mouthes with pelo or other meat, and by an affected laughter take occasion to exonerate their chaps, and throw the overplus into the dish againe whence first they had it; and as a symbol of intire good will (sir reverence) offer you, to eat what they had chewed formerly: to make an end, having soak't their hussinees or water baggs, the wine bottles are then emptied; they sit long and drink soundly,Drink. condemning that precept in the Alcoran as an idle toy, a lie invented by Osman That it is Giants blood, yea, of those we call Theomachi, or who fought against the Gods; the Turks forbeare to drink it from that prohibition: the Persians laugh them to scorne, and by this have brought them to a favourable opinion of grapes and wine. But the Persians in this are commendable; they never quarell in their cups, yet such usually irritates: nor compell they any to sit longer than hee please (arising without any excuse,) nor drink they one unto another; a prejudicat conceit tis in any man to think all brains alike in such more than beastly exercises; a base custome, too much abus'd in this Age of corrup∣tion; forgetting that Minos an old Heathen strictly forbad it the Cre∣tans, as Plato warrants in his Dialogues. But these, compar'd with those of old are without resemblance. These are homely, those full of excesse and braverie. Dyon and Ctesias assure us that in old times the Persian Mo∣narchs made many feasts,Feasts. & usually invited fifteen thousand men; in every entertainment expending foure hundred Talents, amounting in our mo∣ney to two hundred and forty thousand crownes: at private feasts when forty or fifty were received and no more (as Ephipius Olynthius records,) each supper stood him in a hundred Mynaes of gold, each mina or dina, in our money valuing six and twenty shillings and eight pence: pretty in that juvenility of time (for we say plures opes nunc sunt, &c) yet credible when we consider the vast revenue of the Persian Empire in those dayes extract∣ing Tribute from many Nations; For, what accrued out of those twentie Provinces, was not lesse than forty thousand and five hundred Attique or Euboick Talents,Crowne re∣venue. in our summes forty hundred thousand crowns or there abouts: therfore might they easily lavish out such prodigious expences. Out of Indya also they yearely received three hundred and threescore Talents of gold. The crowne revenue at this day is little lesse, (albeit the juris∣diction royall be not halfe so spatious) and amounts to mighty summes: Ta∣hamas Anno Dom. 1560 received eight millions of crownes, gathered from fifty Sultans who farm'd his in-comes; besides an annuall present or tribute of 20000 crownes Leventhibeg a Georgian Prince, never fail'd to send him: and 12000 horse the Curdyes 'twixt the two Seas also eased him of pay∣ment: and Abbas at this day from silk, tribute, and exactions, receives yeare∣ly above nine millions: foureteene millions and 280000 florins some say, 357000 Tomans in Persian money, in ours 1190000 pound sterlin: And
though the ground (by a continued flaming of the Sun) be barren in grasse, trees, or the like, yet it hinders not that her womb is rich and uberous: for besides her store of rarest marble, the earth from her concave bosome, oft-times discovers many rich mineralls and stones of lustre, Jacynths, Jasper,Myneralls. Chrysolites, Onix, Turquoises, Serpentine, and Granats: the Pezars and Pearles (than which no part of the whole world has better) also no lesse valuable. Of old, the Persian hills have been famoused for Mynes of gold. Plautus in Sticho remembers it, The Persian hills he may deserve to hold Which (if the proverb lie not) are of gold. Mereat Persarum montes, qui esse aurei perhibentur, &c. and Varro alluding to their tempting excellencies, thus; The Persian mountaines nor the Lydian state Our mindes from care or zeale can seperate. Non demunt animis curas ac religiones Persarum montes, non divitis atria Croesi. But whether they have any now or no I know not. Thus having done with this of old; record we the coynes at this day used:Coynes. the Abbassee is in our money sixteene pence; Larree ten pence; Mamoodee eight pence; Shahee foure pence; Saddee two pence; Bistee two pence; double Coz∣beg one penny; single Cozbeg one halfe penny; Fluces are ten to a Coz∣beg: the gold coynes are Sultanyes, Duraes, &c. but few seene; all but the Cozbegs and Fluces being pure silver, the other brasse, and currant all o're his Monarchy. I have else-where described the buildings in Persia: a word of their beds and other customes, Their beds are generally, Cotts of two foot height,Beds. or foure posts strengthened with girthweb; a shagg or yopangee atop; of double use, serving as an Vmbrella abroad, at home a Coverlet: in Sum∣mer their Slaves attend about them; some to waft and to beget coole ayre, others to scare away the Gnats and such like buzzing vermin. The men account it no small shame to urine standing, but call such dogs rather than Mussulmen; we beleeve them: they mundifie their genitors after it, and to that end have Slaves every where attending them with Ewers of silver to cleanse pollution: they hate to see men walk: such they think mad; a madder thing to see them ride tho not a stones-cast journey. Their horses are of the Arabian breed, bodied like Jennets,Horses. but farre more swift and couragious: they curb their fierie mettall with sharp cut∣ting bitts, a ring of iron also helping them; their bridles are long and stud∣ded with gold: of such mettall are their pummells and stirrops; their saddles are usually of velvet; high & close, like the Morocco sort: the trees are curiously painted: those they borrow from the Tartar, are hard, and small, and close; sure, but not so easie. They are generally fat and in good liking, albeit their fare be meane and slender; a little bagg fill'd with bar∣ley and chopt straw hung about their heads, is both livery and manger; they strictly tie them to a proportion, more or lesse breeding death or dis∣eases. The Mules are no lesse valuable; of better service where the passage is sandy, desart or mountanous. Men use Horses and Asses to ride upon;
women never, but upon Camells; every Camell loaded with two Cages (or Cajuaes as they call them) holds two women; of wood, coverd with scarlet commonly, low, and not suffering them to stand upright, but lesse grievous in that for most part all sorts sit, & cannot endure long standing: when any mans Haram travels, they are guarded with leane-fac't Eunuchs without weapons to offend women, but arm'd with bowes & swords to de∣fend thē against any bold or curious opposer: upon sight of any of them, all travellers fly out of the way, albeit they be the best men in Persia; to make good the custom, and to prevent such mischiefe as jealousie drawes too oft along with it, enflaming there as quickly as in any other part of Asia: where we will finish our domestick view; and turne our eyes upon other objects: their Language first; next, their Religion; and (as a farewell) end all in a compendium of her Emperors. I will offer you their Alphabet, writ in their owne Character: to which if I add somwhat of their present Language, it may both shew thee the af∣finity it has with the Saxon in many words (for from the Sacae a people neere Mount Taurus they borrow both Name and Descent;) and perad∣venture benefit the future Traveller. Aleph. bea. tea. sea. Icam. hea. chea. taul. zaul. rea. zea. zean. sheen. saut. zaud. ctea. zcea. me. kine. phea. caufe. coffe. Lom. meam. nuen. wow. Loomealephloy. yea. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Cum{que} superba foret Babilon spolianda tropoets.
English. Persian GOD VVHoddaw the Sunne Afta the Moone Maw a Starre Nacosh the Sky Kabowdas a Cloud Sephyte the Earth Zameen Emperour Pot-shaw King Shaw Queene or Em∣presse Beggoon Prince Mirza Duke Cawn Marquesse Beglerbeg Earle Sultan Lord Beg Lady Conna Lords sonne Beg-Zedday Gentleman Awgaw Merchant Soldager Souldier Cowzel-bash Lord Ambassa∣dor Elchee-beg President Visyer Judge Cauzee or Caddi Justice Darraguod Chancellor Mordaer Constable Calentar Purveyor Mammandar a Christian Franghee a Moorish belee∣ver Mussulman a Jew Iehewd an Armenian Armenee Persian Farsee Indian Mogull Georgian Gorgee Sarcashan Carcash Turk Tork A Church Dear a High Priest Mustaed-dini an Arch-Bishop Kalyph a Priest Mulai a holy man Hodgee a begging Fryer Abdall a Saint Meer a Prophet Emoom a Prophets son Syet & Emoom∣zedda a holy Father Padre a Father Bobbaw a Mother Mamma & Madre a Brother Broder a Sister Qhvaar a Sonne Zedda a Daughter Daughter a Boy Oglan & Pissar a Girle Daughter a Mayden Whotoon a Cosen Choul a Friend Memam a Slave Colloom a Servant Marda a Foot-man Shooter a Groom Mitar-bashe a Cook Ash-pash a Butler Suffrage a Barbar Syrtrash a Physitian Hackeam a Doctresse Dayah a Mountebanck Shytan-Tabyb a Scribe Vikeel an Interpretor Callamaehé a speech or lang. Zavoan a Mechanick Oastad a Man Adam a Woman Zan the Head Serry Hayre Mow Eyes Chasin Eye-browes Browz Nose Bynny Eares Goush Cheekes Row Mustachoes Sibyl Lips Lab Teeth Dandoon Chyn Chynoser Arme Bozow Breast Sinow Hand Dast Finger Angusht Belly Shykam Yard Kery
Stones Sekym Matrix Cus Thighes Roam Knees Zoanow Foot Poe Wine Sherap Water Obb Fire Attash Wind Bawd The Sea Deriob a Ship Kishtee a Boat Kishtee-cowcheck Fish Mohee a Sheep Guspan a Goat Booz Roast Meat Cobbob Rice Brindg Boyled Rice Pelo Wood Yzom Apples Sib Pomgranads Narr Musk-Melons Corpoos Water-Melons Hendoon Myrabolans Allilha Dates Wchormaw Almonds Bodoom Raisons Kishmish Walnuts Gardow Sugar Sucker Small Nuts Pistachoes Sirrup of Dates Dooshab Pleasant Liquor Sherbet Bezar Pezar a Rose Gull Grapes Angwor Figges Anger Orenge Norenge Lemmons Lemoon Carroway seed Giznees Anny-seed Zera Nutmeg Goose Cloves Mekut Mace Basbas Cinamon Dolcheen Spice Filfill Ginger Gingerfill Pepper Pepperfill Ophium Triack or Therias Rubarbe Rhubarr Onions Peose Spiknard Sembul-tib Manna Sheer-quest Sena Machyi Poppie Pustie one Yeere Yeck Sol one Month Yeck-Maw a Day Rowse to day Amrowse Yesterday Diggrowse to morrow Subbaw two dayes hence Past-subbaw Night Shave or Shab Soone Zood Much Pishaar More Diggar Good Cowbass Bad Baddass Naught Cowb-nees Great Buzzurck Little Coucheck Small Kam Lesse Andack Write Binwees Sing Bowhoon Bread Noon Butter Rogan Cheese Paneer Milk Sheer Sower Milk Mosse Vinegar Sirca Rose-water Gule-ob Hony Dowshabb Salt Namack Water Obb Raine-water Ob-baroon Salt-water Ob-namack Hot Garmas Cold Sermawas a Book Catobb a Chest San dough a Carpet Collee a League Farsang
halfe a League Nym-Farsangas a resting place Manzeil a common Inne Carravans-raw a Nursery Haram a House Conney a place Ioy Straw Io Barley Cow Wheat Gandowm Money Zarr White Sevittas Red Sourck Iron Pholot a Knife Cord a Sword Shamshere a Gun Tophangh a Glasse Shusha Inck Moora kabbas Silke Abrushumas Lace Chytoon Buttons Dougma a Furre Fust a Dagger Hangier Spurre Mahamis Boots Chagma a Window Pangera a Doore Darr a Table Taghtah a Chayre Cursee a Cup Paola a Candle Sham a Candle-stick Shamdom a Bed Mafrush a Pillow Nazbolish a Quill Callam a Garden Baugh or Bawt a Towne De the Devill Shitan Hell Iehendam Rogue Haramzedday Slave Colloom Whore Cobba Cuckold Ghyddee Foole Doo anna Villaine Haram zedda old Whore Moder-Cobba the Kings Evill Boagma Dogge Segg Cat Chat Mule Astor a Goat Buz Cow Gow an Asse Owlock an Elephant Behad a Nightengall Bulbul Camell Shouter Mule-man Astor-dor Camell-man Sheuter-dor Horse-keeper Myter a Horse Asp a Saddle Zeen a Saddle-cloth Zeen-push a Shooe Cosh a Naile Cheat Sheepherd Vloch Bird Quoy Beefe Goust de gow Hen Morgh Hens-Egges Tough-morgh Boyld Poactas Halfe boyld Nym-poact Paper Coggesh & Cartas Thred Respun All boyld Hamma-poact Kitchen Mawdbaugh Old Chonnay New Novas I Thou He Man San O Nothing Hech a high-way Raw a Tree Drake a Turquoise Pheruzay a Pasport Phyrman a Cap or Turbāt Mandeel a Coat Cabay a Key Cleet a Ring Hanguster a Tower Manor a Needle Suzan a Looking-glasse Dina a Whip Chabuck a Towell Dezmal
a Gift Piscash a Platter Langaree a Plate Nalbachee a Colour Raugh a Misbeleever Caffar a Privy Adam Conney a Close stoole Ob-Conney a Cradle Cajua a Glasse bottle Shuzan a riding Coat Bolla-push a hill Achow a Hot-house Hummum a Sweet heart Ionanam Strength Zoor Full Pooras Strait Tanghea Weake Sanghe nees In health Choggea Sick Na-choggea Dead Mordass Gone Raftas Here Ingee Above Bolla & hollanda Below Poin Angry Ianghea Hungry O jam Sope Saboon Broken Shekestas Laden Barkonnas Lost Gumshottas Found Paydcun Tobacco Tombacoo & Tu∣toon A Tobacco pipe Calliown & lula Stop Bast Wash Bushur The Market Buzzar the great Market Mydan You lie Drugmaguee You say true Rosmaguee Very right Dreustas Neere, farre off Nazeecas, duras Bring it higher Beare ingee What say you Chechesas Goe, call him Bro, Awascun He is a sleepe Cobbedat He is abroad Swarshudat He is not within Conney neese He is beheaded Shaw cusht He eats & drinks Mough whorat Come quickly Zood beaw Goe quickly Zood burro Know you, yes, Medanny, baly Where is he Quo jaas Who, my father Che, pader man I know not Che madannam Can I tell you Che cunnam Not farre off Durneese What say you Chemigwe I drink to you Esco-sumaw I thank you Bizmilla with all my heart All humderalla Much good do it Awpheat Give me Biddy Do you love me you Dooz me daree Take away Verdure You trifle Bazi-mecunné Fill full Pour-kunn Boyle the meat Goust-buppose Stay a while Andac wiest Even so Hamshé Beat him Besome It is day Rows-hast It is night Shab-hast It is dark Tareekas Say thou Gufta I have forgot Man Varamash∣cardam Bravely done Barra colla Brave game Tamas-shaw
English. Persian. A good morrow or God blesse you Sir, Sallam-alleekam The like I wish you Sir, Alleekam-sallam Whether doe you goe? Quo ja merué? Not farre Dure neese How doe you to day? Chaldery Amrooz? Well I praise God Choggee Shoocoro-Whoddaw Good, I am very glad thereof, Koobas, Whoddaw bashat Where have you beene? Quo ja boodee? Now I am your servant Hali man Merda sumaw Welcome, Sir, heartily welcome. Hoshmodee, Agaw, Suffowardee Tell me, how you doe? healthie Gufta, chehaldery? choggee Where is your house? at Babylon Quo jaas chonna sumaw? Bagdat Have you a Wife? Zan daree? Yea truly, fifteene Sir, Bally, pounsdata beg How old are you? twenty foure. Chan sol daree? char-beest How are you called? Che nom Daree sumaw? My name is called Teredoro, Noma mannas Teredore Is this the way to Tauris? Een raw hast Tabyris? Yea, but how many leagues thither? Bally, o chan Farsangas untraf? I suppose, tis twenty, Man medonam, beest Is the way good or bad? Raw koob o baddas? Is there good Wine? Vnjee koob sherabbas? Yea, in the high way. Bally, raw hast Whose Garden is that? Een baugh mally chee? Tis the great Kings, Mally-Pot-shawhas Know you Cazbeen? Cazbeen medanny? I doe Sir, have you seene it? Man bali beg, sumaw dedee? Why not, I know all Persia, Cheree-na, hamma Farsee dedam, Come hither good Boy, Ingee bear koob Pissar Give me some Wine, soone Sherap bedee, zood Fill me but one cup Pourcun yeck paola Then saddle my Horse Asp zeen pushee I thank you Sir Whoddaw-negaturat It growes dark, Ile sleepe Tarreekas, man mechobed Give me some water, slave Ob be dee, colloom Here Sir, take it Ingee Agaw, hast bedee Much good doe it you brother Awpheat bashat-broder What businesse have you? Che Corr daree sumaw? Little, but stay a little Coocheck, andae wyst I have some occasions Man corr daram Tell me where is the King? Gufta? Pot-shaw quo jaas? I beleeve in Hyrcania, Man medonam Mozendram God blesse you, Wheddaw bashat. Persian. English. Turkish. Yeck One Beer Do, or Dew Two Ekee Se Three Eweh Char Foure Dewrt Panch Five Beash Shesh Six Altee Haft Seven Yedté Hasht Eight Seckez No Nine Dockoz Dah Ten One Yauzda Eleven One-beet Dozda Twelve One-ekhe Sezda Thirteene One-ewch Charda, or Chaharda Fourteene One-dewrt Pounzda Fifteene One-beash Shoonzda Sixteene One-alté Hawda Seventeene One-yedté Hashda Eighteene One-seckez Nouzda Nineteene One-dockoz Beest Twenty Ygarmy Yec-beest Twenty one Ygarmy beer Dota-beest Twenty two Ygarmy eckee Se-beest Twenty three Ygarmy ewch. Char-beest Twenty foure Ygarmy dewrt Sounce-beest Twenty five Ygarmy beash Se Thirty   Chehel Forty   Pangoh Fifty   Phast Sixty   Haftat Seventy   Hashtat Eighty   Navat Ninety   Satt One hundred   Da hazatt, or hazar One thousand  
The Religion of the Persians. THE Persian Religion at this day varies not from the Turks in any particle of the Alcoran; and yet they account one the other He∣reticks, and are no lesse zealous and divided in their profession, than wee and the Papalins: a devision begun Anno Domini 1400, by a Syet of Ar∣doveil (a Citie in Media;) the better to advance the Sophyan Title to the Crowne, derived from Mortis Ally their famous predecessor, cosen and sonne in law to Mahumet: which Ally, albeit hee had just right to sit as Kalyph at Mecca next to Mahomet, yet in his despight, three other men stept up before him; and during their lives kept him in slaverie, and with∣stood him. These three, Abuboker, Omer, & Ozman, are by the Turks most venerably accounted of; but by the Persians (as appeares by their cursing them in a prayer made by Syet Gunet) as impostors, doggs, and hereticks; whereby is sown such mortall hatred betwixt these two potent Monarchs that (to Europs good) they abominate each other with implacable hatred. MAHOMET, (sonne of Abdar a Pagan, and Emma a Jew) was borne at Iathreb (or Itrarip, Iezrab in Postellus, now Medyna) in Arabia, the yeere from the Creation 4544, of Christ our blessed Lord and Saviour 574: Iu∣stinian at that time commanding the Roman Empire, and Cozrhoes (father to Hormizda) the Persians. His parents being mean and poore, he was forced to serve an appren∣tiship, and with much patience served Zayed-ben-Hartah a rich and famous Merchant; who dying, left his servant so good a legacie, that Mahomet was thought worthy any woman in Mecca: but by reason of those inces∣sant broyles commenc't by Cozrhoe and inflamed by the Romans, Traffick decayed, and most men danc't to the shrill brazen sound of Bellonaes mu∣sick; Mahomet amongst the rest serving for pay first with Heraclius, and then the Persian; not caring much who was victor, so he was on the safest side, by both their confusion to plot some way or other to advance himselfe, both in a terrhen dignity and as a Deity: nor did he erre in his prediction; for what by his great estate and good fortune in the warres, he soone threw off the qualitie of a common man, and got a companie; yea at length an Armie of so many Tattars and Arabians, that he dared to assault the infeebled Christians, and became victor; yea, by stratagem (mingling with the credulous and gladded Persians) upon a watch-word cut asunder and confounded the Persian Armie. Which done, hee blusht not to extoll himselfe to all his troops, deciphering the misery of Persia and horror of Roman bondage; acquainting them also with the great dis∣cord 'mongst Christians; of that inhumane villanie perpetrated upon Mau∣ritius by Phocas (then Emperour) his detested servant, and of Pope Boni∣face's usurpation of the title of Universall Bishop; contrary to the good will of all the World, and what Pope Gregory the great had lately bran∣ded Iohn the Constantinopolitan Patriack with, as the Antichrist; in that sixtie six good Bishops of Rome from Lynus (seven yeeres after the passi∣on) to that Pope then teaching, never desired it. That hee himselfe was
ordained from the begining of the world to eclipse the pride of that Pope, to instruct the world in a better and more plausible way than either Moses did the Jewes, or Christ the Christians; that hee was the Comforter pro∣mised (yet sayes that he came to give his Law by the sword and not by mi∣racles) and to advance the Arabians name and dignitie above all other Kingdomes in the Universe. The amazed Savages admire his boldnesse, and (though some thought basely of him) most part hoping hee could ef∣fect his promises, give credit to him and atttend his revelations. But ere he could finish his new moulded work, the inraged Persian sud∣denly steales among them and in memory of their late kindnesse, retaliates them so fiercely, that Mahomet (to save his life) posts away, leaving the rest to the mercilesse furie of the Persian. Mahomet with a sad heart arrives safely in Mecca (Mocura and Muny∣chiates in old writers, the Arabian Metropolis:) but when he cals to mind his miserable estate, by this last defeat being cheated of his moneys and men, yea such men as hee had prepar'd to help forwards his ambition, hee consumes in the meditation, and by his faint-heartednesse and constant vexing had doubtlesse made Death his executioner, had not Satan physicke him. Some safer way he intends to take, than in Mars his rugged fields, so full of cost and blood-shed. And therefore in the first place, to solace his un∣quiet spirits & inrich himselfe, he laies seige to Chodaige or Aediga a woman of great wealth and worship, by some thought Queene of Corasan; whom after a few amorous assaults he won, and of her begot three sonnes and foure daughters, named Ebrahim, Tajeb, and Taher (all three dying young) Fatyma and Zaynab (both married to Mortis Ally;) Om-Kalthom and Rachya, wives to old Abuboker. Mahomets stomack grew weak, and one sort of meat begun to loath him, Chodaige was stale, and others fancied him: he therefore purpos'd in his Law (then in hatching) to allow all sorts of car∣nall liberty: and to incourage them by his example, solemnly (as Ben Ca∣sen a writer of his beleife sayes) espoused Aysce the beloved child of his sonne in law Abubocher: a child (though Mahomets wife) I well may call her, at that time not exceeding six yeeres old; yet so pliable to the de∣lights of her wanton husband, that hee calls her his best beloved, and dictates a whole chapter to her praises; so that for her affection to him, her courtesie to others, her witty conceits, her skil in history and language, she is intituled Mother of the Faithfull; and (contrarie to his tenet in his Alcoran) in whose grave (hoping there also to imbrace her) Mahomet desired to be buried, as was by old Abubocher afterwards performed His third wife was Miriam (or Mamrya) of whom he begot Ebrahim Cas∣sen, who at the age of six months, by the arrow of grim death was directed the inevitable way of his brethren. Zaynab (the repudiate of Ben-Har∣tah Mahomets master) was Mahomets fourth and last wife (concubines hee had above a hundred, but in any Author I find not named) a Lady of singular perfection, and so credulous of his feigned visions (and that his epilepsie was caus'd by an Angells glory, oft conferring with him) that by all Mahomitans she is also named a second Mother of Mussulmen or true beleevers.
These his bosome friends, and other his bed fellowes, together which taught birds to feed at his eare, and beasts by practize directed, blazond his holinesse, and put all Arabia into a confused wonder: and having by the Devills prompting, and the help of Sergius an Italian (a neast of un∣cleannesse, a Monck, a Sabellian, a discontented wretch for missing world∣ly preferment at Byzanth,) and of Iohn of Antioch (an infamous Nesto∣rian) finisht his Alcoran in the yeere of our blessed Lord God 620. and of Mahomets age 46. which so transported him, that to Mecca hee goes, intending to divulge it, and where hee hoped to have it easily credited; but therin his prediction faild him, for so soon as they perceived his ground of innovation (formerly acquainted with his birth, breeding, and subtle∣ty they banish him, and but for his wives kindred had crusht him and his Cockatrice egge, but then in hatching. Mahomet (involud with more per∣plexity now than ever) is at his wits end, once resolving to burne his book and fall to trading: but Sergius moderates, telling him, a designe of so great consequence must needs bee attended with persecution and many other circumstances. The halfe dead Prophet revives upon this incou∣ragement, and quickly apprehends this affliction propitious to his me∣mory; so that to Iathreb hee goes, and for two yeeres secludes himselfe from much company; till having finisht his plot, and commanding the ac∣compt of all his sectaries to begin from his late flight out of Mecca, he again adventures, and by bribery, magick, and other meanes attracted ma∣ny followers, and in seven yeeres after is received in Mecca: from this accursed root branching out so many sects as in short time infected and shaded all the Orient, in an eclipse of fearfull darknesse. Mahomet (whose name Arabically signifies Deceit, and many times Conveniunt rebus nomina saepe fuis; affoording also the number 666 the marke of Antichrist,) having accomplisht his desires, and runne his race, is summond to appeare before the Lord of all flesh, the God Omnipo∣tent, Omniscient, and Judge of all mens actions; where (no doubt) he re∣ceived a just judgement for his impiety. This was in his great clymacteric 63, of the Hegira 17, and of our Saviour 637, ordaining Ally to succeed him, and his Carcasse to be placed in Aisces grave in Iathrip which per Antono∣masiam he new named Medina Talnabi; it or Mecca, in my opinion, being that Munichyates in Ptolomy; but I rather think Mecca it, because I read that Medina (or Iathrep) was built Anno Domini 364. by Aadhuddaule then King of Babylon: and by Osman allegorically call'd El-haramain, and by others De-A'salem i.e. a holy place or Town of mercy, none daring in the garb or language of a soldyer tread East, West, North, or South, nigher than six one way, twelve, eighteene, and twenty foure miles the other; upon paine of death and eternall displeasure. Speak we now a little of his fabulous Alcoran, or Sunna, i.e. the Book of truth, or a Legend for the faithfull: stuft with obsceannesse, lyes, miracles, visions, morall and natu∣rall Philosophy; such trash as may powerfully provoke the silliest student to a height of laughter. The proem this; That it was sent from God by Gabryel the holy Angell to Mortis Ally; but hee mistaking the man, gave it to Mahomet; whom when God saw replenisht with equall vertue, the Angell was not blamed, but the guift confirmed and made irrevocable.
The Alco∣ran.To begin then; The Alcoran or Bible (by them call'd Kurrawn and Alesalem i.e. the law of peace, or Alcacan i.e. Judgement, as it was digested by Ozman fifteen yeeres after the death of Mahomet) is in volume twice so big as the Psalmes of David; divided into a hundred and foureteene Azoaraes or Chapters, put by Ozman into a poore kind of rythme, unplea∣sant to the eare, unlesse well ordered: It is not a continued tract of de∣votion or direction, but of his owne life, the Art of warre, the use of peace, Rhetorick, Numbers, the Zodiack, the Earth, and a mishmash out of Applis (or Aristotle) grosly and confusedly handled. His mother instructed him in the Jewish Rites or Talmud: and Sergius in the Gospell: where∣by, in the seventy one Azoara of Nohha, and in the tenth of Iunys, hee re∣cords the Historie of Noah and Ionas; and in other chapters, of Enoch, Abraham, Ioseph, Moses, Elias, and David; whose songs call'd Zebur-Dahood or the Psalmes of David, and the Teurat Moissah or pentateuch of Moses, he extolls most vehemently. The Ingil also (or Gospell of Saint Luke) he sets out at large in the fourth Azoara of Anneza, and in the fifth of Al∣meyda, naming Christ, the Messiah, Rooth-noor Alloh, and Hazret, i.e. Mes∣sias, the Spirit or word and light of God, holy Jesus: not omitting his bo∣dily ascention into heaven in sight of his twelve Apostles, seventy Disci∣ples, and five hundred men. Yet denyes him be to the sonne of God, but that the Virgin conceiv'd by smelling to a Rose presented her by Gabriel; and that he was borne out of her breasts. Also that he was not crucified, but Iudas or some other wicked theife; Christ being separated from them by a cloud that covered him and came from heaven. And thence it is, the Crosse is so rediculous amongst them; they say also that hee was the most holy, chast, and powerfull Saint that ever converst on earth: and that (in the second Azoara of Albacara in the Alcoran) Moses and Christ shall save the Jewes and Christians at the day of Doome: and yet in the next chap∣ter of Amram (forgetting what hee had said) protests that no soule shall ever bee saved but by his Alcoran, hee being sent into the world to mode∣rate the strictnesse of the Gospell, as Christ did the severity of the Law ce∣remoniall; varying also from what in the twelfth Assuratto hee com∣mands, that they should bee held in equall repute with the Alcoran; run∣ning thus: The holy and mercifull God, first sentt he ceremoniall Law, and then the Gospell to direct all men in the right path, and lastly the Al∣coran, a faithfull Book, and for your instruction. No man therefore that is truly religious, dare to undervalue the old Law and: Gospell, but to practize it no lesse than what is commanded in the Alcoran. From whence it is, that they reverence the holy Sepulchre, visit Saints Tombs, and ho∣nour the memorie of our Saviour; abhorring the Jewes of all creatures. Saint Iohn Baptist also hee speaks modestly of, and of the blessed Virgin with singular reverence: saying in the nineteenth Azoara to this purpose, Hayle Mary, thou art blessed, yea in puritie and holinesse excelling all other women; the meditation of Gods lawes was ever in thy heart, therfore he hath selected thee, refined thee, and made thee his happiest dwel∣ling; thou art full of knowledge and mercie; free from pollution, hatred or ambition: yea, thou the Virgin Mother of the great Prophet Jesus, art only of woman-kind most lovely and perfect in the sight of the Al∣mighty,
&c. Which I name, not that his Book is any way more valuable, (the end considered, which was his plot for Apostasie) but that the Devill and Sergius who helpt him, could not blaspheame, nor bee suffered to de∣rogate from their Majesty; and to whom we say in the words of our Savi∣our to the Demoniack, hold thy peace; and ex ore tuo laus sordet. The residue of the Book consists of Heresiarchyes against our blessed Saviour; with Arrius it denies the Divinity; with Sabellius the Trinity; with Macedonius the holy Ghost proceeding; with Manicheus the death of Christ; and such like errours as to them and Satan seemed plausible. In the 32 Azoara, hee commands that no man be so impious to question any particle of his Law, nor to dispute about it; and yet in another chapter confesses that tis full of lyes. 1 Commandement; There is one, and but one great God, and Mahomet is his Prophet. Sung every fourth houre both by the Muyezins & Talismanni from the steeple tops of every Mosque in a cleare note, Llala y-lala, Mohummed resullula; and the Persians by Syet Gunets direction to the honour of their Prophet, Llala y-lala Mortus Ally vel-hillulla. 2 Comman. 'Tis neither good nor just that any Mussulman live unmar∣ried; lest the professors of the Alcoran (or Mahomet) be thereby diminished. Whence it arises that Poligamy is tolerated; yea, that such are thought the most honourable and brave men who super-abound in wives and con∣cubines. The chast Prophet Mahomet in the Azoara of Bacara boasts much of his owne delight and singularity therein; and that he had strength at most times to satiate the lust of forty women. In that chapter of Attahrim he also confesses that he oft had violated his faith and troth; but, it grie∣ved him not, in that hee had received pardon from God; and had to wit∣nesse it, his good friends Rachel and Gabryel, two holy Angels. But who sees not, that in this precept of his (like a polite Machiavillian) he had respect to the naturall disposition of the Arabians, pleas'd with free∣dome and voluptuousnesse, rather than to any vertue: not caring how, so by any magick he could yoak them to obedience, and affectation of his Alcoran. 3 Comman. It behooves all Mussulmen to bee charitable; and to hate contention. From this command, issues most good to Travellers; for whereas Innes are not to be had in heathen countries, stately buildings (call'd Imarets in Turkie; Carravans-raws in Persia; Serrays in Indya) are purposedly built and open for all commers, never questioning their Country, businesse, nor religion; the roomes are sweet and well kept, the stables be convenient; and not any is to pay ought, in that twas founded from the charity of some Mahomitans; who have beene knowne to spend in one of those common receptories fifteene thousand pound sterling: such are in Shyraz, Cashan, &c. they also erect Hospitalls for lame men and diseased: yea, for aged, starved, or hurt birds, beasts, and such like creatures. 4 Conaman. It behooves all Mussulmen to invocate their Prophet, every
day five times at least, with sobriety: and to attend his comming patiently. Which, they carefully accomplish; and with such regard that when the Muyezin is heard to cry aloud from the Mosque they fall to prayer, though then busied in prophane talk, drinking, drabbing, or the like. And in praying, to help their memorie use Beads, stop their eares, and shut their eyes, lest any thing might divert them in their zealous Orizons; which they actuate in a quiet and silent murmur, bending, prostrating, and kissing the ground or some relique of holy earth brought from Medina, the Haram or Alcaba, two holy Chappels in Mecca, erected (sayes the Alco∣ran) by Abraham from the true Idea of that which Adam built in Paradize; albeit some hold that he stayed there not above a day, & carried by Angels into heaven at the generall Deluge: in every El-fata or prayer sizedaing or kissing the earth at each Epethite or name of God and Mahomet: and after they have battologuiz'd Ilalay-lala, they iterate another to this ef∣fect following. In the name of the good and holy God. Praised be the Soveraigne of all worlds, the only mercifull God of Doom': thee we serve, thee wee call upon: shew us the best way; that, which thou hast revealed to Mahumet; but not that wherby thou punishest the Ungodly. This also, as I have noted amongst them, being a meere Tautologie of the names of God and Mamet. Bizmillah! raugh mawn, a raugh-heam Allhundill Alley: Etto byatto, almo barakatto, assulwatto, Attayo batto; Leyla, heessalem, Aleyka, I, Iaanna, ne∣been rough meet Wallough heeweeber-catto. Essa-lamalena, Wallah Ebadulla, hesolaheem Eshaddo. Awla-El aha, El-Allaho, Eshaddai, Mahummed resull-Al∣logh. L'alla, Essalamalena Ebadulla Solaheem. Essalamaleekam Essalamaleeka. Allyhomma Sul-hillulla. Allaw Mohummed don Wallaw, Wassaleem-chamma Salleata, Alhumderalley, Whoddaw, & said by all Mahomitans in Arabia, Per∣sia, Indya, Iava, &c. And though this be the most usuall, yet they are not without other set formes of prayer, compiled by Osman in his Parody, (for, in the 17 Azoara Mahomet confesses that he could neither read nor write) and by that famous Almotannabby, who fell in his learned conceits to make his Name more venerable than Mahomet. Their Elfataes are either for the safety of their Kings, a happy issue, the welfare of their Country, thanks that they are Mussulmen, Bosarmen, or true beleevers, and the like: five times in foure and twenty houres praying (or rather balbutiating) orderly. The houres are, day-breake, noone, three in the afternoone, sunne-set, and at mid∣night: recorded by these titles.Ashaera, Magreb, Adelesher, Kalamath, and Erketh; Arabically thus, Dahour, Lashour, Mogrub, Sallit & Sabaha L'hair. The first houre, is acted by foure Tessalems or prostrations and two pray∣ers; 2. by ten times kissing the earth and five El-fataes; 3. houre requires eight grovelings, and foure ejaculations; 4. has five Sizedaes and three orations; and the last houre for a farwell has fifteen tesselems and eight re∣petitions: after that houre to day breake tis held an ungodly thing to in∣vocate. The Persians since their reformation, think it enough to pray thrice in foure and twenty houres; at sob, dor, & magareb Arabick words, and which signifie morning, noonee, and night. On the Gynmaa or Sab∣bath (by the Persians call'd Y'owma and D'siuma, by Turks Zuma-g'iuny,
Dumaad by the vulgar Arabs) they assemble in the Mosques (without seats and bells;) each first washing, then kneeling with his face to Medina, not speaking one to another, spetting nor coughing: scapes unpardonable. 5. Command. See thou observe yeerely a Month Lent, a Byram, &c. The Lent or Ramdam (call'd also Ramadan, Ramazan, and Ramulan) be∣gins commonly at the Sunnes entrance into Aries, Libra other times, no time certaine; and is an imitation of our Lent, or rather the forty dayes Moses was in Horeb, and by some said in memory of Mahomets forty dayes hiding himselfe in the Desart, flying from the rage of Mecca's Inhabitants, and that in that moneth he divulg'd the Alcoran: but most likely (as in the 47 Azora of himselfe, and 25, in which he treats of the excellencie of the Alfurcan) from his blasphemous lie that he was so long in the sixt heaven call'd Alahal, where this Anthropomorphite sayes hee had the honour to shake hands with the Almighty (which he sayes were 70 times colder than Ice;) and that being upon th'earth, to make the people credit him, he com∣manded the Moone to descend; halfe of which he put into his own sleeve, and the other halfe serv'd as a zone or girdle to Mortis Ally: and to their like amazement, after so rare a complement peec't it, and placed it in the same Orbe whence first he drew it. During this Ramdam, all the day long they abstaine from all sorts of vi∣ands or refection, he being counted the veriest heretique in the world dare ryot it. But, Don Phoebus is no sooner inveloped with his dark mantle the earths interposition, and Dame Cynthia arrayed with brightnesse in their Hemisphere, then they gormundize and let loose the reines of their un∣bridled appetite, Epicurising in all kindes of delights to be invented, or pleasures possible: Prosper's saying, That to fast from sinne, is the best fast; is here ridiculous. So soone as the nine and twentieth day is past (for though the Alcoran command forty, yet by those of the late reformation, it was limited to one Moone) they begin the Byram (as we doe Easter) and continue their merriment and sports till the third day be ended; the two dayes after the Byram, are commonly call'd Chutsi-baaram, & Char-bahram (or Byram.) The last houre of the last festivall many vow a zealous pil∣grimage to their Prophets Sepulchre (not magnetically attracted, nor in∣tombed in an iron coffin as some report, but laid under a faire marble, po∣lisht and ingraved with Arabique sentences out of the Elesalem.) But in the way, wallow in all kind of swinish turpitude, villany, and lothsomnesse; yet no where persecuted, being palliated with a Pilgrims coat and hypo∣critique sanctity. The Buccarie they solemnize in November or Chodad-maw (by Turks Silcade, by Arabs Rabiel owl) in commemoration of the Ram sacrificed by Abraham such time as Izmael (they say) should have beene killed. Many other Festivalls they celebrate. The Oud Hussan, Nowrouz, Imamy, Caddyer-Ally, Iedt-Ousant, Auwpatsian; the Sophyan, the Roses, Daffadil∣lies, &c. The Oud-Hussan is from Hocem or Hussan (soone of Ally) slaine with eleven of his sonnes by Mavi the Chalyph, Lord of Damascus, and Nephew to Ozman. A Festivall begun by Syet Gunet, followed by Aydar, and com∣manded by Sha-Izmael, as a Triumph against the Ben-Humyans, who tho
they thought to have extirpt Ally's root, yet by divine providence St. Az∣mully brancht secretly, Anno Hegirae 90. and from him this Siet of Ardoveil, reviver of the Sophian dignitie. For the Syet not onely sleighted the Turkish opinion of Mahomets three successours Abubocher and the rest, but cursed all such as honor them; yea, and foure other great Hodgees or Doctors of the Alcoran, contemporarie friends and helpers of Mahomet; those foure (if I be not deceiv'd) whom Mahomet (in a feare for his pre∣sumption beholding God in Paradize) wip't from the sweat of his brow, and by divine myracle metamorphiz'd into foure learned men, thus named, Achmet Sembelim, Abu-hamet, Melec-zeddah, and Sheck Vaffaim: a tenet so offensive and exasperating to the Turks, that of late the Muphti condem∣ning an innocent Persian, swore a great oath, he thought it a better act and a more meritorious sacrifice to kill one Persian, than seventy Christians. But to our Storie. All agree that Hussan was slaine trecherously by Chuse a slave to Mnavi. Mavi was an Actor, they therefore punish him yearely (though rotten 1000 yeares since.) First, framing a deformed Image, his face blackt, his nose pierc't with a Dart, and clad in straw: which done, they hurrie it through the streets in a hurly-burly of thousands of people, who when they have dragd it enough within the City, hale it to some rising hill with∣out, wher to all mens view they elevate this (supposed living) Caytiffe. The Caddy bawles out a pathetique Oration to this purpose, That after much search, Ally had directed them where to apprehend this Traytor, unwor∣thy the least pittie or procrastination: this being that same villaine who slew Hussan and his sons (Ceresin only escaping:) that every good man is bound in conscience to curse him, yea to help to torment him in the vilest manner possible. In shew of joy and assent they unanimously sing Epicinia (a song of victo∣rie and crie aloud, Yough Ally, yea strive to rend the clouds with their ceaselesse clamours. At a set time they cease roring, and fire is given to a trayne of Gunpowder which sets divers squibs a fire, and at length dissi∣pates and blowes up the detested Syrian, by a hideous noise making the ayre eccho at his smokie Funerall. Hussans ghost now sleepes quietly; each Persian commends one anothers zeal; haste home, & spend that night in merriment. The Nowrouz is in imitation of our New-yeares day; but they begin (af∣ter the old manner) in March, such time as Phoebus in his equall shine to either Pole, makes the Aequinoctium. A festivall of jovialitie, for one pray∣er preying upon varietie of wanton pleasures; the Talismanni piping now to Bacchus, Ceres, and Madam Venus. For, I have observ'd, that in manie parts for 11 months in the yeare we could see verie few women, and those vailed; but impossible in the streets or gardens to converse with anie with∣out danger: yet these twelve dayes of the Nowrouz all places were full of them, yea their naked faces openly discovered; frisking in amorous po∣stures, and drawing the eye by a forced Magique. Gifts also and recipro∣call presents are retorted up & down; with garments of silk & gold, horses, fruits, and piscashes of other sorts; nothing but riding the great horse, drinking, cock-fighting, fortune-telling, singing, courting, and the like
observed to the last minute of that Festivall. The Imamy has some dependance on the Buckaree. This a Camell, that a Ram; that for Ismael, this for Mahomet. In November, the Meccan Protomist sends a sanctified Camell by an adopted sonne (sometimes natu∣rall) who is welcom'd to Spahawn by many thousand Mussulmen, who shew th'extream of joy for so holy a Present. After they have tried & tired their voices, the Hodgee from an exalted place acquaints them with the cause of his long journey, perswades them to a thankfull remembrance, and blesses them. The zealous multitude without anie respect of men or danger, throng about the Beast, who is no sooner in the field where Death arrests him, but that they fall upon him, and pluck off his haires with an ad∣mirable dexteritie, keeping them as sanctimonious reliques, praevalent against sudden death (though manie die in the assault, and thousands re∣turne maymed) hunger, thirst, povertie, and the like. After which, the tormented Camell is by the Hodgee againe signed for a sacrifice. The Darroguode, first transfixes his Javelin. The Visier beheads him, and gives it the King. The carkasse is torne peece-meale by the foole-hardie mul∣titude; so greedie to obtaine this charme of long life and plentie, that im∣mortalitie and the place where meat and drinke is needlesse, oft praeci∣pitates them. The Caddier Ally is for Ally's victorie over the three old Caytiffs of Mecca by death (not Ally) conquered; and his joy in heaven: which after some threnodies many prayers are muttered, songs chanted, and almes be∣stowed: the King being at most charge, the greatest honor reflecting him. The Iedt Ousant is from a Cabala, that Housant was lost in a terrible great wildernesse, where thirst killed him. Nine dayes they wander up and downe (shaving all that while neither head, nor beard, nor seeming joy∣full) incessantly crying out Hussan Hussan in a melancholy note, so long so fiercely, that many can neither howle longer, nor for a moneths space re∣cover their voyces. The tenth day they find an imaginarie Hussan, that Nunquem{que} satis quae∣situs Adonis, whom they eccho forth in Stentorian clamors, till they bring him to his grave; where they let him sleepe quietly till the next yeares zeale fetch him out (Semper enim perdunt semper & inveniunt) and force him againe to concomitate their merry devotion. The Auwptpatsion (or Owdt-baptsion) is from Mahomets baptisme by cursed Sergius: and seemes to deride our customes, to make their circum∣cision lovelier. A rascall troop of circumcis'd Mahomitans assemble, and (after the Darroguod has put a period to his rustick Oration) promiscu∣ously besprinkle one anothers faces, then soile their flesh with durt and filth, the great ones many times to please the King acting among them; Lastly, they cleanse themselves with purer water, supposing all contami∣nated deformitie washt off, and their bodies wholsomer. The Sophian, is a solemnitie of fasting, feasting, and praying for the pro∣speritie of their King, of the Sophian pedegree. The feast of Roses and Daffadillies is begun by a Procession of holy men, at the first budding of those sweet flowers, and for thirtie dayes is ce∣lebrated with all manner of sports, and recreations to be imagined; conti∣nued
from the great feasts of the old famous Monarchs of Persia; tents in abundance, men, women, boyes, & girles, with Armes, musick, songs, dances, and such as may revive the Olympick memories. 6 Com. Reverence thy Parents. Which how ill they performe, many Tragick stories daily informe us of. 7 Com. Cursed be the slayer. This is so well practis'd in Persia, that what by rigour of the Lawes, and what from this, one may travell in any place at any time without all danger; and although, they be generally Martialists and affect much wine, yet I never saw any quarrell nor strife amongst them. 8 Com. Do so to Others, as thou wouldest Others should do to thee. From whence they are humane and curteous; but bribery is lately crept amongst them, and deceit too, too easily discerned. The Alcorar is a miscellany of other prodigious things. It tracts in the 33, that Dagial or Shytan, i. e. the Devill, shall be saved by Mahomet: & in the 72 Azoara, that all Elgehenni or infernall ghosts shall after I know not how many yeares bee freed. The other Azoaraes of his Kurrawn are of Arithmetick, fights, dangers, truth, falshood, tyranny, warre, peace, pro∣phesie, &c. The 85 Azoara treats of the Zodiac; the 90 of the Sunne; the 91, 92, 93, of the Moon, of night, of morn; the 113, of the Firmament; but is Philosophy of such coursenesse that I may well say, Discum potius quam Philosophum: for how can it well be otherwise, since in his 17 Azoara, hee confesses that hee could neither read nor write; but that all his learning was super-naturall. In one chapter hee is bold to say, that Solomon was a great Magician, and that hee learnt it from Marot and Arot, two great black Devills: with more reason we may say, that Mahomet was skild in that infernall wisdome, if halfe of those miracles bee true hee re∣cords of himselfe; one is this: In a great assembly of Arabian Pagans, he pointed at the Moone with his thumb and long finger; it seemes it knew his mind, for the Moone immediatly clove asunder, and in two peeces fell upon the hill of Mecca, on which hee at that time stood: Mahomet with a peece of his linsey-wolsey coat patcht it and made it whole againe; and after it had also (say the Persians) circumvolved Mortis Ally in way of imbrace or complement, it re-ascended, and from that day became the badge or coat armour of all Bosarmen. In another, hee assures his Pro∣selites, that Mecca, Medina, and Ierusalem be holy Cities, built by Adam in Paradize, but fram'd in heaven: & thence it is, that Ierusalem is by Turks as well as Christians, honoured: foure Cities sprung out of hell at the birth of Mahomet (at which, time all Idolls fell, and Lucifer was throwne into hell, so deep into that abisse, as hee was some yeeres ere he could get up againe) the names of those devillish Townes are (as pleases Mahomet to say) Elmedin in Caldea, Antioch in Syria, Vastat in Aegypt, and Eh-beram in Armenia: Places, it seemes which had refused him and his learned Do∣ctrine. But lend your eares a while and listen to the most serious subject of his Alcoran. In the 47 Azoara, he records hi pilgrimage into the highest heavens; where he saw rare things, and thence brought a certain descrip∣tion of the severall Spheares, Heavens, Hells, and Paradises: as also of
Angells, and Saints; of judgement, the resurrection, joy and paine, &c. of which I will afford you a compendium for Mussulmen to beleeve, for us to laugh at. One eve (as Mahomet was sporting privatly in's chamber at Mecca, with Aysce his young wife) Gabryel (Seraphyel the Persians call him, the same that fosterd Mahomet and Ally three yeares, and was perad∣venture such a Malus Genius as haunted Brutus) in a flash of fire entred their bed-chamber, and saluted Mahomet with this message: Haile thou beloved man! I come to fetch thee: the God whom thou so zealously worshippest, desires to see thee at his owne station. Mahomet rejoyces, and going to mount upon the Angells wings (of which hee had seventy pire) is hindred: he asks which way he should take towards heaven, the Angel shewes him a huge Asse, Albarack by name, and bids him mount upon him; which Mahomet essaying could not doe, till hee had prayed for him. From Mecca hee posted (in the twinckling of an eye, for Barack at foure steps had done it) to Hierusalem: there, the Angell dismounted him, and took him into his owne protection. In few minutes Mahomet ascended heaven, and was let in by Gabryel the Porter there. From one heaven to another is a travell of five hundred yeares; howbeit,The Heaven Mahomet glanc't through the seven in a moment. In all which Orbs hee saw many strange things; but first take notice what mettall the Orbs are made of. The first is of refined silver, and wherein all the glittering starres are fixt with chains of burnisht brasse: in this heaven he saw a Cock so great that stand∣ing upon the Moon, his cox-comb reacht into the imperiall heaven, many millions of miles altitude: every time that this Cock crowed, all other Chanticlears upon earth, re-ecchoed him. The second heaven is of gold, such gold as has beene seven times tried in the fire. The third is of pearle; in this heaven hee saw innumerable troops of Saints and Angells; each of them saluted him by his name, and he prayed for them. Amongst the rest he took notice of Adam, Enoch, Abraham, Samuel, David, Salomon, &c. all whom he knew by revelation; and of which, some he taxed, others hee commended as occasion served him. The fourth heaven, is of Smaragd, and where he saw infinite companies of other Angells who made a mighty noise and incessantly praised God: and well they might make a noise, for (sayes Mahomet) every Angell there, was a thousand times bigger than the globe of the earth; and each had ten thousand heads; every head, three∣score and ten thousand tongues; and every tongue praised God in seven hundred thousand severall languages: amongst them, he noted one espe∣cially, Phatyr, or the Angell of Mercie; a creature of that vast frame that every step he trod was twelve times more than the distance is twixt both the Poles. Mahomet inquired of him why he wept so fiercely; the Angell replied, that it was out of his compassion to see the deplorable estate and vanity of man. This is that same Angell that has the Holy Quill or pen in keeping; a pen of orient Pearle; so long, that an excellent Arabian Cour∣ser in five hundred yeeres continuall galloping, can hardly reach to the further end of it: with this pen, God registers all things past, present, and to come; the Inck he writes with, is pure Light; the Character so miste∣rious, that none but he and Seraphael can understand it. All the hundred and foure holy Books are written by this Quill; viz. those ten which Adam
received; Seth had fifty; Edris (or Enoch) thirty; and Abraham had the rest: it also writ Moses his Law, Davids Psalmes; Christs Gospell, and Ma∣homets Alcoran. The fifth heaven was of Diamonds: where hee saw a mighty Angell, and of all others the wisest: hee had as many heads and tongues and voyces as any two others had in the inferior Orbe; and had the keeping of that Book, wherein all men in the world have their names written: he did nothing but turne over the leaves and blot out one name or another, for by that (as by the arrow of death) they died suddenly. The sixth was of Turquoisse; the Seventh of Alahal; (some interpret it fire; others, pure light or breath congealed.) All these circumvove one another like Pearles or Onyous; but herein is the miracle, they be trans∣lucent and yet of mettalls: a rare Philosophy! above all, is the heaven of heavens, full of light and silence: immense, and within which, all other bodies are comprised, but it incomprehended: there Mahomet saw the throne of God, rich beyond expression: very great also, for it was supported by seven Angells, each of them so wonderfully great, that a Faulcon if he were to flie a thousand yeeres incessant flight, could scarce go so far, as is the distance of one eye from another: about the Throne hung foureteene candles, everlastingly burning: the length of every of those candles (as Mahomet measured) was from one end to another as much space as a good horse can ride in five hundred yeeres: there hee saw the Almighty, who bad him welcome, and laid his hand upon Mahomets face: his hands (sayes this blasphemous deluder) were a thousand times colder than Ice: for all which, Mahomet in shame of his owne basenesse, blusht for shame, and swet with feare; but with his long finger hee swept away the sweat from his brow, and threw it into Paradise: rare sweat! Each drop (he notes them to be six) turn'd into some rare thing or other: one drop into a Rose, another into a graine of Rice; the other foure into foure learned men, Ac'met, Sembelin, Abuhamed, Melec-zed, and Seh-vaffin; After hee had sufficiently instructed himselfe in many mysteries, and was assured of Gods favour, he descended with his Alcoran: but how he got it enter∣tained, how notoriously it has blasted the earth and poysoned most parts and Iles of Asia and Africk;Angells. it requires another place, to have it spoken: here only let us note the mad conceits he fancies of Angells, the last judg∣ment, Paradize, hell, &c. Angells are either good or bad; both are sub∣ject to death: the good, because they consist of flame, an Element; to sin, because Lucifer an Angell, by ambition was expulst Paradise. The bad An∣gells are imprisoned in Doggs, Swyne, Toades, Wolves, Beares, Tigres, &. After the day of Doom they shall be tormented in hell some millions of yeers; but must in the end by vertue of Mahomets law be delivered. Day of Doome.The great and generall Judgement is as certaine as the day of Death, and will happen suddenly, such time as all the world is wrapt in a carelesse security: the Angells know not the time, till Mahomet point it out by a great and fearfull Duell twixt death and him, whom in the end hee makes to fly away; but by that combat becomes so inraged, that he destroyes all living creatures in the world suddenly; for new arming himselfe in flam∣ing brasse, in each quarter of the world hee sounds his dreadfull Trumpet, whose affrighting clangor not only makes men, beasts, fishies, birds, and
like creatures dy, but the Angells also give over living; and lastly, Adriel himselfe, whom God commanded to follow the rest in the ineviale path, by wrapping his iron wings about him, and strangling himselfe with such a dreadfull noyse, as is scarce imaginable. After this ensues a terrible and universall Earth-quake, followed by a violent shower of purling brimstone, which must devoure all grasse, trees, and vegitable Creatures; yea the Pallaces of the proudest Tyrants: and turne topsi-turvie, the earth, water, and other elements into a confused lump. Forty dayes it must rest in a disordered Chaos; in which time, Almighty God shall grasp it in his fist, and (beholding it) say to this effect. Where are now the haughty Princes, the cruell Tyrants, lacivious wan∣tons, and greedy earth-wormes of the earth? which said; he will for for∣ty dayes and nights space incessantly raine downe a gentle shower of mer∣cy, and by a gratious breath reduce the world into a most glorious estate: after that, hee will call up Seraphyel, and bid him take his Trumpet in his hand: the Trumpet is of purest gold, and above five hundred yeeres tra∣vell from one end to another: at the first sound will ensue a revivification of Angells and Men: at the second, the Angells re-assume their glorious roabs, and men their naked flesh againe.Iudgement. Michael the Arch-Angell (per∣ceiving the Tribunall rais'd upon a high mount in Iehosaphats vale) he ap∣proaches with his mighty ballance, and poyses every man their good and bad deeds in either cale: such whose good deeds out ballance their evill actions, are put upon the right hand, the other on the left: after that, they are loaden with their sinnes packt up in a satchell and hung about their necks; in this sort they passe (upon a narrow and weak Bridge) over Hell; such as have few sinnes get oversafely; those that be heavie laden breake the Bridge and fall into hell: at the otherside stands Mahomet in the shape of a Ram, and in his deepe and monstrous fleece lodges all his Sectaries, whom after long travell he brings to some gap or other he finds in Para∣dise; and skiping in, disburthens himselfe, and shakes them out; at that in∣stant assuming new formes, more lovely, more strong, and every way more excellent; with eyes as big as the whole earth, and with eye-browes big∣ger and more beautifull than the Rain-bow. Let the Alcoran tell you what Hell is, and what is Paradise. Hell is in the Umbelic or navell of the world; circled with a huge thick wall of attractive Adamant:Hell. tis entred by 7 gates of flaming brasse; divided into many severall cells or dungeons: some are more loathsome and fuller of torment than others be; and lodge such soules as have more highly sinned: some caves bee so deep that in a thousand yeeres, a milstone cannot find the bottom of it; in whose descent are sharp swords and pikes placed purposely to cut and torture the soules that move there: some places be abisse or without any bottome; so full of oyle and brimstone that it is ever flaming, and so terrible, that the De∣vills howle, and scritch, and rage there beyond measure: other prisons be full of Toads, Serpents, and all noysome and horrid creatures imagi∣nable: the damned eat nothing there save the forbidden fruit; which being in their guts inflames like sulphur, and makes them roare for anger. Some rivers be full of Crocodiles: others so cold as makes them gnash & chatter: howbeit, these paines of hell must not abide for ever, for after each soule
has suffered so many thousand of yeares as the sinnes amount unto they have committed, Mahomet will deliver them (and the Devills also;) first changing their affrighting shapes into shapes more tollerable, & then bring∣ing them to Alcanzar, (a streame flowing out of Paradise) they must coole their extreame heat, and wash away their black-scorcht mummies, and varie into a moist flesh, whiter than the driven snow, and thence-forth sing Lala hillullaes unto Mahomet.Paradise. Paradise is a place of as much delight, as Mahomets carnall rapture was able to imagine: he is incertaine of the locall place (it seemes hee forgot to aske Gabryell) but supposes it shall be upon the earth after the day of Doome is past, and all deformity removed: (till then the soules and bodies of men sleep in their graves, but sensible of joy and torment.) Paradise (sayes the Alcoran) is so many miles about as there be moats or atoms in the Sunne: It is inclosed with a wall of nine∣ty times refined gold; ten thousand miles high, and in thicknesse about three thousand: It has also seven gates to enter in at (seven is a mysterie;) of Carbuncle or purest Rubie is the first gate; the other six be of Pearle, of Emrald, of Turquoyse, of Hiacinth, of Smarag'd, and of Amarist; some∣what reflecting upon the spheares. It is divided into seven spacious Gar∣dens, and those are sub-divided into seventy times seven severall places of delight; each of them fill'd with Inhabitants, Musick, Wines, and all sensuall pleasures possible: all have coole refreshing rivolets of Chrystall, and trilling over pibbles of sweetest Amber: curious Summer-houses it al∣so has, shaded with trees, ever fruitfull and verdant: in center of that plea∣sant fancie, is a tree (a high and spreading tree) higher than all the moun∣taines of the world, were they heapt one upon another; and so broad that all Paradise is shaded by it; the trunck or bole of this rare plant is of Dia∣mond; the leaves be of Ophyrian gold; the boughes of jet: each leafe is wraught into an antick shape, very delightfull; and most admirable in this; on one side is growing in letters of light, the name of God; on the other side the name of Mahomet. Foure streames gush out of it, in severall quartets; they be of purest water, of milk, of coho, of honey; and empty themselves into Alchansar, whence this mixture of Nepenthé flowes into other parts of Paradise: there are also Aromatick flowers, such as ravish both eye and smell; birds also or aëry Quiristers; the meanest of which as far excell our Nightingalls, as they the Ravens: the ayre is a compound of sense-ravishing odours: the Mahometans (Christians, Jewes, nor Gentiles, have not such glory) are ever young and lustfull, a hundred times bigger and more frolick than ere was Mahomet: The women are severed from the men; not that they are kept from them (for Gabriell never away to let them in) but that by such restraint they may become more transcen∣dently delightfull the women have such visages as Aisce had (Mahomets best beloved;) their haires be threds of gold, their eyes of Diamonds as big as the Moone: their lips of cherries, their teeth of pearle, their toagues of rubyes: their cheekes of corrall, their noses of Jasper, their foreheads of saphyre: round-fac't, sweet, amorous, and mercifull: In this Paradise there is a Table of Diamond, seven hundred thousand dayes journey long; along which, are chayres of gold and pearle to feast upon. The hee crea∣tures are of Mahomets favour, such as hee had when Gabryell mounted
him into heaven: none but are farre brighter than the Sunne, with such eyes, eye-browes and eares as are not fit for a repetition. To end; Gabryel the porter of Paradise has seventy thousand keyes which pertaine to his office; every key is seven thousand miles long; by which you may imagine the doores are no pigmie ones: in a word, had not Mahomet Confest hee had writ three parts of foure, false lyes in this his Legend; we would have concluded him, Notorious. To smile at his conceits is pleasure, to confute them, a labour needlesse (though Melancthon has done it:) for wee may say and that very truly, Perfidiam eorum recitasse; superasse est. Such are the grosse fanatick Dogmataes of the Alcoran, credited by most Asiatique Inhabitants, deluded by the Devill and his disciples above 70 in severall specie and nomenclation: some of which, with heed I have observed; and here (as the cover of their book) will shut all up in mustring them; but in an Alphabetique way, lest I affront their Seniorities. Abdalli, Alambeli, Alfaqui Alfurcani, Anefij, Asaphij, Bedvini, Benefiani, Bosarmani, Buani. Caddi, Cadaleschi, Calyphi, Calsi, Choggi, Cobtini, Cume∣rati. Dephtardarij, Deruissi, Dervislari, Duanni. Emeri, Emawen-zeddi. Fy∣lolli. Gularchi Hodgei, Huguiemali. Imami. Kalenderi. Leshari. Malahedi, Melichi, Mendee, Morabiti, Morrabouri, Mudreessi, Mufti, Mulai, Mulevei, Muezini, Mustadini, Mutevelij, Muzulmanni. Naappi. Ozmanni. Papassi. Ramdani. Santoni, Seriphi, Shahi, Sophini, Sunni, Syetti. Talismanni, Teck∣nai, Torlaceni, Terlaqui. Zaidi, &c. Their rules are many and masqued under a serious (hypocritique) sanctitie. The Muphti is chiefe in case of error or division: which, if hee faile in, the Meccan Protomist censures and swayes it. The Caddi, Cada∣leshi, and Mustaedini, are next in ecclesiastick dignitie. The Hodgei, Emeri, and Mulai, are Doctors and expositers. The rest are mendicants, and eat their bread in idlenesse. The Fylalli converse most in the Alcoran. The Deruissi are wandring Wolves in sheepes cloathing. The Talismanni re∣gard the houres of prayer, by turning the 4 hour'd glasse. The Muyezini crie from the tops of Mosques, battologuizing Llala Hyllula. The Calende∣ri, Abdalli, and Dervislari be notorious Paederasts, and dangerous to meet in solitarie wayes. The Terlaqui and Cobtini pandarize. The Leshari and Papassi, are fortune-tellers & star-gazers. The Sunni, Naappi, & Tecknai, vow perpetuall silence, and assassinate. The Sietti and Imami, oft pull out their eyes having seene Medina. Other of these, pull out their tongues, that whensoe're they talk they may be credited. The Huquiemali sing bawdie songs: some for pennance goe ever naked, and other some in ashes. The Dooanni are naturall fooles or madman, but thought divinely in∣spired. Some as the Mendeae afflict their bodies by thirst; lashing & wounding themselves; and in charitie without pay, carrie burthens or doe anie labour. Some protest against flesh, fish, wine & rose-water. Some live Eremites ne∣ver conversing with men: and some built houses to safegard birds, & beasts, feed them and have musique to prevent their melancholy. Other-some build Hospitalls, Inns, Sudatories, Mosques, and like good houses. Some are Poëtasters, or Mimographers. Other-some have seeds and charmes to make women fruitfull. Some also scorch their skins in the Sun. But others of more pittie and pietie oyle their naked bodies, and to allure the poore
Flies to pasture, rost themselves in the burning Sunne. These and many other miserable pathes they tread, all leading into Acheron. To close; This (more crasftie than learned) Law-giver, perceiving his Divinitie and Philosophie not sure enough to abide opposition or triall, strengthens it by this stratagem. Hee commands that none upon paine of torture and damnation, be so bold to question a sillable of his Alcoran, Suspectaest Lex (sayes Tertullian) quae se probari non audet. From whence, few except they be Ecclesiastiques, trouble themselves to read or studie it, hoping by a reverent ignorance and the Colliars Faith to be saved. But by your favour Sir! each of us (whom God hath blest and honoured with the grace and name of Christian) may answer you out of Martial. Decipies alios verbis, vultu{que} benigno; Sed mihi jam notus, Dissimulator eris. Others with words and pleasing lookes thou may'st deceive; but me Thou shalt not so, I know thee a ranck Hypocrite to be. The Persians have (since Gunet reform'd the Alcoran) contracted it in∣to a lesser volome.Schismes in ehe Alcoran. They vilifie Ozmans labours, and censure him of ex∣treame arrogance. The Persians also abominate the foure great Doctors, who dropt out of Paradise from the sweat of Mahomets brow, whom also Gunet execrates: these are indeed the mayne differences 'twixt Turk and Persian. But let none think that Syetts was the first Schisme amongst them: for Ozman being dead, Ibnul adds more Commentaries to infeeble Ozmans: and after him, one Ibnu Abel-hasen of Balsora An. H. 88. a notable subtil man; for by his austere life and eloquence, he not only nullified the Melchian credit, but Ibnul also in comparison of him was counted sottish: At his death they Sainted him: but trusting to tradition (for they could never prevaile with Hassen eternize himselfe by writing) his Disciples differ in many doctrines; so farre, that blowes made a party of times in case of dif∣ference: not could they agree in any point, till Elharu-Ibnu-esed of Baby∣lon did his best in many comments to reconcile them, and make cano∣nicall Elhesin's Paragraphs. It seem'd calme a while, but ere long a thun∣der-clap was heard from Mecca's Territories; anathematizing Elharu-Esed, persecuting him and all his fautors: and finally, by Meleck-sha's command, not onely burnt his papers, but banisht him from converse of all Mussull∣men. King Cazel is perswaded Elharu was an honest man, & at that time being favorite to his Uncle the great Melec-sha (a Turk and late Victor over Ba∣bylon) makes use of his power, desiring some favour for the late excommu∣nicated men. Melec stormes a while, but Nydam Emull another Courtier of note, seconds Cazel, and prevailes to have the Anefian Sect call'd home againe. Elgaz-zuli a nimble Mercurie undertakes it, and by miraculous conceits agrees them, and fills up the late made breach; so as now, Maho∣met shines gloriously without any shew of eclipse; but an alteration quick∣ly followed: for Saint Azmulli from the Caspian shoare defies all such as thought well of Mahomets three intruding successors. This seem'd a ter∣rible Apostasie, but whiles all Asia were looking thitherwards, a crack of
no lesse amazement falls West, where Almotannabbi (ayming to be all or nothing) exalts his own worth, pietie and learning above Mahomets. This seem'd intollerable, and his ambitious ends quickly determined; for they put him to a miserable death. After this the Clergy & Layety became inebriate with Bacchus and Ve∣nerie: it was thought a foolish thing to affect learning or honestie. Lasci∣vious Poems was adjudg'd the only delight, and Mahomets Paradise seem'd then in being. This wickednesse of theirs is inveigh'd against by Essebraver Disseraverd a Bactrian, whose severe Satyres so stung them that they grew melancholy; till Ibnull Pharyd sweetned all by his amorous and exact Poe∣sie, defended & enlarged by Elfargany a witty Epicure who retorts an Apo∣logie, applauded by most, but by some exploded as a busie Cabalist. A Chaos seemed then to cover them, till Elifarni a grave Historian took up∣on him to rectifie these crooked postures. Of 72 Sects reducing all to two, the Leshari, and Imami. The first, Eulogically extolling Mahomet; re∣ceiv'd in Thrace, Aegipt, Palestyne, and Syria. The other, Ally: received all over the Persian Monarchy. After all, Syet Gunet displayes his Ensigne, whose divisions if we should here rehearse or moderate, would prove te∣dious to you, and to me no lesse offensive. Non nostrum inter nos tantas componere lites. Let us therefore pause a while, and make use of Thesaeus his thred, to un∣twist us out of these sense-confounding Labyrinths. The severall Kings and Conquests of Persia compendiously remembred. TO offer you a Historie of the severall changes and warres of this great Empire, might peradventure in another place prove acceptable; espe∣cially, of the acts and conquests of these late Kings of the Sophyan or Ben-Allyes pedegree: for to goe higher were but to gleane from Xenophon, Cur∣tius, Siculus, Metasthenes, Agathyas, Eusebius, Cedrenus, Diaconus, Proco∣pius, Trebellius, and others. Whereas the warres of the late Kings are, to say truth, so meanly & obscurely handled, that the reporters have too pro∣digally detracted from the high courage of the men, and the excellencie of their fortunes. Here I am confin'd, lest by commixing even an Epitom{que} of their severall victories and contingencies, this Book which I desire should travell meerly upon Geographie, might grow voluminous. On the other side, to omit them altogether may as justly tax me of neglect. I will there∣fore but name them, and reconcile some mens mistakes in misnaming these antique Kings of Persia. Cyrus is the first we can deduce a true succession from. For albeit they had Kings formerly, of which Chederlaomer was one, as wee read in Gen. and it may be the same whom the Persian Histories call Cheyomaraz fa∣ther of Siamech, to whom succeeded Owchange, Iamshet, Zoak, Fraydhun, Manucher, Nawder, Afraciab (Achemenes some think) Bazab, Kaycohad, Sa∣lemon, Chozrao, & Lorazpes; yet the succession from him is most incertaine and doubtlesse of no grandeur, in that the Assyrian Monarchie (begun by Nymrod sonne of Chush, sonne of Cham, sonne of Noah) ecclipsed it, and un∣der
whose command it lay for above 1300 yeares, if Berosus be not coun∣terfetted: and from Belochus (who deposed Sardanapal the last Assyrian Emperour of Nymrods race) and Arbaces (the first founder of the Median, Monarchie, a confederate with Belochus) to Cyrus (who advanced the Per∣sians to a Monarkique greatnesse, by subduing Astiages his Grand-sire, trans∣ferd the Empire to the Persian, as formerly the Medes had the Assyrian) 260 yeares. This change hapned in the yeare, from Adam 3400: after the building of Rome 287: after the first Olympiad 50: and before the incarna∣tion of our Saviour 567, &c. Persia made a Monarchy by Cyrus.Of Cyrus many memorable matters might be offered: but I dare not enter the Labyrinth lest I wander so farre, that I may chance to lose my selfe and your patience: this only be remembred, that this is that Cyrus of whom the Prophet Esay fore-told some hundred yeares ere he was born; of him also Nabuchadnezzar prophesied, beginning thus, Ast ubi Medorum jus regni Mulus habebit, &c. That a Mule should over-runne Lydia (fulfild in Craesus) and subvert the Caldean Monarchie: the word Mulus had rela∣tion to his mixture of bloud; his mother beinga Mede, his Syre a Persian. Hee married Cassandana, and by her had Cambyses, that reigned after him. Cyrus after he had ruled thirty yeares, and in that time had added to his Empire, Arabia, Mesopotamia, Syria, Capadocia, Phrygia, Armenia, &c. ho∣ped also to subject Scythia, but neere the river Oxus was slaine by Tomyris the Queene of those parts of Zagathaya: but (upon ransome) his body was delivered and convayed to Pasagard where Alexander found his Tomb, but not that wealth he thought it had contained. Cambyses ruled the Per∣sian Monarchie but nine yeares; of whose reigne is little to be said save that he subdued Aegipt: after which he grew so luxurious and tyrannous, that all men hated him: his death was imputed to divine Justice, for, at Memphis hee committed sacriledge in the Temple of Apys or Anubys, and broke the neck of that apish god set there by the idolatrous Aegyptians: but at Damascus fell accidentally upon his owne weapon, and dyed by it. At his death seven Noble men or Magi of Persia severally contended for the Diadem (for smerdis the upstart King was discovered by wanting his eares to be an impostor;) of which, Darius sirnamed Histaspes (who by the cunning of his Groome made his horse neigh next morne before the rest) mounted the Throne: and the  or delivery of the King∣dome from the Magi, from that time to Alexanders comming, was annually celebrated. Darius governed happily 35 yeares: the last only was infor∣tunate, by that overthrow he received at Marathon by Miltiades the noble Athenian. This is he who so much favoured the Jewes and Ierusalem: his death was caused by losse of that battell at Marathon, and that by it hee wanted Anthina's faire daughter. This Darius Histasp I imagine to be the same Gustasp who first by imposture (as else-where I have re∣membred) made his people fire worshippers. To Darius succeeded his son Xerxes, by the Persians call'd Ardxer: an infortunate Prince; for howbeit he was in his time the greatest Emperour in the world, and had a worls of men and wealth to obey his humours: yet what by too much confidence in them, and contempt of other Princes, he reaped the greatest dishonour that ever befell any Prince of Persia: for, albeit, he entred Greece with an
army of 1800000 men, yet could he not prevent an overthrow given him at the straits of Thermophilae by Leonidas the Spartan Generall, who had not foure thousand men: and by Themistocles the Admirall neere to Sala∣mys, was equally opposed, and his whole Army confounded. Afrer 20 yeeres rule he died, and left Arta-xerxes his son his inheritor. This Ar∣taxerxes (i.e. a victorious conquerour) is in Persian story call'd Ard-xer-Bohaman; and by Arabian writers, Tama-xerxicas: this is he that married Atossa or Hester the Jew, in which book he is named Ahasuerus: at the end of forty foure yeeres happy government he died, and Art-axerxes sirnamed Muenon in his place was crowned King: (some insert Darius Nothus before him.) Artaxerxes (sonne of Artaxerxes and Parisatys daughter of Cyrus) ruled Persia forty and two yeeres, and at the age of eighty was buried at Persepolis, Artaxerxes Ochus his sonne succeeded him: who also when he had governed cruelly twenty and six yeeres, was hastned (but by an un∣timely death) after his Father; Arses (or Arsamus his sonne) investing him∣selfe with the Persian roabs of rule and majesty. Of Arses, little can bee said save that he died by the hands of the Eunuch Bagoas his Fathers mur∣derer, after his Coronation foure yeere: and in his place (by meanes of Bagoas) Darius Codomanus, (by Persians call'd Darab-kowcheck i.e. lit∣tle Darius) was saluted King: him Alexander the victorious Greek ore∣threw, in three great battells, at Arbela, Amanus, and Granicus: the last, concluded his life and six yeeres reigne, Anno Mundi 3640,Persia sub∣jected by the Greeks. of the Olympiad 112, of Rome 420, and before the Nativity 333 yeeres or there∣abouts. Alexander (worthily sirnamed Great) two yeeres after died at Babylon, (foretold by a Calan or Indian Gymnosophist) in the three and thirty of his age, of his rule twelve yeeres; his heart was transfer'd to Alexandria, his corps interd at Babylon. Alexanders Legacy, bequeathing the successi∣on (not to his owne issue or kin, but) to the Worthiest, made Pyrrha's bones revive againe; discord, and pride, and envie, emulating every of his great Captaines, who by this common Motto, Virtus mihi Numen, & En∣sis quern gero, challenged the Empire, and ceased not to lay claime, till death and warres fury cut them off; Seleuchus Callynicus sonne to Antio∣chus Theos by survivership (after long stormes) seeming to steare in that unruly Ocean: during whose life and fifty yeers after, the Greeks awed Persia,Recovered by Arbaces a Parthyan, till such time as Arbaces an heroyck Parthian broke that yaok of sla∣very asunder, and for three and twenty yeeres did what was possible to re∣vive the more than halfe dead Persians. To Arbaces succeeded Methri∣dates, who ruled twenty yeeres, after whom, Pampasius twelve, Pharnaces eight, Methridatus Medus Thirteene; to whom followed Phraortes, (call'd by the Perses Pharug-zed) Artabanus, (call'd Ard-Bahaman) Methridates 3, and then Herodes, slaine by Phraortes his cruell sonne. At this time Cras∣sus the rich and famous Roman was slaine and twenty thousand Romans at Carrhas by the Parthians; a foule blemish to the Romans; till soone after Ventidius (Mark Anthonies Liefetenant) purged it by a new victory, in which Pacorus the Kings sonne was by that valiant Roman slaine: and the Empire acknowledged Augustus Caesar over them; who deposed the Paricide, and made another Phraortes King in his roome. At this time was
ecchoed the golden song Pacem te poscimus omnes: a time most fit to enter∣taine the Prince of Peace, Christ Jesus our Saviour, who as then became flesh, and dwelt amongst the sonnes of sinfull men. To Phraortes 2, succeeds these severall Dynasts of Pathia; Orodes, or Daridaeus, Vonones, Tereditates (the last of the Arsacidae) slaine treache∣rously by Artabanus; to whom these; Bardanis, Goterys, Vonones 2, Volo∣geses, Artabnus 2, Pacorus, Chozroes, Phamaspates, Vologeses 2, Velogeses 3, and lastly Artabanus, vanquisht by Caracalla, by Macrinus slaine: Howbeit in him the hopes of Persia slept not, but rather joyed at the farwell of that strange race;Redacted by the Persian. for upon that advantage (the Empire seeming distracted 'twixt two severall affections) one Artaxerxes (Chobad before, but to speed the better he assumes this pleasing name) steps forth, and with a Majestick grace modestly chides his Country-men for their sloth and faint-hearted∣nesse; and that now or never the occasion was offered of reviving their name and redacting the Persian Empire to her former freedome and lustre: the people admire the man, and by his name doubt not that bee was a true Persian; so as with an uoanim assent they crowne his temples with the Dyadem, and resolve under him to dye or to dispell that cloud of bondage which the Parthian had so long wrapt them in. For three dayes the fight continued twixt those two neighbour, the stake was freedome and Mo∣narchie: at length the Persian has the victory, and Artabanus the Parthyan King by his death pat this late triumphant Empire into bondage. After that he vanquisht the Roman Emperour Alexander Severus; but in the 15 yeare of his reigne is himselfe by imparriall death vanquished. An. Dom. 243 Sapores his sonne begun to reigne. And here Teixera may be taxed, who assures us that Artaxerxes late named (or as they call him, Ardkhyr∣babba-cawn, i.e. Father and Lord to men of warre,) reigned contempo∣rarie with Caesar Augustus. This same Sapores is by the Persians call'd Shaw-Pot; by Teixera, Scbabur; by Schicard, Xahur-Xabulketaph or Dbul Aktaf: a Prince sufficiently couragious, but basely cruell. He over-ranne Syria, Cilicia, Mesopotamia, Capadocia, Armenia, &c. but returned with many curses for his crueltie, and had next yeare beene retaliated by Gordi∣anus the Roman, had not this Emperour dyed by the hands of Philippus a rebell, that slew him at Ctesiphon. But which efflated Sapores above the rest was the rare overthrow he gave two yeares after to Licinius Vilerianus sirnamed Colobus, Roman Emperor; who after he had inhumanly triumphed ovet St. Lawrence, & thousands of other Christians whom he made Martyrs or witnesses; in an open field Sapores vanquisht him (betray'd some say by Macrinus his Liefetenant) and to his dying day made that proud Roman his footstoole to mount upon: verifying the old said Saw, Superbos sequitur ultor a tergo Deus. After he had tyrannised twenty yeeres hee dyed Anno Domini 273, and before the Hegira or Mussulmanish accompt 347. To Sapores followed Ormisda (Cherman-sha, say the Persians) who at the end of thirteene months dyed, and Vararanes for three yeeres (till death prevented) suc∣ceeded him; to him Narses, (Tesdgird say the Persians:) who after sixteene yeeres rule died also, and left to inherit, his sonne Vararanes 2 (cogno∣minated Seganese,) by Persians calld Baharan; who in the first quarter fol∣lowed.
the common fate, Narses a stranger succeeding him. This Narses made bitteer warre with the Armenians and Mesopotamians, at which Ga∣lerius stormed; but his being the Roman Emperor could not dant Narses, nor privilage him from being beaten; yet in the second conflict is victor: and Narses for griefe and shame burnes himselfe; after he had eight yeers ruled Persia. Misdates his sonne reighned seven yeere after his fathers death: to whom followed Sapores an Anti-Christian: for the Romans did not rage more furiously against the Christians in the lesser Asia, than did this Tyrant in the great: he was a posthumus, and the crowne set upon his mothers belly, even before his birth acknowledging him their sove∣raigne: hee was the Romans inplacable enemy; by no threats, no bribes, no reasons to be pacified: he fired Nisibis, not valuing that Bacchus was there borne and suckled: after which, in his owne Dominions he martyrd (as Ecclesiastick writers report) from the yeere 337, to 347, above thirty thousand Christian: for in those dayes, those eastern parts were most part Christians: the names of many of those noble Martyrs you have in Sozimen: he also affronted (but with bad successe) Constantius the Roman Emperour, who dyed of griefe so soone as hee heard what cruelties Sapor had perpetrated upon the Citisens of Singara, Bizabda, Aminda, Bombyca, &c. Mopsicrive a Towne under mount Taurus in huming him. No better luck had that malicious Apostat Iulian, who when he had done his worst against the Christians, endeavored the subversion of Persia; but most strang∣ly he is peirced with a Persian dart in the night and expires with a tandem vicisti Galileë, and in his place Iovanian with the joyfull cry of all his Camp, Omnes sumus Christiani, was saluted Emperour of the Romans. He could do but little good against the Persians, and therefore returnes to∣wards Constaninople, but in the way is arrested by grim death, after hee had beene but eight months, Emperor. Sapores about that time also sighed out his affrighted ghost, at the age and reigne of seventy one. Anno Mundi 4350 Anno Domini 380. and Artaxerxes his brother ruled after him; who dyed in the 11 yeare of his reigne. Sapores followed him, after five. Varanes sirnamed Cermizat him, after 10 yeares: and to him succeeded Yezdgyrd a constant friend unto the Romans; and (as Socrates Scolast. reports) a Christian: converted by Maruthas Bishop of Mesopotamia, sent into Persia to that end by Pope Innocent and Theodosius the Emperor. The Persian Stories say he apostatized; who can tell the truth of it: this is cer∣taine, that in the 20 yeare of his reigne Anno Dom. 426 hee dyed; and that Varanes 4 (or Baharan) inherited his royalties. By all Writers this Prince is taxed for his perfidie, lust, and crueltie, especially against the Christians. In their defence Theodorus junior sends Artaburus with a gal∣lant Annie. Vararanaes diffiding in his owne, requests ayd from Alaman∣durus a Saracen: whose Armies when they met, were so many, that they covered the earth for many miles with their innumerable numbers. At Babylon both meet: but ere the battell begun, such a pannique feare struck the Pagans that they fled amazedly: by land some perisht, but Euphrates without any pittie ingulpht 100000 of those miscreants, and by that losse he Persian King is heart-broken, after he had tyrannized 20 yeares; and another Vararan 5 of that name placed in his stead: hee tooke truce with
Martianus the Emperour, and after 17 yeeres left both life and crowne: Perozes succeeded him, call'd Pheruz by the Persians; a Prince more rash than valiant: in the 20 yeere of his reigne, the warres of Scythia made an end of him. Valens (or Belax and Ialas) was then chosen King; he ruled 4 yeeres; to him Cabades, (call'd also Chobad and Canades) dethron'd by Lambases in the 11 yeere of his greatnesse: which Lambases (or Blases) was also deposed by the Nobles of Persia in the 4 yeere, for that hee had set forth an Edict, that all women should be us'd in common: and Canades is re-established, but at last through his too much curtesy to his vile brother is made blind, and the other mounts the Throne againe. At this time great warres commenced 'twixt the Roman and Persians; the Persian storming that at their perswasion Zatus (sonneto Gurgenus King of the Lazarrs, a part of Colchos or Mengrellya) had received Baptisme at Con∣stantinople, Iustyn the Emperour witnessing for him at the Font. After that this Persian Tyrant had full gorg'd himselfe with the slaughter of many thousands of the Lazarrs and Armenians, Death summons him to an unwilling accompt, after 30 yeeres tumultuous reigne: and Cozrhoe his son (they call him Chezir) is solemnly crowned the Persian King. About this time the Roman Monarchy in the West took end. Chozrhoe of all the Tyrants of Persia was most wicked and desperate: hee first concluded peace for 110 yeeres with Iustinian the Roman Emperour; but quickly broke it, and to the utmost of his power inraged them: 'twould bee end∣lesse to speak his restlesse motion, his barbarisme, his hypocrisy. In meere malice he put to death his brother Balax and Aspebides his aged Uncle; the people murmur at him, and to be even with them, he commands them to follow him into Syria, where hee ingages their valour and at Palmyria is beaten soundly; but so exasperated that he ransacks Barrhosa, Antioch, Selucia, Apamea, and other parts; in Phoenicia also hee gluts his mischiefe: there hee forced Euphemia a Christian Lady, and of her begot Hormisda who succeeded him: hee also there compelled the chast Nymnhs of Daphné to offer incense to him, as to a Deity: and for their kindnesse ra∣visht them. He consumed the great and stately Temple dedicated to St. Michael the Arch-Angell: and accompted it no sacriledge to rob other Churches: hee besieged Sergiropolis, but is forced thence dishonourably: he attempts the spoile of Ierusalem, but hearing that Bellisarius (in his time the most rich and wretchedly poore of men) was approaching, hee renues his league with the Romans: but purposes not long to keepe it; for next yeere hee forrages Armenia, and Phoenicia. Anno Dom. 556, Iustyn the Roman Emperour enters Mengrellia, and by death of Nachorages the Per∣sian Generall got a happy victory: Cozrhoë next yeere assauts Edissa, but fruitlessely; for at Sagarthon, that yeere the Christians vanquisht him: An. Domini 574, he commands Artabanus (or Adaarmanes) with a great Army to enter the lesser Asia: accordingly they spoyle Syria, and unpeople Antioch: in Iberia also and Armenia they entred with no lesse voracity. At this time Armenia received the Christian Faith; and the Romans have cōplaints sent them of Cezrhoes his cruelty. Iustin sends Tiberius (elected Caesar) to quiet him. His Army was great, and consisted of many Nations, French, Italians, Peonians, Illirians, Misians, Massagets, Isauriaus, &c.
towards Armenia he marches to meet with Cosrhoé: Cesarïa (the Cappa∣docian Metropolis) he soone mastered and after long toyle comes in view of the Enemie. The Persians were strong and lustie. The signall of bat∣tell was no sooner given, but each man in a wrathfull posture hastned to vent their furie. Cosrhoe by a sigh presages his overthrow, but doubts it more when when Cursé a Scythian that led the right wing of the battell, entred with rare courage into the body of the Pagan Armie, and mastred all the Persian-baggages: but the losse of that fight did not so much grieve him, as that his Fire-god was falne into the hands of his scoffing Enemies. Many night stratagems he invented to recover it, but all to no purpose: so that seeing it past recoverie, it broke his heart at Ctesiphon, after hee had reigned 48 yeares: leaving this report behind him, that to the Christians he was cruell; to the Greeks perfidious; to the Persians lustfull and ty∣rannicall. In his place, his sonne Hormisda (Ormous by the Persians hee is call'd) was crowned Monarch of Persia: Anno Dom. 580, of the world 4550 His eight yeares rule was troublesome: For in his 3 yeare, Mauritius (son in law and Liefetenant to Tiberius and also Emperour afterwards) ham∣mered the face of Persia; he ranged where hee pleasd and did what listed him; albeit to prevent it Tama, Cosrhoé, Adaarman Alamandure, and Theo∣dorique did what they could to hinder him. Anno Dom. 589 Philippicus with some Roman Legions entred Persia, especially to comfort the poore Christians who were threatned by the Magicians to be slaine all of them that yeare by myracle. Cardarigas the Persian Generall supposes they were forced thither by a fate uncontroleable: but the event prov'd such as in sted of the Christians above 30000 Persians were slaine by the great valour, the great Captaines Philippcus, Heraclius, and Vitylian manifested amongst the superstitious, who depended upon some supernaturall helps so long that Nature no whit defended them. Barames a noble Persian by hap escaped, but not a second disadventure; for Hormisda grew so madded at his late overthrow, that hee forces Barames to weare womens apparell, and with a Distaffe in's hand to disport the insulting multitude: but this jeere cost him deerely, for Barames flies into such parts as loved him, and inceases Byndois a potent Persian against the King, by whose confederacie they raise so great an Armie, and passe to Shyraz so privatly, that ere many knew of their approach they enter the Citie and imprison the King; yea that same day crowne his sonne Chozroes King: the barbarous Traytors executed their wrath upon the Queen & her children, whom most cruelly they sawed asunder: at which Hormisda expresses all the simtoms of an in∣raged man: his son cannot comfort him, because his beloved wife was ir∣revocable. Cosrhoes in passion commands some villaines to temper him, whose crueltie prov'd such as drubd the wretched King to death: an act so infernally devillish, that all Persia cursed him. Vpon their mutterings he growes tyrannicall, but Barames that had mounted him, wich the same hand thinks to pull him downe: the King acquainted wich his intent, com∣mands this and that man to raise some force to punish him, but into such hate was he growne, that none would obey him; whereby, to save his life he flies with Cesarca his wife to Byzanth, (his Parents dreadfull ghosts eve∣rie where hanting him:) But by the, Christian Emperour Mauritius and
his Empresse is with his Queene and little ones courteously welcommed. After he had repos'd a while, the Emperour assisted him with an Armie commanded by Narses and Commentiolus to re-invest him in his Empire: into Hyeropolis and Martiropolis they easily entred: at Daraz the Rebel Ba∣rames affronted him with an Armie of Scythique-Persians: but such was the courage of the Christians that Barames was vanquished. Cosrhoes re∣turnes the Christian his thanks in teares of joy: and knowing nothing would better please them than his conformitie, he presented them with a rich Crosse, of great value in jems and gold; and returnes that other (which Theodora wife to Iustinian had devoted) brought from Antioch by Chosroé the elder, and dedicates another made at's owne charge, cir∣cumscrib'd with an hypocritick Motto thus beginning, Hanc Crucem ego Chosroes Rex Regum, &c. misi, &c. Quoniam ope Sancti Sergii Martiris hono∣rabilis contra Baramum iniquissimum adepti sumus, votum fecimus, &c. Nos auream Crucem lapill distinctam ad ejus Templum missuros, &c. una cum Cruce quam Instinian Imp. ad Templum ejus misit, & quam Cosrhoes Rex Regum, &c. filius Cabadi nostri proavi, &c. advehit, &c. ad Aedem Sancti Sirgii mittendum curavimus, &c. as you may find at large memorized by Baronius. A Dish of gold also he dedicated with this inscription, Ego Cos∣roes Rex Regum, &c. haec in Disco inscribenda curavimus, non ut spectentur ab hominibus &c. Nay, he went further in his hypocrisie: hee gave out to indeare the Christians (his owne hated him) that he affected to be a Chri∣stian: but how politique so ere he was, his Queene Cesarca found him a dissembler. Shee (good Lady) to espouse Christ, fled to Constantinople, and there received baptisme most joyfully: Cosrhoes followed her with 60000 men, and when he saw she was not to be recovered without he would be∣come a Christian, he also was baptized and all such as followed him; to the amazement of the Asiatique world: as P. Diaconus has it in his 4 lib. 16 ch. In Victor also and in Iohn Abbot of Biclar, as is extant in his Epistle in these words, In his ergo temporibus quibus Deus omnipotens prostrato ve∣ternosae heresis veneno, pacem suae restituit Ecclesiae, Imp. Persarum Christi fi∣dem suscipiens, &c. But of speak of his Apostasie, his crueltie against the Christians, and other barbarismes he afterwards perpetrated, would rather require a volume than to be confin'd to so small a narration as I intend to all of them. For so soone as he heard of the massacre of Mauritius, his wife and children, by Phocas a Captaine in his Armie; and of the arrogance of Boniface the Romish Bishop, who at that time assumed the title of univer∣sall Bishop, he rejects Lilius the Roman Ambass. & Apostatises; yea vowes to sacrifice himselfe in Mauritius his quarell, or be revenged on that villa∣nous Phocas: and thence-forward he revives his Pagan titles; in all his let∣ters and proclamations beginning thus, Cosrhoes King of Kings, Lord of Lords, Ruler of princes, Salvation of men, &c. By such his blasphemie he hoped to assure his owne he was once more a Pagan. Anno Dom. 603 with an Armie of 100000 men he entred Syria; there, in Palestine and Phenicia doing all the mischiefe imaginable. All the lesser Asia parched in his inflamed furie: hee harried the poore Christians as farre as Chalcedon: takes Capessa and Edyssa. Anno Dom. 612 hee heares of the untimely deaths of Narses and Phocas his enemies, beheaded by Heraclius the Emperour. That yeare
also he sackt Apamea, Cesaria, Cappadocia, &c. but at Antioch is overjoyed with a victorie he obtain'd against the Christians: This encouraged him to over-runne Palestyne, Ierusalem also, where hee derided Zacharius the Pa∣triarch and transferd the Crosse thence to Shyraz in Persia: hee subdued Aegipt also, Alexandriae, and Lybia; and made the blackt fac't Aethiopians admire his frenzie. The Roman Empire had reason to be affrighted, when they felt his wrath in Anatolia, chiefly in Ancyra the Galatian Metropolis. 'Tis reported that in that out-breaking he slew 300000 Christians; agran∣diz'd by the Jewes who followed him, and payd readie money for many Christians, whom without mercie they slaughtered. Heraclius sent 70 Roman Gentlemen to mediate Peace; Saes the Persian Generall threa∣tens them as spies, and barbarously beat them back againe. Heraclius is so impatient at that high indignitie, as with a good number of men he fought with Saes and gets the victorie: Saes for his payment is by Cosrhoes com∣mand flayed alive, and Sarbaeras made Generall. Heraclius Winterd in the Pontique Regions, Sarbaras with a monstrous Armie passes through Cili∣cia, and one Moone-shine night assayled the Romans whom he thought to have found unprepared: but by that haste lost 50000 of his men, and gave a brave encouragement to the Christians. Cosrhoe next yeare sent Sarna∣bassa to trie his fortunes. Heraclius requires a truce, but Cosrhoes vowes revenge, and never to rest vexing the Christians. And to that end sends Sathyn into Trepizond, but at Azotus, Heraeclius affronted him, and had the victorie. At Gazacot, Cozrhoes dares the Roman Emperour with an Armie of 50000 Persians: never was battell better fought nor more doubtfully; but at length the Persians flie away, yea Cosrhoes upon a swift Arabian Courser posts to Theobatman, hoping there if any where to finde safetie. But such was the generall hate he had plunged himselfe into, that he distrusts that Santua∣rie. Heraclius resolves to ferrit him, but Cosrhoes hearing of his approach, thinks it more safe to flie away than looke for help from that helplesse Deity. Heraclius when he had throughly searched that idolatrous place and could not find him, is sorrie; but rejoyces againe that his Deastri were there to execute his wrath on. The people, some he slew, the rest he ba∣nished: the Flamens he sacrificed to their Idoll, the Pyree he incinerated, and made other common fire be commixt with that they boasted they had from heaven, and together made it consume the whole Citie into ashes: at Gazacot also hee did the like where was another Pyree infinitly resorted to by those Idolaters. An abomination taught them by Zertoost in King Gustasps time, and seemes to mee either that which Moses forbad the Israelites, that they should not let their seed (or children) passe through the fire to Moloch (which some think was a brazen hollow heated Statua) or as the Sepharuites practis'd, of whom 'tis said, that they burnt their chil∣dren in the fire to Adrammeleck and Anammelec, the Gods of Sephervaim, as is in Levit. 18.21. and in the 2 Kings 17.17. and 31. and concerning which Idolatry we read in Lucian, Strabo lib. 15. Procopius lib. 2. de bello Persico, Aga∣thias lib. 2, &c. Amongst other things which Heraclius found there in that Temple de∣dicated to the Sun, was one Deaster or image of Cosrhoes, which the people
worshipped: the frame was round, resembling heaven; his head was wreathed with the Sun; the rayes spread themselves to the umbelique or navell of the image: on one side was the Sun againe depicted, on th'other the Moone and Starres, his brother and sisters; and under his feet, the An∣gels with Crownes and Scepters, attending him: bat albeit the work was rare and the materiall of refined gold; yet did the good Emperour throw, it into the fire to incorporate it with his Diety. Cosrhoes by this had ga∣thered a fresh Armie out of Hyrcarnia, and bids Shae-Rablecca to forrage Al∣bania: but they stood so excellently upon their defence that Rablacca re∣turnes till Sarbaras with new forces forc't him back; and much hurt questi∣onlesse had they done had not Heraclius speedily entred and rooted them both in one day, yet neither knowing it. Mahomet the Prophet was in He∣racliu's Armie till now: and about this time begins the Hegyra or flight of that false Prophet from Mecca, whose people threatned to kill him for his innovation and doctrine. Anna Dom. 622 and of the Emperours reigne 13, Sarbaras past his Armie over Euphrates of purpose to trie the fortune of warre with Heraclius: who so soone as hee knew his intent gave him rea∣son to repent his arrogance: the good Emperour himselfe discharging his duty so excellently & with such excellent courage, that Sarbaras upon view of it cryed out thus to Cosma his Companion, O Cosmal seest thou with what courage the Emperour fights? certainly hee alone is able to vanquish all our multitudes. That Winter the Emperour marched to Sebastia, and crossing the river Halys made Paphlagonia his rendezvous. But Cosrhoe swels with passion, and combines with Lucifer, that by diabolicall Witchcraft he might vex the miserable Christians, against whom hee raged with all sorts of cruelty: and ere he gave a farewell to this world, once more ventures a battell with the Romans: 150000 men he musters up, and divides them in three; to Sayn one part, to Serbaras another, to himselfe the rest: ima∣gining by some or all of these to doe wonders. Sayn with his 50000 went against the Emperour. Sarbaras with his 50000 marcht to Constantinople: and Cosrhoe stayes upon the frontiers. Heraclius divides his also into three; the one to hasten into Thrace, the other to bestow a Camisado upon Sayns Quarter, the last hee led himselfe into the Lazic Territories: to which place the Gazarrs (a sort of Turk) came to serve him: Theodore in small time rais'd Sayns Armie, his Chrysolocae; assisted by hayle from heaven, so direfully thundring on them, that all men there, saw that God fought for them. Sayn was a slaine in that battell; but in stead of a decent buriall, the Persian Tyrant array'd his carcasse in raggs, persumed him with dogs turds, and slasht his sencesse trunck into a thousand peeces. That yeare the Gazarrs (to gratifie Heraclius) under conduct of Ziebit broke through the Caspian straits, and did the Persians much mischiefe, and to the Roman Armie exprest no small affection. Anno Dom. 626 Sarbaras with infinit troopes entred Thrace, pillg'd Calcedon, a towne built by Iason and Ar∣gias, much traded to, in view of Bysanth and upon the Bospherus. After that, they layd siege to Constantinople; and for ten dayes, incessantly laboured to enter it: but such was the excellent courage of the Christians, such her naturall defence, that the Persians could not prevaile; but upon notice that Heraclius was approching, they rais'd their siege & retreated shamfully.
Anno 628. the Roman Emperour entred Armenia, and in a long fought battell obtained a mervailous great victorie. After which, hee demolisht Ctesiphon, and pursued Cosrhoe: who when he heard that Sarbaras had sped but ill in Thrace, and had re-delivered Caloedon to the Christians, inflamed with passion he sends a villain an Assassinate to murther him: but by strange hap the Emperors sonne had notice of it and acquaints the Generall; who by this ingratitude of Cosrhoe begun to raise a dangerous rebellion. Cos∣rhoes when he saw things succeeded thus infortunatly, in anguish of soule breath'd out his spirit: a Fever first, and then a Flux so taking him, that after he had reigned 50 yeares, upon his death-bed he nominated, as King his sonne Mardesae begot of Syra his Queene; who ere hee could set the Crowne on's head, was slaine by Syroes his brother, yea before his fathers face: an act so horryd that Cosrhoe bitterly curses him; but Syroes (the most bloudie viper that ever liv'd) heaps greater sinnes upon his head, by commanding some villains to shoot him to death: at that instant his loathed soule call'd to mind his like cruelty to Hormisda his father, and acknow∣ledged that God was just to his retaliation. So soone as Heraclius heard of Cosrhoes death, he imagines all his quar∣rells ended: that yeare therefore he travell'd to the holy Citie, and pre∣sented Zacharyas the then Patriarch with the Crosse of Christ, found by Saint Helena (a Brittanish Lady) 3 May 326. and ravisht thence by Cosrhoes as I lately remembered. His triumphant entring thither was the 17 of Sep∣tember 628: the same yeare that Boniface published to the world his Ca∣tholique Supremacie; and in which, Mahomet divulg'd his Alcoran. Syroes (by Teixerae call'd Chobad-Xirvihé, in the Tarich or Annal of Time, Scyrviah) in the sixth yeare of his reigne was slaine by Sarbaras. Sarbaras is by the Persians call'd Shawryr; by Shicard, Shiribar: in the third moneth of his reigne he slew Ardohyr ben Xirviah, right heire to the Crowne: eight moneths after that, is himselfe slaine by Ioen-sha or Shyn-Shaw, Lord of part of Taurus. The successours to this man are uncertainly delivered. The Roman Authors from him to the conquest of Mahomet rec∣kon three Kings of Persia. The Arabs 6. The Persians 5. The Tarich 4. Teishera 7. The Armenians 11. How can I therefore reconcile them? The most plausible is this. That Ioon-sha at the end of three moneths was banisht by Tuwan or Turan Doct naturall daughter to Cosrhoe. She had as bad a fate; at the end of sixteene moneths shee was poysoned and dyed, much lamented: to her followed to Iazan-Zeddahs, by the Tarich call'd Ian-ku-kar-connah; by Elmacyn, Gaescan-zedda; who ruled nine months: to him succeeded Azurmy Doct (Cosrhoes youngest daughter) who after sixteene moneths dyed; and left Shezir (or Kezir) to suceed her: who also at the end of six weeks was slaine by Phorog-Zeddah (or Shyriar as some call him) who after like time, dyed of poyson; and Yesdgyrd followed, who was forth∣with made away by Bornarym, and he by Hormisdas; the last of those 12 vanishing Turrets, Cosrhoe saw in a perplexed vision one night after he had beene admiring Aristotle. The Period of Pesia's command was now ac∣complished. Such time as Hormisda after five yeares rule (ten some say; others six;) was slaine by Omar the 2 Calyph after Mahomet: at which time viz. Anno 640: and of the world 4610. and from the yeare of the
Hegira 20. by whose fall,Persia con∣quered by Arabi∣ans. Persia after so long glory sets in an Ecliptique cloud, and is fettered and forced under the iron yoak of Saracenic bondage. Mahomet (whose life and acts I have already spoken of) was borne in Arabia petrea, Anno Dem. 574. in the yeare 620 was banisht Mecca: and in the yeare 637. May 3 and at the age of 63 dyed, and was buried in Medina (Munichiates formerly) now call'd Tal-nabi. i.e. the Citie of Gods Pro∣phet. From him to Abbas I intend to runne over cursarily: and to reject all circumstances. To Mahomet succeeded Ebubokar, Abdalla Eubochar some name him. In the great Clymactick yeare he also dyed; suspected to be poysoned: he sat as King of Persia and Caliph, but two yeares. Omar succeeded him. Hee is called Howmar and Homer, and was sonne to Kattab-Faruques, a wealthy Merchant. Ally the Persian and sonne in law to Mahomet, was by this rest∣lesse Kalyph not a little persecuted in his quarell: hee sackt Bashra an Ara∣bian Citie, wall'd by Muslyn; and as an over-flowing turrent, rusht as farre as Gabata, monstrously tyrannizing in Syria and Aegipt; after that hee ru∣ines Palestine and Iberia, and as an unluckie comet blazes in Assyria, where he full gorg'd his furie. At Bagdat hee intends to meditate, but commands Mavi to sack Damascus, and encourages other his grand Captaines to doe their best to propagate the Alcoran in all Nations. Rustan beg with 15000 horse enters Cusistan, but at the siege of Escair-Mecron is slaine: and in the Armaie Moses sirnam'd Ashar governed. This wild Arab forced the Citie, and made Ahawaz, Sabur, Arckan, Cownrestan, Iaarown, and Laar become Mahomitans, and to enroll themselves Omars Tributaries. Habu Obed-ben-Masudh also with 13000 horse subjected Irack, wall'd Rastack, and of a poore Towne made it a brave Citie, but new-named it Kufa or Kalufa ô∣phrat, since then the place of Coronation for the Kings of Persia: 'tis 40 miles from Babylon, and conjoynes Mosqued-Ally the buriall place of Mor∣tis-Ally St. King, and Prophet to the Persians. Habu-Obed next yeare subdued Wasit upon Dig lat; a Towne agrandiz'd by Abdal Melq' Anno Dom. 705. Heg. 85. Elsheer he also attempted; but in the triall lost 5000 men, Obed was slaine and the Saracens rooted. Omar reani∣mates his men, and perswades them that the Elsherians overcame them by Art Magique: which also hee knew how to practise. They hope the best and returne to El-sheyr, under the conduct of Siet-Bep Abi-Vaker, who had such luck through Omars skill, that Elsbeyr was forced to feele his tortures. At Elcadisia (a frontier Towne) he slew 25000 Persians, and at Galula, Spa-hawn, and Yezd, at severall times made Yezdgirdfly; who had no com∣fort left him, when he beheld how fortunatly Omar himselfe subjected Cu∣sistan, Parc, Carman, and Iraack; and in Maqueroon, Iaaroon, Aedgan, Dea∣cow, Lar, Shyraz, and Moyoon, had made all men there sweare themselves true Mussulmen. Yesdgird dyes, and Hormisda labours to repell the Sara∣cens; but in vaine: an uncontroulable Decree hastned this long slavery and change of Persia. 15000 men with himselfe hee sacrific'd as a farwell ende∣vour to his Country. Omar also six moneths after this battell was slaine trecherously by a varlet; and in the Alcaba in Mecca neere to Ebubocar bu∣ried. Ozman (in despight of Ally) succeeded him. Omar sat Kalyph twelve yeares; ths man ten, and foure months in the Pontificacie. By Hucba his
field Marshall he subdued divers parts of Afrique, viz. Mumydia, Mauritania, Lybia, and as far as Carthage. Mavi, Sultan of Damasco, also over-ran Syria, Aegypt, and in a 1000 Gallyfoists transfer'd such a swarme of Saracens into Cyprus, that upon their entry they seemed enough to cover it: there they sackt Constantia (or Ceraunia, a City built by Cyrus) and thence fell upon the Rhodes, where they perpetrated all possible villany: & amongst other spoyles they dimolisht that Colossus which was built by Chares of Lyndus, scholler to Lysippus in 12 yeeres. It was 80 cubits high, the thomb as big as a large man, the leggs stood on either side the river, so wide and spatious, that thereunder might sayle a large vessell: in the one hand it held a ja∣velin, which it raised to the East: on its breast was a mirror, wherein those that dwelt far within the Ile might descry Ships sayling at a great distance. This wonder of the world, and which cost 300 Talents, Mavi sold to Emisi∣sa a Jew for 200 pounds sterlin: who with the brasse of it loded away 930 Camells. In that Ile he also defaced 100 other Colosses and of costly Mo∣numents 73000. During this, Heraclius dyed, Anno Domini 640, after 30 yeeres rule, and in's place Heracl; Constantinus succeeded, who in the 7 month of his Empire was poysoned by Martina his step-Dome, and Hera∣clionas her soone advanced: but were forthwith both of them exiled by the people, their noses and tongues cut out; and Constans saluted Empe∣rour in his place. Osman by this time had finisht his Paraphrase upon the Alcoran, and di∣gested it into 7 small books, subdivided into 114 chapters. It hapned that by some chance or other he lost a Ring of gold which Mahomet left him, and which was to discend to every succeeding Calyph; no paines, no ma∣gick could recover it: he conceales the losse, and made one of silver, em∣bowelling a Motto or Symbol, to this purpose; O Pertinaces, O Poeniten∣tes: from which patterne, all Mahomitans to this day weare their Rings of silver. Osman's mind fancies new conquests, and under a pretext of charity; to teach those purblind Nations the lesson how to attaine Paradise. India in those dayes was rich and well peopled: to any would undertake the im∣ployment he gives a thousand benediction. Abdall-ben-Emyr accepts the hazards, & with 30000 horse hasts thitherward; but by new commands from Osman who had considered how long a businesse 'twould bee to subdue India, he directs his course towards Tartary. Aria hee easily subjugated, Corasan, Maurenahar, Gasuehen; and took the Cities of Nizabur, Thalecan, and Tocharistan; yea all Dilemon to Balk, and as farre as Iehun and Ardoc would give leave; rivers beyond Oxus. But Osman how victorious so ere he was abroad, dyed miserably at home of poyson; which he suckt volun∣tarily, rather than be slain by the inraged multitude: in the 88 yeere of his age, of his Calyphship 5 yeeres & 8 months, Anno Domini 655. Heg. 35. and in his place long-lurking Ally is saluted King and Calyph: whose reign was full of misery; for Mavi stormes at Osmans fall, and with 100000 men enters Arabia to depose Ally, but in th'incouoter lost 10000 men; howbeit at the second tryall Ally lost the day, his life, his Empire. Of the Aegyptians were slaine 15000: of Saracens 20000: and by which victory Mavi or Mnavias was re-saluted King. Mortis-Ally dyed aged 63, and was
buried neere to Cufe upon Euphrates; at Mosqued or Massad-Ally, Karb-Ally, some have mis-called it. Mortis-Ally left a Ring, with which the Persi∣an Kings wed their Kingdome: it's Motto is (say the Molai) Corde Sin∣cero Deum veneror: by the Persians he is sometimes call'd Emir-el me∣munni, i.e. Prince of the feithfull. By Fatyma (Mahomets sole child) he had Ocen (or Hocem) who after few months rule dyed poysoned, An. Dom. 666. Heg. 46. and was buried at Mosquit-Ally; his Symbol (as sayes the Iuchasus) was Solus Deus potens. Mavi soone after Hocens death slew 11 of his children, the 12 escaped Musa Cherisim or Mahomet Mahodin by name, from whom the Kings of Persia at this day say they are discended. Mavi Lord of the Ben humian family, when he stated himselfe in the Empire; sent Susindus his kinsman with huge forces aginst the Grecians: according∣ly Suzindus beseiges Siracuse, & after that Byzanth: but by Constantine the Roman Emperor is lastly slain and 30000 other rascall Sarazens; that same yeere the Plague raged so terribly in the Mahomitan Empire that the like was never formerly: amongst the rest Mavi expired, aged 77, in his reign of Aegypt &c. 24, his Symbol this (as is reported) Ignosce Precor. To Mavi followed in the Empire of Persia and as Kalyph, Yhezid or Ie∣zed: memorable in his veine of Poetry: he it was that put the Alcoran into that bald rythme, as it is now extant; his venery and riot exasperated Mutar-Mavia-ben-Abdella, so as at the age of 40 hee dyed, having ruled 3 yeeres. Mutar is quickly dethroned by Abdall-ben-Iezid a Ben-humian: some are of opinion that Ocen and his 11 sons were slain by this Calyph. Marvan (after he had sat 9 months) dispossesses him, and hee by Abdalla againe; But both by Aben or Abdalmelec were both, both of life and King∣dome bereaved. Didacus dethroned Melec; Oyledore, Didacus; and Soly∣man by help of Iustinan the Emperour slew Oyledore: Melec returnes from banishment and expulses Sulyman, and most exactly tortured Mutarrs murtherers: the Christians were the worse for this re-establisliment; for he forraged Syria, Armenia, Thrace; and in the 15 of his Empire dyed, or∣deyning Vbyt (call'd also Vlitus and Evelyd-Miralminus) in his stead; this Calyph dyed of griefe, that his Armies he bad sent into Spain were rebel∣led. Zulzimyn succeeded him; and him, Omar-ben-Abdemazed, depos'd by Yezid sonne to Melec the late Calyph. Ebrahim succeeded him, a Prince foole-hardy and infortunate. After his death the Empire was divided 'twixt Gezid and Vvalel; who with all the forces they could make invaded Europe: thinking it a happy death in striviog to increase their new Religi∣on. Into Spaine went Vvalids Army led by Abdiramo: Gezids part, led by Sha-Rablan entred France; the first had better fortune than the se∣cond: they took Granada and so rooted themselves that till Ferdinand of late expulst them, they there inhabited. Those that entred France; (albeit they were incouraged by Endo Duke of Aquitayne, who hated Charles Martell mortally) were resisted by Martell and 30000 French Gal∣lants (Endo the West Goth upon better consideration syding with the Christians) so as after long fight, neere Turin a in Peidmont the Saracens were beaten; and of their numberlesse company 300000 slaine, July 22. 726. as Beda and others at that time living testifie: the two Calyphs dyed of rage when they heard of their misfortunes: Marvan was placed in their
stead: in whose time Hyblin his Generall purposed to invade Tartary with 100000 men; but in the way was assail'd by Sophy-Salyn, Saint Azmully's sonne, of discent from Ally; and Lamnoit the Arakosian, and in that conflict was Hiblyn slaine. Marvan vowes revenge, and with 300000 Saracens he affronts Salyn neere Spahawn, but is vanquished and 100000 of his men slain; Marvan from Babylon fled to Mecca, and thence into Aegipt, but thi∣ther also Salyn pursues him; and by his death gave an end to his inveterate enemies the Ben-Humians, begun by Mavi, by Marvan finished. The family of Mortis-Ally or Ben-Abbas in this man begun agen to rule the Scepter of Persia: An. Dom. 750. Heg. 130. Abuballa a while opposed Saint Azmulli, but in vain, Asmulli at Cufe was made King and Chalyph of Persia. This man reviv'd Mutar's tenents to the honour of Ally and disgrace of the three successours of Mahomet: againe revived by Siet Gunet of Ardaveil, as hereafter may be spoken of. Saint Azmulli being dead, his sonne Salyn is saluted King. In three yeares he also dyed, & Abu-becr (call'd Bugiaser & Almansor) followed him in his royalties. An. 758. Heg. 138 he repaired Bagdat. Mahadi-Abibala succeeded him, by some call'd Negmedden-Phidul Ally; to whom, Moses or Eladi∣mirza, father of that Amarumlus the French men prate so much of. In his time viz. 798 Charlemaigne flourished, and this our Isle altered its name from Brittaine to England. 'Twixt this Amarumlus (or Aaron King of Persia) and the Christian Emperour Charles was great friendship: Ambassa∣dours and Presents were sent from either of them: of which, read Aegin∣ardus his Secretarie, This Aaron is thought to have dyed a Christian. In his time many frantick Schollers in the sight of thousands of men, threat∣ned to flie, but in the tryall from one rock to another dyed miserably. Aaron after 23 yeares dyed, and Mahomet his sonne reigned after him five yeares: Abdalla after him; who when hee had raged against the Chri∣stians, and troubled the Ilands in the mediterran Seas, dyed: and was suc∣ceeded by Mulla-Cawn, who also vext the Christians, disturb'd Italy, and dared Rome: but he also suddenly vanished and was succeeded by these Ka∣lyphs, Vvaceck, Almoto, Montacer, Abbas, Mustead zem, (in whose time hap∣ned the greatest Earthquake ever felt in Asia) Almotez, Moctadi-Bila, Anno 875. Heg. 355, Almet-Hamed, Mutazed, Moctifi-Byla, Moctader, Elhaker, Rat∣sha, Razi-bila, Muctacsi, Moriah, Tayaha, Kaderkamet, and Mahomet-El-takert i. e. Gods servant; in whom ended the Chalyphs of the Arabique or Persian Pedegree. For then An. 1030 Heg. 410 came in the Turquemen led by Tangrolipix, first call'd into Persia by Mahomet the then Sultan to assist him against the Babilonians: but (after he had freed him from that danger) de∣sires leave to goe into Armenia to visit his kindred lately seated there, and is denied: an unkindnesse of such force that Mahomet ere he could ap∣pease the enraged Turk, was forced to divest both life and Kingdome. In him the family of Saint Asmully eclipsed, till Sha-Ismael dispeld the inter∣posing cloud, and resuscitated the glory of his Ancestrie. The Boyiaean Kings who begun Anno Heg, 319, and ended Anno Heg, 480. In the Iucha∣sin they are chronicled and at Shyras I have alreadie spoken concerning them. The successor of Tangrolipix was Ottoman son of Ertrogul the Oguzian,
who in the yeare 1300 Heg. 680. layd the foundation of the Turkish Em∣pire in Europe and Asia:The Turks and Tartars conquer Per∣sia. the Salghucian (of the same extraction) comman∣ded Persia: agrandiz'd by Togrul-beg, sonne of Michael, sonne of Salghucius, sonne of Didacus a Turq'man. Togrulbeg, (some say) was slaine by treason: his successour was Pharug-zed, Masuds sonne; slaine by Olo-ben-Aesolan Prince of Gasnehen: to him followed Ebram-ben-Masud, whose sonne Ma∣sud married the daughter of Melec-sha, King of Turq'stan. Masud from Co∣resan entred Persia with a great Armie, and neere to Tabryz slew Almostar∣shed-bila-Caliph, and in another fight Rashed-byla his sonne at Hispahawn. To Masud in Gasnehen succeeded Sha-Aesolan, slaine by Babaron-sha his bro∣ther, Ar. Heg. 499; to whom followed his sonne Cosrhao; who after he had forraged India dyed A.H. 540: and in him took end, the Sabutaque family. In those times as Kaliphs of Babylon and part of Persia, were Ghaladud∣daul, whose seventh successour Mustaed-zem was slaine by Cingis Chan An. Heg 580; Almostansor bila Mansor in his place governed Caldea and Persia. Of those Tartars I have formerly spoken. Descend wee therefore to the yeare of our Lord 1415 Heg. 795. such time as Chara-Mahumed the Turk re-entred Persia. Hee ruled three yeares and left Kara-Issuph to succeed him; who also after three yeares dyed at Casbyn, and left six sonnes. viz. Pir-buda-cawn, Scander-mirza, Ioon sha, Sha-Mahomet, Abuzedda, and Mir∣sa-Absall; all which dyed untimely by envie and one anothers emulation. Of those seven; Ioon-shi was last; and he also slaine with Acen-Ally his sonne by Acem-beg: at that time the family of the Guspan Caraculu or black∣sheep ended, and the Guspan Acorlu or white-sheep took beginning. The first were Turks; the last, Armenians. The Arme∣nians sub∣due i.Acem beg (otherwise call'd Vsan-Cassan) conquerd Persia An. Dom. 1470. Heg. 850. he subjected Hyrac, Trakeyn, Aderbayon, Kaboncara Mosendram, Car∣man, and Cusistan: and after eight yeares command dyed at Kazbyn in Sher∣van, & was solemnly buried. He left behind him seven sons; Ogorlu, Sultan-Kalyl, Iacob-mirza, Iosias, Yssuf, Maczud, and Zenal-beg. O gorlu was poy∣soned: Kalyl was slaine by Maczud-beg: Iosias and Synall were slaine in the Turquish warres. Iacob was murthered by a Whore at Tauriz: and Yssuf dyed of an Impostume. The seven sonnes of Vsan Cassan being all dead, the Empire descended upon Baisangor, Iacobs sonne: hee was deposed by Rustan-beg sonne to Muczud-beg. Next yeare Baisangor return'd with many of his Armenian friends, but in the way dyed. Rustan that yeare was dethroned by Hagmet beg sonne of Ogorlu; and he by Kacem-beg and Hayb-Sultan, two powerfull rebells; who also by Alvan-beg were slaine, and in Spahawn all of them buried. Alvan-beg, Baisangor's brother after he had ruled Persia five yeares. An. Heg. 878, was vanquished by Ismael his Aunts sonne: and two yeares after, Morad was slaine at Spahawn. In him ended the race of white sheep, who under Acem-beg had conquered Persia. In Ismael revived Saint Azmully and Mortis-Ally's glory; whose successors at this day rule Persia. I will very briefly touch some passages of their Reigne, that I may hasten to our other Travells. Ismael sirnamed Sophy was invested Monarch of Persia An. Dom. 1500, Heg. 880. He drew his pedegree from Mortis-Ally King of Persia, Anno Dom. 750 Heg. 130. In a descent of 35 Princes, some of them are thus named.
Abi-Taleb (or Abutalip) had Mortis-Ally, Father of Mahomet Mahadyn, from whom Mutar, Saint Asmully, and Salyn descend: to them, these; Shec-Sophy Eddin-Isaack sirnamed (from his learning and piety) Cutb'b el-eulya, to whom in order are these, Shec Moses, or Mizra-Sedryddin, Shec-Ally-Shec-Ebrahym, Siet-Gunet, Shec (or Siet) Aydar, and Shaw-Ismae: Whose Title to the Crowne was this. Shec-Sofy such time as Tamberlane returned from his Turquish Conquests, this Shec was of that holinesse and fame that that great Monarch vouchsaf't not only to visit him at Ardaveel, but also to expresse his best affections. Hee made no other use of the Tartars fa∣vour save to beg the lives of many thousands of miserable Persians, whom by Hoharo-Mirsa's folly, Tamberlane had markt out for death. That act ad∣ded infinitly to the Santo's credit. Tamberlane dyed Anno 1437. Heg. 787, and is buried at Anzar in Cathaya. The Persian Saint lived but three yeares after him: of whom I may say, as Horace did of another. Crescit occulto velut Arbor aevo Fama Sophyi.— Syet Gunet his sonne, by the excellent report his Syre had honoured him with, not only inheriting his fathers repute, but so popularly beloved, that he suddenly hatches the ambitious thoughts how to dispossesse Ioon-Sha of the Empire. Hee attempts it divers wayes, but finds none so sure as by making a Schisme in their Religion: he therefore dictates a new Currawn, wherein he villified & accurst the three successours to Mahomet, and mag∣nified Mortis Ally: adding this, That he was lineally frō him descended. Ioon-Sha espies his drift and seeks to kill him: But he (doubting no lesse) avoyds it; and flies into Armenia, where Vsan Cassan entertained him with all respect possible, and to make it more apparant bestowes his daughter, Martha (Ka∣daijon Katun the (Persians call her upon Despyna daughter, to Calo-Ioannes Emperour of Trepisond) upon Aydar his sonne: on whom he begot two sonnes, Ally-Sha sirnamed Sulyman, and Sha-Ismael. Ally was slaine in the Cradle by Prince Iacup their Uncle, Vsan Cassans sonne. But Ismael found mercie from Rustan Amansor sent to murther him: and who lived to re∣venge his fathers and brothers death upon him. Aydar in the Annalls of Persia is said to have subjected Trebizonal, & to have him sat as Emperour 8 moneths; conquerd afterwards by Mahomet first Turquish Emperour. Upon Vsan Cassan's conquest of Persia, he also recovered his Barony of Ar∣daveel: but (by the treacherie of Iacup) at his besieging Tabriz, was slaine by Pharuc-Issur the then Viceroy of Sultany and Tabriztan. I have told you that Ismael in revenge of his Fathers murther, and to make good his claime from Ally, in two battells (wherein hee vanquisht Alvan and Morod Kings of Persia) made himselfe Monarch of that Empire. For upon his flight into Arzenion he was so welcommed, that in memorie of his Grandfires kindnesse to them (when hee begd their lives of Tamber∣lane) they all rose in his defence: namely those great Tribes, the Auxar∣chiars, Romlu, Sufiah, Estayalu, Kayridac, Versabli, Shamlu, Zulcaderlu, &c. by whose help hee slew Pharuc Issup, conquerd Shervan, at Tabryz beat Alvan, and in himselfe establisht the Empire. In memory of which, and the other hee gave Morod that yeere neere Shyraz, hee instituted an order of Coosel-basha's; in them both memorizing his discent from Mahadyn 12 sonne
of Ocen of Ally, and Mamalucks who then flourished. Bajazet the Turk squints at Ismaels greatnesse, having formerly in his appetite devoured Persia. But such was Isamel's high courage & vertue, that he not only resisted the utmost furie of Bajazeth, but also made the Tar∣tars and Indians tremble at his fortune. The Persians honoured him, the Armenians loved him, but the Jewes deified and assured him hee was the Messias they so long wayted for: but Ismaels severity towards them upon that blasphemie, made them quickly recant, and rather think him a second Vespasian. Ere I goe further, let mee speake a word of his sirname Sophy. Ismael at his Coronation proclaim'd himselfe King of Persia name of Pot-Shaw-Ismael-Sophy. Whence that word Sophy was borrowed, is much controverted. Whether it be from the Armenian idiom, signifying wooll, of which the Shashes are made that enobled his new order. Whether the name was from Sophy his Grandsire, or from the Greek word Sophos im∣posed upon Aydar at his conquest of Trepizond by the Greeks there, I know not. Since then many have called the Kings of Persia, Sophy's: but I see no proper reason for it; since Ismaels sonne, grand great grand sons Kings of Persia never continued that name, till this that now reignes, whose name indeed is Soffee, but casuall. Ismael the second of his reigne, subjected Shervan and Gheylan; Parc, Hy∣erac and Cusistan; Kerman, Macron, and as farre as Iasques. Coom Coom was com∣monly his Winter rendezvous. The fourth yeare by Elyas-beg he purpo∣sed to infest the Tartars: but Elias through neglect was vanquisht in the way by Ocebeg-Geholy Lord of Chalat-Pherusky, who at Ismaels approach for∣tifies his Castle, but is forced out by flux and famine; hee and fifty of his best men slaine, and the rest pardoned. Which done, he hasts back to Yezd, hearing that Mahomet had besieged it: he quickly rais'd the siege and bur∣ned Mahomet. And after hee had compounded some differences 'twixt himselfe and Morod-sha, brother to Alvan; Anno Dom. 1507. Heg. 887, hee journeyed to Shyraz where he was solemnly crowned: but next day put to death 30000 men, such as were either guilty of his Fathers death, or had taken part with Morod against him. That yeare he hastened into Mosendram and repuls'd the Tartarrs, albeit he had not above 20000 horse, and Vlu∣chan and his were above 300000. And to retaliate them he billited his men that Winter in Taron; but so soone as the weather permitted hee entred Tuzz, intending to spoile Samarchand. But hearing of Sultan Ocen's death, and that Shac-beg-chawn an Ouz-beg, had usurped the Crowne of Corasan; in the behalfe of ther injur'd Princes Ocens sonnes, he entered Corasan; and in a long fought battell 'twixt him and the Rhumestans, slew Sha-beg-cawn, 30000 Tattars, and made Acen-Ally be crowned King; upon condi∣tion that at his death it should hold of the Persian Dyadem. That Sum∣mer he passed Oxus, and slew Chamsylba the Maurenahar King, sackt the strong Castle Ael-kama, depopulated Dargan, Farghwan, Azfaker, and many other strong holds in T'sogd, Kennough, Gaznehen, Maurenaher, Rhumestan, Turq'stan, farre beyond Balk the Ouz-beghian Metropolis: and returning, he sackt Tuzz, Sakalkand, Sikamest, &c. sufficiently retaliating what his own Nation had formerly suffered from the Black-sheep of that vargant Coun∣try:
and when he had fully glutted himsefe amongst the Tartarrs, came joyfully back to Coom, where he was received with all symptoms of joy possible to be expressed. Next sommer he went into D'arbeg against the Turks, who so soone as they had heard of Ismaels doings in Tartary entred Bagdat and exprest their utmost villanie there; calling them Raffadins or Schismaticks, and cutting off the noses and thumbs of many hundred Persians. In their re∣venge Ismael affronts them with 50000 horse, and in despight of what Ca∣rigy and Ally-Bashaw could do, upon the bancks of Tygris he gave the Turks an overthow; and that yeere seconds it by another he gave the Beglerbeg of Anatolia: whereat Bajazeth stormes, but Ismael to exasperate him took a Swine into his Court, and names it Bajazeth, madding the Grand-Senior and his Ambassador; but joying the Persians; to see the excellent courage of their Emperour. At this time also, Tekelles, a favorite to Ismaels father Aydar, to propagate the Reformation leads 20000 men into Trepisond; whi∣ther the Armenians flockt in such abundance, that that Syet entred Turquy with 200000 men, as farre as Iconium in Lycaonia; where hee vanquisht Mahomet and Orcan the 2 youthfull Nephews of Bajazeth: Carogozes the Bassa of Asia also he triumpht over; sackt Cutay, and in the plaines of An∣cira put to flight Ally-Bassa and his innumerable company; yea had Ismael taken the advantage to have backt him, he had prov'd another Tamberlain: but wanting his countenance and other necessaries, Ionuses Bassa neere to Anti-Taurus conquered him: and which was no lesse miserable; that fa∣mous Captain doing some violence to a Carravan he met with by the way, is at this entring Casbyn apprehended, and by Ismaels command burned. Anno Domini 1511. Heg. 891. Ismael recovered Bagdat, Barrhyeck-beg the Sultan betraying it and opening a posterne where-through the Persians entred, Mahomet Bassa being forced to flie to save his life. That yeere hee entertained Lemius (the Portugall Agent) at Cashan; who was led into the Army by Mirza Abucaca the field Marshall: the which Lemius reported to Albuquerq, that Ismael had 350000 Paviilions pitcht there, and in the field 130000 men. That yeere Bajazeth was poysonned by a Jew, and in his Place Selym his younger son, made Emperor of Turquy. That yeere, Morad sonne to Sultan Ac'mat, Bajazeths eldest sonne, fled to Ismael fot safety; and Aladyn his brother, to Campson Gaurus Sultan of Aegypt: where both were welcomed. Selym prepares to fetch them thence: but Ismael irri∣tates his vexation; and incourages Morad with 10000 horse (promising to second him by Vstref-oglan with 20000 more) to forrage Turquy: ac∣cordingly Morad past through Armenia the lesse, and in Cappadocia shewed himselfe an adversarie. Chendemus with great forces opposes him: who upon notice of his Uncles approach, fell back to Vstref, and both of them to Anti-Taurus, where Aladules quietly suffered him to passe the Moun∣taines into Armenia; whither they knew ere-long the Grand-Senior would hunt after them. Selym commands his whole forces to follow him into Persia: Chendemus for diswading him slaine; but Ebrahim Bass's ad∣vice after long march into Armenia, he got; where in the Calderan plains was fought 'twixt the Turk and Persian a most memorable battell: Ismael with 30000 Persians for 16 houres maintaining the fight with Selymus and
300000 Turks; and where (if the Turquish Artillery bad not disordered and affrighted the Persian horse) the Persian had gloriously triumphed: but as it was, for one Persian 10 Turks were slaine; and neither of them obtained conquest: the horror of it such, that the Turkish Ann∣alls call that dayes fight, The day of Doom. Anno Domini 1515. Heg. 895, Selym returnd with new forces into Armenia, but by the way strangled Aladeules be Mountanous King: Ismael leaves Synal-beg to pursue his con∣quest of Mosendram, and with 30000 horse, attended Selym at Tabriz: but Selym diverts his first thoughts, and at an unexpected houre enters Aegypt, and by the slaughter of the Sultan Campson (betrayed by Cajer∣beg Sultan of Aleppo) conquered it and gave end to that order of Mama∣lucks which from Sultan Saladyne who lived Anno Heg. 896. had continu∣ed with much fame and excellencie: Tomambeyus sought to have restored it, but Selym made his life the price of it. Anno Domini 1514. Hegaria 894. Sha-Tamas was born, who succeeded Ismael in the Empire; in 5 yeeres after, he had also Hel-cawn, Som-Mirza, and Bacram-cawn: some call them, Elias, Sormiza, and Barhon-cawn. An. Dom. 1520. Salym the Turkish Emperour dyed, and was succeeded by Soly∣man. Anno Domini 1525. Heg. 965. Ismael also dyed; in the 40 of his age, and his reigne, 20 yeeres. Ismael's foure soones did what they could to ruine the Empire, by one anothers ruine: Hel-cawn especially: who to effect it, syded with the Tur∣kish Emperour. Vlembeg also (who had married their sister) laboured it. But albeit Solyman did his best by his owne forces and by their treasons, yet such was his ill luck, that (excepting Babylon and Tabryz) they got no∣thing but sad experience: for Tamas upon notice of the Turkish entry, leaves Kazien Bassa and Corasan (which he then had beseiged) and hasts to Cashyn: the Turks so soone as they had rifled Tabryz, retreat; but are so assailed in the rear by Delementhes, still as they marched, that they could not preuent the losse of 40 Cannon, 3 Sansacks, 800 Janisaries, and of Asaps or common men above 20000: a victorie so plausible. that to this day upon the 3 and 10 of Ardabehish or October, tis with many signalls of joy solemnized: 4 yeeres after, as Morod had done to Ismael, so Bajazet Solymans sonne fled to Tamas; to save his life, willing to part with his hopes of a Monarchy: his rebellions and injuries to his father and brother had beene many and notable; so as Hassan Bassa comes to Casbyn, and upon assuring Tamas that Bajazeth came purposely to kill him, that infortunate Prince was by that old villaine strangled, and his 4 sonnes also; Homer, Morad, Selymus, and Mahomet. Solyman next yeere enters Persia with 150000 men. Tamas affrighted with their great ordnance, hyres 5000 Portugalls from Ormus and Indya, who brought 20 Cannon along with them, and by whose helps the Turks were vanquished. That yeere Tamas eatf ed the Ouz begs country and retorned victorious: and next into Cabul; whence he thought to have gone to Lahore; but upon newes that Mustapha (Solymans eldest sonne and brother to Bajazeth, lately at Casbyn strangled) was fled from his Father to him from succour, he returnes and welcomes him, willing any way to agrandize discord amonst the Ottomans. Solyman in person with 80000 men followes him, in every place hee came that lo∣ved
the Persian, perpetrating all sort of savage cruelty. At Erez, Tamas fought with Solyman, but with worse successe than formerly neere Bagdat: for 1000 Persians were slaine, and 20000 Turks; but by their numbers the Persians were forced to leave the field; which when Mustapha saw, fled to his Father and beseeches (for Roxalana his Mothers sake) par∣don: but it would not be; his Father forthwith made him to be strangled. Anno Domini 1576. Heg. 956. King Tamas dyed at Cazbyn, aged 68; ha∣ving reigned 50 yeeres; and left his eldest sonne Mahomet to succeed him: hee had in all, 12 sonnes and 3 daughters; Maomet, Ismael, Aydar, Sulyman, Emangoly, Morad, Mustapha, Ally, Hamed, Ebrahim, Hamzé, and Izma cawn. Ismael during his stay at Cohac complots with Peria-Conconna and Sahamal-can; by whose help hee strangled Aydar, and beheaded 8 o∣ther of his brethren: hopefull also to meet with Mahomet: who being fled to Georgia finds such friends that ere long he returned with 12000 horse, Curds and Georgians, by whose service, and the valour of Leventhy∣beg, he arrives at Spahawn; where he had newes of Ismaels death, slain in his bed by Periaconconna and 4 Sultans, who entred habited like women, An. Dom. 1577. The same yeere that Ismael was thus slain, Peria-Concanna was also made away by Salmas-Mirza, at the command of Mahomet. Mahomet (call'd Codobanda by the Turks) had many sonnes: Ismael, Mustapha, Mir-can, Guynet, Sophy, &c. Ismael was famisht to death Cay∣kahe Castle neere Tabriz, by meanes of Massombeg the favorite: the rest of his sonnes dyed untimely. He had also 3 sonnes begot of Ioon-Conna Princesse of Heri and Corassan: Emyr-Hamzé mirza, Sultan Aydar, and Abbas. Emyr-hamze-mirza, was the most famous, active, and, beloved Prince that ever to this day lived in Persia. When he commanded, they thought nothing impossible: the Turks, the Indyan, the Arab, and Tartar feared him; with 40000 horse hee vanquisht 200000 Turks neere Van, and cleared Armenia of those Locusts. After that, with 30000 Persians and Ouzbeghians hee over-threw them at Erez, and obteyned a most glorious victory. Two yeeres after, Anno Domini 1580. Heg. 960 at Bagdat he beat the Turks; at that time of Persians being slaine 10000, but of Turks 70000. Next yeere, he opposed the Tartar neere to Sumachy and slew 20000 of their men: and that same month of the Turks led by Mustapha Bassa 100000: but with losse of above 40000 of his owne men. An. Dom 1584. Heg. 964. neere Van againe, he slew above 20000 Turks: and with his own hands slew the Sultan of Caramit, the Generall; the Basha of Trebizond, and 5 Sanzacks. At Sancazan the insuing spring, he also beat Osman the Basha (who dyed to think of it) and slew above 23000 other Turks. At Tephlis he vanquisht Sycala the famous Basha, and slew 30000 of his Turks; the Prince losing 9000 Persians: but by that victory regained Tabriz, Babylon, and all other such places as King Tamas had Anno Domini 1537. Heg. 917, lost to Solyman. Next yeere he took Derbent from the Turk, and neere to Tephlys with 20000 horse, scattered and slew 80000 Turks: so dismall to Amurath, that rather than see his face Musta∣pha by voluntary poyson at the age of 78 gave up the ghost, and Acmat the renouned Ennuch resolv'd to beg rather than to see Persia againe. But
Synon Bassa was so puft up with his late conquests (at Cyprus, Malta, and, Aegypt) that he threatens his payment; and to that end with 100000 men he entred Georgia, sackt Tephlys, and in Shervan did many mischiefes: but plague and famine puisuing him, the Prince of Persia ere the Tartar could joyne with Synon bad him battell at Carse in the Turq'men confines and beat him, but two dayes after lost 5000 men more, and was forced back to Trepizond: But at length, what enemies abroad could not effect, at home his brother Abbas perpetrated by poyson: insomuch as in the vigor of his age, and hopes of further conquest, this gallant Prince goes down not aged 30; and of such force with purblind Mahomet, that in few dayes after hee expired: An. Dom. 1585. Heg. 965. after 8 yeeres reigne, and at Ardaveel by his father was some part buried. Abbas had much adoe to quiet the distemper of the Persians, such hate they bore him for his cruelty. At Casbyn hee found most welcome: they had considered the other two were irrevocable, & that it concerned them to have some expert man to defend them from the Turk, who almost eve∣ry day from Tabriz affronted them. Spahawn indeed paid deerely for her rebellion. The first yeere of his reigne Amurath the Turkish Emperour sent his Ambassador to Abbas, to command him (If he desired peace) to send him his sonne Ismael as a hostage: the Ambassador had better have stayed at home, for albeit hee escaped with his life, yet hee was mise∣rably bastinadoed. Enraged by that message hee besieged Tabriz, and easily forced the Turks thence, as also out of Van and all Armenia: two yeeres after he beat them out of Balsorac and Bagdat; yea made Dyarbec and Iaziry too hot for them. By Curchiki-can he subdued Ghey-lan; by Ta∣mas-coolibeg, Mozendram; by Ferrat-chan, Candahar; and by Lolla-beg and Emangloy-cawn, Larr, Cusistan, Carman, Macron, and part of Iazirey or Arabia: yea to this last over-throw at Babylon, he gave successively to Ma∣homet 3, Acmat, Osman, Mustapha, and Amurath, all of them Grand Seig∣niors, above 20 other severall over-throwes; most of which the Turks conceale, and thence it is that we have them not recorded in our Turkish Histories. About this time, Abbas became inraged against the Georgians: and up∣on this occasion. Scander, lake King of Georgia (a Countrey confyning palus Meotis, 'twixt the Euxin and Caspian seas) by a Sarcashin Lady had 3 hopefull sonnes; Scander-cawn, Thre-beg, and Constandell: all borne Chistians; but for preferment the two last named became Bosarmen or circumcised. Thre-beg serv'd the Turk; Constandell, the Persian. Constandell was natu∣rally deforned, but of such an active spirit, that his bodily imperfections were not noted: yet his hatefull ambition rendred him more than mon∣strous. It hapned that Abbas vowed some revenge upon the Turk; and to that end gave order to Ally-cawn to trouble them. Constandell per∣ceives the occasion right to attempt his hellish resolutions, and therefore after long suit got to be joyned in Commission with the Persian Generall. Through Georgia they go: where Costandell under a pretext of Duty vi∣sits his sad Parents, who (upon his protest that his Apostasy was counter∣feit) joyfully welcomed him: but forgetting that, and all other tyes of
Nature, next night at a solemn banquet caus'd them to be murdered: and till the Georgians saluted him by the name of King, perpetrated all sorts of villanies possible. But how secure soere hee stood in his owne fancie, the dreadfull Justice of an impartiall God retaliated him: the rest of his life proving to this hellish Assassinate infinitly miserable; for first, neere Sumachan, Cycala's sonne the Turkish Generall, wounded him in the arme, and by that forfeited the victory to the Persian. That same night he was also assaulted in his tent by his inraged Country-men; who in his place, (for at the first alarme he escaped) cut a Catamite in peeces, his ac∣cursed bed-fellow: and albeit hee so farre exasperated the Persian to re∣venge, that he brought the whole Army into Georgia, resolving there to act unparellel'd tragedies; yet was hee over-reacht in his stratagems: for upon parlee with the Queen (his late brothers wife) he was shot to death, at a private signall given by that Amazon to some Musqueteers, ambushed of purpose 'twixt both the Armies. A just punishment for such a viper. For can there be a punishment more fit Than he should die, that first invented it. —Nec enim lex justior ulla est Quam necis artisicis, arte petire sua, But Abbas (glad of all advantages to spoyle and conquer) takes the affront as done in his despight, in that Constandell was his subject and a Ma∣hometan; and therefore studies their destruction: but such good reasons Ally-cawn gave him to the contrary, that hee alters his first intents, and seekes by conferring his best love upon young Temerisk their Infant King to oblige their affection: and accordingly returned him into Georgia roy∣ally attended, yea made him bee crowned King in Georgia, with all cere∣mony requirable. But long these Halcyon dayes endured not; for the Grand Seniors Ambassador at Spahawn laboured by all wayes how to sepe∣rate this their Union; & by deceit effected it: First wispering in Temerisks eares that Abbas hated him; and then made Abbas beleeve that Temerisk was an undoubted creature of the Grand Seniors: so that (upon Temerisks deniall to come to Abbas) he enters Georgia with 30000 horse, where Lol∣la-beg, at his Masters command, made fire and sword equally tyrannicall. Temerisk was forced to the Turk, from whom he got such forces, that hee re-entred Georgia, and slew the Persique Garrisons, yea forraged beyond Tephlys into Medya: which so inraged Abbas that from Mosendram he issued with a greater Army than formerly, and in Georgia made a more terrible execution: firing their Churches, houses, and Mulberry-trees; destroy∣ing their silk-wormes, and massacring young and old, without mercy. But so soone as Abbas was gone, Temerisk re-possessed his desolate Countrey; and by a stratagem of Morad-cawns, in some sort requited the Persian: for Morad like another Zopyrus, deformes his face, flies to Cazbyn, and is welcomed: pretends that Temerisk had so mutilated him; and that hee resolved to betray him to the Persian. Abhas beleeves him, and sends 12 famous Dukes and an Army along with him: but being upon the Geor∣gian Confines, and knowing that the Persians were fearelesse of danger, he issues at midnight from his owne quarter upon them with 500 volun∣tary Georgians (whom hee had appointed should accidentally proffer
their services) with such hideous clamours, that 11 of those Dukes and 700 men were slaine; the rest so terribly affrighted, that they rather chose to dye any other death than hazard any more adventures amongst those Christians. Since which, Abbas (by meditation of his Cosel-bashaws, who are most of them Georgians) has firmed a sure friendship with the Geor∣gians. If I should but memorise his severall victories against the Tartar, Geor∣gian, Mogull, and Arabian; It would be enough to make a Book volumi∣nous. But I promised to weave no circumstances: for if that could have beene accepted of, I had here also spoke his journey and warres of Arme∣nia; and his tragick acts against his own children: which in regard I have elsewhere glanced at, I have here pretermitted purposely; this only be re∣membred; That Sha-Abbas dyed Anno Domini 1628. Heg. 1008. aged 70, having ruled the Persian Empire 43 yeeres; and was buried, part at Caz∣byn, part at Ardaveel, in the Chappell where are intombed his famous and warlike Progenitors: And albeit in the infancy of his reigne he had beene Tyrannicall, yet such was the Majesty of his aspect, his courage, policy, wis∣dome, & good fortune in all his wars, that never any Prince before him was better beloved, and every way by all Symptoms of Duty and respect, more honoured. His Care to administer Justice; his Zeale to Strangers, whom he ever much regarded, and gave all safety and priviledges to; it beeing his usuall phrase, that Strangers added especially to the lustre of his Court, more than any Domestiq' magnificence; his Labour to increase Com∣merce with other Nations; his Incouragement to Souldiers; his Indul∣gence to Merchants of his owne Nation; and in a word, his great Know∣ledge in History and Philosophy, not only made him to bee adored by his owne, but admired at by Travellers; especially when with him they com∣pared other Emperours and Princes of Asia, who suck with delight their native ignorance: and thence it was that Abbas went to his grave, with such generall lamentation as made it known that he was their Father, Pro∣tector, and Emperour. In his place was Sha-Soffy (Abbas his Grand-sonne) saluted King; whose fathers death and his brothers I have elsewhere remembred. Of Sha-Soffy I will say little, save that since his being King (albeit very young) hee has vanquisht the Turks 4 times: albeit twice the Grand-Seignior was in person to fight with him. Many of his Nobles hee has be∣headed: but in these things argues his just discent from Ally: and is as like∣ly as any that reigned before him, to advance the Monarchy of Persia; and every way to make it rich, and famous. To conclude Persia and this second Book, give me leave to do it in this Epidicticon. The Epidicticon. VVHy do the wyndings of inconstant state Molest us Weaklings? since the selfesame Fate Turnes Kings and Kingdomes with an equall doome: Whiles Slaves, too oft, possesse their Masters roome.
So pricking Thistles choak our fairest corne, And hopefull Oakes the hugging Ivies scorne: Men are but Men, and be they strong or wise, All their Designes subject to hazard lies. Millions of helps cannot support that Crown, Which Sin erects; Fate justly pulls it down. Witnesse faire PERSIA, large and rich of ground, (The fitter Nurse of warre:) In it was found (Even in those golden times which Poëts vant) Victorius Cyrus; who yet did supplant His Father. Oh, that men would learne to see What life were best, not what doth please the eye! But out, alas! when they have drunk of blood, That bitter potion's sweet: yea even a flood Of lives food cannot their hot thirst allay, Till Tomyris that blood with blood repay. So hapt to Cyrus, whom th'insulting Queen Upbraid with blood-shed; Vengeance is too keen: For in a bowle of goar, dead drowned lies His crowned Temples and insatiate eyes: That King aspir'd, and for his itching veine, 200000 Subjects there lay slaine: Thus faires it still with thee, proud Persia, Whose various Native beauties freely may A strangers love intice. Thy breath is sweet, Thy Face well made, a Nursery of delight; Thy breasts not dry of milk, thy armes are strong, Thy belly fruitfull; legs both clean and long; Thy veines are large; blood pure; quick spirits hast: But for thy back, Oh stay! there lies the wast. To this faire Symmetrie of outward parts, The giver great (to ingage by great desarts) Infused hath, into thy childrens wit, Wisdome and courage best to mannage it. Nor wast thou Barb'rous, or Indisciplin'd; For had thy Eare unto its good inclind, Thy Country Prophetisse fore-told thee how Hell and its wrath by Christ to disavow. Since which, thy Sages, Kings or more than Kings (If I mistake thee not!) their Offerings Unto my Infant God humbly present. O Faith exceeding almost Faiths extent! But now this Light of lights on Earth did shine, See how thy Vertues retrograde decline: Holy Thaddaeus, (whom Saint Thomas sent To cure thy King) thy Flamens did present With hellish torments: and with like foule hands Symon the Cananyt's good newes withstands.
In after times thy Cozrhoe (Persia) made A pond of Christian blood: Nor here thou staid But (in dislike of christ,) th'Arabian Theife Thou choose to be thy unlearned Judge and Cheife. Hence, hence, proceed those grosse Impieties, Which swallow'd, greedily delight thine Eyes! Blood-shed and lust, the foulest out of kind, Which, my chast Muse is fear'd to name: the rind Thou only keeps of zealous awe: the heart, Is foule defil'd: for so thou learnd'st the Art Of lust and pride from thy curst Mahomet, Whose thoughts unbounded all on Thrones was set. Nor did his Successors as Prophets live, But one another murdered; All did grieve At Neighbours Diadems. The God of Peace For those thy sinnes, thy power will sure decrease. And thou that oft hast felt a forrain power; Once more maist feele a Scithyc race so sower; That all the World shall know, how greatest Kings Are thrall to change, as well as weaker things. FINIS LIBRI SECUNDI.
THE THIRD BOOKE. LEt's now abroad againe: and see what Obser∣vations wee can make in the Ilands circum∣jacing Orientall Indya: than which, the world has none richer, pleasanter, or every way more excellent. To encompasse it, we must to Sea againe; for, without such helps there is but little travelling. Apr. 13. We took ship at Swalley: when, being three or foure leagues off at Sea, the wind came faire and made the liquid bil∣lowes swell so advantagiously, that next day wee lost sight of many pretty marittim Townes, at this day owned by the Portu∣gall: namely Gundavee, Daman, St. Iohn de Vacas, Chowl, Dabul, &c. most of them subjected by Don Albuquerq' about the yeare after th'incarnation of our Saviour 1512; Dabul (Dunga of old) excepted, which yeelded to the mercie of Symon Andradius Governour of Choul; from whom 'twas rapt by the Decanees, but by that made a Basis of greater calamity. For, Al∣meyda some few yeares after by stratagem recovered and burnt it to the ground: but by command of the Goan Vice-roy 'twas repaired, repopula∣ted, and stood victorious; till Captaine Hall (if I mistake not the mans name) about nine yeeres agoe forced it; and made th'insulting Portugall know, how their bravadoes, to the English were no way formidable. The South point of DABUL has Artick Elevation 17 deg. 35 minuts; Dabul. variation West, 15 degrees 34 minuts. It once obeyed the Monarch of Decan; but at this day the Lusitanian. 'Tis seated at the foot of a high, but pleasant mountaine; whence, distills a sweet rivolet, beyond measure use∣full in those torryd Clymats: the Road gives reasonable good Anchorge. The Towne it selfe is beautifull to such as view it at distance: the houses are low & thick, and tarras't at the top; serving both to lenifie the scorch∣ing flames of wanton Phaeton, and to resist the quick and subtill rage of Hyem's icyles: an old Castle and a few Temples or Monasteries are all
she boasts of, the Buzzar or Forum is but ordinarie, the streets narrow are: nor is her mart now notable; Surat and Cambya to the North; Goa and Calicuth to the South so much eclipsing her; that she condoles with other her disconsolate neighbours, and acknowledges a secret destinie & change in Townes as well as other temporaries. CHOUL (in Ptolmyes dayes call'd Comane, if Castaldus guesse right) is subject to like varietie: it is removed from the Aequi-noctiall 18 degrees 30 minuts North: and was ravisht from the Emperiall Dyadem of Decan (or Decanory) by Almeyda that ambitious Portugall in the yeare of our re∣demption 1507, and in which (to perpetuate his Conquest) hee erected a gallant Fort or Bulwark, & planted it with Cannon: a Castle also no lesse fortified; so terrible to the Indyans, as they have forborne to make them rore, doubting the very clamour may undoe them. The Inhabitants are a few melancholy but lustfull Portugalls, and some peacefull crafty Ban∣nyans: it affoords naught else to be spoken on in this place. The Expedition bearing up to speak with us, both ships fell foule (to speak in Neptunes lan∣guage) or thwart one anothers houlses; by which mischance her bole∣sprit gave our mizzen shrouds a churlish kisse; but by a happy gale parted without farther inconvenience. After five dayes sayle wee were Na∣dyr to the Sunne, at that instant in our Verticé or Zenyth; his decli∣nation then being just fifteene degrees; and we close by the Ile incyrcling Goa, a gallant Citie, the Metropole and seat of the Spanish Viceroy and Archbishop, the Citie I have formerly described: haste wee therefore to other places. The wind was favourable a while; but ere long becalmed, whereby the ayre inflam'd, and Sea gave a fierie reflection; to sweat and live like Salamanders was no novel thing with us to suffer bravely all mu∣tations; Coelum non animum, was a verified Motto, and serv'd in generall to comfort us. The three and twentieth of Aprill we got to Mangalore a Citie obeying the Mallabar, in whose road wee found thirty or forty Fri∣gads of Mallabar men of warre, who durst not insult upon their numbers, but choose rather to avoyd, and accordingly all together hoist saile towards Goa; one onely miscarrying, suffering a while the Ionas her Barge to do∣mineere, but after variable strife by rowing and augmenting canvasse got away, with some short in her side, and many wounded. That same night we came to an anchor in Mount Elly or Delyns bay, a Towne and Port ac∣knowledging vassalage to the Mallabar: wee rode in nine fadoms, not above three neerer the shore. Gladly wee would have landed, but durst not be too prodigall of our beliefe; they seemed willing, wee knew them treacherous; but seeing wee had discoverd their villany, they ventur'd aboard our ships, they knew us mercifull: they fill'd their Canoes with Coco's, Mangoes, Jacks, greene Pepper, Caravance or Indyan Pease, Buf∣falls, Flesh, Henns, Eggs, and other things, sold us not at very easie prices; but (what principally vext us) also made us pay for every tun of water a Ry∣all or foure shillings foure pence: and though they hand plenty of it, yet grudg'd exceedingly to shew us any curtesie in that common element, in fringing by that their barbarisme, the law of Nature and Nations; one of their owne religion (but more morall) shall accuse them. Ovid, that sweet Roman Poet I meane, who to that end brings in his
Goddesse vindicating Natures right, and blaming the Rusticks for their immanity. Why are these waters stopt? whose use is free; The Sunne and Ayre disperst to all we see Why not those Brooks? I crave communitie. Quid prohibetis Aquas? usus communis aquarum est; Nec Solem proprium Natura, nec Aëra fecit Nec tenues Vndas; in publica munera veni. And that we have such variety of choyce fruits, suffer a little entertain∣ment; the banquet is seasonable in these paralells: but first perfume the place with Calambuco wood (a lignum vitae,) and to imitate the Aegyptians, place we a deaths-head, as an object of mortality. The Bannyans in these parts are as superstitious as any other where, and arrogate as much vainglorious ceremony in their Funeralls: transcending in cost and curiosity as the Carcasse differ'd ere-while from others in Estate and Quality: the richer sort have redolent gums, or aromatick odours of Arabia incendiated or put to flames, wherein the dead body is laid, in∣volv'd in linnen pure white, sweet, and delicate; or in Taffataes of trans∣parent finenesse: of all sorts of wood they affect that called Aquila, and the older kind nam'd Calamba; or Calambuca; trees, rare, sweet, and pretious; of admirable height and evennesse, found commonly in the lofty Moun∣taine of Chaemoys in Cochyn-chyna; and which, these people sell at exces∣sive rates; both in regard the Bannians delight to have it in their Obsequies, as that the Japonians so much valew it. They imagine no pillow whol∣somer, no thing more efficacious for health, than that to sleep upon. They extreamly hate such as have doun or what their heads may sink into; both, for that it heats the blood, and pertubs the fancy: you now may view your fruits asore you. I will select the rarest, and first present a short description: here are faire and juycy Lemons, Pappaes; Coco's, Bananas, or Plaintains, sweet and delicious: the Orenges may tempt a tast,Orenges. they are succulent and dainty, of so curious a relish as affects the eater beyond mea∣sure, and offer the rynd no lesse pleasant than the juyce, both which seeme to have dulcity & acrimony mixt together. The Bannana's is no lesse dain∣ty: the tree mounts not high, but spreads in a most gracefull posture: the fruit is long, not unlike a Sossage in shape, in tast most excellent:Plantans they ripen though you crop them immaturely; and from a dark-greene, mellow into a flaming yellow: the rynd peeles off very easily; the fruit put into your mouth, dissolves and yeelds a most incomparable relish; the Windsor or Pome-crittien are to it farre inferiour. The Jack or Giack growes upon a hyer tree, uneasie to bee ascended:Iiack. the Jack for shew and quantity resembles a Pompeon; without; 'tis a gold yellow, commixt with veins; within, is soft and tender; full of golden co∣loured cloves, each full of kernells, not unlike a great French Bean, some∣what more globous: all of them comprise abone or stone not manduca∣ble, except being boyld the Buffols eat it: the fruit is somewhat unplea∣sant at first gust, the heat and rarenesse causes it: 'tis glutinous and clam∣my in the mouth, but of double benefit in the stomack, being restorative, and good for the back; but of singular use against that French disease, they brought from the hot warres at Naples; whither the lustfull Spaniard brought it, with his Idol-gold from ravisht Indya.
Ananas.The Ananas is not inferiour to the Jack in bulk, in roundnesse; yet is the plant or parent it spung from no way equall: it arises from no seed nor sowing, but from a root like to an Artichoak: at maturity they shew themselves, and affect not above two foot height, the better and with lesse labour to inrich the gatherer: without, 'tis armed with a moystlesse rynd, hard and skalee; within, is wholsome and pleasant: and though a little seeme to satiate the appetite, yet experience teaches us the stomack co∣vets it,Duroyen. and admits an easie digestion. The Duroyen somewhat resem∣bles the Jack: the shape is round, the out-side bravery no way parellells the intrinsique vertue: at first opening it gives a smell not unlike a rotten Onyon, to many seeming odious and offensive: the meat is whitish, divided into a dozen cells or partitions, fild with stones as big as Chez-nuts, white and cordiall: in Malacca, and Iava they abound, & are worth the inquiring after: a fruit, nutritive and dainty; yea, without an hyperbole may well bee called,Arecca. an Epitomè of all the best and rarest fruits throughout the O∣ryent. Arec and Betele also is here much used. The Arecca tree aspires in height like to a Caedar, but rather simulates the Palmëto. It is a fuzzy con∣cave substance, decorated at the very top with plumes, wherein the fruit hangs in clusters: 'tis shaped like a Wall-nut and of like bignesse; white within, not easily penetrated; has no taste, smell, nor sapor: they never eat it alone, but wrap it in a leafe of Betel, and chaw it in many severall mor∣sells: some (as I have noted amongst the Mohelyans) adde to it a kind of Lyme of Oyster-shells; all which together, cures the chollick, removes melancholy, kills wormes, helps Venus, purges the maw, and prevents hunger. Mount Elly is in 12 deg. latitude; in 55 deg. 30 min. longitude; variation 13 deg. as eminent in precipitious hills as any other part of Indya, and limits the two rich and populous Kingdomes, Decan and Mallabar. To me it gave this resemblance, as wee rode before it: where ere wee weighed anchor, Mount Ely. Cananore an unhappy accident hapned; and thus: On the five and twentieth day, at the point of the Bay we saw a Junck of about seventy Tunnes: fraught with merchandize, bound for Acheen, a mart Towne in the Ile Sumatra: neere her skulkt a Mallabar Pirat, with a full intent to board her when she was off at Sea; and out of our view, hopefull of a booty: the poore Junck perceiving the danger, chose rather to put her selfe into our mercy, than hazard the rapine of that Frigat; but her fortun was little bettered; for, the
boarding her with her Barge tow'd her to our Admirall, and (after short consultation) agreed she was a prize, good & warrantable; riches too oft cause causelesse destruction; for doubtlesse had it bin poore,it had escaped; but the great store of Cotton, Opium, Onyons, and somewhat under the Cotton (of most value) made them be adjudged Slaves; eighty able fel∣lowes receiving the brand of hatefull villanage. The Ionasses men, not content with so much wealth and conquest, unworthily and without cause fell upon those disarmed Negroes and beat them cruelly; a wretched va∣lour to actuate in rage where they knew was no resistance; but rather than suffer so much insolence, threescore of those wretches threw themselves headlong into the Sea, desiring rather to expose their carcasses to such a hazard though therby their lives were terminated, than by such cruelty, or a lingring slaverie to be in a perpetuall torture: and albeit it seemed sport to many insolent Saylers, in me I assure you, it bred compassion, to see so many miserable Infidells throw themselves downe-right into hell; at that instant in stead of rest beginning an endlesse unquietnesse: the Canoos from the shore sav'd some of them; those our Boats saved were not joy∣full; seeming more willing to be drowned than be sold to the Banta∣neses, who proffer 50 Ryalls for one man, but shew them no mercie to their dying day. That night we had terrible weather, many furious gusts commixt with thunder, raine and lightning assaulting us; wee admired it, but such as live so neere the Sun say, That weather there is usuall. Thence we sayled due South, and that evening past by Cananor, in view of us: by Montingue, by Onor and Batticala next day; and then by Mangalor (Mandagara of old,) Calicut, Cochyn, Crancanore (in 10 degr. 12 minutes) Coulam, Brin Iohn, to Cape Comery, the utmost promontory of Mallabar, in seven degrees and a halfe, North; var. 14 degr: by Ptolomy called Cory; by Strabo, Conomancina; by Pliny, Calasca; Comar by Arrhyan; by other ancient Cosmographers Calligicum and Calingon: at this day by the Inha∣bitants, Tuttan-Cory; where, ere we passe further, wee will essay the cu∣stome, habit, and superstition of the Mallabars, with such as mix among them; but differ in descent, garb, and religion: this serving as our caveat there, and in other places. 'Tis praise to observe a meane; by moving much, Religious Faith oft gets doubtfull tuch. Observare modum laus est; nimiumq, movendos in dubium trahitur religiosa Fides. Of Mallabar. I Account so farre Mallabar, as is included 'twixt Cape Comry and twelve degrees North, neere about Batticala; foure hundred miles in length, in breadth no where above a hundred; yet so populous, that the Samoryn or King of Callicut is at any time able to affront the Narsingan, Decan, or Gulcundan Kings (his borderers) with 200000 men: his Country is green and full of all delights, cattell, corne, fruit, cotton, silkwormes, and other merchandizes; store of strong Townes, safe Harbours (not inferiour to those at Goa, Choul, Dabul, Swally, or at Danda-ragea-poree) as Coulam, Co∣chyn, Calycut, Mangalore, &c. and to say truth the Ocean it selfe 40 leagues
into the Sea, all along the Indyan shore is anchorable. But before wee goe any further, I hold it the best way to direct your eyes in finding out such exotique places of East Indya and the adjacent Iles as I intend to speake of, in two Mapps; either of which are limitted by Ganges: that thereby our Travell may be the lesse difficult to your inquirie. And first of India intra Gangem. map of India Mallabar is subdevided into many Toparchyes, all obeying the Samo∣reen, a naked Negro, but as proud as Lucifer; swarthy and tyrannicall:
the Nayroes are his Lords; a sort of Mamaluck; they live by the sweat of other mens browes, lust wholy masters them; they goe no whither but are as well armed as if friends & enemies had no difference. Maffaeus, improperly imagines them a kind of Braminy, to no sort of people more unlike; the Bramyns being men of peace; the Nayro, ever quarelling: their armes are clad with Armolets of silver, or Ivorie; they walk no whither without sword and target; and have such a superstitious conceit of their owne merit and temper above other men, that wheresoere they meet a vulgar fellow, they clamour Nayro, vibrate and clash their sword and shield together, and so passe without opposall; but that no poore man dare looke them in the face or come within fifty paces of them, Thevet, Vertoman, and M. P. Venetus have so reported I know; but either the cu∣stomes have altered, or I must call the one a deceitfull Monk, and the other two too credulous Travellers. The extent of Mallabar I have given you. The people generally are big limb'd, strong, cole black, and weare their haire (more like wooll than haire) long, and curled; about their heads they wreath a small but curi∣ous sort of lynnen wrought with gold and silk: their waist is circled with a peece of Callico, which makes them modest ; from the thigh downward, and from their middle upwards, are surely naked. The vulgar sort weare about their waist a parti-coloured Plad (like Barbars Aprons) and pinck their skin in many places. The women (such as credit Mahomet) vaile them∣selves like other Indyans: such as affect gentilisme covet nakednessce: their greatest ornament and pride is in their eares and noses; they suppose them most brave, most courtly, who can teare or dilacerate their eares widest (which they effect by many ponderous bables they hang there,) and ring their snouts with silver, brasse, or Ivorie: their armes and leggs also are chained richly. The Ethnique marriages want not superstition: where God is not knowne, the devill invelopes and traines them up in mystique darknesse: one same ceremonie is observed by King and Pesant. Whoever marries, he enjoyes not the first nights embraces with his Bride; a vene∣rable custome transferres all maydenheads unto the Braminy, who (to shew their obedience to the law) accept the motion and first season her; it betides happinesse ever after: they suppose the ground richer, the crop excellenter, which receives such holy seed; and promises such future Har∣vests of contentednesse: no marvell then, to see a Priest enter where hee pleases, discourse when and where he will, the good man joying at their privacie; since they are in apparition terrhene Idolls: But, which is more than marvellous, the King not knowing whether his children be of his be∣getting; to make sure work, conferres the Empire on his sisters issue; assu∣red it seemes that shee is of his blood, and they of his by consequence: a very simple Sophistry, grounded upon custome more than reason. The men, what they want in Sciences, supply by a surpassing courage and pollicie; the Portugals at their first intrenching on their shore, thought them silly, because unlearned; easie to be overcome, because covered with an indefensive nakednesse: but both conceits deceived them: they found (by sad experience) Nature had instructed them in their owne de∣fence, and that no Cannon nor iron is so violently dangerous as revenge
precipitated, exasperated by contempt and where furie rageth: howbeit, by long warres, they are growne expert and orderly: yea know how to play with Cannons, have as great store of Harquebuzes, and are as well ac∣quainted with the force of powder, as we or any other Nation: in all fights, they also use bow and arrow, darts and targets, granads and variety of fire-works; of which they have such store, that they proffered us as much and of what sorts we would, so we returned them money. Their Country abounds with mineralls and stones of lustre: no part is without abundance of fruits and provision: generally (especially by the Sea) tis woody and mountanous. We will a-shore at Callicut the Metropolis. CALLICVT (ten leagues from that place wee tooke our prize) is thought to be that Towne Ptolomy calls Canthapis, a Citie in 23 deg. an er∣ror broacht by Niger and Bertius. It was above a thousand yeares ago call'd Callicaris: was then knowne, but now is famous; and had beene of more trade and excellence, had she prosperd against the continuall bravadoes of the Portugall: who when they fail'd to conquer her, (did with her as Se∣leuchus did with Babylon) transferr'd their trade to other Townes, and di∣verted her Merchants to other places; whereby in small time it became halfe desolate. It declines from the Aequator towards the North-Pole, eleven degrees: and from its standing in the burning Zone must needs be hot, if not sulphureous: the earth is but meanly fruitfull in grasse, Apollo eats it up; but, her gardens by industry and help of some brooks are green, spatious, and redundant in variety of choise fruits. The Citie it selfe is large, but of no beauty: the houses are low, and thick, and dark: the har∣bour is a pretty way distant from the Town, and but indifferent to anchor in: it shewes two great Forts, built Anno 1515 by the Portuguise; unfor∣tified and in a sort raized by the Mallabar; the Samoreen or Emperour in this place usually abiding: a Prince of great power and awe: black as the devill, and as treacherous: is also of his religion, and makes him heire to all his offrings. Many deformed Pagatho's are here worsshipped: they say they adore not the Idolls, but the Deumos they represent, and who sometimes enter and Oraculize: the Chappel where the grand Caco-Deumo sits is un∣covered, and about three yards high; the wooden entrance is ingraven with infernall shapes: within, their beloved Priapus is imperiously in∣throniz'd upon a brazen Mount: they advance his head with a resplendent Dyadem, from whence issue foure great Rams hornes, denotating some especiall mysterie: his eyes squint, his mouth opens like a Port-cullice, and from thence branch foure monstrous tusks; his nose is flat; his beard like the Sunnes rayes, of an affrighting aspect; his hands are like the clawes of a Vulture; his thighes and legs, strong and hayrie; his feet and taile re∣semble a Monkeys: which put together, renders the devill wickedly de∣formed, and the idolaters beyond all measure grosse Demonomists: Other Temples have other Pagods; ugly, all: yet all differ in invention: some of them are painted or smeered black; others red: some bright; others de∣vouring soules; hell fictitiously tormenting white ones: These Gods of theirs are of the old stamp: they seeme to threaten and to take notice of mens offrings: but what They cannot doe, their Baalyms effectuate. Each morne, the Priest (a Jogue) perfumes and washes them: it seemes the De∣vill
ever pollutes and leaves a base smell behind him: he departs not with∣out a benediction; humbly he prostrates his corps and has it granted him. Every new Moone they solemnly sacrifice a live Cock as a Symbol of lust and courage; in themselves predominating; the Priest is pontifically atty∣red in pure fine Lawne, arm'd with a sharp long silver knife, his armes and leggs garnisht after the Morisco mode with bells, round silver plates and other jangling trifles: after he has bravely sacrific'd the yeelding Cock, he fills his hands with Ryce, goes retrograde, not daring to looke on any other object save his Idoll; till being come neere an Acherontique lake, he then turnes, there embowells his offring, advancing his hands some set times above his head, and so returnes crown'd with applause and blessed in other mens opinions. The Samoryn eats not till it be first offred, and so ac∣knowledges his food sent him from the Deumo, i. e. by the devills permis∣sion: what he leaves, is not for the poore; the Crowes expect it: good reason too, They think them the Devils serviteurs. The people to this day retaine some commendable customes amongst 'em: they commonly ex∣change their Wives one for anothers, nor seeme the women angry at it; Poligamy is sufferable: but in this they differ from other libidinous Law∣givers; as the men have many wives, so one woman may here have many husbands: the issue is bequeathed as she nominates. COVVLAM is a Towne and Province (call'd Sopatpa in Arrhyan) in 9 degrees North, and included in the Travanzorian Kingdome. Once it obeyed the Narsingan Monarch; once the Mallabar; at this day, neither. 200 yeares agoe, the Towne was rich, and great, and populous; traded to by many Indyans, augmented by the Samoryn, and able to number a hun∣dred thousand inhabitants: of such value was the scituation for trade, se∣curity for anchorage, and fidelity of the Coolamites. But now, whither her glasse is runne, the period of her excellence out-runne; or that Cal∣licut first, and then Goa have attracted her custome and resort, I cannot say; this I may: at this day shee is vailed with a sable habit, desolate and disconsolate; shee contemplates the mutability of Times, and other's dis∣asters; and then comparing them with her owne, sees they conclude in a like Center. And albeit I have in many places memoriz'd the Bannyans; here al∣so I may name them, where they swarme in multitudes, and suck in the sweetnesse of gaine, by an immeasurrble thirst and industry; but (Sic vos non vobis) it is ravisht from them by Drones, the lawlesse Moores and Gentiles, who Lord it over them. Alas! the Bannyan is no swaggerer, no royster: he hates domineering and fighting, yea will suffer himselfe to be fleec't by any man, rather than shed blood by any unhappy contention: they love no tumult, no innovation; but wish that all men were of their mind; that is to say, courteous in behaviour, temperate in passion, mode∣rate in apparell, abstemious in dyet; humble, mercifull, and so innocent, as not to undoe the silliest vermin: doubting that if they should destroy any living thing, thereby they might dispossesse their parents or deare friends of a peacefull Mansion; but by eating such, may peradventure devoure the soules of such as once were dearest to them. Ovids conceit is partly for them.
—inque ferinas Possumus ire domos, Pecudum{que} in corpora condi, Corpora quae possunt animas habuisse Parentûm Aut Fratrûm, aut autaliquo junctorûm faedere nobis Aut hominûm certe! Lets home, and in bruit Beasts our bodies hide, Where happily our Parents may abide, Our Brothers, or some by Allyance tide. One man or other sure! And in as many places are Christians, or relicts of that holy profession: for no doubt the Apostles propagated the glad tidings of salvation to all Nations; prophesied by the Prophet David, Psalme 19. Their sound is gone into all lands, and their words into the ends of the world: Mantuan also celebrates it in these verses. Sicutaquis, quondam Noë sua misit in orbem Pignora sedatis, ut Gens humana per omnes Debita caelituum Patri daret orgy a terras: Sic sua cum vellet Deus alta in regna reverti, Discipulos quosdam transmisit ad ultima mundi Littora; docturos Gentes quo Numina ritu Sint oranda, quibus Coelum placabile sacris: As when the Flood ore-spred, old carefull Noe His sons disperst throughout the world, to showe The Law of God, and sacred rites to pay: So when our Saviour would no longer stay On earth, a mission of his Schollers he To th'utmost bounds of th'earth with Charter free Doth make to instruct the world both how to pray, And to appease Gods wrath with sacred Lay. In both Asiaes the Gospell was throughly preached: but now the subtle∣ty of Satan, and that carnall law of Mahomet have infected these soule-sick Nations: for all which, Christ has his flock there, which though at this time scattered, yet in due time shall be gathered, and made one blessed company. In Persia are many thousand Christians; in India a no lesse multitude; compared indeed to other Idolaters, but a hand-full: yet that does not discourage them: 'tis better go to heaven alone, than to hell with an innumerable multitude: Arnobius of old times could say Nationibus cunctis nos sumus Christiani. In many marittim Townes of India, that name is honoured. In Meliapore, Narsinga, Coolan, Gucurran, Curigan, Bipur, Tanor, Battacala, Onor, Cranganor, Goa, and other places are Chri∣stians: yea, in many Indian Iles some are numbered: among Mahomitans they have freedome of conscience from that Azoara in the Alcoran, That none are to be diswaded from the religion they suckt from their cradle: amongst Panyms, from that rule of Nature; Use others, as thou would'st others should use thee. The Christians in these parts differ in some things from us and the Papacie; yet retaine many principles of the Orthodox and Catholick doctrine: Lets enter their Temples. Their Churches are low and but poorely furnished; their vassalage will reach no further: whether from their subjection, or that (so the Temples of their bodies bee reple∣nisht with vertue) the excellency of buildings conferre not holinesse, I know not: neat they are, and sweetly kept; matted, without seats, and in∣steed of Images have some select and usefull texts of holy Writ obviously writ or painted. They assemble and haste to Church each Lords day with great alacrity: at their entring they shut their eyes and contemplate the holinesse of the place, the exercise they come about, and their owne un∣worthinesse: as they kneele, they look towards the Altar or Table, neere which the Bishop or Preist is seated, whom they salute with a low and humble reverence; who returnes his blessing by the up-lifting of his hands
and eyes: at a set houre they begin prayers, above two houres seldome continuing: first they have a short generall confession, which they follow the Priest in, and assent in an unanim Amen: then followes an Exposition of some part or text of holy Scripture: during which, their attention, dejected lookes, and silence is admirable: they sing an hymne, and at par∣ting out of Church, re-salute the Minister; who ceases not (till all be gone out) to elate his hands and blesse them. When they are come home they read a chapter in either Testament, both which they suppose they have in∣corrupt after the Originalls, and translated for them by Saint Thomas the Apostle and patron of the Orient: they have it also in the Chaldy; but none save the Clergie understand it: every first Sonday in the Month, the Priest reads a Sermon out of an old Homily, writ (as they say) by the Apostle or some of his Disciples: they Baptise commonly at the 40 day, if the Parents do no sooner desire it, they first signe the Infant on the fore∣head with the Crosse, and then wash it all over with water: the Sacra∣ment of the Lords holy Supper they administer in both kinds; the Commu∣nicants receive it (reverently) kneeling: they observe two dayes strict preparation, during which they eat no flesh, revell not, accompanie with no women: in the Church they confesse their sinnes and demerits with great reluctancy: They marry as wee do: the Clergie marry but once; the Layety but twice; widdowes if they marry before the yeere be expi∣red (after which their husbands dyed) are ill reported of, and hazard their joyncture: none (save for adultery) have lycence to part till death sever them. In sicknesse the Priest is sent for to comfort them, and to give the Eucharist, if it bee heartily desired: that done, they take farwell of their wife, and children, and all others; and so rid themselves of carnall distracti∣ons; which too oft hinder the desired meditation, of the misery of world∣lings; and by a holy contemplation of the ineffable joyes of heaven, strive to mitigate the pangs of their disease, yea the grim aspect of approaching Death; and the survivers rather joy than mourne as they solemnize his fu∣neral: they first wash, then wrap the Corps in clean linnen; & a few selected friends concomitate it to the grave, wherein they place it looking (not East, but) West towards Ierusalem: five dayes after that they visit his Fami∣ly. They feast and fast as we: their Lent or abstinence from flesh and the like, begins each spring, and is strictly observed fortie dayes, without ban∣quet or bravery: their yeare is Soli-genian: our three cheefe Feastivalls they celebrate, in July they commemorate the martyrdome of Saint Thomas: they have many Patriarchs or Protomists, the cheife resides at a house built upon a high mountaine, nine miles from Cranganor. Since the Portugalls traded Indya they have shaven their heads: the Layicks pay De∣cimae or Tythes willingly: they affect justice, truth, peace, humility, obe∣dience, &c. and acknowledge Saint Thomas (some the Eunuch of Arabia, converted by Philip) their Tutelary Saint, and Patron. They beleeve no Purgatory. May 7, we had 8 degrees: and ere Sunne-set darted our eyes upon that high mountaine commonly called Brin Iohn i. e. the Mount of Iohn; and revives the British Antiquity. Next day we had 7 degrees 30 minutes; va∣riation 14 degrees: than which, that famous Promontory of East-India
extends no further towards the Aequator. Next day wee sailed by the Maldyvae, Iles memoriz'd by Pyrard de Laval who lived there, and reports that the King there styles himselfe Emperour of thirteene Provinces and 12000 Ilands; most and least any King in the world is owner of. Neere these are other Iles, Candu, Nicubar, and Sumbrero by name; in the view of Zeyloon, and Sumatra: to which place and many other I must guide your patience. of Zeyloon. ZEyloon (or Ceylon,) one of those five Iles Ptolomy calls Barussae, was not innominate to the Antients. By Ptolomy, cald Panigarensis; & since him (in Arab. Authors) Sisuara, Tenarisis, and Nanigeris. At this day Zeyloon by us; Chingall, by the inhabitants: an Ile, spatious, rich, and famous: severed from the Asiatick continent by a small sea, not forty Leagues over. It is limitted from 8 to 11 deg. of latit. North; the length is about 70 leagues; breadth 40, and circuit 250 or thereabouts: an Ile famous in some old con∣jectures, as that Paradise was here; & that K. Salomon had hence his obrize gold or gold of Ophyr; but I beleeve neither, in regard most writers fix the ruines of the one in Mesopotamia; and the other rather in Pegu, Iava, & those wealthy places. The most memorable is this, That Meleck (or Melchior) Pyramal, King of this Iland is thought one of those wise-men (premonisht by that prophesy of Balaam the Edomite in Num. 24. 17.) that brought (as to a King, a Priest, a Prophet,) Gold, Frank-insence, and Myrrh, unto our blessed Saviour; foretold also by the Persian Sybill, and by a new made Starre guided by the finger of God, miraculously directed: and who at his returne made knowne the mystery of Gods Incarnation, for mans redemption; & by his laborious teaching made many Proselites; some to this day by tradition memorising him, and reteining somewhat of Chri∣stian knowledge, though the greatest part bee Apostats; and drunk with abominable demonomy and superstition. But whether Melchyor returned (upon Saint Thomas his arrivall) and with the other two came into Europe, and whether those three buried in Cullen be fictitious or no; it is not per∣tinent to a Travellers curiosity to insist upon. But this is obvious in Histo∣ry, That Candaces Noble Eunuch, baptised by Philip, left her service to preach Christ; whom very fruitfully he made knowne to many parts of Araby and sundry Iles; as Socotora, this, and Tabrobane, or Sumatra; as Dorotheus Bishop of Tyre, in the dayes of the great and godly Constan∣tine witnesseth. The honour of the first Christian European discoverie, we owe to Lau∣rentius sonne of the brave Almeyda the Portugall Generall, about the yeare 1500: not altering the name from what the Natives named it. Which though Hayton (300 yeares agoe) and Barrius (by many sophisticated No∣tions borrowed from the braines of Corsalus and Varryer) will have to be Tabroban; we will grant it so, when by Epedemick assent, hee can prove Peru to be Ophyr. To speake of the Time present. The Ile is over-runne with stinking weeds of cursed Heythenisme.
Here, grow those heaps of Errors, which we see Of all uncleannesse and Idolatrie. Hic, errorum cumulus, hic omnis spurcitia Hic, infoelix populus gaudet Idolatria. Scarce any Village or Mount without its inanimate Pagod; which being divers in shape, are therefore diversified, in that they relish the divers pal∣lats of divers men. Witnesse that infamous Apis Hanimant, or Apes∣tooth-god, so highly, so generally resorted to by millions of Indians, till Constantine the late Goan Viceroy landed 500 men, spoil'd Columbo, and tooke away that simple Idoll, and in his zeale burnt it, refusing 300000 Duckets which the Zeylonians profferd to redeeme that their helplesse Pagod. Unwisely refused; in that a craftie Bannyan produced such ano∣ther, protesting it the same, was beleev'd by the Jogues the Priests, there∣by exceedingly enriching himselfe, and joying not a little these credulous Zelonyans. They have many other Cacodaemons horrible and ugly. The more de∣formed the more exact Idaeas of Devills, & the more venerable. A notable one is that (not farre from Mattacala) conspicuous in its standing, an Idoll of great bulk and Antiquity; Of which, the Singales and Jogues Crono∣graphy. That, many yeares agoe, one Iohna their King nourisht a ridicu∣lous and impious conceit of this Diabolo, as a foolish and senselesse Idoll. But loe, the Jogues by the Devills craft so wrought that upon a solemne day, as Iohna entred, he beheld the Pagod to breath out fire and furie, his eyes colour'd with rage, and the Semiter in his hand wrathfully bent against him; the amazed King cryes out for help, accuses his infidelity, confesses it a perfect Devill, and having well satisfied for his errour, is reconcil'd, and ever after a zealous Idolater. The place where this grand Pagotha stands, is invelloped with a cloud of Armes, and as sedulously guarded. Good reason too. The Time shall come; when sea, when land, when all The heavens vast moving regions, burning shall Consume, and to their ancient Chaos fall. Esse quo{que} in Fatis reminiscitur affore tempus Quo mare, quo Tellus, correpta{que} regia coeli Ardeat. Et Mundi moles operosa laborer. Verily beleeving, that so soone as this tott'ring Idoll falls, the finall ru∣ine and overture of the whole world by fire or other wayes shall immedi∣ately come after. Upon Columbo's high peake (a place deerely bought by the covetous Portugall) is also shew'd and seene (and credited) the vestigiating or foot∣steps of old Adam, here (beleeve them if you can) borne and buried Here also for a little money and much paines you may see a Lake of sale water (and because salt, upon so high a hill) said to be no other water, but the very teares which Eve shed a hundred yeares together for the murther of righteous Abell. A Cabala, how strange soever it seeme to mee and you, yet Frier Oderic of Friuli (Anno 1300, a contemporary and fellow Travel∣ler and Figmentor with our Sir Iohn) not onely beleeves it, but perswades us to a like credulity. A word now of the soyle. It abounds with sundry sorts of aromatique
spices; but in most plenty with Cinnamon; and thence, by Ptolomy and Stra∣bo is call'd Cinnamomifera regio.Cynamon. Cinnamon, is a pretious bark. The Tr is straigbt and low, the branches no way ruinous but growing in a com¦posture. It resembles the Olive tree in height, with which it co-operats towards perfection. The leaves are not unlike the Bay and Orenge. The blossoms, are exactly white, fragrant, & beautifull. The fruit is globous, hard, and (by reason of Apollos constant kisses) darkly coloured. It is apparelld with a thick rynd or barke, which, in Summer (when it may best discover its virgin nakednesse) tis disroabed of, and by the churlish Pesant cut in ma∣ny small peeces, arefied by th'imbracing Sonne, and so gathered. I might here also present you many other rarities this noble Ile abounds with. Orenges, Dates, Coquos, Ananas, Plantans, and Mastick, which Tom Coriat will not beleeve growes any where save in Syo. Elephants, Buffolos, Cowes, Sheepe, Hogs, &c. Smaragd, Rubies, Ambergrice, and the like: But I rather desire to please thee by naming them. And with this, that all put together seem'd so magicall and dazeling in the eyes of the avaritious Lusitanian, that Almeyda in despight of her united Heptarchy landed here Anno Dom. 1506, fortified and forced for Emannuel his King a prety Tribute, an Annall tax of 250000 pound weight of their best Cinnamon, which Sousa begun to lode away the third yeare after. But the King (more rich than crafty) to shew how little hee regarded the losse of so much uselesse barks of Trees, and (I know no other reason) to set a better edge upon the monstrous appetite of the leane faced Portugall, invites them to see him walk upon a Tarrass, arrayed in an imbrodered coat thick powderd with gold, Smaragds, Pearle and Diamond all together darting out rayes of a most wonderfull delight and luster: to which (albeit Phoebus did his best to encrease the splendour,) yet (as if that wanted glory) 500 Flam∣beauxes were put is flames to make this miserable Prince seeme able to strike men dead with his dazeling glory. But it rather was as Balme to the heart, and as a Corpo Santo to the devouring admirers. For forthwith, Sil∣veira built a brave and well-defended Castle there, (under promise to ayd them against the Mallabar) but it was rather to be his Jewell keeper; for in small time they so pursued the feeble King, that they became Ravishers of what he had; and by a forced nakednesse, learnt him a future better way of politique braverie. From Zeloom let us hoise saile for some eminent Ports and marittim parts of Indya, Lorded by many black but daring Pagans: the Mogull (of whom in the first part wee have treated) who has swallow'd up, and in∣circled within his owne Diadem many great and noble Kingdomes: the rest, being the Decan, Samoreen,(or Mallabar) Narsingan, Pegu, Syam, and others; of whom we will briefly glance at. As of the chiefest Iles, vicina∣ting this we last landed at. As Sumatra, the Iavae, Borneo, Celebes, Moluccoes, Bandae, Amboyna, Phillippinae, &c. And first, of the coast of Chormandel. Of Chormandel. THe coast of Chormandel (Catigardamna in Ptolomy) stretches from Cape Comryn under 7 degr. minutes odd North, as farre as the great
and famous gulph of Bengala, receiving both the heads of holy Ganges; the Ocean bellowing upon these well knowne Townes of Trade, Negapatan, Meliapore (both, famous for intombing S. Bartholmew and S. Thomas,) Poly∣cat, Armagun, Narsinga, Mestipatan, Bipilipatan, and other places; where of old the Assacani (whence the Assassinates) are placed by Strabo, and Narsinga I take to be Magoza. NEGAPATAN (i.e. a Towne upon the river Negay) has 12 deg. lati∣tude North, odd minutes; hot and unwholsome, both in regard the wind and raines are for the better part of the yeare, high and unseasonable. The Towne has good water, and Fruits well relisht, cooling and nutritive; notwithstanding, the people are much vexed with Fevers, Fluxes, and other Diseases. The people be blackish, blockish, and unapt for studie or exercise: Heat (which here predominates) debelitates their appetite, and invites them to too much ease (the Mother of luxurie;) a small, thin, but very fine Shuddery or vaile of Lawne is drawne afore their secret parts; their head also has a small wreath, the rest is exposed to view and weather. They want no gold, stones of value, nor such things as the Merchant co∣vets; but they prize them as we doe Trifles. Any religion is tolerable: so that some praise Mahomet, some a Dog, others a Crocodile, and some love senselesse Pagods. The Banyan wives here have more freedome to burn themselves to ashes at the Funerall of their husbands, than where the Moores have command; so that in this Coast the custome is usuall. Their Marriages require the first place. They are various, the most Novell be∣ing, that a Priest, a Cow, and the two Lovers go together to the water side; where the Bramyn mutters a prayer of smal matter to some purpose; which finisht, in order and Symmetry they linck hands, and have the Cowes tayle commixt as a holy testimony; on all together the Bramin powres his hal∣lowed Oyle, and forces the beast into the river, whereinto shee goes wil∣lingly, yea so farre till they be to the middle in water; nor returnes she, nor doe they disunite, till Neptune fright her: but being on shore, they untie, holding that conjunction sacred and powerfull ever after. Their Epithalamy is sung, let's heare their Funeralls! when Death has cut in two their Union; shee conceits her selfe a loathed carkasse to live after him: shee roabs her tender body with a transparent Lawne; her armes, leggs, and thighes, are fettered with wanton chaines of love; her eares, nose, and fingers, adorn'd with Pearles and precious stones; one hand holds choise of flowers; th'other a Ball; Embleams of immortall Paradise. She goes attended with a mighty company; some for love, most for No∣velty. The Priest all the way describes the rare joyes she is going to; she grants a modest smile, trips on, and upon sight of the flame, seemes trans∣ported beyond measure; she sees the carcasse of her Husband layd upon a pyle of pretious wood, and when the fire begins to embrace him, like a mad Lover shee bids Farwell to her Parents, children, and friends, and wil∣lingly incorporates her selfe with fire; which quickly makes them one, and nothing; nothing extant save fame, flame, and ashes. Of which the Poët, thus of old.
Et crtamen habent lethi, quae viva squatur conjugium; pudor est non licuisse mori. Ardent victrices, & praebent pectora flammae; imponuntque suis ora perusta viris. They strive to die, and who best speed can make; They blush, grim Death so slowly to o'retake. The Conquerors burn, their brests yeeld to the fire, And to their husbands their burnt lips aspire. Some refuse to burne, but are forced to shave and live as Monsters: a pu∣nishment justly given, they were growne so audiciously wanton, that upon any distaste the liver of their abused husbands could but satisfie their lust∣full boldnesse acted by venome, till by Parliament this course was taken to avoyd the danger. Grosse Ido∣latry.Such is the miserable vassalage the old red Dragon cheyns this wretch∣ed people in; who are so farre from commiserating their owne woe, that they invent many tragick tricks of devotion to destroy themselves, and to agrandize their idolatry. They have a massy copper guilded Pagod, mounted upon a triumphant Chariot moved by eight mighty wheeles over-laid with pure gold; the Ascent is spatious and easie by many steps, on which are placed (upon a solemne day) the Priests and many sober girles (who to inrich the Divell (poore knave) prostitute their bodies to the li∣bidinous flame of wicked men: Oh ignis infernalis luxuria! fond zeale of such besotted Parents, to destinate their pretty children from a miserable infancy to the old age of hellish devotion: the procession followes, (not unlike the Thensa us'd by the superstitious Romans or that by idolatry of the Danes reported by Ditmarus and Dado their writers.) happy is that man, rich and poore, great and base; can fasten a hand to draw the Char∣riot: yea they account them happiest, who out of a frantick zeale, teme∣tariously throw their naked bodies in the way; that by the ponderous∣nesse of the Devill and his Charriot, their wretched bodies may be crusht in peeces, by that thought Martyrs, not knowing that their mortall silly soules flie into the fry of an endlesse flame: yea more (infandum) such is the stupid folly of these men that they perswade their fanatique daughters to become base strumpets to please their fancy and inrich their Pagods, insomuch, as it is a great wonder to see so many girles at such immaturity, so impudently delighted with filthy men. Quid juvat durum proverare Fatum? Omnis haec vaga turba libet ad manes Facitque inertivela Cocyto. What helps it thus to haste your destiny? In such post-haste since all this wretched fry Shall with full sayle to hell through Cocyt fly. From Negapatan goe we for Meliapore. MELIAPORE, is a Town on the Coast of Kormandel, elevating the Artick Pole 13 degr. 20 min. both old and famous; first call'd Calamina, then, Melange, Meliapore after that, and now S. Thomas, by reason that in this place he suffered martyrdome. The Towne is at this day small and poore; under Moorish command; and yeelds little for Trade, save Cotton ware and such Commodities; howbeit, is exalted in her memory. This was the last place where the Apostle preached, after hee had converted Persia, Hyrcania, Bactria, Sog∣diana,
and many parts of Indya, yea and many Proselites were here, who embraced his soule saving doctrine, and those not of the basest sort; for Sygamus himselfe (Emperour of this Coast) was baptized, and (by his ex∣ample) other of the Nobles. Howbeit, the Devill so wrought (by Gods permission) that some apost atizd and inraged the multitude, so that in a common furie they both suffered, the one was shot to death, the other brayned, and both crowned with glorious martyrdome, thirty yeares after our Saviours passion. And, however Abdias Babylonicus (who writ that after their deaths they appeared and preached againe their former do∣ctrine,) may seeme doubtfull, this is certaine that in Memory of their cru∣ell ingatitude, the divine justice hath marked their posterities, (as some Jewes say the Tribe of Benjamin are to this day, who of all others were most fierce against our Saviour of the Tribe of David and Iudah) so these have one leg as big againe in the calfe as is the other. Notwithstanding the peoples rage, the two noble Martyrs had each his sepulcher, and to this day was a receptory of many native and other holy Christians; till about fiftie yeares since, their skulls and bones were brought a way and (as ho∣ly relicks) at this day kept in the Virgins church in Ioa) by command of Iohn 3 of Portugal, who sent Emanuel Frias (guided by Alphonsus Sousae) to that purpose. Many strange reports I could give yee out of Spanish reporters, But I am not enjoyned to beleeve them. What is very observable and with warrant, I may. That in the yeare of our Lord God 883 (as Malmsbury, Glor. Wigorn. and others justifie) Syghelmus a devout Bishop of Shirborne in Dorsetshyre encoraged by Alfred a holy English King travelled to this place in pilgrimage with Alms and Offrings; yea and return'd home in nine yeares with great joy, rarities and experience, bought by incredible pati∣ence, cost and danger, after which the place was very famous. I read also, that in the yeare of our Lord 1277, Myrangee an Atheist conquerd Narsinga and beyond this City, a man full of rapine and other impietie; yea so base∣ly opinionated of this relique and Tradition that havihg one yeare abun∣dance of ryce and other graine, and roome enough to hoord it in, in a con∣temning way and bravery no place would please him to put it save the holy Chappell, where prayers were incessantly made by many religious Christians. They intreat him to refraine, by all submissive meanes, but it spurs him on to a greater height of profanenesse, yea is infinitely glad it vexes them, by this supposing himselfe to be thought a God (a Devill ra∣ther) and to be worshipped. But see Gods power and favour in it; that night, in an affrighting dreame or vision he sees the old Apostle approach∣ing him in wrathfull and discontented way threatning to punish him for his ungodlinesse, and with an Iron whip proffers to lash the relenting King, who suddenly is a waked and as soone beseeching the Christians to pray for him, helping himselfe to purge the house of God and satisfying for his sacriledge. A Miracle not a little joying the sad minded Chri∣stians. Polycat in 14 deg. Armagun Caleture, Tarnassery and Petipoly are in our way hence to Narsinga and Meslipotan; but by reason they are but lately become factoryes of English Merchants, and differ in customes colour,
and other things, little from Narsinga: wee will passe thence to other descriptions. Of Narsinga. NARSlNGA, is a Noble part of India where some would have Chormandell to terminate, but I like it not. Narsinga is famous all over Asia: confined by Mallabar, Gulcunda, Bengala (Baracura of old,) and the Ocean. The King so rich, that he despises his Neighbours: so powerfull in Men, Armes, and Ammunition; that hee values neither Mogul, Decan, Samoryn, nor Peguan. His Kingdomes are defended by loyall slaves, and many naturall advantages; full of all things requisite, for use, and plea∣sure: as faire Townes, strong Forts, pleasant fields, and choisest Mineralls; abounding in rivers, hills, dales, corne, cattell, fruit, &c. so that with good cause he is reputed as absolute a Monark as any other in India. The Banny∣ans swarm like Locusts here; the Bramyns are no where more reputed of: the Temples indeed in their structures boast of no great bravery, but are proud within; reteyning many rich and massy Idolls, shaped and com∣manded by the Devil for his service and their devotion. BISNAGAR (Modura of old, Arcati saies Castaldus) is the second Citie in Narsinga for grandeur and braverie; being circled with a wall of foure miles compasse, and as well fortefied: well built, and no lesse wealthy. Some Churches it has, remarkable for shape & ornament; but in their gen∣tilisme base and immodest, yea unworthy the relation. The Port or Haven is good to anchor in: the Citie well frequented by European ships and Iunks from Malacca, Pegu, Cambogia, Cochyu-Chyna, Chyna, Iapan, Phyllip∣pinae, the Moluccae, Borneo, Iava, Sumatra, Zeiloon, and many parts of In∣dia, Arabia, Persia, and like places. When any Traveller comes to his Court, he shall have fitting entertain∣ment: and is many times invited by the King, the better to shew his fine cloaths, which to shew ourselves thankfull we will report to other nati∣ons; being thick set with stones and gems of infinite valew and wonderfull lustre; which when he is roabed with (for the resemblance they have with the Son, which they worship) he is adored: his Court is full of Majesty, his guard being a thousand pensioners: he affects poligamy, and therefore writes himselfe husband of a thousand women; many of them having him all his life in such esteeme, that at his Death they make his flaming Grave their consuming Sepulcher. MESVLIPATAN, commonly pronounc't by contraction Mestipa∣tan, is subject to the Gulcundan King, and removed from the Equinoctiall 16 degr. and a halfe, North; seated in the skirt of the Bengalan Ocean. The whole province admits a mixture of severall Idolatries; in most parts the Saracius and Bannyans being the greatest number. Mahomet was bla∣sted among them by a Colony of Persians conducted hither in the 28 yeare of the Aegyra and of our account 648 by Abdall Ben Hemyr a man of no smal reckoning with Ozman the then Calyph of Babylon & Mecca, since when their off-spring have here inhabited. The town it selfe cannot be famosed either for bulk, beauty, or pleasure. 50 yeares agoe by a raging mortality
and Famin being well nigh depopulated. The streets are few, and narrow; the houses low and unfurnished; the fields and gardens parcht by flaming Phaeton, which here rages from March to Iuly; from thence to Novem∣ber the wind and raine as incessantly disturbing them: so as of twelve months, they have but foure from November to March salubrious and moderate: howbeit by reason of the English residence here, of late traf∣ficking for callicoes, rice, and the like, it begins to flourish, and is not to be doubted unlesse the unquiet and deceitfull humour of the people distaste the English and force their removall to adjacent places as Armagun and Polycat, where they may sit downe with more ease, lesse charge and choyser merchandizes. Hence remove your chast eyes and eares to an unchast Towne, though Casta by name; a Towne infamous in cursed demonomy and wantonnesse. The Mosques have Idols in them, shewing art in sculpture very commen∣dable, but hatefull in the stinck of their devotion. The common shapes of Pagods here resemble beastly Priapus and Pan (as is described by Servius in Aegloc 2 Virgil) having great eyes, flat nose, wide mouth, foure great hornes, a long beard shaped like beames or radiance of he Sun, clawes for hands, and crooked legd, all over deformed. Nil sine Numine is old. Here we see Nil nisi Numen. The Devill pleasing them in varietie and not caring how nor in what shape it be, so he be ser∣ved. Some imagins a cow above all creatures worth his adoration. Others regard the Sunne, Moon, Starres, as heavenly soules and helpers: and other some the refreshing streames, shading trees, and the like; whereby I may fitly paralell them with what Tacitus speaks of the Celtes our neigh∣bours. Multa simulacra, multum peregrinae superstitionis vestigim ibi vi∣dere liceat. They have many solemne Festivalls. In some of them they fasten sick or needy-men (made stupid by too much zeale) to a hook or en∣gine, which being hoist to elevate him with the Pagod, the blood trick∣ling from his wounded shoulders (excessit medicina modum) is preserved by the Priest; & at his discent (as a meritorious sacrifice) dasht against a Tree: and after he has (in most submissive sort) intreated the divell to accept his offring, returnes fild with joy and applause and hopes to thrive the better ever after. They Offer in the night, first making the streets bright as day by a multitude of lights, then stuffing their hands and bags with ryce, they glo∣merate and wind in dances; in every corner (wher a puppit-god sits) throw∣ing ryce and fruits; but being once out of the magick ring, haste away; not daring to looke back lest the Devill should teare them for this their gra∣titude. They use not common burialls; in that the Carcaffe is placed in a deep cave, long and narrow; or betwixt two walls built so of purpose; and wherein the foolish widdow immures her self; never after speaking to any, but expecting death by the arrow of Famine, of all other the most formi∣dable and insufferable. Their Habits are best part nakednesse, the zone excuses cloathing. They delight in fishing, and to sport upon the water, in boates or curricurries thus shaped.
A Curricurre or boat Of Malacca. MALACCA (Terra aurifera in Iosephus:) elevates the Artick Pole 5 degr. from the Aequator. Was known of old by the name of Au∣rea Chersonesus, and if my ayme deceive me not, the same, Ptolomy in his 7 lib. 2. c. cals Facola, and more likely to be part of Ophyr, (from such abundance of Gold as hence, in Pegu, Syam, Borneo and Sumatra is and has ever been ravished, and in that, Ophyr and Hobab with Havilah their brother, sonnes of Ioctan here inhabited) rather than Hispaniola supposed Ophyr by Columbus and Stephanus; Soffala by Ortelius. Gambra by Ar∣tius Montanus; Ormus by Danaeus; or those moon conceits of Peru by bold fac't Goropius; or that Spanish brag of Pineda who threatens those that will not beleeve Cadiz was it: for I see this place admits the conje∣cture better both from the Port of Ezion-geber in the red Sea, whence by Arabia's shore and the Indian they might without helpe of the Adamant or Pole Starre facilitate their voyage; and that this place has of old been denominate the Land of gold. This old verse of Tzetza points at it. Insula est Indica quam (Poetae) Auraeam vocant. Alii vero peninsulam dicunt, sed non Insulam. Hebraei autem Ophyr Lingua sua vocant. Habet enim Metalla Auri & Lapides omnifarios. Excellenter magis vero Prasinum lapidem. The golden Indian Ile (by Poets sung) A peninsule some name it, and no Ile. The Hebrews call it Ophyr in their tongue. All sorts of stones and mynes of gold ere while Are found there with the choisest Prasine stone. And Malacca is a Chersonesse or Peninsula; which makes it agree the bet∣ter with this description of Ophyr.
The Citie Malacca is under 5 (some observe 4) degrees North, and obeys the Monarchy of Syam, ever since Abdalla the honest King therof was An. 1508. most inconsideratly beheaded by the Portugall; and that upon Se∣queyra's complaint Albuquerk sackt it, obteining an incredible masse of treasure; 3000 peeces of great Ordnance, and so much minted coyne, that the King of Portugalls part (being but a fift) came to 250000 ryalls of 8: a conquest so forceable, that (notwithstanding the Castle and Garison left there by the Lusitanian) the Syam King at his owne leisure prostrated it. The Citie is above 3 miles long, but very narrow; built in a hemicycle, upon the banks of a pleasant river, as broad as is the Thames, but not so po∣table: a rivolet of sweeter water glides gently thorow the Town, over which is rais'd a Bridge, strong though meanly beautifull: the wals circling her are reasonable strong; but invalidable against the fiery vomits of the Cannon: the buildings are generally low and base, and lined with poore furniture, though they want no gold to buy it with; but being dark and close, tis the lesse usefull: the most observable are her Fanes, Cypresses, and Gardens; the streets and fields show many delightfull Arbours and choyce fruits; amongst which the Duroyen (as valewable with them as Mynes of Gold and Silver, abounding here,) Corne, Suger, and some other rarities: the people are naturally hospitable; affected with musick, songs, and strangers: howbeit, impatient and fierce, if exasperated; jealous, if occasioned, deceitfull if too much credited: their language is epedemic, and serves no lesse in these parts, than with us the Latine; in other parts, the Arabic: leave we Synca-pura, and passe to Patania, an easie dyaes jour∣ney thence. Of Patania. PATANIA, (Perimula of old, at this day a well-known Citie in the Ben∣galan or Argaric gulph, and extra Gangem) elevates the Pole Artick, about 7 degrees; and is scituate in midst of those two famous Ports, Ma∣lacca and Syam. The government is Monarchicall; the Kings derive themselves from a Gentile King of Delly; who when he had subdued Pa∣tania, left his sonne Gingee his Prorex here; and from whom the late Queene and this Prince are truly branched. The Mogull oft threatens to dethrone him; yey he sits close and keeps his owne; especially safe∣guarded by interposing Ganges, and some small but usefull I'lets where he advantagiously fortefies. The Towne is strong, and best defended by 12 peeces of great brasse Ordnance; one of them (a Basilisco) is twenty six foot long, well proportioned in bore and squaring. Some Temples of Idolatry Patania shews, furnisht with wooden gods for politheisme; but more note-worthy in some antick Monumēts of former Kings. The people are black, and go with the most part of their bodies naked: they take great delight in eating of Betle and Opium, and love Areck (or strong liquor) exceedingly: they usually eat in plates of gold. They fre∣quently speak three Languages, the Malay, Siam, and that of Chyna: Their writing differs, one which is the Malay, from the right hand to the left, as the Hebrews; another, which is the Syam, from the left to the right, as
we; a third, which is the China, right downe and bending no way: all three very usuall and affected by the industrious. They are part Moores, and part Gentiles: the one so worship God; as the other do Pa-Gods or Idolls. They are hospitable to such strangers as from desire of novely or gain, reside amongst them: neither do they enquire of what Countrie they be, what their Businesse, nor Religion. The men of note transcend in cur∣tesie; for at any mans arrivall, they blush not to proffer their Daugh∣ters or Neeces to be their bed-fellowes; yea to concomitate them at bed and board during his stay; the price for such a favour not equalling so high a complement: but that, were it lesse; too much in my opinion for such Pandars and base prostitutes. At the end of the prefixed time the woman returnes home well pleas'd; so far from shame or losse, that they rather accompt her honoured; and fit for preferment: But 'tis dangerous to be wanton elsewhere; jealousie on either side inflaming into rage, which seldome dyes without one or anothers destruction: I cannot but cry out upon them, and adjudge them in the civil sorrow of one of their Religion, but more temperance; who could sigh out, at sight of such absurdities, Oh miserum! cui peccare liceat. Adultery they punish rigidly; Fornication is more tollerable. The young women are carelesly frolick, and feare∣lesly merry; the married, melancholy and strictly observed: idlenesse and heat provokes them to inchastity. The men are also effeminate; yea wallow in all kind of turpitude and sensuality: their females are often in their sight; the grape commoves them to wickednesse; they delight their gust and pallat with choysest wines, waters, Rack, Ryce, and fruits, both succulent and restorative; and which make Venus predominate: but by this their intemperance they abreviate their dayes; few exceeding sixty yeeres: an old age, if you contemplate their lust (Deaths best harbinger,) and the Zone they sweat in; bad, both; both, intemperate. Of Siam. SIAM, (calld Sobanna formerly; a Citie and Kingdome so denominated; declining North from the Aequinoctiall 14 deg.) is famous for power, wealth, and many sorts of excellencies: a great part of Pegu, Braama, and Cambogia are tributary to him; Patania also, Iamohay, Odjea, and many other Territories watered by Ganges acknowledge him: his power is great, usually warring with 1000 Elephants and, 200000 men. The Zone is hot, the men black, and in such torrid places, little cloathing is required: a Cambolin of pure lawn of a sad colour, trebled on and about their naked shoulders: some tye a leather skin about their neck; and (as a badge of de∣votion) gird their middles with a leathern thong, and hold a Sumbrero or Umbrella in their hands to lenefie the flaming Sun; but weare no Sandals, that the scorching sands may so mortifie, that the Tallapoi, may be thought a wonder. They are transcendent Idolaters, carving Gods to worship, after the shapes of Pan, Priapus, and other gotish fancies, yea and in postures not to bee remembred: they have Groves and Altars also, whereon they offer flesh, fruits, flowers; and many times when the Tallapoi tells them the Devill is melancholy, they warble out harmonious musick, and do
what they can to make him merry: others (so sonne as Aurora shewes her golden Trammell) runne to their Pagods with a basket of Ryce to be his breakfast, hoping there by to prosper that day the happier. The Tallapoi preach every Monday in the Market, and assemble their auditory by a copper Bason. But though they seeme Fryer-mendicants by profession, yet what by awe (for the very infernall spirits obey their in cantations) and what by pollicie (for they contemplate humilitie exter∣nally much) the people have them in singular estimation: Nor is it dimi∣nisht, but agrandiz'd exceedingly by their prediction of future events, and mervailous knowledge in things past and present; by Magique and Morall observation, resolving, diswading, applauding, directing, and pleasing all that come unto them (as to Oracles) from such enthusiastic Notions as Satan prompts them with, in a word, being. Of Gods, Interpreters, of Phoebus layes, The three legd charming Stoole, the Claryan Bayes, Planets, Birds, Language, and all old assayes. —Interpres Divûm; Qui Numina Phoebi Qui tripodas Clarii lauros, quisydera sentis, Et Volncrûm Linguas & praepetis omnia pennae, They have beene (in foregoing times) wicked Sodomites, a sinne so hatefull to nature it selfe, that it abhorres it; and to deterre these cata∣mits, a late Queen rectrix commanded that all male children should have a Bell of gold (in it an Adders tongue dried) put though the prepuce, which in small time not only became not contemptible, but in way of or∣nament and for musick sake few now are without three or foure; so that when they have a mind to marry, he has his choice of what maid he likes, but beds her not, till the Midwife present a sleepie ophiated potion, during which, the Bell is loosed from the flesh, and fastned to the fore-skin, which hinders not but titulates; the unguent is applied; and the cure is perfected. But to see a Virgin here, at virgins yeeres, is as a black Swan, in regard, in green yeers they give the too forward maids a virulent drink; whose vertue (vyce rather) is by a strange efficacy to distend their muliebria so capaci∣ously that Bels and rope ring too too easily: and which is worst (dull memo∣ry compels us write it) the women here are not ashamed (the better to al∣lure men from sodomitry) to go naked to the middle, where with a fine trāsparent cobweb-lawn they are so covered, that by a base device tis made to open as they go; so that any impure ayre gives all to mens immodest viewes, denudating those parts, which every modest eye most scornes; each honest thought most hates to see and think upon. The Boyes paint them∣selves with a celestiall colour from top to toe, and as an augmentation of beauty, cut, gash, and pinck their naked skins; which in mine (contrary∣ing their) opinion, rather breeds horror than affectation in any Traveller; the men affect perfumes, and practize complement. The soyle is but indifferent for grasse, or natures Tapisrtry, but in rich stones, as Dyamonds, Chrysolites, Onix stones Magnets, Bezarrs lignum Aloes, Benjamin, Cotton; and Mynes of Gold, Silver, Iron, Copper, and the like, most uberous; and made more by Silverplentifull brought from man Iapan, and victualls and commodities from other parts, and bought here cheaper than in any other places: but most memorable in the Cabriz or blood-stone he generated; the mervailous vertue being such (as Osorius tells us) That
such time, the Portuguizes warred against the bold Sumatrans, they de∣scried a Junck or Ship at Sea; they made to it, and were resisted boording it, by Nahodabeg Captaine their inveterate adversary: but after long and cruell fight they entred among the naked Indyans, slew such as resi∣sted them, and amongst them Nahodabeg; who (to their amazement) bled not, albeit they had hackt him in forty places; they thought it magicall, till (having taken from his Arme a bracelet of gold, wherein set the Cabriz stone) they found the reason, for that was no sooner removed, but that his blood issued abundantly from each wound hee had about him: doubtlesse it is a most pretious stone, and had it power to expell death al∣so, it were more than admirable. Of Pegu. PEGU, is also a renowned Kingdome of the Orientall Indya (Lestarum regio, in old writers) confined by Syam, Ganges, and the Ocean; a Mo∣narchy of farre greater extent and power fifty yeeres ago, till the Syamite pluckt forceably from her Dyadem many brave and wealthy Seigniories: howbeit she is yet commandresse of many Ilands, Monym, Barongo, Nogo∣mello, Duradura, Cocos, &c. Pegu (by Castaldus supposed that old City Triglipton in Ptolomy) has Artique elevation 16 degrees 40 minutes: a Citie walld with good stone, beautified with many Turrets and parrapets: and to issue out and enter in, shewes foure faire Gates, and twelve posternes, prettily built; and made more safe, by that deep Moat or Trench (fild with Crocodiles) that cir∣cumvolves her: the streets are not many, but large and broad they are and seldome crooking: afore every doore (the houses are all low) growes a pleasant tree, whose fruit and wholsome shade makes them double use∣full. It is divided into two, the new Towne and the old; the old is most great and best inhabited. The Varellaes (or Temples) and Sudatories are observable; each Va∣rella farcinated with ugly (but guilded) Idolls: that at Dogonnee is not a little memorable; for structure and ornament out-braving any other in the Orient: the wildernesse about it and antick superstition might cha∣lenge a copious description; which I forbeare, having other things to denotate. This Kingdom is full of al earthly delights, & blessings of Nature; Gold, Silver, Lead, & Iron; also Smaragds, Topaz, Rubies, Saphyres, Garnats, Em∣ralds, Espinells, and Cats-eyes; as also Ryce, Caravances, long Pepper, Sugar, Benoyn, Musk, Gum-lack, Cotton, Callicoes, and what else a rea∣sonable man can lust after: But all these if they were centuplied, are not able to make them truly happy, wanting the true pearle, that which the godly Merchant bought, though to obtaine it he sold all his fraile wealth and possessions: for, albeit the holy Apostle Saint Thomas brought them blessed tidings of salvation; yet they quickly lost the true light, delight∣ing to this day in obscure and loathed sinnes, the Kyacks fild with base Idolatry: insomuch that father Bomferrus (an old Franciscan) after foure tedious yeeres labour to reduce them to some knowledge of the Church
of Rome, came home, desiring rather (as did S. Anthony) to preach a∣mong piggs, than such a swinish generation. The truth is, they beleeve they know not what; and Quaenam est ista simplicitas? neseire quod credas sayes Hierom against the Luciferians: yet some what (if all be true he tells us) wee gather from his observation: that they beleeve the world (con∣sisting of Heaven, Sea, and Earth,) had foure Creations; and for impiety was foure times destroyed: by Fire; by Wind, by Water, and by Earth∣quakes: each Age or World governed by a severall tutelarie Numen or God; miserable only in this, that he was transitory, and not omnipotent, nor immortall: they reckon that the last destruction of the world & death of their last God was thirty thousand yeeres ago; and that in Plato's great yeere all shall once more suffer a chaos. They imagine a great Lord om∣niscient, omnipotent, and immortall, lives and rules in Heaven; but they do not worship him, in that Satan tels them, he desires it not: they beleeve a revivification of the body after death, and co-union with the soule; and (Bomferrus beleeves it) confesse a three-fold receptacle of soules departed, Nashac, Nishac, and Schua; Heaven, Hell, and Purgatory: by which that holy Frier convinces us of more ignorance than these Pagans: but wee beleeve it never the sooner, since the Devill is their instructer, yea who dictates their profession. Their habit is thin and fine; it differs little from that they have in In∣dustant, and Syam: but in this they varie; they weare no beards; they dye their teeth black, in that Dogs teeth are white; whom they hate to imitate: they also cut and pluck their flesh to become braver than other Nations I have told you the best of Pegu; the worst is also memorable: In lesse than a hundred yeeres ago, the Peguan Monark was farre more powerfull and formidable than at this present: his Dyadem then sparkled with a gal∣lent lustre; twelve wealthy Kingdomes at that time acknowledged Pegu their Soveraigne: Some of those Provinces are well knowne to us, as Sy∣am, Auva, Kavelan, Barmaw, Iangomer, Tangram, Cablan, Lawran, Melio∣talk, &c. out of which, hee yeerely extracted as tribute-money two Millions of crownes; and had a Million of men to serve him at all occasi∣ons; but this hardly could content him, for by a two losty conceit of his Monachick greatnesse; he grew efflated, and to contemne others as too base to fix his eyes upon; Tyranny succeeded his pride, and decadence or destruction of his Empire: Tyranny, for the Auvan King when he found no priviledge by being Uncle to the Emperour of Pegu, nor that he was his loyall subject; he swells with rage, and breaks asunder his silver yoak of hated servitude: howeit, ere hee could ripen his designes, the Peguan has notice, and so suddenly arrests him, that in amazement he acknowleges his fault, and begs his mercy: but the Peguan King forthwith beheads him, and (to terrifie others by his example) makes no difference 'twixt no∣cent and innocent; his wife, his children, and forty other whom he most respected concomitating the miserable Auvan King in that sad Tragedy. It was terrible Justice no doubt, but rather exasperated others to new re∣bellions; the most incenst and greatest in power was the Siam King, who seeing his owne incertaine standing, (any occasion breeding jealousie, and
the least jealousie bringing death from his conquerour) hee suddenly breaks out, and with all the forces he could make by money or promises (ere the Peguan was return'd from Auva) in short time enters Pegu, and ap∣parantly made knowne his high rebellion: the Peguan threatens terrible things, and to effect them opposes the Siamite with an Armie of nine hun∣dred thousand fighting men; but that world of men could not contrarie the decree of a more powerfull King; for such was the confused haste he made, precipitated by furie, such the hate, his crueltie had defam'd him with, and such the affright his uncles Malus Genius (as Caesars did Brutus) every where opposed him with, that in three houres fight his monstrous multi∣tude turne raile and willingly yeeld themselves a prey to the inraged axe of war, chosing rather to dy, than any way to increase the Paguan's pride; so as the Siamite triumphs, & the Peguan hastens back to raise more men to trie a second fortune: The Siamite (not willing to ingage himselfe too far) returnes; the Peguan is almost there as soone as he, all the way burning and destroying all he met with: the Siam King armes himselfe with the Foxes skin; he refused to fight, not that he feared, but that he knew an easier way whereby: to assure his conquest; the Pegu darts many fiery defiances, calls him rebell, coward, and what not; not dreaming of his stratagems: for ere hee could leave his trenches the swift and mighty river Suhan (Mean some call it) sweld desperately, broke ore her bancks, and flasht so violent into the Peguan army, that for want of boates and others helpes, above seven hundred thousand perished, the rest were as bad as dead; feare and famine so overwhelmed them; this river every yeere (like Nilus) over∣flowes, and supplies their want of raine; so mellowing the earth as it com∣pares with Aegypt for plenty, and with any other part of Indya for rarities: the next yeere the King of Pegu seconded his fight, but was compensated with no better fortune, we may say with worse; in that his sonne in this triall by too much valour lost his life, and of 500000 not a third got safe back to Martavan. And which was worse than that, by these perpetuall brawles of warre, his coffers were emptied; his Cities impoverisht by want of trade; and his Kingdome in a sort depopulated by losse of so many men: these prov'd not motives of pittie to the other late subjected Ter∣ritories, but provocatives rather to unsetter themselves (as Siam) had done from unnaturall thraldome; so that the King of Bramaw, the viceroy of Tangu, and of Rachan (a Province twixt Pegu and Bengala) confederate; and whiles the King of Pegu was hatching more prodigies at Martavan, they steale into Pegu with a resolute Army, destroying such as the late famine had spared, but though they found few people, and lesse food, yet got they riches incredible; out of Pegu the Citie as much treasure as loaded 2000 Camells; and as a period of that designe not only made the wretched King crownlesse, but crowned their conquest with his life, his wife, and three sonnes sorrowfully accompaying him: Arrakan and the other two disagreeing about the spoyle, were beaten home by the Bramaan King; hee enjy'd it but a while, the Siamite entring so furi∣ously, that hee also packt home and left Syam the victorie; who since then, upon a marriage twixt one of the royall family of Pegu and his daugther, has quit his claime; and gives way to have both Citie and
Kingdome brought to such trade and beauty as it had formerly. But to facilitate our travells, and to point you out the way the easier, accept an adjoyning Map, to that in fol. 300: This describing India extra Gangem. map of east Asia
From Pegu to Bengala are 90 leagues: the second Towne of note is Martavan under 15 degrees; and which I guesse was that Triglipton, note by Ptolomy, rather than Pegu as thinks Castaldus, I might tell you of the vanitie of this wealthie Monarch; either when he showes himselfe in his royall paradrome or in his loading himselfe with glittering gems; his head, eares, armes, hands, legs, and feet, resembling a bespangled firmament; such as may amaze a good sense, yea dazle a good eye, and force some men to judge him infinitely rich; but I behold him otherwise, and think him poore and miserable: Or of his deifying his Elephants, because milke white, and of greater bulke than usuall; I suppose him worth our description, not that he is unknowne in England, but for other things in him; than his shape, more observable. Elephant.The Elephant is for growth and understanding chiefest, of unreasonable Animalls, so as he has bin a subject of many learned writers, Aristotle, Plu∣tark Pliny, Strabo, Annian &c. They go two, sometimes three yeares with young, and have extreame torment in their labour; their teat is twixt their fore legs, which the young one easily finds and sucks with eger∣nesse. When they attaine three yeares, they feed upon Dates, Meale, Milke, Whey, Fruits, Suger-canes, and Honey: they grow till fifteen, in that time mounting to foure and twenty foot, yet lie downe, dance and prove very active. In hot weather or when lust inflames them, the males grow mad, and past jesting with, their testicles being in their fore∣head. Umbragious shades, caves, and rivers please them. Swine, Ser∣pents, and Mice displease them; cockcrowing does not so afflict him, as with his Proboscis to encounter the Rhynoceros affects him. The Persians call him the Symboll of Fidelity; Aegyptians, the hierogliphic of justice; Indians of piety; Siamyts of memory; Arabs of magnanimity; Suma∣trans, the Embleam of providence; Pliny in 8. lib. Nat. Hist. gathers them; Intellectus illi sermonis patrii, imperiorumque, obedientia officiorumque di∣dicere memoria, amoris & gloriae voluptas, imo vera religio quoque Syde∣rûm, Solisque ac Lunae veneratio &c. Musk Cat. The Musk Cat here also convenes and may merit a ca'tagraph: shee ex∣ceeds the Castor for bignesse; her head is little, eyes cleare, a long muz∣zle, her teeth sharp, and offensive: her hayre is particoloured, harsh, and bristly; yellow above, and whiter downewards: her profound pocket is neer the genitory, excerpt sometimes with a spoone or stick; but when out of servitude, of her owne accord parts with it, and by its fragor is oft found by the carelesse passenger. Having refresht enough upon the mayne, hoise we saile for the most noble Iles of the Orient, and vicinating the Cities lately spoken of. Of Sumatra. SVMATRA, is that famous Ile, by Aristotle lib. de mundo, and others of old, cald Taprobane; Symunda in 7.lib. Piol. and now by the in∣habitors, Salyce or Salutra; and (provided Iapan be not an Ile) may truly be reputed the third great Ile in all the Universe: six hundred (some say nine hundred) miles long, and in breadth two hundred and forty; traded
to by Solomon, but unknown to Alexander, though Megasthenes thinks One∣secritus his servant saild thus far. One Iambulus an errant Greek is said to have bin here, 200 yeares afore Christs nativitie (if D. Sic. say true,) and may be the first discoverer: of a Christian, Alvaro Telezzo is the first, who An. 1506 to find out gold, saild whether Aeolus guided: since when, who people of the world have knowledg of it: 'Tis Nadyr to the Equinoctiall: and now a place, where many petty Kings advance their Scepters. The most glorious Dyadem incircles the ecliptick brow of that Tyrant of Acheen. All of them rich in gold and fruits and stones, but miserable in their Mawmetry and superstiion; most of them so ingulpht in the abisse of paganisme, that they dare adore Cat, Rat, Dog, Divell, or what can be moulded after the representation of an elementary Creature: both Sex go most part naked; both are couragious, and apt in Bellonaes dances. The soile is good where rivers fructisie, barren where gold is veined. Many Townes of valew are mediterranean; of which, Manancabo (full of gold) is not least memorable. But of best note here are Ports and Villages marittimat; such as bee Achecu (by them cald Ashey) Pe∣der, Pacem, Daya, Tico, Priaman, Tykoa (east of Iambee,) Baruzee, Catta∣tinga, Aru, Daru, and (though last, first in gold and value) Passaman. The rivers flow with fish, and might prove more delightfull for the Net and Angle, did not those hatefull Crocodyles (here more than in Nilus) frustrate both. This noysome creature is one of the greatest wonders we meet with,Crocodile. in that from so small a beginning as an Egg (not much bigger than that of a Turkey) they increase to 8 or 10 yards in lenght. Their bodies are not longer than their tayles, which is of like use with them, the Pro∣boscis is to the Elephant: their mouths are very wide, at one gulph able to swallow horse or man; their teeth are ingrailed; they have no tongue: nor can they move their upper jaw-bone: their bellies are penetrable: backs hardly to be peirced; the brumall quarter they fast from food: but the rest of the yeare devoure all sort of prey, with much voracity and gre∣dinesse. No lesse notable is the Females burthen: sixty dayes passe ere she lay her egs, and which be commonly sixtie numbred: sixtie dayes shee conceales them: and when she sits, sixtie dayes consume in hatching: and to agree in one, sixtie yeares is usually the Age of this detested beast, fish, or Serpent: by Sea-men improperly cald Alligator, corrupted from Allergardos, a mixture of Spanish and Alman language: the name Cro∣codile is taken a croceo colere, or per Antiphrasin quòd crocum timeat. It is the most obnoxious of all sea monsters, and rightly becomes the Dis∣semblers epithite, In quibus est astutia Hyaenae, piet as Crocodili; the Aegyp∣tians of impudency: awed by none save the Ichnenmon, who steales into his belly and gnawes his guts whiles he opens his chaps to let the little Trochil pick his teeth, which give it feeding. Hence, saile we by many small Iles, as Marrah and Lampon in the straits of Sundy, so named by Ptolo. and from a point and Town in the next great Iland. Of Polygundy also we might speak, but love not to land there, pae∣nitisse juvabit, such bad luck by malevolent Venus or ill dyet had our late plantation, wherby the Monopoly died with them; out of their graves only springing a new deterring name, of Kill abundance. But cast we Anchor
an ozier ground, and fix our wandring eyes upon a more delighted object, Iava, an Ile both great, wealthy, and famous; Insula Iabadiae, Niger ghesses it. Of Java major. IAVA the greater, is an Ile nigh the Bengalan Sea, declining seven (some observe nine) degr. 40 minutes towards the Antartick Pole from the Equinoctiall; and in the 120 degrees of longitude. From East to West it stretches one hundred and fifty leagues, or of english miles foure hundred and fifty; from North to South nintie leagues, or two hundred and seventie miles: the midland is for the most part mountainous and ill peopled; the marittim low, and populous: the first is windy, but conducing to health; the latter marish, and insalubrious. It is full of small villages, and inhabitants: the sea coast (by reason of trade for pepper) has Townes well built, most wealthy, and best defend∣ed: upon the North side, and to the N.E. especially, are Bantam, Palam∣ban, Iackatra (new named Batavia by the Duch; but formerly Sunda-Ca∣lapa by the Inhabitants,) Iaparra, Tuban, Iortan, Greecy, Chyringin, Sere∣baya &c. Bantam is under Antartick declination or latitude, 6 degr. 20 minutes, and of westerly variation 3 degrees: the biggest Citie in the Iland; ownd by the Natives, built well nigh two miles long, distinguisht into a Buzzar; the Pengrans Pallace, a few streets, and at the furthest end the Cheneses live together in low built dwellings. Of it selfe it affords nothing save ryce, pepper, and cotten woll: though indeed, pepper for the greatest part is brought hither by the crafty but infinitely industrious Chyney men, who each Ianuary anchor here, and unload their Iuncks or Prawes from Iamby, Borneo, Malacca, and diversother places; making Bantam their Maga∣zen or Beehive, out of which they furnish the English & other merchants. These Chyneses are men of peace, voluptuous, venereous, costly in their sports, great gamesters, and in trading over subtle for young Chri∣stian merchants: oft-times they are so wedded to dicing, that after they have lost their whole estate, wife and Children are stak't and parted with; yet in little time by gleaning here and there, he will be able to redeeme them; if not, at the day, they are sold in the market. The lavan Kings are five, (Viceroys I might better call them;) foure of them are subordinate to the Mattaran's command, who is able to bring unto the field 200000 desperate slaves, black, but valiant: they have small order or pollicy in warre; yet dare attempt any thing, they are so forward. The climate burnes so fiercely, that little apparell pleases them; most, goe most part naked: they use lances, darts, arrowes, and shields; but their sole braverie is in their crizes; a weapon, commonly two foot long, broad, waved, sharp edgd, and small pointed; but (against the lawes of Nature, and honour) basely poisoned: the hilt or handle is usually of wood or horne, (some have them of gold, silver, and Ivory) cut into the crooked shape or figure of a deformed Pagod; yet were they a thousand times more ugly, these savages would dare to adore them; especially, in that they aske the Idoll on their creast pardon, after they have perpetrated homycide or such like villany; a trick us'd by Lewes
the eleventh to the Crucifixe in's hat, to his eternall infamy. But these avans are drunck in their demonomy; they the more earnestly imbrace it, by how much their poysoned natures abhorre honesty. They trade in murthers, adulterie, thests, rapine, deceit, and all kinds of knave∣ries: Magique also, and Astrologie delights them: a study their Priests are execellent in, and in which Satan instructs them; the better to oblige their gratitude, and to worship him as the Apollo of knowledge; which wee inculcate, and abominate, yea say with Isaiah, Is there any God be∣sides the Lord (Iehovah)? yea, there is no God, we know not any:Isa. 44. hee maketh the diviners mad, hee turneth the wise men backward, and maketh their knowledge foolish. Let us not learne the way of the heathen,Ier. 10. they are altogether brutish and foolish; his molten Image is falshood, and there is no breath in them: they are vanity, and in the day of account they shall perish. But in the Lord shall all true beleevers bee justified and shall glory. These people know better how to swim than navigate; yet are not ig∣norant in sea affaires, nor want they vessels to doe mischiefe in. Their chiefe delight is hunting Tygres, Ounces, and such beasts as give chase and resistance; They know Mahomet in some parts of the Ile, who as an infectious ayre is suckt by many people of remote Ilands. Friendly they are to English men and delight to serve them, especially since the Duch forced Iacatra from them, betwixt whom is such mortall vari∣ance that fifteen ryalls (is given by either) as a reward for each prisoner dead or alive, either people can take nor is there ever hope of true Amity with Barbarians. The Oran-kays or best sort of people here, are lasie, sociable, but not to bee too much trusted: they suppose them∣selves descended from Chyna; in a Iunck 700 yeares ago forced hither by Tuffon or tempest. They are proud, and weare their hayre pretty long, and about their crispes wreath a valuable Shash or Tulipant; go naked to to the wast, where they gird them with a parti-coloured plad or mantle, falling no longer than the knees; and are impatient if any of∣fer to touch their heads. The ordinary food had here (not at easie rates) is ryce, wheat, pinange, betele, ophium, goates, egs, hens, coquos, plaintains, jacks, and rack-a-pee so cald ; which drunck immo∣derately, accilerates Death; but temperately, exhilirates the heart, cures fluxes, kill wormes and helps digestion. To conclude. Whence this great and noble Ile is called Iava, I confesse my ignorance. I dare not say from Iavan (Iaphets sonne) grandson of Noah; in that most agree, he planted Greece. But by reason his own brother Tharsis peopled these parts, why might he not from his brothers name (to eternize his me∣mory) borrow the denomination. Nothing else save Pepper presents it∣selfe in this Ile, worthy our nothing: Pepper is sowne,Pepper. and in the growth supported by poles or canes, about which it entwines and duplicates with many embraces, till by maturity it gets the shape and strength of a bushy, round, and pleasant tree. The pepper hangs foure inches in length, and one about, in many clusters; each yeelding fifty or sixtie cornes, full, round and fragrant; the smooth is best accounted of. The Cotton (more common in Persia and Guzurat) is no lesse memo∣rable and usefull. The tree is slender, streight, a yard high, and like a bryer;Cotter.
at the top it expands into many severall branches; each, charg'd with ma∣ny balls or cods conteining the Bumbast or Cotton: the shape is round, and equall in bignesse to a Walnut: at maturity the cod opens, & discloses her treasure; but being cropt, is put in an entire heap, and with flayles or such like usefull (though churlish) instruments is forced out; and by the enriched owner cheerefully gathered. The Malayan Tongue sounds well, and may prove harmony to the in∣genious observer; in these parts no lesse musicall & epedemic, than is (with us, and others) the Latine, Arabique, and Sclavonian.
English. Malay. A King Rutgee a Nobleman Oran-kay a Lord Kay a Priest Cadda a Merchant Phetor an Interpreter Iorbissa a Man Oran a Woman Tadon Paran-poan & a Child Buda a Boy Catsion a Youth Monda a Father Babba a Mother Mamma a Brother Addal-Ally a Sister Adda-paparas an Uncle Niana a Friend Marty-lowty a Stranger Oran-Leya a Chirurgian Goething an Iron-Smith Goada An Elephant Catgha an Oxe Cambi. Alomba a Goat Carbow a Sheep Domba a Dog Hangbé a Bird Borron a Hen Ayam a Duck Bebeé a Musk-Cat Catto-Dalgalia a Sow Sabi. Sieleng a Fish Ican a Water-Pot Laude a Herb Oberbedil. Lancuos a Musk-Nut Palla a Ship Capel. Iunck a Boat Praw. Paca-sura a Coat Nasse a Needle Naroen a Custome Negry a Rope Tali a Stone Batu a Ring Chinsim a Wimble Alforees a Shooe Apon a Sword Ita. Padang a Dagger Cryze a Knife Pieson a Javelin Tomba a Sheild Salvack a Gun Bedyl. Pitsil a barrell of a Gun Sombo-bedyl a looking-Glasse Sarmi a Glasse Lora a Lamp Pulita a warme thing Penas a Cap or Turbāt Caya a marriage maker Coemodo a Command T'suyka a Yeare Tauwa a Day Aris a Book Nimoda. Kitab a Bed Bantell a good Day Tabea a Royall of 8 Serpi a Christian Vrangby All Samoanga The Head Capell. Coar Hayre Ramboyet Eares Talinga Eyes Martic Eye-broowes Alys Nose Irotdon
Neck Goulon Lips Lambider Tongue Ilat Teeth Auton Beard Tianga Back Balacca Shoulder Baon Arme Backeyen Hand Tangan Finger Iary-laree Belly Penot Blood Darno Privie part Perot Tigh Backy Legg Gula Foot Bhackhyé Toe Ghoumo Fire Api Ayre Baya Water Eyer Earth Zam the Sea Chay Gold Maz. Cabo Silver Peca. Salorca Brasse Temba Copper Tambagle Lead Tyma Iron Negle Money Sarfi Scarlet Facca lata-miera Death Mattu Merchandise Bayick Dimana Melancholy Chinta Silke Sabuck Paper Cartas Quills Cazamp Inck Mangsi a Book Khytab. Nymoda Wine Aracca Vinegar T'suka Strong Water Pinangha Bread Sagu Boyld Ryce Braas Fruit Tacat Drink Larnick Sugar Gula Salt Garram, Matary Oyle Nuagia Flesh Lalyer Fish Ivack Crabs Horrae Plates Pienig Pepper Lada. Sihang Ginger Alia Mace Bengo Cloves Chocho, Sianck Cynomon Cajumayns Aloes Garro Tamarind Assa Ryce Braas. Parce Nuts Calappen. Palla Sweet Gums Daringo Sweet Spices Dingyn Plantaines Gardang Cocos Calapa Mustard Sajani Egges Teloor Woe Saya Better Parma Great Bazaer Sweet Manys Heavie Brat Strong Cras Needles Calvenetten Baggs Corni Hard Wax Caju-lacca Friendship Pondarra I Manyr Thou Pakanera Hee Itowen Wee Dep Yee Pachaneras They Itowe Shee Dya Sunday Ion-maheet to Day Mari Yesterday Bulmari the other Day Bulmari-dula Early Pagi Night Malam to Morrow Ysouck What say you Abba-catta
Is he not here? Beef? Whats done? Bigimana? Well done Soosa Where is it? Manauten Bring it back Combali? Now Bacabaren How much? Barappe itu? Give place Lalan Require it Minta Regard Nanthy Let passe Ganga Neare hand Gila We will go Maree Leave it Iangemast I have Ada It is found Botonvum It is Dalan I will bring it Addadizano I see Green I thank you Terimacaché I understand not Tan or tyedae-taw I care Tage I have not Tyeda-da I desire not Tyeda-maw I am sick Bite-secata To eat Macan To remember Engat To stretch out Dusta To beat one ano∣ther Baccalayo To ashame Malon To choose Damare To pay Chiny To give Bering To buy Bilby To live Iagava To poyson Ampo To observe Doduer To be silent Dyem To gaine Menang To destroy Ilan To cover the head Kocodang To arise Passai To burne Baccar To kill Benue To spin Tuedda To sell Iouwall To do Bretcon To sweare Sempa To help Touloug To us Quia-bota To let blood Bewaeng-darner To question Betangia To know Kyunall To dye Bantaren Take it Ambell Not good Tiedae-Bayck Sloth Checo Give thanks Tarima. Casse Farewell Tingal One Satu Two Dua Three Tiga Foure Enpat Five Lyma Six Nam Seven Toufiou Eight De lappan Nine Sambalan Ten Sapola Eleven Sabalas Twelve Dua-balas Thirteene Tiga balas Foureteene Enpat-balas Fifteene Lyma balas Sixteene Nam-balas Seventeene Toufiou-balas Eighteene De lappan-balas Nineteene Sambalam-balas Twenty Dua-pola Twenty one Dua-pola-satu Twenty two Dua pola-dua Twenty three Dua pola-tiga Twenty foure Dua pola-enpat Twenty five Dua pola-lyma
We must yet to sea, and think us not a little happy, that we land so safely  the Celebes, not out of our way, to our intended places. Our course from Iava hither, is North-East; from Bantam two hun∣dred leagues or thereabouts. Of the Celebes. CELEBES, by some is cald Makasser Ile, from her best Citie so cal∣led: a place for quantitie and quality no way despicable; stretching from the Equator 6 degrees South: ovall formed, two hundred miles long at lest; well peopled, but with bad people; no place ingendring greater Demonomists, well agreeing with the old name Ptol. gave them Anthro∣pophagorum regio. Mahomet is not unknowne among them, but by him, a malo in pejus: for though he teach them, there is one and but one God; yet seeing Iesus Christ is unknowne there, what does this their know∣ledge, but make them more capable of torment, than if they had been far more barbarous. From Macasser to Cambyna W. N. W. are foure and twentie leagues; to Nossaseres eightie. The Ile is fruitfull, though under the most frying part of the burning Zone. The Son yeelds them day and heat enough; but Night, their com∣plexion: the habit they weare, differs not from their grandfather Adams, a few fig or plaintan leaves tide about their middles, being elsewhere naked: the better sort (to varie from the vulgar) are tulipanted, and shirt their coleblack skins with a pure white cloth, which does not leni∣fie the scortching sonne, but serves for complementall difference. The women are Gods creatures, but have adulterated his holy stampe, by not only deforming their face and body, but by that vile lubricitie, their soules are spotted with. Impudence goes here unmasked: It is no novel∣tie for them to open the sack they goe in, and intice a stranger to conco∣mitate; her honesty was lost before, but now she ferries two to Bara∣thrum: if his body (by that voyage) leak not to death, the Tobacco she proffers him will operate it; for such is their damned Art in horrid venom, that these Syrens can sing safety to themselves, and by the same pipe and weed smoak him to death; a trick they will be perfect in, though the Di∣vell owne them for it. Pythagoras made the wantons of Crotona modest and the men moderate: lam qui corrigat, alter erit. And which is no lesse infernall; the men use long canes or truncks (cald Sempitans) out of which they can (& use it) blow a little pricking quill, which if it draw the lest drop of blood from any part of the body, it makes him (though the strongest man living) die immediately; some venoms operate in an houre, others in a moment; the veynes and body (by the virulencie of that poyson) cor∣rupting and rotting presently, to any mans terrour and amazement, and feare to live where such abominations predominate. You cannot chuse but think this a hell upon earth, though at our first approach upon sight of so goodly an Iland, we thought it better than Elysium: but remembring Impia sub dulci melle venena latent: we will away for better places; the Moluccoes I meane, Ptolomy calls them Syndae, than which, no part of the Universe gives more delight and
varitie of refreshments. But by the way cast our eyes upon many small Iles and (as we saile due East) upon Baly in 8 degr. 30. min. and on Tymo 10 degr. South 20 min. easterly from the last: both of them more rich in stones and spices than some greater Iles about them: leave we also Conio and Serran unspoken of; not that they are unworthy, but because we hast to the Moluccae, in view now, and where wee meane to rest a while. Of the Molucco Jles. THey are numbred five. Molucco. Gillolo. Ternate. Tidore. and Ma∣chan (where Magellan after his long voyage Anno 1520 lost his life by treachery of these barbarians.) The English were the first that ever trad∣ed to these Iles of any Christians: and most of them have acknowledg'd our King their Sovereigne: but by the Duch it seemes our men are now thrust out, as if all India were theirs by title from the Creation. Of these Gillolo is greatest; but in Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Ginger, Pepper, Oyle, Aloes, and Honey, all of them alike plentifull. All or most of these, have the Equinoctiall for their Zenyth, and by those diurnall showres, and breezes which faile them not, and Apolloes commorance, the the fruits ripen sooner, the earth smells more aromaticall, and the Ayre seemes more nutritive than in other places. Let us rest a little upon some fruit descriptions. Cloves.The Clove tree differs in proportion according to the place it receives vigor in: some being comparable to the Bay, others to Box or such like trees of humble stature; 'tis, most part of the yeere green and pleasant, having leaves long and small, distending into many branches: It blossmes early, and becomes exceeding inconstant in complexion; from a virgin white palliating other colours: in the morne a pale green, in the meridian a distempered red, & sleepes in blacknesse. The Cloves manifest themselves at the utmost end of all the branches in great plenty; and in their grow∣ing evaporate such sense ravishing odours, as if a compendium of Natures sweetest gums and delicacies were extracted and here uunited: they are thrice yeerly pruined, and gratefully retort a treble vintage: and though but perfected in 3 yeares, yet must be counted an advantage; for Physiti∣ans tell us, they are hot and drie in the third degree, corroborate the sto∣mack, and benefit concoction. Nutmeg.The Nutmegg (or great Nut) like those trees most famous for their ex∣ellencies, is not very lofty in its heigth, scarce so proper as the Cherrie; by some, resembled to the Peach, with which it varies in forme of leafe and graine, affecting more assize and compasse. The Nut is cloathed with a defensive husk like those of baser quality, but at full ripenesse disroabs it selfe, and discovers her naked purity the Mace, which chastely intwines (with a vermilliion blush or colour) her endeared fruit and sister, both of them breathing out most pleasing smells and perfumes: the Mace in few dayes (like choisest beauties) by Apolloes wanton flames becom's tawny and unlike her former braverie: yet in that dissent, best pleases the rustick gatherer.
Neere the Molucco's, and neerer the Antartique, wee see many other Iles, noble in esteeme, and rich in qualitie: but, for that more than bar∣barous basenesse our miserable Country-men suffered by the Dutch, we have no pleasure to stand upon any thing save recitall; such are Amboyna, (placed 'twixt Banda and Molucso:) Banda, (in 4, degrees 30 minutes, and (from Amboyna 24 leagues:) Puloway, (from Banda 3 leagues:) Puloreen, (from Puloway W.N.W.) Lantore, (the greatest of the Iles of Banda:) Ba∣tan: Labatacka, Nero, Ticobassa, Cumber, Salame, and others: all of them, especially Puloway and Puloreen, seeming continued wildernesses of Nut∣megs and Clove-trees, Pepper, Vines, and Olives. These two last named commerced first with our Merchants, and contracted a perpetuall Amity and Fealty to our King; but in despight of them and us, the uncivill Dutch (whom for their braving humours here, pride, hate, and bloody execu∣tion of our innocent men at Amboyna and other places in India, I cannot name with patience) have banisht our Merchants, and entitle themselves Lords of most of Banda Ilands, caring neither what right the Tarnatensian nor Banda Kings have over them. From these, steer wee another course, to Borneo a great and wealthy Iland. We are soone in sight of it, the gale is so prosperous. Of Borneo. BORNEO, or insula bonae fortunoe in Ptol. is Nadyr to the Aequator; and resembles an ovall shield; the major part inclining North: Antartick elevation not mounting above 3 degrees; Artick, to 7 and odde minutes: & owes her first discovery (by any Christian European) to one de Bren, who in the yeere of our blessed Lord 1523. anchored here. It groanes at this day, (for the most part) under Spanish bondage; who in any place where gold or other treasure is to bee had, cease not till they can master it; va∣lewing neither soule nor body of any Inhabitant, (save for their lust) with the least weight of that too much soule-confounding creature. But let us consider! Nulla Coelum reparabile gaza. It has many Villages and people; but the one are poore in their ma∣teriall; the other more wretched in their infernall Religion, and late taught Idolatry: both, no way valewable; did not those mynes of Gold and Dyamonds, and some other merchandises; as, Bezarrs, Musk, Am∣ber, Lignum Aloes, Sanguis Draconûm, Wax, Rice, and Rattans or Canes make her most magneticall. Her marittim Townes and Ports exceed not for number, but Peu & bon. Socodania, (in 1 deg. 35 minutes South, from Bantam N. E. 160 leagues) and Bemermassin; Little, but good, if such thou interpret. Safety and Satiety. We are landed in so good a place, that wee will rest our wearied feet awhile, and entertaine your curiosity with a few viands; friends (though simple food) to infeobled Nature. Bezar, Lignum Aloes, Musk, Civit, Benjamin, and Amber. Bezar, or (as the Persians call it) Pezar, is of two sorts; generated in Persia and both the Indyes: the American is worse than be these of Asia and the Orient. The shape also is various; some resembling a plum, some
a Date-stone, others like Egges of Doves, some like Cheznuts, and Goats kidnies; all agree in this, they are blunt ended: they are no lesse incon∣stant and divers in colour; some being red, pale-greene some, other-some of a dark yellow, and some sky-coloured: the last are best, these consist∣ing of many skales (like Unions and Onions) circumvolving one the other, and in which. Nature has exprest farre more excellency, than Arts best in∣genuity or perfection: for, each inferior skale (not unlike the glorious Orbes inverted) yeelds fresher beauty, and more celestiall splendor than the former: each skale diminishing & being of more vertue, as the Bezar is in tenuity or crassitude. Many are counterfeit. They try them thus, either by pearcing them with hot bodkins; or after they have wayd them, to steep them in cold water foure houres; and if it crack not, tis not feyned: to know it good, they then, wipe it, and ballance it againe; observing, if it weigh never so little above the first weight, 'tis base and despicable. Note also, that Borneo Bezars are not halfe so valewable as Persia's. Lignum Aloes, from diversity of Countries, varie in their Nomenclati∣ons. The Javans and Malayans name it, Garroo: Indians and Portuguizes, D' Aquillha, the Chinae, and Cochinchinae, Calamba: fram'd of large round sticks, of a cloody graine, commixt with ashy veines; no lesse pleasant to the eye, than to the hand ponderous: the relish or taste proves bitter, in its language telling you, It would be burned; for, hot coales of Fyre no sooner touch it, but it incendiates, and (to the honour of its owne Fune∣rall solemnity) expires and breaths out an odor so aromatick and comfor∣able, that no other is used by the Indians, Malayans, Siamites, Peguans; Cambogians, and Borneans, when they incinerate the Carcasses of their most honoured Parents. Musk, is either yellow, browne, or black: the first is best, last is basest: the choysest yellow shews a deep Amber complection (not unlike Spike∣nard) cloathed with a reasonable moist skin, sweating out some bristly hayres, without stones, lead, or like adulterate mixtures; of so strong a smell as seemes offensive; but tasted, penetrates a strong braine by its fra∣gor: sweet spices dead it; and put in the mouth, if it suddenly dissolve, or in the hand if it be long a melting; those trialls discover it for bad and imperfect. Civit, is diversified in colour also: deep yellow (I have beene told) is best, the worst is white, gerasie and sophisticat: how beit, the new is pale, and soone after groweth yellowish. Benjamin, by the Malayans call'd Menyan; by other Indians Benyan: is either pure cleare white, or yellow, streaked or coloured; the gum issues from a tree high, small, and furnished with fruitlesse branches; the leaves are not unlike the Olive: Pegu and Siam yeelds the best; Arabia very good; that from Sumatra, Priaman and Barrouse, course, and had: better lik'd of at Iava, than in England. Amber, is of so many formes; grey, browne, white, black: grey is best; black is worst; the other two are indifferent. The best sort of grey is pure, interlac't with ashie veines, not subject to sinck; and got (as Mer∣chants informe us) in Soffala, Magadoxa, Mombassa, Mosambique, Madagas∣car Mohelia, Melinde, other parts of Afrique: found there at incertain
hazards, had at home at easie charge and lesse danger: for Gems, I will summe up all in naming their proper places; and though I borrow the re∣port from Merchants, I never thought any many Notes or Language lesse honourable; so thereby they may in a decent way prove to the reader ad∣vantageous. We have Corrall, Amber, Emrald, Calcedon, Pearle, Onix, Sardonix, Sardis, Bezar, Hematist, and Turquoise from Arabia. Indostan, and Persia: Pearles, Berills, Saphyres, and Adamants from Zeyloon: Jasper, Cornelion, Agat, Heliotrope, Jacinth, and Chrysolite from Mallabar, Narsinga, and Cochin-chyna. Diamonds from Borneo, and Gulkundah: Gold, Silver, Rubies, Saphyre, Granats, Topaz, Emrald, Smargd, Espinells, Cats-eyes, and Porcellan, from Pegu, Siam, Bengala, Sumatra, Iapan, and Chyna: enough to make a poore man rich, and rich men miserable. Let us now to Sea againe, and by a N. N. E. course in few houres view Mindanao, an Ile (as big as Cicely) branching from 6, to above 9 degrees North. North of it, and neighbouring, are the Phillippinae, so named from King Phillip 2, by Lopez, de Legaspi who first discovered and planted there Anno Domini 1565. Iles for the greatest part namelesse and number∣lesse; all of them wounded by avaritious men, and branded under Spanish servitude: of these, the best and greatest in Luconia, under 14 degrees North latitude; from whence in a direct azumoth West, is Cambogia a rich part of the Asiatique Continent. North of Luconiae, are Shyma and Shycoca knowne(by costly neighbourhood) to Chyna and Iapan, as is Co∣rea also; a long narrow peninsule, famous in the scite, but infamous in her Pagan inhabitants; said to bee more subtle, cruell, and indomitable than be the Chyneses. Of Japan. IAPAN, unlesse Mercators fancie be true that it was Aurea Chersonesus, was questionlesse unknowne to old Geographers: howbeit, the Name Chryse is given it by Niger; Zipangri, by M. P. Venetus: who would rather feigne a name, than that so great, so noble an Ile should be so long inno∣minate. The primier discovery wee give to Motus, Peshotus, and Zeymorus, ba∣nisht Portugals; who in the yeere 1542. were cast upon this Ile by storm and accident. Whether it bee an Ile or no, is disputable: such as make it one, give it in length 600, in bredth, 190 miles English: for my part, I hold it questionable. The most Southerly part is removed from the line 32 deg. the best Townes and Ports of strength and trade are Meacco, Ozacca, Tenze, Fyrando, Fuccate (or Falcate) Sacay, Cratez, Tenkeday, Oringaw, Vo∣suquis, Machma, &c. Of these, Meacco (a mediterran City) is call'd the Me∣troplis, Surunga next, and next it Ozacca, honoured with the Court som∣times till of late viz. 1615. a rebellious fire subverted and incinerated not it only, but many other Townes in that wealthy Province. Meacco is as big as Florence, but not so beautifull: proud in a sweet and spatious river, in many low, but comly houses; and memorable in abundance of stately Temples or Fotiquees full of guilded Mannad'as or Idolls; to which (above all other Nations) the Japonians are most addicted; the Jesuits
industries & seminaries there producing small growth; instead of a happy harvest reaping scorne and catholique apostasre: Neither their grave as∣pect, nor subtte sophistry; neither their many miracles there, nor their collegiat bravery, having that force to make them thought other than fe∣ditious, vain-glorious, and avaricious: such is the reward of Hipocrisie; in shew seeming desirous to do others good, in truth ayming at their uni∣versality, gaine, and hope of Conquest. The government is Monarchicall: above threescore petty Kings do ho∣mage, and prostrate their massy Coronets to be encircled, and to illustrate the Emperiall Diadem; from whose frowne, a punishment and affliction worse than common death usually is darted: such is his power, his awe; such their vassalage, their opinion of their Governors. The Country is most part mountanous; but full of floods, trees, corne, grasse, and mine∣ralls: every way presents Villages, swarming with heithen Inhabitants: the North and East parts of Iapan are lesse peopled than the South and West; and those much more savage and barbarous; cruell, trecherous, idle, lascivious, and awed by no Law, nor any way industrious. The old Roman way of execution is here usually suffered; they fasten malefactors to Crosses with foure nailes; whether in hate to the Jesuits, or of Antique custome I am not certaine; but sure it is, the punishment is full of torture and ignominious: the Civill Japonians are vallant, curteous, complemen∣tall, and great affectors of novelties; but beyond measure jealous, crafty, and revengefull, if injured; yea divelish, if exasperated. They would, but cannot deny themselves discended out of China, banisht upon a heedlesse rebellion six hundred yeeres ago; in memory of which, they hate one another mortally, no quarter being given to either Nation at any time, nor cease the Ilanders to rob and piratize the Chyneses at all advantages; at home also in their prayers abhominating them, and in all complements and ceremonies varying from one another to expatiate their wrath and unnaturall distempers. In any slight suspect or accusation, the very chil∣dren are so jealous of their reputations, that in case you lose a trifle and say to one of them; syrrah I beleeve you have stolen it? without any pause the boy will immediatly cut off a joynt from one finger or ano∣ther; and say Sir, if you say true, I wish my finger may never heale againe: murder, theft, treason, and adultery, are punisht with death; either cru∣cified, or beheadded with a Cuttan; an Indian sword which slices easily. Towns of note and strength are Ozacca (80 leagues from Bungo) a Port Towne of good note, and neare the Sea; strong and beautifull: in no∣thing more famous nor observable than in the royall Castle, varnished, ty∣led, and burnisht over with flaming gold; rich and majesticall: form'd of the best shape, of excellent stone; the walls, every where twenty foot thick, finely fram'd, well polisht, curiously cemented, pleasant, and du∣rable: circled with deep trenches full of water; and for entrance and de∣fence shewes above a dozen iron Gatest, and drawing Bridges. It has formerly succoured many Kings, and secur'd them from the pur∣suit and heat of Rebels; in this as memorable, 'twas of late yeeres made the prison of Goja-zamma Prince of Tanzey and eldest Sonne of Tiquazamma the late victorious Emperour; whose Father Faxiba-zamma subjected all
the petty Princes of Iapan; and made them by oath and pledge agnise him and his their Soveraignes: Coja-zamma upon his Fathers sudden death was as suddenly seiz'd upon by Ogosho-zamma one of the three Protectors, and by him compelled to betroath his daughter; and for portion was if thrust, and for ever damned to this hatefull Prison. Against Ozacca, on the other side the river is seated Sucay a Towne well traded to by Christians: Edoo is well wall'd and peopled: 15 leagues thence is Oringoo a Towne af∣fording good refreshment and excellent harbouring or anchorage. Fy∣rando (300 leagues thence, to coast thither,) is a Chersonesse and elevates the Artick Pole 33 degrees, 30 minutes: var. East 2 degrees 50 minutes: where and at Fuccate the English had a residence or factory. Fucate or Fulcate is pretty sweet Towne, well watered, and ownes a strong and defensive Castle or Fortresse: a Forrest of loftie Pines and spreading Sycomores for three miles space environs it; with other Groves of force against the scorching Sun; delightfull to the eye, yea more grate∣full than any other object: but (which renders them ingrate and basely idolatrous) under those greene trees, and in many small but richly tyl'd Temples or Fotiques, they adore Pan and Priapus, yea Satan himselfe in his ugliest resemblances: for where the Country is most inhabited and garnisht with most variety of trees, grasse, corne, &c. (as, 'twixt Edoo and Suringa) there are erected most Fotiques, there the people are most idolatrous. In Meacco are 70 Temples, wherein they number 3333 Chamaetirae or little guilded Devils, to which they give divine respect: they call them Mannadaes: But more notable than the rest is that in Meacco; not unlike the Rhodyan Colossus, huge & wonderfull. This was built by Tyco-zamma, and without much paine and cost was not finished: 'tis of Oricalke or guilded Copper; its posture is fitting in a Chaire 70 foot high, and 80 broad: his head is capable to support fifteene men, who may stand toge∣ther without preasing: his thumb is forty inches about; and his other limbs proportionable. This is the grand Pagotha: the other are Dii mi∣nores, or of lesse adoration. No lesse notable is the Monument adjoyning, in a Cloister within the principall Fotique of Meacco, where are gallantly interred (but to their ignominie) the eares & noses of 3000 Coreans, a base, theevish people, vicinating & infesting the Japonians. At Dabys is another Mannada no lesse infamous and resorted to: this Devill (or Molech) is of concave copper, vast, thick, and double guilded: its height is foure and twenty foot, and would be more but that they have form'd it kneeling, his buttocks resting upon his leggs after the usuall mode of the Easterne Pa∣gans: his armes are safe stretcht to the utmost; and at solemne times is inflam'd within, and sacrific'd unto by offering him a child, which in's embraces is fride to death in an infernall torture. But of more note is another at Ten∣chedy East thence, where Sathan visibly playes th'Impostor. The Fo∣tique is of rare structure, and daily served by a multitude of hellish Priests or Bonzees; not admitted to attend there, except they be young, well shap't, and as strong in venerie as was Hercules, Every new Moon they so∣lemnly betroth unto the Devill a Damosell, whose Parents account the ceremonie happie and honourable: if any be more faire or singular than
another, shee is selected, by the lustfull Priests devoted, and brought into the Temple, and placed right against the Mamada or Idoll: the roome is first made glorious with Lamps of burnisht gold, and a preparation by in∣cendiating Lignum vitae, or other gums and perfumes, such as be curious and costly: by and by the Lamps extinguish by myracle, and in a grosse darknesse the Prince of darknesse approaches and abuses her; so shee imagines, and the rather credited, in that the Devill leaves behind him certaine scales like those of fishes, an argument of no phantasma: but, by this hellish conjunction they swell not, unlesse the Bonzee second it: Sa∣than is no sooner gone, but she is saluted by the Bonzees, who ravish her with songs and pleasant musique; which ended, shee acquaints them with her fortune, and resolves them in such questions, as she by their instruction propounded to the Devill, and he had satisfied her in: shee issues with ap∣plause, and ever after is reputed holy and honourable: many other things I could present you from tradition, but I avoyd (as much as may be) to in∣sert incertainties: from hence therefore faile wee West and land in Chyna, where though the travaile be difficult, yet suffer me to glean a little, though it but expresse my industrie and care to offer you the truest Novelties. Of China. CHINA, is the most Easterly part of Asia. A Kingdome, both great and wealthie: famous also, but scarce discovered. Their jealousie and discourtesie to strangers (they suffer any to enter, none to returne,) chiefly causes it. It is subject to many severall names: scarce any two strange people ac∣cord in one Nomenclation: and no wonder, since amongst themselves they affect variety: the Kings new naming the whole Kingdome at their Coronation, as they fancie it. Ptolomy long agoe call'd it Sinarum Regio: other Geographers, Seres: the Moores in Industant, call it Cathayo: the Arabians, T'synin: the Sya∣mites, Cyn: the Malayans, Tabenzo: the Japonites, Thau, and T'syn: the Tattarrs, Ham: Alhacen, Tangis: Paulus Venetus, Mangi: the Inhabitants (if Perera, Riccius, and Trigautius say true) Tamen; and themselves Tame∣gines. But how various soe're that be; this is not uncertaine: that it is a very spatious Monarchie: for it extends from 17 deg. to 43, of North La∣titude: and to the South, Cantam; to the North, Pequin; two royall Ci∣ties, seeme to terminate it. But thus confined: On the East, it has the Sea of Iapan (Corea is part of China, no Ile, but to the North conjoyned with the Continent:) On the West, the Desarts of Industant; On the North, the Tattars: On the South, the Phillipinae Iles; and the South West ad∣joyneth to Cochyn-China, and Pegu, with part of Siam. All agree that it is square; and that from any one side to another is 1500 English miles: the circuit above 4000. the Country is generally champaign, & fruitfull; full of sweet and navigable rivers; and which are no lesse inhabited than the Villages and Cities be: of which, China has no fewer than 600 Cities; 2000 wall'd Townes; 4000 unwalled; 1000 Castles; and of Villages scarce to be numbred: and many they had need to be, since they give
lodging to above threescore millions of men and boyes, besides women; which be not inrolled. The whole Empire is divided into fifteene great Provinces: governed by so many Quon-fu and Lausia; who have their Tutans, and Chyans, or Deputies under them. Each of those Provinces has a Metropolis: full of people; fairely built; and very spatious. But every way more excellent than the rest, are these foure, Paquin by some called Pasquin: Nanquin or Nanton: Cantam or Canton: and Quinsay, by them called Ham-ceu: of which foure, at this day Paquin is chiefe or Em∣periall. PAQVIN elevates the North Pole 41 degr. 15 minutes; and by late Geographers is accounted that same Citie which some call Cambalu water∣ed by Polisanga; and China then must bee Cathaya: yea (if Pantoja, and Di Canti say true) the Chyna Monarch is that same great Cam, which M. P. Ve∣netus and Mandevile afore him have famoused. The Citie Pequin is que∣stionlesse the most spatious, and best peopled in Asia, if not in the world: since it has 30 Duch leagues (ninety English miles) circumference: it includes many stately buildings; and Mausoleas; 24000 are numbered of the Mandarins Sepulchers; the meanest of which, is not without beauty: and a no lesse number of little guilded Chappells, beside 3800 Temples devoted to Idolatry. It has as many Gates & Posterns as be dayes in a yeer: sixscore Buzzars or Market-places: above a thousand Bridges of stone: and such water as is every where potable. This City is not above a hundred miles from that marvellous wall, which Crisnagol their King (Zaintzon the 117 King some say) built 1000 yeeres ago, to keep out the invading Tartarr: a wall 1200 miles long; six fathoms high; twelve yards thick; and such as was seven and twenty yeeres erecting, by a continued labour of 750000 men. NANQVIN (the second Citie for grandeur and bravery, till of late,) was the China Metropolis. It elevates the Artick Pole 32 degr. and is di∣stant from the Sea 8 leagues or there abouts. The City is 12 leagues a∣bout; circled with three strong walls and ditches: the Kings Pallace is glorious and vast; the other buildings many (for 200000 are reckned) but meanly beautifull: the Temples are above a thousand: the streets fayre; the people industrious: from Paquin removed East, six hundred miles English: most part of the way is navigable. CANTAM is at the South end of China, in 17 deg. a Towne both rich and spatious: our Ships came almost in view of it: from it to Paquin is two months travell. QVINZAY or Ham-ceu borders Cochin-China: of old, the greatest, at this day the most admirable for variety of antick rarities in the Orient. These bee the most noted, but many other great and populous Cities this great Empire conteineth: generally of one shape and alike governed: None be without their Meani or Temples fild with Deastri or Idols. The Countrey is generally champaign and fruitfull; the husbandmans care and paines make it to fructifie and repay its thanks in various tribute: each Pro∣vince there is well watered: and few of those rivers but abound in fish, which the Chyneses not only banquet on, but on Frogs, Snakes, Rats, Dogs, Hogs, and such food as many other Nations abhominate: they fish with Cormorants.
The people are Olive coloured; more black or white as they vary from the Aequinoctiall: they weare their haire very long, and fillited; their eyes are commonly black; their noses little; their eyes small; their beards deformedly thin; and nailes often times as long as their fingers, serving as a mark to distinguish the Gentry by. The better sort are habited in silke and a sleight sort of satten; the meaner, in black cloth made of cotton: their coats or vests are long and quilted; made to tye under the left arme after the usuall garb of Asia; their sleeves are also very long, and at the wrist very strait: their shoes are many times of such stuffe as bee their coats; and soaled with cloth or callicoes: some have them richly imbroy∣dered. The greatest variety amongst them is in their head attire: some knit their hayre in cawles of silk, of horse-hayre some, and some with fillets of gold or silver: others weare high caps or felts made of fine twigs, round, and commixt with silk of divers colours; and other-some an antick sort of hat, high crown'd, round, one halfe without brim, and tawny coloured. The women are commonly modest, and differ not in ap∣parell; in that a like vaile of white linnen wholly couers them; shewing nothing but their polt-feet, which from their infancy are straitned; so as to make them alla mode, many of them are maymed. They tollerate Polligamy, and Sodomy; yea, what else their lustfull idle natures can dictate to please their effeminacies. They are generally crafty, proud, lasie, jealous, complementall, and voluptuous. Musick, Po∣etry, Painting, and Stage-plaies delight them exceedingly: they care not what they spend in luxury and fire-works: they eat in porcellane; and have their dyet in many but small dishes; their meat minc't, and which they take up with two sticks of bone or Jvory; but some have their nailes so long as may excuse them; for to touch their mouths or meat with fingers is held absurd and impious: their drinck is commonly hot, and by its tast and colour seemes to be such a Coho potion as they drinck in Persia; they drinck oft and little. The Louthya's are served on the knee, and much re∣garded; they all sit upon stooles and eat on Tables. And albeit no Nation in the world is more idle and gluttenous; yet are no beggars to be found there; if he be young and beg, the whip rewards him; if old or lame, or blind, the Hospitall releeves him. Murder they punish with death; theft and adultery commonly with the strappado: their Justice is severe and impartiall; their prisons, strong; their executions, beheading; or star∣ving them. The Mandarins are honoured; the Chyam's reverenced; the King adored: no Subject nor Ambassador ever sees or speaks with him, (save his children and Eunuchs) except by petition. They suffer Ambassa∣dors (or others) to enter China so they bring presents of valew; otherwise they suspect them as spies and no way honour them. The Chynaes are curious in novelties: and love to see strange Arts; which they also delight∣fully practise: few of them but has skill in some thing; either in tillage, making China dishes or porcellane, to paint, sing, or play well: the Mathe∣maticks they affect, & the civill Laws: they use not letters but Characters, or Hyerogliphicks, of which they have above 40000: they write neither to the right hand nor to the left, as the Latin and Hebrews did; but right downe and simmetrically: they write with pencills made of horse hayre,
such as they also paint with: their language is most part of monosyllables: they be generally Poets and Musicians: affected with Rhetorick and Di∣vination. The Schollers and Merchants in this republique are much more honoured than the Souldiers bee: and some reason they have for it, They are so cowardly, lasie, and tyrannicall. No people in the world more ho∣nour their King than do the Chynaes: they suppose him too glorious for them to look upon; they obey his will in every thing; they fill his Ex∣chequor yeerely with above a hundred millions of crownes; they call him The undaunted Emperour, and great Lord of the whole World; Son of the Sun; and beauty of the whole Earth. No people whatsoever, expresse more filiall respect unto their Parents than the Chyneses do: they obey them at all times, and every where: they do nothing to displease them: they marry not without their assent: their childrens Names are at their disposing: they honour them, bee they never so meane; releeve them, bee they never so poore; at their death, expresse all symptoms possible of their loyalty and duty: and sel∣dome mourne lesse (in white linnen, as did the Jewes) than two or three yeeres; the longer they mourne, they think they the better expresse af∣fection. They arrogate all sorts of excellencies whether in Art or Science, as peculiar to their Nation: they think their Speech the most sweet and rhe∣toricall of any in the world: what other people have, they judge deduct∣ed and borrowed from their transcendent Notions. They say they are the most ancient and immixt people in the Universe; and borrow nothing of any other Nation. They say they first invented Letters (or Characters,) Guns, Painting, Tillage, and Navigation: yet in none of these (for all their brags) can they parallell us of Europe. For their antiquity, I deny not but they may have continued their plantation and without much mixture (admirable if so, for the Tartarrs and Siamits have oft over-runne them) since the first seminary, begunne by Sem in those parts: yet may others in that point compare with them; I might nominate the Bryttains: for I re∣gard not their Lies and Histories of such Kings as reigned, or such Con∣quests as the Chyneses obteined (long before the birth of Time) a hun∣dred thousand yeeres ago; unlesse wee qualifie it by the example of the Arcadians, whose yeare had but ninety dayes; of the Massagers, who had fifteen yeeres, or of the Aegyptians who had twelve yeeres in one of ours; following the course of the Moone, and not the revolution of the Sunne, nor regarding the Dies intercalares: an error, most of the Orientall Eth∣niques are plunged in. Their letters are not so succinct as ours: their Hieroglyphicks come short of the Aegyptians. Their Guns are not so serviceable: they have them not above a span long; so that they rather resemble Pistols than Guns: nor are their bore nor squaring so good as ours; so strong, so near, so mathematicall. Their painting is of good co∣lours; but their designing farre short of our invention: they draw the postures filthily, and shadow meanly; which doubtlesse in painting makes the perfection. Their husbandry is without Art or Reason: the graine is good, the soyle rich, the Zone moderate; and yet their corne is neither so various, so good, nor so certaine, as be our Harvests. Their Na∣vigation
is lame: they build many ships; but without beauty, or service: nor have they much skill in sayling, their Logarithms and Mathematick instruments to take the height of the Sun by failing them: their Compasse also is defective; for they have but eight or twelve points at most to di∣stinguish by: nor is the Magnet (till of late) acquainted with them: for all which, they say they see with two eyes; we with one; and that all o∣ther people be more than purblind in sottish ignorance. They delight excessively in all sorts of games, and voluptuousnesse: they can play at chesse, irish, passage, in and in, hazard; and not only play great games, but when they have lost, care not though they stake their wives and children; whom if they lose, they part with till they can ad∣vance so much money as they were staked for. They are very hospitable one to another, and have so sure a faith of the Resurrection that they some∣times lend money to be repayed them in the world to come. Inter-Iudes, Masqs, Fire-workes, and such devices wonderfully take them: nor valew they what money they expend in such sport, so their expectation bee not deluded. Their houses are meanly built, and as badly furnished. Their Meani or Temples have no such grandeur, nor beauty, as in a Countrey so peacefull, so rich, and amongst a people so studious, so superstitious, might be chalenged: but though their outsides bee but ordinary, yet bee they many times lined with excellent good Marble, Prophyre and Ser∣pentine. They celebrate their Natalitia or Birth-daies with great solemnity: for fifteene dayes they rejoyce and play; and each night gormundise up∣on choice fruits, wines, and cates, with no small voracity. The New yeere, which they begin in March, is no lesse illustrated: at that time every man reares up his Pageant, and beautifies his door with paper Arches, and Ima∣ges, and all the night long makes them visible by store of Lantherns. Their Weddings have equal Ceremony: greater or lesser after the qua∣lity of the Deceased. When any Chyna dies, they wash him every where, perfume him next, and then apparrell him: they put his best cloaths on, and hate to let his head be naked: that done, they seat him in his chayre, and make him sit as if hee were not dead but living. At a set time his wife enters the roome; she first does him respect, kisses him, and takes her farewell by expressing so much love and sorrow as is possible: at her departure she takes her lodging, and her children next enter; where they kneele and kisse his hands, yea sympathise, and strive to out-vie each o∣ther in their ejaculations, and such outward notions of sorrow and piety as is imaginable; beating their breasts, and powring out teares in abun∣dance: next to them his kindred do their parts, and then his friends and other acquaintance: the third day they coffin him, in most pretious wood; cover it with a costly cloth, and over it place his Image: for fifteen dayes the corps rest so; each day having a Table spread with dainty meats, but nightly the Priests eat it and burne Incense, & offer an expiatory Sacrifice: when they carry it to the grave (which is neither within any Town nor Citie) they have women that do accompany it, purposely hyred to howle, to teare their hayre, and to move others to compassion: sometimes upon his coffin they place divers pictures of dead men, whom they intreat to
shew him the best way to Paradise: that done, his wife and children for some dayes seclude themselves from sight of men: and when they go a∣broad, go dolorously habited: they put course sack-cloth next their skin; have their cloaths made long and plain; and for three yeeres scarce laugh, or seeme to joy in any thing: but contrariwise indeavour to the utmost of their power to agrandise their Duty by a continued lamentation, absti∣nence from publique feasts, and pastimes: yea in all their letters, instead of their Names subscribe themselves Such a ones disobedient and unworthy Child, &c. But for all this, the Devill has too great a soveraignty over them: most of their Colledges and Temples expressing by one or other invention, their infernall wisdome, and familiarity with that old Magician; to whom they devote many enthusiastick boyes, who with their long spread haire, prostrate themselves afore the Mannada or Idoll; and suddenly as if some Hag had terrified them, start up and vibrate their swords, kept there of purpose: whiles the Idolaters with dejected lookes note their antick po∣stures, and cease not to warble out a soft Doriq' sort of musick, not de∣parting till the vaticinating youths pronounce somewhat, poynting at his Worship and their Obedience. But we have saild too far. Tis high time to look homewards. Yet not till we have bid farewell to Asia: into which when others adventure, let this Motto be remembred. Mans heart commands as many wayes as Stars find resting places: Who travels must disguise himselfe each way with Ianus faces. Pectoribus mores tot sunt, quot in Orbe figurae: Qui sapit, innumeris mori∣bus aptus erit. How delightfull & how magical the excellencies & riches of the Orient are, yet Ovid's Nescio qua natale Solum, &c. was my song and blest mee in my succesfull wishes: so that upon the seventh of June (after long saile, some stormes, and much patience,) we againe described land: it bore N.N.W. from us, but at Tytans first blush the ensuing morning, we were assured it was Digarroys, a small Ile, about fifty miles about, and in 20 degrees South latitude: there we anchored not, wee knew Moritius was but 90 leagues distant thence; the course W.N.W. a more hospitable place, and where we expected better welcome and refreshment. Digarroys (as Sea-men tell us) was first discovered by the Portuguise: but except some Welsh-man had the honour of naming it, I know not whence calld Dygarroys, for Digarrad in the British dialect fitly com∣plies with it, An Ile so Desolate: desolate I mean in humane Inhabitants; other things 'tis Uberous in, as Wood, (choyce and store) Tortoises, Do∣dos, and other Fowle rare & serviceable. To our view, it gave it selfe not very high at 6 leag. distance: and this remember, that at the South-West-end are Syrtes or shoalds long and very dangerous. By benefit of constant winds, in few houres wee arrived at the Mauritius, a place no way despi∣cable; but rather such as in the Travelling over, deservedly chalendges my paines, your patience.
The Bay of Mauritius in the North-west side of the Ile. Of the Mauritius. MAURITIUS (an Ile scituate within the burning Zone, not farre from the Tropick of Capricorne) has twenty degrees, five minutes Antarcick latitude; longitude from the Meridian of Cape Comoryn, twenty degrees and as many minutes; variation, foure and twenty degrees and nineteene minutes: In what part of the World, questionable; participa∣ting both with America, in respect of that vast South Ocean; as bending towards the Asiatique Seas, washing India, Iava, and other Iles; and with Afrique also, if you ranck her with that Empresse of Iles, Madagascar, which seemes to shadow her, and from whose Easterne banks shee is removed above a hundred leagues or three hundred English miles: But, however doubtfull to which three it appertaines; of this I nothing doubt; that, for variety of Gods temporall blessings no part of the Universe obscures it. I will not satisfie you by report of others, but by being an eye-witnesse in part, and partly expert in the rest, I may without much hyperbolizing, af∣firme the whole scarce to be parelleld. It was first discovered by the Portugall; whose industrious arme and ingenious fancie (ere America was discovcred by Columbus) brought strange things to passe, and gave Names to many places formerly innominate. Amongst others, the name Do-Cerne unto this; improperly, if they allude to that which Pliny names in his
6 lib. cap. 31, for that Cerné of his is placed neere the Gulph of Persia; some be also of this name amongst the Azores and other places. After that, it varied into other denominats, as Roderigo; Cygnaea; and now, by the Hollanders, Mauritius: but whither, borrowed from Grave Mau∣rice, or in memory of a Ship so named, that by age or accident layd her bones here, I determine not; for, by equall authority and lesse presump∣tion I may conferre the Nomenclatlon upon some adventurous Cambryan (the relicks of whose most auntient speech and dialect is yet living in ma∣ny of these remote and secret quarters of the world,) the word Maur∣Yuisus or bigger Iland; fitly so named, if compared with those other lesser Iles, Dygarrois, Englands Forrest, Dozimo, St. Apollonia, &c: and by a more euphoniacall concision now Maurisius. But grant it be so called by the Hollanders, yet it followes not that they have more right to it than the English; for they themselves know that the English landed there a dozen yeares, before them: and no question had new-named it, but that they knew the Portugall had done it before them. This also remembred, that in the yeare 1505, when Franciscus Almeyda, of all the Portugalls the most excellent in conquest and discoverie, subjected many marittim parts of Aegi-symba or South-Afrique, in Quiloa, Mombazza, Melindé, Mozambyc, &c Hee reports that there and in some Iles (I suppose this one,) where hee erected Forts and Castles of defence, he found Crosses and other symbolls of Christianitie: whereby (as Osorius in his 4. lib.) hee was sure Christ had beene served there, and therefore would not esteeme himselfe of any of those parts, The first Christian discoverer. Mauritius is an Ile abounding with all good things requisite for mans use, and require-able for the Zone 'tis placed in: the land (especially where it respects the Sea) is high and mountainous: the shape somewhat round; the circuit not much above a hundred English miles: the greatest extent is from the North East to South-West: every where sweet & flourishing. It procreates a healthie ayre; the blooming fragrant trees both lenifie the scalding heat such time as Don-Phoebus wantonizes with the Goat; and fan the gentle Breezes wasted from the Noto-Zephirus, such time as Sol re∣sides in Cancer. And here I should set a full point to her commendations, did that ignorant opinion of our home-bred Seniors discourage me, af∣firming positively that the Torrid Zone was un-inhabitable: a conceit sometime predominating; but now that mist of error is dispell'd, the vaile removed, and experience advanced: wee see it yearely, and plainly, that no place 'twixt the two Poles is more habitable, more young, more excel∣lent. I grant; the Zone is twice every yeare subject to the Sunnes ex∣treamest Candor, that the ayre enflames, and that clouds doe not there so usually as else-where in colder Regions generate: but, two Winters they also have, they want not clouds; (for, the benevolent heaven daily diffudes a gentle shower, whereby the earths siccity is mollified and made most ube∣rous,) the ayre also is lenified by a constant breez or favonius which breaths sweetly every day towards Sun-set, and so refrigerates, that no distempe∣rature is perceived, no not when Apollo dimits his perpendicular rayes and divests himselfe in his most ardent splendour: yea, when the Dog-starre rages, the people in this Zone find the ayre salubrious: the ground also in
most places is enricht with delicious sleepe-charming streames, which by their infusion not only fructifie the solid earth, but also by a harmonious progresse affoord an unresistable magique to ease and meditation: the in∣finite store of loftie and spreading trees, all the yeare condecorated with such verdant beautie and fragrancie; their boughes never unapparrelled from their Summer liverie; the ground ever spread with Natures choisest tapestrie; the sap never exiled into the melancholy earth by Winters fri∣giditie; yea, the mirthfull Sunne (the provoker and reviver of decayed Nature) is ever pleased to re-enforce a continued vigour and activitie; so as an Epitome of all delight and plenty seeme contracted here, and to display it selfe in her exact content, health, and braverie, Such as some have fabled of Elizium. Hic, radiunt flores, et prati viva voluptas herba Ingenio varista suo, fulgentibus illic Surgunt structa thoris: hic, mollis panditur Sollicitum curis non abruptura soporem. Turba salutantum laras tibi perstrepit aedes. Hic avium cantus, labentis murmura rivi. Here, radiant flowers, the Meadows vive delight Vary their Nature, rising to the sight In shining Beds: here, spreads the tender Grasse Not breaking carelesse sleepe o'th' dainty Lasse. The attendant Troops make thy large House resound, But here Birds chirp, Streams murmur on the ground. And as that body is best compounded which pertakes indifferently of all the Elements; for either to want or superabound, begets defect: so, to be blest in all, this place (humane societie excepted) is abortive in none. For, water is here in plenty; nor is its goodnesse and sweetnesse excell'd by plentie; but, as it gently drills it selfe from the stupendious rocks; so it trickles along the pleasant valleyes, as it were besotted at the delightfull murmur it liveth in: in some places it spreads into Meanders, till (too se∣cure in its owne mildnesse) it commixes, and is ingulpht by that vast and brinie Ocean. It also abounds in divers sorts of Trees: some, good for tim∣ber; others for food; all for use. I cannot tell you the halfe of them, I want names to speake, and Art to describe them by. There, is store of Box (as they first appeare, so I remember them) whose growth and green∣nesse affoords profit and delight: here is also great store of Ebony, of all sorts; black, red, white, and yellow: the tree is high, small and straight, the out-side is covered with bark; the in-side lyned with Ebony: black is the best, and good for maay noble uses; for frames of pictures, Mathema∣tique instruments, Chess' and playing tables, bowles, &c. so rich, so valu∣able, that few yeares passe but either Dutch or French Ships came to this Ile of purpose to load away with nothing else but Ebony: than which, no wood is better; than which, no Ile in the world has more, more sorts, or lesse chargeable: and if Virgil's conceit may carry it, we may conclude this Ile a member of East India. — Sola India nigrum sert Ebenum.— —No where but in India Black Ebon wood doth grow men say. And as in most things it is plentifull (Non tellus eadem parit omnia,) so no one thing in plenty exceeds the wood, which is so thick, that in most parts
I could hardly beget passages. The Palmeto is a remarkable Tree and most beneficiall to Travellers: 'tis like the Coco or Date in growth, save that her boughes are large and rounder: the Palmeto is long, and straight, and round, and soft; without leafe, bough, or branch, save at the very top; and those are few, and greene, and sedgie: under the branch appeare certaine codded seeds: both trees (male and female) blossome, but the shee is only fruitfull; and not so neither, unlesse a flowring branch of the male tree be yearely innoculated or incorporated, that by a commixture of seed the fe∣male may fructifie; no miracle in Nature: the leaves serve for many uses; wee made them cover our Tents, to shade us from the Sun and the sere∣nes which fall nightly, and are dangerous: at the top of the Palmeto tree is a soft pith, in which consists the soule or vergetative vertue, for being cut out the tree dyes; the pith is in bignesse like a small Cabbage, in taste like a Nut, but boyld eats like a Colli-flory. Of more value is the Palmeto wine; it is must or sweet, pleasant and nourishing; in colour and taste not unlike new Muskadine. It is intoxicating, but cold in the digestion; it pur∣ges and helps obstructions, kills wormes, and let stand two dayes in the Sun, becomes good vinegar. The wine is thus gathered: we peirce or cut small holes in three or foure trees that grow together; the sap or liquor effudes presently, and all the holes or vessells are quickly filled: impatience for∣bids to bring wooden barrycoes thither, our bellies were prepared to re∣ceive it; by help of a Cane or Quill we suck and suck againe, from one tree to another, two or three trees in lesse than an houre repletiating the gree∣diest appetites, though they bowze their bellies full. The shape of which and Coco, after my rude way I thus present thee: Their excellencies I cannot more elegantly expresse, than Silvester has already celebrated. A Coco-tree A Batt A Tropique bird A Palmeto-tree
The Indian I'les most admirable be In those rare fruits call'd Coquo's commonly: The which alone farre richer wonder yeilds Than all our Groves, Meades, Orchards, Gardens, Feilds! What, would'st thou Drink? the wounded leaves drop wine. Lack'st thou fine Linnen? dresse the tender rine, Dresse it like flax, spin it, then weave it well: It shall thy Cambrick and thy Lawne excell. Long'st thou for Butter? bite the poulpy part. For, never better came to any Mart. Do'st need good Oyle? then boult it too and fro, And passing oyle it soone becommeth so. Or Vinegar? to whet thine appetite. Why, sunne it well and it will sharply bite. Or, wants thou Sugar? steepe the same a stownd, And sweeter Sugar is not to be found. Tis what you will, or will be what you would: Should Mydas touch it, sure it would be gould. And God (all good) to crowne our life with Bayes, The earth with plenty, and his name with prayes, Had done enough if he had made no more But this one plant, so full of choisest store. Save that the world (where one thing breeds satiety) Could not be faire, without so great variety. For indeed, such is the life and pleasure of this Ambrosia, that (I often noted it) wee were no sooner parted from these trees (no not three yards space) but divers birds, as Parrats, Kites, Thrushes, &c. and Lizards (here abounding, and not a little curious in their shape and colours) would speed to suck the distilling Nectar. Divers other Trees here are, various in their shape and nature: one, out of curiosity I bit and tasted of, but for halfe an houre it so malignantly wrongd my mouth and lips, as if Vitriol had beene imbrued with Sulphur: it procreates nothing that is greene or good, destitute of shade and beauty, wholy naked, without leafe or flower; the bole or body is soft and pene∣trable, such as a Musquet bullet can make way thorough though the Tree be of five yards circuit; the softnesse of it invited my knife to carve my name in, and which, it as easily performed, as with a stick you can write in sand; I have no name for it. Nor for another very frequent there, but by its likenesse the same which the barbarous Africans at Sierra-leon call O'gou, with which they invenome their Darts and Shafts: the Tree is not high nor bungie; the branches spread to a great length, and beare many Cods (not unlike the Indian Beanes) arm'd with many sharp prickles: by such a defence one would think the fruit or kernell valuable, but it decei∣ved us; the fruit (or kernell hid within those Cods) is round, scarce so big as a Doves egge; the shell, and colour very like a Bezar stone; hard to crack, but crackt it may be; within, it has a Nut, tasted like an Acorne, the quality (if not the same) little better than poyson. Many other rare
Trees there are; some, like unto Pines; like Ashes, some; some, Box; some like to Cypresses. The fruits are also variable, some like Pine-Apples, like Artichoakes some, others like Plums, and Nuts, and Berries: whose seve∣rall names or vertues, my small skill in that Theory apprehends not. This I tooke notice of, that what the Birds eat not, the Tortoyses doe eat; and what the Tortoyses refuse to eat, the Hoggs devoure: so, as by one or other, all is tasted of. Againe, as this noble Ile is prodigall in her water and wood, so shee corresponds in what else a fruitfull Parent labours in: not only boasting in that variety, but in feathered creatures also; yea, in the rarenesse of that variety: I will but name some of them; you shall lick them to perfection. The Dodo comes first to our description: here, and in Dygarrois (and no where else, that ever I could see or heare of) is gene∣rated the Dodo (a Portuguize name it is, and has reference to her simple∣nes,) a Bird which for shape and rarenesse might be call'd a Phoenix (wer't in Arabia:) her body is round and extreame fat, her slow pace begets that corpulencie; few of them weigh lesse than fifty pound: better to the eye than stomack: greasie appetites may perhaps commend them, but to the indifferently curious, nourishment, but prove offensive. Let's take her picture: her visage darts forth melancholy, as sensible of Natures injurie in framing so great and massie a body to be directed by such small and com∣plementall wings, as are unable to hoise her from the ground, serving only to prove her a Bird; which otherwise might be doubted of: her head is va∣riously drest, the one halfe hooded with downy blackish feathers; the other, perfectly naked; of a whitish hue, as if a transparent Lawne had co∣vered it: her bill is very howked and bends downwards, the thrill or breathing place is in the midst of it; from which part to the end, the co∣lour is a light greene mixt with a pale yellow; her eyes be round and small, and bright as Diamonds; her cloathing is of finest Downe, such as you see in Goslins: her trayne is (like a China beard) of three or foure short feathers; her legs thick, and black, and strong; her tallons or pounces sharp, her stomack fiery hot, so as stones and iron are easily digested in it; in that and shape, not a little resembling the Africk Oestriches: but so much, as for their more certain difference I dare to give thee (with two others) her representation. A Catato A Hen A Dodo
Here are also sundry other fowle, yea birds of highest quality; as Gos∣hawkes, Hobbies, Lannars; and also Reer-mice or Bats as large as Gos∣hawkes, Passe-flemingoes, Geese, Powts, Swallowes, Kites, Black-birds, Sparrowes, Robbins, Herons, white and beautifull; in their flesh good, in their feathers more valewable: Cacatoes, a bird somewhat like a Parrat, but may seeme to borrow his name from , he is so fierce, so ra∣venous, and so indomitable, Bitters, Hens, and many other; which I for∣beare to name to avoyd impatience: But I must give the Parrats a pecu∣liar salutation, they made mee so admire their feathers, and are so catho∣lickly beloved and pointed at; Such are their curious liveries, and such their language, not unaptly thence cal'd  a good Epithiton. Psittacus, humanas depromit voce loquetas Atque suo Domino  valeque sonat. The Parrat, humane language knows right well, And to his Lord, saies Save you, and Farewell. Here are also as great variety of fish, as in any other part of the world, I thinck: such as wee took and tasted of I noted. The Man-atee or Cow-fish was best and rarest; for taste and shape equally can appose both feeder and beholder. They use both elements; those very fins which steare them in the Sea, serve as stilts on shore to creep along, and to support them; their paps also in their land travels do befriend them: and though a fish, yet differ little from Veale in tast, save that it is somewhat waterish; the ribs and entralls resemble a Cows, so do their face, and thence have their denomination: for doubtlesse the land has not that creature which the watery citizens resemble not. This fish is of a great length, and swims but slowly; they affect shoald waters, and to be neare the shoare to graze on; Andrew Evans our honest Captaine, struck one of them with a Trident or Fis-gigg, and (here in this Bay) leapt upon her, wounding her above fifty times with his steletto, but ere hee got the victory, she crusht him by incir∣cling him with her taile, enraged by sharp pangs of death, so that his con∣quest was dearly bought; for though at that present he spat blood without feeling other torture, yet so mortall was his bruise, that he bade this world farewell, within three weekes after; as in my description of Saint Helena is remembred. The head of this fish is like an Elephant (save that the pro∣boscis is wanting:) but to a Cow most liken her: her eyes are very small; her bulk, about three yards long; and in bredth halfe so much: 'tis fa∣moused for a gentle fish; yea in their love to the visage of a man, are ranckt with Dolphins: most certaine and most valewable is the stone con∣solidated in their heads: for, being pounded, put in wine, & drunck fasting, it is (as are the brains of Sharks, some call them Tuberons) most soveraigne against the stone and collick: questionlesse of more prise than his other six great teeth, which yet to him are farre more usefull. Give mee leave to name what fish wee took, 'twill ease my memory: Dolphins, Bonetates, Albicores, Cavalloes, Whale, Porpice, Grampasse, (or Sus-marinus,) Mullet, Bream, Tench, Trout, Soles, Flounders, Tor∣toyses, Eeles, Pikes, Sharkes, Crabs, Lobsters, Oysters, Crafish, Cuttle-fish, Rock-fish, Limpits, and a speckled Toad-fish or poyson fish, as the Sea-men from experience named it: This came first to net and was eaten
too greedily by the heedles Sailers; an error which cost some their lives, others their sences; a deere rate, a bad reckning: It is not unlike a Tench, but farre more black, meazled, and deformedly painted. Other strange made Fishes we had there, who met with some strange stomacks, who in a dangerous curiosity would needs tast them: some of them had the shape of Hedg-hogs, of Cats some: some were bungy, others bristly and trian∣guler; such as Gorraeus calls Lepus marinus, of which and the rest this caveat may be inserted. The poysonous Sea-fish drinck, learn to beware: Whom the deep Channells of the Seas prepare. Her Scales have bane, her Oyles like purging are. Disce venenatos Leporis cognoscere potus Pestiferi, mediis peperit quem fluctibus aequor Virosi Squammas et purgaménta marini piscis olei. The Torpaedo or Cramp-fish came also to our hands, but were amazed (not knowing that fish but by its quality) when a sudden trembling seazed on us; a device it has to beget liberty; by evaporating a cold breath to stupifie such as either touch, or hold a thing that touches it: heare Oppian. Along her stretched guts two branches rise With fraud (not strength) endued; they patronise The Fish: whom who so wounds, his joynts decay His blood conjeales, his limbs move not, they say His powers dissolve, he shakes, and falls away. At duo se tollunt distenta per Ilia rami, Qui fraudem pro robore habent, Piscem{que} tuentur Quos si quis tractat, perdit per membra vigorem Sanguine concreto, rigidos nec commovet attus, Solvuntur subitò contracto in corpore vires. Moreover, this Ile affoords us Goats, Hogs, Beeves, and land Tortoi∣ses: so great, as suffer two men with ease to sit upon them; so strong, as they can carry them: yea (in Portugall reports,) fifteene men have alto∣gether stood on one of them: Sailers affect to eat them; but are better meat for Hogs, in my opinion: they make pretty sport, but are odious food; and so are their Rats, Bats, and Monkeys: most of which usefull and unusefull creatures were first brought hither (men say) by the Portu∣gall to refresh them in their returne from India, but at this day dare nei∣ther anchor there (searing the Eaglish and Dutch,) nor owne their first∣lings. The Birds, had here at no charge and little labour, are Hens, Bats, Herns, &c. The Hens flock together twenty and forty in a company; if you catch one, take all: the surest way is to shew them a red cloth; that colour exasperates their spleen, they shew it by flying out-ragiously at it; and when wee struck downe one, the residue budgd not one jot till all were vanquished: they eat like parcht Piggs if you roast them. The Herons also through a long continued security (ignorant of the deceits of men, and unused to the villany of powder) are as easily gotten: wee have come in shot of six, and when wee had killd one, the other took not wing but suffered us to shoot and take them all, one after another; neither know∣ing nor valuing danger, but quicken destruction to themselves by a strange condoling their late dead associates. All sorts of fish are easily taken. The Bats are innumerable, and admirable in their bignesse: Some of them are not lesse than Gos-haukes: Sea-men case them like Rabbets, but (if my stomack deceive me not) worse meat cannot be tasted of: a fierce ilfavo∣red
carrion it is, ever squeaking, and in most hidious and offensive noises calling one another: they hang in swarmes upon the boughs of trees, by clawes fixed at the extreame part of their wings; their monkey faces tur∣ned downwards. Tectaque cum silvis celebrant, lucemque perosae Nocte volant, seroque tenent a vespere Nomen. Houses and Woods they haunt, hate Day, and game In Night time, and from twi light have their Name. Their shapes which I have formerly put upon the Coquos, best speaks 'em. A day afore wee parted thence, wee took a Fish, an Eagle-fish I ima∣gin'd it: the eyes were five quarters asunder: from one fin end to ano∣ther, were above foure yards: its mouth and teeth resembled a Port-cul∣lice; a long small taile it had: a creature (take it altogether) rather made to wonder at, than to juncket on. depiction of fish A word now of the Soyle it selfe. The Ile has many good places to anchor in: two are well knowne; the one, at the North-West side, which beares the forme of a Hemi-cicle, and elevates the Pole Antartique, 19 degrees, and 30 minutes: the other, at the South-East is directly opposite, and in 20 degrees, 15 minutes; in lon∣gitude from Cape Comryn the utmost promontory of India, 20 degrees, 20 minutes: and from the Lizard the extreamest part of England, 99. both Bayes seeme land-lockt, the ground is oazy, the depth in 5, 10, 15, or 20 fadoms, as the Sea-man best affects: No where dangerous. The Soile it selfe; is stony and troublesome towards the shoare; howbeit the in∣land parts are fat, and pleasant, full of shadowing trees, and drilling rivo∣lets, reciprocally benevolent, equally delightfull to the eye and taste: some few places excepted; which either storming at the aspiring height of some adjacent Mountaines, or efflated in their owne noise, descend so violently that they become Cataracts in their violent and precipitious
fluxes: but, though the eare be angry at it, the other sences derive much happinesse; for hereby the earth is mellowed and made fruitfull, which otherwise would bee too full of stones and sand; yet such is the richnesse of it, as rather commands us wonder at, than describe it. Amber-grease is often found flooting about this Iland: how generated, whether in the Whale, or froth of Seas, or other wise, is yet doubted of. Corall, white and pleasant to look upon, grows here in abunda-ce: but how that stincking weed Tobacco came thither I know not: whether by Art or Nature que∣stionable. To conclude, this pleasantest of Asiatick Iles is un-inhabited, unlesse you please to intitle Beasts and Birds Inhabitants: those live here without dread of Lyon, Tygre, Wolfe, Fox, Dog, or such offensive crea∣tures; and have it upon this condition, to pay a gracefull Tith or Tribute to such ships as famine or foule weather direct to ride here: a fit place for Sir Thomas Moore to have seated his Utopia in. But his conceits were for∣ged: this merits the best of people. If I have stood too long in her description, excuse it in the surpassing delight I took in it, such as without Circe's spells had a magick force To wish wee dwelt there. But home we must; the wind blew faire, the Sea was calme and all our company fully refreshed. So, aboard wee went, and in three houres saile lost sight of that Elisium; wishing such an Optick glasse as every where would shew it us: but our strong imaginations repre∣sent it. The fift day we descried land; it bore South-West from us: by its height, shape, and position, wee knew 'twas that our Captaines called Englands Forrest: next day we attained it. The name was Anno 1613. imposed by Captaine Castleton Commander of the Pearle (a ship I meane:) some say the errant Potugall first saw it, and by Seignior Mascarenas from his owne name was denominated: yet other-some go further and call it Pulo-puar, an Indian name, but by whom or when, darkly writ in the mistique Cha∣racter of Oblivion. The Ile has above fifty English miles circuit: the South Pole is elevated in that place, 20 degrees, and 55 minutes, South from the Aequator: in longitude from Mauritius 1 degree and a halfe: (but distant thence, seven and thirty Duch leagues:) and variation of the Compasse 23 degrees: an Ile exceeding lofty, made fying her aspiring fore∣head within the middle Region: every where greene, and ever florish∣ing; pleasantly apparelled in various liveries; especially in store of trees, branching gallantly, and mounting to a rare sublimity. It had no Creature in it, save birds; till our Captaine landed some Hogs and Goats of both kinds, that by a happy multiplication and encrease the future Passenger might be releeved and blesse the Planter. It wants not water, sweet and plentifull: the fresh streams are Magazeins of watry Citizens, such as sport themselves in that liquid Element: 'twere prolixity to name halfe of them; the Eeles are notable; many there be, and most weigh thirty pounds; not odious in their corpulency, for to the tast they render themselves sweet, moist, and excellent: the birds are many, rare, but most of them such as are spoken of in the Mauritius. We must to Sea againe, but not without a gratefull farewell to those
healthy and well-plac't Ilands, prepossest with a felicitated memoriall, yea enricht with so great choice, such plenty of victualls, that the vast and churlish Ocean became lesse distastfull to us; contemplating the jocune exercises and pleasures we were so late possessors of. In few dayes (by benefit of propitious windes) we lancht farre into the Mare del Zur, the Antartick constellations more visibly discovering them∣selves, and to approach our Zenyth. But, long those happy Favonii con∣tinued not: the wind veered into other (our contrary) quarters; the Skie ore-spread with black and lowring clowds, the Sea roar'd and labour'd in many dreadfull tumors, threatning spight, and no small danger: for seaven whole dayes and nights the Tempest raged, and forced us all that while to lye by the Lee (to speake Sea language) no saile but the mizzen daring to oppose, the rest made prostrate to a sencelesse furie: howbeit, the old song Venit post multos una serena Dies revived us, by a continued patience begetting freedome and victory. For many hundred miles we had nothing bat Sea and Ayre to feast our sights with: somwhat bettered by many shoales of fish every where con∣comitating us, now and then by too much greedinesse proffering them∣selves to the deceitfull bait of the cunning Marriner. In this vacancie, I may remember; Aristotle 2 lib. Meteor is of opinion, that no great blasts of wind blow from the South; meaning, that the burning Zone is without much raine, and clouds, such as conduce to exhalation and vapours: or, that before they can exceed the Tropicks, and enter the temperate Zone, the Sunnes vehement and continued heat and rays dispell, annihilate, and make them unforceable. Doubtlesse he retracted; for who sees not, that Phoebus in his attractive power (so, the matter be alike) equally co-operates towards a generation of wind and raine in his progresse unto either Tro∣pick. Experience, the Mistresse of Knowledge taught it us; we found it so: for from the South many gusts and stormes assailed us. Ovid in his 4 lib. de Ponto is of Aristotles opinion (to be granted in our Hemispheare.) Hic oritur Boreas Orae{que}, domesticus huic est, et sumit vires à propiore loco. At Notus adverso tepidus qui spirat ab Axe est procul, et rarus, languidior{que} venit. Rough Boreas our Domestique, ruleth here, And takes his vigour from a place more neere. But the mild South, from adverse Quarter sent, Comes farre, blowes gently, and more impotent. After threescore and ten dayes further saile, wee came in view of Saint Helena, (so long were wee with faire winds 'twixt that Ile and the Mauri∣tius;) a very little Ile and strangely founded. The spatious Ocean bel∣lowes on every side so fretfully, as it might feare an inundation, had not the extraordinarie height, but chiefly a Supreame providence (which hath set the Sea its bounds) safe-guarded it. It has no neighbour Iles, neither great nor small; but seemes equally removed from those two famous Ports Rio Grandi and Cape Negro; the one in Brazelia, th'other in Congo: in America the first; in Africk the last: both, in one elevation, and in the same parallel with Saint Helena: from that in America, distant above 400 leagues; from this in Africk 300. But let us a shoare, and search what she aboundeth in.
Of Helena. SAINT HELENA is an Ile, & was in-nominate till Iohn de Nova gave it one, in the yeare after th'incarnation of our Saviour Christ 1502: and so named, for that he discovered it (in this returne from India to Lisbon) the third of May; a day consecrated to the memory of Helena the Empresse: She that first found the Crosse, she that was the most religious of Ladies in her time, she that was mother to the first Christian Emperour, great Con∣stantine: both of them glorious to the world; Brittans both; both bright Jems of this our Nation. St. Helena is removed South from the Aequator sixteene degrees: has longitude from the utmost promontory of South Africk, two and twenty degrees: the needle varies there, five degrees and thirteene minutes From the lands end of England is distant 1500 leagues, or 4500 English miles: From the Cape of Good hope 580 leagues, or 1740 miles. From Mada∣gascar 1000 leagues, or 3000 miles. From Surat 2200 leagues, or 6600 miles. And from Bantam in Iava 2300 leagues, or 6900 miles, or there∣abouts. The Ile has this front in that Bay which takes name from the Chappell, nigh which we anchored. St Helena. To what part of th'inhabited world it appertaines, is doubtfull; the vast Aethiopique Ocean so largely circles it. To Afer I imagine (because its neerest to that Continent,) rather than Vesputius. The Ile is small; it exceeds not thirty English miles in circumference: excessive high; it wraps its head for the most part in the clouds, where it opens its wide mouth, and gulps down sufficient moisture to coole its heat, and fatten it: and but for that affinity it has with the middle Region which invelops it with a chil-cold Tulipant, the extreame heat wanton Phaeton darts con∣stantly in that Zone, yea twice every yeare perpendicularly upon this Ile when hee is Zenith, would doubtlesse incinerate, and make the entralls enflame (for it has Sulphur) like another Vesuvius. The land (I told you) is very high, but not more eminent in its height, than the Sea (close by the Ile) is admirable in the depth; so deepe that it admits ill anchoring (a place, N.W. from the channell where is riding at 20 fadoms, excepted;) where∣by,
Marriners are forced to carry their anchors a shoare, if they would ride securely: and with good cause too; for, by reason of the abisse, I could hardly discerne any flux or reflux, as if wee had beene neere no land, but rather in the body of the Sea, where neither ebb nor flow can be disco∣vered: the salt water indeed continually plashes and froaths with rage to see it selfe to suddenly resisted; but, the moist breath usually vapring in or upon the Seas occasions it, and makes it turbulent. The Ile is hard to be ascended; not that the passage is craggie, but pre∣cipitious: the Sailers Proverb of it is, A man may choose whither he will break his heart going up, or his neck in comming down; a merry jeast, but let them choose it. Once up, no place yeelds a more delightfull object. It is even and plaine above, swelling no where to a deformed rising; cloath'd with sweet grasse, long and curious; every where it gives a large prospect and horizon into the Ocean. The Springs above are sweet, but below are brackish; the reason is, they participate (in their drilling discent) of the salt hills, through which it cuts a passage; salt both by their owne compo∣sition, and the salt breath the Sea perpetually evaporates. There are but two rivolets in that Ile: the one bubbles down into the Chappell, th'other into the Lemmon Vallyes. They take their names frō a Lemon tree whence it arises, and an old Chappell built at the very bottome by the Spaniard Anno 1571, and delapidated by the Dutch; a place once intended for Gods glory, but by malice of rude man made ruinous and a prophane nest of un∣cleane avarice. The ruines of a little Towne demolisht lately shew them∣selves, and serve to testifie a like Fate makes men and Villages dye, Death and destruction makes both mortall and miserable. Some say the Spanish King subverted it, in that it became an unlawfull Magazein of Sea-mens Traffick, turning and returning out of both the Indyes: thereby losing his tribute in too apparent measure. It is but lately made sociable: the world is but beginning there; no Monuments, no Antique rarities are there found. You see all, if you looke upon the shatterd ribs of an old weather beaten Carrique, and some broken peeces of great Ordnance left there against the Owners good liking, and serve now in stead of Anchors. The Ile is desolate of reasonable Inhabitants: Hoggs and Goats dwell there: they agree well-favouredly, and multiply in mighty numbers; happy in their ease and safety, till ships arrive there to banish hunger: wee got also other good refreshment; Phesants, Powts, Quailes, Henns, Partrich; and (which were as acceptable) divers sorts of grasse & roots, Wood-sorrell, three-leav'd-grasse, Basil, Parsly, Mints, Spinage, Fennel, Annys, Radish, Mustard-seed, Tobacco, and some others, which by a willing hand, directed by an ingenious eye, may soone be gathered: brought hither, and here sowne by Fernandus Lupius an honest Portugall, in the yeare of our Lord 1509. whose Country-men at this day dare hardly land there to over-see their Seminary, or owne their labours; lest the English or Hollander in the churlish language of a Cannon question them. Anno 1588 Candish our Country-man landed here in his circum-navigating the earth: I name him in this respect; he reports, he found here store of Lemmons, Orenges, Pomgranads, Pomcitrons, Figgs, Dates &c. but now are none of these fruits growing there that I could see or heare of, a Lemmon tree excepted;
to conclude, here wee buried in the old Chappell our honest Captaine Andrew Evans: his deaths wound (as I have told you) was given him by a fish at the Mauritius. Saint Hellena was a pleasant place, but bad for us to stay too long in: after six dayes commorance, wee paid our reckning in a hearty Farwell, and by benefit of a happy gale cut swiftly the yeelding billowes in a North∣west course; whereby, on the sixteenth of October wee made our selves Nadyr to the Sunne, at that time in his Progresse towards the Antartique Tropick: our latitude was 13 deg. and 13 min: the third day after that we got sight of Ascention Ile, nam'd so by Iohn de Nova in the yeare 1502: 'tis removed South from the Equinoctiall Circle seven degrees, 40 minutes: in circuit it is 30 English miles; from St. Hellens Ile removed seven hundred and twenty: little in it save wood and water, observable. On the seven and twentieth day we crost under the Aequator; whence, to nine degrees North latitude wee were pesterd with continuall Torna∣thes; a variable weather, compos'd of lowd blasts, stinking showers, and terrible thunders. The eleventh of November we were parallel to Cape de Verd, and with the GORGADES, Isles famoused by antient Poets, who say, that the three Gorgons, Medusa, Stenia, and Euryale, the daughters of of King Phorcys Neptunes sonne here lived, and by the transcendent ex∣cellencie of their beauties (their yellow haires curling like Snakes, and deshevelling about their naked shoulders) turn'd the beholders into a stu∣pid admiration, and by Perseus his report of that their faculty gave Poets some ground whereon to build their fiction. Leaving those, wee steered Westward, and past by many parts of the New found world (as some men call it) Guiana, Florida, Virginia, Nova Anglia, (parts of Norumbega) and the gulph of Mexico: where I have seated my selfe a while, and will de∣fraud the Reader of some patience, by travelling to find out the first Disco∣verer: a Question not a little controverted. Madoc ap Owen Gwyneth discovered America above three hundred yeeres before COLUMBUS. ALbeit I have formerly in a line or two vindicated the honour of our Country, lost in the greater part by protract of malitious time, and wane of well-willers to defend it; I desire to speak more largely here, and give you the ground of my conjecture, That Madoc (sonne of Owyn Gwy∣neth) discovered the Westerne world now call'd America, three hundred and odd yeares before Columbus: not to detract from that mans worth, but that the truth may prevaile, and the memory of our Heroick Country-man revive; having gaspt too long in hatefull ignorance and oblivion: for, if analogie of language and authority of good Authors may be credited, it may peradventure be accepted of, yea amongst Critticks gaine entertain∣ment.
In the first place it may be asked whence Madock's resolution came. I answer. From an innate desire to travell, and to avoid domestique broiles he put that in action which some old prophetique sayings gave him light and encouraged him in. 'Tis very like he had read Plato (for what part of the world has ever more affected learning than the Britians) who in his Dialogue 'twixt Tymeus and Cricius, discourses of a great vast Ile, West from the Atlantique Ocean, and named ATLAS: as bigg as Asia and Africa put together. Some Humination hee had also out of Aristotle and Theophrastus their Books of Rarities writ two thousand yeares agoe, re∣lating how some Merchants passing thorow the Straits of Gibralter, were by tempest driven whither wind and Sea compelled them, so farre West that they finally discried land, but un inhabited: It may be 'twas some of the Azores: but what ere it was, it proved a Magnet of encouragement to illure future Ages to discover Westward, and doubtlesse was a prime cause of finding out the Westerne Continent. Hanno also is supposed to have landed there. Questionlessed he adventured farre (far in regard they had no Compasse to returne by) into the Atlantique Seas; but which way he sail'd is disputable: West, some say: some say, Southward. Pomponius Mele and Lampridus affirme the land was South from Carthage hee discove∣red; if South, then no part of the West-Indies: the Canary Iles perhaps, the Atlantiades, the Gorgades, Ascention, or Saint Helens; who though they carry not the Epithite of Great, yet the Novelty considered, and the Distance, the word great may be affected. Some (but I beleeve them not) carry him to Madagascar: if that, hee discovered a great Ile indeed; But then sure he would have found out the Red Sea (not comparable to the dangers he had past, in doubling Cape Tormentoso) and made his journey home, lesse dangerous. Virgil the best of Latine Poets, from some vari∣cinating Notion seemes to point at it, in the 6. lib. Aenead. where hee pro∣phesies vast extent of Caesar's Dominions. —Iacet extra sydera Tellus Extra Anni Solis{que} vias, ubi coeliser Atlas Axem humero torquet, Stellis ardentibus aptum. —A Land beyond the Stars dothly, And the Sunnes way; Atlas that beares the Sky The fire fit Star-fraught Pole doth wheel therby. Which though Servius understand of the Sunne-burnt Aethiops; others otherwise interpret it inconsiderat Laudinus is one of them; who cannot be perswaded that any part of Aethiopia exceeds the Tropicks: an idle conceit; and which in fol. 15. I have refuted: but see his reason for it, the word extra he moderates to pene extra, a witty comment. But Donatus parodically takes Solem pro Die, and Annum pro Nocte; the Sun for Day, the Yeare for Night; which granted, Virgil has neither prophecie nor wonder. The truth is (as Lod. de la Cerda notes) the Poet meanes thus, Augustus Caesar should con∣quer beyond Mount Atlas, a famous part of Afrique (Morocco now, of old Mauritania) not included within the burning Zone, out of which Apollo never wanders, Extra sydera, nimirum Zodiaci; whence we gather that Vir∣gil meant not of America. But in a more perfect way, Seneca (Nero's Master) fore-tells the disco∣very (he conceales the place) in his Medaean Tragedy.
—The Time will one day be (Guided by providence) whom you shall see The liquid Ocean to enlarge her bounds And pay the Earth a tribute of more grounds In a inplest measure; for the Sea gods then Shall shew new worlds and rarities to men. Yea; by his leave, who all great acts commands See Thule lesse North by farre, than other lands. —Venient Annis Secula seris, quibus Oceanus Vinculd rerum laxet & ingens Pateat Tellus, Typhisque novos Detegrat orbes, nec sit terris Vltima Thulè. Madoc from these lights discerned it: And least any may thinck the man to whon we erect a Trophy of so great honour, an obscure or illite∣rate man, not worth a memory; let's in a line or two speak his discent and quality, and then the particulars of his vovage. He was brother to Prince David, sonnes of that famous Owen Gwynedd Prince of Wales, who for above thirty yeeres governed wisely, with great courage and good fortune: his Father was Gruffith ap Conan that did ho∣mage for some lands in England, to William the Conquerour at S. Davids: and descended lineally from King Rodri Mawr (or Roderic the great) glo∣rious in many, conflicts and victories against the savage Saxon; in those foure great battells especially, at Berthem, Bangelu, Monegid, and Anglesea, in the yeere from Adam 4820: from the nativity of our Blessed Saviour 846. such time as Burchred King of Mercia, Athelwolfe King of the West-Saysses, Meiric and other valiant Princes by sad tryall found him fortunate: which suffice to illustrate Madock's quality, every way exceeding honourable. It followes why they put to Sea upon discovery. The Annalls of those times (to this day happily preserved) tell us, That so soone as Owen Gwy∣nedd (or Venedotia) was dead; the custome of Gavelkind (which has con∣founded Wales) became a Subject of implacable hate amongst his sonnes, Iorwerth (or Edward, sirnamed Dwryndwn, from his broken nose) Howel and David; whose peculiar, ambition banisht all generall kinds of love due amongst friends and brethren. Iorwerth, albeit he was eldest, was held incapable of the Crowne in respect of his lamenesse and other deformi∣ties: Howel also was thought unworthy by reason his Mother was an Irish Lady, with which Nation they had then some difference: David had least right by law of Nature and Nations, being youngest; howbeit, by his comly personage, his skill in Armes, but principally by marrying Emma Plantaginet, sister to King Henry the second, hee got the Scepter into his hands, and swayed it as best liked him: yet the Crowne tottered upon his head, till in a victory against his brethren wherein Hoell was slaine, hee fitted it better and fastned it. But a supream power and Justice would not establish it against right and reason, for so soone as Llewellyn (Iorwerths sonne and right heyre) was capable to grasp it, hee drew many of Davids men to his party (such is the vulgars levity) promising them great matters; and ayded by Howell ap Meredith and Conan ap Owen his active kinsmen, David unwillingly descends from his Princely Seat, and Llewellyn is seated Anno Domini 1194; not without much blood-shed and distraction of the wisest. Madoc ap owen Gwyneth perceives the Normans ready to swallow them
(for nothing more destroyes a Nation than division:) and that his advice nor propositions of peace were harkned to, but rather by such good of∣fices made himselfe the object of their furie; he thence-forth studies his owne preservation, but sees no part of his native home-glance any happi∣nesse, but every where horror and destruction: his genius therefore prompts him to adventures, yea to hast aboard: in some remote place or other to establish his present state and future happinesse; no shew of feare, no improbability in reason, no peradventures any whit disaminating his well-temper'd spirit, to Sea therfore he meant to go and prepares speedily: for at that instant hee saw that Prophetique song penned by Ambrose Te∣leyssen a noble Bardh fulfilled; writ in the yeere 490, such time as Aurelius Ambrosius, brother to Vther-pen-Dragon arrived here (from Armorica) to re∣venge them upon the uncivill Saxons: the Bardh vaticinating that when they fell to Idolatry, to discord, or to admit strange people among them, that then the Brittish glory should be Eclipsed. Eu Nar a folant Eu hjaith a gadwant Eu tir a gothlant and gwyllt Wallia In Latin this Vsque laudabunt Dominum createm Vsque servabunt idioma linguae Arvaque amittunt sua cuncta praeter Wallica rura Whiles Cambrya's issue serve the Lord their maker, Whiles with no other Language are pertaker, Whiles so, with glory they their own shall keep, Whiles other Nations in oblivion sleep. Teleyssen at the same time and in the same song joynd this other invective, reproving the pride and avarice of the Clergie, who to despight the Welsh had given out that Austen the Monck, sent hither by Pope Gregory the great, was their first Converter; ignorant it seemes, or rather wilfully malitious, that our Country-men had embraced Christ (long before Au∣sten's time) by the preaching of Ioseph of Arimathea and Symon Zelotes; and thence came that religious boast, that they excelled all the world for three things, having the first Christian King, Emperour, and Monastery in the world; Lucius, Constantine, and Bangor. The Song is this. Gwae'r offeiriad byd Nis angreifftia gwyd ac ny phregetha Gwae ny cheidw eygail Ac effyn Vigail ac ny's areilia Gwae ny theidw ey ddevaid Rhae bleidhie, Rhufeniaid ari'ffon g'nwppa Woe be to that Priest Y-borne That will not cleanly weed his corne, and preach his charge among. Woe be to that Sheepheard I say That will not watch his fould alway as to him doth belong. Woe be to him that doth not keep From Romish Wolves his silly sheep with staffe and weapon strong. Madoc the rather confirmed his intentions for travell, when hee saw such distraction at home, such apostasy in all callings; also his life every
day in danger: all things therefore being fitted, he put to Sea without bid∣ding his kindred farewell, least too much love or hate might have with∣drawne him. The yeere he set forth in, was from Adam 5140. from Christ 1170. the wind and sea seemed to favour him (Omens of good fortune:) so as, after some patience and weeks saile due West, hee descried land, a land where he found store of good victualls, sweet water, fresh ayre, gold, (and which was best) where they were a good whiles healthfull: such, as over-whelmed him with joy, but moderated when he considered how Almighty God was alike powerfull and gratious in all places: his exile now turned into comfort. In leiw of ingeminating his owne misery, hee joyes himselfe, and sees his brothers most unhappy Princes; who so eagerly emulated one anothers greatnesse: a Territory causing it, which compa∣red which this, God had directed him to, was but as a handfull of earth, and which he had had possession of without opposition or bloodshed. Here Madoc planted (in Florida or Canada, some part of Mexico) rais'd some fortificati∣ons for defence, left a hundred and twenty men (I follow the old Copie, in this Storie) and directly by Gods providence (the best compasse) and benefit of the Pole starre after long saile arrived safely at home; where, hee recounted his mervailous succesfull voyage, the fruitfulnesse of the soile, the simplicity of the Savages, the great wealth abounding there, and facility of Conquest: a discourse that fill'd them with joy and admiration; and whereby hee drew many willing minds to returne with him. In ten good Barques, loaded with all necessary provisions they advanced back, and most fortunately re-attained the same place they hoped for. Great re∣joycing was among them at that their happinesse, but no lesse sorrow fol∣lowed: for, being come to the Plantation, they found few of those they left there, living: caused by too much eating, the indisposition or Novel∣ty of that ayre arid climate, (which though never so excellent, yet causes sicknesse and alteration in new Inhabitants) by some trecherie of the Bar∣barians. Madoc digested it with a Christian fortitude and patience, and forth-with bettered the Colony, by help of Eneon and Edwall his brothers Contriving every thing with so good order, that they were secure from any Enemie, and had all things conducing to ease, plenty, and contented∣nesse: they threw away the too indulgent thoughts of their Native homes, by this reason, that if they died there, they were in the same distance from heaven, and had as easie a journey thither: what most afflicted them was the breach of promise, many of their friends had made but not performed. The cause was not in them, but in the overture of that state turn'd topsie∣turvie by the Brittaine Princes, and totally by the indiscretion of that un∣happy Prince Lluellyn ap Gryffith, (lately married to Eleoner, daughter of Monteford the bold Earle of Lecester and Eleoner daughter of King Iohn) which Gruffyth was slaine Anno 1282 at Buelht by Franckton an English∣man in an unmanly fashion. So that Madoc and his Company returned no more, nor did the Welsh saile thither afterward, whereby one of another in small time were in some sort forgotten and never remembred. But although Madoc and his Cambrian crew are dead and their memo∣ry moath-eaten; yet the foot-steeps and reliques of their former living there are to be traced; and such, as deserve to be revived clearly: the lan∣guage
they left there, the religion they taught the Savages, manifested it; otherwise how come those many Brittish words (not much altred from the dialect) amongst the Mexicans? whence had they the use of Beads, of Crucifixes, of Reliques &c? all which the Spaniards (as we tcad in Lopez de Gomera and others) confesse they found amongst the Canibals, and those of Acusano, and Culhuacan at their first landing in America. Yea, some tra∣dition and reports amongst the Mexicans, that (about the time that Madoc was there) a strange people came thither in Corraughs or Ships, who taught them some knowledge of God, and by whose examples they became more civill and industrious: testified by Columbus, Franciscus Lopez, Coz∣tezo, Postellus and other Castilians of quality; that of Fernando Cortez, (Anno Domini 1519 Ambassador and Generall for Ferdinand and Isabell) is also remarkable. In some discourse betwixt him and Mutezuma (second sonne of Antzol, and Father of Quabutimoc last King of Mexico,) the Ambassador observing the Indians to have many ceremonies the Spaniards used, demanded of the King who first instructed them, who answered Cor∣tez; That many yeeres ago a strange Nation landed there, a civill people, and from examples of piety they received them; but how they were cal∣led, or whence they came he could not satisfie him. Another time, in an Oration of thanks which Mutezuma returned them for some favours, hee thus told them. One chiefe cause of my especiall affection to your Nati∣on is this, I have many times heard my Father say, hee heard his Grandsire seriously affirme (out of a continued tradition) That not many Descents above him, his Progenitors came thither as strangers by accident, in com∣pany of a Noble man, who abode there a while and then departed, but left many of his people behind him; and that upon his returne, most of those he left, died: and that from him or some of them they thought they themselves discended. A speech agreeing with our Narration: and that this people were Welsh rather than Spaniards, or others, the Records of this voyage writ by many Bardhs and Genealogists confirme it; memoriz'd also by those learned Poets Cynwric op Grono and Guten Owen (who lived in Edward the fourths time) and by Sir Meredith ap Reese a valiant and lear∣ned man, living in the yeare 1477. and of Madoc in this Eulogie. Madoc wif' mwydic wedd; Iawngenau Owen was Gwynedd Ni funnum dyr, fyenaid oedd Nada Mawr, ond y'm oroedd. Madoc ap Owen was I call'd; Strong, tall, and comly, not inthrall'd With home bred pleasure, but to Fame, Through Land and Seas I sought the same. Made more orthodoxall by Welsh names given there to birds, rivers, rocks, beasts, &c. as Gw'rando (with us and them,) signifying to give eare unto or hearken: Pen-gwyn, referd by them to a bird that has a white head, and to rocks of that resemblance: the Iles, Chorrhoeso: the Cape of Bryttain: Gwyn∣dowr, white-water: bara, bread: Mam, Mother: Tate, Father: dowr, wa∣ter: pryd, time: Bu or Buch, a Cow: Clugar, a Heathcock: Llynog, a Fox∣wy, an egg: Calaf, a quill: Trwyn, a nose: Nef, heaven: and others, Welsh words, and of the same signification: whereby, in my conceit, none save detracting Opinionatists, can justly oppose such modest testimonies and
proofes of what I wish were generally allowed of. Nor is it a phantasie of yesterday, many worthy men of late and antient times have revived it: such are Cynwrie ap Grono, Meredith ap Rhyce, Guten Owen, Lloyd, Powell, Pris, Hackluit, Bronghton, Purchas, Davys, &c. Enough to satisfie the wel∣willers of truth; too mush foe Zollists and such as delight in opposition. This, no doubt had it beene so deservedly knowne and Catholiquely be∣eeved as it merited; then had not Christopher Columbus (a man in truth, honourable and idustrious) Americus Vespusius, Magellan, nor others ca∣ried along with them all the honour in so great an enterprise: Nor had Prince Madoc beene defrauded of his memory, nor our Kings of their just right and Title to the West Indyes (a secret fate as it were miraculously renuing their claime by Columbus his proffering the discoverie and wealth of those Countries to our King H. 7.) nor then had his Holinesse, nor his Catholique Majestie had that plea nor immediate Interest grounded upon the Genoans discovery, as many Jesuits and State-politiques have so ve∣hemently, so late disputed for. Farre be it from me or any honest man to detract Columbus, or to derogate from his deserved glory: It may be his discovery was (as Madocks was) meerely from his owne skill, genius, and magnanimity, without knowledge of Madocks former being there, or of en∣couragement from old conjectures: his greatest reason I know, was that so much of the 360 degrees could scarce be Ocean & that he might as well discover Westward as the Portugalls had done East to the other Indies. But this I would withall have also granted; That this his voyage was after the other (of our Country-man) three hundred and two & twenty yeares; and that the Spaniards have not so much right to those Countries (I meane of America) as our King has; so long as they arrogate their claime from a primier discovery. Columbus was borne at Gugureo (at Nervi some say) not far from Genoa: a man of a modest nature, studious, and well read in the Mathematiques: and of that, chiefly in Navigation: His first encouragement of going West upon discovery, grew (as say the Spaniards) from his perusing an Ephe∣merides writ by a Spanish Mariner, who had beene forced into the West Indies by tempest, and died at Columbus his house upon his arrivall: this is a Spanish lye, invented meerely to derogate from his worth, and that an Italian should not master so much glory. Whither Columbus had any illu∣mination from old Poets, or that he had seene or heard of Madocks journey Westward, who knowes: for, what Nation formerly knew not the acts of English-men better than themselves: otherwise, Polidore Virgil that craf∣tie Monck had not andertooke to illustrate (to his and our shame) the English Cronologie, nor Verstegan (alias Rowley) dar'd to make us all Teu∣tonicks; from both which wee suck to many egregious falshoods. Co∣lumbus armed with much confidence, sends his brother to our King Henry the seventh, the wisest in his time and most noble, if too much avarice had not swayed him: whose ill hap it was to slight the Messenger and his Mes∣sage, from his incredulous heart and the poverty of Columbus, who in his passage had been imprisoned by Rescalls, and nakedly (after much intreaty) delivered. Upon the Kings refusall, he desired the French King to Patro∣nize it, but hee (hearing that King Henry had refused) derided him; who
had beene for ever discouraged, had not Ferdinand the Spanish King (af∣ter long suit) accepted of the motion, and trusted him with two hundred men in two small Ships, at the earnest snit of Iohn Perez de Marchena, at that time Rector of the Monasterie of Rabida, a great Mecenas to industri∣ous men: with which, after threescore dayessaile, much impatience, and no lesse stirre to quiet the discontented Spaniards, Columbus descried land, that part call'd Guanahami, but by Colon new nam'd Saint Salvador, a part of Mexico, (very neere where Madoc had first landed;) a discovery no lesse joying them, than as if thereby they had got the Conquest and Em∣pire of all the world: a Prize so worthy, that from that yeare 1492 to this, they have brought home no lesse gold and silver, than all Europe enjoyed formerly. Columbus died in the yeare 1506, in his fourth returne out of the Indyes. But of his sorrowes afterwards, and of the Spaniards ingrati∣tude to him; their pride to all the world, and cruelty to the miserable Indyans; thou mai'st satisfie thy selfe at large in their owne and other Histories. An. Dam. 1497 Americus Vespucius a Spaniard (before his Voyage in∣to the Orient) adventures South; where with small toyle or studie hee found land enough (but part of the Continent formerly discovered) to glut his ambition: howbeit, as if Colon had done nothing in respect of him, conceiting his endeavours more transcendently meretorious, hee dares to call the whole Continent (reaching almost from one Pole to another) from his own name, America: injuriously assumed, and unwisely followed by other Nations; who if they had given every man his due, had more rea∣son to have called it Madocya, Nova Brittania, Colonia, or Columba (for to Noah's Dove he may be likened:) but we see, by Epidemic assent the su∣percisious Spaniard has got the honour of it: yea, thrives better than did Bathillus the Poetastor, who thought to have defranded Virgil of his ela∣borate Poem; and some there be (yet those not envious) that wish his re∣ward agreeable: for, they are Furtivi colores (Americus) you are cloathed with. Magellan sailes more Southerly than Vespucius, in the yeare 1519 thorow that Fretum or Strait, with good reason called Magellane. A hun∣dred Others have since that laboured in the like harvest, and reaped seve∣rall Epethites of honour, memorizing (and not unworthily) their Names in fresh discoveries of Ports, hills, rivers, rocks, &c. Only hee that most of all deserved it, is diserted, left out, Madoc, who sleepes in rest, more happy in his lasting quiet than the bubble of vaine-glory. Howbeit, such as love his memory cannot passe by such living monuments of his deservings (of which number I am one) in the Indyes, without some small Essay of their affections: But I am neither able nor worthy to speake in such a subject: and therfore wish a better Author, who in a better method may revive him clearelier. In magnis, voluisse sat est. Let's homewards now, for we have too farre wandred; tired in a double Travell; of scorching and intempe∣rate Zones, and of too great presumption in your patience. Being off at Sea, the beginning of December wee got sight of the Azores, Flemmish or Westerne Ilands, (by so many severall names they are call'd by severall Nations:) but wee got not thither without much strugling with adverse winds, and some tempests. The Flemmings cha∣lenge
them for theirs, and say, That a Merchant of Bruges intending Anno 1449 to goe for Lysbon, was by force of ill weather driven upon these Ilands; that they peopled, & named them. At this day, they are comman∣ded by a higher power, the Portugall: they are nine in number, Tercaera, Saint Michael, Saint George, Saint Mary, Pyco, Fayall, Graciosa, Flores, and Corvo, all of them included 'twixt 38 and 40 degrees: Nam'd Azores from the many Ayeries of Goshawks found there. Ortelius (in the behalfe of his owne Country) wrests the name from Essorer to dry or wither: the old one (knowne to antient Cosmographers) was Vxiana: the Ilands also have their peculiar denominats; Tercaera, from a three-fold partition: Fayall, from Beach trees: Flores and Corvo, from Flowers and Crowes: Pyco, from its piramidall shape and height. The rest are named from Saints, such as the Portuguize then thought on. Of these, Tercaera is the greatest, if not the fruitfullest: it abounds with Oyle, Wine, Corne, Oade, Fruits, &c. Her best Towne, is Angra; best Fort, Brazeil; her Haven, bad to anchor in. This Ile is most famous for a defensive warre the Prior Don Antonio, Titulary King of Portugall, commenc't, and a good while held out against the insatiate Spaniard, who finally got that and the rest of Don Antonio's Territories; by sword they forced them, but claimed both by blood and Conquest; as Cunestagio in his Union of the two Crownes Spaine and Por∣tugall, treats of. views of the Azores S.E. Pyco E S E. Fayall E by N Gratiosa Flores E S E St George Loa: dist Pyco is highest, though not greatest; above five miles (some say) it mounts into the ayre, and is so oft invelloped with foggs and clouds, that but sel∣dome her head or peake can be discovered: it exceeds not ten miles cir∣cuit, is for the most part compos'd of Sulphur; which many times confla∣grates; for, within are some concremated vast Caves, where the ayre in∣flames, and from thence evaporate smoke and flame, and belch out Brim∣stone: below, are umbragious shades, and chil-cold rivolets, into which when the vomited fire is forced, those opposite elements eccho forth their
discontentments not in silent murmurs: some of these Iles have tasted ad∣verse fortune; yea, became prostrate to the English bravery: such time as that valiant Earle of Essex (Generall and Admirall of her late Majesties Forces) to retaliate the Spaniard for his intentions in 88, arrived here in the yeare of grace 1597, landed in their despight, and did what pleased him; he also made Flores and Corvo to curse the ambition of the Spaniard; Saint Michael also; and out of Villa Franca tooke what was valuable; so much as amounted to foure hundred thousand Duckets and upwards: most of which, had eight yeere formerly yeelded to the mercie of that never to be forgotten Heroe, George Earle of Cumberland: Fayall also in the yeare after 88 enobled his good fortune and victory; and in the yeare 1597 was sackt by Sir Walter Raleigh, whiles Pico became a prey to other English∣men: ere wee lose sight of these Iles, remember wee that the antient ac∣count of the first Meridian is transferd hither from the Canaryes or fortu∣nate Ilands; for, 'twixt Flores and Corvo the Needle feeles no Variation, in all other parallels encreasing. From these Iles, by an East course wee quickly entred the Cantabrian Seas, where (when wee thought all danger past) a violent storme threatned us with no small danger, for thrice foure and twenty houres blustering with such rage that we could make no saile, but in despight of Helme and Misen forced us upon Ushents point in Brit∣any (a marittime part of France, Armorica of old; but now (in memory of their descent from us) call themselves Brittans, Brittanauts: ere long the storme abated, and in few watches we attained sight of our long-lookt for Ithaca: the rather that these Relations (the issue of youth and haste) might find acceptance from that most noble Lord the Earle of Pembroke Lord Steward, &c. (now with God,) and my Lord of Powys; from whose encouragements I affected Travell; whose memory I honour, and whose love merits my acknowledgement. To conclude, wee-got safe to Plymouth; where (not without great cause) wee gave God thanks for our safeties. Reditu{que} sou singula gaeudent. FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICALL, TABLE: WHEREIN THE NAMES of Men are distinguished by a different CHARACTER. A ABbas, King of Persia, takes Canda∣bor, fol. 81. his rigour at Spahawn 160. Curtesie to the English Ambass. 171. His severe Iustice 171 & 172 His cruelty to his sonne, from 173 to 176. be conquers Larry-Ioon 187. & Sheer∣van 200. His letter in favour of some English Gentlemen 205, described 206. depected 207. his Titles 208. paralleld with other Monarchs 209. his Reve∣nue 225, 242. domestique policie, &c 242, 24 K. Abdalla slaine by the Portugall 315 Abdul cawn an Indian Vmbrave enters Decan 76. expulst by stratagem ib is made Vice-Roy of Kalpa and Khoor 77 destroyes the Coolyes ib. serves Sultan Currown in the warres of Decan 79. passes Bellagate ib. his sonne married to the great Moguls grand-child 81. made Generall against the Persians ib. and Governour of Goujurat 84. his Eu∣much baffled 85. himselfe vanquesht by Saffy cawn 87. his sonne imprisoned 88, he takes Ioonpore 90. dissention 'twixt him and Radjè Rhyem ib. he is beaten from Elabasa ib. and at Brampore 93 forsakes Currowne 96. is disgraced 103 restored to grace againe 107 Abdulcheries Tragickend 202 Abdul-Fazel slains 71 Abubocr succeeds Maomet at Mecca 280. his young daughter marries Mao∣met, and hee Maomets daughter 252. dyes poysoned 280. Accursed by the late Persian reformation 269 Abulghar 55 Acheen in Sumatra 298.323 Aden 31.110 Ad'smer 60, 61 Aderbayan 56, 57, 192 Aelcama 286 Aequator 9 Aethiopia 15 Agamiae 224 Agra 59. the Castle built ib. and 62 de∣scribed 60.153 Ahasuerus 167, 271 Ahawaz 280 Aladules K. of Anti-Taurus slaine 288 Alborrs 186 Albuquerq 108, 121, 114 Alcabam Mecca 135, 280 Alcanzar 266 Alexander the great 129, 181, 201, 216, 218, 220, 271 Alexandria 271 Aliavar 167 Amadavad 61, 62, 77 Amazons 11 Ambass of Persia poysons himselfe 35 Ambass of England lands in Persia 120 Ambass. of the great Mogul 104 Ambass. to the Persian 77 Ambass. of Chynainto Persia 209 Ambass. England dyes 204 Amber 332 Amboyna 321 Aminda 273 Amnadagar 67 69 79, 82 Amrobant 148 Amurath the grand Seignier invades Per∣sia 200, is forced thence ib. Anamogery 86 Ancira 277 Angels 264 Angola 910 Amewar 69 Annanas 298 Antipodes 6 Anti-Taurus 137.287 Auzar 57 Anzigui 11 Arabia 110.270 Arabique 111 Aragus flu. 117.180 Ararat 151.185
Araxis 147.177.180.222 Arbaces 270.196.224 Archan 280 Ardaveil 285.292 Arecca 298 Argaric Gulph 315 Aria 281 Armagun 311.313 Armenia whence named 151, how devi∣ded 152. their religion ib. when con∣verted 274 Aro 56 Aru 323 Artaxerxes 271.272.273 Arzan 184 Arzenion 285 Asaph 210 Ascension Ile 355 Asharaff 167.177 Assempore 86 Astiages 270.271 Assepose 148 Astra-can 179.180 Attack 98.100 Atlantiq' Ocean 2 Atlantiades 8.15 Atlas 2.4 Atlas Maurus 223 Atropaa 192 Augustus Caesar 271 Avicennaes birth-place 184 Aurdenagar 76 Author's sicknesse 222 Aurea Chersonesus 314 333 Auva 319.320 Aydar 286 Aygar 55 Azemia 224 Azfacher 286 Azores Iles 463 B BAb-mandel 31 Babur great Mogul 69 Babylon 216.224.271.273 Bacteria 192 Bacu 177 Badashan 58.65 Badur's Pilgrimage 58 Baezd 177 Bagdat 218. whence named 219.280.283 Balaam the Edemite 306 Balk 58.184.281.286 Balforac 110.113.290. Banda 331 Band-Ally 124 Bander-Gumbrown 121 Banges 73.78 Bannians described 38. their religion from 41 to 47. opinion of the soule 122.46.303.304 Bannian tree 122 Bannaras upon Ganges 89.90 Bannarow 131 Bannasoed 73 Bantam 324 Barag. 111 Barfrush-de 177.181 Barnagasso 30 Baroch 61.82.87.88 Barango 318 Baronta 210 Baruze 323.332 Bashra 280 Bassoweer 84.100 Battacala 299 Baetan 331 Batts 347 Baut 163 Baze-bacow 133.148 Bebey a Lady beats the Mogul 67. poy∣soned 70 Bedar 70 Behar 76 Bebat fl: 69 Begun 66 69 Belgian Mount 210 Bellaguate 55 Bellizarius 76.79.94 Belochus 274 Belshazzar 270 Bemermassin 193 Bengala 331 Benjamin 63.89.90, 94 99.312 Benomotapa 332 Berar 68. subjected 9 Berry 77.79.82.103 130 Berodach Baladan King of Assur 193 Beyramghano-cawn slaine 59 Bezarr 331 E'ildith 177 Bimberry high mountains in Indostant 66.74 Bindamir fl. 134 Binny and Guinea 8 Bipilipatan 309 Biscay 2 Bisnagor 312 Bizabda 273
Bizanth 275.178 Bizdebode 215 Bobbaw-hodgee 132 Bochar 184 Bombyca 273 Bonavista 8 Bonay 101 Booby 11 Borneo 312.314.324.331 Bowbentalow 86 Boyall 148 Brachmans antiquity 40 Brama 316.319.320 Brampore 60.67.70.93.82 Brin-Iohn 299.305 Brodera 86.87.88.107 Buccary 90 Buckor 79 90 Buldat 215 Bullochy eldest sonne to Prince Curseroo imprisoned 98. relieved 100. crownd Emperour of Insdustant 105. murdered at Lahore 107 Bandama fl: 177 C CAlajate 109 Calamba wood 297 Calderan plaines 137.287 Caleture 311 Callamina 310 Callicut 299. described 302 Calpi 69 Campbaleck 56 Cambalu 337 Cambaya 59.61.82.103.108. Cambogiae 312.316.333 Cambyna 329 Cambyses 270 Camelion 23 Campson Gaurus 109 Canaria 3.4 Cananore 299 Candaces Eunuch 306 Candahor 81. besieged 134. 224.290. Candu 306 Cangra taken 78 Canoo 29 Cantam 336 Can Assem goes Ambass. from India to Persia 77. bravely intertained ib. Capessa 276 Cape Comory 108.299.308 Cape of good Hope 12. to 19 Cape de Agvilbas 19 Cape falso 19.14 Cape Roma 21 Caepe Rozelgate 109.113 Cape Verd 8 Cape Palmas 8 Carraculia 152 Carcash 224 Carravans raw depicted 194 Cashan 213 Caspian Sea 180 Caspia 177 Caspian straits 165 Cassimeer conquered 65. described 66.89.78.90 Casson 177 Casta 313 Castle Iland 25 Cathaya 337 Cattatingae 323 Caucasus 55.66.185. Cazbyn 196 Celebes 329 Cesarca Queene of Persia baptiez'd 276 Chacoporo 177.181 Chandis 68.103 Chara 194 Chatighan 90 Chedorlaomar 217.233.269 Chery 69 Chersam 69 Chesel fl: 180 Chilmanor 144.146 Chiulpha 137 China 312.306. pride of their Kings 209.299 Chiraef 143 Chirigin 324 Choul 34.67, 108.295.296.299. Christians in Socotorae 31 in Persia 152 in India 304 Chrysoborca 65 Chytor 60.102 Constandel-cawns villany 290.291 Cingis-cawn his birth and fortunes 55.56 Cinnamon 308 Civit 332 Cloves 330 Co-Araxes 147 Coat-armour of Persia 230 Cuaspes fl. 222 Cocos 29.318 Colchis 152.167 Columbo 307 Columbus 361 Colume of headsin Spahawn 161 Commeshaw 148
Coome described 212, that it was Heca∣tompylon, rather than Spahawn. ibid. Conny Ile 12 Congo 352 Conio 330 Corasan 55, 58, 183, 184, 281. Carca fl. 177 Connack 177 Cormandell 65, 308, 312, 345 Corranda 215 Corbet and Corryn ibid Corea 333 Coriats error 132. his grave 35 Corvo 364 Costack 113 Cosumbay 87 Cotton 325 Coughton 132 Cawrestan 125.280 Cowlam 299.303 Cozrhoe King of Persia 192. his Titles 208 Cozrhoes a Tyrant of Persia breakes faith with the Christians 274. ravi∣shes a Christian Lady, and the Nymphs of Daphne ib, spoiles Armenia ib. is vanquished by the Christians 275. Cozrhoes King of Persia, a parricide flies to Bizanth 275. is reseated by meanes of the Chr. Emp. 276. he and his Court are baptized ib. he apostatises ib. takes the Crosse from Ierusalem 277 is beaten by the Rom. Emp. who burnes his Idols ib. his 3 Armies are confoun∣ded 278. he dyes desperately 279 Crassus vanquisht by the Parthians 211 Cranganor 299 Crater 333 Crocodile 323 Ctesiphon 275.279 Cuface 111 Cumber 331 Cuncam 56.290 Curiate 111 Curroon (youngest son to Sha-Selim late great Mogul) to make his Ne∣phewes incapable of the Crowne makes them be christned 75. hee changes his name 79. is made Generall against the Decans ib. subjects Berar and Chan∣dis 79. rec. Tribute from the King of Galcunda ib. his ambitious desigues 80. rebells 81. indeavours to rob his Fathers Exchequer, but is frustrated ib. fights with his fathers Army at Delly ib. is vanquisht by Mahobet-cawn 83. flies to Mew at 84. by Assaph. cawns means is pardoned, but rebells againe ib. is beat by his brother Sul∣tan Perwees at Mando, and flies into Decan 88. be forrages Bengala, Purop, and beyond Ganges 89. escapes a great danger 90. he takes Rantas and Tzin∣ner ib. is wounded and his army put to flight 91. flies to Potan 92. to Gul∣cunda 93. to Decan ib. besieges Bram∣pore 93 flies into Decan 94. hearing that his father was imprisoned he mar∣ches to Asmeer and is banisht Agra 99. expulst Tutta ib. again flies into Decan 102. receives joyfully Maho∣bet-cawn 105. under whose conduct hee speeds to Agray and challenges the Crowne 106 by foule murther ob∣taines it and alters his Name to Sul∣tan-Sha-Bedin Maomet, &c. ib. Ambass. salute him ib. plague, famin, and rebellion pursue him 108. his cor∣ronation celebrated by the English at Surat. 108 Curricurre depicted 314 Curseroon or Gushroo sonne to the great Mogul aimes at the Crown 72. is par∣doned but flies away ib. is beaten 73. flies to Labor ib. taken and imprisoned 74. his miseries 73. lookt to by Assaph-cawn and cawn-lehan 78. murdered 80. much lamented ib. Cuscuzar 148 Cusistan 56.290 Cut-bobbau 132.133 Cyrapolis Cyrus King of Persia 134.270 Cyrus fl: 177.180 D DAbul 34.67.295.299 Dabys 335 Daeck 77 Damky 35 Damarcana 111 Damiadee fl. 69 Dmoan 183. described 192 Dmon 34 67.295 Danda-Radjeporee 108.299 Darghan 286 Darius Medus 193 Darius Nothus & Codomanus 271 Daultabat 76. 88. 93 Dayta 106 Deacow 129.133
Decan 55, 67, 68.70, 299 Decans vanquisht by the Mogul 67. bea∣ten againe 76. they recover their losses 93. and beat the Moguls Lescar 103 Debaca 89 Degardoo 133, 148 Delly 58, 60, 68, 99. Delphius 24 Demyr Cape 179 De-Moxalbeg 148 Derbent 177, 196, described 201 Deylan 192 D'hast 55 Dia and Daru 323 Diarbec 56, 208, 224, 287, 290 Digarroys 23, 341, 343 Dilemon 281 Dilementhes 288 Diu 108 Diul 82 Doab 59 Dodo's 347 Dover 2 Drake 8 Duradura 318 Duroyen 298 Duz-gun 125 E EAst India 34 Ecbarr, crowned great Mogul 59. con∣quers Doab ib. goes on a Rummery or Pilgrimage to Asmeer 61. Subjects Bengala, Kantam-pore, and Patan 63. divers Kings doe him homage 65. hee conquers Casmeer 66. and Hassarr 69. pardons the insolence of his sonne Sha-Selym 70. afflicted with the death of his two sonnes Amurath and Dhaen-sha 67 71. buries his mother 71. beats his re∣bellious sonne 72. unhappily poysoned ib. Ecclissar 102 Ecmeazin 152 Edissa 276 Ehberam in Armenia 262 Elabass built 65.89. besieg'd 90. Elam 223 Elcandifia 280 Elephant 322 Elmedin in Caldea 262 Elsheer sacke by Ben Abi-Vakez 280 Eltarch 111 Emangoly-cawn Arch-duke of Shyraz triumphs over Ormus 115. and Lar 126. his Titles 136. Acts 137 pride ib. he feasts the English Ambassador 139. his revenue ib. visits the Ambass. 140. is beheaded 206 Emir-Hamze-Mirza, sonne to King Ma∣omet Codabanda, vanquishes both Turks and Tartars 201. enters Casbyn in triumph ib. his valour and many victories 289 is poysoned 290 English Ambassador lands in Persia 120. entertained by the Sultan of Gumbroon 121. feasted at Shyraz 138. gallantly welcommed at Spahawn 150. hee visits the Prince of Armenia 151, has his au∣dience at the Caspian Sea 168. injur'd by Maomet Ally-begg 202. disconten∣ted ib. at Cazbyn dyes, and is solemnly buried 204 Englands Forrest 343.351 Eneon & Edwall sonnes of Owen Gwy∣ned, saile with Madoc their brother into Mexico 356 Erez 177 289 Earles of Cumberland 5, 364 Of Pembroke 364 Of Essex ibid Escar-Mecron 280 Estacher 148 Etamon Dowlet accused by his slave, and disgraced 74 by his daughters high ad∣vancement he is pardoned: restored 75. and buried 80 Etnizaria 224 Euphrates fl. 56.217.218.221.222.278.282 F FAlcata 333.335 Farghan 184.286 Farrabaut 177.178 Fatima's Sepulcher 212 Fayall 363 Faza 134 Fettipore 60.62.73.90 Ferro 3 Firando 333 Fitz-Herbert 16 Florida 355 Flores 364 Flying fishes 32 Flemmish Iles 363 Forte-Ventura 5 French K. Charles the great sends Am∣bassadors into Persia 283 Frons Africae 8 Funeralls of the Canarians. 4 Of the Anzigui 11 Of the Soldaniaes 17
Of the Bannians 45 Of the Persees 53 Of the Gowers 162 Of the Persians 237 Of the Indians 309 Of the Kormandelians 313 Of the Iapans 335 Of the Chyneses 339 G GAcheen 125 Gambra, not Ophyr 314 Gandetzin in Decan 70 Ganganna an Indian Vmbraw sides with Sultan Curroon 84. his deceit de∣ceives him 88. is imprisoned 90. hee and his family are put in chaines and sent to Agra 91. sorrowes the death of his children 92. exasperates the great Mogul against Mahobet-cawn 95. is made Generall of the Queenes Army 101. dyes and is buried 103 Ganges fl: 59.60.99.222.229.309.316 Gardon-Achow 148 Gassany in Tartary 89 Gazacot 277 Gaznehen 56, 57, 58, 281, 184, 284, 286 Gentfro. 76 Georgian man and woman 151 Georgian Tragedy contracted 290 by stratagem revenge themselves upon the Persians 291 Ghabor 129 Ghanotts and Ghastanpore 69 Gheer 167 Ghelac 184.192 Ghezz 165 Ghezzimeer 104 Ghillolo 330 Ghylan 192.286.290 Giach a fruit 297 Goa 33.67.299.303 Goga 82 Gomera 3 Gorgades 355 Goujurat 61.90 Gouro 90 Gowers in Parthia 162.186 Goyeome 131 Gozan 129 Gratiosa 363 Greecy 324 Guadez 224 Guiana 355 Gulcuzda 67.68.70.79.89.93.299.312 Gulph of Arabia 31 Of Bengala 309 Of Argarica 315 Of Persia 110 Gumbazalello 148, 212 Gumbrown in Persia 120, 121 Gundavee 34, 295 Gunet of descent from Mortis Ally 284, by Tamberlains respect to him, dares broach his roformation 268, be marries the K. of Armeniaes daughter 285, conquers Tripizond, and is murdered ibid Gurgee 152 H HAbyn fl. 180 Haloen 152 Halvary 166 Hamadan 56, 197 Hambyer 84 Hanimant, the Apes-tooth-god, burnt 307 Hansot 87 Harran 192 Hassar taken 69, 94 Heaven and Hell in the Alcoran 263, 265 Hecatompylon, not Spahawn but Coom 154, 212 Hegira 253 Hemoometzar 215 Heraclius the Rom. Emp. prosecutes the warres of Persia 276, hee vanquishes Cosrhoes and burnes his Idols 277, his great courage 278. reduces the ho∣ly Crosse to Ierusalem 279, dyes, and is succeeded by Constantine 281 Herbert's Mount 14 Hery 184 Hesperidae 8 Hiblin slaine 283 Hiero 3 Hieropolis 276 Hispaniola, not Ophyr 314 History of the Mogulls 54 Of the Persians 269 Hodge-Nazar the Armenian Prince 150 Homayon the great Mogull his sudden death 59 Hony-shaw 136 Hormisda King of Persia rages against the Christians, who beat his army 275 disgraces Baramis his Generall, but looses by it, ib. in a vision a sees 12 Turrets, and in them the overture of Persia 279
Hydero fl: 177 Hyerac 56.286 Hyrcania whence named 177. habit of the inhabitants 178 I IAarown 129.280 Iackatra 324.325 Iackalls 14.124 Iacup, Vsan Cassans sonne, envies his bro∣ther in lawes good fortune 285. gets him murdred and his children 285 one of them miraculously is saved, who kills Iacup in his fathers revenge ib. Iamahoy 316 Iambee 323.324 Iambulus 323 Iamshet 146 Iangheer rebells against his father Ecbar 69. is pardoned 70 breakes out againe 71. and is againe pardoned ib. crownd great Mogul ib. in danger of conspira∣tors 74. suffers his grandsonnes to bee baptized at Agra 75. marries faire Noor-mahal ib. curses his sonne Per∣wees for losing the conquest of Decan 77. sends Mahobet-cawn thither, and an Ambass: to Abbas K. of Persia ib. laments the death of his eldest sonne Curseroo 80. comforts his sad widow, and entailes the Crowne upon Bullochy his sonne ib. loses Candahor 81. rejoy∣ces at his victory over his youngest son Curroon 84. captivated by Mahobet-cawn 98. escapes 100. much troubled at his sonne Perwees his death 102. re∣ceives a famous Tartar Ambass: 104 dyes 105. and is royally buried ib. Iangomar 319 Iapan 312.333 Iaparra 324 Iasques 113.114 Iathryb 110 Iava 312.324.325 Iazirey 290 Idolatry of the Africans 9.17 Of the Angolases 10 Of the Madagascars 22 Of the Mohelians 28 Of the Banuyans 40 Of the Indians 88 Of the Persees. 48.52 Of the Mallubarrs 302 Of the Gowers 162.186 Of the Persians 251 Of the Cormandelians 309.310 Of the Zoylonians 306 Of the Siamites 317 Of the Iaponians 333 Of the Narsingans 313 Of the Iavans 325 Of the Chyneses 341 Iehun fl: 180 Ieloor 64 Ielphi 150.151.161 Iengapore 106 Iemina-Bahrim 110 Iemini fl. 59.60.61.71 Ierusalem 211.270.274.277.279 Ilment fl: 180 Imaus 185 Imbum 110 Indus fl: 66.109.222.224 Ioanna 25 Ioonbasser 82.88 Ioonpore 60.61.90 Iortan 324 Irack 280.224 Iudgement in the Alcoran 265 Iupiter Babylonicus 193 Iupiter Belus 217 Iulian the Apostats death in Persia 273 Izmael-Sophy his birth and pedegree 284. revenges his fathers death 285 flies into Arzenion ib. returnes and is crowned Persian King 286. mortally hates Turks and Iewes 286. vexes the Tartars ib. chases the Turks 287. re∣covers Bagdat ib. dyes 289. and is suc∣ceeded by Tahamas his sonne ib, K KAblai-cawn 56 Kablan 319 Kaboncara 177 Kabul 58.78.83 Kalpi and Khoor 77.79.90 Kalsistan 224 Kanchri 86 Kandahor 66.224.290 Kapper bemizz 85 Karizath 177 Katighan 90.99 Kavilan 319 Kavise 86 Kazz 184 Kazeron 148 Keldhan 224 Kennaugh 286 Kerman 56.286.290 Kerchy 76.77.94 Kerry 86 Kholeat-pherusky 286
Ketoa-Kotan 55.56 Khoemus 58 King Iames & King Charles Mounts 16 Kings of Industant 55 Of Ormus 115 Of Lar 126 Of Shyraz 141 Of Persia 269 Kishmy Castle 113.114 Korasan 56.184.281 Kostac in Moghestan 113.114 Kufe, why so named 280. the buriall place of Mortis-Ally ib. and where the Per∣sian Kings are crowned ib. and 282 L LAbatacca 331 Lackary 215 Lacknoon 60.69 Lael-Cooly slaine 76 Lael-Sod 84 Lahore 68 La Gomera 3 Lampon 323 Lancerota 3 Lantore 331 Language of the Savages at the Cape of Good Hope 18 Of the Mohelians 27 Of the Arabians 111 Of the Persians 245 Of the Malayans 326 La Palma 3 Larr 126.127.128.129.280.290 Larack 113.114.115 Larry-Ioon 165.178.183 Latyr fl. 74 Lawran 319 Lazarrs 274 Laztan-de 125 Leventhibeg Tribute 242 Lignum Alloes 332 Loore-Bander 108 Lopez, Gonzaloo 8 Luconia 333 M MAcassar 329 Machan 330 Machma 333 Macron 113.224.286 Madagascar 20, 21, 22, 23 Madaera 3 Madoc ap Owen Gwineth discovers A∣merica 355 Magadoxa 23.30.332 Magellan 362 Magi 134 213 Mahobet-cawn is made keeper to Prince Gushroo eldest sonne to the Mogul 74. fights with Ranna Radgee 75. is call'd home ib. goes Generall into Decan 77. returnes with victory, and is made Go∣vernour of Brampore ib. of Cabul and Banges 78. he defeats Sultan Curroons Army at Delly 83. and at Mando 88. he relieves Elabass and imprisons can. Canna 90. vanquishes Currown 91. pursues him to Patan 92. in discontent leaves the Army & goes to Rantampore 95 griev'd by Normall the Empresse 96 his son in law is basely abused by Nor∣mall ib. the Lescar 97. takes the Mogul and Normahal prisoners 98. affrights Currown 99. receives great sums from his son, out of Bengalae ib. sorrowes the death of Prince Perwees 102. is perse∣cuted by the Empresse 104. flyes to Ran∣na Radjee ib. is perswaded to serve Cur∣rown 105. who receives him joyfully ib. he marches with Currown to Agra 107 and at his Coronation is advanced ib. Mahomet-Ally-begs Iustice at Cazbyn 198. his discourse touching Sir Robert Sherley 22. his barbarisme to the Lady 204. his originall 206. his great estate and power ibid. Mahomet Codobanda King of Persia in danger to have bin slaine 289. flies into Georgia ib. returnes 199. is crowned King ib. commands his sister to be be∣headed 200. the miserable end of his children 289 Mahomet his birth & breeding 251. serves Heraclius the Rom. Emp. ib. and 278. compiles his Alcoran 252. marries di∣vers women ib. is expulst Mecca 253. dyes, and at Medina is buried ib. his law 254. his Sectar as 267 Malacca 298.312.314.315.324 Maldivae 306 Mallabar 299 300 Mallabars drowned 299 Malva 55 Manancabo 323 Mandoa 77 82.86 Mandow 82.215 Mangolore 296.299 Mangerelpore 82 Manicongo 9.209 Mannatee 26 Map of Madagascar 21 Of the Persian Empire 149 Of Hircania 180 Of India intra Gangem 300
Of India extra Gangem 321 Of the Manritius 342 Maqueron 280.290 Mardash 147 Marrah 323 Martavan 320.322 Martiropolis 276 Mascarenas 351 Mattacala 307 Mattaran 324 Maurenahor 55.58.184.224.281.286 Maurenahar King slaine 286 Mauritius 342 Mavi Lord of Damascus persecutes Ally 281. over-runnes Aegypt and the Rhodes 281. beaten by Ally sends Susindus against the Christians 282. massacres 11. of Ally's grandsons, and dyes of the plague ib. Mayo 8 Mazaeras fl: 177.180.69 Meacco 333.335 Mecca 110.253.259.262.267.280 Mecpore 69 Media 192 Medapore 82.88.92 Medina Talnabi 110.253.262.267.280 Melec-Amber crownd K. of Decan 67. hee fights with the Mogulls Army ib. expells them by craft 76. by force 93. receives Curroon ib. gives his men li∣berty 99 Melec-Bahamans Tragick end 187 Meliapore 309.310 Meliotalck 319 Mengrellia 153.274 Meragah 56 Merent 56 Mesopotamia 222.270 Mesulipatan 89.311.312 Methridates 271 Mewat 84 Meyottey 25 Mexico 359 Midan in Spahawn 157 Mindano 333 Miscarroon 215 Mocrib-cawn drownd 103 Mogulls pedegree 55. Empire 54. coigne 38. revenue ib. Moffa 118 Mohack 132 Moghestan 113 Mohelia 26 Molthan 90 Moluccoes 312.330.331 Mombassa 30.332 Momodabat 86 Monomotapa 9 Moneths how severally named 112 Montingue 299 Monym 318 Mouzoon 9 Mortis-Ally marries Fatyma 212. is by Mahomet nominated Calyph 251. put by by Abubocr 280. persecuted by Omar ib. saluted K. 281. slaine by Mavi ib. buri∣ed 282. his Emblem ib. Siet Gunet re∣vives him 268. the Kings of Persia at this day from him descended 265 Mosquet-Ally 111 Mosquet-Zulzimen 148 Mount Taurus 183.185 Mount Taurus conquered 187 Moyechaw 132 Moyeore 149 Moyeown 147 Mozambique 23.24.332 Mozendram 56.177.224.290 Municpore 90 Multhan 90 Muscat 109 Musk-cat 322 Musk 332 N NAbandycen 148 Nabuchadnezzar 193.217 Nagor 107 Naysarie 82 Nahodabegs rare bracelet 318 Nancery 52 Nantam 336 Narsinga 299.309.311.312 Narsinga-patan 309 Narvar fl: 87 Nassor Thormet 88.102 Natave 215 Nayro 301 Nazareil 215 Nazivan 56 Necanpore 106 Negapatan 309 Nekaw 167 Nerebede fl: 69 Nero-roade 331 Nicubar 306 Nogomallo 318 Normahalls first husband slaine 74. se∣condly married to the greas Mogul 75. her hate to Mahobet-cawns sonne 94. to Mahobet-cawn ib. imprisoned by
Mahobet 98, released ib. fights with Mahobet-cawn 99, scoulds at Assaph-cawn 101, intercepts Mahobets trea∣sure ib. labours to disgrace his sonne 103, affrighted at Mahobets journey to Currowne 105, sorrowes her hus∣bands death ib. labours to make her son King 106, vanquisht by Sultan Bul∣lochy, and pordonod ib. her son slaine 107, she and her daughter imprisoned by Sultan Currown ibid. Nossaseres 329 Nova 191 Nowbengan 148 Nutmegs 33 Nycaphtac 184 Nylus fl. 4, 222 Nimrod 134, 193, 216, 269, 270 Nynus 193, 217 Nyriaed 86 Nyshapore 184 Nyzabur 281 O OB-crawn fl. 69 Obsell fl. 177, 180 Ob-ygarmy 164 Ocem 285 Ocen-beg Gelohy slaine 286 Odjea 92, 361 Ogg 55 Ogorlu 283 Ogtai-cawn 56 O-jone 147 Olympus 4 Omoall 177, 182 Omar or Homer succeeds Abubocr at Mecca 280, he persecutes Ally, and is slaine by treason ib. is accursed by the late Persian reformation 269 Onnepore 82 Onor 299 Ophyr 306, 314 Orders of Mahomitans 267 Orcan 287 Orenges 297 Orfaza 109 Oringaw 333 Orixae 64, 65, 89, 90, 96 Ormus how called 113, when first planted 114, her Kings 115, ruined by the Eng∣lish and Persians 116, 118 Osacca 333 Osman succeeds Homer at Meccae 280, subdues divers parts of Africk 281, regulates the Alcoran, and is poysoned ib. accursed by the Persians 289 Osman Bassa vanquisht 289 Oudepore 75, 77, 82 Ourmanghel 125 Oxus fl. 180, 184, 270, 286 Ouzbeg Tartar 65, 89, 184, 286 P PAcem 323 Paddar fl. 69 Palamban 324 Pantado birds 19 Paquin 336, 337 Paradise, the severall conjectures about it 221, where placed 222, what the Persians think of it 266 Parthia 149, 164 Pasagard 270 Patania 315 Patan 65 Pathan 63, 90, 99 Pathang 59, 63, 79, 82 Pedyr 323 Pegu 312, 314, 316, 318, 322 Pengab 55, 69 Pengran of Bantam 324 Penguin 13 Pepper 325 Peria-Conconna Princesse of Persia, her masculin spirit 198, makes Aydar her younger brother King 199, by her el∣dest brothers command she is slain 199 Periaw 87 Periscow 166, 177 Perissophoon 210 Persees in India 48, their Idolatry 49 Persia, her severall names 223, subjected by the Assyrians and Medes 270, by the Greeks 271, recovers freedom 272, conquered by the Arabians 280, by the Turks and Tartars 284, and by the Armenians ib. gets her liberty againe 285, and at this day is victorious 290 Persians depicted 123, 162, 207, 229. described 226, their habit 227 Armes 228, coat-Armour 230, suprstition and forces 233, exercises ib. Mathe∣maticks 234, disposition 235, circum∣sicion 236, marriages 237, burialls 238, reverence to their Kings 208, 239, Dyet ib. 242, revenue of the Crowne ib. myneralls 243, language 245, Religion 251, Monarchs 269, Idolatry of old 277 Persepolis described 143, ruines depicted 145, 272.
Persian Ambass. poysons himselfe 35 Persian Court 169 Peru, not Ophyr 314 Perwees sonne to the great Mogul, has victory over his brother Currowns ar∣mie 83. and at Mando chases him 88. arrives at Elabasse 90. relieves Bram∣pore 93. fights with Currown 91. woun∣ded, but victorious ibid. falls out with Mahobet-cawn 95. dyes at Brampore 102. lamented by Mahobet and Ian∣gheer ibid. Pesepoly 311 Phasis fl. 167 Pheruzabat 148 Phillippinae Iles 312, 333 Piramall 306 Pilae Caspianae vel Semeramidis 167 Persides vel Susianae 129 Cancasiae vel Iberiae 201 Plantains 28 Policat 311.313 Poligundy 323 Polisanga fl. 337 Porto Santo 3 Pourmandell 75.77 Prage 65.96 Prester Iohn 30.209. Priaman 323.332 Primero 23, 24 Puloveen and Pulway 331 Pully-Potshaw 132 Purop 65.89 Pyco 363 Pyree of the Persians 52.186. burnt by Heraclius 277.278 Pyson 222 Q QVabutimo 360 Quiloa 23 Quinzay 336, 337 Queene of Persia baptized 276 Queene Nannangalla 28 R RAbayon 56 Racan or Arrachan 320 Radgeè Cottz 74 Radgee Mahal 74.89.92. Radjee Rana Mardout loses Chyttor 60, submits to Iangheer 77. dyes grieved ibid. Radjeè Ranna 102 Radjepore 88.106.107 Rantas 90.74.92 Rantipore 63.96.101.102 Rassanweer 96 Rastack 280 Ravee fl. 67, 69.73 Rea-Sea 31 Rehen 69 Reigue 163.215 Religion of the Socotorans 31 Of the Armenians 152 Of the Christians in India 304.305 Rha fl. 180 Rhazunda 193 Rhyadago fl. 180 Rhogomana 147 Rhos's 55 Rhumestan 286 Rhyphaean hills 20 Rhyvan 152 Rotas 63 64 Ruc 20 Ru-Friero 117 Rustan 146. his Tombe 159 S SAbber-cawn 215 Sabuz 280 Sablestan 224 Saint Azmulli 268.283 Saint George 148.151 Saint Hellena 353 Saint Iohn de Vacas 34.295 Saint Maria 363 Saint Michael ibid Saint Thoma 31.205.310.318 Sacalkand 286 Sal 8 Salamo 331 Sally 2 Salamander 23 Salmanassar K. of Assur 129.152.184 Salt and sandy Deserts 164 Samarcand 58.184 Samoreen 302.308 Sanball 59.60 Sancazan 289 Sangurrabaut 196 Sapores triumphs over the Roman Emp. 272. rages against the Christians 273 Sarracens conquer Persia 280. and Spaine 282. in France 200000 are slaine ib. Sarcash 184 Sardahan 163 Sardanapalus 270
Sarlochia 152 Savages at the Cape of good Hope descri∣bed 17.18.19 Saughtar 99 Saway 210 Saxons issued from Persia 244 Scorpions 213 Scyths depicted 185.270 Seleuchus 271 Semiramys 165.193.217.220 Seonargant 99 Serebaya 324 Sergiropolis 274 Serran 320 Sharck 7 Shawmet 56 Sha-Saffee in danger to be slaine by his Father 176. crowned K. of Persia 292 Shervan 192.197 200.224.286.290 Shicoca and Shima 333 Shushan 220 Shyraz 133 Siam 314.316.319. Siavend 75 Sianpere 69 Sierra-Leon 8 Siet Ghunet 269.285 Sigamus slaine 311 Sigestan 224 Sighelmus an English Bishop goes Pil∣grim to Saint Thomas his Tombe in In∣dia, and returnes safely 311 Sinca-pura 315 Sinde fl. 69 Sindery fl. 155 Singara 273 Sir Dodmore Cottons death 204 Sir Robert Sherley dyes 113.120.148.202.203 Sirhenakar 66 Siss'meer 75 Soar 109 Socodania 331 Socotora 30.306 Soffala 23.30.332. not Ophyr 314 Sogdian 66.184 Soldania bay in Aethyopia 13 Solomon 144..146.148.306.323 Sondiva 99 Soor 71 Sophy whence derived 286 Spahawn described from 153 to 163. its antiquity 154. greatnesse 155. circuit ib. Market-place 157. walls 158. plea∣sures 159. Aquae-duct 160. misfortunes 170. Suburbs 162.283 Spahawnet 150 Spoots of raine 9 Stork 135 Straits of Sunder 323 Stygias 224 Suffedow 164 Suhan fl. 320 Sultania 192 Sultan Sheriar made Viceroy of Gouju∣raet 75. heerescues his Nephewes 100. at Lahore expect Normall 101. baffled there 106. is made blinde ibid. and slaine 107 Sumacan 291 Sumachy 177.200 Sumatra 312.314.322 Sumbrero 306 Sunda-Calapa 324 Surat 35.36.60 Suznuga 333 Swally road 35.295.299 Syacow 164 Sybella Persica 134 Sycamest 184.286 Sys 152 T TAbb fl. 128.134 Taproban 306.322 Tabriz 194.289.290 Tabriztan 192 Tahamas Shaw K. of Persia, his 'twelve sonnes 198 Tallapoy 316 Tama-Cozrhoe 275 Tamas, King of Persia bis birth 288. hee repells the Turks and Tartarrs out of Persia ib. dyes 289. and is succeeded by Maomet ibid. Tamberlains Conquests and buriall 57. his modesty 59.210.212 Tanda 90 Tanghe-Dolon 125 Tanghu 320 Tangram 319 Tangrolipix aydes the Persian 283. sub∣jects that Country 155.213.284 Tappee fl. 70.87 Tarnasseri 311 Tartangh 147 Tattarrs pride 209. Prince slain represented 201.185 Tauris 194 Taurus 183 Tawgebaus 163
Temerisk K. of Georgia his Troubles 291 Tenchedai 333 Teneriffa 3.4 Tenze 333 Tephlis 201.289.290 Tercera 363 Teresia Lady Sherleys adversity and cou∣rage in Media 203.204 Ternate and Tidore 330.331 Tesel 102 Thalan 184 Thalican 281 Theobatman 277 Thermopilae 271 Thezican 192 Thonec 91 Thymar 148 Tico 323 Ticoa 323 Ticobassa 331 Tidore 330 Tiglath Pilezar 191.129 Tigranocerta 210 Timore 330 Tiroan 193 Tochares 184.281.286 Tocharistan ibid. Toady 29 Togrulbeg 284 Toman 225 Tom Coriat 308. his grave 35 Tornathos 7 Torpedo 349 Tortoyses 25 Travanzor 303 Triglipton 318.322 Tropick of Cancer 5.110 Tropick Of Capricorn 11 T'satsa 60 T'seray 86 T'sogd 286 T'senob 74 T'sinner 90 Tuban 324 Turq's sonne strangled at Casbyn 288 Turq'stan 184.281.286 Tutta 67.99.102 Tuttan-Cory 299 Tuzz 286 Tygris fl. 56.219.222 T'zecandor 62.72 T'zicary 61.73 V VAaspracan 162.224 Vaeldac 134.220 Valerian the Roman Emperour used by the Persian King Van 2 Vararanes 2 273 Vastat in Aegypt 62 Versably 285 Vespusius 362 Visiapore 67.68.70.79 Vlacuck-cawn 56 Vlai fl. 134.221 Vlembegs treason against the Persian 288 Vloches 130 Vnghee 132 Vlogheses 272 Vologocerta 210 Vosuquis 333 Vsan Cassan the Armenian King con∣quers Persia 284. his daughter mar∣ried to a Persian Saint 285 Vshent in Brittany 364 Vstref-Oglan 287 Vvaceek 283 W WAfitt upon Diglatt fl. 86.280 Welsh 2.13.25.341.360.363 White-Sea 30 Whomg' 163 Whoomghesh 148 Whormoot 125.133 Wight 2 Wihi fl. 69.109 Wives that burne themselves at their hus∣bands Funeralls 309.310 Wine affected by the Persians 242 X XAbur-Xabulchetaph 272 Xenophon 173 Xerxes invades Grecia 270. is over∣throwne at Salamys and Thermopilae 271.181 Y YEzd 53 Yezde-Kawz 148 Yezd-ghyrd 113.148.272.273.279 Yhezyd 282 Yowmachama 113 Yssuff 284
Z oc-cawn 63 Zaed-can, Maobet-can's son is made Generall against the Tartars 89. Vice-Roy of Kabul and Bengala 94. his men slaine treacherously 101. deposed from his government, and derided by Nor∣mall 104. who falls in love with him ib. restored to favour 107 Zagathay 270 Zagrian Straits 167 Zanitzon 337 Zama 110 Zamaen 60.74 Zanzibar 30 Zarama 182 Zatus King of the Lazarrs 274 Zayre lacus 222 Zel-Ally 66 Zenal-cawn's discourtesie 193 Zenyth 5.296 Zenzen 213 Zerhind 73 Zertooft 48.162.186.270 Zeyloon 306.312 Ziagrum 108 Zialor 102 Zidim 110 Zieth 110 Ziet Borka 104 Zioberis fl. 180 Zoack 269 Zopirus 291 Zulcaderlu 285 Zulzimyn 282 Zipangri 333 Zyrmol 102.104 FINIS.
