1341 S112122 99847380 12413
AN INSTRVCTION How to Pray and Meditate well. DISTINGVISHED Into Thirtie six Chapters. COMPOSED At the request of certaine lo∣uers of Pietie, desirous to aduance themselues in per∣fection. By the Reuerend Father, IGNATIVS BALSAMO Priest of the Societie of IESVS. And translated out of French into English, by IOHN HEIGHAM. At S. Omers. Which licence of Superiors Anno 1622.
TO THE RIGHT WORTHIE AND VERTVOVS Ladie, the Ladie LOVELL RIght worthie MADAME Hauing in my handes an ab∣hortiue infant, which
hath a father, but wan∣teth a mother, my breast (the tables wherein I euer write the loues of those to whom I am obliged) had many impulsions, hamblie to present this litle gift to your protection; encoura∣ged in this, that honora∣ble persons, doe not bal∣lance oblations according to their bignes; nor weigh so much the gifte, as the good will of the giuer; nor yet respect the matter, but the mind of the offerer You are not ignorant, that euen the verie left
things in this world, ar of∣ten times those which, of the most noble & curious of all, are chieflie required. Orient pearles are litle in quantitie, but riche in apri∣ment. Archimides sphere cōtained no more in its en∣closure, saue onlie the big∣nes of a hazell nut, but for that it so ingeniouslie re∣presented what so euer was admirable in the mo∣tion of the heauens, it rauished the spirits of all behoulders Holie Scripture doth also teache vs, that the
daughter of kinge Pharao was not offended at the lit∣tlenes of Moyses (whom she termed so, because she tooke him foorth of the vvaters) moued vvith pit∣tie and commiseration to∣ward him, by reason of the singular beautie vvhich shined in him. This motherles childe, of far greater price then any Orient pearle, admi∣rably surpassing Alchimi∣des Sphere, & shining in al sort of beautie like the in∣fāt Moyses, might happelie neuertheles haue incurred
like misfortune, if he had not had the good hap, to be taken vp into the armes of so worthy a mother as your selfe, far surpassing Kin∣ge Pharaos daughter, in pittie, compassion, vvith many other diuine and ho∣lie virtues, vvhereof that vnchristian Queene must needes be incapable. Conceiue then (Right Curteous Madam I doe be∣seech you) of this my pre∣sent, as of a pearle of vn∣speakeable price, or at the least, as of a Messenger by vvhom I sende you, my
best, my truest, and hartiest eire of your spiritual pro∣fit & aduancemēt in virtu. If I haue offended in presu∣ming to write without suf∣ficient pretext, to so wor∣thie a person your self (vir∣tuous Madam) be pleased at the least to disburthen me of some part of the bla∣me, finding my selfe bound here vnto, by the sundrie bondes of honor, benigni∣tie, with diuers most sin∣gular fauours which you haue demonstrated both vnto me, and to myne: which, together with your
gular pietie and zeale to virtu, haue pressed my pen, in part to acquit me of mine owne dutie, and of your desert Wishing you conti∣nuall encrease of all vir∣tues, with long life, health, and happines in this world and euerlasting life in the next, I take my leaue, Re∣mayning euermore. Your Ladiships hum∣ble seruant and vn∣worthy gossip. IOHN HEIGHAM.
AN INSTRVCTION How to Pray and Meditate well. CHAPTER I. AMongst all the exercises of a spirituall life, there is none more difficult, nor more necessarie, then the exer∣cise of Prayer, & medita∣tiō
the which many ho∣lie person ages haue wit∣nessed, & reason and ex∣perience do sufficientlie shew vs: wherfor on the behalfe of man is requi∣red a great desire, care & diligence in this affaire. One may learne to pray well in three maners, or by three particular mea∣nes. The first meanes, or Maister, is, the holie Ghost: for if all thinges be the gift of almightie God, specialy the gift of Praier, is this gift. Wher∣fore wee must instant∣lie
aske the same of Al∣mightie God, saying with the Apostles (Luc. 11) Domine doce nos orare. Lord reach vs to pray, for if thou (ô Lord) teach vs not to pray, ne∣uer shal we knowe how to pray well. The second meanes is, the selfe same Prayer, my meaning is, that in pray∣ing & meditating, a man shal learne how to pray & meditate, as other arts or occupatiōs. And euen as hee who should not write at al, or onely once
in a moneth, should ne∣uer learne to write: so he who neuer, or sldom prayeth and Meditateth shal neuer learne to pray & Meditate. The third Maister shall be, some spiritual Father, wel see∣ne & experiēced in these affaires. For as S. Hierō saith, writing to Rusti∣cus, de Monach▪ institut. Nulla ars sine Magistro. None can euer learne a∣ny art without a Maister: whence we read in the Gospel of S. Luke (c. 11) that S. Iohn Bap. taught
his disciples to pray, and our Lord & Sauiour his. To Meditate & make Mentall Prayer, two things are verie necessa∣rie, to witte, the Manner, and the Matter, that is to say, that one must knowe the methode how to doe it, and next haue the subiect in a rea∣dinesse, to employ him∣selfe therevpon: and for wāt of these two things or of the one of them, many are cast backward, and cannot attende to this holie Exercise. We
will endeuour then, to aide them in the other. But first we must note and vnderstande two things; The one, what Prayer, Meditation, and their species meaneth; The other, what things helpe, and what things hinder Prayer, and Me∣ditaion. CHAP. III. An Explication of the wor∣des Prayer, Meditation, and such others. THis worde Prayer, is taken in three
manners, the second be∣ing the most proper. Sō∣times Prayer is called Petition, in English, de∣maunde, or request: so S. Iohn Damascen taketh it. (Lib. 3. de Fide cap. 24.) when he saith. O∣ratio est Petitio decentium à Deo. Prayer is a demād of Almightie God, of thinges that are decent. Othertimes, Prayer sig∣nifieth the speech, dis∣course, or Colloquie of the soule with Almighty God, be it in in asking somthing of him, be it in
thanking him, or other∣wise conferring with him. And in this sence S. Chrisostome taketh it (Hom 10. in Gen.) say∣ing, Ortio est colloquium cum Deo. Prayer is a Col∣loquie of the soule with Almightie God. Other times, this worde Prayer signifieth genera∣ly al the interiour acts of the vnderstāding, of the will, and of the other fa∣culties, when they ar ad∣dressed to almighty God. And in the same sence, the selfe-same S. Iohn
Damascene saith in the place before alleadged, Oratio est ascensus mentis in Deum. Prayer is the ascēding vp of the mind into Almighty God; So that Meditation, Con∣templation, Praysing of God, Thanksgiuing, Petition, Obsecration, Oblation, Promise, Ac∣cusation of a mans selfe, Complaint, Examen of Conscience, Admirati∣on, and other like Actes, are all species of Prayer; and to Meditate, Con∣template, Giue Than∣kes, Offer, and examine
of Conscience, all this is Prayer; yea, to reade some spiritual booke by way of deuotiō, is also to Pray. For whē one read∣eth in this fashion, Al∣mightie God speaketh with man, as in praying man speaketh with Al∣mightie God. For this cause S. Bernard in his book. De scala Claustraliū hath placed the reading of spirituall bookes, a∣mōgst the parts of Praier To Meditate, is as much to say, as to thinke on some kinde of thing
or matter diligentlie, & attentiuelie, to the end to pray, and to speake, with God. This I saye, because to cōsider some mysterie of our faith, or other like thing to ex∣plicate in classe, or for o∣ther like ende, is not an espece of Prayer. This Meditation, or Cō∣sideration, is an acte of the vnderstāding, when∣ce foorthwith folow∣eth the acte of the will; for man knowing some good or euill, moueth it to loue or hate the same,
Whēce the Holy Prophet said. Psal. 38. In medita∣tion emea exardescet ignis. In my Meditation, fire shall be kindled within myne heart. And for this reason it is, that Prayer & Meditation, goe ordina∣rilie together, and are in such wise conioyned, that oftentimes one can∣not treate of the one, without the other. Contemplation, is an excellent and affectu∣ous Meditation, which is made without dis∣course, and without
paine, the soule being vnited with his God both byknowledge & loue together, as one who beholdeth stedfast∣ly a beautifull Image, without moouing his fight this way, or that way, and therein taking his contentment. The Prayse of God, is to laud and blesse him, for the vertues and per∣fections, which are con∣ained in him. Thankesgiuiing, is to render him Thankes for the benefites we haue
receaued of him. Petition, or demaund is simply to aske some thing of him. Obsecration, is a demād interposing some other sacred thing agreable vn∣to him, to the end to en∣clyne him: as saying, by the pretious blod of thy Sonne, I beseech thee. Oblation, is to offer some thing vnto him, as our soule, our bodie, or the workes which wee performe. Examen of Conscience, is to search out our faults
before Almighty God to craue pardon, & to amēd and correct our selues. Admiration, is an excel∣lent act of Prayer, when the soule being in Con∣templation, commeth to wonder, & to be astoni∣shed at the Wisdome, Boūty Patience, & other works of almighty God: whence do follow Ex∣clamatiōs, & sometimes Extasies, or Rauishmēts. Now taking Prayer properlie in the second signification, there are three sortes of Prayers,
to witte, Mentall, Vo∣call, and Mixt. And the reason is, for that in three sorts or manners, a man may speake with Almighty God, by Hart, by Mouth, and with the one and the other together: but we are to vnderstand them well. Mentall Prayer is, when the soule speaketh to God interiourlie, with∣out pronouncing any worde at all, shewing vnto him what she desi∣reth, with the motiō of the lippes; This is true
and perfect Prayer, & in the which God delights him, as our Sauiour said to the Samaritan wo∣man (S. Iohn cap. 4) God is a spirit, & they that adore him, must adore in in spirit. Vocall prayer, is that which is made with the voice, forming and re∣citing the wordes; But marke, that this ought to proceede frō the hart, that is to say, that wee must consider the wor∣des which we speake, or haue at the least, in∣tention
to Praye, for if one Pray onely with the Mouthe, without any intētion, vsing no inde∣uour todriue away dis∣tractions, and the wan∣dring of the spirit; such Prayer is neither vocall Prayer, nor any Prayer, but rather sinne, the which God reproacheth vnto his people by the Prophet Esay (cap. 29. & in Mat. cap. 5.) saying. This people honoureth mee with their lippes, but their heart is farre from mee: This Prayer therefore,
is not called Vocall, be∣cause it is made onelie with the mouth, but to be distinguished from that which is Mentall: because that Mentall Prayer is made with the heart onelie, and Vocall, by adding to the thoughts, the wor∣des also. Mixt Prayer, is as much to saye, as composed of Mental and Vocal toge∣ther, and is, when a man Prayeth vnto God, part∣lie by heart, partlie by by mouth; so that it is
not mixt Prayer, when on prayeth with spirit & word together, conside∣ring or pondering what one saith (as some sup∣pose) but it, is Vocall Prayer. But mixt Praier, is so called, when after one hath prayed in spi∣rit, he doe adde thereun∣to some prayer by wor∣des.
CHAP. III Of that which we must do, and whereof we must be∣ware, to the end, to Pray and Meditate well. THere are verie ma∣nie things which further, & are requisite, yea, verie necessarie, to Pray and Meditate wel; & likewise many which doe hinder, and wher∣of we must carefuly take heede. And this is one of the causes, for the
which this exercise is so difficult: it is also the cause, that there are so fewe in the worlde that doe performe it wel, be∣cause we bring not that which the thing requi∣reth, nor countergarde our selues frō the thin∣ges that are contrarie; which thinge, euerie one may know, exami∣ning himselfe, after wee shal hae explicated the the same. Of these mea∣nes and impediments, the R. F. Lewis of Gra∣nade, hath treated won∣derfull
well, and amplie in his second booke of Prayer and Meditation. The time. First, hee must deter∣mine and set downe, a certaine time, to employ in this holie exercise e∣uerie day. And touching the same, sundry things are to be noted. 1. First that one can∣not giue a general rule for all, to employ thus much or thus much time because of the great di∣uersitie of persons, Not∣withstanding, euery on
according to his estate, ought to depute one hower, or at the least halfe an hower, or two howres, or as shal seeme best vnto himselfe: and withall, to determine the howre wherin he doe the same, either in in the morning, or in some other time. 2. Hauing resolued to allow so much time vn∣to Prayer and Meditati∣on, and at such an houre, he must neither omit it for any affayre in the worlde (vnderstanding
that this busines is of the greatest importance of all others, and ought to be preferred before al others) nor change the same into an other hou∣re; for the subtile enemy endeuoureth to haue it deferred to another time more incōmodious, to render the Praier & Me∣ditarion so much the worse, or wholy to for∣sake it: nor to cut off, or shortē the time designed whereof shall be spoken after. Neuerthelesse, this ought to be vnderstood,
sauing obedience & cha∣ritie: for if whilest we pray, either our Superi∣our cal vs, or some wor∣ke of Charitie presents it selfe to assist our neigh∣bour, wee ought then to leaue Prayer, vnderstan∣ding that Almighty God wil haue it so, & we shal haue the greater merit. 3. When such a case shal happē, that we leaue for iust cause, one parte, or al our Praier, we must not forget to recompen∣ce the same, and to doe it some other time,
on the same daye, if it may be possible: euen as he who hauing bin let∣ted to dine at his accu∣stomed houre, doth not forget to take his refe∣ction afterwardes. 4. The time most pro∣per to attend to Medita∣tion and Mental Praier, is the Mid-night, becau∣se of the great silence & quietnesse thereof. Af∣ter this time, the Mor∣ning houldeth the secōd rancke, after we are vp, & before wee set hand to any other worke or
studie. For in the first place (as our Sauiour saith in S. Matthew, cap. 6.) Wee must first be∣fore al things, seeke the kingdom of God. And after the Morning, the most proper time is the Euening before supper. 5. Furthermore, a fit time to pray and Medi∣tate is, when the Spouse calleth the soule interi∣ourlie, & preuenteth her with his heauenlie gra∣ce, in such sort that shee findeth her selfe who∣ly disposed to pray and
Contemplate. As also when the soule longeth and desireth to make her prayers: as the bodie, which hath an appetite to eate. Moreouer, on Holie daies, we must attende a longer time to Prayer and Contemplation, and to doe no other thinge on those dayes, if it be possible, because for this they were ordained and instituted. And by how much the solemnitie, & the misterie which is ce∣lebrated is greater, by so
so much more the more ought wee to giue our selues to this holie exer∣cise. The Place. There must likewise be a proper place, & the best, is the most secrete and remote from noise, as God him-selfe hath taught vs, both in the new Testament, and in the Olde. I will lead him (saith the Prophet Ose, cap. 2.) into the desert, & there will I speake to his hart. And our Sauiour in the Gospell of Saynt
Matth. cap. 6. When thou shalt pray, enter in∣to thy Chamber, and hauing shut the doore, pray to thy Father in secret. And albeit this may be vnderstood spi∣ritualy, as much to saye: enter within thy selfe, and shut the gate against all other affaires and co∣gitations, yet there is no doubt, but it is to be vnderstood also accor∣ding to the letter. Wher∣fore wee must shut the gate that none disturbe vs, and with all the win∣dowes,
because the pla∣ce which is obscure, is the more proper and most doth aide the exer∣cises of the spirit. Also the Church or Chappel (prouided ther be no noyse) is a place verie proper to Pray & Contēplate, especialy if the B. Sacramēt of the Al∣tar be there. But if euery one ought to haue in his owne house, a deuout Oratorie, there to with∣draw himselfe and to make his deuotions.
Contrition and bodelie Chastisement. Pennance doth mar∣uelloufly helpe to praye well, as well the inte∣rior, which is to haue Contrition, Compun∣ction and sorrowe for sinnes, as the exterior, which is to mortifie the flesh by Fastinges, Disci∣plines, Haire-cloth, and other austerities, to ren∣der it subiect vnto the spirit, & by how much the more any one shall loue these two sortes of pennance, so much the
better will he make his Prayers & meditations. And contrariwise, who is no great friend ther∣of, it impossible that he praye wel, or that he ad∣uance him selfe in spiri∣tual exercises; For Pray∣er and Mortification, be inseparable companiōs. Euerie one therefore, ought to informe his Ghostlie father, what hee doth in this case, & to do nothing without his aduise and approba∣tion. Abstinence. Amongst exteriour
Pennances, Abstinence & Fasting do helpe thee most to pray and Medi∣tate well, because Absti∣nence doeth easilie ele∣uate the spirite vnto Al∣mightie God, as Holie Church singeth in time of Lent: & contrarywi∣se, the bodie being filled with meate, doth ren∣der the spirit vnapt to his functions. Where∣fore, who so desireth to vnite him-selfe with God by Prayer & Con∣templation, it behoueth that he be very sober in
his eating & dringing, & that he haue great regard to the quantitie, quality, & maner of eating, re∣pressing & mortifying his sensualitie, as much as hee may; being wholy perswaded (as trueit is) that the sensual man can neuer Pray nor Meditate wel, because the flesh & the spirit are things con∣trary. And this sobriety, is especiallie requisite in the Euening, to the end to be the better disposed to attēde to deuotion in the Morning.
Silence and keeping of the senses. No lesse requisite and necessarie is, the careful keeping of the Tongue, and of the other Senses, as the Seeing, and the Hearing; Because curio∣sitie to see and to heare, causeth distraction, and hindereth deuotion (and to talke much, a great deale more.) as contra∣rie, taciturnitie, and not to care to see and to heare, dooth greatlie helpe to conserue the
same wherefore, who so desireth to profite in this holie exercise ought to be verie vigilant, to keepe these gates or passages carefully shut, to wit, the mouth, the eyes, and the eares, and to liue, as much as he may, as one dūbe, blinde, and deafe. Solitude, Recollection, and Iaculatorie Prayer. For the selfe-same rea∣son, Solitude & Recol∣lection of a mans selfe, are singular helpes to Pray and Meditate Wel,
that is to say, to be reti∣red, and to loue his chā∣ber, and not to conuerse with men no more then necessitie doeth require. Also alwayes to cōtayne him within himselfe, & recollected in the pre∣sence of Almighty God, euē admidst exterior oc∣cupatiōs, vsing oftē Iacu∣latory Praiers, which is a thing exceeding profita∣ble; For in so doing, whē the time of Prayer ap∣procheth, a man is who∣lie disposed, foorth with entreth & findeth what
he desireth. But contra∣rie, the man that is di∣stracted, when the time of Prayer arriueth, he findeth in himselfe great paine, hauing his spirit filled with diuers fancies of which hee cannot ridde himselfe. Multitude of affaires. For the same cause also, one of the thinges which do most hinder Prayer & Meditation, is to haue ouermanie affai∣res and occupations, what soeuer they be, in which the time passeth,
and distraction entreth, and our vnderstanding becometh drye and tast∣lesse towardes spirituall thinges. Wherein oft∣times the enemie be∣guyleth, and pernici∣ouslie deceaueth sundry zealous seruants of Al∣mightie God, making them to addict themsel∣ues ouermuch to such affayres, and to forget themselues, or at the least to post-pose their owne saluation, or ad∣uancement in spiit, vn∣der the pretext of the
honour of God, good of soules, charity, obedien∣ce, and the like, and see not the poore whom they oppresse, doing cō∣trarie here in to the will of God, and peruerting both the order of Cha∣ritie and of nature, by the which we are bound to loue our selues much more thē others. Wher∣fore it is necessarie, that euery on beware of this deuilish deceit, & that he do not ouer-burden himselfe, to the ende he may attēde to Prayer & Meditation.
Interior peace. As the Bridell and Mor∣tification of the exteri∣riour senses, is altoge∣ther necessarie to Praye and Meditate well (as hath bene said) so like∣wise ar the mortificatiō of his inward passions, contergarding himselfe from all vnquietnesse, trouble, and vexation, and from all disordinate affection towardes any creature what soeuer, keeping him-selfe all∣wayes in true peace and trāquility of spirit with∣out
loosing the same for any euent or worldly ac∣cident; For it written (Psal 75.) Factus est in pacelocus eius. God doth lodge in the place of peace; and into troubled waters, one cannot see clearely. Spirituall Lecture and Health of the body. Spirituall Lecture, doeth greatlie helpe, Prayer and Meditation, wherefore it be hooueth to haue spiritual bookes, and sometimes to serue a mans selfe of them, ac∣cording
to the opportu∣nitie and necessitie of e∣uerie one. Of this lecture and bookes, shall be spoken in his place. Healh, and the good estate of the bodie, is as much necessarie vnto this exercise, as any o∣ther thing, because if the bodie which is the in∣strument of the soule in its functions, be not well, the soule cannot pray and Meditate well; Euen as if the Penne be il made, the writers shal write nothing to the
purpose especillie heed must be taken, that the he ade be well dispo∣sed. Discretion with a right intention. Albeit that to this exer∣cise of Prayer, and Me∣ditation, a man must bring all possible diligē∣ce, enforcing himselfe to performe from point to point, all that which is required, neuerthe∣lesse, he must dili∣gentlie take heede of
indiscreete violence, in the soule, or to the bo∣die, which is, diaboli∣call illusion, to hinder vs afterwardes to pray: as to obtaine teares by force, to constraine the bodie, to set one his knees, and to ouercome himselfe; but hee must rather carrie himselfe, sweetly and humblie, & and saye with the Pro∣phet (Psal. 48.) Audiam quid loquatur in me Domi∣minus Deus. I will listen what my Lord God saith within mee.
Beside this, hee must haue herein, as in euery other thing, a good & holie intention, not see∣king him selfe, or his proper gust and consola∣tion, but purely the ho∣nour, and good pleasure of Almightie God. Simplicitie, Humilitie, Re∣uerence, and Puritie of Conscience. Simplicitie ought to be the companion of prayer, not searching cu∣rious thinges in Medi∣ditation, as are rare con∣ceptions, or eleuated vi∣visions
for God pleaseth him not with the curi∣ous, but with the simple. Et cum simplic▪ bus sermoci∣natio eius (Pro. 3.) & the simple are more capable of Prayer & Meditatiō. Also Humilitie, and both inward and out∣ward Reuerence, pro∣strating himselfe before God, in hart, and in bo∣die (yet with the afore∣said discretion) remem∣bring himselfe, that he is in the presence of the deuine Maiestie, as her∣after shall be sayde.
Prayer likewise requi∣reth a great puritie of Conscience, and a life that is holie, for Beati mundo corde, Blessed are the cleane in heart (Mat. 5.) Those which haue their hart pure & cleane are capable to see All∣mightie God. This is the cause, that those who haue a large Conscience and make no great ac∣count of faults, which are but litle in their con∣ceit, shall neuer attaine to be men of Prayer.
Conference with others preparation, and per∣seuerance. It serueth also to pray well, to conferwith o∣thers, and to talke and discourse of spirituall thinges, and concerning deuotion. For such dis∣courses doe enkindle the heart, as witnessed the two Disciples which went to Emaus, and our Sauiour with them, di∣scoursing of the myste∣rie of our Redemption. (Luc. 24. 13.) Wher∣fore those parsons who
please them selues to speake of other things, shal neuer haue the gra∣ce to Praye and Medi∣ditate well. Finallie, two thinges are more necessarie then all others: diligent Pre∣paration before Prayer, (whereof shall be spo∣ken in his place) & per∣seuerance, continuing vntill the last hower of our life, this so impor∣tant and hard an enter∣prise, and that with a great confidence in Al∣mightie God, and di∣trust
of himselfe, and surmounting all maner of difficulties which may present themselues Whereunto may be ap∣plied, that which our Sauiour sayeth, we must Praye alwayes, and not be wearie. (Luc. 18.) CHAP. VI. How Mentall Prayer is to be made. MEntall Prayer, is a Colloquie or interiour speech of the
soule with Almighty God speaking to him in spirite, what she will, without exteriour wor∣des. This may be done in two manners. The one is, when the soule for∣geth of her selfe, that which she speaketh to Almightie God, as say∣ing vnto him interiorly. My God, thou hast done vnto me such infinit good, &c. I wretch that I am, I am not worthie, &c. Giue me me grace &c.
The other fashion is, to passe in spirit, some vocall Prayer, as the Pa∣Pater noster, &c. or any other that one hath by heart, from one ende to another, presenting vnto God the demandes and thinges contained in the wordes of the same Prayer. In prayer, that is to saye, in speaking to God, one doth, and ought to doe, three thinges ordi∣narilie; Thanke, De∣maund, and Offer. De∣maund consisteth in two
things in general, either to demaund pardon, or some other grace, good, vertue, or other thinge which we desire. To doe all which, wee wil a litle shew the pra∣ctise. CHAP. V. How we must render Thā∣kes vnto God. TO render Thankes to Almightie God a man must haue, and know without booke, two Rolles of Benefits.
The one of generail Be∣nefites, which may be these Seauen. Creation, Conseruation, Redem∣ption, Faith (or the be∣ing a Christian) Iustifi∣cation (to haue expe∣cted my repentance, and padoned my sinnes) The Communion of his most sacred bodie. And Vocation to his ser∣uice. The other, of parti∣cular, which euerie one himselfe may make, as to be borne of honest fa∣ther and mother.
To haue a good com∣plexion and health. To haue bene deliuered from some sicknesse, dā∣ger, or other like; and considering a litle euery Benefite, there is matter enough to render Than∣kes and to stay himselfe in Prayer. And more in gene∣rall, a man may render thankes in this fashion, for the goods of Nature, of Grace, and for those acquired; Of the soule, of the Bodie, and for Exteriour.
CHAP. VI. Of Petition, or Demaund. IN a demaunde there are foure points, to wit; what things wee ought to demaund; For whom; Of whom; And how. And we must doe all things wel, to the end we may obtaine that which we demaund. That which we ought to demand, is contayned in our Lords Prayer. But besides these generall
demaunds of the Pater noster, which wee ought dailie to make in the first place: euery one ought also euerie daye to de∣maunde of Almightie God, some particu∣lar thinges, which are needfull vnto him, ha∣uing a rolle or list of them, and knowing thē by heart, to serue him∣selfe thereof in Mentall prayer: as for example. A Rolle or Liste of parti∣cular Demaunds. 1. To demaund gra∣ce, well and duelie to
performe his office. 2. To employ the time well. 3. To obtaine the per∣fection of his estate and profession. 4. To vnquish some vice, and to extirpate some imperfection. 5. To Demād some ver∣tu wherof on hath most necessity especialy Chari¦ty & humility, or the gift of Prayer, or of greater Faith, saying with the Apostles (Luc. 11.) Lord teach vs to pray. And Luc. 17. Lord increase faith in vs.
CHAP. VII. Whereof vve must De∣maund pardon ONe may demaund in generall, pardon of all his offences; or di∣uide them into three partes, asking pardon of all the euill that one hath done: and of all the good, which he hath left vndone. And of all the time one hath em∣ployed ill. Another generall fashion is;
to aske forgiuenesse of our euill Thoughtes, Wordes, and workes. And of the Omission of good Thoughtes, Wor∣des, and workes. In particular, to fixe his mide vpon these foure points. 1. The Comman∣dements of Almightie God and his Church. 2. The seauen Capi∣tall sinnes. 3. The three facul∣ties of the soule; Vn∣derstanding, Memorie, and Will.
4. The fiue Sences of the Bodie, Seeing, Hear∣ing, Smelling, Tasting, and Touching. For in these foure su∣biects are conprehended all the sinnes which a man may commit in his whole life: and discour∣sing vpon each of these points, on after another, to demannde pardon in particular, for sinnes committed, against such or such a Commande∣ment; and in such a sort of sinne, and with such a Facultie or Sence.
And beside this, euery one may adde the sinnes proper to his estate and office. A Rolle or list, of thosefor whom vve ought to Pray. In generall we ought to pray for all, as our Lorde hath very well shewed vs in the Prayer which hee hath taught vs: and for some more in particular. This ex∣ample may serue euetie one. 1. For all the Holy Church, and namelie for our Holie Father the
Pope, Prelates, and all Ecclesiasticall persons. 2. For the reducti∣on of Heretickes, and Couersion of Infidels. 3. For all the whole Kingdome, and namelie for the King, and our Princes. 4. For all Lordes and Christian Princes. 5. For our Superiours, Gouernours, and Ma∣gistrates. 6. For our Benefac∣tors liuing & departed. 7. For the soules in in purgatorie.
8. For all those which are in our charge. 9. For our enemies, and aduersaries. 10. Then in particu∣lar, for such and such li∣uing or departed, and for them also who haue recommended them sel∣ues vnto our Prayers. This Prayer which is made for others, is ve∣ry agreable vnto almigh∣tie God, as S. Chrisos∣tome saith: and we both ought, and are bound thereunto, and therefore must euerie day, duelie
discharge our selues of the same. It may likewise be no∣ted, that as we pray and demaund for others; so may we render thankes and offer for others: For example. To render thankes vnto Almightie God, for all the benefits which hee hath done to all the Angels, and to all men, and especialie, to his B. Mother. Also, to all Christi∣ans. To all Religious per∣sons;
vnto this realme: to this Person, and to that, considering the the persons, and the Be∣nefites some what in particular, and rendring thankes to Almightie God for euerie benefite, in the selfe-same fashion that we render thankes for our owne selues. A Rolle or List of Patrons, which wee ought to Pray vnto. Euerie one ought to haue a Rolle or List of Patrons, and to pray de∣uoutlie vnto them euery
daye: This for exam∣ple, may seeme pro∣per. 1. Our Ladie. 2. After our Ladie, our Angell Gardien. 3. The Saint of whom euerie one beareth the name. 4. Afterwardes, the Saintes to whom one hath most deuotion. 5. The Saint or Patron of the place or countrie whereof one is: As also the Angell who hath the charge of the said place or country.
6. The Saint of the present day. 7. The Religious per∣sons, may put in the fifth or fourth place, the Saint or Founder of their or∣der. The maner Howe we ought to demaunde. To obtaine that which we demaund, three thin∣ges there are which greatlie helpe. The first is, that in de∣manding any thinge of Almightie God, we must actually exercise Faith, considering that
hee can doe all things. Hope, considering his great bountie, and ha∣uing a desire and confi∣dence to obtaine our demaund. And Charitie, demanding such a thing, for the desire we haue of the honour of God, of ouraowne saluation, and of our neighbours. 2. The second is, in demaunding, to vse Ob∣secrations, as we see in the Litanies, and suppli∣cations of the Church. 3. The third is, to ad immediatlie thereunto,
the Intercession of the Saints, who can much better then we, obtaine that for vs, which we doe not merit. That which vve ought to offer and hovv. We must offer vp vn∣to Almightie God, all th which he hath gi∣uen vs, and doth daylie giue vs, our Being, our Life, our Soule, our Bodie, our exteriour goods, our thoughts our wordes; and our works. Item, to offer vnto his Sonne, his pretious
Blood, his death & passi∣on, his Merits, and his wounderfull workes. Itē al the good workes of his sacred Mother, of al his Saints, & of al de∣uout & Godly people, and of all the Church, since the verie beginn∣ing of the worlde. And thē to offer al this, as wel for our selues, as for all others in general and in particular, in the selfe-same fashion, as wee haue said before, speaking of Thankesgi∣uing, & of Demaund.
We must then doe al these things Mentallie; Thanke, Demaund, & Offer for our selues, and also for others, for of this sorte of Prayer, we speake at this present; And it is an excellent meanes to remaine and continue long time in Prayer. It is further to be no∣ted, that these things are to be done in certaine times euery day: as in the Morninng after Medi∣tation, or in hearing Masse, or after Masse
and to keepe herein good order, to the ende we fayle not: for other∣wise we doe easilie for∣get them, but being a litle accustomed therto, there is no difficultie. Tha which resteth of Mentall Prayer, shall be touched hereafter, where wee will treate of Colloquies. CHAP. VIII. Of Mixt Prayer. MIxt Prayer, is pro¦perlie so called (as
we before haue ex∣plicated) when one prayeth a litle Mentally and a litle Vocallie; as if after I haue prayed in spirit, for the soules in Purgatorie, I should re∣cite by mouth the praier Fidelium Deus omnium Conditor. And his sort of Prayer, is much more easie, then Meditation and Mentall Prayer, and in particular, a man may serue himselfe thereof, at such time as one finds not himselfe disposed in Soule, or Bodie, to Me∣ditate
& to Praye Men∣lie. 1. First, one may pray in this fashion, vpon the Commandements of Almightie God, and of the Church: as for example: To take the first Commandement of the Decalogue, and to consider how euilly we haue obserued the same for the time past, reducing a litle, to me∣morie, the sinnes that one hath committed a∣gainst this Comman∣dement, and to aske
forgiuenesse in heart Mentallie; and after, to recite our Lords Prayer and to doe the same, on each Commandement. 2. To make the same discourse vpon the sea∣uen capitall sinnes. And first, to reduce to me∣mory, the sinnes of Pride and the sundry wayes that one hath offended in this sorte of sinne, & to aske forgiuenesse for the same in spirit: and then to adde the Pater noster vocallie. 3. Vpon the three Fa∣culties
of the soule, the Memorie, the vnderstā∣ding, and the will, vsing the same fashion to Pray Mentallie, and Vocallie, after we haue a litle con∣sidered, as for example. Wherefore almightie God, hath giuen me Memorie, and the sinnes which I haue committed in this facultie, not em∣ploying it as God hath willed mee, but doing the contrarie: And in the same sorte, of the vnder∣standing and the will. 4. The like is to bee
done vpō the fiue Sēces of the bodie, the Sight, the Hearing, the Smel∣ling, the Tasting, & the Touching. 5. The same sort of Prayer, a Religious per∣son may vse vpon the Rules of his Order and Office. And euerie per∣son, may easilie and pro∣fitablie apply the same to his Estate and Office.
CHAP. IX. Of Vocall Prayer. VOcall Prayer is two-fould; The on Publique, to wit, the Canonicall houres and Psalmes: The other Pri∣uate, as the Office of our Ladie, the Bedes, & and the like. The first, is of Obligation: The se∣cond is often made of deuotion, and someti∣mes also of Obligation, as whē it is enioyned for
Penannce by the Con∣fessar, or else by Statute or Vowe. Both to the one, and the other, we are to bring due prepa∣ration & attention, ob∣seruing three things. 1. At the beginning, or before hee beginne Vocall Prayer, to retire himselfe a part, or to en∣ter into himselfe, & lift∣ing vp his hart to Al∣mightie God, to offer vnto him this worke, to his honour and glorie, beseeching him to assist vs. &c. And to this ende
may saye; Actiones no∣stras, &c. 2. In the progresse of this Prayer, hee must doe two thinges; The one, to promoue the wordes distinctly, with∣out making ouer-much haste; Theother, some∣times (as at the Gloria Patri of the Psalmes, and at the ende of euerie ten of the Beades) to renew his attention, that is to say, to rectifie himselfe, if he hath bene distract∣ed, and to goe forward with a new deuotion.
3. Hauing finished, to render thankes, & craue pardon for the faultes which one hath com∣mitted in praying. An excellent forme of Vocall Prayer, is this: To recite our Lordes Prayer, (and the same is to bee vnderstood, of all other prayer) faire & softly, word by word, & pronoūcing each word, to pause or employ so much time, as the natu∣rall breath of a man can last, in such sort or wise, that the wordes do fol∣low
or march together, with the seuerall brea∣things: prouided, that whilest on pronounceth the wordes outwardlie, he must inwardlie con∣ceaue the signification of the worde, or the excel∣lēcy of the persoage, to whō on speaketh or our owne vilitie, one may stay himselfe, praying af∣ter this fashion, as long as one wil, reciting sun∣drie other Prayers, or repeating the same. This sorte of Prayer is verie good, easie,
full of deuotion, & not subiect to distraction; & ought euerie day to be put in practise, not in saying the Breuiarie, or the Beades (for it would take vp too much time) and saying at the least a Pater and Aue, and that especialie at the end of Meditation, after wee haue made the Mentall Colloquie. When one is in iour∣ney, and euerie time that one cannot conue∣niently Meditate, then may one serue himselfe
of this sorte of Prayer, the which is very easie, and may be made euen in going. The Supplications of Holie Church, which wee call the Litanies, is a kinde of vocall Pray∣er, very ancient, and ve∣rie proper, which com∣prehendeth the suffra∣ges of Saints, Obsecra∣tions, and all sorts of re∣quests, for our selues, & for our neighbours, quick, and dead, and for all estates: and therfore all Christians ought of∣tentimes
recite them. The Prayers also which we call Collects, are verie good, deuout, and holie, whereof one must serue himselfe, es∣pecially when one will demande some particu∣lar grace, or praye for some necessity, which presenteth it selfe, as, for Peace, for the Sicke, for those that are in voyage, and the like: and are to be found, at the end of the Missal, and in the Office of our Ladie.
Likewise it is good in prayinge vnto some Saint, to present vnto Almightie God, and to recite the proper Prayer or Collect of the same Saint: and, if hee haue not a proper Collect, to take the Common. CHAP. X. Of the Beades. AMongst all other Prayers, as well Vocall, as others; the first and principall is, the Pater noster, and
after this, the Aue Ma∣rie. For this cause (be∣sides sundrie others) the Beades, or Crowne of our Ladie, is an excellēt forme of Praier, as being composed of these two Prayers. Now to recite de∣uoutlie and fruitfullie the Beades: First one must obserue the three precepts before men∣tioned, touching Vo∣call Prayer. Besides this one must (whilst one reciteth the Aue Maries) haue his
thoughts fixed vpon some good and whol∣some thinge, as vpon Death, vpon Hell, vpon Heauen, his sinnes, and principallie vpon the mysteries of our Re∣demption, which are contayned in the life of our B. Lord, and of our Ladie. For this cause or rea∣son, B. Saint Dominike chose fifteene Mysteries of the Rosarie, perswa∣ding the whole worlde, to contemplate and consider them in saying
the Beades. Wee must thē haue them & know thē by heart, the which is very easie. The Mysteries of the Rosarie. Fiue are called Ioyfull. 1. The Annūciation of the Angell. 2. The Visitation of our Ladie. 3. The Natiuitie of our Lord. 4. The Presen∣tation in the Temple. 5. How he was founde disputinge amongst the Doctors. Fiue are called Dolefull. 1. The Prayer in the
Garden. 2. The whip∣pinge at the Pillar. 3. The crowninge with Thornes. 4. The cary∣ing of the Crosse. 5. The Crucifying. Fiue are called glo∣rious. 1. The Resurrection of our Lord. 2. His As∣cension. 3. The com∣ming of the holy Ghost. 4. The Assumpion of our Ladie. 5. Her Coro∣nation. The practise & fashion to say the Beades vpon these fifteene Misteries,
is double, or two fould. The one is, vpon one Pater noster, & ten Aue Maries, to consider one mysterie, that is to saye, whilst one saith one Pater noster, and ten Aue Maries, alwaies to haue our thought vpon that mysterie; As, at the My∣sterie of the Incarnatiō, to thinke vpon the An∣gell, vpon our Ladie, and vpon their dis∣course &c. The other is, vpon each mysterie, to say on∣lie one Aue Marie, that
is to saye, recite one Aue Marie, considering the Annuntiation, another considering the Visita∣tion, & so consequētly, and to make the round of these fifteene, so ma∣nie times, as till all the Beades be finished. One may also collect fiftie or sixtie mysteries, and principall workes of the life of our Lorde, from the Annuntiation, vnto the Ascention; and vpon each one, to say an Aue Marie: allwaies remembring to say a
Pater noster, at the be∣ginning of euery ten. A forme of Meditating, in saying the Beades. There are sundrie o∣ther manners of saying the Beades, wee will content our selues here to set downe one other onely, the which con∣sisteth in consideringe our sinnes; and the foure last thinges of Man, and is this. One must imagine, that the Beades which one hath in his hande, are coloured, and that
these colours represent vnto vs, the matter which we desire to con∣sider, in recitinge the Beades. To imagine the first tē graines, which are on the Beades, as if they were of diuers colours, white, black, red, green, yellow, tawny, &c. The second, of a pale colour. The third of a red co∣lour. The fourth, of a blak colour. And the fift, of the colour of gould. That is to say in say∣ing the first ten, which
are of diuers coloure, to reduce into memorie, the multitude & diuer∣sitie of thy sinnes, which thou hast committed in thy whole life, crauinge pardon of Almightie God, by the intercession of our B. Ladie. In saying the second ten, which are of Pale colour, to represēt vnto thy selfe the memory of Death. In sayinge the third ten, to thincke of the terrible day of Iudge∣ment.
In saying the fourth tē, of the paines of Hell. And in the fifth of the glorie of Heauen. And who so would saie in this sort, the Bea∣des of sixtie three Aue Maries, let him adde to the sixt ten, of the co∣lour of Siluer, represen∣ting to his thought, the puritie of our B. Ladie. Thus to say the Bea∣des, is Vocall Prayer, to the which one may pro∣firablie adioyne Mental Prayer and Meditation, at the beginning & en∣ding
of euery tē, resting himselfe sometime; to meditate some mistery, and to pray Mentally. CHAP. XI. Of Iaculatorie Prayers. SAint Augustine (in his Epist. 121. ad Pro∣bum) calleth Iauclato∣rie Prayers, certaine briefe Prayers and Ele∣uations, or dartinges of the spirit, into Almigh∣tie God; as for example in saying: Deus in adiu∣torium meum intende. All
such Prayers may bee both Mentall and Vo∣cal. Mētall, inuoking in∣wardly Almighty God, vnto our succour, and pondering in spirit, the meaning and contents of the same sentence; Incline to myne aide, o God. Vocall, pronoun∣cinge with the mouth the same wordes, either in Latin, or in the vul∣gar tongue. These Iaculatorie Prayers are very pro∣fitable, as well to enter∣tainevs in continual de∣uotion,
and in the pre∣sence of Almighty God, as to accomplish that which our Lord hath said: Pray alwaies. Wher∣fore we must not mar∣uell when we heare say that S. Bartholomew praied a hundred times a day, and a hundred ti∣mes in the night; Also S. Martha, and S. Apol∣linus Abbot, and sun∣drie other Saints, who wholly gaue themsel∣ues to Prayer; for this is most easie (so farre off is it from being impossi∣ble)
by the meanes of these Iaculatory, Men∣tall, or Vocall prayers, especially, sith Prayer is nothing else, then an e∣leuation of the minde vnto Almightie God, which may be done an hūdred times an houre; and our Lordes Prayer, was expresly giuē vnto vs so briefe, to the ende, that euery Christian might present it to God a hundred times a day, if so he will. Euerie spirituall man then, ought to take the
paines to accustome him selfe to these Iacu∣latorie Prayers. And to remember him selfe, a good meanes it is, eue∣rie time that one hea∣reth the clocke, from the Morning, vntill the Euening, to make a Ia∣culatory Prayer, both by heart and mouth, being all alone. Whereunto, also would greatly ser∣ue, that euerie one doe select some sentences, most pleasinge vnto them, taking them prin∣cipallie, out of the sa∣cred
Psalmes, and to take each day, one for practise. And for as much as the Pater noster is truely our dailie bread; it shall be very good to take for Iaculatorie Prayers, the seuen Petitions con∣tayned in the same, eue∣rie day one; As one Sundaye, to repeate manie times, both by heart and mouth, San∣tificetur nomen tuum. One Munday, Adueniat regnum tuum: and so of others.
The Excellencie of our Lords Prayer. And note I beseeche you, the perfection and excellēcy of this diuine Prayer, how the same fitteth all sorts of Pray∣ers, to wit, Mentall, Vo∣call, Mixt, Iaculatorie, and Meditation. 1. The Parer noster may serue for Mentall Prayer, saying it in spi∣rit, and presenting to God, all that which is contained in the same, frō one ēd to the other, 2. For Vocal Prayer,
recitinge the same with the mouth. For mixt Prayer, say∣inge it first with the heart, and after with the mouth. 4. For Iaculatorie prayers, as we haue la∣tely said. 5. Fiftlie, for Medi∣tation, for one may me∣ditate the same: yea, it is a most excellent mat∣ter of meditation, as shal be feene hereafter. Of all these manner of Prayers, the one are more proper for some
persons, the other more proper for others; yea, one and the same per∣son, at one time shall be more apt to vse one manner of Prayer, and at another time ano∣ther, accordinge to the disposition of the soule or the bodie. As when any one is wearie, or else is not well at ease, and shall be indisposed to make long Medita∣tions, then may hee most helpe him selfe by Vocall, or by Mixt Prayer.
In voyage, a foote, or a horse-backe, vo∣call or Mixt prayers; are most proper and most easie. CHAP. XII. Of Spirituall Reading. LEt vs presuppose that which is true, the readinge of holie bookes, to be a thinge exceedinge profitable, and a cōpanion of Pray∣er: whence we see, that all those who haue
loued, and doe loue Prayer, haue embraced with like affection spiri∣tuall reading; we will here therefore onelie shewe that which is to be obserued, to reade with profite. The first aduertise∣ment is, what bookes we ought to reade. First of all, the Holie Scrip∣ture (for such as shall by their Spirituall Father be iudged fit to read it) especially the holy Gos∣pell; the Epistles of S. Paule; the Epistles of S.
Iames; and the first Epi∣stle of S. Iohn. Of the Ould Testa∣mēt, the bookes of Iob; the three bookes of Sa∣lomon; the Prouerbes; Ecclesiasticus, & Eccle∣siastes. After the holy Scrip∣ture, to reade other spi∣rituall bookes, but the best and most profita∣blest, whereof we will make a roule or Cata∣logue. 2. Each one ought to reade those bookes, which are most to his
gust, and which he hath experimented to haue brought him most pro∣fite. And therefore he ought to proue diuers, and then to houlde him selfe to that which hee findeth fittest for him. 3. Not to deceaue him selfe in the election of such bookes, let him aske aduise of his ghost∣ly Father. 4. He must not be inconstant, and nowe read one booke, and nowe another, but con∣tinue
foorth one booke, from one ende to the other. True it is, that sometimes one may change to take away distaste, or that a man doth sometime finde himselfe more disposed to reade one booke, then another; and then to continue to reade the other which he had be∣gunne. 5. It is verye meete to cōforme his reading, vnto his Meditation, that is to say, to reade the same matter, that
one doth Meditate as much as is possible. The second, how one must reade. 1. He must haue a right intention, and not to reade vpon curiositie, or for desire of knowledge, or for the elegancy of the stile; but to stirre vp him selfe to deuotion, and to profite in spirite. 2. He must not read in poste-haste, but softly and deuoutly, chewing the wordes which one readeth. 3. Meeting with any
notable and profitable thinge, not to passe far∣ther, but to stay himself, and to ponder it, adding moreouer some little prayer. 4. The most worthy sentences, and thinges most profitable, to lear∣ne them by heart, to be able to recount them, and to serue him selfe of them. The third, touchinge the time whē one must reade. 1. First, when the soule hath appetite to
reade, and enclineth thereto. 2. When a man fin∣deth himselfe arride & drie in deuotion. 3. On holy daies more then on other dayes. 4. Before, or after Communion, or cele∣bration of the sacred Masse. 5. Sometimes it is good to reade before. Prayer and Meditation, to excite himselfe to deuotion, and to finde matter, whereon to Meditate.
CHAP. XIII. Such Spirituall Bookes as are most profitable for all persons. A Little booke inti∣tuled, Gerson, or Thomas a Kempis, of the followinge of Christ. The life of Christ, by S. Bonauenture. The workes of F. Lewes of Granade; namely, his Spirituall Doctrine or Abridge∣ment.
His Memoriall of a Christian life. His Me∣ditations. His Treatise of the loue of God, and of his Benefits. The contempt of the worlde. The Liues of Saints. The Meditations of Father Loart, vpon the Misteries of the Rosary. His Christian Exercise. And his Meditations vpon the Passion. Comfort in Tribula∣tion, by Sir Thomas Moore: The Epistle of Com∣fort,
by Father South∣well. And his Rules of good life. The Paradise of the soule by Albertus Mag∣nus. The miracles of our Ladie of Loretto, of Si∣chim, & of other places. Father Fuluius An∣drotius, of the frequen∣ting the B. Sacrament. And his Meditations vpon the Passion. Father Brunoes Me∣ditatiōs. And his Abrid∣gement. The Societie of the
Rosarie. The Introduction to a deuout life, by Francis Sales, bishop of Geneua. Father Points Medi∣tations. Father Parsons Chri∣stian Directorie. A briefe Collection, concerning the Loue of God towardes man, found amongst his wor∣kes, who composed the Iesus Psalter. Wholsome and Ca∣tholique Doctrine, con∣cerninge the 7. Sacra∣ments, by the Reuerend
F. in God, Thomas, Bi∣shop of Lincolne. The booke intituled, Six spirituall bookes, full of marueilous pietie and deuotion. The sacred Mysterie of the Flagellation of our Lord and Sauiour. Others, particularlie for Religious persons, besi∣des the aforesaid. The Epistle of Iesus Christ, to the faithfull soule. A briefe Methode, howe to serue God in a perfect māner, by F. Al∣phonso.
The Spiritual Cōflict. A Treatise of Mental Prayer, by F. Molina, Carthusian Monke. The Mirror of Perfe∣ction, by F. Lucas Pi∣nelli: And him vpon the life of our B. Ladie. A Spiritual Exercise, written by F. William Perin, Prior, and Friar Preacher, of great S. Bartholomes in Smith∣field. With sundrie others (all of them to be found in our English tongue)
which the Ghostlie Fa∣ther shall iudge to be most conuenient and proper for euery person. CHAP. XIV. Of Meditation. WE haue said at the beginning, that two thinges are necessarie to make vs to Meditate, to wit, the Matter, and the Manner: whereof we must now treate in par∣ticular, to the ende to ayde euery one, both in
the one and the other. The matter of Medita∣tion, that is to say, what things one must Meditate and consider. Death, Iudgement, the paines of Hell, and the glorie of Hea∣uen. The vanitye of the world, and the miseries of this present life. The sinnes wee haue committed in our whole life. The life death, & Pas∣sion of our Lord, and vpō the holy Eucharist.
The Benefites of God. The life of our Ladie, and of the Saintes. The vertues. The booke of the Creatures. The Perfectiōs of God which we cal Atributes. Al the holie Scripture, especially, the holy Gos∣pel, and the Psalmes. Our Lordes Prayer, as also the Creede of the Apostles, is verye good and profitable to Meditate. Al which is contained in the Christian Doc∣trine,
of Catechisme, may likewise serue for matter of Meditation. One must meditate often, vpon the ende for which mā was crea∣ted in this worlde, for it is the foundation of our saluation & perfection. It is good to confor∣me ones selfe to Holy Church, and to followe her traces: as, One so∣lemne daies, to consider the Misteries, which thē are proposed vnto vs. One the Feastes of Saints, to consider their
life, death, vertues, and most remarkable actes, and the glorie which they haue acquired. In Aduent, to Medi∣tate on the mysterie of the Incarnation, or on the life of our Lord. In Lēt, one may take euery day, the Gospel of the day for Meditation. The matters most proper to Meditate vpō the Sundaies, are the re∣surrection of our Lord. Our Resurrection and beatitude, figured by the Sunday. The Bene∣fits
of God. And the Gospel of the day. And as there are foure Sun∣daies in the month, one may Meditate euery Sū∣day, one of the four mat∣ters aforeaid. On the dayes of Cō∣munion, to Meditate v∣pon the holy Eucharist, or vpon the Passion of our Lord. On Fridaie, vpon the Passion of our Lord. And on Saterdaye, somthing of our Ladie. When one hath heard some Sermon, or
Exhortation, the same daye, or on the morrow to repeate the same, and to make his Meditation thereupon. Besides this, the Reli∣gious person, the Priest, and euery one, ought often to Meditate vpon his vocation, vow, ru∣les, estate and office. Euerie one also ought often to Meditate vp∣pon the vertue, wher∣of he hath greatest ne∣cessitie: and vpon the imperfection, whereof he most desireth to a∣mend
him selfe. And euen as the bo∣die doth addict it selfe most willinglie, and would oftenest eate of those meates, which best doe like it: so like∣wise the soule ought oftnest to chew & Me∣ditate those matters, wherein shee findeth most taste and spirituall profite; For it is true in thinges spirituall, as in∣corporall, as the Phisi∣tians say. Quod sapit nu∣trit. That which reli∣sheth, nourisheth.
Finally, as touching the matter of Medita∣tion, thou must obserue three other points. The first, that at the begin∣ning of euerie Moneth, and of euery week, thou oughtest to be diligent, to foresee, and prepare the matter, that thou entendest on the month or weeke ensuing. The second, that when one hath begun to Meditate some mat∣ter, each daie, if some iust occasion present it selfe to Meditate some
other thinge, as a Ser∣mon, Solemnitie, &c. For that day to inter∣rupt it, and to leaue the matter one hath in hād; and on the morrowe to returne & goe forward, as before. The third, that all∣though it be good, from month to month, and from weeke to weeke, to take some matter, to meditate one so manie daies as it shall last, ne∣uerthelesse, one may also euerie daye meditate diuers matters. And be∣cause
that the most ne∣cessarie, are these foure; the last Endings of mā, Death, Iudgement, Hel, and Heauen, the Pas∣sion of our Lord, our sinnes, and the Benefi∣tes of Almightie God, one may oftimes, and within one weeke Me∣ditate them all, accor∣ding to the same order, and in this sort. Monday, of Death. Tuesday, of Iudgemēt. Wensday, of the paines of Hell. Thursday, of the glory
of Heauen. Fridaie, of the Pas∣sion of our Lord. Saturdaie, of our Sin∣nes. Sundaie, of the Bene∣fites of Almighty God. CHAP. XV. Diuers manners of Medi∣ting diuers things. Manners of Meditatinge the foure last ends of a Man. ONe may euery day Meditate one of
these foure thinges, Death, Iudgement, the paines of Hell, and the glorie of Heauen. One may also vpō each of these foure endes, make sūdry Meditatiōs. Vpon Death, one may con∣sider principally these points. 1. That one must nee∣des die. 2. When, where, and how, no man knoweth. 3. That in Death, one leaueth all behinde him. Another manner. 1. To consider the
thinges which goe be∣fore Death, as sicknes, phisicke, dolors and Ex∣treame Vnction. 2. The thinges that accompanie it, as are the grieuous paines of the bodie, the losse of the senses, the waxing cold, the paines of the soule, the temptations, the visions, &c. 3. Those which fol∣low it, as Buriall, & par∣ticular Iudgement. Another Manner. 1. That death is very dreadfull.
2. That one must feare it, despise, and desire it. 3. That one must pre∣pare himselfe to dy wel. Vpon the latter iudgement, these things principally are to be considered. 1. The dreadful signes that shall goe before it. 2. The Renouation of the world. 3. The Resurrection of all the children of Adam, at the sound of the Trumpet. 4. The maiestie of the Iudge, assisted with all his Court.
5. The rendring of account, and the ope∣ning of the bookes of al mens consciences. 6. The double sen∣tence: & each one ought to know the wordes, & to consider them. 7. The executions of them. Diuers manners of Me∣ditating, vpon the Glorie of the blessed. 1. One is to cōsider, 1. the place. 2. the per∣sons, 3. the actions of the Blessed. 2. Another, to cōsider, 1. The goods of the sou∣le.
2. The goods of the bodie. 3. The Exteriour. 2. Another to consi∣der three douaries and Perfections of the soule, which are, vision, pos∣session, and euerlastinge Enioying. 4. Another to consider the foure douaries and perfections of the Body, Impassibilitie, Claritie, Agilitie, Subtilitie. 5. Another, to consi∣der the Ioy, which eue∣rie one of the fiue Sēses shall haue. Another fashion is,
to consider the seauen points following, in one or more Meditations. 1. Point, to consider the excellency of the Place, to wit, the Great∣nesse, the Beautie, and the Riches of heauen. 2. The Beatitude of the Bodie, how it shall be endued with foure excellent qualities to wit, that it shal be alto∣gether Impassible, most bright-shininge, most Agile or nimble, and (as the Apostle spea∣keth) spirituall, that is
to say, which can passe quite through other bo∣dies (as through a stone walle) without let or impediment. 3. The Beatitude of the Soule, as, the great wisedome, seeing Al∣mightie God face to face, and all thinges in him. The most ardent loue of God, and his neighbour. The Ioye and Contentment, al∣most infinite. 4. The Companie of the Blessed, to wit, of all the Angels, of all the
Saints, and of the glo∣rious Mother of Al∣mightie God. 5. To confider the Actions and Exercises of the Blessed; which are, perpetuall Contem∣plation, Ioye, Loue, Fea∣sting, Passetime, & Lau∣ding of Almighty God; Magdalene alone, and no Martha, no externall businesse, or office of the world. 6. No euill, and all that is good, consi∣dering the good things, and the euills of this
world, to ascend to the consideration of those aboue. 7. How long all the same shall endure: for all eternitie without ende. 8. Another fashion is, to consider, that on euery side, they shall enioy most vnspeakable con∣tentment. 1. The Ioye that the Blessed shall haue in be∣houlding on high, the most sacred mother of Almightie God, our Lord and Redeemer,
and all the holie Trini∣tie. 2. Rounde about him, the aforesaid com∣panie, and the excel∣lence of the place. 3. In him selfe, the beatitude both of soule and body. 4. Beneath him, the world, Limbo & Hell. Another, to consider that in that place there is no manner of euill, and is all manner of good; makinge two discourses, one vpon the euills, another vpon the good things. Touching the paines
of the damned, there are as manye manners to Meditate them, as the glorye of the Blessed: there needs no more, but to change the good things into euill. CHAP. XVI. Manners of Meditating, whereby to attaine the knowledge of ones selfe. 1. THe first is, to cō∣sider the time past, present, and to come, as S. Bernard tea∣cheth
in sundrie places, saying. O man thincke, first, what thou hast bene: second, what thou art; third, what thou shalt be. Or thus; First, from whence come I? Secōd, Where am I? Third, whether goe I? Or thus; what is the entrie of man into the world. Second, what his abode. Third, what his departure. 2. To consider (as the same Doctor saieth, lib. 2. De consid.) 1. Thy
selfe, who and what thou art. 2. The things that are vnderneath thee, Limbo, Purgato∣rie, and Hel. 3. The thin∣ges that are rounde a∣bout thee, the world, the Creatures, the di∣uels. 4. The things that are aboue thee, the glory of Paradise. 3. To consider foure other thinges, according to the counsaile of the same Saint Bernard (De inferiore capite 65. 1.) What thou art by na∣ture. What thou hast bin
by sinne. 3. what thou maiest be by the grace of Almightie God. 4. To consider the words of Moyses (Deut. 32.) O that men would consider the things that are Past (the euill com∣mitted, the time lost, and Iesus Christ cruci∣ied.) The Present (the benefits of God, the vanitie of the worlde, the breuitie of this life, and the difficultie to be saued.) And fore-see things to come (Death particular, generall Iud∣gement,
Hell, and the glorie of heauen.) 5. To consider the four causes of man. 1. The cause Efficiēt, who made him, to wit God, 2. The materiall cause; the body made of earth, 3. The formal cause, the soule, the image of God. 4. The finall cause, wherefore man was made, to witt, for eter∣nall beatitude. 6. To consider him∣selfe, according to sun∣drie estates. 1. In as much as man. 2. In as
much as a Christian. 3. In as much as Religious, a Priest, or of any other estate or condition. CHAP. XVII. The manner how to Medi∣tate sinnes. THe first is, to Me∣ditate his proper sinnes, to know them, and to haue true sorrow and contrition for them: deuiding them into cer∣taine points and consi∣derations, as, to Medi∣tate. 1. Their multitude.
2. Their grieuousnesse. 3. The damages they bringe with them. For the multitude, one may obserue some order: as, to consider the yeares of our life, in such, or such a place; and in such companie &c. Item, the sinnes com∣mitted by thoughts, by wordes, by workes, and by omission. Item, the sinnes I haue committed against God, against my neigh∣bour, and against my selfe; And note, that in
considering his sinnes, he must not staye him∣selfe vpon the sinne of the flesh, and of choler, but verie little. Note also, that it is ve∣rie fit and profitable for a spirituall man, to re∣fresh in him selfe, the memorie of his life past, and sometimes to make one whole Meditation vpon the same, and of∣tentimes to passe it ouer in praying and Medita∣ting, in a quarter, or half an houre, diuidinge it into as many partes, as
the places are, wherein he hath dwelt; in the same fashion that we shall by and by, speak of the life of our Lord. The other fashion is, to consider the Sinne in it selfe, to conceaue a hatred and horror of the same, meditatinge. 1. How much sinne is dis∣pleasinge to God, and wholie contrary vnto him. 2. How much hurt it bringeth to the man who committeth it, and sometimes to his neigh∣bour
also: to soule, to bodie, to honour, and to his goods, or substance. 3. How manie do∣mages it bringeth to the whole world, and how exceedinge grieuousie Almighty God hath al∣waies chastised it: recal∣ling to minde some ex∣amples, as of the An∣gels them selues, and of mankinde. Another maner is, to take the seauen capitall Sinnes, which some call Mortall, and euerie day to meditate one in
forme following. Vpon Sunday, Pride. Mūday, Couetousnes. Tuesday, Luxurie. Wensday, Enuie. Thursday, Gluttonie. Fridaie, Anger. Saturday, Slout Vpon euerie one of which, one must consi∣der these three points. 1. Howe much such a sinne displeaseth God. 2. How much it hurteth mā. 3. How many times I haue offended God by such a sinne, & his brā∣ches: and each of these
points may be made double, as for example. 1. Howe much this vice displeaseth God, & how doeth please him the contrarie vertue. 2. Howe much this vice hurteth man, and howe profitable is the contra∣rie vertue. 3. How much I haue offended by this vice, and how farre off I haue bene, & am from the opposite vertue.
CHAP. XVIII. Manners how to Meditate the whole life of our Lord Iesus Christ, com∣prising also his Passion. THe first manner is, to Mediate the principall mysteries, e∣uerie daie one, from the Annuntiation, vnto the Ascension, as S. Bona∣uenture, F. Lewes of Granade. & F. Vincent Bruno haue done. 2. One may deuide
the whole life of our Lord into seauen parts, and finish them in one weeke, as Saint Bona∣uenture doeth. 3. One may diuide the whole life of our Lord, into ten parts, ac∣cording to the ten pla∣ces where hee hath dwelte in this worlde, cōsidering what he hath done, and endured for thee in euery place. 1. In his Mothers wombe, nine Moneths. 2. In the Māger, or in Bethelem, fourty dayes.
3. In Egypt, about seauen yeares. 4. In Nazareth, more then two and twentie yeares. 5. In the Desert, fourty daies, & forty nightes. 6. Preaching in Iurie, and in Galilee, about three yeares and a halfe. 7. In grieuous paine and tormēt, one whole daie. 8. Vpon the Crosse, three houres. 9. In the Sepulchre, and in Limbo, fourty houres.
10. Here in earth, af∣ter his Resurrection, fourty daies. In this maner, within one houre, yea halfe an houre, one may medi∣tate the whole life of our Lord Iesus, pausing a litle vpon euery one of these tē parts, or points: the which is very easie, and very profitable. One may likewise make vpō these ten partes, ten Me∣ditations, or more, or lesse, as one wil himself. 4. One may likewise diuide the whole life of
our Lord, into three partes, to wit, his entrie into this worlde, his a∣biding here, and his issue or departing. How hee entred, what hee did whilst he dwelt here. And in what manner he went out of it: as S. Tho∣mas hath diuided it; And vpon each of these parts to make one, or more Meditations. 5. One may also cō∣prehende it in three o∣ther generall partes or members, as S. Bernard saith (in his Summe:)
considering, what he hath said, what hee hath done, and what hee hath endured. Dixit mul∣ta, fecit mira, pertulit du∣ra. He spake many thin∣ges, did maruellous things, endured paine∣full things: and vpon each of these points, to make one, or more me∣ditations. Wee will stay no longer vpō the explica∣tion of these points, not to be ouer-lōg: for if he be a little exercised in these affaires, he may
forme of him selfe, that which here is said: or if he haue need, lett him aske aduise of his ghost∣lie Father. 6. One may likewise do in this manner, to wit, to meditate the fifteene mysteries of the Rosarie, making v∣pon euerie one, one or more Meditations. 7. One may take one of the foure Gospels, and meditate the same, from one ende to ano∣ther. Or of the whole foure, to mak one Mono∣tessaron,
those who can performe it. 8. In the litle Cate∣chisme of Canisius, there are seuen very excellent Meditations, each one containinge fiue points, drawē foorth of the In∣fancie, Life, and Passion of our Lord. CHAP. XIX. Maners of Meditating the Passion of our Lord. 1. THe first manner is, to beginne
from the last Supper, and euerie day to medi∣tate one Mysterie, vn∣till his death and burial, followinge the text of one Euangelist, or of all the foure togeather: as S. Bonauenture Loar∣tus, and Costerus haue done. 2. To deuide the Passion of our Lord into seauen partes, and to meditate it in one weeke, as S. Bonauen∣ture, & Lewis of Gra∣nado hath done. 3. One may make as
many Meditations, as there are places wherin he suffered, makinge each day, as a Station in one place. 1. In the place of the last supper, where he washed his Disciples feete, and instituted the B. Sacrament. 2. In the Garden, where hee contristated him∣selfe, and sweat a∣boundantly a bloodie sweate. 3. Before An∣nas, where he receaued a grieuous blow on the face. 4. Before Cay∣phas where he was spit
on, and blinde-foul∣ded. 5. In the house of Pilate, where beinge falslie accused, he vsed wounderfull modestie, patience and silence. 6. In the house of Herod, where hee was despi∣sed, clothed in a white garment, and reputed for a foole. 7. Againe, before Pilate, where he was nakedly scourged, and condemned to die. 8. In the way towar∣des Caluarie, bearinge his heauie Crosse. 9. His death and Passion,
vpon the same moun∣taine. 4. One may medi∣tate in one weeke, the seuen words which our B. Lord and Sauiour spake, hanging three houres aliue vpon the Crosse: which each good Christian ought to haue by hart. 1. Father forgiue them, they know not what they doe. 2. To the Thiefe; Verely I saye vnto thee, this day thou shalt be with mee in Paradise.
3. To his sorrowfull Mother; woman, be∣hould thy sonne: and to Saint Iohn, behould thy mother. 4. My God my God, why hast thou forsa∣ken mee. 5. I thirst. 6. All is cōsummate. 7. Father into thy hands I commende my spirit. 8. One may choose out of the whole Pas∣sion, about a dozen my∣steries, whereon to Me∣ditate, as F. Fuluiu An∣drotius
hath done. 9. Another maner is, to meditate three thin∣ges, or three seuerall sortes of paines, to wit; that which our Sauiour suffered in foule in bo∣die, and in his honour: and vpon each of these three points, to make one, or more Medita∣tions: and all this may be drawen foorth of the holy Ghospell, or foorth of some booke that treateth of this subiect. 10. One may likewise
Meditate foure thin∣ges. Who he is that suffereth. What things he suffereth. For whom. And how he suffereth, makinge vpon euerie of these points, one or more considerations; The which foure con∣siderations, ought also to bee made in all the Meditations, which one maketh vpon the Pas∣sion. And albeit that so∣me of these maners seem to be points of Medita∣tion, yet are they di∣uers waies and fashions
of Meditating. 11. One may Medi∣tate the Passion of our Lorde, by diuers waies, to drawe from thence diuers affections, as Saint Bonauenture hath taught in his booke, of the darte of diuine loue, and after him, Denis the Charter-house Monke, Granado, Loartus, and others. 1. By way of Com∣passion, considering the grieuousnesse of his paines. 2. By way of Contri∣tion,
considering that he is dead for our sinnes. 3. By way of Imita∣tion, to imitate and fol∣low his example. 4. By way of Thāks∣giuing, considering the greatnesse of the be∣nefit. 5. By way of Loue, considering the Loue, which he hath shewed vnto vs. 6. By way of Hope, sith that he is deade to saue vs. 7. By way of Admi∣ration, astonishing him
selfe, at so great a loue and bountie. And this may be done, in one only weeke, Me∣ditating the Passion of our Lord, euery day by one of these waies. Item, at each point or Meditation of the Passion, one must excite in him selfe some one, or more of the said Af∣fections. CHAP. XX. Maners of meditating vpon the holy Eucharist. ONe may meditate a great number of
thinges vpon the holy Eucharist. The Historie. How he eate the Pas∣chall Lambe with his Apostles. How he washed their feete. How he instituted the B. Sacrament, and did communicate them. The names. Eucharistie, Sacra∣ment, absoluement, Communion, Sacrifice, Bread, Viaticum. The figures. The bread and wine
of Melchisedeck, the Paschal Lambe, Manna, and the bread of Elias. The Causes wherefore it was instituted. For a memorie of his Passion. To shew vs his loue. For foode of our soule. To serue vs for Sacri∣fice. For pledge of Beati∣tude. The effects or fruits of the Sacrament. 1. It worketh in the soule, all that which the bread doth in the body;
it nourisheth it, it gi∣ueth it life, it fortifies it against her enemies, cō∣tenteth it, and reple∣nisheth it with ioy &c. 2. illuminateth the vnderstanding, and en∣flames the hart. 3. It vniteth and incor∣porateth mā with God. 4. It augmenteth all the vertues, Faith, Hope, and so of others. 5. It changeth a man, & maketh him another by amendement of his life and maners. 6. It rendreth a man
as it were assured of his saluation. 7. It giueth in this world the grace of al∣mightie God, and in the other, glorie. One may also meditate vpon the Antiphone, O sacrum conuiuium, the which containeth sixe partes or branches. O sacred banquet. In which Christ is re∣ceaued. The memory of his pas∣sion is called to minde. The soule is replenish∣ed with grace.
And a pledge of future glorie is giuē vnto vs. Moreouer, one may Meditate vpon these foure circumstances. Who he is that com∣meth. To whome he commeth. How he cō∣meth. And wherefore he commeth. Likewise one may Me∣ditate vpon the prepara∣tiō & endeuour, of him which is to receaue it. How one must Re∣ceaue it. Two things are ne∣cessarie before we re∣ceaue
it; Puritie, and desire. Two in receauing it; Humilitie, & Chastitie. Two after receauing; Thankesgiuing, and a∣mendment of life. One may likewise meditate vpō the Hym∣nes of the B. Sacrament, and vpon the Prayer, Deus qui nobis sub Sacra∣mento mirabili &c. And vpon some sentence of the same, as, Caro mea verè est cibus. Panem An∣gelorum manducauit ho∣mo: my flesh is meare
indeede. Man hath ea∣ten the bread of Angels, and the like. One may take for matter to meditate vpō the 6. Chapter of Saint Iohn. The 4. booke of Gerson. The Cate∣chisme. The Medita∣tions of Lucas Pinellus, Lewis of Granado, & Fuluius Androtius, vpō the Treatises which they haue made of the holie Communion.
CHAP. XXI. Maners to Meditate the Benefites of Almighty God. ONe may consider in one Meditatiō, all the benefits of Al∣mighty God; the which, because they are innu∣merable, hee must make two seuerall Rolles. One, of the General, and most principall Be∣nefitesl these are: Crea∣tion, Conseruation, Re∣demption,
Faith, or to be a Christian, Iustifica∣tion, Communion, and Vocation to his holie seruice. Another of the par∣ticular Benefits, as, To be borne of a good fa∣ther and a good mother. To haue a good com∣plexion, and his health. To haue bene deliuered from some sicknesse, or danger. Euerie one may repeate his owne, & hee must know thē by hart, and pause a little vpon euerie Benefite.
2. One may diuide the benefites of Almigh∣tie God into sundrie fa∣shions. 1. The Benefits of Nature, of Grace, and Acquired. 2. Of the Soule, of the Bodie, and Exterior▪ 3. Past, present, and to come. 4. Common to all men, to many, to fewe, to mee onely: and vpon each ranke or kinde of benefites, one may make, one, or more Meditations. 3. One may take the seuen Benefites aforsaid,
and pause vpon them so long, as he may, consi∣dering diuers and sun∣drie thinges. Vpon one Benefite, one may make all these considerations. Who hath done me this Benefite? God. What hath mooued him to doe it? his only Bounty. Wherefore he hath giuē it me? For his owne honour, and for my sal∣uation. How great is this Be∣nefite? How much I am o∣obliged
vnto him for the same? How vngratefull I haue bene vnto him, & how euillie I haue ser∣ued my selfe of this Be∣nefite? What I ought to doe for the time to come. CHAP. XXII. Maners of Meditating the life of our Ladie. ONe may Meditat the life of our La∣die, euen as the life of
our Lord, beginning from her Conception, vntill her Assumption, as Costerus hath done in his booke of the fifty Meditations, vpon the life of our Ladie. 2. To meditate the principall mysteries of her life, which are those that holie Church doth solemnise: to wit, her Conception, Natiuitie, Annunciation, Visitati∣on, Purification, and Assumption. 3. To consider the Aue Maria, after the selfe
same maner, as the Pater noster. 4. Her vertues; See Arrias, of the Imitation of our Ladie. 5. Her Priuiledges. 6. Some Hymne of our Ladie, or some sen∣tence of holy Scripture, appertaining vnto her. 7. One may also me∣ditate the figures and prophecies of our B. Ladie.
CHAP. XXIII. The manner of Meditating the Feastes of the Saints. Taken out of S. Bernard vpon the Sermon of the Vigill of S. Peter and S. Paul. ONe must consider three thinges; The asistance of the Saint. His example. And our confusion. His Helpe. In what place he now
findeth him selfe. With what glorie he is crowned. That by his merits and prayers, he can as∣sist me. His examples. How he is arriued to this glorie. By what workes, paines, and vertues. Our confusion. What doe I? I will come where he is, and will not doe what he hath done.
CHAP. XXIV. The maner of meditating the vertues. FIrst one must haue a Rolle of vertues: whereof these are the principall. Faith, Hope, Loue of God, Feare of God, Prudence, Iustice, Humilitie, Patience, Obediēce, Meekenesse, Chastitie, Pouertie, So∣brietie, Mercie, Tacitur∣nitie, Simplicitie, Mo∣destie, Magnanimitie, Perseuerance.
1. One may meditate manye vertues in one Meditation, as the three Theologicall, the foure Cardinall, or the three Euangelicall Counsels, Pouertie, Chastitie, and Obe∣dience: making of each vertue, one point of Meditation. 2. One may take the seauen greater or more eminent vertues, as the three Theological, and the foure Cardinall. Or those which are oppo∣site to the seuen capi∣tall
vices, and to medi∣tate then within one weeke, euery day one. 3. One may meditate al the aforesaid vertues, euerie day one, and o∣thers also if one will; as the Contempt of the world, the Contempt of him selfe, Zeale of soules, Deuotion, Dili∣gence towardes the di∣uine seruice, Concorde, Veritie, Fidelitie, Libe∣ralitie, Prudence, Gra∣titude or knowledging of Benefites, and Pen∣nance.
4. One may take one only vertue, and stay him selfe thereon, so lōg as hee can, considering diuers thinges vpon the same, as; What such a vertue is (for example of humili∣tie:) wherin it cōsisteth: and what it meaneth to be humble. How faire, excel∣lent, profitable, and necessarie this vertue is, consideringe in particu∣lar, the profite that it bringeth. How much it plea∣seth
almightie God, and maketh a man accep∣table vnto him. What example and doctrine our Lord hath giuen vs of such a ver∣tue. How detestable, da∣mageable, and displea∣sing the contrarie vice is vnto Almightie God. How farre off I haue hitherto bene from this vertue, and what e cause thereof hath bene. What I ought to doe for the time to come,
considering the meanes to acquire the same, and the impedimēts to keep me from them. 5. The fifth meanes is, to Meditate some ver∣tue in the person of our B. Bauiour, considering three points. 1. What example the Sonne of Almightie God hath giuen vs of this vertue (for example of humilitie.) 2. What he hath said and taught touchinge such a vertue, remem∣bring him selfe of some
one sentence. 3. Wherefore he hath done and said all this? Assuredly for me. In this manner one may meditate in one weeke, seuen principall vertues of our Lord and and Sauiour; as, Sunday Charitie. Munday. Munday, Humilitie. Tuesday, Patience. Wensday, Obedience. Thursday Meekenes. Friday, Pouertie. Saterday, Chastitie. 4. To meditate the Beatitudes, which are
eight most goodlie ver∣tues, considering three thinges vpon each Bea∣titude. 1. The sentence it selfe, which hath two points, to wit, the ver∣tue, & the recompence. 2. How much this vertue hath shined in our B. Sauiour. 3. How far I am from this vertue, and what profite it would bringe mee, if I were owner thereof.
CHAP. XXV. The manner how to medi∣tate, vpon the Crea∣tures. BY the consideration of the creatures, one commeth vnto a great knowledge and vnder∣standing of the Creator: for there is not any crea∣ture, how little soeuer hee be, which shewes not the power, wise∣dome, and great boun∣tie of him that made
him. Wherfore, who so desireth well and truly to profite in the spiri∣tuall life, let him giue him selfe to the reading of this great and good∣ly booke of the world, which is alwaies oen vnto all; & that therein he make manye good and frequent meditati∣ons; the which may be done in two sortes or maners, to wit; Either meditating them altogether, consi∣dering all this whole world, in one Medica∣tion,
or in particular, making one Meditation vpon each creature, as, the heauen, the earth, and obseruing alwayes therein, the power, wis∣dome, and bountie of almightie God. Furthermore that he accustome him selfe howerly, or at euery oc∣casion, seeing any crea∣ture, a beast, a flower, &c. to eleuate his spi∣rite, & to consider who hath made it, & foorth∣with he shall finde the three aforesaid vertues
and diuine perfections. Vpon the Creatures in ge∣nerall. 1. The Creatures of the world, euidently shewe the greatnes of God, Creator thereof. 2. The multitude and varietie of the thin∣ges created, the infinite perfections which are in God. 3. The good dispo∣sition and Order of the worlde, the wisedome of God. 4. The profite which the creatures doe bring
vnto vs, the Bounty of God. 5. The Beautie of the worlde, the beautie of God. 6. The roundnes ther∣of (which ▪hath neither beginning nor ending) the eternitie of God. 7. The vnitie of the worlde, demonstrateth that God is onely one. 8. The aboundance of good thinges, which we receaue of the crea∣tures, sheweth the libe∣rallitie of God. 9. The stabilitie and
Constancy of the world (continuing alwaies the same) sheweth that God is immutable, and chan∣geth not. Vpon each Creature in particular. 1. To consider its be∣ginning, which is God. 2. The ende wher∣fore such a creature hath bene made, to wit, for the honor of God, and seruice of man. 3. Whereof, & how it hah bene made. 4. The qualities, and effectes of the same crea∣ture.
CHAP. XXVI. The maner how to meditate the perfections of Al∣mighty God. FIrst one must haue a Rolle; these are: In∣finite Essence, Power, Wisedome, Bountie, Loue, Mercie, Iustice, Prouidence, Liberallity, Patience, and Meeke∣nesse. Then one must know and consider the workes and effects which he
hath shewed, of such and such a vertue; The examples & sentences of holie Scripture will greatly serue thereto. As, to know his diuine Essence, to consider the sentence of the Pro∣phet Ieremie, cap. 2. saying, I doe fill both hea∣uen and earth. And Acts 3. In him we liue, mooue, and haue our being. For the Power of almigh∣tie God. He spake and they were made: he com∣manded, and they were created. Psalm. 32. And
so of others. Where∣fore this meditation, a∣greeth especiallye to those that are most per∣fect, and most practised, as well in Holie Scrip∣ture, as in spirituall matters: and therefore may be called, the most excellent of all Medi∣tations. CHAP. XXVII. The manner how to Medi∣tate the Pater noster, & the holie Scripture. IT is an excellent good manner, & ex∣ceeding
profitable, to meditate vpon the wor∣des of Holie Scripture, which are the wordes of Almightie God, and marueilously replenish∣ed with diuine myste∣ries. The maner how to meditate them, is, to take the first worde of a sentence (as if it were this;) So God loued the World, that hee gaue his only begetten Sonne. Ioh. 3. The first word wherof is So, & to staye him selfe, and to pause
vpon the consideration thereof, so long as our soule can finde diuersity of conceits and instruc∣tions, gust, and vtilitie therein: & then to passe to the next word after, and to doe the like. After this maner, one may meditate the Col∣lects and Hymnes of holy Church, & aboue all, our Lordes Prayer, the which for that it was composed imme∣diatly by God himselfe, conteineth in it verie wounderfull mysteries,
and ought to be often Meditated and conside∣red, for the great fruits which such Meditation bringeth. After this diuine Prayer, to Meditate the Aue Maria, Salue Regina, Anima Christi, Veni Crea∣tor, Veni sancte Spiritus, Te Deum laudamus &c. And Priests the Holie Canon of the Masse. CHAP. XXVIII. Of Examen of Conscience. BEcause examen of Conscience, con∣sisteth
principallie in knowinge our faultes (which is an act of the vnderstanding) one may very well place it, a∣mongst the species of Meditation. Now, there are two sortes of examen of Conscience; the one is called Generall, when one examineth and sear∣cheth foorth al the faul∣tes which he hath com∣mitted, by Thoughtes, Words, Works, and O∣mission, to the end to a∣mend himselfe of al; and
ordinarily is made in the Euening, & containeth sixe points. 1. To render thankes to Almightie God for his Benefites. 2. To aske him grace to know our sinnes, and to amende them. 3. To aske an account of our owne soule, of the sinnes committed that present day: consi∣dering all the houres of the day from the Mor∣ning, wherein we haue failed, by Thoughtes, Wordes Workes, and
Omission. 4. To demaund par∣don, for that wherein wee haue offended. 5. To purpose firme∣lie to amende vs, by the helpe and grace of Al∣mightie God: and to say at the ending, the Pater noster. The other, is called Particular, and is, when one examineth one on∣ly imperfection, wherof one desireth to correct him selfe; the practise is this.
In the morning being risen, one must inconti∣nently make a stedfast purpose, to keepe him selfe diligently in that day, from such a fault and imperfection, with the helpe and assistance of Almighty God. After dinner to exa∣mine him selfe vpon the fame, sequestringe him selfe a parte, and doing three particular things. 1. To demand an ac∣compte of his owne soule, consideringe all the houres frō the mor∣ning,
how oftē hee hath fallen into the same. 2. To make so many markes, or streekes with his penne. 3. To purpose a new, to countergard him selfe for the rest of that day. After supper, to doe the very same; And to see from day to day, and from one weeke to an∣other, the profite and a∣mendment which one hath made; alwaies cra∣uing the assistance of al∣mightie God, to inable him to amend himselfe,
and excitinge him selfe, to greater amendment. CHAP. XXIX. That Which hee must doe before Prayer. FOr final accomplish∣ment of the forme or manner of Prayer, and of all that which hath bene hitherto said, we drawinge and ap∣proachinge nowe to an ende, wee will shewe the practise, diuiding the same into three partes,
to the ēd to obserue or∣der, & that one may the better beare it in memo∣rie. And let euery one perswade him selfe, that by how much the bet∣ter hee shall obserue these instructions and documents, ordinarily, by so much better will prayer succeede with him; as contrariwise, if he vse not the diligence well to obserue them, so much lesse progresse will he make. The thing then which is most necessary before
Prayer, is, to make a di∣ligent preparation, a doctrine and precept gi∣uen by almightie God himselfe; and in the auncient Testament al∣so by the Wiseman. (Eccles. 8.) saying, to whomsoeuer will pre∣sent himselfe before his diuine Maiesty, to speak vnto him; Before Prayer prepare thy hart, and be not as one that tempteth God. As if he said; It is too much presumption, it is a haynous offence, to come before my Ma∣iestie,
without first put∣ting thy selfe in order. And by his Sonne in the new (Mat. 6. Where hee saieth.) When thou wilt pray, enter into thy chamber, that is to say, enter within thy selfe, prepare thee wel &c. This diligence and preparation, consisteth in the doing of sundrie things. 1. One must exactly know the historie, my∣sterie, or subiect which wee meane to meditate, and the circumstances
of the same, as the pla∣ce, the persons, & other particularities; for the knowledge of the fact, is the ground of the Meditation: and there∣fore, one must either read the Text, or a litle refresh the memorie thereof. 2. One must deuide the aforesaid subiect or matter of meditation, into sundrie parcells or parts, which we call points or considerati∣ons, to the ende, to con∣sider them one after an∣other.
And then also, one must prepare the preludiums and collo∣quies, conforme to the subiect of the medita∣tion: whereof shall be spoken, in the ensuing Article. 3. It is not so good in meditatinge, to take some meditation made by another all at lēgth, as of S. Bonauenture, Granado, or others: for better it is, that the soule of her selfe doe finde her owne pasture. 4. One must not be
weary, either in bodie or minde, when one goeth to prayer, as to haue read or written o∣uermuch: but for some time before, to leaue al, to finde him selfe fresh and wel, disposed, at the time of Prayer. 5. About one quarter before the houre (if the prayer be made by day, and the Euening before he goe to bed, for that of the morning) one must diligentlie fore∣see and learne by hart, the points of the medi∣tation,
& the rest which one hath prepared for this purpose, yea and if neede so require (at the time of prayer, to hould the paper or booke in his hande, the better to remember and medi∣tate one thinge after another. 6. Being layde in his bed, he must briefelie reduce them to me∣morie; and arising in the morning, giue and pre∣sent the first of his thoughts vnto almighty God, & then make him
selfe readie, thanking him, and praying vnto him, both with heart & mouth, and thinking v∣pon the subiect of the Meditation that hee meaneth to make, ex∣cite in him selfe a fer∣uent desire to doe it well. 7. About a quarter of an houre before, one must doe that which onr Sauiour saith (in S. Mat. cap. 6.) Enter into thy chamber &c. Enter into thy selfe, and close the gate against al other
affaires and cogitations, consideringe, whether one goeth, and where about: and houlding him selfe so recollec∣ted, to attende and expect the houre of Prayer. 8. It is also good to goe to prayer, with a good appetite, that is to say, with inclination & desire to pray. And e∣uen as those who want an appetite, labour to get one, either by doing some exercise, or by sawces, and the like,
which procure an appe∣tite: euen so must one seeke for deuotion (not hauing the same) either by reading, or by exa∣men of conscience, or lookinge fixedly vpon some sweete and de∣uout Picture, or doing some Penance, as a dis∣cipline, or other morti∣fication; Moreouer, the more to stirre vp him∣selfe, he must, going to Prayer, thinke that he goes to a mine of gould or siluer, from whence he may bring, most ex∣ceeding
treasure. 8. Then, hauing heard the clockes, or the time being arriued, thou shalt take holie water, accor∣dinge to thine ordina∣rie, to driue awaie the Deuill. Next, thou shalt goe faire and soft∣lie towardes the place where thou oughtest to pray; and standing one or two steppes off, before thou fallest on thy knees, pause a lit∣tle, and raise vpp thy spirit on high, conside∣ringe on the one side,
the greatnes of Almigh∣tie God, & his presence, howe hee looketh vpon thee: on the otherside, thy smalnes, and thy sin∣nes, and that he atten∣deth thee, to giue be∣ninge and curteous au∣dience. 10. After this, thou shalt make him an hum∣ble and deuout reue∣rence, setting thy knees vpon the ground, saying wih heart and mouth, sometimes the wordes of the Patriarch Abra∣ham, I will speake to my
Lord, I that am but dust and others: sometimes those of S. Francis, Lord who art thou, & who am I? 11. Going to prayer, it will greatly helpe thee (as in all other thinges) to recommend thy selfe to thy Angell gardian, and to beseech him that he wil accompany thee, and bringe thee before thy Lord, and to assist thee at that instant, and that he would put back & hinder all distractiōs, and both pray for thee, and likewise present thy
prayers to Almightie God. 12. Thou must be di∣ligent to put in execu∣tion these instructions, allwaies notwithstan∣ding without scruple or anxietie, neuer to forget anie thing: for sometimes it chanceth (especiallie to the most perfect and most habi∣tuated) that without so much preparation, one findeth him selfe prepa∣red, and one presenly enereth into the wine celler of our B. Lord:
it sufficeth that we all∣waies doe on our be∣halfe, our endeuour & diligence. CHAP. XXX. That which is to be done, during Prayer. DVring the houre, or time of Prayer, there are foure things to be performed, to wit; The Preparatorie Pray∣er, the PreIudiums, the Points, and the Colloquies. Order is
good in euery thing, & the holye Scripture (Deuteronomie 31.) that the thinges of God are wel disposed. Now to vnderstand those wordes, and maner of speaking. Preparatorie prayer is called, a briefe praier, which is made in the minde at the begin∣ning of prayer and me∣ditation, offering vpp to God, all our faculties and operations, to his honour and glorie, de∣manding his assistance
to make our prayer, of whom all our sufficien∣cie is (1. Cor. 3.) And one may adde thereto the vocall Prayer, Actio∣nes nostras. &c. or some other. Preludium, is as a Pre∣amble which aideth the soule & vnderstanding, to enter the more easily into Meditation. And ordinarily one maketh two Preludiums, after the Preparatorie Prayer. Now, to vnderstād how one must make these Preābles, note that the
matter of Meditatiō may be of two sortes, Cor∣poral, as the Natiuitie of our Lorde; or Spiri∣tuall, as Sinne. The first Preludium, whē the matter, is Cor∣porall, and visible, is, to imagine the persons, e∣uen as if we sawe them before our eyes. As for example, if we will meditate the Natiuitie of our Lord, the first Preludium shal be to re∣present before our eyes the Stable, the Manger, the little Infant, our
Ladie, and S. Ioseph. And euen as the Pain∣ters represent them to vs in their Pictures: the same are we to doe in our imagination; proui∣ded without too excessi∣ue inforcement, for they which haue not a good imagination, should breake their heades in vaine; and others make great proite thereof. When the matter is Spirituall, one must vse some other like represē∣tation; as for example, to imagine to see our
soule enclosed within this bodie, as within a prison; or man banished into this vale of teares, amongst the brute and sauage beastes; or to see him self enuironed with diuels; or to be amidst the Angels; or to ima∣gine to heare a voice from heauen; or from the mouth of our Lord, or other Prophet or A∣postle▪ speaking or pro∣nouncinge the wordes which one will Medi∣tate. The second Prelu∣dium
is, to craue of Al∣mightie God, the grace which one desireth to drawe from such Medi∣tation, as sorrow for sin∣nes, loue of God, know∣ledge of him selfe, &c. conforme to the subiect of the Meditation. Colloquie and Prayer, (taking the word praier, properlie) is al one, that is to say, to speake with God, as hath before bene explicated & con∣sidered. After then that one hath contemplated & considered; one must
next pray, that is to say, speake with almightie God, thanking him, cra∣uing pardon of him, or the like. Briefly, doing that which hath bene said in its place. Now we will adioyne three things, to wit; how one must make these Collo∣quies; how many, and when. 1. As touching the first (besides that which hath bene said in his place touching the ma∣ner howe to Thanke, Aske, & Offer, in which
three doe ordinarilie consist the Colloquie) Note first that all this ought to be done men∣tallie and in spirit; albeit after the same, one may adioyne some Vocall prayer, such as one will, and according to the subiect of the Medita∣tion; and ordinarilie, at the ende of the prayer, one oght to recite that diuine prayer, by the which one craueth of almightie God, all that which may be demāded and desired, to wit, our
Lordes Prayer; But it must be said, softlie or leasurelie, worde by worde. 2. To make this Col∣loquie well, one thinge there is which doeth greatly ayde, which is, to speake vnto Almigh∣tie God, one while, as a little infant speaketh to his father, another while as the seruant speaketh to his maister, the vassall to his king: Now as the spouse speaketh to hir betrothed: and someti∣mes as a poore begger
to the rich; as a guiltie person to his Iudge, as one sicke to his Phisi∣tian: and imagining him self like to the Prodigall childe, lame, leprous, a traitour, rebell, &c. 3. It is also good to make some mentall dia∣logue, which is, to in∣troduce our Lord, or God the Father so spea∣king to the soule, and saying vnto him, such or such like thinges: and the soule answering him. Or contrariwise, the soule speakinge, and
God answering her. As touchinge the se∣cōd, one may make one Colloquie onely, as to God the Father, or to our Lord Iesus: and one may likewise make sun∣drie if one will. Take an example of three Colloquies, First, to addresse vs to the blessed Virgin, besee∣ching her to obtaine for vs the thing which we desire, or which is ne∣cessarie for vs: and ha∣uing prayed Mentally, to make another Collo∣quie
with our Lord, as he is man, and our Me∣diatour, beseeching him mentally, to obtaine for vs the same grace, and immediatly to recite some praier which is di∣rected to him, as, Anima Christi; or some other. The third Colloquie, with God the Father, that it would please his Maiestie, by the Merits and intercession of the Mother and the Sonne, to graunt vs that which we demaund; and at the ende, to recite the
Pater noster. As touching the third, albeit the proper place and time of the Collo∣quies, be at the ende of an howre, and neuer to omit to departe from Prayer, without making some kind of Colloquy; neuertheles one may also make them in the middest, and at euerie point and consideration, when the soule doeth finde her selfe mooued and stirred vp to say or speake somethinge. Or the better, to continue
attention, and counter∣gard himselfe from di∣stractions, by the mea∣nes of these little Collo∣quies. I say little, because if the Colloquie at the beginninge or midst of the meditation should be long, it would hinder the Meditation: not∣withstāding, that which comes from the Holie Ghost, cannot be but good; whence we see, that there are certaine persons, who spend the time of Prayer and me∣ditation, by manner of Colloquie.
CHAP. XXXI. That which is to be consi∣dered vpon the points of Meditation. HAuinge shewed howe manie thin∣ges there are to be done in the time and houre of prayer or meditation; next we will note that which is to be conside∣red vpon each point, wherin many doe finde them selues troubled, not knowinge what to thinke or meditate. To
helpe therefore all the world, and to giue vnto all sufficient matter and meanes to entertaine them selues in medita∣tion, and to profite ther∣in, we will set before them sundry Medita∣tions, which one may make vpon all thinges whatsoeuer they be. Note then, that the matter which one medi∣tateth is, either Corpo∣rall, or Spirituall. If the subiect be Corporall (as are all the misteries of our Lord) one must
vpon each point consi∣der these circumstances, to wit, 1. The persons who are found in this misterie, as our Lord, our Ladie, the Angell Gabriell, the Apostles, &c. And their qualities, vertues, excellence, and office, 2. The wordes which each of thē spea∣keth: and when there are no wordes written, to thinke what probably they might say in such a case. 3. That which eue∣rie one doth. 4. The
ende and cause wher∣fore the same was done. 5. The effects and vtili∣ties which haue procee∣ded thereof. 6. One may also cōsider, the though∣tes & affections, which those persōs had in that instant. If the matter be spiri∣tuall, there are diuers things to be considered. 1. What such a thing or matter is. 2. What his first beginning, and cause efficient is. 3. Wherfore, and to what ende, it hath bene done. 4. The
vtilities or detriments, that it doeth produce. 5. What our Lord hath done or said of such a thinge. 6. How I haue comported my selfe in times past, concerninge the same. 7. What I ought to doe for the time to come. 8. It is verie good to consider the name, or the diuers names of such a thing. 9. And some sentence of Holie Scripture v∣pon the same subiect. Behould then, if there be aboundant matter
to stay ones selfe in me∣ditation or not. But one must knowe these points by heart, a litle also accustome himselfe, or hould this booke, or this paper in his hande. And note, that it is not necessarie euery daie to make these conside∣rations, but onely some: nor yet exactly to fol∣low the same order, as, to consider alwayes, all the persons in the first place, in the se∣cond the wordes, and so
foorth, but accordinge as the soule shall fasten her selfe, rather to one thing, then to another. CHAP. XXXII. Of the Composition of the Bodie. THere is yet another thing to be knowē, and to be explicated, which is, the composi∣tion of the bodie; wher∣in sundrie thinges are to be noted. 1. That it imports
not how one place, or settle him selfe in medi∣tating, or praying, pro∣uided that the medita∣tion and Prayer it selfe succeede wel, be it knee∣ling or standing, or sit∣ting, or lying, orleaning, or lying prostrate on the ground, or houldinge the armes in forme of a Crosse. Walking, is not proper to Meditate, but rather to prepare one before, and to examine after prayer. 2. That in what man∣ner soeuer it be, one
must obserue great res∣pect and reuerence, al∣waies remembring, that one is in the sight and presence of Almightie God, and to be verie warie, not to doe the least indecent thing that may be. And albeit that greater reuerence is re∣quired in the acts of the Will, then in the actes of the Vnderstandinge, that is to saie, that one must comporte himselfe more reuerentlie and more humblie, when one prayeth, and ma∣keth
Colloquies, then when one considereth only, notwithstandinge in meditating one must not forget the reuerence due to his maiestie; and therefore albeit one sit, he must be bare-headed, if that his health permit the same. 3. That ordinarilie one must begin vpon his knees, or prostrate; and after that one hath be∣gunne in such fashion, he must not stirre, but hould him selfe so, so
long as the bodie doeth feele no paine, and that his prayer succeedeth well. Then when it shal be neede, to accommo∣date him selfe faire and softly in some other maner. 4. As touching the eies, for the most part, he must hould them shut, to praye and me∣ditate well. One may also sometimes open them, but fixed on some certaine place, without moouing them this way and that way.
All this being pre∣supposed, the practise is this. That being placed vpon his knees, or pro∣strate vpon the ground, after he hath blest him with the signe of the Crosse, immediatly he must make the prepara∣torie prayer with great diffidence in him selfe, and confidence in God. After that the Prelu∣diums; Which done, he must take the first point of the Meditation, and consideringe the same, stay him selfe, or pause
so long time thereon, as the soule doth finde to thincke and to profite theron; & then to passe to the other, and to do the same. At the ende of the houre, or after one hath meditated e∣nough, to make the Colloquie, or Collo∣quies, and makinge an ende, to recite deuoutly the Pater noster. And because the grea∣test difficultie in this af∣faire lieth in the medita∣tion and consideration of the points, to the end
that euery one be well instructed, we will ad∣ioine some other aduer∣tisements, that must be vsed in this behalfe. CHAP. XXXIII. Other aduertisements tou∣ching Meditation. 1. THe first is, that if it chance (as so∣metimes it doeth) that in meditatinge the first point, or the second, the meditation succee∣deth well, and that the
soule findeth therein manie thinges to consi∣der and profite her selfe, he must staie him there, not caring to passe to the other point, albeit the whole houre should be spent therin: only hee must remēber to make the Colloquy at the ēd. 2. The second, that hee must not content himselfe with the onely consideration, & know∣ledge of thinges, but to passe further, and to mooue the will, and to doe as the Prophet saith:
ps. 8. In my Meditation, fire is kindled. Now the most ordinary affections which one ought to ex∣cite in time of Medita∣ting, are, Loue, Feare, Sorrow, Ioye, Desire, Hope, Admiration, and Confusion of him selfe. It is meete then, that the meditation be not drie, and onely pure speculation, but affec∣tuous, and full of inte∣riour taste. Moreouer, of euerie point which one considereth, one must endeuour to draw
some fruite, making re∣flection vpon him selfe, and resoluingto execute that which the Holie Ghost hath taught vs in our Prayer. 3. The third, that the sentences of the holy Scriptures, do greatly helpe to meditate well: and for this respect it is good, to find out & pre∣pare some one vpon the same subiecte, whereon hee will Meditate; As to Meditate vpon the knowledge of himselfe, & of the miseries of ma
in this world, to cōsider this sentēce of Iob. cap. 14, A man borne of a wo∣man &c. And making a meditatiō of the loue of God towards man, to take this sentence of our Lord. (Ioh. 3.) So God loued the world. &c. and so of other matters. 4. The fourth, that similitudes also do mar∣uellouslie ayde to me∣ditate well, for the thin∣ges of this world, doe leade vs to the know∣ledge of inuisible and spirituall thinges; as for
example: wilt thou con∣sider and comprehend something of the glorie of heauen? Take some similitudes of Bāquets, Marriages, Riches, Ho∣nours, and Pleasures of this present life. In like maner, to contem∣plate the paines of hell, propose vnto thy selfe the most grieuous tor∣ments, and the greatest euils of this world: and the very same thou must doe in other matters. Application of the Senses. 5. The fifth is, tou∣ching
the application of the Senses, which is a thing that doth ayde & further meditation, and are placed onely in those Meditatiōs, whose matter is Corporal. To apply the Sences in me∣ditating, is as much to say, as to imagine to see, heare, smell, taste, and touch spirituallie and by deuotion, the per∣persons contained in the meditation, their gar∣ments, steppes, and all things else appertaining vnto them: but this is
to be done with all hu∣militie and reuerence And this application o the Senses, is made or∣dinarily a part, and sepa∣rate from the meditati∣on, & in another houre or euen then also, bu after meditatiō, after & the discourse of the vn∣derstanding is ended. There is another for of application of th Senses, or rather medi∣tation vpon the Senses which is, to consider for example, that which our Lord sufferedin ech
of his Senses, or the ioy, and contentment that our Ladie receaued of our Lord, by her Sēses, beholding him, hearing him speakinge to him, touching him &c. Also to consider the ioyes, that the blessedshal haue and the paines which the damned shall suffer in the fiue Senses. CHAP. XXXIV. Remedies against di∣stractions. THe sixt is, touching the distractions
which chance in pray∣ing and meditating, and like vnto dead flyes, spil the sweetnesse of the oyntment. (Eccles. 10.) one must therfore know the remedies. And first, to make a diligent pre∣paration, as hath bene saide, to aske ayde of almightie God, and our Angell Gardian for this effect. 2. Because medi∣tation is more subiect to distraction then pray∣er; one remedie is, not to continue ouer long the consideratiō, which
is the act of vnderstan∣ding, but to each consi∣deration, to adde some prayer, or a litle Col∣loquie. There are other mea∣nes to driue awaie the distraction, which is all∣readie entred. First one must be diligent, pre∣sently to take notice of it, and speedely to reiect it. 2. Humblie to craue pardon of almightie God, to haue turned our backe towardes him. 3. If the distraction doe re∣turne, or wil not awaie,
one must not impatient or trouble him selfe, sith comming against our will, it is no sinne, but matter of merit. 4. To humble and confound him selfe, cōsidering his pouertie & feeblenesse, not able to doe any good thing of himselfe, and to esteeme himselfe vnworthie to speake vnto God, and to stand in his diuine presence. 5. To recommende him selfe to our B. Ladie, to his good Angell, and other Patrons. 6. To
make this vocall Prayer deuoutlie, worde by worde, and to content himselfe therewith, euē as he who hauing bread made of wheate, con∣tents▪ himselfe with bread of Rie or Barley. 7. Sometimes not to loose too much time in this combat of impor∣tunat cogitations, one may take some good spiritual booke, especial∣ly Gerson & make mixt prayer, and meditation together, reading one period or sentence, and
considering it a litle, & then to make some mē∣tall prayer, or Vocal, or the one or other, and so to passe from period to period. 8. For al distrac∣tion, difficultie, & paine which may present it selfe, he must neuer for all this abandon prayer, nor shorten the time which he hath accusto∣med, or otherwise de∣creed to employ therin, which the diuell doth especiallie pretende and labour to perswade: but in such case, he
must rather a little passe beyond the howre, to the end to vanquishe him selfe, and the ene∣mie together▪ Doing this, that which the wise man promiseth wil come to passe (Eccles. 7.) to wit. That the end of Prayer, shall be better then the begin∣ning, that is to say, that one shall not depart frō thence without conso∣lation, or at the least, one shall merit verye much, mortifying him selfe for the loue of God.
The seauenth, apper∣taineth to Repetition, that is to say, that it is expedient, and some∣times necessarie, once, twice, and thrice, to make againe the same meditation: the which is done for two reasons; Either for that the first time one hath found therin exceeding sweet∣nesse and profite, and re∣chewing the same, he shal both taste and pro∣fite more; Or, for that the first time he could not enter therein, and
returning thereto, it wil come to passe, that at the seconde, third, or fourth time, the gate shal be set open vnto vs, according to that which our Lord teacheth in S. Mark. cap. 7. saying: Knocke and it shal be ope∣ned vnto you. Adde, that by these Repetitions, the like mysteries are better imprinted in our soule, and also the vnderstanding doeth habituate and make it selfe more prompt to meditate.
Lastly, one may Re∣peat, in three manners: either all the meditatiō, or some one point ther∣of, whereof one could not tast before: or to Repeate two or three Meditations together, pausing, especially vpon those points wherein at the first one hath found least tast or relish, or which one could not meditate.
CHAP. XXXV. What one must doe when he is disgusted, and in spiritual aridity or dri∣nesse. THe eight is, howe one ought to go∣uerne him selfe, and what he ought to doe, in the time of ariditie, or drinesse. Where it is to be noted, that the spi∣rituall life, albeit for the most part it be full of sweetnesse and content∣ment
of spirite, for the vertuous people sake, who enforce themsel∣ues truely to serue our Lord, notwithstanding it is sometimes subiect to desolation & distaste, so that a man hauing lost this sensible deuo∣tion, doeth finde him∣selfe drie, not able to bide at prayer and me∣ditation. Now, finding him selfe in such estate, what must he doe? 1. He must neuer loose cou∣rage, but expect with firme hope and confi∣dence,
that God after this storme will sende faire weather, as Tobie said, cap. 3. Who after tempest; sendeth faire wea∣ther. 2. To haue pa∣tience, and to say with Iob (cap. 1.) If wee haue receaued good things from the handes of our Lord, is it not iust that we receau also euill? 3. To humble him∣selfe, lauding almightie God, for at that time wee see, and touch with the finger, that wee are nothing woorth with∣out
the aide of almightie God Also, wee ought to beleeue, that this cō∣meth not but through our faules and offences; for the which God doth presently punish vs, and hūbly to aske him par∣don. Besids this, he must likewise vse other mea∣nes, to recouer the de∣uotion which one hath lost for the former would not suffice. 4. The fourth then is, to doe some Penan∣ce, or Penances to this ende.
5. To examine more diligently his consciēce, to take awaie the cause of euill. 6. To recommend himselfe more instantly vnto our Lord, to our Ladie, to his good An∣gell &c. And he must be aduertised, that in such time of distastfulnes, he must not omit any good worke which he was accustomed or delibera∣ted before to doe, nor yet to seeke himselfe, nor his proper gust, but the honor & good plea∣sure
of Almightie God. CHAP. XXXVI. That which is to be done after Prayer. AFter that Prayer is finished, one must make a particular exa∣men vpon the same prayer, in this maner. Either sittinge or wal∣king faire and softly, to consider the space of a quarter of an houre, or there about, how thy prayer hath succeeded
with thee, well or ill; If thou hast had good suc∣cesse, render thankes to the diuine boūty, hum∣bling thy selfe, and ac∣knowledging that this good proceedeth not of thy selfe; If thy affaires went ill, humbly aske him pardon. 2. Examine & search out the cause whence this proceeded, consi∣dering from point to point, how, and with what diligēce, thou hast performed that which was to be obserued, and
wherein thou hast fay∣led: and make a firme purpose to be more dili∣gent, and to doe better for the time to come. 3. Retaine in memory some fruite of the Pray∣er, which almighty God hath communicated vn∣to thee, to make thy profite thereof. 4. After this, giue a glance of the eye to all the day ensuing, wisely disposing thine affaires, and purposing this and that, as God shall in∣spire thee.
5. If some one after prayer and Meditation, wil commit to writting some profitable point, which hee hath recea∣ued, or felt in medita∣ting, to the ende to serue himselfe therof for his owne profite, or his neighbours, it is both lawfull, & of great vti∣litie; but alwaies proui∣ded, let the same be done very briefly. 6. Sometimes before dinner and supper, he must remēber himselfe of the meditation in the
morning, both in gene∣rall, and particularlie of that point which hee had retained, chewing the same a litle, renew∣ing his deuotion, & ac∣complishing that which the Prophet sieth. Re∣liquiae cogitationis diem festum agent tibi. Psal. 75. 7. He must put in executiō, the good pur∣poses, which he made in the morning, taking heed of the occasions which offer themselues, much lesse procuring them: for it is the prin∣cipall
ende and fruit of Prayer. 8. In the day time, hee must keepe himselfe closely recollected, and as in continuall deuo∣tion, and to beware of distraction, as much as possible may be, not let∣ting our Lord goe out of our sight, and saying in euerie place with the Prophet: I had alwaies our Lord before my sight. Psal. 10. 9. Finally, to accom∣plish all that hath hi∣therto bene said, and to
profite better in this holy exercise of prayer and meditation, the ser∣uant of Almightie God, ought twice a weeke to make an examen here vpon particularlie, sith the thing is of such im∣portance: that he exa∣men, I say, how prayer goeth with him, how he aduanceth himselfe herein, to wit, if there be some impediment, and the like: comparing one weeke with an∣other, and one moneth with another. And to
make this examen, he must set down the daies, and the howres, to the ende to remember him, as on Tuesdaie, and Sa∣terdaie; in the morning after Prayer, and in the euening, after supper. FINIS.
Instructio haee ad bene orandun, à R. P. Ignatio Balsamo; com∣posita & Anglice red∣dita vtiliter imprimi po∣terit 12. Aug. 1617. Au∣domaropoli. I. Redman S. T. Doctor & librorum Censor. Huius iudicio subscripsi Duaci, 37. Augusti, 1617. Georgius Coluenerius S. Theol. Doctor & Professor, & libro∣rum in Academia Duacena Censor.
THE FLOWERS OF DEVOTION. Where with euerie pious soule, may easilie practise how to discourse spiritual∣lie, with Iesus Christ his beloued Spouse. Containinge 24. holie Aspirations, to be recited in eache of the 24. hou∣res, as well of the night, as of the day. For IOHN HEIGHAM.
THE PREFACE to the Reader. IT is vpon Iesus-Christ, your best beloued Spouse (deuou & deare affected soule) on whome your hart ought al∣waies to muse & meditate. in all your thoughtes, wordes deedes wills, desires, and as∣pirations, yea euen in all the houres, and moments of your life; It is he, I say, Who ought to be imbraced and lodged therin, both night and day, the Idea of your soule, the desire of your hart, and the onlie obiect of all your motions. To the end therfore, neuer so diuide or sequester your
selfe from his blessed compa∣nie, behould here certaine amourous discourses where∣with to entertaine you, and where vpon to employ your spirit in euerie moment, in manner of Petitions or briefe Meditations, so sweete, so fruitfull, so spirituall, yea s deuout and aggreable to your dearlie beloued Sauiour Iesus Christ, as that the same is a true and assured meanes, and most perfect methode, to con∣serue you perpetuallie in his holie grace, and to dwell with him, and in him, and he likewise with you, and within you in all occasions. Performe then, I beseeche you, that which is here perscribed vn∣to you, not for the loue of me (allbeie I instantlie require
you) but for the most tender loue which you beare to his diuine maiestie. You shall begin this An∣gelicall office at fiue a clock in the Euening, to meditate the first Aspiration & sweete discourse, and so from houre to houre you shall continue, vntill the four and twentith houre, which will bring you to finish this exercise, at four a clocke, the next day after in the Euening; And then you shall begin againe att your first, and so shall conti∣nue euerie day (Gods grace assistinge you) vntill the day and houre, that he shall determine to place you with him selfe in perpetuall repose. Now, as touching the
houres ordained for rest, you shall obserue this easie rule. Before you fall a sleepe, be i∣ethor in your bed, or he ort you goe to take your rest, you shall meditat four of the ∣foresaid Meditations. An if it happen also that you awake in the night time, you shall meditate one or two more. If you awaken not all the night, in the morning you shall ac∣cōplish althose houres which you haue omitted: and in this sort you shall alwaies con∣tinue. This holie Exercise, you haue meanes to performe in working, talking, walking and in all manner of affaires which you shall doe, for it is nether the bodie, nor yet the tongue which is burthened by
this Exercise, but it is the spirit & the hare which spea∣keth, and testifieth to Iesus-Christ, the fidelitie and care which it hath to please him. This also may be done, with∣out hindringe you any thinge at all from your other pray∣ers, ether Mentall, or Vo∣call, yea or so much as to with∣hould you from attendinge, to any other godlie worke, or laudable Exercise whatso∣euer; Practise then, and per∣seuere. Your seruant in Christ Iesus. Iohn Heigham.
The 1. Meditation, at fiue clock at night. O Most meeke Iesus, the patterne and example of perfect humilitie. In this houre, entring into the lod∣ging of a frinde, thou vouch∣safedst to wash the feete of thy disciples, in signe of th great and singular Humility Grant deare Iesus, that I may obtaine the vertu of mo perfect Humilitie, euen t the abiecting of my selfe vnder all mens feete; An let it please thee so to wash my sinfull soule, that I ma loge thee therein, for eue and euer. Amen.
The 2. Meditation, a six a clock at night. O Good Iesus. In this houre, euen then whilst thine enimies conspired thy death, and sought to teare thy flesh in peeces with their teeth, and to drink thy blood for rage and madnes, in the same houre, thou vowchsafedst to institute that most diuine Sacrament of thy bodie and blood, for our foode and sustenance. Deare Iesus, by the vertu of this thy sweete and ineffa∣ble loue, preserue and keepe me from the sinne of Ingra∣titude; And neuer suffer me to depart this life. till first I be fed with thy Bodie and Blood in the blessed Sacra∣ment, Amen.
The 3. Meditation, at seauen a clock at night. O Good Iesus, in this houre, thou wentest with thy Disciples into the garden of Gethsmany, where pro∣strate on the ground, and praying to thy Father, thou felst into such excessiue sad∣nes, that thou didst sweat, a sweat of blood, for paine and anguish. Deare Iesus, asist me with thy grace, in all ri∣bulations, to haue my pre∣sent recourse vnto thee by holie prayer, and make me in this life, willingly to sweat with thee, that in the life to come, I may for euer ioifully repose with thee. Amen. The 4. Meditation, at eight a clock at night. O Good Iesus, in this
houre, thou wast sould and betraid to thine enimies, by thine owne Disciple, with the signe of a kisse, and this for the loue of a litle lucre. Deare Iesus let no filthie lu∣cre, euer cause me to sell or betray thee: or vniustlie to wronge or oppresse my neighbour. And refuse not (I beseeche thee) the kisse of him that epenteth to haue offended thee, sith thou refusedst not the kisse of him that did vnkindly be∣tray thee, Amen. The 5. Meditation, at nine a clock at night. O Good Iesus, in this houre, thou wast bound and fast tyed by most barbarous soldiers, and haled by them hither and thither like a very
beast, without once opening thy mouth in thine owne defence. Grant me deare Ie∣sus, in vertu of these thy sa∣cred bondes, to binde and captiuate, all my senses, both of soule and bodie, in obe∣dience vnto thee. And neuer to hale thee to any beastlie sinne, or voluptuous pleasu∣res, wherby I may trespas or offend thee, Amen. The 6. Meditation, at ten a clock at night. O Good Iesus, in this houre thou wast forsaken of thy Disciples, and remai∣nedst alone in the handes of thine enimies, who led thee away, as their priso∣ner, and captiue. Deare Ie∣sus, receiue me, I beseeche thee, thy fugitiue seruant,
who manie times (for feare and other respects) haue fled from thee; And keepe me safelie vnder thy protection, that mine infernall enimies, doe not carrie me awaye as their condemned and per∣petuall captiue, Amen. The 7. Meditation, ar eleuen a clock at night. O good Iesus, in this houre thou wast presented before Annas, who deman∣ded questions of thee, con∣cerning both thy doctrine and thy disciples: and recei∣uing a violent blow of one of his seruants, yet rendredst vnto that wicked and inso∣lent wretch, a most milde answere, Deare Iesus, strēgh∣ten me to confes thy faith and truth, vpon all occasions,
when I shall be called or vr∣ged therunto. Neuer to pu∣nish any in the heate of my passion: and such as any way shall iniurie me, to mollifie their wrathfull hartes with wordes of sweetnes and be∣nignitie, Amen. The 8. Meitation, at twelue a clock at night. O Good Iesus, in this houre thou wast sent from Annas to Cayphas, where the chiefe of the Priests were assembled together▪ secking false witnes against thee to put thee to death: but found not any. Deae Iesus, grant me to accuse no man falselie, and being falstlie ac∣cused, to suppore it patient∣lie. To despise, yea and vt∣terlie
to detest, all lies and falsitie, sith by lies and fal∣sitie, thou wast vniustlie ad∣iudged and condemned to die, Amen. The 9. Meditation, at one  a clock in the morning. O Good Iesus, In this houre, thou was thrice de∣nied of Peeter, who forswore himselfe to be thy Disciple, but thou gratiouslie looking back vpon him, he presently went foorth of that wicked companie, and bitterlie be∣wailed his offence. Deae Iesus, haue mercie on me, who both by wordes and deedes, haue so oft denyed my selfe to be thy Disciple. Looke vpon me with the eyes of thy clemencie, for that wherin I haue offen∣ded
thee: and make mee to flye all wicked companie, sith the same is such an oc∣casion of falling from thee, Amen. The 10. Meditation, at two a clock in the morning. O Good Iesus, In this houre, thou wast sent from Cayphas, to Pontius Pilat, where the wicked Iewes began a fresh to accuse thee falslie, alleadging that thou peruertedst their people, and forbadst them to pay tribut to Cesars Maiestie; Deare Ie∣sus, let this thy false accusa∣tion, excuse me (faultie that I am) before the Maiestie of thy Father; And make me so to giue vnto the world that which is the worldes, that I neuer omitt to giue vnto
God that which is Gods, which is, all honor and glo∣rie, for euer and euer, Amen. The 11. Meditation, at three a clock in the morning. O good Iesus, in this houre, thou wast sent by Pi∣lat to Herod, who of vaine curiositie, had long time de∣sired to see thee: where thou (king of heauen) cloathed in a white coate (the habit of fooles) wast contemned of him and of his whole court. Deare Iesus, grant vnto me, a most feruent desire to see thee, and to haue thee conti∣nuallie present before mine eies; And vtterlie to detest all pride of apparell, sith thou in a coloured and dis∣figured coate, wast mocked
and accounted for a foole. Amen. The 12. Meditation, at four a clock in the morning. O good Iesus, in this houre, thou wast sent backe againe by Herod, to Pilat, where thou wast stripped naked, bound to a Pilar, and so inhumanlie beaten with roddes and scourges, that the blood ran downe on euerie side of thy B. bodie. Deare Iesus, grant me thy grace, nakedlie to discouer my sinnes to my ghostlie Father; Willinglie to re∣ceiue the rod of thy father∣lie correction; and neuer to scourge thee againe by my former offences, Amen.
The 13. Meditation, at fiue a clock in the morning. O Good Iesus, in this houre, thy sacred eies being hid and blindfoulded, those sacrilegious wretches gaue vnto thee sundrie blowes and buffets, saying. Prophe∣cie vnto vs o Christ, who he was that smote thee, Deare Iesus, hide not from me the eyes of thy mercie: nor let me hide mine owne, by thinkinge when I sinne, that thou doost not see me. And prophecie vnto me, o Christ, what, and who I am, that so often, with the hand of my wicked workes, haue so daringlie, and so auda∣ciouslie smitten thee, Amen.
The 14. Meditation, at six a clock in the morning O Good Iesus, in this houre, thou (king of all glo∣rie (wast clothed in a purple garment, crowned with a crowne of Thornes, and a hollow Reede was giuen into thy handes insteede of a Sceptie. Deare Iesus, grant me neuer to put vpon thee by mockerie, a kinglie gar∣ment, by doing good wor∣kes for any vaine glorious end: to remember by this hollow Reede, the hollow∣nes and instabillitie of all temporall thinges: and wil∣linglie to weare the crowne of thornes, and of all con∣tempt, in this world, so that I may weare the crowne of
glorie in the world to come, Amen. The 15. Meditation, at 7. a clock in the morning. O Good Iesus, in this houre. Pontius Pilate brought thee foorth, and shewed thee vnto the peo∣ple in this pittifull plight, sayinge. Behould the man, profferring them Barrabas, to deliuer thee: but they in∣cessantlie cried out aloud to haue thee crucified: Deare Iesus, grant me, that being at any time afflicted with temptations, I may present this figure vnto thy heauen∣lie Father, saing. Behould the man. And to beare it most patientlie, though wic∣ked or inferior parsons be
preferred before me, sith a thiefe and murdrer was pre∣ferred before thee, Amen. The 16. Meditation, at 8. a clock in the morning. O good Iesus. In this houre, Pilat ouercome with the importunat clamors of the Iewes, pronounced the sentence of death against thee: and Iudas casting downe the mony, despai∣ring, hung him selfe vpon a tree. Deare Iesus, pardon me, who many times in fauour of the world, and myne owne flesh, haue pro∣nounced the sentence of death against thee; And grant me perfect Contrition for all my sinnes, so that I neuer, finallie despaire of
thy grace and mercie. Amen The 17. Meditation, at 9 a clock in the morning. O Good Iesus, In this houre the Iewes pullinge off the clothes of mocke∣rie, which Herod and Pi∣lates soldiers had put vpon thee, and reuestinge thee with thine owne apparell, that thou mighst the better be knowen, thou carriedst thy heauie Cosse towards the mount of Caluarie, e∣uen till thou felst downe in the way for excessiue wearines: Deare Iesus, grant me hereby to remem∣ber, that at the last, death will despoile me, of what∣soeuer the world hath lent
me. And make me neuer to be wearie, of bearing thy Crosse, that being par∣taker of thy paine, I may be partaker of thy glorie, Amen. The 18. Meditation, at 10. a clock in the morning. O Good Iesus, in this houre, thou wast crucified on the Crosse betwixt two theeues, thy B bodie being so violentlie extended ther∣on, that one might number all thy bones: meane while thou praiedst for thine e∣nimies, and promisedst Pa∣radise vnto the penitent thiefe. Deare Iesus, cause me to crucifie all my disor∣dered appetites, and to ex∣tend all my members, with
all the powers both of soule and bodie, in the seruice of thee; And at the houre of my death, vouch-safe to doe me the selfe same grace, that thon didst vnto the penitent thiefe, and to those that crucified thee, Amen. The 19. Meditation, at 11. a clock in the morning. O Good Iesus, in this houre, thine enimies most spitefullie vpbraidinge thee, that if thou wert the Son∣ne of God, thou shouldst come downe from the Crosse and saue thy selfe; meane while, thou sor∣rowfullie criedst out to thy Father, saying. My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken
me? Deare Iesus, grant vnto me. that by no suggestion of the world, the flesh, or the deuill, I euer come downe from the Crosse of thy ser∣uice. Nor euer to despaire in myne aduersities, though it seeme vnto me to be quite forsaken, sith the like deso∣lation did happen to thee hauing on the Crosse, in such extremitie, Amen. The 20 Meditation, at 12. a clock at noone. O Good Iesus, In this houre, crauing a litle drincke to quench thy thirst, they gaue thee most bitter gaule and vinegre to encrease thy torment, which hauing ta∣sted, cryinge with a loud voice; All is finished thou rendredst vp thy spirit into
the handes of thy Father. Deare Iesus, make me neuer to abuse the good creaures of meae or drinke, sih gau∣le and vinegre was giuen to thee. Constantlie to perse∣uer in veru, euen to the end, that I may trulie say with thee, All is finished which thou hast comman∣ded me: and so may recom∣mend my soule into thos holie handes, extended;, pierced, and with thy pre∣tious blood, all besprinkled for me, Amen. The 21. Meditation, at one a clocke in the after-noone. O Good Iesus, In this houre, the sunne was dark∣ned, the earth trembled, the rocks rent a sundre; the gra∣ues
opened, and many that slept arose, went foorth, and appeared to diuers in the ci∣tie. Deare Iesus, wound my hart with such compassion, that like to the sunne it may quite loose the light of all wordlie ioye. Like to the earth, to tremble with feare. Like to the rocks, to rent with sorrow. Like to the graues to open by confes∣sion. Like to the dead, to arise and goe foorth of the sepulchre of sinne. And like vnto those Saints, enter into the citie of paradise & euer∣lasting pleasure, Amen. The 22. Meditation, at 2. a clock in the morning. O Good Iesus, in this houre, thy most holy soule, des∣cended
into the prison of Limbo, to deliuer from thence thy faithfull frindes, meane while, the sacred side of thy dead bodie, was ope∣ned with the stroake of a soldiers speare. Deare Iesus, make me willingly for the loue of thee, to visit priso∣ners, the soules in Purgato∣rie, or any poore that are in necessitie. Wound my hart perfectlie with the loue of thee, and let this most sa∣cred wound, stand allwayes open vnto me in my neces∣sitie, Amen. The 23. Meditation, at 3. a clock in the afternone. O Good Iesus, In this houre, Ioseph entring bould∣lie to Pilat, and begging
thy bodie, with the helpe of Nicodemus, vnnailed, and tooke downe the same from the tree of the Crosse: and coming towards the earth, was receiued of thy blessed mother betwixt hir armes. Deare Iesus, grant me to de∣sire with loue, and to beg with faith, thy blessed body in the holie Eucharist; And to reciue thee often within the armes of my soule, with such burning teares of loue and deuotion, as did thy sad and afflicted mother, Amen. The 24. Meditation, at 4. a clock in the afternone. O Good Iesus, In this houre thy welbeloued frinds annointed thy dead bodie
with most pretious oint∣ments: wrapped the same in a cleane sindon, and fi∣nallie, enclosed the same within a new sepulchre, wherin neuer any was laid, or buried before. Deare Ie∣sus, vouchsafe to annoint my soule, when it shall be dead by sinne, with the pre∣tious liquor of thy preue∣nient grace. And grant (I beseeche thee) that my hart may be vnto thee a new se∣pulchre (trulie renewed in newnes of life) wherin thou onlie and thy celestiall loue, may be lodged and inclosed, for euer and euer. Amen.
Saluations to all the partes of Christ and recommandation of himselfe vnto him. AL I hail ô head of our Lord and Sauiour Iesu Christ, dreadfull to all pow∣ers, crowned for vs with thornes, and smitten with a reed. All hail ô most beauti∣full face of our Sauiour Iesu Christ, spit at and buffeted for vs. All hail ô most be∣nigne eyes of our Lord and Sauiour Iesu Christ, be∣dewed for vs with teares. All hail ô honny-flowinge mouth, and throat most sweet of our Lord Iesu Christ, made for vs to drink gall and vineger. All hail ô most noble eares of our Lord & Sauiour Iesu Christ,
vexed with contumelies and vpbraidings for vs. All hail ô humble necke of Iesu Christ buffeted for vs, and most holy back whipped for vs. All hail ô most venerable handes and armes of our Lord Iesu Christ, stretched vpon the Crosse for vs. All hail ô most meek brest of our Lord & Sauiour Iesu Christ, much troubled for vs in thy passion. All hail ô most glo∣rious side of our Lord Iesu Christ pearced through with the speare of a soldier for vs. All hail ô sacred knees of mercie of our Lord and Sa∣uiour Iesu Christ bowed for vs in thy prayers. All hail (ô feete to be adored) of our Lord and Sauiour Iesu Christ, fastened with nai∣les
for vs. All hail ô holie body of Iesu Christ, han∣ged on the Crosse, woun∣ded;, dead and buried for vs. All hail ô most pretious bloud of our Lord and Sa∣uiour Iesu Christ, powred out for vs. All hail ô most holy soule of our Lord Iesu Christ, recommended vpon the Crosse for vs into the handes of thy Father. In the same recommandation, I recommend to thee this day, and daily, my soule, my life, my hart, and body, all my senses and acts, all my friendes and benefac∣tours, my sonnes and kins∣folks, the soule of my pa∣rents, brethren, sisters, and of all my friendes and eni∣mies: that thow voutsafe
to protect, deliuer and de∣fend vs from all the as∣saultes of our enimies vi∣sible, and inuisible, now and for euer more. Amen. FINIS.
APPROBATIO. LIbellum hunc piaru Meditationum pro 24. diei horis, legi attente: & nihil inuenio quod sit con∣tra fidem aut bonos mores; sed dignum iudico qui pro solatio deuotorum imprima∣tur. 4. Ianuarij. 1618. F. Leander de S. Martin Benedictorū Anglorum Vicarius generalis, S. Theol. Doct. & Regius Professor linguae Sāctae in Academia Duacena.
