1583 99840262 4743
THE GOLDEN Booke of the Leaden GODDES. WHEREIN IS DESCRI∣bed the vayne imaginations of Heathē Pagans, and counterfaict Christians: wyth a description of their seue∣ral Tables, what ech of their Pictures signified. By Stephan Batman, Student in Diuinitie. Exod. 17. Wryte this for a remembraunce in a Booke and committe it vnto the eares of Iosua: for I wyll roote Amalech, from vnder hea∣uen, so that hee shalbe no more remembred. Psal. 102. This shalbee written for those that come af∣ter, that the People which shalbe borne, maie prayse the Lord. ANNO. 1577.
To the Right Honorable Lord, HENRY CARY, OF THE MOST NO∣ble order of the Garter Knight, Baron of Hunsdon, Gouernour of the Queenes maiesties towne of Ber∣wycke, and Lorde Warden of the East Marches of Eng∣lande, agaynste Scotlande, his singuler good Lord and Mayster: Stephan Batman wisheth the feruent zeale of Gods truth, & long con∣tinuaunce of prosperous health, vvith encrease of much honour. CAllyng aduisedly to remembraunce (right Honora∣ble) the worthy places of those, which by a speciall prerogatiue, and the prouident goodnesse of almighty God, are endued with Magnanimity, and called to the hyghest roomes of Authority: I see and finde that by their wyse and prudent gouernmente, there is generallye caused a publique peace both abroade, amonge straungers, and at home among our selues: and also I perceyue and by experience do proue, that the bayte of their cheereful countenaunce, allureth and winneth the hartes of the Inferiours, to the imitation and ad∣miration of like curtesie: And as anye occasion is offered, so do they testifye and geeue out (as tokens of their good will & obedience) some yerely fruict, more or lesse, to confirme & (as it were) to seale vp the vowed zeale of vnfeigned dutie, which they faythfully, and hartely owe and beare vnto theire Superiours. Such Noblenesse, Magnanimitie, Af∣fabilitie,
& Curtesie, harbouringe wythin your L. breast, hath also incited & emboldened me, now to dedicate, and present, vnto your Honors view and consideration, this smal Treatise of the putatiue & imagined Gods of the Gentiles: a worke, as hereto∣fore not gathered in oure vulgar tonge: So I trust not so barrein of fruictfull documentes, but that it maye seeeme both to sauour of no small paynes on myne owne behalfe, and also to yelde out such other instructions, as maye tende to sundrye Godlye pur∣poses, and to the betteringe of manye others. VVherein we Christians, now lyuinge in the cleare light of the Gospel, may euidently see, with what er∣roneous trūperies, Antiquitie hath bene nozzeled: in what foggy mystes, they haue long wandered: in what filthye puddles they haue bene myered: vnder what masking vysors of clouted religiōs, they haue bene bewytched; what traditions they haue of theyr owne phantastical braynes to themselues forged: & finallye into what Apostacye, Atheisme, Blasphemy, Idolatrye, and Heresie, they haue plunged their Soules, & affiaunced their beleeues. VVhose mise∣rable captiuitie, so long and so manye yeres, vnder the greuous yoake, and thraldome of oure deadlye Enemie, and Capital foe Sathan, as wee are moste pitifullye to bewayle: so are we most humblye, and incessauntlye to prayse God for oure owne delyue∣raunce from the lyke slauerye, for the openinge of our eyes and vnderstandings, & for the reuealing of him selfe vnto vs, in his moste sacred and blessed worde, the most perfect Touchstone, which vnfey∣nedlye
tryeth Truth and Simplicity, frō Falshode & Hypocrisie, Lighte from Darknes, Perfect honoure from Superstition, finally God and Godlines, from the Deuil & Diuelishnes. Receyue therfore (right Honorable Lorde) this poore pawne of my dutifull hart, & vnder the Ensigne of your noble protectiō shrowde it against the malicious Querkes of the Sycophanticall Crewe, if any happen either to con∣demne my Enterprise, or impungue my honest mea∣ning: which was, and is, by shewing my selfe duti∣ful vnto you my Lord and Mayster, to do good also (as much as in me lyeth) vnto al others. Beseching Almighty God to continue and encrease his riche blessinges vppon you, and after manye and flouri∣shing daies here in this life spent, receyue you amōg the trowpe of his holy and heauenly Inhabitaunts, to rest with him in his blessed Hierarchie for euer. AMEN. At Newington the 8. of September. 1577. Your Lordshippes most humble Seruaunt in the LORD, Stephan Batman, Minister.
Thomas Newtonus, Cestreshyrius. ME tibi, te{que} mihi coniunxit amica voluntas, Et firma à multo tempore amicitia. Quam quoniā virtus, fuluo preciosior auro, Mutuus ac fidè conciliauit amor, Spero remansuram: quam me Iouis ira refringet, Nec ferrum absumet, nec cariosa dies. Cùm{que} tuos limae non dedignere labores Submisisse meae, verberibus{que} meis, Accipe, quae nostrae iam sit sententia mentis, At{que} infucati pectoris omen habe. Crede mihi, tua cuncta placent, tua cuncta placebunt Quae dextrae scribis Palladis auspicijs. Te morum candor, stylus, ingenium{que} venustat, Te decorat Pithô, Suada, Minerua, Charis. Te pudor ingenuus, te rara modestia adornat, Te pietas, grauitas, te polit alma fides. E rostris quoties verborum fulmina torques, E grato toties manat ab ore lepos. Curas, ne Stygius lupus insidietur ouili, Romanúsue pias rabula vexet oues. Praestigias aperis, veterum et figmenta deorum, Et pandis verae relligionis iter. Detegis horrendi fraudes Cacodaemonis atras, Informas Iuuenes, erudis at{que} rudes. Ne dubites Batmanne igitur prodire in arenam, Magna tibi accrescet gloria, magnus honos. Iste tuus foetus miro splendore superbit, Multa{que} in exiguo commoda fasce tenet. Thomas Newton.
E. L. in the Authors Commendation. HE merites Fame (I say) that taketh payne, Not for himselfe, but for his natiue Soyle: Where one alone the profite shall not gayne, But all may reape the sweete, of his sower toyle. By all mens doome, that Man must needes haue prayse, Who for behoofe of others, spendes his dayes. Then since that all, by one, shall profite get, What she disdaynes the trauaylle of this wight? Not one: vnlesse such Curres as stil do set Themselues to byte at those, who bring to light The slye deceiptes of their vngracious Crewe, Who vertuous men to hurt do still pursue. Braue golden workes may Iewels called bee, That fine been formde with shape of straunge deuise: Such Iewels then, let not to viewe and see Mo times then once, yea, more then twise or thryse: For why? the rarenesse of this piece is such. To view it styll, you cannot do too much. For proofe, lo here that Iewell rare in sight, This Booke beholde, that Leaden Gods contayne: And how a Bar, like glittring Gold most bright, Those glosinge Gods depaintes in colours playne: That euery man, which doth his Booke beholde, For guerdon will geeue it, the name of Golde. Certes, such a worke in English neuer was As this (though small) which doth vayne thinges bewraye: What then needes hee, that made the same once passe, On Romish Curres, what they do barke or say: No let them gnarle, and do the worst they can, The Worke is good, the proofe shal prayse the Man. FINIS.
To the wel disposed Reader. MEnnes natures being as sundry and variable, as their Phisnomies & faces bee diuers & disagre∣able, small maruayle is it, though in iudgements and verdicts, they square frō an vnity, and iump not together in one reasonable accord of opiniō. Knowing therfore gentle reader, that there be as many Tastes, as there be Mouthes: I loke not to be accompted so perfect a Cooke, as is able to season foode and condimentes for euery palate & appetite: but referring the construction of my goodwil, to the considerations of such hūgry Stomakes, as cā and wil feede vpon and digest such holesome (thought homely) cheare, as is settte before them: for the other coyer sorte, I professe my selfe more redier to disclayme acquaintaunce, then willing to ioine with thē in their so squemish affectiōs. I proofe of both these natured persons, I am sure in this boke to find: ho¦ping as touching the censure, thereof, rather to fal into the hā∣des of indifferente welwillers and by theym to be tryed, then, among thē which (lyke Aesopes Dogge) lying in the Maunger wil neyther doe any thyng themselues, nor thynke wel of others, yt sweat for their cōmodyty. Which poore labour, if I perceiue to be wel accepted, I shalbe animated shortly to aduenture a further, payn∣fuller and greater Enterprise. Fare well.
THE GOLDEN BOKE, of the Leaden Gods. IVPITER. IVpiter was figured syt∣ting in Throne of Estate, with three eyes, and no Eares, al naked from the middle vpward, the rest couered: his Vysage resembling a womans coun∣tenaunce: in his right hand he held Lightening, and in the left, a Scepter. Standing or treading vpon Gy∣auntes: before him an Eagle, and a Page presentinge a cup of Golde. Ouer his head an Angel standing on a Globe holding a laurell Garland. Signification. HIs sitting in Throne, betokeneth his Kingdome to be durable, his three Eyes signifieth his merueilous Wysdome, by which hee ruleth Heauen, Sea, and Earth: his want of Eares declare him to be indifferent vnto all, not barkening more to one, then to an other. The naked∣nesse of his vpper partes, and couerture of the nether, did purport him to be inuisible vnto mē, which dwel beelow, but visible to the heauenly myndes, whch are aboue. Hys womanly looke and full Breastes, intimate al thinges to be made & nourished by him. His Lightening in dis right hand, dooth signifie his power, which lyke to Lightening pearceth through all: his Scepter betokeneth his proui∣dence, by which, as by a Scepter hee disposeth with hys
creatures, as he thinketh best. His treading vpon Gi∣auntes doth declare him to be a punisher of thē, which are at destiaunce with him: by the Eagle is vnderstode the Soule: for as the Eagle surmounteth all other Birdes, and is swiftest, so much doth the minde sur∣passe the Bodye: by the Page, the simplicity therof: intimating thereby, that if the Soule of Man, be free from the querkes of dissembling phantasie, and as the Eagle soareth aloft, so if the Soule of Man, shalbe oc∣cupied with heauenlye cogitations, that then shalbee enioyed, the Cup of golde, whereby is signified the re∣warde of Uertue, in the presence of Iupiter. By the Angell is signified the swiftnesse of well do∣ing. By the Globe vnder his feete, the small regarde of worldlye Uanitie. By the Garlande, the endlesse crowne of Immortalitie. The auncient Romans en∣tituled him Optimus Maximus, because in very dede it is better, and more acceptable, to profite many, thē to possesse great Wealth and reuenue. IVNO. IVNO was portraicted sitting vnder a Rayn∣bow, with a Crowne of white Lyllies on her head, a Scepter in her right hand, and in her left hande a payre of Sheares, on ech side a Peacocke: She had for her footestoole a Lyon, her bodye couered ouer with a fine Lawne. Signification. BY Iuno is mente the Ayre, the Raynbowe betoke∣neth Rayne, whereof it is a token. Her Crowne of
Lyllies, signifieth the cause to bee in the Ayre, that ye Earth doth yelde foorth sweete Flowers: her Scep∣ter is a representation of the power that is geeuen to the Ayre, aswel for preseruation, as encreasing of na∣tural thinges. Her Sheares in her left hand sheweth Hotenesse and Moystnesse of the Ayre, into which two qualities it is sundered and parted. The two Pea∣cockes are added, because theyr cry doth prognosticate chaunge of Weather. The Lyon is a figure of the Sunne, and the Lawne, of thynne Uapours: for the force and vertue of the Sunne is greatest, when hee entreth into Leo: hereby aduertising, that the heate of the Sunne draweth thyn vapors into the Ayre, where beeing congealed, by the extreeme colde of the middle Region, they are agayne by the scortchinge heate of the Sunne resolued into droppes. The Poetes feigne this Iuno, to be sister and wyfe to Iupiter. I thinke because Iupiter beinge taken pro Aethere, and Iuno pro Aëre, they haue most semdla∣ble qualities and dispositions. Iupiter and Iuno, are sayd to bee at variaunce, be∣cause Iupiter being hoat and drye, not hauing his heat repressed with moystnesse, all thinges are burned and paed: agayn, when Iunos moystnesse is not quali∣fied with Iupiters heate, all thinges are drowned and ouerflowed: but when their qualities are with equal temperaunce combyned together, then the Earthe doth yelde her fruites with greate plentye and abun∣daunce. APOLLO. APOLLO was portraicted beardlesse, standing by a Bay tree, on whose toppe, stoode a Crowe.
Apollo treading on a Dragon hauing three hea∣des. Vpon his head, a Crowne of burning Lampes, in his left hand an Harpe, and in his right hande, a Bowe. Signifycation. BY Apollo is ment the Sunne, and being wythoute a Beard, Lustines of youth, which for the tyme is likened to the Sunne, whose beauty or pulchritude, is alwayes one: and standing by a Baye Tree, alwayes greene, Figureth the freshnesse of lustye Youthe: the Bay tree was first found, growinge on the Hyll Par∣nassus consecrated to Apollo, whose Uertue is not to be subiected neither to Beastes, nor Lightenings, as Authors haue reported. Tiberius, as often as it thū∣dered, for his better preseruatiō against the same, was crowned with the Baye, called among the Latines, Laurus. By the Crowne is signified Uigilancie to ouerlooke all things betime, as also the Crowe when hee is sicke, remedieth his disease by eating the leaues: Apollo hys treading vpō the Dragon, betokneth the crooked course of the Sunne, into the twelue Signes of the Zodiake: the three heads of the Dragon, where∣of the one is a Lyons, the other a Wolfes, the thirde the head of a Dogge, generally doth represent tyme: and particularlye, by the head of the Lyon, tyme pre∣sent, the head of the Wolfe tyme paste, as it were so∣denlye snatched from vs: by the head of the Dogge is signified, tyme future or to come, because hoped tyme flattreth ech estate accordyng to ech vocation, to gayn, or to reuenge: his burning Lampes in his crown re∣semble his diuers Beames, which geeue lighte to the
earth: His Harpe in his left hand. betokneth the har∣monie of ye celestial Spheres: & his Bow in his right hād, signifieth his wasting of some part of the Earth, by the Arrowe of extreeme and intemperate heate. The Poets feygn, that Oenomaus, a king of Arca∣dia, counsayled by the Oracle, learned that he shoulde dye, when his daughter called Hyppodamia, shoulde take an Husbande (because of a Sonne which shoulde dispossesse him of his Kingdome) wherefore hee in∣stituted and ordained a Game called the Runninge of the Chariotts, that who soeuer ouercame him by ouer swyftnesse, shoulde haue his Daughter, and whom be ouercame to be presentlye slayne. Hauing by his pollicy, subdued many, he hoped so to daunt ye cou∣rage of the rest, to be aduised of buyinge loue so deare, and thereby to stretch and lengthen his dayes to Ne∣stors yeares: But Pelops far enamoured on Hyppo∣damia, by ye helpe of swyfte Coursers, ouerran Oeno∣maus Chariotts, and wan his Loue, or best beloued. Apollo for ioye of his Uictorye gaue hym to his Ma∣riage, his thre footed stoole, wrought out of fyne Gold, by Vulcan the Smyth: the Legs of the Stoole were Luste, Beautie, Strength. The Seate to sitte vppon, Ryches. DIANA. DIana was portraicted, standing in the middest of Satyres, Gods, and Nymphes of the Seas, Ry∣uers and Fountaynes, wyth three heades and two wynges, her bow was bent, and Quiuer by her side, she standing betweene a Panther, a Lyon, and a Shyppe.
Signification. BY Diana is ment the Moone, her Garde of Saty∣res, Gods, and Nymphes, be token all forces of pople vnder her Gouernment: and also her lighte o∣uer Woods, Seas, & Fountaines: her iii. heades: the change of euery Moone into Calends, Nones, & Ides. Her winges betoken her swifte motion, because she fi∣nisheth her course twelue tymes in euery yeare. Her bow & arrowes, represent the lyuelye effect & operatiō of her beames, aswel in quickning, as filling of mortal creatures. She hath a Pāther on the one fide, because the spots of that beast when it is yong, are horned as the Moone in her first quarter, & in her ryper yeares, her spots waxe round as the Moone in her ful: on the other side a Lyon which resembleth ye Sunne, because the Moone hath no light of herselfe, but yt which shee boroweth of ye Sunne. The Ship warneth Mariners in their courses to haue a special regard to the Mone, to the tydes and Flouds guyded by her: who when the Seas in the night sparkle like Quickesiluer, it beto∣keneth tempeste to folow, geeuing Saylers warning to prepare for Weather. The Poetes faygne that Actaeon, a man seekinge more for vaine pleasure and iolitye, then Uertue, and of the progenie of Cadinus, after much wearynesse in folowing his houndes, sodainly espied Diana with her Dryades & Nymphes bathing, was for his vnmaner∣nerly viewing, trāsformed into an Hart, & so deuoured of his owne Dogs. Diana appellata est quod diem noctu efficiat, vel quasi Duana, quod duobus temporibus maxime cō∣pareat, die ac nocte. Prudentius because he allowed the Goddesse Diana to be gouerner of both ye Lightes, he being also a vali∣aunt
& liberal Capitayne, esteeming Men before Mo∣ney, and Ualiauncie before Bryberye: and being fal∣len into great pouertie, not able to haue the funerall, of vayne brauerye, with more mourning Weedes, thē mourning myndes, was neuerthelesse, by the earneste prayers of his Souldiers, by Titan and Cynthia ca∣ryed into Coelum Empyreum, for an immortall re∣warde among the Gods for euer. MERCVRIVS. MErcurie was portraicted with winges at head and feete, wearing an Hat of white & blacke colloures: A Fawlchon by his side, in one hande a Scepter, & in the other a Pype, on the one side stode a Cocke and a Ramme, and close by his side a Fyl∣cher or Cutpurse, and headlesse Argus. Signification. BY Mercurie Marchauntes be ment. His wynges at head & feete betoken the expedition of Marchā∣tes, which to gett worldly pelfe, post through all cor∣ners of the World: the whyte & blacke coloured Hat, signifieth their subtilty, which for greedines of gaine, spare not to face white for blacke, & blacke for white. By his Fawlchon is signified, goodes gotten by vio∣lence, when subtiltie cannot comprehend. His Mace is a token of peace, but the knot with two serpentes, clasping ech other aboute the sayde Scepter, doth in∣timate that no promise must be broken.
Hys Pype resembleth Eloquence, which refresheth the mynde, as Harmony doth the eares. The Cocke is sayde to be the best obseruer of tymes and seasons, warning Marchantes and trauelers, to forsake no opportunity. The Ramme is a resemblaūce of hys offyce, because the Poets fayne Mercurie, to be Embassadoure of the Gods: all are obedient to hym, as the Flockes of shepe, are to the Ramme: the figu∣red Cutpurse, is a proofe that Mercurie was a thiefe: and Headlesse Argus, is a witnesse, that one Plague, bewrayes a thousand euilles. The Poets feigne that Argus the Sonne of Aristor, had an hundred eyes, of al which, only two did sleepe by course, so that he was not to be takē with al a sleepe: So subtil was Argus, that what fraude soeuer was imagined, hee had poli∣cie to defende it. Wherefore Iuno enuyinge Io (her brother and husband Iupiters Harlot) committed the keping of Io to Argus, supposing so to be most assured from euermore the hauing of Iupiters company. Iupi∣ter to acquite Iunos practise, commaundeth Mercurye to take him to his Pype, and with melodious soundes, brought Argus Eyes a sleepe: by which is signified, what is hee that is so circumspect or aduised, but that Flattrye or counterfeited perswasion, at one time, or other may deceiue? which worke being accomplished, hee stryketh of Argus head, and setteth Io, the trans∣formed Cow, at liberty. Iuno seeing this hap, in token of her good wyll, sets Argus eyes into the Peacockes tayle, for a perpetual remembraunce of his trusty ser∣uice. A manifest showe how vayne a thinge rewarde is, when it dyeth wyth the partie, from the posteritie. As when Carnalia had slayne his freend Obliuios e∣nemye, thereby receiuing his deathes wounde for his laboure was rewarded with a Million of Gold: what
pleasure had hee thereof, beeinge preuented from the vse by death, and not geeuen to his familye. MINERVA, OR PALLAS. PALLAS was portraicted all armed: her coū∣tenaunce menacing the beholder, hauing a Clo∣ke of three coulers, in her righte hande a Speare, and on her lefte a Christalline Target, embossed with a Gorgons head. By her stoode a Greene Oliue Tree, and a Dragon, with an Owle flyinge ouer them. Signification. BY Minerua is signified Wisdome, ioyned to Force, to qualifie extremities. Pallas Armature doeth purporte, that it concerneth a wyse man to be fenced, aswell against frowarde affections, as the outward e∣nemie: Her fierce Looke or Countenaunce doth admo¦nish vs, not to beholde sinne, with gentill and amia∣ble Countenaunce, but menacinge, and as it were with a Speare, to bydde and wage Battayle against it. Her Cloake of Whyte, Golden, & Purple, co∣lours, setteth foorthe Wysdome to the viewe of the eye. For the Whyte, betokeneth Simplicitie: the Golde, the glitteringe force of Prudence, & the Pur∣ple the pearcing brightnesse of modest Gouernment.
By ye lōg speare is also signified, ye foresight of things to come. The Christalline Target, betokneth the wa∣rynesse of the wyse, in which as in a Glasse, he seeth to the bottome, the subtiltie of others: The Gorgons head warneth to vse Martiall Lawe, not in fostering, but in killing them at the firste, whiche are knowen to be wylfull, and manyfest offendours. By the Oliue tree is signified peace, intimating that warre must ne∣uer bee raysed, but when peace cannot otherwise bee maynteyned. The Dragon carieth a resemblaunce of prudence, for as hee, amonge all other Serpentes is most waking. so the Prudent is circumspect in al hys doinges. The Owle representeth warynesse, because when all other sleepe, she waketh, and flying beholdeth that, which the common sort, neither do, nor can. The Poetes faygne, Pallas to haue proceeded of Iu∣piters brayne, and neuer to haue had any mother, be∣cause the Athenians supposed the first sorts of men ge∣uen to politike gouernmente, and wyse in foreseeinge Daungers to come, allowed the Lawes, and Sta∣tutes of Iupiter, calling them by the name of his dau∣ghter: the purpose of the Poete is, that for asmuch as Iuno, the wife of Iupiter was barren, for verye griefe shooke his head encountringe the wall, whence issued Pallas, & after gathering some courage to her self like Virago, steppeth foorth all armed, that which Lawe cannot wynne by lenitye: it must compel by force. MARS. MARS was portraicted al armed, his Chariot was drawen with two horses breathing Fyer.
A VVolfe went befoore him with a Sheepe in hys mouth, and a Cocke following. Signifycation. HYs Chariot, Horses, and Armour, betoken War, because they be the chiefest furniture thereof. The names of the two Horses are Feare, & Terrour, because where Mars inuadeth, all thinges are lefte desolate, & destroyed. The Wolfe with the Sheepe in his mouth representeth Mars, whose Souldiers are as great raueners of other mens goodes, as the wolfe is of seely sheepe. The Cocke followeth Mars, eyther because he is a warlike Byrde, or ells that hee is mes∣senger of the Sunnes approach, to the which Souldi∣ers must haue a vigilant respect: vnlesse they mynd to let passe, sundrye and many good opportunities. The Poetes faygne that Mars neuer had father, be¦cause he hated peace. Loquar requesting of Mars the Countrye of the Pauperculans, hee asked howe they should then lyue, he sayde by labour, then quoth Mars it is as fyt for thee, so to do, and get that thou hast not, and they shall possesse that which they haue: hee not contented, by the determination of the Goddes, it was agreed,A good vvar∣ning to beg∣gers of statutes penall: vvhere by the cōmons are greatly im∣pouerished, & their good kin¦ges, neuer the better enri∣ched. thot hee shoulde not onely feede of the earthes encrease, but also that earth, should so possesse him, as hee desired: Loquax supposing the Pauperculans dis∣herited: hasted the possession, where hee beinge tyed lyke a Dog, was forced for hunger to eate the grasse and in the same earth to be buryed, that hee so greede∣lye had coueted.
VENVS. VENVS was figured in a Garden of Flowers, naked, with a Garlād of Flowers and Roses on her head: her VVagon was drawen with two white Swannes, and a payre of whyte Doues. Signification. HEr Garland of Roses doth signifie the superfluity which wantons require, and being naked, ye shame∣lesse care of Uirginitie: The Garden of Flowers, the variable allurementes of amorous Louers, her Wa∣gon betokeneth Pleasure: the Swannes, stoutnesse of swift reuenge, and with as great myldenesse wyth∣out attempte, whose properties bene diligently to de∣fende theyr owne, and vseth to singe before their death, aduertising Louers to be constante: the Doues signi∣fie mildenesse, chastitie, and continuaunce. Tee Poetes faygne, of Paris, sonne to Priamus, & Hecuba, how shee dreamed that shee brought foorth a Fyrebrande that set all Troie on fyer: Priamus mole∣sted in mynde, commaunded that assone as the Boye was borne, to be slayn: but Hecuba being mooued wt a motherlye compassion, caused Paris to be nourished with a Sheepeard, who in continuaunce of tyme gro∣winge to be a man: Iuno, Pallas, & Venus, fel at con∣tention for a Golden Apple: on which this Poesie was wrytten: Geeue it to whom thou lykest, if to Iuno, then shalt thou bee Victorious, if to Pallas, then prudente and wyse to gouerne: If to Venus, then Knight ouer the fay∣rest Lady in the worlde, in Lust and Pleasure.
Paris beinge astonied, to whom the Apple mought best be geeuen, Iupiter espying his dismay, willed him to bestow the Apple on whom he best lyked, who gaue it to Venus. So after sweete Meate, came sowre Sauce, after Laughinge Weepinge, to the vtter ruine of the Tro∣ians. Saylinge to Sparta hee espyed Menelaus wyfe, whose Lecherous Lust lost himselfe, his Paren∣tage, and his countrye. VVLCAN. VVLCAN was figured lympinge, wyth a blew Hat on his head, a Hammer in his hand, prepa∣red to the Forge lyke a Smyth. Signification. BY Vulcan is ment Fier, & by his blew hat the ayry firmament, by his limping, the Reuolucions of the Heauens, which whē it descendeth to vs, looseth much of his former strength. By Vulcan is signified labor by his hatte of blew, true dealing, by his Hammer, or Sledge, the continuall toyle of Husbandrye, aswel by the Plough in earing the tough earth: as by the Ham∣mer in forging of Mettall, whose force must bee prepa¦red aswell to the mayntenaunce of the Prince, as the enriching of the subiect. The Poetes faigne that Iupiter iarring with Iuno his wyfe, fell from wordes to blowes. Vulcan com∣ming to the reskue of Iuno, Iupiter waxed so angrye that hee tooke Vulcan by the Legges, and flange him into Lemnos, whom the Inhabitants receiued as sent
from Heauen and learned of him, to prepare Iron for necessary vses. VESTA. VESTA was figured like a Virgine, not suffe∣ring the holy Fyer to be extinguished. Signification. BY VEsta (Vas) the vessel of Uirginitie is signified: the Fyer resembleth the Sunne which maketh the Earth a mother of manye goodly Creatures. In the Honour of Vesta, were ordayned sixe Uyr∣gins of her name, called Vestales, their office was to looke that the Fyer in the Temple neuer went out, so that, when so euer by their negligēce it was extingui∣shed, they endured such punishment, as the hye Priest awarded: But if so it happened that anye of theym, did suffer themselues to be spoyled of their Uirginity, it was ordayned they shoulde bee burned quicke. So zealous were the Romans not onlye of the honour of their Godds, but also they helde Uirginitie, for an ex∣ceeding Uertue. The Uirgins were chosen to serue this Goddesse betweene the sixte and tenth yeares of their age, from which tyme tyl after the expiration of 30. yeares, it was not permitted as lawfull to mary. NEPTVNE. NEPTVNE was portraicted in manlye forme naked, on the Sea horse most swyftlye
flotinge on the Seas, hauinge a forke on his shoul∣ders, the Tritones attending on hym. Signification. BY Neptune is signified the swift passage of Ebbes & Flouds, the Manlye forme purporteth the rage of the bellowing Waues, and being naked the readi∣nesse of Shyppes to be smothe, and wel garnished, ells is the swiftnesse stayde, when the outeside is not free from all annoyes: by the forcke is signified the furni∣ture that good Shippes must haue, aswell in weapon as tacklinge, thereby to preuente both Bellona, & Cy∣clops Seas, and Theeues. By the Tritones, skilfull Maryners, Souldiers, and Munition. The Poetes note that Neptune roade on an horse, because when Athens was erected, Pallas & Neptune were at stryfe aboute the naminge of the Cittie, after many Wordes, the discorde was put to arbitremente of the Gods: they awarded that which of theim coulde finde out the moste profitableste thinge for the life of manne, he onlye shoulde haue the aucthoritye to name the Cyttie. Neptune smote the ground wt his Forke, and foorthwith leapt out an Horse: But Pallas smy∣ting the Grounde with her Speare, sodeynlye sprong foorth a Oliue tree, which the Goddes iudged to bee more profitable to the vse of man. Pallas obteyninge victorye called the Cittie Athens. It was more by the fauour of the Gods, so to iudge it, then it was to preferre the Oliue tree, before the Horse. An Epitheton. Except by the Oliue tree is signified Uertue and by
by the horse vyce: Venusta Venus. CERES. CESES was figured havinge on her heade, a Crowne of wrythen Eares of Corne, in her right hande an handfull of Corne, and in the lefte the Herbe Poppye. Signification. CEres betokneth encrease of Grayne, because she is called Dea Frugum, of the frugalitie which com∣meth of Earthe and Seede. The Crowne of Corne Eares betokeneth the encrease: ye Eares of Corne in her hand betokneth ye reserued Seede, whereby doth follow the yeares encrease. By the Poppie is signified the slouthfull or sleepye tyme to ensue, yt ech laborer may take hede to neglect no tyme: for as the Poppye is a causer of sleepe: So Slouth is a vice that looseth gaine. The Poppye also called Papa-ver,Papa-ver, a fro¦sen religion, springing to soone. with other weedes are suffered to grow among the Corne, which must be weeded foorth, for byndring the Cornes encrease. The Poetes feigne that Saturne, Ceres father was a great deuourer of his Children: so sayde by the Fy∣gure Antithesis, for that the Earthe, as shee yeldeth encrease, doth receiue all into her agayne. IANVS. IANVS was portraicted double faced, & stan¦ding vpon twelue Alters, in his right hande hee
helde a Keye with ξ & ε wroughte vppon it, in the left hand a Barre, with this letter τ grauen on it. Signification. HIs two Faces on both sides, aswell beehynde as beefore, aduertiseth wiselye to consider thynges aswell past, as to come, & standinge vpon Twelue Al∣ters, admonisheth Prynces, and Men of Honoure, to bee constant in all theyre doynges, but moste espe∣ciall in Religion, as was IANVS Kynge of Italye: so named of Italus, from whom proceded the name of the Countrye. The Keye in his ryghte hande is a resemblaunce of policie, to open and bringe to light, the treacherous deuises of diepe dissemblers. The Letters ξ. and ε. sygnyfye 55. The letter τ. on the barre three hundred, which Barre signified ye For∣titude of a good prince in maynteyning Uertue & sup∣pressing vyce: By the number 355. the dayes of one yeare, wherein no day ought to be ouerpassed, without some exploite or good act. The Romans in honour of Ianus, erected a beautifull Temple, which in tyme of Warre stode wyde open, & in tyme of peace it was alwayes shutte. Ianus is supposed the firste beginner of letters and skyll of the starres, taught the plantinge of the Uyne. Deuided the twelue Monethes, and sundrye Dome∣sticall skilles, for a common wealth, therefore double faced, the Face of Gouernment, and the Face of La∣bour.
SATVRNVS. SATVRNE was portracted with a hoare head, but black bearded, & feeble footed. He held in his hand a Sythe of serpentine forme, leaninge on the sneathe or staffe. In his left hand hee helde an In∣fant, greedelye deuouringe it, his collour pale and wanne. Signification. SAturnus boarynesse, betokeneth Winter: his black beard signifieth the Golden worlde, in which no mā was tormented with care: the earth yelding of it selfe sufficient, for euery mans contētation: his feeble feete resembled him to be the slowest of the seuen Planets, because he can finish his course in no lesse then thyrtie yeares, his pale and yealow collour, sheweth his cō∣plexion to be cold and dry: hys Sythe signifieth time, in the which, al thinges are mowen down, and wythe∣red: hys greedy deuouring of the Childe, betokeneth the wastfull spending of thinges, before they come to growth whose mouthes be more plentye, then good condicions: deuouringe more at fewe Bankets, then their fathers got in fortie yeares. GENIVS. GENIVS was portraicted like a younge man hauing two VVinges, powring VVyne out of a
Bolle, vpon an Alter. Signification. BY Genius is signified, the towardnes of quicke wit∣tes, whereby sundrye sortes of people are founde to exceede others: his Wings betoken the swiftnesse of the mynde, as also the readynesse, vpon whom he hath taken charge: he is sayed to bee the Sonne of the Im∣mortall God, because hee is ioyned to humaine forme, called reasonable: His powring wyne on an Alter, si∣gnifieth the abundance of Ayry moysture, which doth force the barren earth, to yeld foorth ech creature and substaunce. Plutarch wryteth that Iulius Caesar had a mighty Genius alotted vnto him, by whose helpe, he not onlie atchieued great Uictories in his lyfe, but was also re∣uenged on his murderers after his death: for his Ge∣nius, so pursued his conspiratours at the verye heeles, both by Sea, and Lande, that hee suffered not one to remayne on lyue, which eyther was a doer, or a conspi∣rour of the fact: so likewise, after the fact of Robbers and wilful Murderers, in flyinge from place to place, they haue neuer beene at quiet, til death hath finished they deserued course. PLVTO. PLVTO was portraicted with a frowninge countenaunce, his seate was fiery: Cerberus was his footestoole, in his right hand he helde a Scepter, & in his lefte, a Sowle: Proserpina with hellishe
Furies, attendinge on hym. Signification. BY Pluto is mente, the vnsaciable gotten ryches yt force possesseth, his Statelye countenaunce decla∣reth, that worldlye Goodes make men proude, arro∣gant, and ambicious: His fiery Seate, betokeneth the violence of the Ryche: His Scepter signifieth Wel∣thye menns rule, ouer the Poore. The Soule which he claspeth with his left hande, declareth, that vnsaci∣able desire oppresseth the poore vnto Death, and by the Furies are mente, the cares which Ryches brynge with them. By Cerberus, the three mischiefes whych do oppresse the simple, Flatterye, Hypocrisie and Op∣ression: fayre woordes to allure, Hipocrisie to dis∣semble, Oppression to take by vyolence, is signified. The Poetes faygne Cerberus, to be Plutos Porter, of the Citty Dolor, who receiueth all those that Cha∣ron bringeth, hauing three heades, the one of a Goate, the seconde of a Beare, the thirde of a Tyger, where∣by is also signified, Lechery, Gourmandise, and Mur∣der: dyuers haue framed diuers shapes, onely to paint forth the filthines of vice, the more to terrify the folo∣winge Age. Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. BACCHVS. BACCHVS was portraicted with a graunde paunch, his Charyot was drawen with an Ownce and a Tygre, his head was horned, and crowned with an Iuye Garlande, in one hande a Bunche of Grapes, in the other a Cuppe, hauing to his Garde
an Ape loking in a glasse, a Hogge, a Lyon, a VVolfe, and a Dolphyn. Signification. BAcchus Was the first that in Grece foūd the man∣ner of planting Uines, & the secret of pressinge Wi∣nes, called Liber Pater, by an Adage, the father of li∣berty. In vino veritas. When men bee dronken, they disclose all, as when the Wine is in, the witte is out: al superfluous banquetinges, and Riotous excesse are called Conuiuia Bacchanalia, dronken feastes. The Feastes of diuers spottes and colours, as is the Ounce, & Tigre, signifie the sūdry affectiōs of ye dron∣ken, and the desperate madnes that suche possesseth by outragious deedes, in dronkēnes, his hornes portrait the customes of the Auncients, whiche vsed hornes to drinke in, in steade of Pottes, his strayghte garlande of Iuye resembleth the kerchefes of ye dronkē, for they were accustomed to bind their head the harder, therby to stoppe the vapors from ascending into their brayne. The Ape, the Hogge, and the Lyon, the Woolfe, and Dolphin, bewray the affections of the Dronken: for some playe the Ape in imitating euery thyng, some the Hog in returning to accustomed dronkennes, as filthy affections: some the Lyon in executing of cruelty: some the Wolfe in rauening and spoyling: some the Dol∣phin ouerwhelmed in Bacchus seas: the Ape looking in a glasse, they vaine flattery of deceiuable folly. The Poets sayne that Semele, Bacchus mother, was a woman very bewtiful, beloued of Iupiter. But Iea∣lous Iuno impacient thereof, deuised with her selfe Se¦meles destruction, and taking to her the shape of Se∣meles
Nurse, she telleth her yt it is greatly to be doub∣ted whether hee whō she toke for her Paramour & best beloued, wer Iupiter in dede or no: wherfore her aduise was that Semele should desire of Iupiter, yt hee woulde company with her in suche & so great a maiestye, as hee was accustomed to vse with Iuno, called the Quene of Heauen. Shortly after, Iupiter resortinge to her, shee desired of him to graunte her one request, who promised by an oth that shee shoulde bee satisfied. Iupiters othe was by the Riuer Styx, Semele supposinge not to bee cyrcumuented by Iuno, and chargynge Iupiter with hys Othe to accompanye with her in all his Maiestye: but shee by reason that shee was Mortall, not able to sustayne his presence, died at the first sight thereof, and being younge with chyld at that instante through the clemēcy of ye Gods, it was batched, tyl it grew to a graunde paunch called Bacchus, wherby is also signified that corruption ly∣keth all thynges that are filthye. BONA DEA. BERECYNTHIA or Bona Dea was por∣trayted, sitting in her Chariot, on her head was a turretted, Crowne, her guard with drawn Swor¦des attending on her, her wagon was drawne by Lyons: but driuen by Cocks: she holding in her hād a Key. Signification. By Bona Dea, is ment the worlds lower part. Earth
and by the worlde all thinges earthy, ouer the which the Mone hath gouernment: by the Wagon, the swift course of all thinges issuing and growing forth of the same: her stately sitting betokeneth the firme ground wheron is builded Cityes and townes: by her Crown so signified: wearing on her heade, as on the vpper face of the Earthe all Edifices framed with mountay∣nes and valleis, as Castels & Fortes: her Guard with weapons drawen, betoken the spedy pace of workinge signes & seasons as wel in man as in beast, & al things crescēt or growing, wherin is workīg the spirit of life: by the weapons are signified the sodaynnes of deathe, warning euery estate to take bede of time. By the Liōs the courage of souldiers to lose none opor¦tunitie. By the Cockes are ment the priestes of Bere∣cynthia, Which must be vigilāt as ye Cocks to admo∣nish the people be time. By the Key, the openyng of ye secret and hiddē natures of al things growing in, and vpon the earth: from whēce ye Phisitiō learneth to hea¦le the sicke, and the Chirurgiā to cure the wounded: as also the earth to be opened in the sommer, and shut in the winter, when she diminisheth of her increase, by the frosen and barren season. The Poets faigne her to be the mother of the godds, because, the Earth is the mother of al creatures, into yt which they shal retourne againe. HERCVLES. HERCVLES was figured in a Lions skinne, and holding a Clubbe in his right hande. Signifycation. HErcules apparayled in a Lions skinne, signyfyeth
the valiant courage of a woorthy Captayne, also the Prudencie where with his minde beinge furnished, be subdued his outragious affections: the Club, signifieth vnderstanding, throughe which the motions of wicked affections are repressed and vtterly vanquished. Hercules was before the destruction of Troie, in the third age of the world, gouerner among the Lybians, & had victorye ouer many nations, and subdued diuers Kingdomes, a Prince of worthye Fame, a mainteiner of Uertue, and a punisher of Uice, such a one as hated those yt chose to steale by policye, rather then to win by prowesse. The Poets fayne that the hill Atlas in Maurita∣nia was a huyge Giant which for the height supported the stars, & ouercōme by Hercules, he wanne the coun∣trye and people, also in the valey of the sayd mountain was a pleasant plat, the Ladies wherof were three sis∣ters Aegle, Erethusa, Hespertusa, commonly knowē by these names of Hesperides, in this valley was the fayned tree with golden Apples, kepte by a Dragon: whereby is signifyed, the great riches that proceaded of so fertill a soyle, & the couetus disorder of the inha∣bitantes, who by deuouring of others, consumed them selues. AESCVLAPIVS. AESCVLAPIVS was portraited crowned with a Laurel, standing in a long gown, in one hād a box of oyntment, and in the other a staffe. Signification. Aesculapius signifyeth Phisitiās: his lawrel crown
the cure by many medicynes: his longe Gowne, yt mo∣desty that belonges to such skill. By the boxe of Oynt∣ments, the readines of Salues for bodely cure: for in Auncient times past, the Phisition, Chyrurgion, and Apothecharie was the office of one man: and now for the most parte, ye Practice of three Theeues. For lear∣ninge, is Ignoraunce: For Cunning, Craft: For cure, Spoyle: For Lyfe, Death. Such bee the fruictes, of disceyueable Practise: By the staffe, the stay of Age, whereby is signified, ye Learninge, and Experience is stayed by coūsayle, thorough the which cōmeth know∣ledge of thinges both Good and Euell. The Poets fayne that Aesculapius was slaine of Iu∣piter, with Lightninge from Heauen, for that by hys Arte, he raysed Hyppolitus from Death to Life. Dia∣na, seacretly louing Hyppolitus, desired Aesculapius by his skill too reuiue him to hys former Lyfe: Which beinge donne, shee called him Virbius, as if shee should haue sayd, bis vir, twice a man. Iupiter displeased for the Facte, deuided their loue, by Death: replying that Phisike will not helpe where GOD is disposed to plague. FLORA. FLora, was portraited with Flowers in her hand, of Beanes and Pease, her Coat in as many colours as the Raynebowe. Signification. FLora her coloured coate, signifieth the diuers hue yt is geuē to Flowers: her Beanes & Pease declare a
custome of ye Romayns, who esteeme no more of Bau∣dery, then of Superstition: Which to beare Rusticall Signes in hande, that Flora was Goddesse, as well of Grayne, as Flowers: Yearely in Honour of ye same, they dyd Sparcle, Beanes and Pease, amonge the cō∣mon People. Thys Flora was a Famous Harlot, and exceading Ryhe, Constitutinge at her Death, the People of Rome to bee her Heyre: Shee ordayned for Euer, a great Summe of Money, to be Imploied on Showes and Playes. The ordinaunce of a gentle Deuill, delu∣dinge many Fooles: of such force is wycked Māmon, that hee can make an Harlot, counted for a Goddes. Thus the Pope, and Poet, can make, both Harlot. & Theefe, a Sayncte. AEOLVS. AEOlus was figured standinge in the Mouth of a Caue, in his hād a Tortoyse: Vnder his Feete a payre of Bellowes. Signification. BY Aeolus, is ment the Winde: his standinge in the Mouth of a Caue, signifieth the Wind to be engen∣dered, in holowe Uantes of the Earth: his shell Fishe beinge a Tortoyse (whose Shel is not to bee perced) betokeneth the force of Windes, farre to exceede the force of Murall, or Metall: And as the softe Fishe, is defended by the hard Shell from the violence of the Winde, so all softe, and tender Seedes, are preserued,
by close Earth. For that the harder thinges, the high∣er, and greatter, by the violence of the Winde, is oft ouerthrowen, Trees, Towers, & Hylles. His treading on, the Bellowes, sheweth ye force of engndered Win∣des, by thycke Uapours, combininge the Windes in∣to narowe roomes, as when the Ayre is darkest then is it thickest, and the Windes greatest. Aeolus raygned in Aeolia, an Ilande in Sicilia, ye sonne of Iupiter, whom Poetes fayne Kinge of Windes, because he was ye first that gaue knowledge of weathers: He ruled the Iles, Lippara, Craeta, Strōgyle, & Didyme, wherin were cer¦taine fiery Hilles, like Etna, a man very amiable to his subiectes, and Debonaire to straūgers: The Sauage People beinge taught by experieunce, of their Kinge Aeolus, to marke the seasons, supposed him to bee the original of Weathers, & called him the God of Wind, and Tempest. CVPID. CVpid was figured, vnder the Shape of a blynde Boye, hauinge VVinges at his Shoulders, and a Bowe in his hande, prest to Shoote. Signification. BY Cupid, Loue is signified, and likened to a Childe, because it is not able to resist Affecti∣on: also because Loue maketh Oldemen, sometyme Foolishe as Boyes, in which foo∣lishnes they become more Ignoraūt, then Childrē, his Winges, betoken ye swiftnes of Loue, yt although the body be staied by force, yet is the Mind voyd of victory: By his Being blinde, ye fond affections of foolish Lo∣uers: for yt also loue is as fond in chosinge, as selfe will
vnaduised in deliueringe: Yf it proceade of the man, then is Beauty preferred before Honesty: If of the Woman, then vayne Brauery, before ciuell Modesty. For as a foule Whore, delighteth in a personable Mā, so likewise a soule Knaue taketh pleasure in a fayre Whore. When the Dartes of such Loue proceadeth, it manifestly proueth, that Cupid of cupio is Blinde in deede. The Poets fayne that Cupids Bowe, signified, the attemptes of Loue. And the Arrow, the force of Lo∣uinge: and the percinge to the Heart: the full consent, of the same. Also that Cupid was Venus sonne, who takinge vppon him the Shape of Iulus, so enflamed the Heart of Dido with Aeneas his Loue, that for greife of Aeneas Departure, she slue her selfe. VOLVPIA. VOlupia was figured lyke an Empresse, but pale of Countenaunce, treadinge Vertue vnder her Feete. Signification. BY Volupia, Pleasures bee signified: shee was figu∣red lyke an Empresse: for that for ye most part, Men in preferringe Pleasures, submit them selues, to their delightes. Her pale Looke, signifieth, the feare that Wantons lyue in, fearinge alwayes least Fortune shoulde turne her Wheele, and that Sorrowe shoulde followe their delightes: as after sweete Meate, sowre Sauce. Her tramplinge vppon Uertue declareth, that they cannot be but despisers of Uertue, which wil let
lose the Raynes of their desiers to fleshly Appetite. The Poetes fayne that Syrenes, the Daughters of Achelous, dwelled within a certayne Ilande betweene Italy, and Sicill, who with their swéetenes of Uoyce, allured such as passed by: who no soner obtayned their cōpany, but were rewarded for their cōming wt presēt death. Vlysses, occasioned to passe by: & to preuēt their Whorish illusions, caused all his Saylers and Soul∣diers to stop their Eares, and him selfe to be vound to the Maste of his Ship. By which Policy, hée esca∣ped the perill. The Syrenes, for anger that they were preuented, flange themselues headlonge into the Sea, whereby is described the property of Enuy, who wyll rather then bee vanquished from doinge of Mischeife, further their pretence with their owne Death. As rust consumeth Iron, so doth VVrath, the Bones. HARPOCRATES, AND ANGERONA. HArpocrates, and Angerona, were figured in comely Apparell, holdinge their Fingers vppō theyr Mouth. Signification. THey both resemble Taciturnitie, and in beinge comely Apparelled signfieth the graue modesty of prudent Gouerners. By the holding of theire Fore∣fingers on their Mouthes, sheweth also the heedeful∣nes, that Men ought to haue, in speakinge.
The Poetes fayne that the Pyes Chatteringe bee∣tokeneth Ghestes: And Womens Bablinge, betoke∣neth folly: for sometimes both sortes, so trauayle wyth a word, that they hassard both life & goods. OSIRIS. OSiris was figured with a Basket vpon his head, in the which was a Serpent with three heades, holdinge the Tayle in his Mouth. Signification. OSiris the God of ease or rest, figured slowe pacinge, wyth a Basket on his heade: by his goinge is signi∣fied the carelesse dealinge of vnthrifty subiectes, & ser∣uaūts, which are necligēt in ye Affayres of their Prin∣ces, & Maisters: By the Basket the bōdage of seruice vnder the which, all are helde: By the Serpent with three heades, The first of a Lyon, ye second of a Dogge, the thyrd of a Wolfe. The Serpent signifieth the pru∣dence of Lawes, well to gouerne cōmon Wealthes: The head of the Lion, the courage of ye kinge: the head of the Dogge, the auctority of nobilitye, the watchful barkinge of spirituality, to defende the oppressed from enormities: the head of ye Wolfe signifieth oppressiō wc proceadeth from the Kinge, from nobility, from spiri∣tuality, from Officer in auctority: from the kinge whē he graūteth ouer much liberty: frō the Nobility, whē they regarde not magnanimity: frō spirituality. when they defend not fidelity: from Officer in auctority, whē by carelesse oppression, they cōsume pouerty. These .iij.
heades ioyned to on body, signifieth, the mutuall ac∣cord or consanguinity in euills, which as the Serpent dououringe herselfe, by beginninge with her tayle, so are diuers Kindomes, by oppressinge cōmō Wealthes, made weake, and brought to confusion. Osyris, Rayg∣ned in Aegipt, whom, Typhon, his owne Brother, to ob∣tayne the kingdome, inuaded, & takinge Osiris captiue, murderously cut him into, 25. peeces sendinge eache peece to sundry Conspiratours of his death, supposing thereby to haue obtayned their greater fauours. But Isis, with the helpe of Oros her Sonne, reuenged her Husbandes death, by hanging Typhon on a Gallowes. For sūdry benefits that Osiris had done to the Egypti∣ans, they worshipped him as a God. ISIS. JSis was proporcioned wyth a Cornet in one hand and a Ship in the other. Signification. ISis hath a Cornet in one hand, because her Preistes in their Sacrifices, did Honour her with the Melo∣dies of that instrumēt: she holding a Shipp in ye other hand, in honour of Osiris, which for her sake had pas∣sed many and daungerous Seas. The Poetes fayne that Iupiter companyinge with Io, otherwyse called Isis, Iuno came vpon them, one such a sodayne, as for the hiedinge of the fact, he turned Isis into a Cow, but Iuno suspectinge the matter, desired the Cow of Iupi∣ter, and gaue her to Argus to be kept. But Mercury, by the aduice of Iupiter, to set Isis at liberty, slue Ar∣gus.
Iuno, for reuenge caused the stoute Fly, to stinge and vexe Isis, who beinge exceadingly tormented, hied her selfe from place, to place, til at the last she entered Egipt, where being restored to her former Shape, she was Maried to Osiris, and after her Death was made a Goddesse. PAN. PAn was figured, with a longe Bearde and hornes on his head, his Feete were lyke vnto a Goat, hol∣dinge a Pype to his Mouth. Signification. BY Pan, Shepheardes are signified and neadeth no explication, because the whole description, contay∣neth the Portrature of a Shephearde. The Poettes fayne that Midas, a Rych Kynge of Phrygia, obtayned of Bacchus, to haue any thing geuē him that hee woulde wishe. He therefore desired that what soeuer he touched, might bee turned into Gould. Bacchus graunted the request. Midas to try the truth, touched not only Tymber, Stones, and Fruict, which turned to Gold: But also his Meat, & Drinck: it repen∣ted him of his folly, & seeinge himselfe so ouermatched, waxed pensiue, requiringe Bacchus to take frō him his wish. Bacchus not hard to be intreated, cōmaūded Mi∣das, to washe himselfe in ye Riuer Pactolus, & he should be cured: he did so, and ye Riuer, sithens hath had Gol∣den Sandes. Afterward, when Phoebus, and Pan, contended whether of theym two, should be iudged
ye best musician the hyl Tiuolus being chosē for iudge, gaue sentence on Phoebus side: but Midas standing by and not chosen for a dayes man, very foolishly, prefer∣red Pan. Phoebus espying Midas to be a busie body, for his greate folishnesse, gaue him a payre of Asses eares, but Midas so hydde theym, that none knew it but only his Barbour, and not myndinge to conceale it. Neuerthelesse not daring to report it, hee made a Uaulte, in the which he cryed, Kyng Midas hath Eares lyke an Asse, and after couerynge the same, with Earth in such a Moyste place where Reedes began to grow, oute of the whiche Caue, by shakinge too, and fro, bee founded foorth those wordes, which the Barbour had infused. CONCORDIA. CONCORDIA was figured lyke a comlye Matrone holdynge a Chayne, to the whyche were fastned all kynd of Beastes by couples in theyr kynde sittinge on Instrumentes: she was also like∣ned vnto the Storke. Signification. COncorde signifieth all coequalities, aswell of a∣greeinges in Beastes, Birdes, Serpentes, Wor∣mes, Fishes, Fowles, as Man and Woman, kingdo∣mes and Nacions: Being portraicted lyke a comlye Matrone, showeth thereby the modestye aswell of the Mynde, as Apparel, to bee aduised in al thyngs, her Chayne also signifieth the force of a Stable Mynde, in fast lyncked experience: By the Beastes cowping
together, the accord that Nature yeldeth to her owne kynde. By sitting on diuers Instrumentes, the sup∣pressing of vayne phantasie, not ouer much delighting in naked comfort: for as euery Instrumēt (how braue soeuer they be in show) being foūd discordāt in Note, from the true concord in Musicke, is nothinge worth, so Amities, Frendshippes, and Cordiall dealinges be∣tweene man and man, being but to the vtter show, & not from a faythfull harte, is then called Hypocrisie, and breedeth dissention: For the Auncient Romaines esteemed more a small Acte done in the furtheraunce of the Common Wealth, then great showes of wor∣des called vayne Boastinge without Deedes. In that Concord is fygured amonge the Pagans in the shape of a Storke: it is to be shewed what her properties are, which is, euerye thirde yeare to caste foorth of her Neast one of her Byrdes, from the house or Tree, whereon shee buyldeth and breedeth, as a recompence for her quiet sufferaunce: moreouer when she is olde, she is fedde by her Younge with great di∣ligence. The Kinges in tymes passe, caryed in the toppe of their Scepter, the similitude of a Storke, and in the lower ende, the shape of the water Horse, signifyinge thereby, to be maynteynours of peace, and brydelers of such, as shoulde vse vyolence to anye. As the Storke is a deuourer of Serpentes, so ought Kinges to bee destroyers of Theeues, Murde∣rers and Robbers: and as shee is liberall in geeuing her young, so ought Kinges and Princes, to rewarde their Subiectes, not with the Goodes of others, but with their own, and as the younge Storke doth feede the olde, so ought the Subiectes beinge feede by good Lawes, rewarde their kinges with large Treasures:
for where good Lawes are, there is none oppression. Sundrie other haue figured Concorde in the forme of a Doue, or Turtle, because that shewing the Con∣corde of faythfull Fidelitie, both kinge and Subiecte ought to hold the same trulye. PROTEVS. PROTEVS hath no shape or likenesse, because the Poetes faygne that he was a God of the Sea, which could turne himselfe into any shape, whether it were of flaminge Fyer, or of a Furious Lyon, a grunting Hogge, a running streame, or any thinge ells, whatsoeuer him lysted, which thinge Virgil si∣gnifieth in theese Verses. Omnia transformat sese in miracula rerum, Ignem{que}, horribilem{que} feram, fluuium{que} liquentem: Hymselfe he straungely doth transforme into al shapes, and gleames: Now lyke to Fyer, now like to Beast, now like to siluer streames. Some thincke that by Proteus the dyuers affections, of manns mynde are signified: for somewhyle wee take pleasure, for the chiefeste felicitie, when in verye deede it is but a hoggish affection: otherwhyle Anger haleth vs, and maketh vs more lyke Tygres, than men: somtimes Pryde assaulteth vs, and maketh vs more hautie then Lyons: somtime swynish affecti∣ons, and then we beecome more Dronken then Hogs: as for good cogitations, they haue smalle or no dwel∣linges in our harts, and that is signified by the water.
Wherfore, if wee wyll reape anye profite by Proteus that is, by these our dyuers affections, we must brydle theym: For the Poetes faygne, that Proteus. neuer gaue foorth anye true Oracles, but when hee was for∣ced or constrayded thereunto. ASTRAEA. SHee was portraicted in a Virgins Habyte with verye seuere countenaunce and comelye Gesture. Signification. BY Astraea is signified Iustice. She geeueth Iud∣ges to vnderstand that they bee of Force against the wicked, but mercifull to the Penitente: as precise & vpright in Iustice, as otherwise graue and modeste in Apparell. HARPYAE. HARPIAE were portraicted like Carmarāts in bodye, but strompetlyke faced, hauinge long and cruel tallantes, Signification. BY the Harpyae shamelesse desperate iniuries are signified, which as vnder Feathers are shadowed for a season: By theyr whorishe Countenaunce, the canckered wrath of a malicious woman, as in Dalila,
Memphetica, Vasthi, Iuno, Semiramis, Cleopatra, & Philamertia: by their longe and sharp tallentes, their gredye desyre, to gette in possession the goodes of o∣thers. The poets faygne, yt ther, are three sisters of them, wherof the first is called Aello, which in our speche signifieth a spoyler of men, by vnsatiable whoredome. The second is called Ocypite A spedy conueyer or fil∣cher, a hackney whore, while she is in fact: she pyckes the caytiues pursse. The third called Celeno: which signifieth darke, be¦cause the doinges of whoredome loue darknes & hate the light. PARCAE PARCAE wer thre sisters ef destinie, wherof Clo¦tho was figured holdinge the distaffe, Lachesis drawing out the threed, and Atropos cutting it of. Signification. THe Poets fayne that these thre sisters betoken the felicity and state of man, and the misery of man. By the threedes, mans life is signifyed, for warning euerye estate to lyve well, so longe as Lachesis dothe drawe the Threede, it geueth warnynge that tyme be diligently spent, for when Atropos com∣meth to cut the threed, thereby is signifyed the ende of lyfe, thē is natures course ended: if ye threed be white, it betokens felicity, if it be blacke, endlesse misery: yt is, if the lyfe be vertuous, it obtayneth lyfe, if it bee vitious, then foloweth death.
PRIAPVS. A YOVNG man armed, hauing two winges, in his right hand, a vessel: powringe forth water on a square stone, on his left arme bearinge al sor∣tes of frutes, in his right hande a whippe of three cordes, hauinge also a greene VVillow garland on his heade. Signification. THE young man, betokeneth kyndled lust, other∣wyse called the God of Lecherye: his two winges, swyftnes, to accomplish carnal Venerie: the one wing is Flattery, the other, is Force. The vessel of water poured foorth on the stone, the multitude of wordes tending to no vertue: the square stone, the stubburne and harde harted. By the holdinge of dayntye fruites, the wastful expence that Leacherye vseth by ryotous excesse. By the whip, the sharpe toyle of beggery, which fol∣loweth the haunters of such art: By the three cordes hunger, sicknes & death. The Garlande of Willowe foresheweth the sharpe tyme of youthe, or floryshynge strength. The Poets faine Priapus to be the sonne of Venus, which is Lust following carnal desyre. This Priapus was honowred for a god among the Gentiles, & pray∣ed vnto by their women yt were barrayne, to the ende they might haue children.
GRATIAE THE Three Graces were portraited naked with hand in hand, wherof two loked toward vs and the thyrd from vs. Signification, BY the three graces, thankfulnes, Bountefulnes and liberality is signifyed: for in that one loketh frō vs, and two toward vs, we are let to weete, ye one benefyte when it is bestowed wel, wil bring with him two home agayne. They were portrayted naked, because benefytes muste not be coūterfaited, but done for vertues sake. Theyr holding of one an other hand in hand, signifieth ye boū∣tie doth winne & couple mens hartes together. They also were portraited Lawghinge, because the libera∣litye yt is commended, dothe procede from a cherefull and wylling mynde. The Poets fayne that the first for her mery counti∣naūce, was called Aglaia ye second for her fresh colour was called Thalia: And the thyrd for her pleasantnes was called Euphrosine, Aglaia, signifyeth thankeful∣nes for benefits receiued. Thalia, plenteousnes by libe∣ral reward, Euphrosine liberality whē nede is espied. These prefigure yt the benefits of ye mind, ought to bee no lesse liberal then ye proceding liberality, which proce¦deth frō forth of ye earth, & therfore called Gratiae. ORPHEVS ORPHEVS was figured in a Philosophers wede, playing on a harpe with sundry sortes of beastes and byrdes about him.
Signification. BY Orpheus is signifyed skilful musike, as wel by songe as instrument. By his Philosophers weede, the cumly gesture that belongs to handling the instru∣ment. By the harpe, the wyse sentences and sonets to the adorning of musike. By the beastes and byrdes the delectable mindes of the simple vnlearned. The Poets faine that he was a peerelesse musition in so much, that at his playe, wild beasts would come aboute him, the byrdes stay their flighte, the waters, their flowinge, the trees bow down theyr toppes, and the mountaynes hoppe, whereby is sygnifyed the de∣lightsome pleasures in al estates. The Poets faygne that when his wyfe Euridice was dead, he went to Hell, to speake with her soule, where his swete musique so rauished the mayster De∣uyll, that hee consented to let Orpheus haue his wyfe, agayne, condicionallye yt shee shoulde not loke backe til she were out of the infernal kingdome, which thing she not able to refrayne: he lost her agayne, Musique is delectable to the mynde, but carnally liked, is hurt to the soule. PERSEVS. PERSEVS had wyngs at his shoulders, a Falchi∣on or Percian swoorde by his side, and flyinge Pegasus beatinge the grownd with his heeles. Signifycation. His winges betoken his shippes, by which he sayled
into Asia: his sworde sygnyfieth his victorye ouer Me∣dusa: his flyinge horse, is a representation of Fame, and speedy pursuite after his enemies. The Poets fayne Stheno, Euriale, and Medusa, to bee three sisters. euery hayre on ech of their heades, to to a Snake, and all yt they looked vpon, they turned into stones, by which is signified, their blazing Beau∣tye, to bee such, and so greate, that they bereft or en∣amoured al that looked vpon them, so farre from wyt & vnderstāding, by their alluring slights, & coūterfeyted shewes, yt therfore they were sayde to bee transformed into stones, because they ruled thē at their pleasures. The Poetes faygne Perseus, to haue borowed of Mercurie, both Wynges, and Sword, and of Pallas a Target, and so comminge sodenlye, fyndinge Medusa sleeping hee cut of her heade, and shewed the same to his enemies, at the sighte whereof, they turned into Stones. The force of Forreyne helpe, ech Countrye maketh stronger: And force supplied when time doth last, doth prosper it the longer. The smyling shew, which treates a peace to be Is treasons fraude: let dayly prudence see. FVRIAE. THe three Furies, Alecto, Tysiphone, & Maege∣ra, were portraicted with whyppes, in their han¦des: their hayres hyssyng Serpentes, with haggish
lookes and gryeslye countenaunces. Signification. BY the Furies, the slynge of an euil conscience is si∣gnified: their whippes betoken the Tormentes which the wicked are forced to endure: theyr Serpen∣tyne hayres, doth intimate, that the Conscience doeth alwayes gnawe, and byte the harte of the vngodlye. Their menacing looke and countenaunce, doth threa∣ten the grieslye toyle in the second Lyfe. Tullie in hys Oration pro Roscio, declareth after this sorte. Nolite putare, quemadmodum in fabulis saepe numero vi∣detis eos, qui aliquid impiè scelerate{que} commiserūt, agita¦ri et perterreri taedis ardētibus: sua quē{que} fraus, suus terror maxime vexat, suum quem{que} scelus exagitat, amentia{que} afficit, suae malae cogitationes conscientiae{que} animi terrent. Hae sunt impijs assiduae domesticae{que} furia, quae dies noctes{que} parentum poenas à sceleratissimus filijs repetunt. In English thus. Thinke not (as Poetes haue fayned) the wicked to bee singed and scortched with Flaminge torches: it is our owne guyle, that moste doth beguyle vs, it is our owne wickednesse, that doth most affright vs, it is our own folly, that doth most cast vs downe, and our own thoughtes and wicked consciences that doth tormente vs. These, these I saye are the continual bosome Fu∣ries, which day and night, cryeth for vengeaunce, and punisheth the sinnes of lewd Parentes vppon theire wicked chyldren. The Poets fayne by these three Furies, the diuers affectiōs of ye mind, which force mē into sūdry, & diuers mischiefes: the first is Anger, ye second couetousnesse, the thirde Lust, wherof Anger desireth to bee reuen∣ged: Couetousnesse to possesse great riches: and Luste
to enioy Fleshly pleasures. CASTOR & POLLVX. THese were figured like two Lampes, or Cresset lightes, one on the Toppe of a Maste, the other on the Stemme or foreshippe. Signification. BY the light first appearing in ye Stemme or forship & ascending vpwarde, the Maryners hope of good lucke, for wynde and weather fayre to ensue: But if e∣ther lights beginne at the Topmaste, Bowespryte, or Foreship, and descend down ward into the Sea, it is a token of vehement tempest to folow. Castor is supposed to be that light which ascendeth & burneth cleare & bright. Pollux that which descen∣deth, and is more dymme, & styncking, lyke Sulphur. The Poetes faigne, that Castor & Pollux were the two brethren of Helena, who for their vnsaciable le∣cherie, and hotte burning lustes, were transfigured by Apollo into two lightes, cōmitted to the gouernment of Nocturna, to be dispersed into euery coast for a pla∣gue & reuenge of the Troians destruction. By the en∣creased lightes is ment the fiery lustes: the clearnesse, that which proceedeth of Youth, which for a tyme see∣meth delectable, & soone is quenched. The dymme lighte of Pollux signifieth Age, and the Luste there∣of, to be more filthy, and therfore continually banished of the Uertuous. THe Athenians had for their God a gay Image, with a goldē tōgue, by which was signified that
neither Apparel nor outwarde comlynesse was any thinge worth, not hauing a Golden toung. VVher∣by is signified Truth. Veritas temporis filia. SEinge that wee haue spoken of manye Demi Gods and Goddesses, consider wel, by the Fygure follow∣inge, of the one eternall, most mighty, most true and e∣uerlyuinge God, by whose diuine sufferaunce, manye thinges hath passed, and the former Ages meruelous∣lye darkened, by the onelye crafte, and slye practises of our mortall enemie Sathan, the onely author of al er∣rour and discorde. This Fygure is set betweene the Heathens, Pagans, and false Christians, the more to blemishe their foolishe Imaginacions, for as before is described the Gods of the Gentiles: so foloweth after the Gods of the Romish Churche, to the ende that e∣uery true Christian, may the better dyscerne the light from Darkenesse, and Truth from Falshood: and cō∣ferring the vayne imaginacions of tyme past, with the true Touchstone in tyme present, shal easelye espie, the broade way to destruction, through the which too ma∣nye haue passed: and now fynding the narrow waye to saluation, may euermore be the redier to prepare them selues to the Hauen of Peace, which God in mercye graunt, for his onelye sonne Iesus Christe his sake assisting vs with his holy spyryte now & euer. Amen. A Fygure on fyue Letters, of the Eternitie vn∣der which is comprehended the Hypocrysie of the Church, the losing of Sathan, and the appearinge of the Gospell. C. is the capital letter of Christus, two V.V. end∣wise ioyned maketh an X. which is in nūber 10, ye figure of the Law, nature & grace so ioyned togethers.
called the law of the tenne commaundementes, which being geuē after creatiō, called DIES, stands in in .2. place: the 3 letter I. which is in number one, represen∣ting the beginning, and ending applied to the 3 person which is Homo, who being made in Dies, which word carieth also his proper signification, as of 4 letters 4 Elementes, & then secōdly the woord Homo of the sa∣me 4 letters, the 4 cōplexiōs & hauīg life in it selfe for a tyme by creation, generation, & procreatiō, is said to be ye, which Homo signifieth, which is mā: first Earth, Water, Aire, Fyer: thē Melācholy, fleumatike, sāgui∣ne & choler so cōpoūded as a liuing creature exceding all other. By the thyrd and last figure whiche is one, & the first from the beginning is made 3 by the same, as by the figure more playnely appeareth vnder ye which is figured, Christus, Dies, Homo. cupplinge it selfe into humanity: worketh redēption through mortifica∣tiō, & resurrectiō. The hebrew Schin ש signifieth the coniunctions of the diuine persons as the former in re∣dēptiō father, Son, & Holi ghost by C.X.I. These be∣wraye false religion, Apostacy & Hypocrisy by Chryst in tyme among men.
The letter C, one hundred: the letter X, tē, the letter I, one: which make one Hundred and eleuen: ye two letters V V, as thus X makes an X, which is tenne: and one ten makes foure V, V, V, V, which is twēty: in the whole thyrty. The letter X turned euery way, makes four tennes, which is 40. in ye whole, 70: to 70 ad, C, XI. wc in al maketh 181. Thē gather together ye Hebrew nūber ש which is. CCC. & ye charect  Iod which makes 10, that is in all 491, ad to euerye letter single in the square one thousande, to the number of 491, and you shall fynde 5 4 9 1. from the whyche tyme beynge expyred, to the ende and seconde com∣mynge of CHRIST persecution  to bee loked for. Vnfold me this, and tel me playne: VVhether the Gospel shal remayne. Yf thou say no, then hast thou lied, for truth it selfe the same hath tryed. Sathan was bound a thousand yeres, His members are worse then him selfe. Sathan dayely among men apperes, Romes treasure is turned to pelfe. Many nations and Citties had a wonderful great de¦light in themselues, for that they were cōsecrated vn∣to certayne Gods Athens was cōmended of Miner∣ua, Delos the Ilād of Apollo & Diana, Cicero against Verres prayseth al Sicilia, but especiallye ye mount Et∣na, for that it was cōsecrated vnto Ceres, as thoughe it were wholy nothyng els, but an house or temple of Ceres. How much more honourable is it, for those which be Christians in name, to be the same in deede, the children of the one and the euerliuing GOD,
wc is blessed for euer, amē. For among the gentiles such regarde was had vnto vertue, that they dedicated to ye vertuous, ye reward of three goddesses. The first Strenua whereby is mente Dexterity or va∣liant dealinge. The seconde Agenoria. whiche signifyeth virilitye or manhode tendynge to Actiuitye and valiant∣nes. The thyrd Stimula which signifyeth a spurre, the agility & quicknes to vertuous exercises. Seing ther∣fore that the Gentiles and heathnish people in aunci∣ent times past, haue so preferred vertue, that not one∣ly they haue executed their lawes by punishinge the Ungodlye: but also haue lefte in Tables, written, paynted and grauen, the substaunce of that which they professed for a perpetuall recorde of theyre liues and conuersations, howe much more oughte wee that are Christians esteme of the most deuine tables geuē by God to Moses. wherein was drawen by the finger of the almighty, the happie gouernment of mannes felicitye? Also what pictures canne more admo∣nishe then the grauen, writtē and prynted charectes and bokes of gods eternal word and gospel confirmed by a glorious victory, ouer a tirānous death, to beholde one another it shal suffice whether the deedes frō the mynde be aunswerable to the Image of the bodye or not: but being founde farre otherwyse as euery man and woman, nation & people, wil decke and make com∣ly the earthy body by washing, bathing & curious clo∣thing, clēsing & brusshing ye spots of dyrt & dust, so is it behoueful to euery christian so to clense his mynd and conscience from euel thoughts and workes, as maye prepare the soule with adorned vertues before God wt more Diligēce thē ye garmēts before worldly & carnal
princes the neglecting wherof, prouoked God almigh∣ty, first of all after mans pryde began to growe on the earth, so for to reiect him from his fatherly compassi∣on, that his holy spirite no soner being absent, Sathā presently steps in, and so fillinge the mynde wyth vayn cogitations, whch presently began inuocations to di∣uyls, honours to spirites, & worshipinge of creatures, neuerthelesse in ye middest of the which sin, there amōg some remayned the sparkes of treue seruice, by the which although outwarde Idolatrous, yet inwarde by lawes, & constitutions verteous this Straūge en∣termixed stratageme engēdred after a time Hipocrisie which left at ye last ye act of doing Iustice, & by vsyng ye bare shew, became Infideles: through the which Sa∣thans kingdome increased, & Gods people became few Till by the comming of our Blessed Sauiour many were restored agayne, as by the disputation betwene Adrianus & Epictetus is somewhat to bee parceyued and after the end thereof shall folowe the Goddes of Supersticion. ☞The Capital God in his right fashion. Adrianus out of Vege∣tius de re militari. WHAT matter is it, yf thou vnlose thy gyrdle for vs, thou thy selfe shal not bee vnclothed, regard that body by the which thou mayste be taught. Epictteus It is an Epystle. A. VVhat is an Epistle? E. A silent mesenger. A. VVhat is a Picture? E. A glosing treuth.
A. VVhy doste thou tearme it so? E. Because wee see paynted Apples, flowers, lyuinge creatures, Golde, and Siluer, and they are not the ve∣ry true, & selfe same thinges. A. VVhat is Goulde? E. The bond Slaue of Death. A. What callest thou Siluer? E. The place of Enuy. A. What is Iron? E. An Instrument for euery Arte. A. VVhat is a Sworde? E. The Ruler of Force, the stay of Tentes in Battaile. A. VVhat is a Fensor? E. A manquellour without offence. A. VVho are those, that beinge in health, are sicke? E. They that are busie in other Mens matters. A. Hovve can a man laboure, and not be vveary? E. By gayninge. A. VVhat is Frendship? E. A concorde, or agreeing. A. VVhat is that which in length exceadeth al other thinges? E. Hope. A. VVhat is Hope? E. A slumber to a Watchman: and a doubtful Chaūce to him that looketh for it. A. What thinge is that which a man cānot behold? E. The Mynde of an other. A. In what thinge doth a man offend? E. In lust. A. VVhat is lust? E. A secret stearinge of the Body to Ill: A corruptible heate, the Originall to Leachery. A. VVhat is Liberty? E. Innocency.
A. VVhat is cōmon aswel to a King as to a wretch? E. Byrth, and Death. A. VVhat is the best thinge, and worst thinge? E. A Woorde. A. VVhat is pleasaunt to one, & displeasaunt to an other? E. Bondage against liberty: prosperity to the healthy: To a Kinge, no company: to a Begger, no Almes. A. VVhat is that which is euer? E. Lyfe. A. VVhat is Lyfe? E. The originall of all beginninges. A. VVhich is the best Lyfe? E. Felicity. A. VVhat is the most certayne thinge of all? E. Death. A. VVhat is Death? E. A perpetuall security. A. VVhat is the generall Death? E. The ende of all thinges that euer were: a thinge to bée feared of none that lyueth well: the Enemy of lyfe: a God ouer liuinge Creatures: a feare of the Parētes: a praye to the Children: the cause of makinge Testa∣mentes: a Speach after life is departed: the very last Mourninge: a forgetfulnes, after a Remembraunce: the light Torch of the last Fyre: a burden for a Graue: a title of a Toumbe, & Death is the ende of all euil. A. VVhy are the Dead crowned? E. It is a Witnes yt they haue past the bitter course of lyfe. A. Why are the Thūbes of the dead boūd together? E. Because they may knowe themselues to be equal after Death. A. VVhat is the fatall fier? E. A contentinge of the Dettour: A paymēt of ye debt. A. VVhat is a Trompet?
E. The stirringe vp to battayle: the warninge to fight: a mixture of Swordes: a lamētacion of dead Corses. A. VVhat is a Pooreman? E. A desert Well: whom al the Passengers behold and leaue it still in his place. A. VVhat is man? E. A Man is like to a Hotehouse: the first roome is warme, where the bodies are annoynted: so an Infant beinge borne, is first annoynted: the seconde for the bo∣dyes to sweat in, is Youth: so are the bodies subiect, & therefore equall to distemperatures. A. VVhat is mans strength? E. Like a rotten Apple, eyther they falldowne when they are throughly ripe: Or if they falle before, they falle hardly. A. VVhat is man in Age? E. A Candle placed agaynst the Winde: a Soiourner in Earth, the very Image of the Lawe: a Stable of mi∣sery, a bond slaue to death: a delayer of life, with whom Fortune dalieth. A. VVhat is a VVoman? Litigious: E. A necessary euil: for vnnecessary causes: a touchstone to shew ye colour of Gold, & Siluer: a burdē to beare childrē of two sortes: men & womē: Bastards & Her∣maphroditical childrē, hauing. 1. mother, &. 2 fathers. A. VVhat is a VVoman. Coniunctiue. E. The piller of the house: the Ioy of the Husband, the comforte to children, the Storehouse of Generation, & the Augmentour of Posterity. A. VVhat is Fortune? E. Shee is a noble Matrone yt applieth herselfe to her seruaūts: the next marke wtout Iudgement: a chaūce of outwarde goods wt shineth on him, on whom it happe∣neth, and darkneth him, from whom it flyeth.
A. Howe many Fortunes bee there? E. As many as fond heades hath inuentions: yet sayd to bee three: one blinde that applyeth herselfe where shee list: An other Mad, that taketh away agayne the Giftes by her geuen: The third is Deaffe, that neuer will harken to the Prayers of the miserable. A. VVhat are the Gods? E. The very signes of our Eies, the powers of ye mind, if thou be afrayd of thē, that is feare: If thou refraine of thine owne accord, that is Religion. A. VVhat is Religion? E. A Doctrine established in thy minde, vnto the which is geuen reuerence, either good, or bad. A. VVhat is good? E. That which was neuer Ill. A. VVhat is Euill? E. That which hateth good. A. VVhat is the Sunne? E. The light of the Worlde, which geueth and taketh away the day, by the which we know the course of the howers. A. VVhat is the Moone? E. The Ader of the Day, the Eye of the Night, the Light of Darcknesse. A. VVhat is Heauen? E. A high, and mighty Roofe, a pured Ayre. A. VVhat are the starres? E. The destenies of Men, safe Hauens to ye Mariners. A. VVhat is the Earth. E. The Barne of Ceres. A mansion place for Lyfe. A. VVhat is the Sea? E. A way vncertayne. A. VVhat is a Shippe? E. A wāderinge house, a dwellinge place, where thou
lyst, the power of Neptune, a table for the course of the yeare. A. VVhat is a Mariner? E. A louer of the Sea, a forsaker of the firme Lande, a Cōtemner of Lyfe, & Death, a Cliēt of the Waues. A. VVhat is sleepe? E. The Image of Death. A. VVhat is the Night? E. A rest for the Labourer, & a Gayne for the Robber. A. VVhy was Venus paynted naked? E. Because loue is naked, & because Venus doth leaue those naked, whom naked thinges delight. A. VVhy was Venus maried to Vulcan? E. That declareth all loue to be stirred vp by Heate. A. VVhy was Venus Squint Eyed? E. Because she wanted good Conditions. A. VVhat is Loue? E. A vexation of an Idle Breast, in a Child it is shame, in a Uirgin, a blushinge secret: In a Woman madnes: In a Youngeman heate: In an Oldman a laughinge-stocke: in the mockinge of the Uice, a heinous crime. A. VVhat is God? E. He which ruleth all thinges. A. VVhat is Sacrifice? E. An Offeringe vp of Incence. A. VVhat is without a Companion? E. A Kingedome. A VVhat is a Kingdome? E. A part of the Gods. A. VVhat is a Kinge? E. The head of the publique light. A. VVhat is the Senate? E. An Ornament of the Citty: The Brightnes of the Cittyzens.
A. VVhat is a Souldiour? E. The Bulwarke of the Realme, the Defender of a Coūtry: a Honourable seruice, a Messenger of Might: In some Countries, a People naught set by. A VVhat is Rome? E. The Fountayne of the Empyre: a mother of Moti∣ons: a Possessour of substaūce: a hostage for Romaines, a consecration of eternall peace. A. VVhat is Rome, sithens it ruled by religion? E. The Foūtayne of Ciuil dissentiō, poured into sūdry Kingedomes: A Brothell house for Whores maynte∣naunce: A Sāctuary for Murtherers, & Theeues: A Pardon▪ for homicide, the Temple of Idolatry: A depriuation of Uertue: the execrable face of al ye furies. A. VVhat is Victory? E. An Enemy to Warre: a Louer of peace. A. VVhat is Peace? E. A quiet liberty. A. VVhat is the Courte Haule? E. A place for Brablers. A. VVhat are frendes? E. Goulden Images. A. VVhat is a friende? E. He that healpeth in time of necessity. A. VVhat are Flatterers? E. They that catch men like Fishes. A. VVhat is the best ease? E. He which doth good to most: and harme least? STEPHANVS THAT THE HOPE OF IMMOR∣tality, hath conuerted many from Infidelity. OUr almighty God hath made a plentifull worlde: But miserable fooles, maketh it to seeme scarce: when the hidden goods, bewrayeth the Gatherers. All thinges created in the Worlde, is fructfull.
Therefore, Man being in the World, is fruictful. VVherein? Either in number of Uertues, through yt which hee shal lyue. Either in the number of Uices, by yt which he shal dye: and this is called Gayne. A. VVhat doth a man gaine by getting the world? E. The losse of his Soule. A. VVhat is the losse of the Soule? E. The excludinge from endlesse Ioye. A. VVhat is Ioye? E. The Iewell of health. A. VVhat is health? E. The perfection of peace. A. VVhat is peace? E. The whole rest of immortality. A. VVhat is immortality? E. The endlesse Ioye called felicity, which was from beyonde tyme, and euer shalbe. A. By whom is mortality crowned? E. By Immortality: who as cheife Creatour, chooseth whom hee wil and leaueth what he list. A. VVhat is a Creator? E. The originall of all thinges, that euer were, is, or shalbe. A. VVhat is his name? E. God almighty. A. And why? E. Because he is the same, frō whō, & in whose power, are al thinges in subiection, Man, Beaste, Fysh, Foule, Serpent, Worme, Flyes, Heauen, and Earth, Hell, Sinne, the Deuill, and Deathe, who seeth all thinges before they were, what they are, and what they shalbe: who also sayeth, seeke not out those thinges, which are aboue thy capacity, because they are not subiect to thée.
Stephanus Verses conclu∣dinge these questions. The Tiger fierce, doth followe kinde, The Doue by flyght, doth seeke her rest, The blessed ones, doth shewe their mynde, Although of euill bee possest. The Haughty Rocke though fast hee stande, Is subiect to the quakinge Earth. The vile surmise of wicked Man, Is forst by kinde to lose his Breath. Striue not therefore agaynst the Streame, The foode yealdes such as laboure gleane. Vorax the capitall God of Supersticion, SO called of deuouringe, oppressinge and consuming by takinge with vyolence the Landes and Goods of Kinges, and People, by persecutinge, for the truthes profession, by killinge to suppresse, and darken the ve∣rity, for ye custome claymeth auctority, after the which followeth Superiority, which beinge obtayned, contē∣neth Equality, and so remayneth as highest till the al∣mighty frustrate such Arrogancye. Frauncis. ITem that he sitteth in the first degrée, & chéefest place in Heauen, & hath his Seate in the Highest Place.
that Fraunces is Christes Chauncellour, Treasorer, his banner bearer, & counsayler, & that he beareth, the wounds lyke Christ: & where as Lucifer was ye high∣est sette in the heauen, being longe sithens displaced, Fraunces hathe his roome, implying, yt there is foūd none like him, for hee, hathe obserued the lawe of the highest. Item that the doue sent from Noe out of the Arcke, signifieth the order of the barefoote Friers: also that, in al things, Frauncis was like the sonne of God, whe∣ther this be horrible blasphemy, let al that be of God, Iudge. Pope Gregorie the. 9. made him a Sainct. A Confirmation. FRyer Loy saw Christ crucified goinge before, and Frauncis talkinge with hym, & that Frauncis tur∣ned the Ryuer Tiber into Oyle, it may be thought he kylled a number of Fyshe, but poysoned mo Soules. an vncharitable miracle. Of Frauncis Byrthe by Mistris Picha his Mother I omitte, and infinite other Fables, because he must geeue place to moe. F. Gyles. FRyer Gyles was rapt into Heauen. Dunstane. SAynct Dunstane, helde the Dyuell by the nose with a payre of Tonges, by which is signified the strēgth of holy churche: in the which act, the Legende setteth
foorth this toy to small commendacions: as also in the Alcharō of the Barefoote Fryers. Such a number of preposterous Godds are to bee found: so Saincted & made by the mayster Demon, yt to wryte them al, woulde contayne an huge volume. These haue I sette onlye to sharpen the myndes of wel disposed, the better to consider of the rest: & ther∣fore the more earnestly pray to God almightye, for Ie∣sus Christes sake, to keepe vs from such seruile bon∣dage, as our forefathers haue long continued in, & day∣lye imploye oure studies and wylles to his glorye, in which so doing, our assurance shalbe perpetual, which God in mercy graunt. Item in the Reliques of Rome, the Pageaunte of Popes, the Forest of Hystories, the Secretes of Na∣ture, and Anotomie of the Masse, are all readye tou∣ched the supersticious Gods and Saincts of Romayne factions. I therefore omitte the same, shewinge thee whyther to resort, as also the principal Authors, from whence they were first had. Legenda Sanctorum. Brunellus. Legenda aurea, Mystery of Iniquitie. Sermones discipulorā. Catalogus gloriae Mundi. Vita Sancti Patricij. Vita Christi. The Flower of the Commaundementes. Vitae Patrum. Methodi{us} de Reuelationb{us}▪ with many others, wherby the tyme present maye beholde as in a Christall Glasse lyke true traueylinge Pilgrimes, aswell the freckles of counterfeit perswasions, as also the great spottes of corrupt Religion, which being thus espyed, by the ayd of the three Graces, Fayth, Hope, & Charitie, we may attayne to the heauen of celestial perpetuitie.
A Recapitulation of the Sectari∣an Gods, by whose Heresies, much harme hath growen, to Gods true Church. WHen the Image of the beast, a formed shape had foūd, Thē straightwais he became to geue the church a wound: Which church new erected, by force was put downe By PAPA the great God, which weares the triple crowne. HYs Heresye was and is of the Sacrament, that ye Sonne of God, borne of the Uirgin Mary, was & is, in the Sacramente of theyre abhominable Alter, Fleshe, Bloud, & Bones: also they hold, that it is law∣ful to haue Idols in Churches, to geeue reuerence to Saynctes canonized: also they holde, yt it is no sinne to murder the professours of Gods worde and Uerity, replying that there is none other Uerity, Doctrine, or Christianitie, then what proceedeth out of theyre Dia∣bolical Synagogue: neither any other religion to bee holden for truthe, but that which proceedeth from Ro∣me. The Popes Apparel domesticall, is a purple vel∣uet Cappe, edged with Armine, or other rych Furres, hys vpper Garment, a Red or Purple cloake, euen wt his elbowes, vnder yt which is a blacke silke Uesture, & vnder the Uesture a whyte lynnen Garment, edged wt Golde & hunge with pendentes or belles, his Pontifi∣call adourninge is a tryple Crowne of great rychesse, set with Stones of peerelesse value: his vpper Gar∣ment, is a Cope, more worth then his Condicions: hee is caried on the Backes of foure Deacons, after the maner of carying Whytepot Queenes, in Westerne Maygames.
Basilides. BAsilides, the name of an Heretique, who affirmed that Christ was not crucified, but Simon Cireneus, who, as ye Euāgelistes wryte, was cōstrayned to beare the Crosse, when our Sauiour waxed faynt, through effusion of bloude by his scorginge. He held that it was no offence to denye Chryste in the tyme of persecution: hee denied the laste resurrection: hee also affirmed, ye Uirginitie was of no greater merite, then Maryage, but equall with it. Hee was aboute the yeare of oure Lorde. 110. Cataphriges. THese Heretikes, tooke their name of one Montan{us} of Phrigia, and Archheretique, who affirmed that the Holye Ghoste was geeuen to him, and not to the Apostles. They Baptized not in the name of the Trinitie: and vsed to Baptyze men after they were dead. They did also condemne the seconde Mariage. This Sect began in the yeare. 170. Apelles. THys fellowe began his Heresie in Greece, hee de∣nyed the knowinge of God, as that hee knewe not the God whom hee worshipped, and that Christe was not very God in deede, but a phantasie appearing vnto men as a man, he was about the yeare. 174. Pharisees. PHarisees were before Christ his cōming. 125. yeres:
they tooke their names of Phares, seperating them as a people more worthy then other, taking vpon theym Pharah or Pharasch of expoūding the law of Moses and the Prophets. They beleued that god alone was onely the true god, and that Chrystes comming should be profytable for them, and yet when hee came, they persecuted him: they were proud bosters of their dee∣des. There garmentes were large and wide, and on the skyrtes of their gownes were broad gards, wher∣on were written sundry Charectes in the Hebrew, and they named these, Philacteria. Saduces. These had theyr name of Zedec, whiche signifyeth rightfulnes, and called themselues Zedechim, that is iust & right. These sprang vp after the Pharesies: they beleued that body & soule should both perish together, and that neither the godly should receiue any reward, for his good workes, nor the wicked shoulde receyue pain for his euil dedes, otherwise thē in this life. They held that ther was neither hel nor Heauē, nether An∣gel nor spirite: and that it was in our owne powers, ei∣ther to haue felicity or misery. They were enemies a∣gainst the Pharises, and yet with the Pharases agre∣ing to persecute Christ Iesus. Essees Were a kynd of sect, hating mariage, they came to¦gether in great companies and held opinion that euil soules were dispersed in the Ocean seas, there to bee tormented by the tempestes.
Cerdō. An heretike of Cerdonia who affirmed that Chryst was neuer borne of a woman, and that he had no flesh, nor suffered any passiō, but that he feined to suffer: he de¦nyed God to be ye father of our lord Iesus Chryst, and ye God was knowē and Christ vnknowē: god was holy, Christ he said to be vnholy: he denied the old Testamēt, saying that it was the worke of an other God, & not of the vniuersall God: which other God was the begin∣ning of the vniuersal mischiefe: he was after Christ our lorde 144 yeares. Valentinianus. THis Heretyke held that Christe did passe throughe the Uirgin, as the Wynde passed throughe a Pype. Martion. THis heretike was Disciple to Cerdō, born in Cino∣pe, a Citty of PONTVS who beinge at Ephe∣sus in ye time of S. Iohn the Euangeliste, fayned that there were 2. Gods: the one the maker of the lawe and worlde, the other to bee more mightye (the father of our lord Iesu) He helde that soules are saued, but the bodies rise not agayne. He disalowed of Wedlocke. Sabellicus. A Notable Heretike deniynge Iesu Christ to bee any of the three persons, and that he was not ye
sonne of God. Manes. AN Herityke which affirmed himselfe to bee lyke christ, & somtime to be cōforter that was promised to come. Arrius THis mā was a Prieste in the church of Alexandria in ye yere of our Lord. 320. his erroure was yt the Sonne was not equal wt the father in Deitie, nor of ye same substaunce: but that he was a very creature: hee infected a merueilous great nūber wt his Heresy, for yt which the great counsaile of Nice was holdē by ye Em∣peroure Constantinus Magnus: himself being present wt 318 Byshopes. Afterward Arrius horribly finished his lyfe: for by going to the stoole, his guttes went frō him, and so hee died. Donatus. THis Heretike affirmed that any cōgregation with out him & his Sectaries were not Christiā & that in the church were none euyll, but all good, and that they onely pertained to the Church: he was a Numidi∣an borne, aboute the yere of oure Lorde 353. Macedonius. BEing at Constātinople he mainteined the heresie of Arrius.
Eunomius. An enuious heretike of Arrius sect, whervnto he ad∣ded, that the sonne was in euery thing, vnlike vnto ye fa¦ther: & that the holy Ghost had no medlīg with the fa∣ther nor the sonne▪ he affirmed that all which helde the fayth yt he taught should be saued, had, they committed neuer so great sinne, & continued therin: he was about the yere after Christe. 353. Pelagius Pelagius was an other Archeheretike his opinion was, that manne is iustifyed by his own workes & not by fayth in Christ. Thys Atheist was about the yere of our .L. 388. Eutices Was an Abbot of a Monastery in Constantinople about the yere of our Lord 450. He affirmed yt Chryst had but one only nature, that is to say diuine or of god, like as he was one person. This heresye was condemned in the Counsaile of Ephesin, & Eutices sent into exile. Iohn A leyd This Rustical hedge god was at Mūster in VVest∣phalia by occupatiaō Tailour naming hīselfe king of new Ierusalem: a ringleader of ye Anabaptistes: he so
seduced the people, yt he brought them to vtter cōfusiō: he denied Baptisme to Infants: hee had one Gnipper∣dolling to his Prophet, & Cretching to his cōpaigniō, his end was to bee sterued to death in an Iron cage: be∣fore this Heretique, was borne two Swordes: which betokened the Gouernment of two Kingdomes, Hea∣uen, and Earth: A round Globe, with a Crosse: and a Sworde thrust through the Globe, signifyinge that he was Kinge ouer the whole Worlde. Dauid George. THis Blasphemous fellowe, an other Heretike, na∣ming himselfe to be ye Messias, was borne at Delph in Holland: He saide that hee was Godds Nephew, and talked with wylde Beastes, and Byrdes in their Language, receyuinge his foode of theym. Hee sayde that Heauen was empty, and that he was sent to choose & apoinct the children of God, with other vaine and ab∣surd tromperies. After chaunging his name to Ihon a Bruges, he came to Basill in Swizerland, & there af∣ter. 12. yeares died: His Errowre was, that by hym came saluation: and after three yeares, after his burial he should rise agayne. Ere two yeares were finished he was taken vp, and with his Coffyn, hanged on a Gal∣lowes. Henry N. THis strauagant Heretike, Henry Nicolas, other∣wise called Harry Clash a Fleming supposed, hath by the healpe of others, sent forth, diuers blasphemous
Bookes to the great hurt of many lightbrayne Chri∣stiās. And by his disciple one Christopher Vitell, Ioy∣ner, one altogether vnlearned, sauinge that he is som∣what erroniously, Bewitched hath géeuen foorth cer∣tayne bookes here vndernamed: naminge themselues, & their Adherentes the Family of Loue. They fayne a Gouernment of Immortality, to be by their deifyinge immortality: they cōfesse thēselues to be tēpted: wher∣fore they appoynct, auricular confession, (nothinge to the forgeuenes of sinnes): They sinne til they come to their perfection: then sinnelesse: and so able to bringe o∣ther to the same, beinge of their Family: They wyll haue nothinge to be disliked, yt is done by their Elder. The sayd. H. N. was first of Amsterdame and driuē from thence, because of his Errours, and went to Ro∣terdam, and from thence to Collen: From whence pro∣ceaded al these wicked Errours. The names of his cō∣uerted ones, be of. 3. degrees. 1. The cōminalty of the holy ones, 2. The vpright vnderstandinge ones, 3. The illuminate Elders, The names of. H. N. his Bookes bearinge the name, of the Family of Loue. The cryinge Voyce. The first Epistle and first exhortation. A Dialogue betwene the Father & the Sonne. The true and spirituall Tabernacle. The published peace vpon Earth. The Euangelium Regni. The declaration of the Masse. The newe Ierusalem. The prophecie of the spirit of loue. The Glasse of righteousnesse.
Certaine vpstart Anabap∣tisticall Errours, That Christe tooke not flesh of the blessed Virgin Mary. That Infantes of the Faythfull ought not to be bap∣tized. That a Christian man, may not bee a Magistrate, or beare the Sworde and office of auctority. That it is not Lawfull for a Christian to take an oth. THeese Hellish sortes of Errours are more preposte∣rous & wicked, thē ye lawes or statutes of ye Pagās, al¦though in the respect of any cōmendatiō: bad is ye best: for as the diuel, aucthor of all mischiefe beganne to in∣fect the former Age with illusions, so now in these la∣terdayes he hath almost poysoned the remained seeds, with al abhominations. First in Delphos, then in Euboea, at Nasamone, and among the Dodonean Okes, throughe whose huyge Boughes, the whistlinge wods seemed to yeld forth ye Thondringe clamour of Deuylles: then began wor∣shipping of formed shapes, as of Saturn in Italy, of Iu∣piter in Candie, of Iuno in Samos, of Bacch{us} in India, and at Thebes, of Isis, & Osyris in Aegipt, of Vesta at Troia, of Palas Tritonia among ye Aphricās, of Mer∣cury in Frāce, & Germany, of Minerua at Athens, of Apollo at Delphos, at Chio, at Rhodes Patia, Troa∣da Thymbria, of Diana in Delos, & in Scythya, of Ve∣n{us} in Paphos Cyprus, Gnydos and Citheros, of Mars in Thracia, of Priapus in Hellespētus, of Vulcane in
Lypara and Lemnos: Symon Magus at IERVSA∣LEM, MACHOMET in Mecha, PAPA in ROME, who as the former Pagans set vp Ima∣ges of theyr fathers to be honoured: so likewyse hath ye pestilēt Church of Superstition mayntayned Idolls, yt very ceremonies of the heathē pagans: stocks, stones, gold, siluer, & other metal to be worshipped. This apish religiō, neuerthelesse being espyed, is suffred & of some laughed at, but not subuerted: so while the world hai∣teth betwene two opiniōs, suffring ye Mōster to rule as him listeth, all are so stayned, some wt Idolatry, some wt supersticiō, some with Schisme, Arrianisme, Apos∣tacie and infidelity, yt frō King to Prieste, & frō Prieste to People, ye head is Hypocrisie. I do most earnestly be¦sech thee, deere bought Creature: better to consider of God his Benefites, and holy religion, lest he make thee partaker, with the greater people (at this day) the Armenians, Arabians, Persians, Syrians, Assyrians, Medes, Aegyptians, Numidiās, Lybians, Moores, Bra∣silians, Tartarians, Scythians, Aethiopians, Faythlesse Christians, Romaynes, & an Infinite number of King∣domes and people, which doe far surmount the armye of true Christians, and so seclude thee from his fauour and Kingedome, by harkeninge to fantasy & omitting the verity. The only good God, and merciful father e∣uermore pardon our offences, and defend vs from this yoke of counterfayted carnality, both now and euer. Banaster. THis irreligious caytife, helde an Opynion, that no man ought to feare God. &c.
Eurynomus. A Deuill, who as the Auncient Greekes supposed, did eate and consume, the flesh of Dead men, lea∣uinge the bones bare: Whom they paynted in a figure terrible, hauinge longe Teeth or Tuskes, syttinge in the Skin of a Vultur, of coloure betweene Blacke, & Yealow. A fit God for such Companions. SEra nimis Vita est crastina, viue hodie. To morowes Lyfe is to late, lyue to day. AS God is good, and best of all, So man is ill, and subiect thrall. Ill by good, is made better, Then man to God must bee detter. Though all be many, and one be few, And fewste make many returnde to one, Then many men earthy what do they shew, Sith all and euery standes not alone. One is sayd simple, where moe are in place, The moe thought the strōger, each cause to defēd, One God and one Kyng, yet stil kepes the grace; Creation and kingdom bryngs al to an end. Thē one frō beginning which al things haue made, VVil euery other so gather to gether,
That each thinge in his kynde clearely shall vade, The worldes beautye beginneth to wither. Then shall this summething a nothing make, VVhen all shalbe vacant, as when he began. Of nothinge, in no place, cannot lesse be. VVhen that which was, is not, as soules shal thē see. FINIS. The names of the Authours, out of whom this worke is gathered. ANdreas Theuet Aristoteles. Alex. Aphrod. Aristophanes. Apollodorus. Apulius. Albertus Magnus. A. Gellius. Aratus. Beatus Rhenan. Cicero. Catullos. Cornelius Tacitus. Coelius Rhod. Censorinus. Diodorus Siculus. Erasmus Rot. Eusebius. Euclides.
Fulgentius. Franciscus Picus. Franciscus Philel, Flaccus. Georgius Pictorius. Hesichius. Hermes. Homerus. Hesiodus. Helanus. Iulius Firmicus. Isidorus. Inuenalis. Ioan. Picus. Ioannes Boemus. Ioannes Baleus.
Lactant. gram. Lactant Firmian. Lucianus. Marcus Varro. Martianus. Manilius. Martialis. Manobius. Nso. Orpheus. Propertius. Plinius. Palaephatus. Pindarus. Plato. Plutarchus. Phornutus. Pontanus. Ptolemaeus.
Politianus. Philelphus. Qu. Fabius. Seneca. Solinus. Salustius. Strabo. Seruius. Spanhemius. Tibullus. Theocritus. Th. Beconus. Virgilius. Valerius Maxim. Guilielmus Gratarolus. Xenophon. VVith many others. FINIS. Imprinted at London in Fleete-streete, neare vnto Saynct Dunstanes Churche, by Thomas Marshe. ANNO DOMINI. 1577. Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
