17617 99847679 12733
THE TVRKE. A Worthie TRAGEDIE. As it hath bene diuers times acted by the Children of his Maiesties Reuels. Written by Iohn Mason Maister of Artes. Sume superbiam quesitam meritis Horat. LONDON. Printed by E. A. for Iohn Busbie and are to be sold at his shop in S. Dunstons Church∣yard in Fleete-streete. 1619.
Scaenarum Personae. Mulleasses the Turke Borgias Gouernour of Florence. Duke of Venice. Duke of Ferrara. Bordello an humerous trauellour. Pantofle his Page Eunuchus seruant to Borgias Lord of Florence. Phego a gentleman vsher. Philenzo a gentleman of Ferrara: Prusias. a gentleman of Venice A Fryer Iulia Dutchesse of Florence. Timoclea Borgias wife Amada his daughter Madam Fulsome an old Gentlewoman
Prologus THe markes and notions extant in each spirit, Seald by th'industrious hand of art & merit, Me thinkes appeare transparant (as the minde By sence were bounded and might seeme confind In th'externall eye) nor shall our tragicke muse, (If strong hope faile not) need a coynd excuse But to those marginall noates of yours do bring (In following nombers from the learned spring) Matter instructiue to inrich their parts Where knowledge raignes crownd with it own desarts, Let such with serious and impartiall hearing Sound sence, quicke sight and iudgement neuer erring: Suruay and censure the mineruall frame Of his elaborate worke: and if his name Merrit regard, and you vouchfafe to grace him With eminent loue, or mongst those lawreats place him, That with the magicke of sweet poesie, Transfer Pernassus into Brittany, He shall digest the Chaos of his braine, To tunefull order and acquire a straine, Neere to the musicke of the heauenly spheres, To fit Times guard and rawish choysest eares. FINIS.
Epilogus. FAme and Opinion like the two vvingd cap On Hermes head, do lift all Poets vp: Some, though deseruing, yet aboe the Sphere Of true impartiall censure, vvhose tun'd eare Listens to all and can vvith iudgement say, Others sing vvell, though Thracian Orpheus play. Our Muse affects no excellence: if Fame tell And through her shrill trompe at the Muses well (Where the thrice trebled bench of learning sits In strict examination of others wits) Sound ours, thogh humbly straines, whose infant growth Nor dares, nor will, with times hugd darlings quarrell, Nor stand the lightning with the sacred Lawrell) We rest content: yet thus farre may conceipt Carry each labouring Artist, where the weight Of his ovld taske is ouer, that his tongue May like a father of his tender young Speak natures lauguage and not be withstood, When with our Muse he saith, that This is good. FINIS. This Epilogue should haue bene printed at the end of the booke, but there was no spare place for it.
Mulleasses the Turke, Actus primi. Scaena prima. Enter aloft Iulia, and Amada. Iul. HOw sweet are things knowne in their contraries When onely apprehension, and sicke thoughts Foster a gredy longing Amada? A. Madame you breath: no couetous hand Takes the aire from you: no contrariety Bandy's against your rest: as I am modest, My fathers seeming harsh vngentlenesse Is but a misty pollicy, to be guile some time. Then be your self and Iomiall: Iul. Yet why should I repine, At this my foret restraint of libertie? Our life is but a sayling to our death, Through the worlds Ocean: it makes no matter then Whether we put into the worlds vast Sea, Shipt in a Pinasse or an Argosy: Amad. No Matter: when we hope for change of vessels Ladye And in that hope beguile your passions: Giue your sight freedome o're the citty walls And see what worthie obiectsmeete your eyes: See where two Dukes, each like a god of warre, Lye both entrench't against the gates of Florence To gaine your loue: on the west side, ther's Ferrara hangs his scarlet ensignes foorth And wooes in blood: then from the East behould
In a white ensigne fil'd with starres of gould, Burnes the Venitians loue: the morning Sun Courts not the world more amorously: he as mild As Mihas boye doth proue that lou's a childe, Not techy if not wrongd. The other like Mars Hemms in his Venus in his armes of steele. Enter the Duke of Ferrara at one doore and the Duke of Venice at another doore and meete at the midst of the stage. And vowes a conquest: Se where they appeere: Madame your loue, which hand for a Dukedome? Were I an Orator I could praise Ferrara, He like the marble statue of some God, Carryes commaund in his proportion, In him loue seemes a warrior for the fire, Of best affection burnes in hot desire. Iul. And yet me thinkes the smooth Venitian Should more contenta Venus: In him loue seemeth as he is, calme and mild, Pleasing and sportfull: things rough and violent Dye like abortiue fruit before perfction. Th'are pursy and short breathd: th'ardor of true loue Burns in a calme breast: in him affections Are not like tempests raging: yet of force Like an euen gale of wind to beare loues ship Vnto the port of happinesse: his fire Burns, and consumes no, but maintaine desire. Ven. Giue o're my claime: that should argue, A too cold temperature in loue: besies It would disable the Venetian power Not to make good his chalenge: I dare not. Ferr. Why she is mine by promise. Ven. I grant, that Borgias her Vncle and Protector Promisd you that which he cannot performe.
But know Ferrara that my claime takes roote And growes vpon the promise of the State, I by the Senate was assur'd her loue, And on that ground the justice of my cause Pleads. Thus in armes against the citty walls. Ferr. Herein you erre: for know the Florentine Dying a Prince powerfull and absolute (Not countermanded by a popular voice Or by th'ambitious factions of a Senate) Leaues the Protector in his daughters nonage Free like himselfe, and absolute: of power To promise and performe: on his assurance Liues my loues right: then were you both Direct opposers of what I clayme, by heauen And by that influence that made me great I would persue my chalenge through your bloods. Ven. Giue not such passage to your heat my Lord Ferr: Then giue my power a passage to my Loue: Ven: That I demaund of you. Ferr: And I command: That without stay you raise your powers And leaue this citties siedge vnto our armes, Or what we aimd at them we'le turne on you. Ven. Although your powre we're equall with your pride I would dare stay Ferrara, and proclaime Thy title weake, thy claime litigious: Mine onely iust, apparant, righteous. Yet let not fury so empeach our wisdomes To iarre for her another doth possesse, And make our follies laughter to our foes: Will then Ferrara make his passions subiect To an indifferency that I shall propound? Fer. If the indifferency you shall propound Deuides not me from Iulia: Ven. She's the maine claime of both our armed loues. Fer. And with out her ther's no indifferency.
Ven. Y'are riuolous: Why know Ferrara, thy prerogatiue Extends no further then thy sword can reach: Then when thy conquests hath confirmd thy will Thou maist capitulate with ude commaunds, Til when proud Prince, stoupe at imperious chance: For did no other title then my sword Make my claime righteous: yet the doubtfull lot Cast on the ends of warre, carries my fate Euen with thy pride: the Lady as mine owne To shewe an eminence that o're lookes thy hope, I chalendge and auerre the right of warre Due to my sword. Frr. Vnsheath it then. Vn. Yes at thy bosome. Sound Cornets: they stay. Fer. What meanes his suddaine parley from the walls? Iul. What are the Dukes at odde? Am. Harke Madam from the walls— Sound againe. A suddaine parley speakes vnto the Dukes Iul. Was that that staid their swords. Amad. I woud faine haue seene, how like Esops warriour they could haue fought, For that a third carries away. Some new deuise of pollicy hath caud This vnexepected change: not long since I was resolu'd in councell to maintaine The siege against the hottest opposition. Iul. Did I not thinke my fortunes ebbe at lowest? It might amaze me. Amad. My libertie May soone giue notice to you: then lets away: A Sunne may rise to mak't a happy day. Exeunt.
Enter aloft Borgias and the Senate. Ven. To whome speakes Borgias? Br. Dukes to you both. The present and vnlookt for cause of griefe, That now hath tooke possession on our breasts, Cuts of the feeling of all outward feare: Our priuate griefes were desperate: did there not A pubike care of others burden vs We thinke you wrongd, I and the Senate heere, Causes of both the nonsuites of your loues, Appeale vnto remission. Fer. But whether bends your far-fetcht Oratory? Restore the Lady vnto me: and on my honours pawne Ile free your Citty from the armes of Vnice. Ven. Senate, and you on whose authority, And pawne of honor I engagde my loue, Slau'd my affections, and did prostitute The freedome of my soule to Iulia: Sleight not your wisedomes and your worths in counsel To serue the ends of hidden pollicy: Make good your words engagde, and as I liue A Prince vnstainde in honor, I will free Your Citty from Ferraras hottest fury. Borg. Alas my gratious and renowned Lords, I grieue to see your passions, Emptied of th'obiects that hey wrought vpon: I am the Embassador of heauy newes, To you I am sure as heauy as to vs. Vn. Speake it. Borg. O it doth presse the Organs of my speech, And like a lethargie doth numbe those motions should giue it vtterance. Ferra. Hold the Protector there from falling.
Some standersby helpe to vnlade his burhen. The Camel else will sinke downe vnder it. Borg. Scoffe not my gratious Prince: the griefe I see Will be as heauy on hy now light head, As tis on mine: the Lady whome you loue— Ferr. Why what of her? Ven. Where is she? speake: Borg. Singing with Angels in the quire of heauen, The Requiem o Saints. Ferr. Shee's dead! Ven. Shee's dead! Borg. I Lords vnto your loues. Ven. O my Loues hard fate. Ferr. Dead! Borg. And now my Lords, seeing that she is dead, For whome you raisd these armes against our walls, I hope your furious angers liue no longer. Ferr. We are appeasd: Venice I thus salute thee, and reconcile my fury in thy armes. S'death dead? Ven. Discend Protector, with her our armes are dead. Ferr. I am amazd: possesse me patience, Discend. Credulity Frrara is a vertue, I beleeue it: Borgias: oh my splene, That he should thinke me so rediculous, To fasten any faith on pollicy, The stateliest generall prop is iealousie, On all men & their actions: I know it not. Ven. Should I thinke her murdred, or that she still doth liue? And feede some hope by deeming him a villaine, That sooths this sorrowfull newes into our eares? I might herein seeme polliticke, and nurse Some mischiefe in my bosome for reuenge, Of that wherein I bt suspect a wrong. The trickes of State-moules that worke vnder Princes, Are at the best, but like the vipers young,
That how-so-ere prodigious and hurtfull, To many open and secure passengers, Yet do they neuer liue: without the death Of him that first gaue motion to their breath. This keepes me honest still, the heauens and fate Are the best guardians to a wronged sate. A short flourish. Enter Borgias and the Senate. Borg. Laying aside all feare of what you may, Thus to your powers we do xpose our liues, Your wrongs we do confesse might speake reuenge, Did not this flood of sudden griefe, take vp All passion in it selfe: speake mighty Dukes, Liues Florence in your loues? with Iulias death Dies the memoriall of your former wrongs? Ven. I forget them all. Ferr. I take no pleasure in reuenge. Borg. Then are our Citty gates ope to your loues, And beg a fauour due vnto the dead: This night the funerall hearse of Iulia, (I know that name is deere vnto you both) Returnes againe to her creation. This night the rauenous mother of the world, (The all corrupting earth that eats her yong) Swalloweth the body of your Iulia. This night she takes a farwell of vs all: Then let it be a witnesse of your loues, To giue her hearse an honor with your presence. Ferr. Should we not graunt this, we might be taxt Of much dishonor. Ven. I were not worthy that it should be said I leuyed armes for loue of Iulia, Should I deny my presence at her hearse. Borg. My loue, the neere alliance to her blood,
The deere remembrance of my Soueraigne dead, Whose loue committed her vnto my care, Makes me accept this honor done to me: And I stand bound in bonds of gratitude To both yor princely worths: in lieu of which, Let my emboldned weaknesse mighty Lords, Presume t'inuite you to a funerall supper, A banquet forc'd by ceremonius custome, As a due obsequy. Ven. The loue of Iulia Exacts fom me all rights of custome. Ferr. I yeelde my presence. Borg. Your guards shall be my honor for this night, Your seuerall armies during your stay in Florence, Shall be maintained at our Cities charge, In recompence of loue to Iulia. Ten. We thanke you. Fer. We thanke yous Borg. Nor giue we expectation of proud pompe, Of shewes, or Pageants, for your entertainment: Our bels ring forth our sorrowes in sad peales, No pleasant changes to giue Princes welcome, Our Churches stand not garnished with pictures, To please deuoted superstition with, But mourne in blacke. Our Church men Leaue their chaunting Antheams, & their daily Masse, To sing continuall requiems to her soule. Sorrow sits sad and weeping in our streetes, All eies are wet with teares, saue those where griefe Hath dryed all moysture vp. Our sucking infants Are pale and leane with hangng on the breasts, Of griefe-spent mothers: If these may welcome you, We'le giue you prodigall welcome to our Citty. Ven. Such welcome fits the death of Iulia. Ferr. So should all mourne and weepe for Iulia. Borg. So doe we mourne and weepe for Iulia.
Lead on vnto the Citty: how slowe pac'd is sorrow? Griefe is a Tortoyse to the nimble sence, And chils their motions, the officers of loue, Liue at our funerall, and in death do moue. Exeunt. Scaena secunda. Enter Amada & Eunuchus. Ama. Eunuchu? Eunu. Madam. Ama. What solemnity is that the Citty celebrates? Eunu. The Dukes of Venice and Ferrara, Are with your father entred the wals Vnto the funerals of Iulia. Ama. Why, is Iulia dead? Eunu. I hope your Ladiship— Ama. I cry thee mercy: the remembrance of her Makes me still thinke she liues. And thats the cause they parleyed on the wals. Eunu. True Madam. Ama. Remoue a while. Eunu. At your seruice Lady. stand aside. Ama. Iulia giuen out for dead, And liue in durance at my fathers will? Tis strange: the Dukes inuited to her funerall. More mists of pollicy? O simplicity! The clue of reason cannot guid the fate, Of this Dedalion maze: wer't not prophane In me to question nature for my birth, And quarrell with my starres for being daughter To him whome I suspect to be a villaine: Some inspiration of religious thoughts, Make nature lesse in me, and beare my duty Euen with his awe whose vncontrould commaund, Frees our obedience from our impious parents.
My father Borgias left in charge with me, That I should keepe faire Iulia: I am her Iaylor, To whome, both he and I do owe alleagiance. Distracted duy, how should I bestow thee? On the right owner, Iustice I adore thee. Enter Borgias. Borg. Amada. Ama. My loue and duty. Borg. Alone? Ama. My mothers Eunuch Borg. How fares Iulia? Ama. Liues as you cōmanded, vnseene & priuate. Burg. Thy mothers dead. Ama. Defend it heauens Borg. Dead: no more: Eunuchus? Ennu. My loue and seruice. Borg. You gaue it out last night as I commaunded Timoclea my wife was sicke. Eunu. I did and't like your grace. Borg. When sets the Sunne? Eunu. Some six houres hence. Borg. To night wilbe to soone: to morrow morning Rumour't about the Citty, my wife is dead, Say abroad she is dead. Eunu It shall be done. Borg. So shall thy duty keepe me bound to thee. Amada: some thing more I haue to say, Prepare for marriage. Ama. For marriage? Borg. Question me not, thou must be married, Mulleasses is thy husband, my word hath seald it. Be still my Argus, and keepe Iulia. Death to my soule! Eunucus Canst thou vnknowne (to any saue thy selfe) Poyson a groome to stuffe a coffen with? Eunu. I can to please your Lordship:
Borg. O thou shalt please vs highly! I haue great vse Of such a thing, I prethee do it: My wife last night was poysoned, her body The world beleeues is Iulias, supposed dead. Now for the second funerall of my wife. Her coffin must be fild vp with some slaue, He shall be honod princely to his graue. The funerall staies my presence: Amada See to my Iulia, if Mulleasses moue, Be kinde and gentle to his proffered loue. Exit Borgia. Ama. Heere's a distracted laborith of wit, Iulia aliue, and yet her funeral kept: My mother dead and neuer Sicke: tis true: To many, death is suddaine and vnlookt for: So't was to her: and in the midst of death, I must be married: death take me to, Let me not liue to see those tapers burne, That leade me to his bed: where's sanctity? Religion is the fooles bridle, worne by pollicy: As horse weare trappers to seeme faire in shw, And make the worldes eye dote on what we seeme. Be silent yet for duty stops thy mouth, Ile in to Iulia, 'tis she and I, That must be Chorus in this Tragedy. Exit Amada. Eunu. How so'ere my fortunes make me now a slaue I was a free borne Christians sonne in Cyprus, When Famagusta by the Turke was sackt: In the deuision of which Citty spoyles, My fortunes fell to Mulleasses lot: Nor was it Tyranny inough that I was Captiue, My parents robd of me, and I of them, But they wrongd nature in me, made me an Eunuch, Disabled of those masculine functions, Due from our sex: and thus subiected, These sixteene yeares vnto the vilde commaund, Of an imperious Turke, I now am giuen
To serue the hidden secres of his lust, Vnto Timocla, the wife of Borgias, Whose priuate mixtures I am guilty of: Betwixt hese three I stand as in a maze, I eg'd to al their sinnes, and made a baud To lust and murder: Mulleasses first Giues me vnto Timoclea, that without suspect I might procure their loues secrity: For which they promise me my liberty. Eut Borgias whether iealous of his wife, Of reaching at some further pollicy, Bindes me with golden offers to his trust, And first comaunds me rumour it abroad Timoclea his wife was sicke, when at that instant She was in health and dauncing with her Turk. Now I must second that report with death, And say abroad Timoclea is dead: Short warning for a iourney vnto heauen: But (which amazth most) I must prouide The body of some groome to stop a coffin with. This is a riddle of some Sphinx, let Oedipus Vnfold the meaning: I leaue it to th'euent, And thinke most safety in not knowing it. I must prouide some groome, thats my commaund. Prosper me Saturne, and those starres of sinne, Whose influence makes villaines fortunate. He kils by law that kils men for a state. Enter Bordell & Panofle his Page. But who comes heere? oh my spruce he—letcher That makes his boye saue him the charges of a bawdy house, Fore Mahomet an excellent fellow for my Lords coffin: Assist me power of wit. Bord. Pantofle.
Pan. At your pleasure sir? Bord. Thou hast bene at my pleasure indeed Pntofle, I will retreate into the country, hate this amourous, Court nd betake my selfe to obscurity: I tel thee boye I wil returne by this Cicyan Isle without transformation since Hebe hath discouered her secrets I will turne Ipter, hate the whole sexe of women, and onely embrace thee my Gammede. Pan. Sfoot sir you are as passionate for the disloyalty of your Sempstresse as some needy knight would be for the losse of some rich magnificos widdow: doe you not see how the supporters of the Court, the Lady of the labby gape after your good parts like so many grigges after fresh water, and can you withhold the dew of your moyster element? Bord. I tel thee should the Lady Iulia when she was aliue haue profered me her cheeke to kisse, I would not haue bowed to that painted image for her whole Dkedome: Mercury hd no good aspect in the horoscope of my natiuity: women and lotium are recipocall, their sauour is noysome. Eun. Why her's a slaue in folio will seeme to slight the loue of a Pincsse, when he would willingly spend his talent on an oy∣ster wie. Bor. Sirra Pantofle trusse vp my wardrobe: but withal publish my departure, I would willingly put my creditors to the chardge of garding me out of towne. Pan. ill much scandalize your reputation for to depart indebted: you will be cursed heauily. Bord. To depart in debted boy, is the onely way to be praid for, seeing they knowe it is my prosperity and welfare that must make them satisfaction. Eunu. Before heauen an excellent reason. Pant. Pray Sir make euen with your Taylor, he is poore. Bord. Most willingly, for I am not possest of a pennikin, and if he be not before with me, I take it we are euen, and may walke in campage. Pantofle vanish.
Pant. I goe Sir. Eunc. I haue it, thankes sweete Thalia, thou hast begot a child of mirth in my braine, I will put it to this creature of Flo∣rence to nrse: Saucy Seignior. Bord. Eunuchus, Venus restore thee to thy generation: what doings are now in your quarters? Eun Doings: in faith courtly and weake: Cupid helpe the poore Ladyes. Bord. you are aboue me, I meane not their ingenys or vpper galleries: Eun. Nor I neither: and yet I speake of their vnderstandings, which by reason of a generall spring, halt and debility in their hamms (heauens know) are most falteringly feeble: but to pre∣sent the message I am sent for: to your worthiest self, from my La∣dy and mistresse the protectors wife: you are intelligent? Bord. The beauteous Timoclea. Eun. Heauens grant she may haue the vertue of attraction: for she hath laid open, the luster of her best parts to your grace Sir: nay make not retreate Sir: she knowes you disdaine her loue. Bord. The truth is I am earthly, and like not to participate with the element of the fire: good Eunuchus commend me to your Lady, and tell her by importuning my affection, she seekes the fall of an innocent. Eun. True Sir, but with a firme beliefe of your rising a∣gaine. Bord. I see no hope of it. Eun. The harder is her fortune: but heare me, me thinkes reward should pricke you on with more courage, to such an hono∣rable encounter. Bord. Faith Eunuche I haue made a vow not to vncase my selfe to any of that sexe. Eun. It may be you grounded your oath vpon the vncleanes of your shirt. Bord. Verily since the relapse of my Sempstresse, I haue not
addicted my selfe to that neat & cleanly carriage Eun. Sfoot I thought some soule cause or other, interposed it selfe twixt you and my Lady: But sir, Ile see all wants supplyed, thy debts satisfied, thy fortunes eternally mounted: onely bee tractable to my poore loue-sicke Lady and mistresse, iust and lo∣uing. Bord. As I am, so fates assist me: and Eunuchus here's my hand thou shalt haue ample share in my fortunes. Eun. By this hand sir but I will not: doe not faile sir at eight of the clocke to meete me here, where Ile deliuer you the key of my Ladyes chamber: with further instructions in the businesse, and with assurednesse of preferment and promotion. Bord. Deere Eunuch let me hugge thee: how I long to ma∣nifest thy seruice to my Lady Timoclea. You will meete? Eun. My hand and promise for it. Bord. It shall suffice. By women man first fell, by them Ile rise. Exit. Eun. Ha ha ha: Protector, here's a slaue Shall stuffe thy coffin: him thou shalt sacrifice Vnto Timocleas ghost, whose humerous soule Shall in his passage ouer Acheron Make Charon laugh, and the sterne judge of hell Smile at his folly: this is the fatall key Conducts him to those shades by Borgias hand. Thus fooles must fall, that wise men firme my stand. Scaena. 3. Enter a Frier, after him a funerall in White, and bearers in white, after them Borgias, then the two Dukes, after them the Senate. &c. A solemne march. Bor. SEt downe that heauy load of misery, SO would the easing you, might ease my heart!
Pure virgin Hearke: O let it not impeach The grauity of age to let some teares Fall at thy funerall: true relique of that loue I did inherit from thy fathers mouth, When to my charge he left his heire and Dukedome In thee I am depriu'd of all that honour I should haue purchac'd by that thankefull care Was due vnto thy fathers memory: Did not my griefe load all my powers of speech, Oh I could spend my age in commenting Of those rue vertues dyed with him and thee, But sorrow shuts my brest: Prier, thine office. Fry. By that great power is giuen to mee The gates of heauen I ope to thee, When mongst the Angels thou shalt sing The song of Saints before a King, That sits for euer on his throane, And giueth light to euery one: To him thy soule we doe bequeath, Thy body to the earth beneath: And so we close thy tombe againe, And pray thy soule be free from paine. Ven. Looke from thy holy mansion sacred maid And see how prostrate I adore thy blisse: These armes in hope of conquest of thy loue That rould themselue in stele, shall claspe the aire, And in their empty foldings liue still baen Of all the comfort my youhs hope did promise. And since thy death takes my loues ioy from me, Ile die a virgin-Saint and liue with thee. Fer I cannot vent my brest in loue sicke tearmes, Nor call to record all the gods of loue For my integrity: nor prostitute, An oyly pasion curiously composd Of riming numbes at my mistres hearse: Or tell her dead trncke my true loue in vearse:
But since by death her loue I am denide, To say I loud her is Ferraraes pride. Borg. My honour, and that weake abillity Our state affoords, to doe your graces seruice, Lies at your princely feete, for this your loue Done to the dead: now is Iulia shut For euer from your eyes: saue that she liues Like a pure relique of some holy Saint, Shrind in our breasts for euer: let me now renew My first request, to sup with vs to night, A ceremony due at funerals. So shall you double honour vnto me, In doing double honour vnto her. Ven. Ile do all honour both to her and you. Ferr. Ile breake no custome. Borg. I humbly thanke your graces, please you lead? Heere liues a lasting memory of the dead. Exeunt. A solemne marth. Manet Borgias Thus far my pioning pollicies run euen, And leuell with my aymes: Iulia liues, And in her hearse Timoclea my wife, Deludes the credulous Dukes: poysoned last night By Mulleasses, to make way for me, To marry Iulia my brothers daughter, For which the Cardinall of Aniou my kinsman Sollicites daily with his holinesse, For dispensation with our bloods alliance: As for these weake men, whose pursuits in loue, Dies with my strong auerring of her death, I can commaund their liues: and then maintaine My actions with the sword: for which the Turke By Mulleasses made vnto my purpose, Offers me forty thousand Ianisaries To be my guard, gainst forraigne outrages: And more: hee'le make me king of Italy,
To giue him but commaund vpon the streights, And land his force on this side Christendome And I will do it: on my faith to God And loyalty I owe vnto the starres, Should there depend all Europe and the states Christened thereon: Ide sinke them all, To gaine those ends I haue proposd my aimes Religion (thou that ridst the backes of Slaues Into weake mindes insinuating feare And superstitious cowardnse) thou robst Man of his chiefe blisse by bewitching reason. Nature at these my browes bend: thy mysteries Wrought by thine owne hands in our actiue braines, Giue vs the vse of good: thou art my God, If what I haue of thee, or wit or art, Or Serpent sliding through the mindes of men, Cunning confusion of all obstacles, Be they my childrens liues, my deerest friends May gaine me what I wish, I stoope at thy renown And thinke al's vacuum aboue a crowne, For they that haue the soueraignty of things, Do know no God at all, are none but Kings. Exit. Finis Actus Primi. Actus 2. Scaena 1. Mulleasses solus. Mull. ETernall substitute to the first that mou'd And gaue the Chaos forme. Thou at whose nod Whole Nations stoopt, and hold thee still a God: Whose holy-customd-ceremonious rites, Liue vnprophan'd in our posterity: Thou God of Mecha, mighty Mahomet Thus Mulleasses at thy memory
Discends: accept his prone humility, Great Prophet: let thy influence be free Vncheckt by danger: mew not vp my soule, In the pent roome of conscience: Make me not morall Mahomet, coopt vp And fettred in the fooles phylosophy, That points our actions vnto honesty. Giue my plots fortune: let my hope but touch The marke I aime at: then the gazing time Shall in the present hide my former ill Successe like Ithe to he soules in blisse Makes men forget things past and crownes our sins With name of valour, be we impious. A Scelus felix styles vs vertuous. Enter Eunuchus. Eunu. My honourd Lord: Mull. What diuell interrupts m? Eunu. My duty. Mull. Your duty is too dilligent that dares Pere into my retreats: now should I kill thee. Eunu. The Lord Protector Borgias my maister— Mull. Age and diseases breed consumptions And rot him. What craues he? Eunu. Your instant presence. Mull. I haue instant businesse whose high import Detaines my speed: know you the matter? Eunu. A tumult 'mongst the fearefull multitude, Causd by an ominous terrour in the heauens, Is as I gesse the reason of your want. Mull. What heauens? what terror? Eunu. The Sun on suddaine feeles a darke ecclipse And hides his siluer face behinde the moone, As loath to see some prodegies appeare. Mull. Make that ecclipse eternall Mahomet.
Rise, rise ye mistie-footed Iades of night, Draw your darke mistresse with her sable vayle, Like a blacke Negro in an Ebone chaire, Athwart the wolds eie: from your foggy breaths Hurle an Egiptian grossenes through the ayre, That none may see my plots: Hast any greater newes? Eunu. The daies eyes out, a thousand little starres Spread like so many torches, about the skye, Make the world shew like Churches hung with blacke, And set with tapers at some funerall: Amongst these starres directly from the East, A firy meteor points a burning rod At Florence. Mulle. Perhaps tis thirsty for the blood of Princes, Blase out prodigious starre, and let the fire Dart soule amazing terror to all eyes: Be like the Basiliske fatall to behold: Ile fat the slimy earth more then the plague, And from her bosome send the blood of Kings Stild into oyly vapours & borne on high, To expiate those flames that else would die. Eunu. What answere shall I returne vnto my Lord? Mulle. That I will see him presently, be gone: Borgias, Thou art no tutord Pollitition Exit Eunuc: To lay another in thy bosome. Know a stat-villaine must be like the winde, That flies vnseene yet lifs an Ocean, Into a mountaines height. That on the sands Whole Nauies may be split in their discent. I stand aboue thee, and as from a rocke Whose eminence outswelles the raging flood, See thy hopes shipwrackt: O credulity, Securities blinde nurse the dreame of fooles: The drunkards Ape, that feeling for his way Euen when he thinkes in his deluded sence, To snatch at safety, fals without defence.
Twise hath the Nemean Lyon breathd, forth fire, And made the scalded Dogge-star pant with heate. Twise the dayes planet through the burning signes Hurred his fierie chariot since the time I came to Florence in exchange for Iulia. The sonne of Borgias here to learne the tongues, The fashions and the arts of Chistendome: Now by my sly and affable intrusion I am made intimate with Borgias: He thinkes my thoughts are Osiars to be wrought In any forme: the Dukes (that claimd The loue of Iulia) he hath deluded By a fain'd rumour of a suddaine death: Her he detaines vntill he fits his time By murder of the Dukes to be secure, In his owne power to dacke his marriage: Timoclea his wife (the death of all his plots If she suruiues) he now beleues is dead Poysond by me: in liew of which he grants His daughter Amada to me for wife: As if my hopes flew not as high as his: Now to secure my flight and make my wings Stronger then his that melted in the Sun, His wife Timoclea liues within this tombe Made seeming liuelese by a sleepy iuyce Infusd in stead of poyson in her cup: Here I must wake her and in her stir vp Reuenge gainst Borgias. Image of death and daughter of the night, Sister to Lethe all oppressing slepe, Thou that amongst a hundred thousand dreames Crownd with a wreath of mandrakes sitst as Queene To whome a million of care-clogged soules, Lye quaffing iuyce of Poppy at thy feete, Refigne thy vsurpassion, and dislodge, Hang on the eyes of sloth and make them sleepe
Whose hearts are heauie, or whose sorrowes weepe, Giue way to motion: and thou whose blood Stands in thy full vaines like a charmed floud Receiue the aire againe: suruiue his hate That on thy graue againe climbes high to reach his fate. Timoclea riseth in the tombe. Timo. Who speakes so lowd? Mul. He hat speakes life Timoclea. Timo. You wake me. Mul. Such power I chalenge Lady in my voice, To wake you from your graue. Timo. Where am I? Mul. In your graue. Timo. Hah, my graue! Mul. Be not amased madame: you are safe. Timo. Who speakes vnto me? oh forbeare: I am not for your presence: see my bed Lyes much vnseemely: who attends me there? What meanes this impudent intrusion? Mul. Take time to your amazement: know where you are Tis Mulleasses speakes to you: him you once lou`d: Tis not now time to feare. Timo. I know your face and yet I feare my being Giues cause of feare. Mul. Giue your selfe, to me and on those rites Due to the sweets of loue, here is no daunger. Timo. Accept me in your armes. Mul. See where you are, know you this place? Timo. Some Church I thinke. Mul. And these the Tropheyes of your Ancestours. This is the buriail common to your blood. Timo. Oh free me from amazement, what strange accident Brought me so nere my death? I am now my selfe And truely capable of a discourse. Mul. Then know madame your life hath bene pursued, And my selfe brib'd to be your poisoner,
But that my loue turnd death vnto a sleepe, And brought you thus aliue vnto your graue: Timo Say on my deerest Lord, who brib'd thy loue? What barbarisme, or what desert of mine Mou'd this attempt against my life? Mul. My soule durst iustifie your innocence, But that desease that bred in Paradise, Swels like the Presters poison in our vaines (To which al men are heirs ambition) Desire to be like God: t'was that corruption Gaue me occasion thus to shew my loue On your liues safety: Timo. My loue and life are thine: speake openly, What brest could be so cruelly ambitious? Whose honor or whose fortunes could my life Ecclipse or darken? Mul: First madame you must sweare, By life, by loue, and by that happinesse Your oule assures you in the faith you hold With me, this night to prosecute reuenge On your liues enemy. Timo. By life, by loue and by that happinesse, My soule assures me in the faith I hold, By that which binds me more—by this kisse him. I sweare this night to prosecute reuenge On my liues enemie. Mul Enough: thy resolution like a fire, Makes my warme blood boyle: Borgias. Timo. My husband. Mul. Your husband: start not Lady, Twas he that by a promise of your daughter The fairest Amada to me for wife Made my tongue say, that I would poyson you: Silence deere Lady: choke all passion, And feminine complaints in thoughts of vengance.
Forget you are a woman: and be like your wrongs Full swolne with death: let your inuentiue braines Carry more fate in their conception, Then Hecubas wombe to Troy: my plots are yours, Are you reuengefull? Timo. As full as Iealousie: or the wife of Iason Rob'd by the faire Corinthian of her loue. Mul. Then thus we seale our resolution— kisse Thus I ascend, and from proud Fortunes wheele, Pul my owne fate: forgiuenes Mahomet My hopes make me prophane; and my proud thoughts Vsurpe aboue thy greatnesse: Apprehension? Thou that giuest foode vnto the soule of man, The best companion to relieue the minde. What sweete suggestions of my future blisse Haue I from thee? O I am transported Beyond the power of reason! the present time Craues a more sober temper. Madam this disguise Must carry you vnknowne vnto my chamber Where we haue much to do: release your thoughts, Giue freedome to those faculties of nature, That made your sexe first dare to reach at pleasure. Be proud and lustfull, let ambition sway The power of action in you: murder and blood Are the two pillars of a States-mans good. Exeunt. Seena 2. Borgias solus. Borg. A A Pollititian Proteus-like must alter His face and habit, and like water seeme Of the same colour that the vessell is That doth containe it, varying his forme With the Cameleon at each obiects change. Twice like a Serpent haue I cast my skin,
Once when with mourning sighs I wept for Iulia, And made the two Dukes weepe for Iulia, That coat is cast: now like an Amorist, I come in louing tearmes to court my Iulia, And seeme a louer but of all shapes This sits me worst: whose constellation Stampt in my rugged brow the signes of death, Enuy and ruine: strong Antipahyes Gainst loue and pleasure: yet must my tongue with passionate oathes and protestations, With sighes, smooth glances, and officious tearmes, Spread artificiall mists before the eies Of credulous simplieity: he that will be high, Must be a Parasite, to fawne and lye. Enter Amada. Amada. Ama. Your pleasure. Borg. How stand your thoughts affected to the marriage I lately did acquaint you with, are you resolu'd? Ama. I am Rather to dye then liue to see that houre aside. Borg. I would see Iulia, pray her company? Ama. I will. Exit Amada. Enter Mulleasses. Borg. Your presence is most welcome: Mull. What businesse of import? Borg. Nought for the instant but a wooing sceane, Prepare your wit my Lord to fight with words. The Champions straight approch, but two to two.
Enter Iulia and Amada. Borgias courts Iulia, and Mulleasses Amada, glancing his eye on Iulia. Mull. My lou'd deere Lady. Borg, Beauteous Madam. Mull. Faire as the morning Borg. Be as thy beauty seemes, propitious, louing: Mull. Attractiue Sunshine: all affections mouing. Borg. More then a subiect, and more humbly bent. Iul. How supple seemes ambition? Vncle y'ar too low: Mull. Deuinest faire to whome all hearts should bow. Ama. Fit attributes for heauen: my Lord, my feature Is but earthmould, the weake frame of nature. Mull. Yet grac't with heauenly vertue, it seemes deuine Borg. I know your lights aboue me, yet let it shine Like the daies beauty on the lowly plaines. Iuli. Subiects are no fit loues for Soueraignes. Borg. High comets from the earth draw vp then nurture. Iul. Yet from the Sunne true starres haue all their lustre. Mull. True starre on earth: Ama. You flatter, pray 'forbeare. Borg. Loue Madam is importunate, you must heare: Your nicenesse makes me be abrupt: I loue And must enioy you. Mull. Hell to my loue: Borgias I'le preuent you. Iul. I must be plaine: loue you me my Lord? Borg. I by that power that made me. Iuli. Restore then that, that you haue robd me of, My honor and my life: for I am dead, So thought of in the world: giue me what I am: Returne the title due vnto my birth Duhesse of Florence, and thy Soueraigne.
Make me as free as I was borne, and giue my loue The liberty of nature: then shall I beleeue And thinke you loue me. Borg. I will restore your honors and your life, I will returne the duties of your birth: Dutchesse of Florence and my Soueraigne, The Soueraigne of my heart: and kneele to you, And make my thoughts as humble as my knees: See: I am not ambitious, tis not a crowne The gorgeous title of a Soueraigne, Makes me so euil in your thoughts: the poize of loue Whome some terme light, and giues him wings To soare al oft in me is but the same And makes me stoope thus low to Iulia. Iuli. Vncle I am aham'd that any bloud of mine Should harbor such an incest: you haue an easier way To gaine what you desire: make good the fame The world is now possest of: murther me, Then are you heire to Florence: tis not halfe so ill, As this incestuous mixture you so plead for, Gainst nature and the law of heauen: but on, Vse your vsurped power; be still a villaine: My life is the vtmost, and you may commaund it, But my bloods vessell giuen vnto my soule, As a pure mansion to inhabit in Shall while I am and breath, be vnprophan'd. Ile be more chat then Lucrece, dye vnstaind. Mull. You are a woman Lady, and wil change: The Protector's at a nonsuit in his loue, How now my Lord? Borg. Thus crost by superstitious obstinacy, Ile vse the power I haue, and make—How thriues your sute? Mull. Vnthriftily like yours: we are no Venus darlings, No delight for women: she cannot loue. Borg. She cannot loue? your reason Lady Is your blood holy? are you a sanctuary
That none may violate. What ease of conscience Keepes you vnprophand? know that religion Bindes your obedience minion to my will. Loue him or Ile hate thee. Ama. I tender vp the duty of a childe And yeeld a fathers high prerogatiue Ore what I am: yet for that affection That you would haue me captiue in his breast, Know it is prisoner at so deere a rate, As all my strength can no way ransome it. Borg. Ile vse no rhethorique Lady to your eares: But heare what I commaund and do my will, Or thou shalt heare what will displease thy will. Mull. Be these the precepts Christians giue their children? Borg. But Madam for your loue. Mul. I would forsake a God. Borg. A more soft style beseemes a subiects tongue, Ile be no higher then my selfe: and not commaun'd Whats in my power. Will you resigne your loue? Iul. I to that God that thou hast so prophand, Detested Atheist. Borg. Be religious Madam still and raile not, Thinke of my honest sute: and thinke what power This hand doth gripe: we are troublesome And leaue you to your thoughts: these fits must end, Trees are as easie broke that will not bend. Exeunt at seuerall dores. Scena. 3. Eunuchus solus. Eunu. THis is the houre I should meet my catamite Signior Bordella: I cannot but laugh to see the slaue make a lecherous progresse to Lucifer. The morall will hold rarely: he shall haue his braines fly about his eares in the hight of his vene∣ry: this instead of going to Tymoclea shall conduct him to the
bed of Borgias: a midst whose waking plotts & state volutiōs, the amorous youth must needs be hartyly welcome: for mine owne part, my handshall be cleere from the blood of the goate & yet I could account it happinesse to be within eare shot of his depar∣ture, to here how lamentably the coxcombe would sigh out Ty∣moclea: but the best is, neither Court nor country wil much misse the foole: there are elder brothers inough to supply his roome: Enter Bordela. And see where the Cocoloch appeares: he passeth as if he would steale to hell without company: whist Signeor. Bord. Eunuchus? Eunu. The same: now I see thou wilt stand to thy word. Bord. Thy Ladie shall see that in my deeds Eunuchus if all the sweet meates in Florence be prouocatiue. Eun. I Sir, but Ladyes are of the nature of Idols and will be serued on your knees. Bord. True, were I not a man of warre whose vallour & mag∣nanimious courage is not to be deiected so long as his weapon holds. Eunu. Then I perceiue you will shortly be at my Ladies mercy Bord. If I should, doubt not her gratious hand in my erection: but gentle Eunucus, the key that opens to the Via lactea: Eunu. Here Sir, and looke your entrance be warie, soft and circumspect. Bord. I had thought an entrance rough, manly and boistrou had bene more pleasing to Ladyes: Enter Madam Fulsome, But see Eunuchus I shall be troubled I shall be tormented with this court owle if you assist me not: sfoote the flesh-fly hath espied me, she will neuer linne sucking at me so long as I haue any matter for her to worke vpon. Eu. Who, Madam Fulsome the Gouernesse of the maides? she is a good creature and very musicall: she sets moe instruments a-worke then a Fidler: thou must needs loue her if it were
but for her humilitie: she will bend her selfe to the meanest page of the Scullery: and she hates the pride of the flesh excedingly, and is knowne to be a mortifier of carnality. Bord. I verily beleue it, for her very countenance and com∣plexion shewes she is able to allay any mans courage liuing with a breath. Enter two Ladyes and Phego a Gentleman Vsher. Fulsom. Phego doe you espie no motions behind the arras, no squals, musslings, or pages standing sentinell? or because our head the Lady Iulia is dead, are al her seruants that is her members in the same predicament? Phego. Surely I see no body stirring Lady: it is supper time and euery man is prouiding for the belly. Ful It will be shortly time for euery woman to prouide for the belly too, Pego a word with you. Bord, What is that Phgo Eunuchus doe you know him? Eunu. How, know him, can I mistake him sir, that is neuer hoodwinckt? he is an extreme enemy to Haberdashers: affecting no blocke, but that which nature bestowed on him: and of that he hath bene so curious that it is not a haire amisse: he is sir the reface to your compoundresse of mans flesh, and Vshers her to mployment: and is a creature of singular patience; contenting himselfe with the Theory, when others are the Practique. In his pace he imitates Fensers, and stands much vpon distance: He is partly an Astronomer too, being much giuen to obseruation of signes: for when the Sunne is in Gemini the Dog-starre attends without doores: he is a great friend to Aries but naturally hates Pisces for it is a chill signe and cooles his toes ouer-vehemently: in briefe sir he is a Gentleman Vsher. Phego salutes Bordello. Ful. Sure Phego that should be sigior Bordello: I pray you in∣treate his approach: of all our Courtiers I loue men of his coun∣try and breeding, they are the louingst, best spoken, well gract
creatures in these parts extant: I thinke it be giuen to those that be borne vnder your northren clyme, to thaw and melt away at the Sun-shine of beauty: you shall read in very late stories that many of them haue lost their best members in the seruice of La∣dyes and distressed wayting Gentlewomen. Bord. I should account it none of my neerest mishaps, being interdicted so worthy a presence by more then vrgent affaires. Sweet Sir beare my excuse with all respectiue desire of pardon. Ful. Whether Signior Bordello in such post-hast: you forget your old friends: when you came first to Court, you and I were more inward man. Bord. Being vpon my departure Lady, I am inforced to see to the conuaying of my goods, and the trussing away of my bagage. Ful. And that word bagage (I will besworne) had bene an apt phrase for his bringing in, but you purpose not I hope signior to depart Flrence altogether. Eun. Oh no: his flight Lady is like the Rauens, that hauing spied a fat carckase, romes about to calmore of her fellowes to the prey. Ful. But signior, haue you so fully furnished your discours with obseruation, as with so slight a view of our Gentlewomen to make a departure? indeed signiour the Ladyes of your country will exact some obseruatiue relate of your trauels vpon your re∣turne. Bord. For our Ladyes Madam they are few or none, our coun∣trey men are not so addicted to titles of honour: they vse knight∣hood as rich Iewellers desire Iemms rather for traficque then or∣nament. Phego. Is there any commoditie to be had in the purchase ir? Bord. Great Commoditie, and that is the reason so many mar∣chants and yeomen sonnes hunt after it. Ful. Belike this is one of your obseruations: pray sir be more open: I see you haue profited much since your comming. Bord. For the bettring of mine inward parts, some few notions I haue committed to memory.
Eunu. Impart them Sgnor: it may be I shall add to your store: these Layes will nt discouer vs for intelligencers: they are na∣turally giuen to the concealement of priuate actions. Bord. Since my comming to Florence I haue seene ignorance in the shape of a Citizen mufled in the scarlet of magistracy that coul not write his owne name. Generally I haue noted through the whole Country great enmity betweene witt and clokes lin'd through with veluet: and yet beggers & gallants agree together very fmiliarly. There is no thriuing but by impudence and pan∣arisme: he that is furnished with one of these two quallities shal begg more of a foolish Lord at a marbone breakfast, then all the Poets in the whole towne shall rime out of him in an age: En. ut thse are but petty obseruations: I haue seene since my comming to Florence the sonne of a Pedler mounted on a foote cloth: a fellow created a Lord for the smothnsse of his chinne: and which is more; I haue seene a capp most my racu∣lously turnd into a beauer hatt without either trimming or dres∣sing. Ful. That is strange indeed: Signior and Eunuchus, we are to presse you to a further curtesy in meeting vs in the lobby some two houres hence at a posset. Bord. You shall finde vs as forward in as hot a seruice in the Lobby or elsewhere at your Ladiships appoint, but— Ful. We must haue no denyall. Eunu. Cans not say the Court-grace? promise man promise. Bord. Your Ladiship shall finde vs ready to put in— our spoones. Ful. Till then adiew Signior and Eunuchus. Phego forward. Phe. So long as my ham-strings hold. Exeunt. Bord. You see Eunuchus, familliarity and curtesie hath en∣wrapt me in the knowledge of these meanest vassels of honour: but henceforth my countenance shalbe estranged, and I wil bury my acquaintance in scilence. unu. I thinke the Cuckoe foresings his owne dirdge: Signi∣or, you shall neede no further prescriptions: in the carriere of your delight, vouchsafe a thought of Eunchus, you conceiue me
Sir, manifest my seruice to Timoclea. Bord. I were inhumaine if I should forget you the latest mi∣nute of my life: pray heauens my Page Pantofle haue procured in my absence the embrodered shirt I gaue directions for vpon both our wardrops: that care once ouer, I shal neuer henceforth taste of lowsie misfortune. Venus supplying what Bordello most lackes, Courtiers and Porters liue by able backes. Exeunt Scena. 4. Enter 4. Tapers borne by 2. Pages, Borgias, Venice, Florence, Mulleasses, Prusias, Philenzo. Borg. THus our presumption hath prolongd your stay At a chape banquet: did not the rites of loue Exact your presence as a debt to Iulia, Our boldnesse might haue wanted an excuse Thus to detaine you. Ferr. You are too full of ceremony my Lord, Knowing your welcome prodigall, and full of state, And such as fits our mournefull accidents. Ven. The better part of loue due to the liuing, Appeares in friends euen when their friends are dead, And thinke my Lord Protector that our loue, For which we came in armes against your walles, Would not be wanting in one ceremony Due vnto Iulia at her obsequy. Is Prusias returned from our Campe? Pru. I my gratious Lord. Ven. Doth our Liefetenant keep a careful watch Are Sentinels set out? Prus. They are and it like your grace. Ferr. Where is Philenzo? Phil. Heere my Soueraigne. Ferr. Are all in safety at our Campe?
Phil. Safe and in quiet. Ferr. The night is old, And drowsie sleepe hangs heauy on our eies: Conduct vs to our rest. Borg. Neuer till now was Borgias fully blest: To lodge two mighty Princes in one night Vnder his roofe: where my sonnes sonne may say, Heere might Venic and Frrara lay. My Lord hese Tapers lead you to your chamber, These great Ferrara vnto yours. Ven. Rest to you all. Exit. Ferr. Good night and sleepe vnto your sorrowes. Exit. Borg. Sweete quiet be a guard vto you both, So may you sleepe for euer. Euncus: Remoue with our attendance from our eares. Exeunt all but Mulleasses. Now my hearts treasurer what now remaines? My resolution holds to murder them, And with that force the towne may now affoord, Practise some suddaine stratagem on their powers. Mull. That were too violent: things done for state, Must carry for me, and with an outward glosse, Varnish and couer what would else seeme grosse, Should they be murdered in their beds, or die, Hauing your promise for their guard: th'offence Could haue no safety but in violence. No let them sleepe secure, and this nights safety Will make them feareles, easie to be trapt In a more cunning net. To morrowe at a banquet they shall drinke A drugge, whose working in their breast shall sleepe Twice fifteene daies, vntill their absence hence May giue you colour from suspition. But then dissoluing like a fier that's hid, Spreading a burning poyson through the blood, It scalds the heart, and through the body runs:
Turnes to a hot quotidian and, doth leese Although of poison in a mad desease: So dying, no impute can touch your name: Things are vndone that are vnspoke by fame. Borg. My fortunes on thy councell noble Turke. We'le clime together: my daughters heddy will Shall stoope vnto thy pleasure: as for Iulias loue She must or yeeld or dye: he that is wise, Will tread on any that may make him rise. Exeunt. Finis Actus Secundi. Actus 3 Enter Timoclea like a Ghost. Timo. BLush not thou chast and modest Queene of night, Nor hide thy siluer crescent in a clowde, To see me thus Rhamnusia like attir'd: Stare on ye Argus eyed heauens and se a woman More full of vengeance, then your iealous Queene. Medusa sometime the loue of Neptune, (But after for thy lust transformd a monster) Lend me those serpents that about thy head Curle vp like Else-knots, at whose horrid sight The Sun may vanish or stand still affight. Or you you Furies ministers of feare, (That at Astreas feet lye bound in snakes Attending her iust sentence to begin Terror of conscience in the brest of sin) This night be powerfull in me and inspire My face with feare, my heart with rancke-swolne ire Venice, Venice, great Venice: Ven. Who speakes to Venice? within. Timo. Iulia thy loue. Ven. Delusiue voyce, why dost renew my griefe By naming Iulia?
Timo. Didst thou loue Iulia? Vn. Thou wrongst me to make question of my loue. Whatsoere thou art. Enter Venice. Timo. Then see thy Iulia and reuenge her wrongs. Ven. Dissolue ye glassy pearles and melt in drops, Or with the teare-spent mother Niobe Turne into stones: shall I beleue my thoughts, And credit what thy shape presents to me? Thou art the Ghost of murdred Iulia. Timo. I am. Ven. Immortall essence Virgin-element So may I tearme thy ayry substance freed From the grosse mixture of our earthly load: Oh I am throngd with passions & each crauing vent None can haue passage till some teares be spent, Fall fall ye siluer pearles, and of the earh Purchase a soft relenting at my griefes. Shoure downe like rainie drops, and pearce the stones Make them receiue my sorrowes, or from mine eyes Run like to christall riuers through the world, Slyde ore the flowry medowes that the Nimphs Dancing in feary rings vpon the grasse, May leaue their sport, and weepe to see you passe, Where by the dolefull murmur as you goe, The hils may here you mourne and sound my woe, Pardon: if I be tedious virgin spirit, Or if my griefe be too effeminate: Thy habit is an Index to reuenge, Which thy wrongs seeme to pleade for of my loue, Speake them, or deale them through the yeelding aire Into my eares, and they shall be to me Like the sterne drumme, or musique of the warre Vnto the coward, or the fainting souldiour.
Timo. Venice I was murdered. Ven. Murder is open mouthd, and as the Sea Whose couetous waues in prisond by thy land, Bellow for griefe and roare vpon the sand. So from the earth it cries, and like a childe Wrongd by his carelesse nurse will not be stilld: Are ye then deafe yea gods, ye cannot heare it? Or is iust Libra falne out of your Spheares, That wronged States must to the earth appeale For iustice and reuenge. Then tis not prophane T'usurpe your functions: my hand shall be as iust As my soule louing: and they both shall leaue A story to the world of my reuenge. Nor in succeeding times shall be forgot. Venice reuengd those wrongs the heauens would not. I interrupt what that wouldst say, and seeme To crowne all vengeance in a passion. Speake but his name. Timo. My vncle Borgias. Ven. Enough. O that the genious that attends on man, Should be a doubtfull Oracle to the soule And whispering to our intellect what fate Hangs like a falling tower vpon his state, Yet be no more of force to length our ioy Then were Cassandras prophecies to Troy. Disloyall trecherous villaine Borgias, Some Hydras poyson, or the blood of Nessus Cleaue to thy flesh: Oh my blood swells beyond my power: my voyce Louder then his that thunders through the cloudes, Shall speake this monstrous murder to the world, Ile be thy Orator wrongd spirit and plead Blood and reuenge for thee though thou best dead. Timo. Stay. Ven: What wouldst thou more?
Timo. Heare and be aduisde: To morrow when the Senate sits be there, And in the eares of the whole state proclaime, And iustifie my words gainst Borgias: In this alone I will great Venice proue, Do it as euer thou didst Iulia loue. Ven. I will. Timo. Whilst I borne vpon aire attend my blisse. Ven. Peace to thy soule Adieu. Exit. Timo. Remember Iulia. Yt prosper and go on, for Iulias ghost My false shape takes: th'abused Duke's afire, Through Borgias blood I'le runne to my desire. Enter Bordello solus. Whome haue we heere? Bord. Priapus thou womans God assist me with a Iouiall abi∣lity: this night I may beget a Hercules: Fortune I must con∣fesse thou hast turnd vp thy muffler, and cast a gratious aspect on Bordello: for I am not onely in the state of cleane linnen; but also thou hast made me gratious in the eye of Signior Diaspermaton my Apothecary, who hath furnished me with this receipt: heere is a compound of Cantharids Diositerion, marrow of an Oxe, haires of a Lyon, stones of a Goate, Cock-sparrowes braines, and such like this after an houres receipt, hath a fourefold operation: and least I should be like a Peacocke all taile and no heart, heere is a distillation of ten pound a pinte, that comforts the inward, fires the braines, cheeres vp the spirit, and makes a man lay about him like a dutchman. Let me see, it is more then time that I commit this deuine pill to his hopefull working: least my staffe be out of the rest when my aduersary is in the carriere. So Cupids faire mother be thy mid wife: out and alas I am mare rid, what Som∣ners Ghost or limme of Lucifer, puts poore Bordello in minde of pennance before he hath trespassed?
Timo. I am espied: his feare doth apprehend me for a ghost, And I must feed it. Bord. Se, it makes toward me: infortunate Bordello that the de∣uill should be an enemy to lechery. Scaena. 2. Enter Madame Fulsome, Eunuchus and Phego. Ful. Come let vs set to our businesse, Phego, Lend vs your wind to coole this posset. Phego. It is not the first time I haue bene constrained to puffe and blow in your Ladiships seruice. Ful. It hath oft come in my minde to knowe the deriuation and denomination of this word posset? Eunu. I take it that it comes of the Latin word posse to make a man able: and that's the reason euer after eating them, men de∣sire to make experience of their forces. Phego. I rather conceaue it comes of the word pono of putting together, for that your possets are the vsuall meanes of congregating, putting and combining your Court creatures to∣gether. Eunu. And that may well be: for I remember that reuerent pedagoge William Lilly, brings in gigno, pono, can, one in the necke of another, gigno to beget, pono to put in, and cano to sing. Ful. That Lilly was a beastly knaue to put pono behind gigno there is no musique in it: but all this time we misse not Signior Bordello, it hath not be his custome to be absent where his chops might haue had imployment. Eunu. You speake of the dayes of hunger, when the slaue was a straunger in the land of Hauilah: but the word is retrograde: the last age is a golden age with him.
Enter Brdella. Fuls. See where the sonne of Saturne appeares. Eun. Soot I thought the Dog-fish had bene bayting Cerberus ere this time. Bord. Ladies did you not see a spirit passe this way? Eunu. Thou seest we are feeding the flesh man, what doost thou talke of the spirit? Bord. Without iest a meere Ghost, standing bolt vpright at Timocleas chamber, so nye Court Incubus on my life. Fuls. Were you not much terrified Signior with the appari∣tion? Bord. How: terrefied? I no sooner beheld it, but drawing my better parts together Enter Timoclea. Helpe, helpe! All run out, Timoclea followes the Eunuch out. Scena 3. Enter Ferrara solus. Ferr. FEare and suspition, two night-waking charmes, Banish all sleepe, suggesting in my thoughts, Falsehood and treason: I am slow and dull, Discending like the earth: yet I know not what Prickes like the thorne of Philmel at my breast: And tels me ther is daunger in my rest. Sometime I thinke of Iulia: and that thought Presents her loues in a liuing shape. When not remembring death, I ope my armes, To tye a Gordian knot about her waste And bid her welcome: but that empty claspe, Deluding my false hopes with nought but ayre, Makes my blood angry, and doth turne my passion To seeke a subiect fit for my reuenge: And then I euer thinke of Borgias.
As if my loue were wrongd by Borgias. A groning within. What meanes these suddaine tumults in mine eares? Saue me eternall guard of innocence: Treason, treason, villaine thou shalt buy my blood. Eunuchus rusheth in: he kils him: Enter Timoclea. Eun. O spare me. Fer. Distraction of my braine, what shape art thou? Timo. Iulia Exit. Ferr. Iulia: hah: stay tis gone: did I see? Or did my feare and fancy frame this forme? Villaine thou art some instrument of falshood Confesse thy treason. Eun. You are secure: that shape that nam'd your loue Pursued me through the court, till for my rescue Feare made me vse this violence at your chamber. O I am slaine, and dye a causeles death, I nere liud false to thee: all thou hast gaind Is that my soule dyes cleare and leaues thine staind. He dyes. Ferr. To doe thee good my soule shall say as much And witnes it before the Iudge of soules, When at the generall Barre we meete together. But I must vse thy shape: this night Ile walke Hid in thy habit from discerning eyes: Ile pry about the Court, perhaps I may Once more see Iulias ghost, and learne her wrongs, By them to ayme aright in my reuenge. My hand first dyes the scene: and it shall fill The stage with vengeance: Nemesis shall wade Vp to the chin and bath herselfe in blood, The dangling snakes that hang about her necke Shall sucke like Lethe of the purple gore Shed for my Iulias death. Ile feast the rauenous people of the aire,
And fill the hungrie wolues with slughtered men. The streets of Florence like te streets of Rome (When deah & Sll raingd) hal run with blood Their swelling channels with a scarlet tide Shall wash the stores, and for my Iuli deah The angry gods of wrth shall smil as pleasd To s me so reengd: Eunuchu, thy death Is but a prologue to induce a plot, Maist hu be blessed, th'art not wrth my hate I must reach higher, and on thy disguise, Lay but the ground-worke for reuenge to rise. Exit. Scaena 4. Enter Mulleasses solus. Mull. BE pleas'd ye powers of might, and bout me skip Your anticke measures: like to cole black moores, Dauncing their igh Laoltos to the Sun Circle me round: and in the midst Ile stand And cracke my sides with laughter at your sports. Oh my hopes fatte me: nor shall time grow old, Or weary with attending my successe. One night shall crowne me happy: Borgias wife Appeares vnto the Dukes for Iuias ghost, To breed suspiton in them of her murder, So that if Borgias chauce suruiue this night (As he must dye if all my plots his right) The Dukes to morrow when the Senate sits May proue what ile affirme against his life. Nor to redeeme his saety shall he bring The Lady to disproue what we auerre. Here will I cease, and in some straunge disguise Keepe till my growing faction be of force To second my ambition for the crowne. If I plot well faire Amada must dye,
And by her mothers hand: she must not liue To speake her fathers wrongs. Timoclea Thou, thou art next: I tooke thee from thy graue Not for the loue I bore Timoclea, But to sucke from thy vse the sweets of loue I bore to Iulia: twas loue and state. aue thee this time of life to strngth my fate: But blabbe not: scilence tongue: she comes. Enter Timoclea. Timo. My Lord, what, drownd in contemplation? Mullasses: loue. Mull. Heauenly creation, beauties abstract, natures wonder. Timo. What meanes my Lord? awake, Timoclea speakes. Mul. I must inioy thee Amada: strong force of passion. Timo. Ha: Amada: dearest Lord: your sence And know me. Mul. Ha Timoclea: thy loue and pardon, I was oreborne, And carried from my selfe with iole thoughts Of what sad melancholly suggested in me: What comfort bringst thou? hath thy dead shape Bene powerfull vnto feare? stood they a mazd? Their eyes like fiered starres set on thy face: Their speeche abrupt and short: their haire vpright? Stiffe like the quils of Porcupines? art blest? Timo. I am: if what you speak may make me blest. Mul. It makes vs happy: giues our hope true life. Timo. Neither my life nor hope to be so blest Makes me so happy as thy loue deare Turke. Were I a Venus thou shouldst be my Mars, And I would court thee euen in Phebus sight, Although it mou'd an enuy in the gods. Be Ioial: & like Salmecis, thy loue Shall cling about thy necke. Mull. I am not sportfull:
Timo. Ile dance before thee like a faiery Nimph, And with my pleasing motions make thee spor: Ile court thee nak'd, as did the Queene of thoughts Her sullen boy, and all to make thee sport. Mull You are not pleasing. Timo. Not pleasing gentle Turke? Time hath not set the caracters of age On my smooth browe: my pulses beate as high, As when my first youth lifted vp my blood, I buy no beauty: nor hath nature bene A niggard in my face: I am yet yong Fresh and delight some, as the checkerd spring, The Lilly and the Rose growe in my chekes, And make a bed for loue to rest him on. Mul. But I am restles. Timo. Rest thee on my brest. Mul. No I must pilgrine to a loue deuine. Timo. Loue me and vnto loue Ile build a shrine And on an Altar offer to our loues, The thighs of Sparrowes and of Turtle Doues. Mull. You are importunate. Tmo. Yeeld then and I haue done. Mul. No more: Faire Amada's the saint that I adore. Exit. Timo. Amada: minyon is it you? Makes me thus sue vnheard? my daughter Amada Haue I in my bosome nurst a snake: No fierce streamd torrent nor no storme at Sea, No stepdame is halfe so raging: my blood was not so strong, When thou wert got: now us like the Sea, My soule a Barke that runnes with wind and tyde And cannot stop: the Anchor of my thoughts (Reason) is lost, and like the vine-gods priess Running downe Nia or from Pindus top, I am vnstaid and doubtfull in my couse.
O the strong power of sence: I must do that Which all succeeding times to come shall speake Ye not beleeue; all say twas done, yet none Say twas well done. Loue is a God, Strong, free, vnbounded, and as some define, Feares nothing, pittieth none: such loue is mine. Exit. Finis Actus 3. Actus 4. Scena I. Enter Iulia and Amada. Iuli. O Had our soules no deeper sence then flesh, Were they like waxen pictures formable: Obsequiously to take impression From euery rude hand, and be like this will, That wils vs vnto some defomity, I should not Amada complaine of wrong But make religion of my forc'd restraint: I then should sleepe and pray: and on my beades Number deuoion: my enuironed spirit Shold not thus swell beyond my present freedome: Whisper my wrongs, and prompt my weaker powers To prone impatience Ama. Madam I am yours. Let not the name of daughter vnto him That hath confinde your hope, be preiudice To those affections I beare your state: Ile proue 'gainst reason and receiued truth, Like breedes not like, in breeding euery thing: Cleere streames may flowe euen from a troubled spring. Iuli. I am no infidel to thy posiion, Sad thoughts oppresse me: may I haue no musique? Ama. Yes Madam.
Iuli. Some say that when the Thracian entred hell, The totu'd soules enchanted with his tunes, Felt not their torments: Syciphus sate downe, Ixions wheele sood still: the thirsty sonne of Ioue, Forgat to drinke, and all the rst did stand Caching the aire from his delicious hand: I would I might pertake their happines. Ama. Madam you shall: gie your eares a while, And you shall heare such musicke as would make The greedy wolfe forsake the tender lamb, And listen to it: such as the sonne of Neptune Playd to the Dolphins: when they in a ring Danct their crookt measures but to heare him sing. A song, Madam how fare you now Iuli. Euen as the labouring dayman after sleepe. Enter Timoclea like a Ghost. Refresht and cherisht: ha but Amada. Amad. Some better Geniu assist my feare. Iuli. What would it Amada, it beckens to thee? Ama. My mothers troubled spirit: O defend me heauens. Timo. Away: Amada. Iuli. It commaunds my absence. Ama. O for heauens sake stay. Timo. Away. Iul. Smething it would vnfold to thee: I goe. Exi Iulia. Timo. Conteine thy feare, I liue. Ama. Such terror liues not in a liuing eye, Death is not shaper then those pointed beames That pierce vnto my heart. Timo. Would they were ponyards digging at thy breast. Keepe in thy short-drawne accents: let not th'ayre Carry the softest clamour to the eare Of waking Iealosie: if it do— How Lust and Nature do deuide my soule?
The one doth plead prescription in my blood, And sues as plaintiue with such clamorous spels, As might coniure the violent rape of Lust To modest continence: O but it is a vice Sooner condemnd then banisht: easily spoke against But yet t'wil fawne as smoothly on our flesh, As Circe on the Grecian trauellours, When she detaind them in the shape of beasts. Amada knowest thou my face? Ama. I knew that outward Character of her That sometimes I cald mother. Tym. Dost thinke I haue no life? Sest not my blood in a continuall pulse Beat through the azure conduits of my flesh? Feele how I burne: what star't thou on me? Am I transparant? canst see from my heart Death in the shape of iealousie: stand Like a chiefe organ guiding all my frame, Vnto some tragicke action? Ama. O giue my sence some freedome From feare and terror, that I may distinguish Betwixt the credulous rumour of your death, And what I see. Tym. I liue, the time befits not inquisition Of tedious circumstance: Amada I liue: But thou must dye, and by thy mothers hand. Ama. O be not a Medea. Tym. Why like Creusa hast thou stolne my Iasen? My Mulleasses he dtes vpon thee: I am debard his breast, Robd of his loue by thy alluring lookes. Sad discontent wound in his folded armes, Sighs nought but Amada: but by my better hopes My blood shall like Medusas first turne to serpets And taint thy flesh, ere it shall loose that fire Which makes it boyle and burn in his desire.
Ama. Deforme my beauty fill my face with scarres, Make me more loath some then a dead mans scull: Wash me with spiders blood, that I may swell, And be more vgly then a Gorgons head, That he may feare to see me: onely let me liue, And spare me that that onely you did giue. Time. My pleasure gaue thee life, and it resumes That life againe, because it kils my pleasure: Th'art like an Iuy nourisht at the roote Of some proud oake: that not content to creepe And feede vpon the sap, but stretching vp, Proudly presumst to ouerlooke the top: So that the verdure of the ambitious impe, Detaines all admiration: the Oake wants grace, Onely because the Iuy is in place. Enter Mulleasses. But Ile displant thee for no weede shall grow So neere the roote fom whence my sap doth flow. she kils her. Ama. Cruell vnnaturall: heauen my hopes in thee If virgin purenesse please, accept of me. moitur Mul. What, do you Christians sacrifice with flesh? Or like the Laodiceans vnto Pallas, offer The blood of virgins? O inhumane deed, Vngentle monster, beauteous Amada! Timo. It was her beauty that I offerd vp Vnto thy loue my deerest Mulleasses. Mul. Worse then a Cammel in her time of lust, Cruell vnto thy childe: loose thy snaky armes O thou hast done Timo. As Lucius Catalline Romes terror did for Orestilla, kild My childe: no more: for Mulleasses loue, I would outgoe examples, and exceed
As in desire, all others so indeed. Mul. And yet I loue thy cruelty: for this night thou must Discard the timorous pitty of thy Sexe: Be a Semiramis: let thy husbands death Giue thy hopes life: feed, feed vpon his blood, And let thy vaines swell: now he prepares to bed Be thine owne ghost: and like the apparition Of his beeeu'd-dead wife call for reuenge: Incite his timerous conscience to despaire, Speake of damnanion: let one word containe A hell of torments. But time slides. Timo. I runne. Exit. Mul. Much ere the morning riseth must be done, Ile beare this body hence: ha ha ha, O now me thinkes I gin out-reach my selfe, Now like some huge Collossus cold I strut, And stride that Oke of Mahomet: that beares vp The ponderous center: whose deuided hornes Measuring the passing of a thousand yeares, Touch at both Polles, and tosse the massy ball: Makes mountaines nod and curled Cedars reele On Syrian Lybanus. But soft me thinkes I heare within oh oh Some mutinous and distracted tumult. Enter Borgias & Timocla after him. Borg. Guard me ye iust and intellectuall powers Thou triple & eternall essence. Timo. Borgias. Borg. What dreadfull summons calls on Borgias? What art thou? Timo. Timoclea thy poysond wife. Borg. What wouldst thou, Hah. Timo. Reuenge and horror. Borg. Terror to my soule: forbeare those lookes. Timo. Dispaire and vengeance.
Borg. Maist thou be peacefull, in my prayers I wish it, Let them expiate my sinne: if thou be'st a spirit Blest and celestiall: change that face of feare, Or leaue th'infectious grosnesse of our aire, And like an Angell daunce about the Spheres, Play with the Moone and make the Sun thy glasse, To see thy beauty as thy beauy passe. Or if thou be'st— Timo. A messenger of death. Borg. Then like a Fury post to Tartarus, Fetch vp the snackie curld Eumenides: From Orcus bottome where reuengefull cares Griefe, pale diseases, sad and croked age Are euer resident: let them and their effects Let fierce Erennis with her brazen feet, Seize me at once, and strike me in my fall, Lower then him that durst ascend the Sun. Onely be thou appeasd. Timo. Not till I meet thee in the shades of death. Borg. Which thou deniest me: for thy feares keepe in My trembling soule: it dares not leaue my brest, Mount to the flaming girdle of the world, And fetch me lightnings, I will swallow it. Snatch from the Ciclops bals of Etnean fire And I will eate them: steale thunder from the clowds And dart it at me: quaffe Stigian Nonocris I will pledge thee. Timo. Ile haunt thee to dispaire. Exit Borgias. Timocl following him Mul. Pursue his feare to some effect of death, Whilst I like starres that spred their sparckling fires Beyond an vsuall light fore-shewe a tempest Of the whole state of Florence. Amadas remoued Her neare alliance vnto Iulias blood, Shall not distast my hopes: Timocleas feare Workes death on Borgias: vp Mulleasses Sit like Saturnus on the highest orbe,
And let starre-gazing wizards from thy feare, Buzze sad Astrology in the peoples eare. Enter Borgias and Timoclea aloft. Borg. What night or what darcke Chaos can conceal My conscience horror? rather let me see The feare of Hercules: let the Cretian Bull Bellow and burst my braines: onely may my eares Be deafe to thy exclaimes. Timo. Thou art at farthest. Borg. Then I can but fall. He leapes downe. Timo. Like Lucifer from heauen. discendit Timoclea. Mul. Oh now me thinkes a Chorus all of Angells Clad with the Sun and crownd with golden starres, Should make more heauenly musique at thy fall Then all the Spheres that daunce about the ball: Now should they poetize in verse for ioy, And out-sing Homer in the fall of Troy. Borg. Villaine triumphst thou? Mull. O ye strong power of superstitious faith It reignes on fooles: that men of wit and state, Men that like Eagles climbe to be aboue, And shrowd themselues betweene the knees of Iou Should be struke downe by apparitions. Enter Timoclea. Timo. Deluiue counterfeit. Borg. Conterfeit! Timo. I Valentine I liue And am the actor of mine owne reuenge. That cup of poyson made against my life, Was by my deerest Mulleasses loue Turnd to a philter: and my working sence, Charm'd in the scilence of a quiet sleep,
Shewd as if death had lockt my pulses vp, But posting time brought motion on my blood. And now my full vaines like a water-brooke, Tha slyding gently at some proud hils foot, In pipes of lead are carryed to the top, And thee in amourous branches spreading forth, Courtes the curld mountaine thus, thus, and thus: she kisses him. Borg. Lasciuious strumpet. Timo. My beloued Turke. Borg. Incestuous Phedra. Timo. Loue Hipolitus. Borg. Cruell Medea. Timo. My kind Iason. Borg. Whirle me ye iust & more aupitious powers, Amongst the thicke and thunder darting clowdes, That being wrapt in flames I may be throwne, Like Aetnean bals from heauen and strike you downe: Or would my dying breath wer more infectious Then halfe rotte bodyes digd vp from their graues, Or then those mists felt by the soules of men, When they descendth Acharusian fenne. It should not striue within me, or be loth To leaue my body might it blast you both. He faines to dye. Timo. So with thy death the Embrim of my loue Takes perfect shape. Now like the Sestian maide May I court Leander swimming in my armes And with our pleasing motions mocke the seas That rose and fell to wanton with his thighs: Now ther's no Hellespont betwixt our loues: I am not iealous: Agamemnons dead, And Clitemnestra with Agsthus plaies: Pleasure is free. Mul. Come ther's no pleasure in you: Y'are a lustfull time spnt murderous strumpet, The prostitution of your knowne Bordellos, Where euery itching letcher ents his blood,
Is not so loathsome. Tim. You speake not like a louer. Mull. No, for thou hast kild my loue Amada: And now thy husbands blood bids me beware Of some new lust and third adulterer: Such is your loue to me. Timo. Oh stop those killing accents, be more milde I doe forgiue what you did speake: and aske But a kinde thought for all my louing taske. These eies haue seene you smile: looke gently on me, And let me read some milder characters: Mull. Hence with thy Serpent twines. Timo. I am no Lamia nor no Lostrigon, No high-prizd Lais: that thou shouldst esteeme Repentance purchasd at too deere a rate: Kings shall not come to Corinth where thou maist, Not with a common Ephereian ull, Purchase a minutes pleasure: but with me (As faire but yet more chaste by farre then she) Spend yeares of sweete content. Mull. Syren mine eares are stopt I will not heare thee. Timo. Oh would I had a Syrens charming voice, I'de vse no incantations but to thy eares, Or were my tongue like Orpheus golden lyre, To which the windes were husht and heard it play It should be silent but to please thy eares, Or like the dying swan, would I might sing A funerall elegy to my parting soule, So that the musique might but please thy eares: What should I say? Mull. Be dumbe and leaue me. Timo. Not till thou loue, or else of life bereaue me. Exeunt. Borg. Ha, Are ye gone: all cleere, damnation cease ye, I, a knowne practisde pollititian, And thus outreacht: O my shallowe braines.
Fell I so high? would I had fallen from heauen: So, like a Phaeton I had fir'd the world: Or like a flash of lightning on your heads, Consumd you for these trickes: I dyed in time Like a true coward, counterfeited death, For feare to die indeed: well then for my life I am beholding yet vnto my wit: But for my legges I know not how they stand, Are my bonesstiffe still, not broken? Enter Mulleasses. Ha? he fals againe. Mull. I am at last freed of my lustfull loue, My hope is yet dispaire will arme her hands To her owne death, and saue my sword a labour: If not, tis but the taking backe of what I gaue, And send her once againe into her graue. Now for my Iulia, she is the maine of all, Her will I ceaze and keep, vntill the Fleete Now vnder saile for Florence be ariu'd, From the grand Signior sent to make me strong, And get commaund vpon the straights: how soere Twas promist Borgias to make strong his part, Against the Dukes: she being had, My title's firme for Florence, their claime's bad. Eunuch. Enter Ferrara disguisd. Ferr. Your pleasure. Mul. See you this body? Ferr. I doe. Mul. Conuey it to his bed there let it lye, The murther I'le transport vpon the Dukes, Or on some treason by their meanes contriu'd: See it be done.
Ferr. It shall. Mull. Now vnto Iulia, on her lies my state, If she consents: why so: if not I know Death and commaund makes womens hearts to bow. Exit Ferr. The death of slaues pursue thee. hah Borgias, Protector: true true: clap clap ye furies, Daunce your blacke rounds, and with your yron whips, Fetching eternall lashes as you skip Strike a loud sounding musicke through the ayre, And make the night Queene pale to heare your noise. Be peacefull wronged Ghost where soere thou beest, Post to the blessed fields where soules take rest: Drinke Lethe freely for thou art reuengd. Come thou inclosure of a damned soule, Ile be obedient beare to thy bed, Then in my chamber laugh that thou art dead. Ferrara takes vp Borgias, Borgias drawes out Ferraras dagger and stabs him with it. What suddaine paine assaults my yeelding heart? Borg. Ha ha, ha, youle beare me to my bed, Then in your chamber laugh that I am dead. Ferr. Liuest thou damnd villaine? Borg. I liue, and laugh vilde slaue to see thy fall, This is the inclosure of a damned soule, Villaine thou shalt not breath another word. Ferr. Stay but a minute longer, know that I haue Thy promise and thy oath to be my guard, Thy slaue I murthered and assumd his shape, I am Ferrara. Borg. Ferrara, ha? true true, clap clap ye furies Dance your blacke rounds, and with your yron whips, Fetching eternall lashes as ye skip, Strike a loud sounding musicke through the aire
And make the nights Queene pale to heare your noise: You haue my oath and promise for your guard: So wise men promise fooles, but their reward Like thine Ferrara is the losse of breath. Ferr. Iustice I thee implore, reuenge my death Borg. Mulleasses thinkes me dead, and in his plots Goes on securely: Ile returne his pollicies, And vpon him transport Ferraras murther. My wife he hath forsooke: that sweetens danger That I but liue to see reuenge on her. My weake force built vpon the Turkish fleete, I see is ruind, and I but vndermined: No hope is left saue in mine owne commaund And power with the state: whose light credulity, I easely did delude with Iulias death. But yet Timoclea liues, and may perhaps Escape her false loues hate: which if she do, This blacke nights horror falls like thunder on me: She must not liue till day: be euer darke. Stand night vpon the noonestead: and attend My fates security: if euer blacknes pleasd Or deedes to which men may resemble thee, Turne then thy sooty horse, and with their feete, Beate at the rising morne: & force the Sunne, Forbeare his lustre till this black deed's done. Exit. Finis Actus quart. Actus 5 Scena I. Enter Timocleasola. Timo. HEll and ye furies wheresoere you be, show me your tortures, and present your selues Or let the burning monarch clad in flame, Make an infernall eccho to my name.
I know not what I say: Timoclea wrongd, Loue-slighted and contemned: O my wish! That like the crosse-eyd witch of Thessaly My voice could through the riuets of the earth Hollo and call reuenge: or rather: what? My dangerous ghost attir'd like Nemesis About her middle for a virgin Zone Girt with a forckt-tooth'd serpent, vent at my brest That did exceed a stepdame in my lust. Forbeare yet gentle maide; thy fathers soule Kneels at the brazen Throne of Radamanth And craues that office: Whither am I borne? Dispaire, thou art a false glasse to the soule, And in the conscience dazeld with thy guilt Of many sinnes, dost vary formes of feare. I not belieue thy forc'd suggestions, I am seduc'd by passion: death and terror. Borg. Error, within. Timo. False aire thou liest I erre not: my loues wronge Ile teare out of my brest: forget those hopes Made my hands bloody: I am cleare vnstaind: Borg. Staind: Timo. Forbeare thy thunder gentle, gentle voice, Beate not my conscience torments gainst the walls, To make the Court ring with thy clamorous answers: Heauens let my teares redeeme me vnto life. Borg. Life. Timo. Of my terror: I desire not: speake of death. Borg. Death. Timo. Of my daughter: how easie through the aire Our sinnes are hurried: thou canst tell of murder. Borg. Murder. Timo. I of my husband: night thy cole-blacke wings Though darker then the Moones ecclipsed browe Are not fit Canopies for sinne.
Enter Borgias. Borg. Timoclea. Timo. Distraction of my soule, who breathes my name! Borg. The airy breath of him that sometime liu'd A tenant in the brest of Borgias, By thee driuen out the frame and house of life. Timo. By me Borg. And now like one whome sterne oppression throwes Nak'd out of all he did possesse: being tobd and spoild Of the warme couert he inhabited, I sigh my helpelesse wrongs and in the aire Counting all hope I had, find all dispaire. Timo. Dispaire. Borg. And empty longings for an end of paine, Which I still wish and craue. Timo. But neuer gaine. Borg. Neuer. Timo. Forgiue me. Borg. Aske it of the heauens, To whom my blood with ceasseles clamours calls For Iustice and reuenge. Timo. Iustice in heauen is like my sin gainst thee Cruell: and sooner may I with my knees Eate through the center: from these pearly eyes Should there fall downe more teares of penitence Then the clouds drop to purchase a newe spring I could not be forgiuen. Borg. Death is the winter dombd vnto thy soule Disrobe it of that warme and wanton flesh, The mouth of Iustice bids Timoclea dye. Timo. Be thou then iustice executioner Reuengefull spirit: in this flesh of mine Carue thy reuenge in carracters of blood
Blast me: or from the centers hollow deepe Let loose some coniur'd tempests: whose lowd stormes Driuen through the ayre sings horror to the world, And let them hurle me gainst the labouring clowdes Sinke to the brazen-gated deepe Abisse, Where furies sit curling their snakes in knots, And pull a viper from Alectos head, And on these breasts that in thy heat of life, Haue bene as pillowes to aduance thy lust Let it sucke freely: the AEgiptian Queene Nere dyed more daring. And to the sterne commissioners of blood, Be a glad Hermes: tell them, Timoclea Takes vengeance on her selfe dull Element be gone. Borg. The mornings saffron horse breathes from the East Their spicy vapors, suckt from th'ndian plaines And through the gentle ayre hurle their perfumes. I heare the Suns steedes trot towards the milky way, And in a Coach of flames draw vp the day: Aurorat vsher to the starres of night, Tels the approching of the God of light: They gin to twinckle and take in their fires At their ecclipse we spirits leaue the aire, And in a dismall vale of darkenesse grone, Vnder the burthen of a thousand chaines: I must away, thou onely dost detayne me, With want of vengeance, which thy death must gaine me. Tim. It shall, it shall: Hard hap of misery, it hath many hands, That like the windings of a laborinth, Leads the despayring wretch into a maze: But not an Ariadn in the world, That lends a clewe to led vs out the world. The very maze of horror. Cease thou that stands first mouer of the Spheres
From whose high concaue all inferiour fires Deriue successiue motion. Stand ye night-wandring planets in a maze, And from your hollow Fabricks vewe Timoclea, Or else ye heauens put in your flaring lights, And on your azure-seiled arches hang A rauen-blacke Canopy of congealed cloudes That you may seeme a Chaos to the world, And boade eternall darkenes: thou wert not made to kill, Lookes on her haire displayed. Nor was the Diademe of her Ponticke Queene Made as a fatall instrument of death, And yet it was the engine stop her breath As thou must mine. Soule of Borgias Thus to thy ghost I sacrifice my life, To buy thy requiem. Borg. I accept it wife. He strangles her with her owne haire. And thus returne the fall of Borgias. Nay nay repent not deere Timoclea, Y'are caught in faith: thn like a Lyonesse Snar'd in the wary hunters tangled toyles, Grinde the thin aire: swell higher till thou burst, And let the breath that like a vapour prest Struggle within thy bosome, hurle the vp. Soft—the time spends fast, & I haue much to thinke of Before the tell-tale god displaies his light, To shewe the world the horror of this night. First for thy death the lustfull Turke must dye, My riuall in the loue of Iulia. Him Ile accus for murdring thee. The Dukes Because his claime may alienate my hopes Him in my accusation I will ioyne As ioynt coagent in the Turke deuises. As for that rumour of faire Iulias death,
I'le first proclaime her life: and on Mulleasses (Who now detaines her) will transfer the falsehood, As if my selfe had bene by him deluded: These mazes when like Theseus I haue trod Fortune shall spread her wings to make me sailes, And with a strong ayre cut the angry tide, That into mountaines swels to stay my pride. Hh! what heauy noise beates through my eares? Hang heauy Morpheus on the eies of men, And make suspition sleepe. Enter Philenzo and Phego. Philen. The rumours strange I pray possesse me with your propper knowledge. Phego. You shall vnderstand Sir, that according to my funct∣ion, giuing neere attendance to my Lady, she being feruently imployed in the Lobby, bout a mixture or composure of (as we vulgarly tearme it) a posset: vpon our first entrance, ere we had relisht the sweete of her sweete, that is the fruit of her labors, we were suddainely assayled by a she-goblin: to describe it Sir I am not able, for my eye-sight turn'd inward to looke after my heart that was running from my heeles, yet thankes to the lancknesse of my calfe they made reasonable haste. Borg. Heart of all mischiefe see the Court is vp, Hell and the darkenes keepe me from their sight. Philen. At midnight did Ferrara leaue his chamber, Heauens be his safety. Phego. A ghost a ghost. Exit Borgia Philen. Pursue it where it goes: feare shall not stop me. Followe me sir, Ile speake to it, though death Ceaze on my life: it shall not loose mine eies Vnlesse it sincke into the earth. Exit. Phego. S'foot my office is italianated, I am faine to come be∣hinde.
Enter Bordello. Bord. Was euer man thus distracted betweene the flesh and the spirit? s'foot this Pill hath so fiered my mansion that vnlesse I light on some water-worke, I shall loose the rains like a second Phaeton, and burne my Fabricke. Surely I am that Tantalus the hungry Poets talke of, and am as dry as an Eele in a sand-bagge, and yet want water for the reaching: Let me see, why should I feare spirits that haue raised vp such an able one at my pleasure, that like a bold Orator stands on tip-toes to speake in Barre: and yet me thinkes he should be no good pleader, he was so suddenly deiected and out of countenance with an apparition. I would the case were laid open, that I might see how my young mooter would bestir himselfe: Ha: who is this? no more ghosts I hope: if it be it is the more womanlie of the two. She lyes as if she knewe the end of her creation. On my life some wayting mayde that hath a Court Epilepsie come vpon her: Ile see if she fome at the mouth. Out & alas, the heauens haue conspired poore Bordellos ouerthrowe. The vertuous Timoclea wretched and most accursed hands, that haue trust vp my fortunes in thy Elfe-knot. Scaena 2. Enter Duke of Venice, Lord Prusias Attend. Lord. THese apparitions doe import more weight Then our distracted iudgements can yet poize, Yet mighty Duke suspend a while all feare If both my power in state and worth in honor May be sufficient gage to be your guarde Then thinke you are in safety. Ven. Sir we thanke you: neither is there one
Knowne vnto vs in Florence, on whose worth, I dard assure such safety as from you, And to that end I brought this gentleman, As well to acquaint you with this deepe occurrence, That much concernes your present state, as craue A guard for our security gainst daunger. Prus. Respect your guard great Duke. Villaine what art thou Bord. A most deiected parcell of mans flesh. Prus. Lend your eyes and see A deede as blacke as is the time that hides it: A murdered gentlewoman. Lord. Ignoble villaine, could thy coward-arme Presume the least wrong to her feeble sexe? Bord. Wrong: heauens knowe I meant to haue done her a much right as could haue bene done to one of her sexe. Ven. Death hath not changd her forme: see her face, You may discerne her by her character. Lord, She beares the image of Timocl Wife hnto Borgias. Ven. Soule of delusion, in this very shape The ghost of Iulia was presented vnto me. Lord. Amazement and the giddy thought of feare Run an vnsteady circuit through my braine: Thy feare and trembling doth proclaime thy guilt. Bord. Alas Sir my shaking proceedes of a standing ague I haue had this two houres. Lord. The time importunates and craues suddaine counsell. Guard ceaze him safe, some beare this body hence, Wee'le vnto Borgias chamber, him wee'le wake, Acquaint him with the ground of our suspition: Meane time be safe in me: nor loue nor life Shall turne mine honors current: Ile be your guard: This hand seemes your person, or my sword Shall in the Traytours heart make good my word. Exeunt.
Scena 3. Enter Mulleasses & Iulia &c. Iuli. IF thou beest humane, then forsake thy sute Your words are strange to me: my virgin eares Nere knew such sound: desist I will not bowe. Mull. We loose all pleasure that we do not knowe Then like Pandora view those heauenly guifts. The Gods haue deckt thee with: See but thy selfe And taste more pleasure from thy proper good Then from the full horne of the Protean floud: Elisium is in thee, and I implore— Iuli. Syrens haue left the Sea and sing on shore. Mull. Could I out-ing those Syrens Iulia, Or were my voyce as tunefull as that harpe That now vies musicke with the harmonious orbes, To which each learned Sister naild a star, Thou mightst with safety heare me: thy Vncles loue Cold as the white head of the Apennine feeles not my fire: ambition of rule Tunes al the heate is left in him to incest. If thy warme blood (that dallies in thy vaines, And through thy flesh like wanton riuiles plaies) Desires with Nyle to rise aboue her bankes, And vent in pleasure on the neighbouring plaines; A carpet richer then the breast of Tempe, Or Tagus yellow channell, shall be spread And prst with Iulias weight. Nor the blew Sea-god when in stormes he treads On peales as Orient as the rysing East, For which the toyling Negro diues in vaine, Are boasted of such wealth: thy bed as oft As downe feathers pluckt from Ledas swannes, Shall yeeld vnto thy dalliance,
A hundred boyes like winged Cherubins As faire as Psiches loue shall— Iuia. Enough, too much: I am not fit for pleasure Or if I were thy Mermaid eloquence Sounds harsher in my eares then Sillas dogs Vnto the frighted Sea-man. Mul. Lady. Iulia. Heathen prophane. Mull. Be gentle Madam. Iulia If thou beest gentle leaue me Mahomet Our loues like our religios are at warres And I disclaime all peace. Mull. And I a louers smoothnes: your Vnckles dead His power is mine, and you must goe. Iulia. Soule of wrongs: whither? y'are both to weake Ther's more then woman in me: villaine, slaue: Mul. You vrge me vnto violence come to my chamber. Iulia. In hell or in my graue: a rape, treason: treason. Lord. A guard, a guard. Mull. Deah of my hope the Court is vp. Enter Lord, Venice, and attendants: wih Bordello bound. Ven. From hence the voyce was heard, be circumpect. Iulia. Treason, treason. Lord. Who speakes that word? Iulia. Iulia your Soueraigne. Mul. Scilence or thou dyest. Lord. Error of darkenesse in what Labirinth Our soules are plunged: raise the Court: Iulia? Iul. I. Ven. Iulia and Mulleasses? Mul. Iulia and Mulleasses fond Venitian Preuented at the point of hapines: Ven. Thus I redeeme her. Mul. And like Cephalus kill thine owne Procris. Iul. Saue me. Lord. Thy death shall be her freedome infidell. Mul. Why stop you in your courses short breathed Christians?
Nayle vs together. Now me thinks I stand Lk a prod Lyon with a richer prize Then Nssus would haue stolne from Hercules And dare your enuies: my deah vnto your state Salbe as ominous as his poysond shirt: Your false Protecor's dead: e mockt your griefes And made you wepe at Iulias fnerall, Whoe hope I vnderwrought, and now had worne The wreath of Florence: Loue and ambition, Kindled my cold braine from their mutuall heate Sprung my aspiring aime: nor shall it sincke But in the deah of Iulia: since I cannot Quench my hot thist of Lust, and coole the heat That hotter then the coales of Parta Burne in my liuer: like the snowy Dragon, Tangling the Elphant in his snarled orbes: Ile dye in the pursuit of my desire, And mixe our bloods in death to sate my fire, Ven. Hold monster. Lord. Damnation on thy soule. Ven. Thy death shall ransome her. Mul. Death double thy feard force, and it some forme Affright pale Hecate darken the Moone, I like the Sunne, backt on th'Arcadian beast, When in his burning progresse he did sindge Adonis gardens: from my soules faire light Chase cloudy feare: and like Thetis sonne, When he was oynted with Ambrosia Am more then fire-proofe: liues Iulia yet? Ven. She liues dam'd villaine and out-liues thy hate. Mull. Death had bene kinde in her: with her I might Vnder the coole shades of Elisium Played before Pluto and made Proserpine As iealous as Iuno of my loue— But since I must not Enter Borgias Philenzo, Phego. Borg. Vp from the darke earths exhalations
Thicker then Lernas foggy mists and hide me: I cannot loose their sight, hel of feare! Phil. It flies our eager steps: follow, follow. Lord. What meanes these clamours: Borgias? Mul. Hah, Borgias: Borg. Horror of oules I am surprizd. Mull. Illusiue ayre, false shape of Borgias, Could thy vaine shaddow worke a feare in him That like an Atlas vnderwent the earth When with a firme and constant eye he sawe Hells fifty headed Porter: thus I'de proue Thy apparition idle:—runnes at Borgias. Borg. Treason: I liue: Deuils and Furies I am slaine. Lord. Wonder of admiration: what distraction is this? Mul. Ha ha, ha: climbe high my mounting spirit And when thou hast aspird to thy full hight Like a Collossus on a base of cloudes Stand and applaud thy fortunes: Borgias Borg. Grin'st hellish Anticke? Mul. Should the Cecropian theefe stretch my torne flesh Rackt on his bed of steele: if on Caucasus My growing liuer were exposd a prey To rauening Vulturs: I would still laugh To see thee like a falling Pine-tree reele In a rough tempest. Borg. Hold vp ye broken organs of my soule Carry me high and make me stand as firme As Oakes on Ossa: that aduance their tops Euen till their rootes breake. Timoclea Mull. For loue of me kild her owne childe Thy daughter Amada. Lord. Amazement! Borg. Blest fates I thanke you: I shal dye reueng'd Fly, Ioue lou'd Nemesis and at Iustice feet Shake thy triumphall Ash: I slue Timoclea Mull. By thee before thought dead
I tooke her from the hearse of Iulia, When in the habit of a murdred ghost, This night she appeared to the Duke, to breed Suspect in them of thee, and arme their hate Vnto my plotted faction. Ven. Damnd illusion. Lord. Where is Ferrara? Phil. Heauens be his guard. Borg. So they are. He kild my slue And in his habit by this hand he dyed. Phil. False periurd villaine. He runs at him. Borg. Sinke, sinke Cytheron, high Pllne tremble Greene Tempe wither, and with me forgoe Your place and being, this whole world of flesh With atall earth-quakes totters. False Turke thy fate be but as cruell as is Borgias hate. moritur. Mul. Stoope down thou Lydian mount, bend thy cold head And hide it in thy brackish fathers waues That as thou shrinkst, thy starry loade may nod At Mulleasses fall: or euer shroude Those ioyfull bonfires in a mourning cloude. moritur. Ven. Iust end of treason. Lord. Madame our duties ioy your life And wish your happinesse. Ven. As the iust reward of daunger. My Lord I claime her loue. Lord. Not without Iustice braue Venecian She is herselfe and free. Iulia. And thus I giue my selfe. Lord. Heauens seale it for the the good of both our states. Ven. Philenzo: We can but grieue at great Ferraras losse: Embassadours from vs shall plead our sorrowes Euen to your Senats: meane time his obsequies Shall want no honor: Signior Bordello We giue you liberty: what remaines vndone Shall by the Senate be confirm'd: leade on. FINIS.
