17832 99839137 3536
TVVO SERMONS Preached before his Maiestie, in his Chappell at Whitehall, the one, the xi. of Februarie, the other the xxv. of the same moneth. By Richard Meredeth, one of his Maiesties Chaplaines in ordinarie. AT LONDON Printed by G. Eld, for Simon Waterson. 1606.
Text. Micheas Chap. 6. vers. 3, 4, 5. O my people what haue I done vnto thee, or wherein haue I grieued thee? testifie against me, surely I brought thee vp out of the land of Aegypt, and deliuered thee from the bondage of seruants, and haue sent be∣fore thee Moyses, Aaron, and Miriam. O my people remember what Balaac the King of Moab hath de∣uised, and what Balaim the sonne of Beor answered him from Sittem to Gilgal, that thou mayest knowe the righteousnesse of the Lord. THat Gods excéeding goodnesse towards the Jewish nation and their extreame vnthankefulnes againe towards him, might the more clearely appeare, beeing compared together, the moun∣taines, that is as S. Hierom. faith Hierom in Michea Cap. 6. the elect Angels of heauen, and the mighty foundations of the earth, that is the great Mo∣narchs and Potentates of the world, beeing sommoned to be witnesses of this controuersie and quarrell be∣twéene God and them, the spirit of the Lord God in the mouth of the Prophet Micheas, the pen of a ready wri∣ter, maketh protessation in this place of the one, & prouo∣keth him by open challeng, to auoid if they can in reasō, the shame of the other, and therewithall licenseth them to dispute their owne cause for themselues, & to plead a∣gainst God, eyther to conuince him of wrong done vnto them and iniury, or else to condemne themselues of too much ingratitude towards him and wicked obstinacie. O my people (saith God) what haue I done vnto thee? &c.
It is not my purpose (most honourable) to cal to your remembrance the manifold benefittes and blessings which God from time to time, vnder good leaders, cap∣taines, iudges, and kings, hath bestowed vpon the Iew∣ish nation, that might be tedious vnto some, superfluous vnto others, and impossible to me, at this one time, for so I might at this time begin and not be able to make an ende, my purpose is to come neerer home vnto our selues, and to apply in particular the circumstances of this Scripture vnto these present times and present oc∣casions, men consider with better attention those things which they féele to be done vnto themselues, then they do those things which they heare done vnto others, we beleeue the report of the one, because we haue heard it, our selues can testifie the certainty of the other, because wée haue séene it, as we haue heard concerning them, so also haue we séene concerning our selues in the house of God. God hath as little grieued vs, as euer he grieued them. 1. God hath as aboundantly blessed vs, as euer hée blessed them, 2. We for our parts haue dealt as vnkind∣ly with him, as euer did they before vs. 3▪ And therefore he for his part, may as iustly contest against vs as euer he did against them, and say vnto vs and against vs. O my people what haue I done vnto thee. &c. Poli∣carpus Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 9. beeing required by an Infidell Iudge, to blas∣pheme Christ, made him this witty, and deuout answer, 86. peeres haue I liued, neither did he once harme me in any one thing, why then should I blaspheme my God, which hath neither hindred nor iniured me. We can∣not charge our God with any wrong, our gratious Lord with any hardnes, iniury, or vnkindnes towards vs, but must alwayes & euer with Polycarpus acknow∣ledge his excéeding bounty and vnspeakeable goodnes. There be but 3. things in the world which the Lord hath alwayes vsed as 3. notable instruments, for the filling vp of his sury, and for the spending of his plagues vppon the nations, to wit, Famine, Pestilence, and the Sword,
choose saith the prophet Gad vnto Dauid, whether  wilt haue 3. daies Pestilence, or whether thou wilt haue 7. yeares Famine in the Land, or whether thou wilt flie 3. moneths before thine enimies, and with which of these 3. hath the Lord grieued, I cannot say wronged vs, if so be, it be a blessing and not a punishment, to stand still void and exempt of all affliction and trouble. First as touching Pestilence, albeit it bee a speciall punishment appointed by God himselfe vnto all those which stubbornely disobey and transgresse his comman∣dements, for so speaketh God by his seruant Moyses: If thou shalt not hearken vnto the word which I com∣mand thee this day to doe it, I wil make the Pestilence to cleaue vnto thee, vntill it haue consumed thee from the land, and smite thee with the botch of Aegypt, &c. And no one nation vnder the couer of the cope of heauen (that we flatter not our selues) more sinfull people then we haue béene, yet so farre forth hath the measure of Gods mercie and goodnesse excéeded the measure of our sinne and wickednesse, that the fault remayning too ex∣cessiuely amongst vs, the punishment for the most part hath béene taken away, yea in the verye time of ven∣geance and destruction, our God bethought himselfe of mercy and preseruation, for in the winter season he com∣maunded the Angell to smite, and in the summer season (a mercy beyond all expectation) he commaun∣ded the destroyer to forbear, in one yeare he constrai∣ned this mighty Nin̄iuie the great Citty of London, to drinke of the cuppe of the wrath of his vengeance, the next yeare following spared them, and enforced all the noble Citties of this mighty Kingdome to sucke out the dregges which were left in that cuppe. At this time he hath gathered many of the arrowes of this his dis∣pleasure into his Quiuer, but suffereth some of them to remaine scattered, that we may learne to feare him which hath power ouer the plagues, to take vp betimes with God, lest a worse thing happen vnto vs & so occasi∣on be giuen vnto GOD to fill vp the measure of that
vengeance which he hath begone, and so swéepe vs all, top and tayle, root and braunch, great and small, young & old, superior & inferior sweepe vs I say al with that Be∣som which the holy Scripture speaketh of, the Besom of destruction. For the other instrument of Gods iustice, (famine of bread and scarcitie of foode) this Land hath not this ma∣ny yeares béene grieued and afflicted, the Lord hath o∣pened his góod treasure vnto vs, euen the Heauens to giue raine vnto the earth in due season: and the earth to giue her encrease, the Trées of the field to send forth their fruite, the Lord hath made vs happie in the bles∣sing of Ioseph, euen in the fattnesse of the earth and the dewe of Heauen. The Lord hath heard the heauens & the Heauens haue heard the earth, and the earth hath heard the Corne, and the Corne hath heard Israel his people. Howbeit least our long peace should breede vs too much plentie, and our ouer much plentie should make vs too proud, and our pride should pricke vs to play the wan∣ton children against our gratious GOD, he hath in his Fatherly prouidence tempered our prosperitie with some gentle  of moderate correction: to this pur∣pose some eight or nine yeares since, the séede became rotten vnder the cloddes, the meate was cut of before our eyes, our old store was spent, our garners were emptie, our flocks of shéepe were destroyed, our heards of cattell were oded, the starte of bread  in euery place, the tongue of the suckling Child did euen cleaue as it were to the roofe of his mouth, many asked bread, very fewe brake and gaue vnto them. For the third instrument of the scourge of Gods ius∣tice, (warre and the sword,) of this these many yeares we haue not: and I pray God many moe yeares we do not tast. Inquire the generations of old which were before time, since that God created man first vpon the earth, and aske from one end of the heauen to the other, was there euer any nation vnto whom, & vpon whom God hath be∣stowed greater kindnes & fauor then he hath done vpō us
in this behalfe, ye lord hath done asmuch for vs in this lit∣tle Iland, as euer he did for ye children of Israel in the land of Goshan: through out the whole lād of Egipt there was swarmes of Flies, and Liece, and Caterpillers, and Blasting, and Thunder, and Mildew, but in the Land of Goshan where the children of Israel were, there was none of all these, insomuch as the Lord saith, he would deale wonderfully euen betwéene the beasts of Israel and beasts of Aegipt. Altour néere neighbours and em∣borders round about vs, haue dronken of the fierce cup of the wrath of Gods indignation, hee hath made his ar∣rowes surfeit with blood, and hath made his swoord to eate the flesh of the one, and of the other, but as for vs his beloued, in this little Iland, he hath kept vs in safetie in a Land which floweth with milke and wheal, and honie, and hath multiplied vs, and hath blessed vs, and hath encreased vs, and hath enriched vs, both in en∣crease of our kine and flocks of our shéepe, and heards of our cattell, and hath commaunded the heauens that they should drop vpon vs the fatnes of their dewe, as some times they did vpon the little hill of Hermon, hee hath amazed the Duke of Edom with our happinesse, he hath cast the terror of vs vpon the mightymen of Moab, he hath made the inhabitance of Canaan to quake, and yet for all this, is not the goodnesse of our God ceased towards vs, but yet there is mercie powred on vs still, it is much that he hath giuen vs the Gospell, it is more that he hath giuen it without any publicke Crosse and calamitie. Surely he hath brought vs also out of the Land of Aegipt, and deliuered vs from the bondage of seruants: speaking of this point, I may iustly say where may I be∣ginne, or where may I end, the matter I am to speake of is much, the time allotted mee to speake in, is but short, loath I am to offend any chast or Godly or religious eares, but something must be said of it, that we may shew our selues thankefull for our deliuerance: of religion we are sometimes perswaded that it consisted onely in the
obseruation of a few outward rites and ceremonies, as touch not, taste not, handle not, which all perish with the vsage, and after the doctrines and traditions of men. 2. Of faith, that it was onely a bare speculation, full of feare and terror, without any certaine knowledge of, or sure confidence in the word of God. 3. Of workes, that a man might worke out his owne saluation, or if so be he had none of his owne, he might buy the ouerplus of the workes of other men, which they call the worke of super∣erogation, which they cal also the treasure of the church. 4. Ofdeuotion, that ignorance was the mother of it, and pilgrimage the nurse. 5. Of prayer, that it may be vsed in an vnknowne tongue, and offered to stocks, to saints, and to Images. 6. Of the sacrament of Baptisme, that it might be applied to bels in a mockery, and encombred besides with infinite superstitions. 7. Of the sacrifice of the Masse, that it was a sacrifice propitiatory for the quick and the dead, as if the sacrifice of Christ once offe∣red vp vpon the aultar of his crosse, had not béene suffi∣cient. 8. Of the Church, that it could not possibly erre, although it departed from the expresse word of God. 9. Of the word, that it was but a dead letter written with Pen and Inke, insufficient without traditions, ambiguous without the interpretation of the Church of Rome. 10. Of the Pope, that he was Christ his generall Vicar vpon earth, aboue Kings, aboue Princes, aboue the word of God, greater & of higher authoritie then the Apostles. Of these things were some of vs & our fathers somtimes perswaded, in the doctrine of these things were they trained vp, they worshipped vanities, & honored lies, or if they refused so to do, the talkmaisters were ready to lay more heauy burthens vpon them, then euer were laid vpon ye Israelits in Aegypt, their goods were spoiled, their houses ransacked, their liuings forfeited, their lands ex∣tended, their bodies imprisoned, themselues martyred, their goods, houses, and children ransacked, looke what cursing, what banning, what hangman, what gib∣bet, what torment, what torture, was able to doe, the Saints of GOD did not onely taste of it, but in full
measure drinke of, faggot & fire was as common in their mouths, as Ad leonem Christiane in Licinius his dayes, but God which was able to deliuer Daniel out of the Lyons denne, and Ionas out of the whales belly, & the thrée children in the fiery furnace, and Israel in the Red∣sea, whose eyes are euermore ouer the righteous, and which is néere enough to al them that cal vpō him faith∣fully, working their deliuerance when things were most desperate, sometimes by meanes, sometimes without meanes, sometimes against all meanes, euen he in the aboundant riches of his mercies, hath freed vs from this slauery and tyranny of our consciences, ye Gospel which was defaced, hee hath restored vnto this maruailous light, & hath made the beames thereof so to shine ouer al parts, & corners and quarters of this excellent kingdom: the rich, the poore, the learned, the vnlearned, the great mighty men & potentates in the world are become defē∣dors and maintayners of the same, not onely by their profession and by their word, but by their forces and their sword, whē as they haue protest with their dearest blood, & yet for al this, is not ye goodnes of our God cea∣sed towards vs, but yet there is mercies powred out stil. He hath sent before vs also Moyses, Aaron, and Mi∣riam, if the wish of our hearts were giuen vnto vs in two things, as it was giuen to King Salomon in one thing, we could not desire two greater blessings to be gi∣uen frō heauen vnto earth by god vnto mā, then Moyses and Aaron: a good king to rule vs, and a good priest to in∣struct vs, now if God in the multitude of his mercies hath giuen vs the fruition of both these, how iustly then may he say vnto vs as vnto the Iewes. What can I do more? S. Paul is very earnest with the Corinthians that they should learne to know themselues, which is as some thinke the first point of wisdom. Know your selues (saith he) what do you not know your selues? so giue me leaue a little to importune, know your selues, what know you not your owne state, after God in the multitude of his
blessings, had giuen vnto you to be gouerned for the space of 45. years vnder the regiment of a most heroical, gratious, vertuous, & religious Quéene hee hath in the aboundance of his mercies, giuen you a King to raigne ouer you, O how honorable is the name of a King, for God & the King enterchange names, for the King is a God vpō earth, and God himselfe is a King in heauen. I will expresse all whatsoeuer I meane to say cōcer∣ning this matter in an Embleme or mistery. The Lord past by, & a mighty wind rent the mountaines and tare the rockes, but the Lord was not in the wind, and after 1. King 19. the wind came an earthquake, but the Lord was not in the earthquake, & after that came fire, but the lord was not in the fire, and after the fire, came a small stil voice, and the Lord was in the voyce. In the daies of king Henry the 8. of renowned memo∣ry, true religion began to appeare & to shewe forth her head, but this was brought to passe with much tumult & hurliburly. Here the L. passed by vs in a mighty strong wind renting the mountaines & tearing the rockes, but yet the Lord was not in the wind, Deus in turbine. It pleased not God to haue a temple erected vnto him in his dayes, I thinke it was because hee was a man as Dauid was, a man of Blood. After him succéeded K. Edward the 6. & in his daies the very foundations of Popery beganne to be shaken, whereupon sundry violent insurrectiōs were attempted, and most dangerous conspiracies were preuented, here the L. passed along by vs in an earthquake, but the L, was not in the earthquake. Deus non in commotione, no religion established in K. Edward the 6. dayes. After him succéeded in the kingdome, Q. Mary, and in her dayes was séene in England such a fire, as was neuer séene from the beginning, and I hope neuer shall be séene to the ending. Here the Lord passed along by vs in the fire, but the L. was not in ye fire. Deus non in igne. After her succeeded in the kingdome Q. Elizabeth of most happy and blessed memory, and shée albeit shée
was the voice, yet she was not the small still voyce, the ouerswaying faction of Popery at home, & the manifold suspitions of practises abroad, inforced her to carry her Ensigne vnder his bāner whose name is the L. of hosts, onely in the old Testament, but euer the God of peace in the new Testament. As a voice she gaue forth Tanquam ouis ad mactationem, as a voyce she gaue forth, Posui de∣um adiutorē meum, but the noyse of the warrior, and the report of the Cannon, and the tumbling of garments in blood, and the rumors of warres, and the iust suspitions of Armadoes and inuasions would not permit her to be the small still voice, Sibilus aure tenuis, she found the Gospell professed, by her accompanied by the sword, as our Sa∣uiour foretold, Tinke ye that I am come to send peace Mat. 10. vpon the earth, I tel ye no, I am not come to send peace but a sword. But we haue liued to behold him, who is both the voice and the still voice, Et sibilus, & sibilus aure te∣nuis, as a voice he giues out behold, The Lambe of God Mat. 3. which taketh away the sins of the world, as a still voice he writeth for his word, Beati pacifici. 2. as a voice hee protesteth, This is the way walke in it, turne neither to Mat. 6. the right hād, nor to the left, as a stil voice he hath made peace with them that are a far off, & with them that are neare, Pacem his qui longe, Pacem his qui prope, as a voice resolueth come of it what may, I & my people wil serue 1. Sam. 17. the liuing L. as a stil voice he engraueth, Faciem eo in gē∣tem vnam. 4. as a voice he publisheth, Exurgat Deus dis∣cipentur inimici, as a stil voice he hath done more then a∣ny of his noble progenitors, for although Henricus rosas, yet Regna Iacobus, as a voice he studieth, he disputeth, he Ephe. 2. conferreth to make vs al to be of one religion, on god, on faith, on baptisme, as a still voice hee laboureth to make vs al to become one nation, Vt fiat vnus pastor et vnum o∣uile, 1 Reg. 9. Eph. 4. Cassiodor. vnus Rex, vna lex, vnus dux, vna lux, vna ciuitas vna communias, omnia sunt vnum inquit Milissus. We haue liued therefore to inioy him which is ye voice to enioy him which is the stil voice, et sibilus, et sibilus aure tenuis,
the Lord no doubt of it is in the voyce, the Lord is in the still voyce, and I giue a reason, for warres, and tumult, and sedition, and faction, and scismaticall contention, is like vnto a Cannon stone, which makes two walles of one, but peace, and concord, and amitie, and charitie, and vnitie, and vnion, is like vnto Christ the corner stone, which maketh one wall of two, peace and truth in the dayes of Ezechia, we read it, we beléene it, the Gospell and all quietnesse in the daies of King Iames, we haue it, we enioy it, we haue found him therefore of whom the scripture saieth, Rex Pacificus magnificatus est super 2. Peg. 9. omnes reges vniuersae terra. I dauve not vp with vntempered morter, neither doe I powre out the precious oyle of flatterie, to breake that head which vnder Christ in his Church is the head of vs all, but I speake the words of truth & sovernesse, of truth in respect of the matter, of sobernesse in respect of the fa∣shion, and in very reason, flattery vseth not to commend that which is, but that which is not, but rather to this end and purpose haue I spoken, that which I haue said, that we may be thankfull for the benefit, and with the propheticall King Dauid, breake out into praises of our peaceable King, saying, Praise thy God O Ierusalem, praise thy God O England, for hee hath made fast the batres of the gates, and hath blessed thy children with∣in thee, he setteth peace in thy borders. Now as God hath giuen vs a good Moses, a méeke King to raigne ouer vs, so if he haue giuen vs good Priests withall, we must néedes confesse that he hath loaden vs withall his benefits, aswell spirituall as corpo∣rall, & temporall, commonly they goe not farre a sunder, the one is subordinate vnto the other, a good King will take order that there be good priests So Salomon a good king, drpased Abiathar the high priest, & set vp Saadoc: Euseb. eccl. hist. lib. 2. cap. 5. so lustinian a godly Emperour, deposed two Bishops of Rome, Siluerius and Vigilius, and anthorised others, the same Iustinian was wont to say, that he had no lesse care of the church of Christ, then of his owne soule: so Con∣stantius,
Theodosius, and Valentinianus, were wont to call themselues Vassallos Christi, the vassals and seruants of Christ, and how can Kings serue Christ the King of Kings better, then to prouide for his church a faithfull Ministrie, in that state that the flock is that hath no shep∣heard to lead it, or a ship tost in the floods and tempests, in the sea, and hath no Pilot to guide it, or the sucking child that hath no nurse to séed it: in such state are mens soules vnlesse they haue the Ministery of Gods word abiding amongst them, you are as children, the Preacher is your nurse, you are as a ship tost with the manifold surges and tempests of this trouble some world, the preacher is your Pilot, safely to conduct you to the barbour of rest, you are as a flock of shéepe, your preacher is your shepheard to lead you from dangerous bogges, to the most wholesome pastures of Gods sacred word. It is therefore a most incomparable benefit, euen as much as the saluation of mens soules, to haue a learned Tim. 1.5. cleargie, and a vertuous Ministery, learned, or else how should he be able to discharge his dutie, to teach, to in∣struct, to correct, to reprooue, to rebuke, to confute, that the man of God may be made perfect being most absolute to euery good worke, and therefore it is recuited, that he be such a one which hath béene bred vp at Oxford, where the Vniuersitie is, and not at Stanford where the Vni∣uersitie neuer was, that is of no Vniuersitie, vertuous, otherwise hée will pull downe more by his euill life, then euer he will be able to build by sound doctrine: the saying of Gregorie the great is most true, we finde it by experi∣ence to be so, culpa Sacerdotis ruina populi, in signification Lib. 2. Mi∣ralium. of both these, the Priest had alwayes a Tablet before his breast in the old lawe, in which was written in great let∣ters of gold, Vrim and Thummin, in token that he should be a man, both perfect in life, and full and about dant in the word of God. Concerning our selues, modestie forbids me to say much, yet necessitie inforceth me to say something, it is
true indéed, neither I, nor any man else, with any face, can iustifie all those that are amongst vs, as amongst the best orders that euer were, so also are there some at this day amongst vs, false prophets, deuouring Wolues, wily fores, insatiable dogs, deceitfull workemen, sowers of sedition, vnsauery Salt, idoll pastors, which haue months and speake not, and if they had monthes could not eat as they deuoure, all were very Idols as they are no pastors, Magus buieth, Iudas selleth, and some Bala∣mits inuesteth, this is the great cancker and calamitie of our time, and no maruaile though it be so amongst vs, for even amongst the best alwayes that euer were, are some faulty. Ruben amongst the Patriarchs, Saul a∣mongst the Prophets, Nicholas amongst the Diacons, Iudas amongst the Apostles, the diuell amongst the An∣gels, théeues and murtherers in the Temple of God, ab∣bomination of desolation in the holy place. Notwithstanding, howsoeuer our ministrie be deba∣sed or disgraced by some, for these and such like other en∣ormities, yet for all that, this is true, and the iudgement of those which are very wise, learned, and of great expe∣perience, and much reuerence, confirme the same, there neuer was a more sufficient and a more learned Cler∣gie, then at this day. Albeit in contention of learning I may bée worst heard for to speake, being the most unlear∣ned of all my brethren, yet for all that, we are not so farre to séeke as our aduersaries would make the world be∣léeue, as if we were such men which followed onely the tide and streame of the time and Parliament, religion as they call it, and had neuer séene, nor read, nor saluted a farre of, the Fathers, the Counsels, the Schoolemen, or Ecclesiasticall histories. Saint Paul in a like matter of comparatiue conten∣tion betwéene him and the false Apostles, was enforced Galat. 3. to iustifie his ministery after this sort, they are He∣brews, so am I: they are Israelites, so am I: they are the séede of Abraham, so am I: they are the Ministers
of Christ, so am I: so may I say, and most iustly say, betwéene them and vs, they haue skill in the tongues, Hebrew, Greeke, and Latin, they haue read the Coun∣sels, the Fathers, the Schoolemen, the Ecclesiasticall Histories; so haue we: they haue studied the Artes and Sciences, so haue wee: now if they can be learned doing these things, I what infortunate and vnhappy men are we, which are so vnlearned, and yet doe the same commonly this luck followeth all them which are professors of the truth. Now as these men mislike, as if we lacked learning, so are there others which mislike as much, as though we had more then sufficient to liue vpon, our ship is tossed betwéene two dangerous gulphes, Scylla and Charibdis. Aram before, the Philistines behind, the Papists séeke our liues, the Atheists séeke our liuings, our Preachers now adayes, say they are no better then Paul, then Peter, then Iames, which were poore men, pouertie with them is a commendable estate, with like deuotion as Iudas did, what néedeth this waste saith he, this might haue béene sould for much, and giuen to the poore, not because be had any care of the poore, but because he was a théfe, Psalm. 92. and carried the bagge, and héere for Sions sake I will not hold my peace, and for Ierusalems sake, I will not kéepe silence. The world hath béene disposed to make themselues sport with men of the Church, as Dionysius did by Iupi∣ters Tull. de na∣tu. deor. Idoll, who comming into the Temple of Apollo, and finding Iupiter cloathed with a very stately riche pale of golde, takes it away cleane off from his should∣ers, and giues him a coate of Linsie-woolsie: O Sir saith he, this is a great deale better for you, it will kéepe you warmer in the Winter, and colder in the Summer. Afterwards, finding Aesculapius his sonne, set out for the ornament of his person, with a very faire goodly long heard of gould, playes the Barber with him, shaues him roundly, O sir saith he, you are but a yong man, there is
no reason that you should haue a beard, your father hath none. The rest of the Images in the temple holding forth as it were in their hands certaine costly rich platters, & vessels of gould and of siluer, vpon which this was writ∣ten and engrauen, Bona Deorum. I mary saith hee these are the goods of the Gods, and you doe well to of∣fer them vs, great reason we vse the goodnes of the gods and so leauing a scoffe tooke the gold away cleane. As he did then so haue some others done heretofore, I cannot say iustly speaking the truth that it is done now: the land and yeerely reuenues which our auncestors of renowned memory haue bestowed vpon churches frée∣ly for the maintainance of good learning and lawes, is now altogether taken away from vs, the good vse of them, for ye euil abuse sake, this pale of gold was too hea∣uy for our shoulders, a garment rather of Linsiwolsye must become vs better, I would God they had giuen vs for it either linnen or wollen, for then we should haue seene by the way of exchange to haue had something, they haue taken away al stone, timber, lead, yron, glasse, mannors and lands, and haue left vs iust nothing by way of recompence. Our Bishops, which heretofore did weare long beards of Gold euen downe to their girdles, haue béene if not altogether shauen, yet so nearely cropt and shorne, and wot you by whom? forsooth by their shéepe, there is one abuse added more to those 12. abuses, which S. Au∣gustine noted in his time, Senex sine moribus &c. The shéepe most monstrously and most vnnaturally haue flieced and shorne their shepheards. The whole body of the Cleargie of this land whom our ancestors before vs had endued with very great and sufficient liuings for the maintenance of themselues and reliefe of others, whom also these men might haue spa∣red, if it had beene but for this cause onely, because the Lord hath chalenged as his, and called them his owne portion, towards them how haue these men behaued themselues? some of them they haue polled, and some of
them they haue pilled, and some of them they haue fleed, and some of them they haue fléeced, and some they haue impropriated from them and appropriated to them selues, what by prodigality on way and Simony another way, the 2. horsleaches daughters, which crie out, giue giue, the faces of the poore cleargie of this land haue bene so grinded, and grated, that after so many years past, that we haue had Kings to be our noursing fathers and Quéenes to be our Ioel. 1. noursing mothers, we may begin with S. Paul in ye Primi∣tiue Church to make tents ye residue of the palmer woorme hath the cankerworme eaten, and the residue of the canker∣worme hath the grashopper eaten, and the residue of the Grashopper hath the Caterpiller eaten, all men sées this to be most true, which now I make bold to deliuer to this mightie presence, many find it, some féele it, few will speake it, no man goeth about to redresse it. Only that most deuout, and religious act against the deminution of the possessions of Archbishopricks, and Bi∣shopricks (O King) procéeding on from your most royall munificence, and princely pietie and care, hath made a stop and a stay against all future sacrileges, alienations, depre∣dations, honors, hereditaments & possession of the Church: for this cause shall the holy Vrim and Thummim of Leui shine refreshed, out of ye most gratious heāes of the light of your charitie, his deuotion shall ascend swéeter then any incense in the presence of God, continually to entreat for you, Habes enim multos intercessores, his prayers shall be as so many Legions of angells euerlastingly to gard you, against all plots and practizes, against all treasons and treacheries, the naked loynes of the poore shall blesse him, I meane Leui being couered with his fléece, the emptie bel∣lies shall blesse him, I meane Leui, being filled with his morsells, and wée all shall blesse the memory of you most dread Soueraigne, which hath enabled Leui to giue, and so by giuing to receiue a blessing. He raigneth vnprofitablie, which is horne and deserueth not to raigne, saith the golden-mouthed Chrisostome, but he that commeth vnto vs in a double right of nature and so
much grace; all the blessings of both the testaments rest on him, rest on his, euen so, Amen. And yet I giue my note in conclusion to this point: Moses and Aaron are ioyned to∣gether in my text, and in a 100. places besides of holy Scripture, they should neuer be made base, by any vile contempt, or abiect beggery, which follow kings so néere in the word of God. It followes in the Text, Remember what Balaac the King of Moab hath deuised. As touching the deuise of Balaac, it was on this wise: After that he saw that he could not induce Balaim to curse Gods people, he deuised a new stratageme by the daughters of Moab, suborned some of them thorow their wanton allurements, to entice the chil∣dren of Israel to cōmit first fornication with them, & after∣wards Idolatrie, that in so dooing, they might be brought to stincke in the nostrils of God, and being cast out of his fauour and protection, be made a present prey to their eni∣mies the nations. This was the deuise of Balaac the King of Moab, the end of it was to make hauocke of the people of God, the meane to effect it, was first forni∣cation, and afterwards idolatry, the instrument, a strange woman. The deuise of Balaac the King of Moab, was a de∣uise comming from flesh and bloud, and a deuise to bée wrought by a speciall instrument of flesh and bloud, viz. a woman. The deuise of this last trayterous, Heathe∣nish, vncircumcized Moabites, was a deuise not com∣ming from flesh and bloud, or any humane nature, but from the deuill and his Angels, for séeing their doctrine is a doctrine of deuils, it followes accordingly, that their deuises, be the deuises of deuils, as the trée such is the fruit, a proper kinde of religion which dispenceth with Forni∣cation, and maintaines rebellions. Of hell, the Prophet Esay saith, the nourishment of it is woode, and much fire, and the breath of the Lord like a streame of Brimstone Esay. 10. doth, set it on fire, of this we may say the nourishment of it should haue bin gunpouder, & much fier, & the breath of the deuill, like a streame of brimstone should haue set it on fire.
The Diuell when he threw downe the house vpon the children of Iob, threw it downe when they were doyng il, to wit, eating, drinking sporting, & pastiming, these men, worse then their father the deuill, would haue blowne vp the Parliament house men being assembled together to do good, the King, the state, the Cleargie, the nobility the gentry, the commonalty, all beeing assembled together in one to set downe wholesome lawes, for the good of Gods glory, quietnes of the church, and peace of the common∣wealth, what a strange monster is treason, which diueth downe to hell, and beneath hel, the very bottomelesse pitte of hell, for to hatch deuises: for this is the resolution of treason: Flectere si nequen superos, Acharonta mouebo. The Poets fayne of Cerberus the Dogge of hell, that he is a Dogge of many heads and we read of Hydra the Serpent that he is a Serpent of many heads, which bee∣ing cut off spring vp againe as fast as they bee cutts off. Treason the very Dogge of hell, the verye head of Sata∣nas, the old subtill Serpent is like vnto Hydra a Serpent of many heads, which béeing cutte off, springs vp againe as fast as they be cut off. It is to be wished, nay it is to bée prayed for, that the sword of Gods iustice may so cutte them off, or rather seare them vp in these last Traytors, that they neuer spring vp againe, and if they doe, let them know there is a decrée against them more firme, then the decrée of the Meads and Persians, which neuer changeth, God shall wound the head of his enemies, and the hayric scalpe of such a one, which goeth on still in his wicked∣nesse. Remember what Balaac, the King of Moab hath deuised. That which the Lord would haue remembred, may not bée forgotten. Remember what these heathenish Eth∣nicall, rebellious Moabites had denised, seeking they suc∣ked that deuice frō the smoake & breath, & brimslone of the Locusts of hell, I meane the Iesuit the fouls Puritant Papist, remeber it therefore to al kind of circumstances,
remember the place, they would haue blowne vp the Par∣liament house, a place next the Temple consecrated to holi∣nesse: remember what time, when all the whole estate was included in one: remember the engine, by fire and gunpou∣der, the fuell of hell: remember the instrument, the one Si∣non like, which was in Vtram{que} paratus, he thought to pur∣chase heauen by foule destructions and massakers: remem∣ber to what end, Caligula-like, at one blowe to haue taken away both King and state, and roote and branch, & Church and religion, and common-wealth and lawes. Can this pestilent deuise of this Heathenish Moabites be forgotten? no, no, it will be remembred wheresoeuer it goes by the marke of infamie. Ieroboam the sonne of Ne∣bah, that made Israel to sinne, Ieroboam the sonne of Ne∣bah which made Israel to sinne: the Iesuit yt child of perdi∣tion, that made Israel to rebell: the Iesuit the child of per∣dition, that made Israel to rebell. Let it be remembred to continue more durable against them, & against their plots, & against their practises, & against their deuises, & against their designes, then yt pillers of Hercules, as Gregorie Na∣zienzen Oratio pri∣ma in Iuli∣anum. of his orations against Iulian the ranagate, Hanc a me habes sempiternae ignominiae columnū Herculeis colum∣nis sublimiorem & insigniorē, so let this wickednes of theirs stād against them more durable, then the pillar of Absolō, then the tower of Babel, then the pillars of Hercules, then the black Marble pillar in Paris, then all the Pyramides of Aegypt, to what end? marry to make them stinke in the nostrils of them that are liuing, like a dead carrion, to mo∣derate their excesses and their outrages for the present, and to terriffe the posterities and generations to come. Let it be remembred, that we being the children of God in imitating God, may learne out of euill for to draw good, for as old Origen saith, God were not omnipotently good, vnlesse he were able to draw good out of euill, Malitiam de∣us Origen. in 4. cap. Exod. non fecit, sed factam vtitur ea ad necessarias causas, so it may stand with the good and Christian policie, to vse these wicked actions of disloyall men, to make more sure preser∣uatiues, for godly Princes, and faithfull subiects: Serpen∣tum
venena depelli medicamentis confectis exserpentibus per∣hibent, which speake not bloudily to incense, for what hath the pulpit to do with strangling of bloud? and I know that this presence before whom I stand, resembleth vpon earth the mercy seat of God, and goes vnwillingly constrained, and sorrowing out of the same, as God himselfe did, when he said, Ah I must ease me of mine enemies, and auenge me of mine aduersaries, and therefore I expresse my mea∣ning, and pray, that the deuided heads, and the deuided hearts, and the deuided legges, and the deuided armes, and the deuided quariers of these last traitors, so iustly execu∣ted for their foule offence, may ensample the whole world, neuer to carry a deuided head, or a deuided heart, nor a de∣uided part, nor a deuided tongue, nor a deuided soule, nor a deuided thought against our déerest Soueraigne. Notwithstanding, so many plots defeated, and so many deliuerances, deliuerance vpon deliuerance, wrought vp∣on this a most memorable day of the wéeke, make the King as confident as a Lion, for he knowes, that it is God which hath set a crowne of gold vpon his head. and therefore all traitors may as well flie vpon the wings of the winde, or remooue mountaines out of their places, as to depose and transplant the royall estate of Princes, therefore as King Dauid said, so King Iames may say, Thou hast made my mountaine so strong that it cannot bee moued, yea al∣though Gunpowder lye vnder it. It is a vaine thing for Mole-hils to rise against moun∣taines, as the same little creatures which we call Wants or Moales, dig frenches, make breaches, and raise hillocks, yet by certaine breaches and vents, and hillockes of their owne making, they are discouered, so to their very letter, albeit these traitors did digge vnder the earth neuer so se∣cretly, and carried their conspiracies neuer so couertly, yet by certaine vents and breaches of their owne making, they haue béene discouered, and as the hand writing appea∣ring vnto Baltasar, prognosticated ruine and destruction vnto him, so a hand writing comming from their selues, hath wrought confusion vnto their plotte, and I hope shall
worke confusion to all plottes and practises, issuing from all fancies and factions for euermore. As touching the answer of Balaim to Balaac it was this, Though Balaac would giue me this house full of gold & sil∣uer, I connot passe the cōmandement of the lord, as the lord shal put in my mouth, so will I speake, I cannot passe the commandement of the L. Balaim could not, nor would not passe the commandement of the L. Popish Balamites cur∣seth them whō the Lord hath blessed & blesseth them whom the lord hath cursed, but let vs see by the way of compari∣son whether they be in better state whom the Lord hath blessed, & the Pope hath cursed, or whether they be in wor∣ser state, whom the Lord hath cursed and the Pope hath blessed, & this is euident, god hath made them to yéeld vnto vs, and not vs vnto them, he hath set vs aboue and not be∣neath, he hath made vs the head, and not the tayle he hath sent a faintnes into the hearts of our enemies & sorrow vp∣on the inhabitants of Palestina, the L. hath made vs plente∣ous in goods, we haue lent vnto others, and not borrowed our selues, in our strength and fortifications, the multitude of the valient men of this kingdome, are as the dust of the earth, & as the sand vpon the sea shore innumerable. In ye fatnes of the earth & the fertility of a plentiful soile, we eate our bread in plentiousnes & are fully satisfied, the lord hath blessed vs at home, & abroad in all the workes and labours of our hands, & al the deuises & executions of our counsels, & that which is more then all this, he hath chosen vs to be a holy, and peculiar people vnto himselfe, & hath imparted vnto vs his law & commandement. O how beautifull ther∣fore are thy tents, O Iacob & thy habitations O Englād, as the walles are they stretched forth, as the gardens by yt riuer side, as the Alloe trees which the lord hath planted, as the Cedar trees by the riuers of water, and therefore we care not although the Pope curse vs, the more ye pope Numb. 22. doth curse vs, the more the L. doth blesse vs, & therefore no doubt the L. doth blesse vs, because the pope doth curse vs. All the woorkes of God are done (how soeuer they bée done in mercie or in iustice) to the honor of Gods glory. Now the end why he hath done these and more then these for vs, is that we may know the righteousnes of the Lord,
how good and gracious our God is to vs, that hée hath not immeasurably grieued vs aboue that we can conueniently beare, that he hath kept vs frō the noysomnes of pestilence, biting téeth of famine, & violence of sword, that he hath fréed vs from the bondage & slauery of our consciences, in com∣parison whereof the making of bricke in Egipt had bin very tollerable, that he hath giuen vs a most milde, a most peace∣able & a most religious Moyses to gouerne vs; a learned & sufficient Cleargie to instruct vs, that he hath defealed and disappointed cleane both Balaac & Moab, and all their hea∣thenish deuises; and that he hath turned the curse of Balaim into blessngs, and hath done for vs more then for any other nation vnder heauen, all this hee hath done that we may know the righteousnes of the Lord. O that we were wise, then would we vnderstand this, we would consider our latter ende, why should God thus hem vs in on euery side? why should he set vs still as a signet on his right hād? why should he thus tender vs as the apple of his eye? why should he deale otherwise with vs then with ye rest of the nations? our part, our messe, hath bin Beniamins messe, fiue times asmuch as ye rest of our brethren. In euery one of these things, God knocketh still at the doore of euery one of our consciences, he would come in to vs, & he would sup with vs, he hath besought vs for these many yeares, euē as a father his children, & as a mother her daughters, & as a nurse her babes, yt we would be his people, as he is our God, & that we would be his children as he is our father, or despise we the riches of the bountifulnes and patience, and long sufferance of God, not knowing that the bountifulnes of God leadeth vs to repentance? or if not so? I feare me he may say of vs as heretofore he did say of thē, he that should haue bin vpright when he waxed fat sporned with his héele thou art fatte thou art grosse, thou art loaden with fatnes, therefore they forsooke. God that made them, and regarded not ye strong hold of his saluation, God hath as aboundant∣ly blessed vs, as euer he did the Jewish nation, with whom he contested so earnestly in this place, if wee deale as vn∣thākfully with him as they did before vs, we which know what hath befallen them, cannot be ignorant what in time may befall vs.
God of his infinite mercie, for his deare son Iesus Christ his sake, graunt that our end be not worse then our begin∣ning, and continuance hitherto hath bin thou O Lord hast sent forth strength for vs, stablish the thing which thou hast wrought in vs for thy temple sake, O Lord God at Ierusa∣lem. O giue saluation vnto Israel out of Sion, & perpetuate the same, kéepe vs, & preserue vs vnder the shadowe of thy wings from this time forth for euermore. If it be thy will from the noysomnes of Pestilence that it neuer infect vs, from the biting teeth of famine, that they neuer deuour vs, from the violence of Sword that it neuer come neere vs, & as by a mighty hand thou hest deliuered vs from the bon∣dage and slauery of our consciences, so keepe vs good lord we pray thee, in this freedome & liberty of the gospel which we al enioy vnder our milde Moyses, that hee may long raigne ouer vs vnder a faithfull cleargie, that they may carefully instruct vs. O let yt malice of ye wicked come once to an end, the pestilent deuises of Balaac, and the deuilish imprecations of Balaim, and blesse thou thy people: greater blessings O Lord then we haue already receiued wee can∣not aske or desire: we pray O Lord for the continuance of these things, and graunt our request O Lord, euen for thy deare sonnes sake, vnto whom with the holy and blessed spirit, 3. persons in Trinity, one God in vnity, be rendred all power, do∣minion, glory, maiestie, and ser∣uice for euer and euer. Amen.
The second Sermon. Text. Ioh. 16. verse. 23. Whatsoeuer you shall aske the Father in the Sonnet name, shall be giuen vnto you. A Promise wée haue in these words, more excellent, more certaine, and more vniuersall, then euer as yet hath come, or euer at any time can come out of the mouth of any prince or Monarch, vniuersall, for that it promised all, and excluded nothing, more certaine, for that he promiseth which neuer decei∣ued, Dabit vobis, what so frée as gift? most high and ex∣cellent, because he promised to giue from the highest, a Patre, from the Father. Out of the coafer the treasure may be taken, the coa∣fer is as it were the Father, the treasure is all grace, quicquid: the Key in nomine meo, will open to this trea∣sure. From the cipher letter, the sense is to be found, the let∣ter is as it were the father, therefore aske the father, the sense is all grace, quicquid, the expositor in nomine meo, will finde out the sense. Therefore that yée pray, and pray effectually in your prayers. 1. Know whom you are to aske. 2. What things you are to aske. 3. And what maner you are to aske. 1. Whom you must aske, the father, petite patrem. 2. What things you must aske, quid, or quicquid, that which is worthy of the name of a thing. 3. In what maner, in nomine meo, in the sonnes name: of euery one of these, and first of the person whom we must aske, and that is the father, petite patrem. The most mercifull name of father in holy Scripture, giueth
vs many things to vnderstand in God, to wit, assentia∣litie, eternitie, antiquitie. 1. Generation, spiration, pro∣duction. 2. Predestination, prouidence, gouernment. 3. Creation, disposition, distinction. 4. Adoption, gu∣vernation, education. 5. Instruction, redargution, cor∣rection, many more remaine. But principally in asking graces, the name of father implieth two things, which we ought alwayes to set before our eyes in prayer, to wit, the power of God, & the will of God, the might of God, and the mercy of God, his great abilitie, and his great loue; for so it fal∣leth out amongst men, in asking any thing of a man, I consider whether he can do it of his power, and if he can do it of his power, whether he will do it of his loue, and so it is with God. Therefore these two conceits of power and will, of might & mercie, Mary Magdalen had when she prayed Ioh. 11. in the behalfe of her brother Lazarus. Lord, he whom thou louest is sick: Lord, is a name of power, therefore thou canst, he whom thou louest, therefore I am to per∣swade my selfe, that in mercy thou wilt restore him. These two conceits of power and will, the Leaper had when he prayed, Lord if thou wilt thou canst make Math. 9. me cleane, vis, there is the will: potes, there is the pow∣er: and our Sauiour answered to both, to the will, volo, to the power, mundare, in the Imperatiue moode. These two conceits of power and will, of might and mercie, our Sauiour himselfe had when he praied; Fa∣ther, althings are possible vnto thee, if thou wilt let this cup passe away from me: All things are possible vnto Math. 27. thée, there is the power: if thou wilt, there is the loue. Here the Prophet Dauid doth will, that men ioyne together in their prayers, these two; Semel loquutus est Psalm. 62. Dominus duo haec audiui: God spake once, and heard these two things from his mouth; Power belongeth vnto God, and mercie vnto the Lord, for that he will render to euery one according to his workes, note it: God speaketh onely one thing, he willeth me in my
prayers to call him father: but by this one word father, he will haue me to vnderstand two things, his power & his loue, his might, & his mercy. And as touching the power, who is more able then the father. 1. The father can do euery thing in his sonne. 2. The father of the houshold in the familie. 3. The father of heauen in hea∣uen. 4. The father of the world in the world. 5. The father of all can do euery thing in all. And as touching the will, who loueth more then a father, and what na∣turall father so much as our spirituall and heauenly fa∣ther? Math. 6. If you being euill (saith our Sauiour Christ) can giue your children good things, if so bee they aske them, how much more shall your heauenly father giue you good things, if so be you desire them? Wherefore as the wittie Bées, when they go about to make their swéete hony-combes, licke first vpon the swéetest flowers of the fields and gardens of the world, and then carry the swéete ioyce into their hiues, so be∣fore you enter to your prayers, fixe your cogitations vpon these two swéet flowers of power and loue, which you finde in the name of the father, and then carrie the pure ioyce of them into the inward hiues of your soules and consciences, and so shall you make a most precious hony-combe of all spirituall deuotion. The consideration of these two things, will bréed in vs two other things, 1. humilitie, out of the consideratiō of the power of a father. 2. Confidence out of the con∣sideration of the loue of a father. A most potent father, but to so great mightinesse what profound humilitie will be sufficient. The Pro∣phet Dauid, to humble himselfe in his Prayers, some∣times reckoneth vp his naturall defects, as where he Psalm. 22. saith: I am a worme and no man, a very scorne and derision amongst men: sometimes his originall sinne, as where he saith; I was borne in wickednesse, and in Psalm. 51. sinne hath my mother conceiued me: Sometimes his actuall sinnes, as where he saith, We haue sinned with Psal. 110. our Fathers, we haue done wickedly.
And how many things are there to humble vs before the maiestie of God? speake we one word, make we one becke thinke we one thought, but in God and from God, in him we liue and moue and haue out being. O poore wretched miserable beggers that we are, that which a great King said of himselfe may be said of any, Ego autē mendicus sum, let vs aske then as beggers, acknowled∣ging Psalm. 29 our déepe sores & wounds of sin crauing like beg∣gers knéeling like beggers, following like beggers, im∣portaning like beggers, let vs aske the father, petite pa∣trē, let vs aske yt father we great renerence euen for this, because hee is a father of great power, pater potestatis, aske ye father we great reuerēce, because he is a father of great power, aske the father we great cōfidence, because he is a father of much merey, Pater misericordiarum, Eph. 2. Confidence and assurance in asking graces, is the only strength & marrow as it were of all our prayers, there∣fore the holy Ghost saith, Si fiduciam habemus apud De∣um, if wée haue confidence with God, what soeuer wée 1. Ioh 2. aske we shall obtaine, now the name of a father imply∣eth all confidence. 1. The father is mercifull, therefore Saluum me fac propter misericordiam tuam. 2. Great are the merits of the sonne of so louing a father, therefore Respice in faciem Christitui. 3. True are the promises of the father, therefore fulfill thy word vnto thy seruant, Vt in sermonibus tuis iustificeris. 4. Can my faults, can my defects, can my vanities set a barre against me, and the father? I set against my faults the mercy of the fa∣ther, against my defects the merits of the sonne, against my vanities, the inward comfort and consolation of the holy Ghost, and therefore I implore, I beséech, I intreat I importune, I am instant, in season and out of sea∣son onely let not my heart condemne mee of any soule or grosse thing, and then praying to the father in Thrists name, and for such a thing as I ought to do, I shall be sure to obtaine: so the holy Scripture, Si cor nostrum nos non reprehendit, tunc fiduciam habemus apud Deum. 1. Ioh. 2.
Haue you euer marked that when you would looke vpon the sunne, your eyes béeing not able to behold so great a light, yee vse the defence of your hands, and the same sunne causeth the reflection of a shadow from both your hands vnto your breasts, I must tell you, God the Father is the true bright cleare sunne, vnto whom you may not approach with so confident an eye to aske gra∣ces, without the interposition of these two hands of po∣wer and leue, which you haue in the name of Father, and the interposition of these too, will cause a shadow to reflect vpon your breast, that is, will worke in you good desires, good purposes, and vertuous actions whiles out of the consideration of the power of the father, riseth humility, and out of the consideration of the loue of the Father riseth confidence, these are 2. legges, 2. armes, 2. wings which will carry vs into heauen, two things very néedefull and necessary in our prayers, and both are produced in considering God as a Father. Secunda pars. But to rise a point higher, from the person whom we must aske, to the thing what wee must aske, what may we aske, nap what thing may we not be bould to aske? Si quid, si quid, without any limitation, quicquid, quicquid, without any determination. All fauour, al goodnesse, all grace, all glory, all this may I aske as much as you can sée, as much as you heare, as much you can belecue, as much as you can hope for, all this may you aske, temporall things for the world, spiri∣tuall things for the soule, corporall things for the bodye, eternall things for glory, all this may you aske. What will ye that the heauens be shutte vp? Eli∣as asked it and obtayned, that the heauens bée opened, the same desired it, and had it. That the Sunne stand still, Iosua asked it and obtayned it, that the Sunne goe back ward, Ezechias desired it, and had it. That
fire come downe from heauen, Elias asked and obtained it: that waters spring out of the rocks, Moyses asked it and had it. That the floods and waues sustaine yée? Peter asked it and obtained it: that the dead rise againe, sundrie haue asked it, and haue had it. What will ye, wisdome? Salomon asked it and ob∣tained it. Grace? Dauid asked it and had it. Heauen and Paradice? the Theefe asked it and obtaned it, quicquid, quicqud, without any limitation, si quid, si quid, without anie determination, and to the reason, we may aske all of him, which can giue all, we may aske all of him which will giue all, voluntate labiorum non fraudabo te, saith God, I will not de∣fraude the desire of thy lippes, you may aske all there∣fore, euen as much as your tongue can speake, or heart imagine. And for this cause we Christians, though we be poore, yet are we the richest of all other Creatures, note it, for Cattell and bruite beasts, nature hath prouided foode and sustenance, and many getteth it only by his work and labour God hath clothed beasts which skinnes, and the trees with barke, man only is borne poore and naked, the beasts haue for armour to defend them both hornes and hoofes, and téeth and cloues, man onely is borne disarmed in all, the open ayre hurteth not them, man scarce defendeth himselfe with houses and buil∣dinges, the life of all other things is quiet and secure, and this life of ours, wee know not how to tearme it, a life or a death, surely, if not a perpetual shipwracke, yet a continuall warfarre, neuerthelesse the beasts make no request, but man requesteth, these Creatures vse no praiers, man praieth, now if by this meane of praier, hée may get, all what soeuer is behoueable for him, quicquid petiaritis, who can be more rich, or who can be more wealthy then a Christian? All vniuersalitye is in this word quicquid, or si quid,
wée may aske and obtaine it, so that it bée quid, that is worthye of the name of a thing, now hée that prayeth God will further him in his sinnes, prayeth not for quid, but for nihil, Sine ipso factum est nihil, God made not sinne, so doth Saint Austine conster it, Sinne destroyeth in vs the true quid, which is good∣nesse, and maketh a man as nothing, or worse then nothing, Quia melius nihil esse quam infaeliciter Mat. 15. esse. Therefore it is said of the child of perdition, that it had béene good for him he had neuer béene borne: that man therefore that prayeth that GOD will helpe him in his sinnes shall not bée heard, because hée asketh not quid, but nihil, witnesse the Prophet Dauid, Si iniquitates asperunt in corde meo, dominus non exaudi∣et, If there be any iniquity in my heart, the Lord will Psa. 14. not heare me. Againe, note farther, not onely hée that asketh not quid, receiueth not quid, but hée that asketh nihil, re∣ceiueth nihil, hée that asketh nothing, receiueth no∣thing, he that asketh sinne, receiueth sinne, for in as∣king a sinne, he committeth a new sinne, and so his ve∣ry prayers are turned into sinne, according to that in the Psalme, Fiat oratio eius in peccatum, Let his praier Psa. 102. be turned into sinne. In an other sense doth Gregory the great expound this word, this word quicquid, as si quid, that is, that ye aske quid, & not quale, that is, that ye aske substances & not accidents, that is, that ye aske substantiall things, and not vayne things, that is, that yee aske perma∣nent things, and not transitory things, for all these corporall and worldly things beeing compared to spi∣rituall and eternall things, are not quid, but quale, va∣nities, toyes, leaues, trifles, shadows, smoke, nay that are nothing, or very neere nothing, they are the nihil, or very neere to the nihil, I say, and will proue it. 1. Either nothing for this cause, because manye
in séeking after them by sundry feares & cares, and tur∣moyles, and tumults, and labours, & vexations, do waste and consume their vitall spirits, and so bring themselues to nothing, according to that of S. Austine, propter talia se homines ānihilant imitando, insidiando, machinando, bellādo. Ad fratres in eremo. 2. Or nothing for this cause, because they auaile and helpe vs nothing in the fearfull triall of examination, and seueritie of iudgment, according to the censure of the Psalmist, Dormierunt somnum suum & nihil inuenerunt: Psalm. 54. the rich men of this world haue slept their sléepe, & found nothing, for their bodies must to the earth, their riches to the world, their soules to iudgment, & so there is nothing left of all that euer they had to plead for them. 3. Or nothing for this cause, because they neuer sa∣tiate or content the soule, for the soule hauing receiued many of them, desireth still to receiue more of them, as if she had receiued nothing at all, according to that experi∣ment, which Salomō found to be true in his owne heart. The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the eare with Eccles. 4. hearing. Can honors satiate the soule, many great ho∣nours were vnto Hamon, and yet he is discontented in respect of Mardochay. All this can nothing auaile me, saith he, as long as I see Mardochaie the Iew sitting at the Kings gate. Can pleasures satiate the soule? Salomon had his eyes, his eares, his hands, his heart, full of pleasure, and yet he cries out: All things are full of labour, and man cannot expresse them, can riches satiate the soule? Of & against couetous rich men, God saith: Yee eate and are not fil∣led, yee drinke and are not satisfied, yee cloth, yee, and Hagge. 2. yee are not warmed, he that earneth money, putteth the same into a bottomlesse bagge. Can humane learning, can learning satiate the soule? the Philosophers excelled in this, yet Saint Paul obbraideth them, where is the scribe, where is the learned, where is the disputer of this 2. Cor. 4. world, is not the wisdome of this world foolishnesse before God can territories, can dominions, can Empires, sati∣ate the soule? Alexander hearing that there were thrée
worlds wéept bycause he had got but one of them of whome this verse was made. Ʋnus Pilleo iuueni non sufficit orbis. For de opibus praua, of riches comes wicked thinges, de voluptatibus turpia, of pleasures comes filthie things, de honoribus vana, of honors comes vaine thinges, all Innocentius tends to that which the Prophet Ieremie an eye wit∣nesse saw, aspexi terram et ecce erat inanis & nihil, I be∣beld the whole face of the earth and behold it was emp∣tie Ier. 4. and nothing, emptie, for that it had no fulnesse in it to satiate the soule, and nothing, for that it was ful of sinne to defile the soule. And therefore pray not so much for honors, or riches or treasures, or pleasures, or health or wealth, or prosperitie, and such like: these are not the essentiall quid, but the accidental quale, nay they are nothing in comparison of the true quid, heare the Eccl. 7. censure of the wisest King, diuitias nihil duxi in compa∣ratione illius, I estéeme riches nothing in comparison of wisdome, and if hee estéeme riches nothing in compa∣rison of wisdome, the whole world estéemes al the rest no∣thing in Comparison of riches for. Et genus et formam regina pecunia donat. And therefore for honors and riches and treasures and pleasures, and health, and wealth, and prosperitie, wée pray not absolutely but conditionally, so farre forth as they tend to the true quid, that is to the glory of God, & bettering of our soules, for that petition for temporall things, Panem nostrum quotidianum da nobis, hath al∣wayes a reference to the other petitions for grace and glory: idueniat regnum tuum, fiat voluntas tua, to shut vp all in one, if ye aske that which is euill, you sinne and aske nothing, in that ye aske that which is worse then nothing, if ye aske temporary things only, ye erre, be∣cause ye aske not the substantial quid, but accidental quale, shadowes not substances, if ye aske them in a disorderly manner, preferring temporall things before spirituall things, you aske amisse, because you would
imploy them vpon your lusts. If you aske them conditionally, so farre foorth as they tend to the true quid, to the good of the glory of God, and saluation of the soule: you aske that which by good vsage may be made quid, although in it selfe it Antonius. be not the true quid, for as a wittie Schooleman saith, Temporall things stand as things indifferent be∣twéene quid and nihil, the good vsage of them makes them to be quid, the bad vsage of them brings them Sermone 3. . to nihil, for as holy Barnard saieth; Vsus eorum bonus, abi sus malus, sollicitudo peicr, questus turpior, the vse of them is good, the abuse of them is naught, ouer much care to get them is worse, and béeing euilly gotten, and prodigally spent, they prooue worst of all: but the best way is alwayes to aske that which is quid, which is worthy of the name of a thing. Foure things may we aske which are the true quid: to wit, Remission of sinnes, Grace, Perseuerance, and Glorie: in the te Deum, which is sung in the Morning prayer, you haue all these; for remission of sinnes, Lord saue thy people: for grace, And blesse thine inheritance: for perseuerance, And gouerne them: for glorie, And lift them vp for euer. Thrée things you may aske which are the true quid: Mercie for that which is past, Grace for the pre∣sent, and illumination for the future. In the Psalme which is sayde in the Euening prayer, yée haue all these: for that which is past, God bee mercifull vnto vs: for that which is present, And blesse vs: for that which is to come, And shew the light of thy counte∣nance vpon vs. Two things yée may aske which are the true quid, to eschew euill, and doe good, Declinare a malo, facere bonum, What will yée that the quid be one and sin∣gular? Heare the Prophet Dauid, Ʋnum petij a Do∣mino, Psalm. 88. One thing haue I desired of the Lord, and I will not cease to require the same, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord, to behold the beautie of
his countenance, and to visit his Temple: But in this one thing there are all things: And therefore as Saint Austine saieth; Ama vnum bonum in quo sunt omnia bona, Loue one thing, in which are all things: Pete vnum bonum, in quo sunt omnia bona, and yée haue enough. For 1▪ if ye be delighted with beautie, here the iust shall rise, and shall shine as the firmament; and they that lead many vnto righteousnesse, shall shine as the starres for euer & euer, 2. if with a long and healthfull life, here shall be healthfull eternitie, and euerlasting sanitie, for the bodies of the Saints shall liue for euer, and their health is from the Lord. 3. If for fulnesse and satietie, here the Saints of God shall be made drun∣ken Bonauent. de diala sa∣lutis. with the riuers of Paradice, they shall bée filled with the beautie of Gods countenance. 4. if for concord or charitie? here the Saints of God shall loue God better then themselues, and their bretheren as them∣selues, and God shall loue them better then they can loue their owne selues, and they shall loue God and themselues, and their brethren, for Gods sake; and God shall loue them all for his owne sake. 5. If for power & abilitie? here the will of Gods Saints shall haue an omnipotent operation, for as God can doe all things whatsoeuer he will by himselfe, so they shall doe all whatsoeuer they will thorough God. 6. If with honour and dignitie, here God shall make his faithfull ser∣uants, honours ouer much, euen heyres of immorta∣litie, and heyres of a kingdome, and fellow heyres with Iesu Christ: Therefore aske this one thing with the Prophet Dauid▪ and yée haue asked the true es∣sentiall quid, in which are all things, and so much of the second. Pars tertia. In the third place, I obserued the meane how wée come to obtaine all those things which is néede∣full and behooueable for vs, and that is by offering vp
our prayers in the sonnes name. In the same little in∣struments which are made with many whéeles, one within the other, and each of them hauing imprinted vpon them sondry letters, vntill you turne them for∣ward and backward, in such sort, that the straight line do direct to euery letter, it is impossible that the order of opening shold be disclosed or that drawne out which is fast inclosed. The Father is the fountaine and ori∣ginal of graces, from the aboundance of whose streame, all manner of grace and goodnesse doth flowe, so sayth Saint Iames, Euery good and perfect gift com∣meth from aboue, and proceedeth from the Father of lights, howbeit as Saint Paul saith, He dwelleth in the light which no man can attaine vnto to discouer him, therefore vnto vs, and to open all the treasure inclosed in him, behold the straight line, behold the true letter, Petite in nomine meo, aske in Christs name, and you shall obtaine. But here it may be demaunded what it is to aske in Christs name, Chrisostome saith, that then we aske in the name of Iesus, which signifies saluation, when as we aske nothing else, but that which appertaineth to saluation, S. Austine saith, that then we aske in the name of Christ, which signifieth annointed when as we are annointed in the faith and vertues of Christ: the word Nomen according to the Scriptures, some∣times signifieth authority, as to baptize in the name of Christ is to baptize out of the authority of Christ: sometimes to haue such a name, signifieth to be such an one as his name shalbe called Emanuel, that is by inter∣pretation God with vs, somtimes the word name is taken for the vertue of the merit of Christ, as where it is said, At the name of Iesu Christ, euery knee shall bowe, the things in heauen, the things in earth, and vnderneath the earth, That is, giue thankes for the vertue of Christs merit, Angels in heauen shall bowe their knees, for that implentur ruinas, there seates are filled vp, and men on earth, for that their sinnes
are remitted, and the bodies of faithfull persons vnder the earth, for that they are to be restored to the fulnesse of life, and therefore with Cirrell I take the word, No∣men, in the last sense for the vertue & merite of Christ, and say that Petere patrem in nomine Christi, Is to de∣sire him, not to looke vpon any vnworthinesse in vs, but vppon the worthinesse of his sonne, Respice in faci∣em Christi tui. Thus you sée, it is not enough in your prayers to aske such a one, that is such a person, such a good∣nesse, or such a gift, or such a grace, but you must haue a speciall care in vertue, of whose merit you aske that gift, not in the vertue of the merit of Patriarke, or Prophet, Angell or Archangell, Saint, or Saints, but in the vertue of the merit, and satisfaction of Christ Ie∣sus in nomine meo, there is the meane. The Prophet Dauid vseth many arguments and reasons, by the which (as he thinkes) hee might and should preuaile with God in his prayers, of the which some are drawne from GOD, some from himselfe, others from externall things. 1. From GOD, heare me O Lord for that thou art mighty, heare mée for thy mercye sake, heare me for that thou vsest to take compassion, heare mée that thou mightest bée iustified in thy sayings. 2. From himselfe heare me, for that in comparison of others, I may séeme to bée righte∣ous, heare me for that I haue washed my handes in innocencie, heare, mée for my soule trusteth in thée, heare mée for that I am abandoned of all others. 3. From externall things, heare me for the reproach of the enemy, heare me, why should hee tryumph this day ouer mée, heare me, why should he say to my soule there, there, so would we haue it, heare me, why should the enemy blaspheme thée thus dayly? thus the deuout king Dauid laboured by all possible meanes, to preuaile with God in his prayers. But to say truely, we haue a more pregnant and
vrgent motiue to obtaine at Gods handes, and that is Petere patrem in nomine Christi, a name which the Sinagogue neuer vsed for ordinary, for they neuer went higher then to pray, propter Abrahā, Isaac, et Ia∣cob: Ierem. 12. calling on the father Enigmatically in the vertue of the promised séede, which was to issue out of these Patriarches loynes: and the most illuminate a∣mongst them, neuer vsed this name but figuratiue∣ly when they prayed, Respice in faciem Christi tui, nay the Apostles themselues were not come to this high manner of praying as to aske in Christs name: And therefore our Sauiour tells them in this Chap∣ter: Vs{que} modo nihil petieritis, hitherto ye haue asked no∣thing in my name, and exhorteth them, aske and ye shal obtaine. And as the Apostles of Christ, so the Church of the Apostles, learned to offer vp theyr prayers in the name of Christ: concluding euery prayer and Collect as you may sée in the communion booke with this clause, Per Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum, Through our Lord Iesus Christ, O most bountifull Lord of whom we may say. Petimus te, per te, et propter te. Wee aske Gloss. ord. in loco. thee, we aske by thée, and wée aske for thee, wee aske thee in that thou art God, we aske by thee, in that thou art our mediatour, we aske for thee, in that by the vertue of thy merit, all our prayers are founded and grounded. To make your prayers to bee effectuall, many conditions are to bée required. 1. Let your prayers bée fitly and aptly prepared, for a medicine which is prepared, helpeth, and not prepared, hurteth. 2. Let it bée innocent and pure for the spouse then pleaseth the Bridgrome best, when shee is a Vir∣gin, and beautifull▪ 3. Let it be mentall and vo∣tall, as occasion is offered, for deuotion like the fire of Willowe, vnlesse it be blowne, it will goe out and
die. 4. Let it bee well desposed and quiet, for the harmonie delighteth not where there is a noyse. 5. Let it be discreete and wary, for salte is alway conuenient to a sacrifice. 6. Let it be faithfull and humble, for humilitie aduanceth vs, and faith ma∣keth God to stoupe. 7. Let it be lifted vp on high, for a pigme must be lifted vp aboue his owne measure, to talke with a giant. 8. Let it be deuout and sincere, for the incense vnlesse it bée put on fire sinelleth not. 9. Let it be forcible and strong, for the darte with the more force it is cast, the farther it flieth, and déeper it pierseth. 10. Let it be full of loue and ardent, for the Iron burning, pierseth more then when it is colde. 11. Let it be moist and wéeping, for with that tempe∣rature the hardest stone is dissolued. 12. Let it bée bold and importune, for the silly whelpe after the re∣pulses, obtaineth the morsels at his masters table. 13. In a word to say all, let it be in Christes name, for an oyntment powred forth, made the whole house to smell, and Christs name is an oyntment powred forth, oloum effusum nomen tuum, not only an oyntment, as holy Barnard well noteth, quia lucet praedicatum, for it shineth while it is preached, pascit ecogitatum, for that it féedeth, whilest it is thought vpon, lenet inuoca∣tum, for that it quieteth the conscience whiles it is called vpon, but oloum effusum, an oyntment powrod forth powred forth, for that maiestie tooke vpon it, humility, power tooke vpon it infernitie. The mightie GOD became the prince of peace, the wounderfull became the councellor, Ego dominus, et ego dominus, became misericors, et miserator Dominus, powred forth vpon men, vpon Angles, vpon Saints, vpon sinners, vpon bonde, vpon frée, vpon male and female; powred forth from heauen vnto earth, from the east to the west, from the Iewes to the gentles, from the Grecians to the Barba∣rians, from the knowen word, to the vnkowen world,
from Ierusalem, to Tubal, and Iapan, the Isles a farre off, powred forth like the oyle of the widowes cruse of Sarepta, tooke greater aduantage, for of one Christ, is risen a whole world of Christians, powres forth like the pretious oyntment which ranne downe Arons beard, vnto the skirts of his garment, for we haue all receiued of his fulnesse, grace for grace: powred forth, for the holy oyntment of the Arke of Gods Testament, the sauor and swéetnesse of that oyntment, drew on all the Iewes to follow the Arke, and the swéete sauor of Christs vertues, had drawne on all the world in the name of the sonne to worship the father. Petite in no∣mine meo, Aske in my name, a name of greatnesse, a name of maiestie, a name of saluation, a name of glory, a name of greatnesse, his name shall be called wonder∣full, counsellor, the mightie God, the euerlasting father, the prince of peace, a name of Maiestie at the name of Iesus Christ, euery knée shall bowe, the things in hea∣uen, the things in earth, and things vnderneath the earth, a name of saluation, there is no name giuen vs vnder heauen, by the which we may be saued, but only in the name of the Lord Iesu Christ, a name of glory, in him are hid all the treasures of wisdome, knowledge and vnderstanding, because it pleaseth the father that in him all fulnesse should dwell. Petite in nomine meo, aske in my name, which hath bin derided by the Gen∣tles, scorned of the Iewes, abused of the Heretickes, persecuted by tyrants, and trembled at by the diuels, but within short time shall eate idolatry from the Gen∣tles, superstition from the Iewes, the Church vsurped from the heretickes, the fiercenesse to shed blood from tyrants, and the very seates of heauen from the repro∣bate flocks of diuels, Aske in my name, and yee shall receiue, and my heauenly father Dabit vobis, shall giue vnto you. You will say perchance, yée haue asked many times in this name, yet haue not béene heard: but I say vnto you, that yée were more then heard, when as it séemed
vnto you yée were not heard. Foure wayes there bée by the which God imparteth his fauour and goodnesse, and graces vnto vs. 1. By deferring grace. 2. By changing grace. 3. By denying grace. And 4. by kindling our zeale to aske grace. What saith the zea∣lous man and woman? that they haue praied for feruor of spirit, and could not be heard, yée but if God hath gi∣uen vnto them to be sorrowfull, with a godly sorrow, for the wante of this feruour, behold grace granted vn∣to them, by deferring of grace. 2. What say the sonnes of Zebedie? that they haue asked dextram & sinistram, and could not be heard yée but if God hath giuen vnto them, to drinke of the bitter cup of his passion, that for this they might receiue a greater crowne of glory, be∣hold grace giuen by changing of grace. 3. What sales the luxurious? what say the wantons? what say the ambitious? what say the couetous? that they haue as∣ked pleasures, and honours, and riches, and could not be heard: I but if God had giuen them, they would haue mispent them vpon the lewd shamefull lusts, be∣hold grace here giuen by denying of grace. 4. What say the hipocrits, the worldlings, the Athiests? that they haue prayed in his name, and could not be heard: I but they prayed faithlessely, I but they praied coldly, I but they prayed Kemissely: when they shall pray faith∣fully, and feruently, and deuoutly, they shall be heard, behold grace here granted, in quickning our zeale to aske grace. And surely that oftentimes yée aske and do not receiue, yée séeke and doe not finde, yée knocke and it is not opened vnto you, either it is because when yée pray, yée curse, and that is, to say the Popes and deuils Pater noster: or else it is, because yée aske amisse, as Saint Iames saith: or else it is because although yée aske honest things enough, yet not according to Gods will, as Saint Paul did: or else it is because yée pray vainly, as Zebedeus the wise did, or else it is because yée pray proudly, as the Pharasies did: or else it is be∣cause yée pray with your hands full of bloud, as the
Iewes did: or else it is because yée pray ignorantly as the Papists did, or else it is because yée pray faithlessely and coldly, as the Athiests doe. If any fault be, the de∣fect is on our side, on Gods part, this promise remaineth firme, quicquid petieritis, whatsoeuer yée shall aske the father in the sonnes name, shall be giuen vnto you. O most powerfull, and profitable, and holy prayer, the comfort of the soule, the key to grace, the Ladder to heauen, the entrie to saluation, a most rich field of Man∣na, a most endlesse fountaine of Paradice, the heart of the spirit, the spirit of the life, the life of him that liueth well. Now the reason why I haue thus magnified and extolled this holy exercise of prayer, is to diminish and abate the credit, of a certaine new-fangled, and ouer∣licentious opinion which is of late conceiued amongst men, to wit, that all the chiefe parts, and points of the christian religiō consisteth in the reading of scriptures, frequenting of Lectures, and hearing of Sermons, and here it is necessarie that I preface, least I be mistaken. Therfore as S. Iames is not to be vnderstood to dispraise faith, when as he preferred charitie before it, in respect of continuance, nor almes déeds, nor martyrdom, when as he preferred charitie before them both, in respect of the dayly vse, nor the operation of great and mightie workes, and the speculation of high knowledge, when as he preferred charitie before them both, in respect of pietie: no more would I be thought to dispraise reading of Scriptures, frequenting of Lectures, and hearing of Sermons, when as I preferred prayer before them all, in respect of the vncessant vse we haue of it: in the dayly seruice of God, let euery thing be placed in his proper roome and order, because they are giuen, and procéede all from him, which liketh so well of order, that he vouchsalfeth to be called the God of order. Surely, as touching reading of Scriptures, & hearing of Sermons, we must néedes confesse both these to be great helps vnto the man of God, in yt cause of saluatiō. Whence is faith? but of hearing, whence is hearing but
of the word, howbeit let the vngenerate man heare the Apostles preach strange tounges, he estéemes them as dronkennesse, let Festus heare S. Paul preach of Iudg∣ment to come, he iudgeth it as madnesse, let a multitude come to the hearing of the one of the selfe same sermon, some by the hearing of the same are conuerted, some by the hearing of yt same are preuerted, some beléeue, some doubt, some disdaine, whats the reason? they vse not al a∣like, the ordinary meanes of illuminating their minds, & rectifiyng their wills, & that is prayer: witnesse truth it selfe aske and ye shall receiue seeke and ye shall finde, knock and it shall be opened vnto you, and therefore hée which comes to heare a sermon hauing not prepared, and santified his heart before hand with prayer, is like vnto a marriner which would gouerne his ship without a rounder, or like to a way-faring mā which wil come to his ioyrnies end, by going a diuerse and contrary way: praier therfore vnto our preaching and your reading, is the most necessarie externall coagiuant meanes, which maketh them both effectuall, for to read the word is to receiue it more confusedly, in great gobbots & morsels, to heare the word preached, is to receiue it more orderly deuided and cut, to thinke vpon it seriously is to chew it with the cleane tooth of godly meditatiō, but to pray vn∣to God, to haue the true vnderstanding of the same in our mindes, and a liuely féeding of it in our hearts, and consciences, this thoroughly to degest it in euery part of our bodies, & in euery power of our soules: prayer there∣fore vnto our preaching & your hearing, is euen as the salte, which quickneth ye sacrifice, it is as ye leauen, which seasoneth ye lampe, it is as the soule which giueth life to ye body, it is as the sunne which giueth light to the world. And certainely I am perswaded that as we preach the word sometimes vnto men, so if they did pray at the same time together with vs, not for a fashion sake, with showe to the eye, but in truth & earnestnesse and from ye groūd of the heart: this long planting, watring, & sowing which hath bin bestowed, in husbādring the hearts of ye
men of our age, would haue yeelded more fruit of piety and godlinesse, to the praise of the glory of God, bette∣ring the whole world, and stopping of the mouths of our aduersaries on both sides, which haue spoken and written so much euill of vs. But as it was said of Ze∣ched▪ short in stature, so it may be said of the children of this generation, they are short, they are dwarfs, they are little in stature, little in faith, little in worke, little in modesty, little in sobriety, little in temperance, little in chastity little in piety, little in hospitality, little in charity, little in vertue. To make you men of better groth, tall trées are strong pillers in the house of God, as you come diligently to heare, so remember also de∣uoutly to pray, to pray I say vnto him which hath the kéees of Dauid, openeth, and no man shutteth, shutteth and no man openeth, that he wil illuminate the beames of our vnderstanding, that we may knowe, and direct the streams and courses of our affections, that we may do accordingly. A souldier goeth not to warre without his weapons, a Christian, not without his prayers. Cassiodor Be pleased I most humbly beseech you to heare the explication of one argument more, which induceth mée in respect of the common necessity to magnifie prayer aboue hearing of sermons. Prayer in all extremities remayneth like a Christian tried companion which neuer leaueth his friend, but hearing of Lecturers, & preaching of Sermons, in diuers cases faileth. 1. A mā may be silenced from preaching, as we know Micheas was, but he cannot be silenced from praying, though he be silenced from the vocal prayer of his tongue, yet can he not be silenced from the mentall prayer of his heart. 2. A man may be cast into prison, and fettered in cold i∣rons as Ioseph was. 3. A man may be captiuate, and carried away prisoner with the Turkes and Sarisons, as we know the people of God were, with the Syrians and Babilonians. 4. A man may walke vp and downe in the wildernes, solitary, distressed, and afflicted, as di∣uers of the holy men of God, did before the comming of
Christ. 5. A man may come into a place which is ful of the botch of Aegypt & dangerous infection of pestilence. In some of these cases, nay in euery one of these, how can a mā cōueniently be edified by preaching, I meane for the present? I deny not, but if he had bin a diligent obseruer, he may call to mind sondry things, which hée had heard and read, and so ease his oppressed & distressed soule by them But as S. Paul sayd of charity, it neuer falleth away in respect of continuāce, so we may say of prayer, it neuer falleth away at any time, in any place, or vpon any occasion Ieremie by prayer can cōfort him∣self Aug. 12. ser. de tem. in prison. Daniel by praier, can reioyce in the gréedy Lyons denne, the three children by prayer can triumph in the fiery flaming furnace. Iob can pray vnto God lying on his dunghill, the théefe can pray vnto God hanging on the tree, Non est locus vbi non est Deus, God is in euery place and euery place a man may po∣wre out his prayers to God, yet the heddy, giddy, pre∣size disciplinarian cannot perswade himselfe that hée can be edified by comming to the Church, vnlesse there be a sermon, he must haue a sermon, to informe his vn∣derstanding, he will come to the Church for that, I tell him, he hath as great néede of prayer to sanctifie his soule and body, let him come to the Church for that: 1. Vnlesse he be an infidell, a profession, is to bee made here of his faith. 2. Vnlesse he be too much a Puritant a confession is to be made heere of his sinnes. 3. Vn∣lesse he be a scismatike, his consent is required here by saying, Amen, with the congregation assembled. 4. Vn∣lesse he be a Traytor his prayers are to perse forth here for the good of the king, the state, and the country. Tell me doest thou euer read that Gods house was cald the house of preaching, this thou readest not, but to show that the most vsuall and ordinary exercise which God will haue to be practised in his Church, is prayer, he thought it best to call the place of his wor∣ship by the name of the one, and not by the name of the other, the Church was sanctified for preaching, thou
wilt come vnto it while this is a doing, the church is sanctified for prayer, and hath his name of prayer, Do∣mus mea, domus orationis. Come vnto it also while this is a doing. Salomon vpon, and after the dedication of the temple, went into the temple to prayer, it is read of the Publican & Pharisie, that they went both to ye tem∣ple to pray. Peter & Iohn went both into the temple at ye 9. hours, at the appointed time for prayer: old Anna & Simeon continued dayly in the temple praying, the tē∣ple then to those men, was ye conuenienst place to prai∣er, so thought the good, so the bad, so the beléeuer, so the infidel, so the Publican, so the Pharisie, what a strange Cockatrice egge, hath the madnesse of certaine Scis∣matikes hatcht amongst vs, they wil come forsooth to ye church, but not to prayer? O how much impiety. O how much profanenes hath the liberty & licencionsnes of this our age brought forth? we read of certen of the aūtient fathers, that they made their knées as hard as Camels hoofes, with continuall praying, we read of S. Ierome in moderate fastings, & wonderfull humiliati∣ons of himselfe in watchings & praiers: we haue S. Au∣stins meditations & soliloquia, solitary spéeches, which he vsed vnto God, we see oratoria, not auditoria, orato∣ries, churches, Colleges chappels, so many signes & to∣kens of our parents manificence, & vneōparable deuo∣tion these men thought these to be the godly exercises of religion, to water their couch day & night, for the sins they had committed, with Dauid to chastice the re∣bellions of the flesh, wt saint Paul to meditate vpon their fraile state & miserable conditiō, wt holy Iob to intertain poore, néedy, naked, distressed soules into their houses, & at their tables with faithfull Abraham: al these are for∣gottē, nay, which I speake with the griefe of my soule, they account them vanity, & superstition, & men thinke that they are come to the very mount Nebo, the height of religion, if so be they are come to the church, turned ouer their bookes, found the text, looke on the preacher, marke his diuision, heard the sermon, where is woun∣ding of the conscience, where is compunction of yt heart?
where is mortification of the flesh, where is detestation of sin, where is satisfactiō for the wrong to thy brother, where is pitty & compassion, where are sighes, where are teares, where are strong cries & gronings, where is the wish of the prophet Ieremy, to haue riuers of wa∣ters in your heads, to wéepe day and night, for the ma∣nifold sinnes ye committed against the maiesty of god? The end of preaching is to teach men to liue wel & ver∣tuous, heare S. Paul. The grace of God bringeth sal∣uatiō vnto al men, hath appeared, & reacheth vs, there is the preaching what to do? mary to deny vngodlinesse & worldlines, & then we should liue soberly, iustly, & god∣lily in dispraise of the world: make not thy porch bigger then thy house it is a foolish kinde of building, it is the property of an Athenian to know much, and do litle, it is the duty of a christian to heare often, and do stil that is to pray stil: for it is written, pray continually. This is the perfume made of the gal, & liuer of the fish in the tooke Iob. which driueth away al kind of diuels, Ex∣terminabit omne genus demoniorum, al kind of diuels, al Tob. 6. kind of plots, al kind of practises al kind of treasons, all kind of treacherers: oh as the Angel acuised Toby in that place, that you would giue vs leaue (and so you do) which stand vp in these pulpits, as vpon the bankes, and speake in your eares, which lept too too many times be∣yond your bounds, like to the great fish of Tybris, vsed to deuoure, to take hold of your soules, to pack your af∣fections, from the fluxible watry cogitations of al world∣ly affaires, vnto the immoueable centers of heauenly meditations, to sette your gaules and your liuers, and your bowels, and your entralls, that is your hearts, and affections, vpon the burning coals of the incompa∣rable loue of God, and Iesus Christ his Son: vndoub∣tedly this wil not only make a persume which wil driue away all manner of diuels from vs, but will make for your good, to the good of Gods glory, and the good of the Church, and the good of this noble Kingdome, a most swéete, & adoriferous sauour in the nosestrills of God,
I will speake what I intend more plainly. Your sacred presence (most dread and mightie Soueraigne) at the morning and euening Sacrifice, will induce others to present themselues, they will come, they will runne, they will prostrate themselues, they will worship, they will adore in the holy Sanctuarie of God, the swéete o∣dor of the oyntments of this your gratious deuotion, hath, and doth, and will drawe on others, yea many o∣thers for to follow: yea the strange children will be brought to follow, vnto whom all that euer we could doe, both our preaching and praying, were the sauour of death vnto death, euen an abhominatiō: for this cause of set purpose haue I compiled this Sermon, according to the measure of grace which is giuen vnto me, haue preached the same in the eares of Maiestie, the holi∣nesse of holinesse, which was ānointed with the fulnesse of all graces, confirme & continue your gratious heart, in this most holy and Christian exercise of pietie and godlinesse, that that may be spoken and written, spoken to them that are liuing, and written to the posterities to come, of the most religious King Iames, that was spoken and written of the most zealous king Iosias, that 2. Reg. 23. you may match him in all things, euen by being a king as young and yonger then he, like vnto him was there not any before him, neither arose there any after him, which turned vnto the Lord his GOD, with all his heart, with all his minde, and with all his soule, to loue him, and to feare him and to serue him, and here imita∣ting the wise gouernour, reserued the best Wine for the last, I end. Now vnto God immortall, inuisible, and onely wise, the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, thrée persons in trinitie, one God in vnitie, be rendred all power, dominion, glory, maiestie, and seruice, for euer, and for euer. Amen. FINIS.
